'Duryodhana said, "O Sanjaya! Kounteya Yudhishthira has obtained seven akshouhinis. Together with the kings,
what does he plan to do in preparation for the war?"

'Sanjaya replied, "O king! In great happiness, Yudhishthira is preparing for the war. Bhimasena, Arjuna and the
twins are not scared. Bibhatsu Kounteya has yoked his divine chariot and, invoking mantras, is radiating in all the
directions. We have seen him ready, like a cloud tinged with lightning. After invoking the mantras, he happily told
me, 'O Sanjaya! Behold the portents. We will be victorious.' Bibhatsu told me this and I also saw this to be true."

'Duryodhana said, "You happily praise the Parthas, who were defeated in the game of dice. Tell me. What kind
of chariot does Arjuna possess? What is the nature of his standard?"

'Sanjaya replied, "O lord of the earth! O lord! Together with Shakra, Tvashta and the creator, Bhouvana thought
of and created many beautiful things[Bhouvana or Bhoumana is Vishvakarma, the architect of the gods. Tvashta or Tvashtra is also Vishvakarma,
but is mentioned here separately.]. With their celestial maya, they created many beautiful forms for the standard-extremely expensive, celestial, heavy and light. In all directions, sideways and upwards, his standard is one
yojana long. It is not entangled, even if it is surrounded by trees. Such is the maya that Bhouvana has created.
Shakra's bow[The rainbow.] sparkles in the sky in many hues and we do not know what it is. Such is the standard that Bhouvana has created. It can be seen in many forms. From a fire, smoke ascends up into the sky. It has energy as its
body, but has many forms. Such is the standard that Bhouvana has created. It has no weight and it does not face
any impediments. He has excellent and white horses that are as fleet as the wind. They are divine and a gift from
Chitraratha[The king of the gandharvas.]. Even when some are killed, one hundred will always remain. This was the boon that was granted
earlier. The king[Yudhishthira.] has large and ivory-coloured horses yoked to his chariot, a match for his valour. In battle, Bhimasena has mounts that are as swift as the wind and have the hue of antelopes. Sahadeva has mounts with speckled
bodies, with backs that have the colour of partridges. In affection and delight, his brother Phalguna gave them to
him. These horses are superior to those of his brave brother. Madri's son, Nakula Ajamidha[Ajamidha was a common ancestor and Ajamidha is usually used for Yudhishthira and Dhritarashtra.], has supreme and
bay horses that were given by the great Indra. They are equal to the wind in strength and speed and they bear the
brave one, like Indra, the slayer of Vritra. There are horses that are their equal in age and valour. They are well
trained and have no equals in their speed. They bear Subhadra's son and Droupadi's sons. These are large horses
that were given by the gods."'


'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! Whom else did you see assembled there, to fight for the sake of the Pandavas
against the army of my sons?"

'Sanjaya replied, "I saw Krishna, the foremost of the Andhakas and the Vrishnis arrive, and Chekitana and
Yuyudhana Satyaki. These two maharathas pride themselves on their manliness and have joined the Pandavas with
one akshouhini each. The king of Panchala came, surrounded by one akshouhini and his ten brave sons, Satyajit
and the others, with Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront. Drupada increased their fame and they are protected by
Shikhandi. He covered the bodies of all his soldiers[Presumably with armour.]. Virata arrived with his sons, Shankha and Uttara, with
Suryadatta and the other brave ones, Madirashva leading the way. The lord of the earth was surrounded by his
brothers and sons and joined the Parthas, surrounded by one akshouhini of soldiers. Jarasandha's son from Magad-
ha and Dhrishtaketu, the king of Chedi, arrived, each followed and surrounded by one akshouhini. All the five
brothers from Kekaya, with red standards, were surrounded by one akshouhini and joined the Pandavas. These are
the numbers that I saw assembled there, for the sake of the Pandavas, and wishing to fight with the army of the
sons of Dhritarashtra. The immensely intelligent Dhrishtadyumna is the army's general. He knows about the battle
formations used by men, gods, gandharvas and asuras. O king! Shikhandi has been given the task of killing Bhishma, Shantanu's son. He will be supported by Virata and the warriors from Matsya. The powerful king of Madra
has been assigned to the eldest son of Pandu[That is, Yudhishthira. The king of Madra is Shalya.]. But there were some who held the view that the two are mismatched. Duryodhana, with his sons and one hundred brothers, and the kings who have come from the east and the
south, are Bhimasena's share. It has been held that Arjuna's share is Vaikartana Karna, Ashvatthama, Vikarna and
Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu. Partha Arjuna has also accepted as his share all those on earth who pride themselves on their bravery and think themselves to be invincible. The five great archers, the princes from Kekaya,
have accepted as their share the Kekayas who will fight in the battle[The Kekayas were divided in their allegiance in the war. These five brothers fought on the side of the Pandavas,
there were other Kekayas who fought on the side of the Kouravas.]. The Malavas, Shalvas and Kekayas are
part of their share too, as are the two foremost ones from Trigarta who are samshaptakas[Those who have taken an oath to win or die.]. All of Duryodhana
and Duhshasana's sons have been accepted by Subhadra's son as his share, and also King Brihadbala[However, earlier, Duryodhana's sons have been assigned to Bhima.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! With Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, the mighty archers who are Droupadi's sons
and have standards decorated with gold, will attack Drona. Chekitana wishes to fight Somadatta in a duel of chariots. Yuyudhana wishes to fight with Kritavarma, from the Bhoja lineage. Madri's brave son Sahadeva, who roars in
battle, has accepted as his share the task of killing your brother-in-law, the son of Subala[Sanjaya is addressing Dhritarashtra. The son of Subala is Shakuni, who is Gandhari's brother.]. The deceitful Uluka
and the masses of Sarasvatas have been thought of as the share of Nakula, Madri's son. O king! There are other
kings who will fight in the battle. The sons of Pandu have assigned them, depending on who challenges whom.
This is the way in which the army has been divided into parts. You and your son must do whatever has to be done,
swiftly."

'Dhritarashtra said, "All my sons are stupid. They are deceitful gamblers. They are lost, because they will have
to fight the powerful Bhima in the forefront of the battle. All the kings of the earth have been assigned according to
the dharma of time. They will enter the fire of Gandiva, like insects entering a flame. I can see my enemy destroyed by those great-souled ones, who have been made enemies. In a battle, who will follow those who have
been shattered by the Pandavas in a fight? All of them are brave atirathas[An unrivalled warrior, whose valour is unlimited, greater than a maharatha.]. They are famous in their deeds and
powerful. Each is equal in energy to the sun and the fire. They are victorious in battle. Yudhishthira is their leader
and they are protected by Madhusudana. Those two brave Pandavas, Savyasachi and Vrikodara, Nakula, Sahadeva,
Parshata Dhrishtadyumna, Satyaki, Drupada, Dhrishtadyumna's son, Uttamouja from Panchala, the invincible
Yudhamanyu, Shikhandi, Kshatradeva, Virata's son Uttara, those from Kashi, Chedi and Matsya, all the Srinjayas,
Virata's son Babhru, the Panchalas and the Prabhadrakas, from whom Indra himself cannot steal the earth if they
are unwilling-all of these are brave ones who are steady in war. They can shatter the mountains. All these are
powerful men who possess all the qualities. O Sanjaya! While I grieve, these are the ones my wicked sons wish to
fight."

'Duryodhana said, "Both the sides come from the same lineage. Both the sides walk on earth. Why do you then
think that only the Pandavas can be victorious? The grandfather[Bhishma.], Drona, Kripa, the invincible Karna, Jayadratha,
Somadatta and Ashvatthama are extremely intelligent and great archers. O father! Forget the Pandavas. Even the
immortals, led by Indra, are incapable of vanquishing them in a fight. O father! The brave Pandavas are aryas in
conduct, they are like the fire. But the entire earth is on my side and against them. The Pandavas are incapable of
even looking at my army. I am sufficiently powerful to challenge the Pandavas, together with their sons, in a battle.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All these kings wish to do that which ensures me pleasure. They will restrain
them, like deer caught in a net. Through my great collection of chariots and net of arrows, the Panchalas and the
Pandavas will be subjugated."

'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! My son is raving like a lunatic. He will not be able to vanquish Dharmaraja
Yudhishthira in battle. Bhishma has always known how famous the great-souled Pandavas are, their knowledge of
dharma and their strength, together with that of their sons. That is the reason I do not wish to fight with those
great-souled ones. O Sanjaya! But tell me again about their efforts. Who is igniting the swift Pandavas? They are
great and flaming archers. Who is offering oblations into those who are like fire?"

'Sanjaya said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Dhrishtadyumna always incites them and says, 'O supreme
among the Bharata lineage! Fight and do not be frightened of the war. There are kings who have surrounded Dhritarashtra's son and will assemble in that tumultuous battle, like a lake of armour. Those angry ones will gather for
that battle, with their followers. But I alone will devour them, like a whale devours fish in the ocean. I will restrain
Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Karna, Drona's son, Shalya and Suyodhana-just as the shoreline restrains the abode of
the sharks[The ocean. The word used is makara. This is a mythical aquatic animal and can loosely be translated as shark
or crocodile.].' When he spoke in this way, King Yudhishthira, with dharma in his soul, told him, 'The Panchalas
and the Pandavas together depend on your fortitude and valour in this war. Save all of us in this battle. O mighty-
armed one! I know that you are always established in the dharma of kshatriyas. You are alone capable of countering the belligerent Kouravas. O scorcher of enemies! Whatever you decide, will be for our welfare. There are those
who are shattered and running away from the field of battle, seek refuge. It is better to purchase a man who stands
his ground and shows his valour and manliness than one thousand of those others. You know that policy. O bull
among men! You are courageous. You are brave. You are valorous. There is no doubt that you are the saviour of
those who are frightened in battle.' When Kounteya Yudhishthira, with dharma in his soul, spoke these words,
without any fear, Dhrishtadyumna addressed me in this way. 'O suta! Tell all those who have come as Duryodhana's warriors from different countries-Bahlikas, Kurus who are descended from Pratipa's lineage, the Sharad-
vats, the son of the suta, Drona and his son, Jayadratha, Duhshasana, Vikarna, King Duryodhana and Bhishma.
Without any delay, go swiftly and tell them this. It is best that you come to peace with Yudhishthira. Otherwise,
Arjuna, protected by the gods, will kill you. Swiftly give Pandava, the brave one in the world, what he wants.
There is no warrior on earth who is Savyasachi Pandava's equal. He is supreme in the use of weapons in the proper
way. The celestial chariot of the wielder of the Gandiva is protected by the gods. No man can defeat him. Do not
even think about fighting against him.'"'


