Yudhishthira asked, "What action enables one to obtain happiness? What action leads one to obtain unhappiness? What action frees one from fear in this world? O descendant of the Bharata lineage! What conduct ensures success?"

'Bhishma replied, "The intelligence of the ancient ones was based on the sacred texts and they praised self-control for all the varnas, but especially for brahmanas. A person who is not self-controlled does not obtain success in
his rites. Rites, austerities and the Vedas are all based on self-control. Self-control increases energy and that is the
reason self-control is said to be sacred. A person who is self-controlled is free from fear, is cleansed of sins and attains greatness. A self-controlled person sleeps in happiness and awakes in happiness. He roams around happily in
the world and is cheerful in his mind. Self-control leads to restraint and one is not overcome by fierceness of energy. Such a person always sees his many enemies[These enemies are vices.] as distinct from the atman. Those without self-control are like
predatory  beasts  and  always  cause  fear  among  beings.  It  was  to  control  them  that  Svayambhu  created  kings.
Among all the ashramas, self-control is special. The fruits of self-control are said to be greater than the dharma obtained through these. I will now tell you about the signs of those among whom self-control has arisen-lack of
miserliness, lack of excitement, satisfaction, faithfulness, forgiveness, lack of anger, constant uprightness, lack of
excessive speech, lack of pride, worship of seniors, lack of envy, compassion towards all beings, absence of slander, refraining from speaking too much in public, lack of false speech and abstention from praise and censure.
Among men, such a person is convinced about being virtuous and does not wish to pursue desire. He is not driven
by enmity and possesses no deceit. He regards praise and censure equally. He immerses himself in good conduct.
He is cheerful in his atman and is learned. He obtains reverence in this world. After death, he goes to heaven. He is
engaged in the welfare of all beings and does not hate people. He is like a giant and calm lake. He is cheerful and
content in his wisdom. He has no fear of any being and they are also not frightened of him. He bows down before
all beings. Such a self-controlled person is learned. He is not delighted if he obtains great prosperity. He does not
sorrow during a hardship. If a brahmana is thus accomplished in his wisdom, he is said to be self-controlled. His
deeds are informed by the sacred texts. He follows the auspicious conduct of virtuous people. He is always full of
self-restraint and enjoys great fruits. He has lack of jealousy, forgiveness, tranquility, satisfaction, pleasantness in
speech, truthfulness, generosity and ease. That path is not for an evil-souled person. A brahmachari conquers his
senses, having subjugated his desire and anger. Rigid in his vows, such a brahmana performs valiant and terrible
austerities. He roams around in this world, waiting for his time[Awaiting death.]. He possesses no evil and is full of his atman."'


Yudhishthira asked, "Brahmanas who observe vows sometimes eat the food that is offered as an oblation. O
grandfather! What happens if a brahmana possesses this desire?"

'Bhishma replied, "O Yudhishthira! If one eats after following the Vedas, it is different. But if one commits the
act of eating in violation of the three Vedas, then one's vows are destroyed."

'Yudhishthira asked, "Ordinary people say that fasting is like austerities. O great king! Is this really austerity?
What are austerities?" 'Bhishma replied, "People think that fasting for months or fortnights are austerities. But the
virtuous do not regard them as austerities. Instead, they are an impediment in getting to know about the atman. Renunciation and becoming the disciple of a virtuous person is the supreme austerity. Such a person is always fasting
and such a person is always a brahmachari. Such a brahmana will always become a sage and will always worship
the gods. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Even if he lives in a family[That is, even if he is a householder.], he will always desire and dream of
dharma. He will never eat flesh and will always meditate on the auspicious. He will always desire amrita and will
never cause violence for food. He will always be devoted to guests and will always be like one who survives on
leftovers."

'Yudhishthira asked, "How can one fast and be a brahmachari all the time? How can one always be devoted to
guests and survive on leftovers?"

'Bhishma replied, "If a person eats in the morning and eats again in the evening, without eating anything in between, he will be regarded as fasting all the time. If a brahmana goes to his wife only at the time of her season, he
is a brahmachari, as long as that man always speaks the truth and is always devoted to wisdom. A person who does
not pointlessly eat meat is said to be a vegetarian[The interpretation is that the eating of the flesh of animals killed at sacrifices is acceptable.]. He will always be generous and pure by not dreaming or
sleeping during the day. O Yudhishthira! Know that if a person only eats what has been left after the servants and
guests have eaten is like a person who subsists on amrita. If a brahmana never eats until they[Gods, ancestors, guests and servants.] have eaten, through
that act of  not eating, he conquers heaven. If  one survives  on  the leftovers after gods,  ancestors, servants and
guests have eaten, that is said to be like surviving on what is left at a sacrifice. They always obtain infinite worlds.
With Brahma, the apsaras and the residents of heaven present themselves in their homes. They share their food
with the gods and the ancestors.
They find delight with their sons and grandsons and obtain the supreme objective."'


