Vaishampayana said, 'Having killed thousands of animals, the king and his many mounts entered another forest to
hunt deer. Though supremely strong, he was hungry and thirsty. Travelling alone, he penetrated the deep forest until he came to a vast wilderness. Passing beyond this, he came to a wood that was full of holy pilgrimages, beautiful to the eyes and a joy to the heart. Beyond this, he came to another great wood where a cool breeze blew. The
trees were full of flowers and soft grass extended on all sides. The great wood echoed with the sweet songs of
birds. There were trees all around, with branches that offered pleasant shade. Bees[The word used in the text is shatapada, one with six legs. This is a word for a bee.] swarmed over the creepers
and there was a supreme beauty there. There was no tree without flowers and fruit and none with thorns. Nor did
that wood have one[That is, a tree.] not made dark with swarming bees. Resounding with the sweet songs of birds, adorned with
beautiful flowers that blossomed in all seasons, with the pleasant shade of blossoming trees everywhere, and with
pleasant expanses of grass, that supreme wood was beautiful. And the great archer[Duhshanta.] entered it. Bedecked with
flowers, the trees were shaken by the breeze and repeatedly showered wonderful flowers. They rose up into the
sky, full of the sweet songs of birds. The trees there were attired in many-coloured garments of wonderful flowers.
They were heavy with the weight of new shoots and flowers and full of the sweet songs of birds and bees.

'On seeing that expanse, adorned with many flowers and surrounded by pleasant creepers that seemed to form
canopies, the greatly energetic one was delighted. With branches laden with flowers intertwined with one another,
the wood then seemed to shine like Indra's pennant. A pleasant, cool and fragrant breeze, carrying the pollen of
flowers, wafted around the wood and sported with the trees. Such were the qualities of the wood the king gazed
upon. It was located in the delta of a river and had the beauty of flagpoles. In that forest, the abode of extremely
happy birds, the king saw a charming hermitage. It was full of many trees and blazing fires[Sacrificial fires.]. Many yatis[A yati is specifically an ascetic.],
valakhilyas and other groups of sages were there. Many places for sacrificial fires were around and the flowers
formed carpets on the ground. O king! The sacred river Malini, which gladdens the heart, flowed by and created
beautiful and large pools[The word used in the text is kaccha. This is usually the word used for a marsh. But a marsh does not seem
right, given the context.] of water. It was full of many waterfowl and made the hermitage even more beautiful.
The king was delighted to see predatory beasts and deer peacefully together.

'The king, whose chariot no one could obstruct, entered that enchanting hermitage, which was like the world of
the gods and beautiful everywhere. He saw the river with sacred waters embracing the hermitage, as if the mother
of all beings was established there. Chakravaka[The ruddy goose.] birds swarmed along its banks. The water carried flowers and
foam. Groups of kinnaras and monkeys and bears lived there. The sound of holy chants and studying resounded
along the sand banks. Rutting elephants, tigers and gigantic snakes frequented the place. Having seen the sacred
hermitage ornamented by the river Malini with beautiful banks and islands, the king then desired to enter it. It was
like the abode of Nara and Narayana, beloved by the waters of the Ganga and echoing with the sound of madly
dancing peacocks.

'The bull among men entered the great wood, which resembled Chitraratha's[The king of the gandharvas.] garden. He wished to see the radiant maharshi Kanva, descendant of Kashyapa, blessed with all the qualities and the power of austerities. He
stopped his retinue of chariots, cavalry and infantry at the entry to the wood and told his soldiers, "I will go to see
the descendant of Kashyapa, blessed with the power of austerities and free of passion. Remain here until I return."

As soon as he entered the wood, which was like Nandana, the lord of men derived great pleasure and forgot his
hunger and thirst. The ruler of men put aside his signs of kingship. He entered the supreme hermitage with only his
priest and his adviser. He wished to see the sage whose store of ascetic powers was everlasting. He saw that the
hermitage was like Brahma's world, with buzzing bees and singing birds.

'In one place, that tiger among men heard chanting of the Rig Veda, recited in proper word and metre by the best
of Brahmanas, as they went about their work. Another place was adorned by those who were learned in various
branches of sacrificial rituals[This is probably a reference to the Yajur Veda. The critical edition jumps from the Rig Veda to the Atharva
Veda, at least by name. The Yajur Veda is not explicitly mentioned. Some regional variations mention the Yajur
Veda explicitly and there are shlokas, missing in the critical edition, that mention the Sama Veda.]. That hermitage was adorned by ascetics who were controlled and rigid in their
vows. In another place, those who were learned in the Atharva Veda, respected by the assembled, recited the
samhitas in the proper tone and metre. In other places, Brahmanas learned in the science of tones recited other
mantras, so that all these holy sounds made the hermitage seem like the illustrious world of Brahma. There were
those who were skilled in the art of sacrifices and rules of recital. Others were learned in the Vedas and knew the
principles of logic, self-realization and salvation. There were those who knew the meaning of words and were accomplished in combining them. Others were skilled in special rituals and the rites for salvation. Some were skilled
in arguments, refuting redundant arguments and knew the secrets of words, philosophy and time. The sound of
chanting and hymns was everywhere. The destroyer of enemy armies saw around him many learned Brahmanas of
rigid vows, all engaged in meditation and offerings.

'The lord of the earth was astonished to see the beautiful and coloured seats that had been carefully laid out. On
observing the rituals with which the Brahmanas worshipped the gods, that supreme among kings thought that he
was in the world of Brahma. The more the king saw of the beautiful, holy and solitary hermitage of Kashyapa's
descendant[Kanva.], protected by his austerities and qualities, the more he wished to see. Kashyapa's descendant's hermitage was full of great rishis, powerful in their austerities and rigid in their vows. Thus, the slayer of enemies entered there, with his adviser and his priest.'


Vaishampayana said, 'Thereupon, the mighty-armed one left his advisers behind and went on inside the hermitage
alone. But he did not find the rishi of rigid vows[Kanva.]. On seeing that the rishi was not there and the hermitage was
deserted, he called out in a loud voice that echoed in the wood, "Who is here?" On hearing his words, a maiden
emerged from the hermitage. She was dressed in the attire of an ascetic and was as beautiful as Shri[Goddess Lakshmi.]. As soon as
the black-eyed maiden saw King Duhshanta, she welcomed him and paid him homage. She offered him a seat,
gave him water to wash his feet and the gift due to a guest. O king! She then asked that lord of men about his welfare. Having honoured him in the appropriate way and asked about his welfare, the maiden then smilingly asked
the king what she could do. Having been thus honoured in the appropriate way, the king spoke to the maiden who
was unblemished in form and sweet in speech. "I have come to pay my respects to the illustrious rishi Kanva. O
beautiful and fortunate one! Where has the revered one gone?" Shakuntala replied, "My revered father has gone
out of the hermitage to collect fruit. Please wait for a while. You will see him when he returns."'

Vaishampayana said, 'The king did not see the rishi there. But having been thus addressed by the maiden, he
saw that she was dazzling, with a charming smile and beautiful hips. She was dazzling in her beauty, austerities
and humility and endowed with beauty and youth. The ruler of the earth told her, "O one with the beautiful hips!
Who are you? Who do you belong to? Why have you come to this forest? O beautiful one! You are blessed with
beauty and qualities. From where have you come? O beautiful one! You have robbed me of my heart from the first
glance. O beautiful one! I wish to learn all about you. Please tell me." Having been thus addressed by the king in
the hermitage, the maiden smiled and told him in sweet words, "O Duhshanta! I am regarded as the daughter of the
illustrious, righteous, great-souled ascetic Kanva, wise in the path of dharma." Duhshanta said, "That illustrious
and extremely fortunate one is worshipped by all the worlds and is known to have never spilled his seed. The god
of dharma may stray from the right path, but not this ascetic of rigid vows. O beautiful and charming one! How
can you be his daughter? Dispel this great doubt from my mind."

'Shakuntala said, "O king! Then listen to how I have learnt what occurred in earlier times and how I came to be
the sage's daughter. Once upon a time, a rishi came here and asked questions about my birth. O king! Hear what
the illustrious one[Kanva.] told him about me. Kanva said, 'In ancient times, Vishvamitra alarmed and oppressed
Shakra[Indra.], the king of the gods, with his great austerities. He feared that with the blazing energy of his austerities,
he would dislodge him from his seat. Purandara[Indra.] therefore told Menaka, "O, Menaka!
You are the best of the celestial apsaras in your qualities. O amiable one! Please listen to what I have to say and
do that which will bring about my welfare. The great ascetic Vishvamitra possesses the sun's radiance. He has
been engaged in such austerities that my mind is trembling. O Menaka! O you with the slender waist! Vishamitra
is your burden now. His soul is fixed on meditation and he is engaged in the performance of awesome austerities.
He is unassailable and may dislodge me from my seat. Go to him and seduce him. Bring obstructions to his austerities. Do that which is good for me. O one with the beautiful hips! Turn him away from his austerities with your
beauty, youth, sweetness, efforts, smiles and words."

'"Menaka said, "O, illustrious one! That illustrious one has great energy and the power of great austerities. You
yourself know that he is prone to anger. The energy, asceticism and wrath of that great-souled one have made even
you afraid of him. Why should I not be scared? He made even the illustrious Vashishtha suffer grief through the
premature death of his sons. He was born a Kshatriya, but became a Brahmana through his powers. For the sake of
performing ablutions, he created a river with such a lot of water that it is difficult to cross. That sacred river is still
known in the worlds by the name of Koushiki[Vishvamitra's name is Koushika.]. In ancient times, the great-souled one's wife was maintained
there by the righteous rajarshi Matanga, who had become a hunter. O lord! After the famine was over, the powerful
sage returned to his hermitage and gave the river the name of Para. O king of the gods! Extremely pleased with
Matanga, he himself was the officiating priest at his sacrifice and out of fear, you yourself went there to drink the
soma. In his anger, he who was descended from the stars[Vishvamitra.] created a wealth of other stars, beginning with Shravana[A nakshatra, that is, a star or constellation.] and beyond the existing stars. I am afraid to go to a person whose deeds are like this. O lord! Tell me how
I can escape being burnt from his anger. He can burn down the worlds with his energy. He can make the earth
quake with a kick. He can uproot the great Meru and whirl it around. How can a woman like me touch someone
with such austerities, such energy that is like a blazing fire and who is in complete control of his senses? His
mouth is radiant as the blazing fire. The pupils of his eyes are like the sun and the moon. His tongue is like Yama.
O best of the gods! How can someone like me touch him? Yama, Soma, the maharshis, the saddhyas, the vishvadevas and the valakhilyas are all alarmed of him. Why should someone like me not be afraid? O lord of the
gods! Nevertheless, commanded by you, I must go to that sage. O king of the gods! Find a means so that I can accomplish your wishes under your protection. O god! When I sport before him, let Marut[The wind-god. Vayu is another one of his names.] strip me of my garments. On your instructions, let Manmatha[The god of love. Kama is another one of his names.] be there to help me in my work. Let the breeze carry soft fragrances
from the wood when I tempt the rishi."' Having said this and once her wishes had been catered to, she went to
Koushika's hermitage."'


'Shakuntala said[She is actually repeating Kanva's words.], "Having been thus addressed, Shakra[Indra.] commanded the wind, who was always mobile, to
be present with Menaka. The beautiful-hipped Menaka then timidly entered the hermitage and saw Vishvamitra,
who had burnt all his sins through austerities, but was still engaged in austerities. Having paid her homage to the
rishi, she began to play around before him. At that instant, the wind robbed her of her garments, which were as
white as the moon. Bashful at Marut's conduct, the beautiful one dropped to the ground, in an attempt to catch the
garment. The supreme among sages saw Menaka grasp at her garment. He saw her nude and that she was beautiful, with no marks of age on her body. On seeing her beauty and qualities, the bull among Brahmanas was struck
with desire and wished to unite with her. He invited her and the unblemished one accepted his invitation.

'"The two of them then passed a long time in the wood, making love as they wished. It seemed to be but a single
day. Through the sage, Shakuntala was born to Menaka. Menaka went to the banks of the Malini, which passed
through a lovely plain in the Himalayas. Having given birth, Menaka left the child on the banks of the Malini and
left. Her objective accomplished, she quickly returned to Shakra's assembly.

'"The daughter lay in a deserted forest frequented by carnivorous lions and tigers. On seeing this, vultures[The word used is shakuna. In a general sense, this means bird. But in a specific sense, it means vultures or
kites.]
surrounded her from all sides, so as to protect her. The birds protected Menaka's child. Having gone there to perform ablutions, I[This is Kanva speaking.] saw her in the deep and lonely wood, surrounded by birds. I took her home and brought her
up as my own daughter. According to the sacred texts, there are three kinds of fathers. In proper order, they are the
one who gives a body, the one who protects and the one who provides food. Because she was found in the solitude
of the forest, surrounded by birds, I have given her the name of Shakuntala. O amiable one! Know that it is thus
that Shakuntala became my daughter. The unblemished Shakuntala also thinks of me as her father."'

'"When asked, this is how the maharshi described the account of my birth. O ruler of men! I do not know my
own. But this is how I think of Kanva as my father. O king! I have told you exactly as I heard it."'


