'Yudhishthira said, "O grandfather! You have said that greed is the foundation of everything that is injurious. O father[The word used is tata.]! I wish to hear about the true
nature of ignorance."

'Bhishma replied, "If a person commits a wicked deed as a result of ignorance, he does not know what is good for him. He hates people who observe
good conduct and people talk about him[In words of condemnation.]. Because of ignorance, he goes
to hell. Because of ignorance, he comes to an evil end. Because of ignorance, he suffers misery and is submerged in disaster."

'Yudhishthira said, "I desire to hear about wickedness-its inclination,
status, growth, increase and decrease, the source, its working, progress, periodicity, reasons and causes. O king! I wish to hear exactly and completely,
about the consequence of ignorance, since unhappiness in this earth has it as
its origin."

'Bhishma replied, "Attachment, hatred, confusion, delight, sorrow, arrogance, desire, anger, pride, procrastination, laziness, wishing, aversion, torment, suffering from the prosperity of others-these wicked acts are indicated as ignorance. You have asked about their working, their increase and
other things. O mighty-armed one! O lord of the earth! Therefore, listen to
this in detail. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O king! Know that both
ignorance and excessive greed are equal in consequences and equal in
wickedness. They are the same. The influence of greed is again increased if
ignorance increases. If one is constant, so is the other. If one decays, so
does the other. Each one has many courses. The source of greed is the great
influence of destiny. Even if one has severed greed in every way, the source
that is based on destiny remains. Thus, greed comes from ignorance and ignorance comes from greed. Greed is the source of all sins. Therefore, one
should avoid greed. Janaka, Yuvanashva, Vrishadarbhi, Prasenjit and other
lords of the earth attained heaven because they destroyed their greed. O
foremost among the Kurus! In this world, it is evident that you must cast
aside greed from your soul. Having abandoned greed, you will follow the
path of happiness in this world and the next."'


'Yudhishthira said, "O grandfather! O one with dharma in his soul! In this world, what is said to be the best thing
for a brahmana who desires dharma and makes the effort to study? Many things are seen as best in this world. O
grandfather! Tell me what you think to be best in this world and the next. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The
path of dharma is great and it has many branches. Which are the elements of dharma that are held to be the best? O
king! In truth, dharma is great and has many branches. O father! Tell me carefully about all this and about what is
the supreme foundation."

'Bhishma replied, "I will indeed tell you about how you may obtain the ultimate benefit. O wise one! You will
drink this, which is like amrita, and be satisfied with the knowledge. Each of the maharshis has depended on his
knowledge and has talked about a separate aspect of dharma. Self-control is the ultimate among them. The ancients
were certain in their foresight when they said that self-control is the supreme quality. In particular, for a brahmana,
self-control is eternal dharma. If one is not self-controlled, the success of deeds is not properly obtained. Self-control and generosity surpass sacrifices and studying. Self-control increases energy and self-control is the supreme
purifier. A man who is without sin and possesses energy obtains greatness. We have not heard of any dharma that
is equal to self-control in any world. Those who follow complete dharma praise self-control as supreme in this
world. O Indra among men! Even in the world hereafter, one obtains supreme happiness. Being united with selfcontrol, one obtains great dharma. A self-controlled person sleeps happily. He wakes in happiness. He moves
through the world in happiness and his mind is cheerful. A person who is not self-controlled obtains hardship and
decay. Because of his own sins, he creates many calamities. Among the four ashramas, this is said to be the
supreme vow. I will tell you about the signs that give rise to self-control. Forgiveness, fortitude, non-violence, impartiality, truthfulness, uprightness, conquest of the senses, skill, mildness, modesty, steadfastness, generosity, lack
of anger, satisfaction, pleasantness in speech, lack of an acquisitive tendency and lack of malice-these unite and
give rise to self-control. O Kouravya! One must also worship the seniors, show compassion towards all beings, be
free of slander and tendency to gossip, not indulge in futile conversation and avoid both praise and censure. A self-
controlled man does not indulge in desire, anger, greed, pride, insolence, boasting, confusion, jealousy and disrespect of others. He is not censured and is free of desire. He desires little and is not resentful. Such a man is like the
ocean and is never filled[It is difficult to understand this. A self-controlled man should presumably always be content. Perhaps it means that a self-controlled man is
never content with trifles.]. 'I am yours. You are mine. They are mine. I am theirs.' The self-controlled person
does not say such things about his former relatives[The relatives must be former because the self-controlled person has
renounced.]. Whatever be the conduct of people in the village or in the
forest, such a person does not speak words of censure or praise. He is friendly and good in conduct. He is supremely devoted to his aides. He is free from many kinds of attachment and obtains great fruits in the world hereafter. He
is excellent in conduct. He is good in conduct. He is cheerful in his soul and knows about his soul. He obtains reverence in this world and a good end thereafter. There are auspicious deeds in this world. These are practised by the
virtuous. He possesses knowledge about these and does not diminish the dharma of sages. He departs and resorts
to the forest. He is united with knowledge and conquers his senses. He roams around, waiting for the time[For death to arrive.]. He is
capable of attaining the brahman. He has no fear from beings. Beings have no fear from him. He has no fear on account of being separated from his body. He has exhausted his good deeds and has none to accumulate. He acts
equally towards all beings and behaves affectionately towards them. He is like a bird in the sky or like an aquatic
creature in the water. There is no doubt that his progress cannot be seen[In the sense that he doesn't leave a visible trail. He does not accumulate
any karma.]. O king! He abandons his home and attains moksha. He obtains the worlds of energy for an eternal period of time. He renounces all deeds. He renounces
all the recommended austerities. He renounces the different kinds of learning. He renounces everything. He does
not return to desire. He is cheerful and pure in his soul. He obtains great reverence in this world and heaven thereafter. This is the place of the grandfather[Brahma.] and Brahma's essence arises from there. This is always concealed in
secret, but can be obtained through self-control. A person who takes comfort in wisdom and possesses intelligence
and who does not indulge in hostility towards any being has no fear of returning again[Of being reborn.]. What fear can he have of
the world hereafter? There is one sin associated with self-control and a second one does not exist. Because he is
forgiving, people think that he is incapable. O immensely wise one! But there is an extremely good quality associated with this taint. Because forgiveness is great, the patient person easily obtains the worlds. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! A self-controlled person doesn't need the forest. A person without self-control also finds nothing
there. Wherever a self-controlled person resides, that is his forest and his hermitage."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Hearing these words of Bhishma, King Yudhishthira was cheerful and extremely satisfied,
as if he had savoured amrita. He again asked Bhishma, supreme among the upholders of dharma. O extender of the
Kuru lineage[Janamejaya.]! He told him everything about austerities.'


'Bhishma said, "The wise have said that austerities are the foundation of
everything. A stupid person who has not been tormented through austerities
does not obtain the fruits of his deeds. The lord Prajapati created everything
here through austerities. The rishis acquired the Vedas through austerities.
The siddhas perform austerities in the due order and subsist on fruits, roots
and the wind. Extremely controlled, they can see the three worlds through
their austerities. Herbs and other medications and the three types of
learning[The three Vedas.] are perfected and made successful through austerities. Austerities are the foundation of all endeavour. Everything that is difficult to obtain, difficult to name, difficult to assail and difficult to withstand-all this
can be made possible through austerities. There is nothing that can surpass
austerities. A sinful man who drinks liquor, seizes objects of others without
permission, kills foetuses and violates the bed of his preceptor-can be
freed if he torments himself well through austerities. Austerities have many
forms and many gates through which they flow. Among the austerities that
involve restraint, abstention from food is the best. O great king! Non-violence, truthfulness in speech, donations, restraint of the senses-abstention
from food is superior to these austerities too. There is nothing more difficult
than giving and no ashrama that surpasses the mother. There is nothing that
is superior to the three kinds of learning. Renunciation is the supreme austerity. In this world, the senses protect riches and grain. But in this protection of dharma, artha and austerities, there is nothing superior to abstention
from food. The rishis, the ancestors, the gods, humans, the best of animals
and all other beings, mobile and immobile-all of them are devoted to austerities. They become successful through austerities. It is through austerities
that the gods attained greatness. They always obtained their desirable shares
and fruits through austerities. It has been determined that through austerities, one can even attain divinity."'


