'Narada said, "As soon as he was recognized by those virtuous ones, Yayati, bull among men, regained his divine
status and was freed from his fever. He had celestial garlands and garments. He was adorned in divine ornaments.
He had celestial fragrances and qualities. He no longer touched the ground with his feet[A trait of the gods is that they do not touch the ground with their feet.]. Vasumana was famous
in the world as the lord of giving. In a loud voice, he first spoke these words to the king. 'I have obtained merit in
this world through my commendable treatment of all the varnas. I will give that to you. The fruits of being generous, the fruits of being forgiving and possessing good conduct and the fruits of maintaining fires-I bestow all that
on you.' Pratardana, bull among kshatriyas, then spoke these words. 'I have always been devoted to war and have
been addicted to dharma in this way. I have obtained fruits in this world and earned fame, through the dharma of
kshatriyas. I bestow these consequences of being brave on you.' The intelligent Shibi Oushinara spoke these sweet
words. 'I have never uttered a falsehood to children, women, or even in jest-or in battles, calamities and emergencies. Go to heaven by virtue of that truth. O king! I can give up my life, my kingdom, my deeds and my happiness, but I cannot forsake truth. Go to heaven by virtue of that truth. I have pleased dharma with truth, the fire with
truth and Shakra with truth. Go to heaven by virtue of that truth.' Rajarshi Ashtaka, the son of Koushika and Madhavi, who knew about dharma, also spoke to the one who had performed many hundreds of sacrifices[Yayati.]. 'O lord! I
have performed hundreds of pundarika and gosava sacrifices and vajapeya sacrifices too. Obtain the fruits of
those. I have no jewels, riches or other possessions that have not been used in these sacrifices. Go to heaven by
virtue of that truth.' As his grandsons spoke to that lord of men one by one, the king gradually left the earth and
ascended towards heaven. In this way, through their own dharma, sacrifices, generosity and deeds, those four kings
and grandsons who had been born in royal lineages and extended their lineages, saved their maternal grandfather
Yayati, who had been dislodged from heaven, through their good deeds. They rescued the immensely wise one and
made him ascend to heaven.

'"The kings said, 'O king! We are your daughter's sons and we possess the dharma and qualities of kings. We
have the qualities of all dharma. O king! O lord of the earth! Ascend to heaven.'"'


'Narada said, "Having been thus made to ascend to heaven by those kings who were extremely generous in the
gifts they gave, Yayati took leave of his grandsons and was established in heaven. There was a shower of fragrant
flowers. There was an auspicious breeze with a holy scent. Amidst this, he attained that eternal station because of
the fruits earned by his grandsons. This was enhanced with his own deeds and he was resplendent with supreme
prosperity. He was happily received in heaven by masses of gandharvas and apsaras, with singing and dancing.
There was the sound of drums being beaten. He was applauded by many gods, rajarshis and bards. He was offered
excellent hospitality and was honoured by the gods. He obtained the fruits of heaven. The grandfather[Brahma.] spoke to
the happy and serene king, as if satisfying him with these words. 'Through your deeds in the world, you have entirely accumulated the four parts of dharma. This eternal world is yours. You will again have eternal fame in heaven because of your good deeds. O rajarshi! Darkness had clouded the intelligence of all those who dwell in heaven.
They did not recognize you because of this. Because you were not known, you fell down. You have returned here
again after your grandsons affectionately saved you. You have regained the station you had won through your
deeds. This is immoveable, eternal, sacred, supreme, permanent and without decay.' Yayati replied, 'O illustrious
one! I have a doubt. Please dispel it. O grandfather of the world! It is not proper that I should ask anyone else. I
protected and extended my subjects for thousands of years. I performed many sacrifices and gave a flood of gifts
and obtained great fruits. How could they be exhausted in such a short span of time? Why did I fall down? O illustrious one! You know that I had obtained eternal worlds.' The grandfather replied, 'You have protected and extended your subjects for thousands of years. You have perfomed many sacrifices and given a flood of gifts. You obtained fruits. But all of those were destroyed through a single taint and you were thrown down. O Indra among
kings! The residents of heaven censured you because of your insolence. O rajarshi! If there is vanity, strength, violence, wickedness and deceit, this world cannot become eternal. O king! You should not disrespect those who are
superior, inferior, or in the middle. No one can be an equal to those who are consumed by vanity. There is no doubt
that men who recount the story of your fall and subsequent ascendance will be freed from all calamities.' O lord of
the earth! In ancient times, Yayati was diminished by this taint of insolence and Galava because of his excessive
obstinacy. Those who desire their own welfare should listen to the advice of well-wishers who wish them well.
One should not be stubborn. Obstinacy gives rise to destruction. O Gandhari's son! Therefore, give up insolence
and anger. O brave one! Make peace with the Pandavas. O king! Abandon your wrath. O king! Whatever is given,
whatever is done, whatever austerities are observed, whatever sacrifices are performed-these are never destroyed.
They do not diminish. No one other than the doer enjoys these. This great and supreme account is revered by those
who are extremely learned and are without hatred. In this world, those who examine it and study it in great detail,
learn about the three objectives[Dharma, artha and kama.] and conquer the earth."'


'Dhritarashtra said, "O illustrious one! O Narada! It is exactly as you have stated it to be. I also wish for the same
thing. But I am not the master."'

Vaishampayana said, 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having said this, he addressed Krishna. "O Kesha-
va! You have told me what is good for heaven and for this world, what is in accordance with dharma and what is
just. O son[The word used is tata.]! But I cannot act on my own account. Nor can I do what pleases me. O Krishna! O mighty-armed
one! Anga[The king of Anga, Karna.] and Duryodhana are wicked and act against my instructions. O Purushottama! Endeavour to persuade. O Janardana! You will accomplish an extremely great task as a well-wisher." Varshneya then spoke to the
intolerant Duryodhana.

'Knowing everything about the nature of dharma and artha, he spoke these sweet words. "O Duryodhana! O
supreme among the Kurus! Listen to these words of mine. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! This is especially
for your welfare and that of your well-wishers. You have been born in an immensely wise lineage! It is proper that
you should act in the right way. You have learning and good conduct. You are endowed with all the good qualities.
Those who are born in inferior lineages are evil in their soul, violent and without shame. O son[The word used is tata.]! They are the
likes of those who act in the ways you are thinking of. In this world, the inclinations of virtuous ones are in conformity with dharma and artha. O bull among the Bharatas! Those who are wicked are seen to act in a contrary
way. This adharma and obstinacy shown by you is terrible and will bring about the great destruction of lives. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Because of what you have done, there have been many instances of ill fame.
Abandon that which is against artha. O scorcher of enemies! You should do what is best for your welfare and for
that of your brothers, servants and friends. Free yourself from a deed that will be against dharma and against fame.
O tiger among men! O bull of the Bharata lineage! Make peace with the Pandavas. They are wise and brave. They
have great enterprise and are self-controlled and extremely learned. O lord of the earth! O scorcher of enemies!
That will be beneficial and pleasant for the intelligent Dhritarashtra, the grandfather[Bhishma.], Drona, the immensely intelligent Vidura, Kripa, Somadatta, the intelligent Bahlika, Ashvatthama, Vikarna, Sanjaya, your relatives and your
many friends. O son[The word used is tata.]! The entire earth finds refuge in peace. You have modesty. You have been born in a noble
lineage. You are learned. You are not violent. O son[The word used is tata.]! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Abide by the instructions of your father and mother. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It is said that everything that a father instruct
is supreme. O son[The word used is tata.]! Peace with the Pandavas appeals to your father. O foremost among the Kurus! O son[The word used is tata.]!
This should appeal to you and your advisers also. He who hears the instructions of his well-wishers, but does not
act in accordance with it, is eventually burnt, like one who has eaten kimpaka[A pretty but bitter fruit, probably of the Trichosanthes variety.]. Because of delusion, if one does
not pay heed to beneficial words and procrastinates, one fails to accomplish one's objective and has to lament subsequently. He who listens to beneficial words and acts accordingly, giving up his own views, obtains happiness in
this world. He who acts contrary to words that ensure artha and kama and listens to perverse advice, comes under
the control of his enemies. If one transgresses the views of the virtuous and follows the views of the wicked, one's
well-wishers will soon lament one's destruction. He who abandons his foremost advisers and serves inferior ones,
will face a terrible calamity, with no prospect of overcoming it. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He who
serves those of false conduct and does not listen to righteous well-wishers, preferring others to those who are his
own, is cursed by the earth. You are against those brave ones. O bull among the Bharatas! You seek help from others who are wicked, incapable and foolish. Other than you, is there a man on this earth who will abandon maharatha relatives who are equal to Shakra and seek refuge with others? Ever since birth, you have always maltreated the Kounteyas. But no anger has been generated in the Pandavas, who have dharma in their souls. O son[The word used is tata.]! O
mighty-armed one! Ever since birth, the Pandavas have been falsely treated, but they have treated you well. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! You should act in the same way towards them. Do not be overcome with anger against
your foremost relatives. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The undertakings of wise ones follow the three objectives[Dharma, artha and kama.]. If all three objectives cannot be pursued at the same time, men follow dharma and artha. If those two cannot be reconciled, a wise one follows dharma. A medium person opts for artha. A child chooses kama. If one is driven by the senses and gives up dharma because of greed, and strives for kama and artha through inappropriate
means, one is ruined. One who pursues kama and artha must still resort to dharma. Kama and artha can never be
separated from dharma. O lord of the earth! It is said that dharma alone is the route towards all three objectives. If
one strives for them in this way, one prospers, like a fire in a dry tree. O son[The word used is tata.]! O bull among the Bharata lineage!
You desire a great and radiant lordship that is accepted by all the kings. But you are not resorting to the right
means. One should not maltreat those who treat one's own self in the right way. That is like cutting down a tree
with an axe. One should not strike down the views of someone one is not trying to vanquish. If a wise person's
views are not struck down, they ensure welfare. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! One should never ignore
anyone in the three worlds, if that person is willing to give up his life, even if that person is an ordinary one-not
to speak of the Pandava bulls. If a man comes under the influence of intolerance, there is nothing that he knows. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the excessive growth will be cut down. You will witness the proof. O
son[The word used is tata.]! An alliance with the Pandavas is superior to one with the wicked. If you live affectionately with them, you
will obtain every object of desire. O supreme among kings! You will enjoy the land conquered by the Pandavas.
But leaving the Pandavas behind you, you seek salvation with others-Duhshasana, Durvisaha, Karna and
Soubala. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Depending on them, you desire prosperity. They are no match for
you in knowledge of dharma and artha. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They are no match for the Pandavas
in valour. Nor are you, and all the kings combined, enough to look upon the face of an enraged Bhimasena in battle. O son[The word used is tata.]! This entire army of kings assembled by you, with Bhishma, Drona, Karna, Kripa, Somadatta's son
Bhurishrava, Ashvatthama, Jayadratha-all of them are incapable of withstanding Dhananjaya. An angry Arjuna is
incapable of being vanquished by the gods, the asuras, men and the gandharvas. Do not get fixated on battle. In
this entire army of kings, is there a single man who can face Arjuna in the field of battle and return safely to his
home? O bull among the Bharata lineage! What is the point of this destruction of men? Show me one man whose
victory will amount to a victory for you. In Khandavaprastha, he defeated the gods, the gandharvas, the yakshas,
the asuras and the serpents. Which man can fight with him? In the same way, a great wonder is heard about Vira-
ta's city. A single one was enough to counter many. That was sufficient proof. Nevertheless, you wish to defeat in
battle the invincible, unassailable and undecaying Jishnu, the brave Arjuna. With me as a second, who can challenge Partha when faced with him in battle? Not even Purandara himself! He can pluck out the earth with his arms.
In his rage, he can burn up beings. He can topple the gods from heaven. Who will defeat Arjuna in battle? Look at
your sons, your brothers, your kin and your relatives. O supreme among Bharatas! Let them not be destroyed because of what you do. Let the Kouravas survive. Let this lineage not be destroyed. O lord of men! May you not be
called a destroyer of the lineage. May your deeds not be destroyed. These maharathas will establish you as the heir
apparent and your father Dhritarashtra, lord of men, as the great king. O son[The word used is tata.]! Do not ignore the prosperity that
is about to rise. If you give up half to the Parthas, you will obtain great prosperity. Listen to the words of your
well-wishers and make peace with the Pandavas. Living in affection and friendship with them, you will always be
fortunate."'


