Vaishampayana said, 'Then, when she was ready to depart, in extreme grief, Krishna went to the famous Pritha and
took her leave from her and the other ladies who were there. She paid her respects and showed homage to each, as
each deserved, and then got ready to go. At that, great lamentations were heard from the inner quarters of the Pandavas. Kunti was extremely miserable on seeing that Droupadi was about to leave. She uttered these words, in a
voice that was choked with grief. "O child! Do not grieve because of this great calamity that has befallen you. You
know very well the dharma for women and you also possess good character and conduct. O one with the sweet
smiles! I need not instruct you about the duties towards your husbands. Two families[The Kouravas and the Pandavas.] have been graced by your
qualities and righteous conduct. The Kurus in the assembly hall are fortunate that they have not been burnt down
by your rage. O unblemished one! Blessed by my thoughts about you, travel on a route that has no difficulties. The
minds of good women are not distorted by what is inevitable. You are protected by the dharma of your superiors
and you will swiftly obtain prosperity. When you live in the forest, always keep an eye on my son, Sahadeva, so
that his mind does not sink under this great calamity that has come." The queen[Droupadi.] replied, "So shall it be." She
went out, her hair undone, in a single garment that was stained with blood and marked with her flowing tears[She was in her menses.].

'As she wept and left, Pritha followed her, in grief. She saw all her sons, deprived of their ornaments and garments. Their bodies were covered in the skins of ruru deer and their faces were lowered in shame. They were surrounded by delighted enemies and mourning well-wishers. Driven by affection, she approached all her sons in that
state. In words of great lamentation, she spoke to them and their relatives. "You have always followed good dharma. You have always been adorned by fortitude in conduct. You have never been mean. You have always been firm
and devoted. You have always been respectful of the gods. Why should this calamity befall you? Why should there
be this reversal in fortune? I do not see whose envy and wickedness have led to this. Because I have given birth to
you, all this may be because of my ill fortune. So despite possessing supreme qualities, you are suffering the oppression of limitless grief. You do not lack in valour, strength, courage, energy and fortitude. But thin of body, and
deprived of your riches, how will you live in that desolate forest? If I had known that you were destined to live in
the forest, after Pandu's death, I would not have brought you down from the Shatashringa Mountains to Gajasahrya[The city of the elephant, another name for Hastinapura.]. I think your father was fortunate. His mind was set on austerities and wisdom. His mind was set on going to heaven before he encountered misery because of his sons. I think that Madri, knowledgeable in dharma and
virtuous in every way, was fortunate. She had the foresight of knowing what was going to happen and attained
supreme salvation. Love and thoughts and purpose determined my decision. Alas on my love for life. I suffer all
this misery because of that." When Kunti lamented in this way, the Pandavas comforted her and showed her
homage. Unhappily, they then set out for the forest. Vidura and the others, who were themselves aggrieved, consoled the afflicted Kunti. Explaining the reasons, and thus suffering even more, they slowly led her to Kshatta's[Vidura's.]
house. King Dhritarashtra's mind was immersed in grief. He asked Kshatta to come to him at once. So Vidura went
to Dhritarashtra's house. In great anxiety, Dhritarashtra, lord of men, questioned him.'


'Dhritarashtra asked, "How is Kounteya Dharmaraja Yudhishthira leaving? How about Bhimasena, Savyasachi and
the two sons of Madri? O Kshatta! How about Dhoumya and the ascetic Droupadi? I wish to hear everything. Describe to me every act of theirs[One shouldn't forget that Dhritarashtra is blind.]."
'Vidura replied, "Kunti's son Yudhishthira is departing, covering his face with his garment. Pandava Bhima is
spreading his long arms, as he goes. Savyasachi is following the king[Yudhishthira.], scattering sand. Madri's son Sahadeva has
smeared his face, as he goes. Nakula, the most handsome man in this world, follows the king. His mind is despondent and he has smeared his entire body with dust. The large-eyed and beautiful Krishna follows the king. She is
weeping and has covered her face with her hair. O lord of the earth! Dhoumya is chanting terrible sama hymns
connected with Yama and as he treads the path, he is holding kusa grass in his hand."

'Dhritarashtra asked, "The Pandavas are going in many different forms. O Vidura! Please tell me why they are
going in these different ways."

'Vidura replied, "Though your sons robbed him of his kingdom and his riches through deceit, the mind of the
intelligent Dharmaraja does not deviate from dharma. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! This king is always
kind to the sons of Dhritarashtra. Though he has been deprived through deceit, he refuses to open his eyes in anger.

'I will burn these people down if I look at them through my terrible eyes.' Thinking this, the Pandava king goes
with his face covered. Now listen to me, as I tell you why Bhima is going in this way. O bull among the Bharata
lineage! 'There is no one equal to me in strength of arms.' Knowing this, Bhima spreads his long arms as he goes.
Proud of the strength of his arms, he displays his arms. He wishes to perform acts on the enemy that do justice to
those arms. Kunti's son Arjuna is capable of using both arms to shower arrows. Savyasachi follows the king, scattering sand. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Just as he scatters sand, in that fashion, he will release showers
of arrows on his enemies. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! 'Let no one recognize my face today.' Thinking
this, Sahadeva travels with a smeared face. 'Along the route, I may steal the hearts of women who look at me.'

Thinking this, Nakula travels with his entire body covered in dust. Droupadi is attired in a single garment. She is
weeping and she is in her menses. Her hair has not been braided and her garment is smeared with blood. She has
spoken these words. 'In the fourteenth year, the wives of those who have caused my present plight, will find their
husbands dead, their sons dead, their relatives dead and their beloved ones dead. Their bodies will be covered with
the blood of their relatives. Their hair will not be braided and they will be in their menses. It is only after offering
water to the dead that those aryas[Some regional versions say bharya (wife) instead of the arya of the critical edition. Given the context, wives
makes better sense.] will enter Gajasahrya. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Dhoumya is the
self-controlled priest. He is chanting sama hymns connected with Yama and is leading them from the front, towards the south-west. He holds darbha grass[Another name for the sacred kusa grass.]. 'When the descendants of the Bharata lineage have been killed in
battle, the elders of the Kuru clan will chant these sama hymns.' Dhoumya is proceeding with these words. 'Alas!
Alas! Our lords are leaving. Witness this great misery.' This is what the miserable citizens are saying in every direction. The intelligent Kounteyas are leaving for the forest in this fashion, indicating through these signs and
marks the resolutions that exist in their hearts. As those foremost among men are leaving Gajasahrya, lightning is
flashing in the cloudless sky and the earth is trembling. O lord of the earth! Rahu has swallowed the sun, though
this is not the time of parvani[Parvani means the day of the full moon or the day of the new moon.]. Meteors are descending throughout the city. Predatory animals are screaming, together with vultures, jackals and crows, in the temples of the gods, in sanctuaries and from the tops of walls and
houses. O king! These are the great and terrible portents as the Pandavas leave for the forest. They indicate the
doom of the Bharatas, since you have acted in accordance with evil counsel."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Narada now appeared in the sabha and stood before the Kurus. He was surrounded by maharshis and spoke these terrible words, "In the fourteenth year from now, because of Duryodhana's crime and
through the strength of Bhima and Arjuna, the Kouravas who are here will be destroyed." Having uttered these
words, the supreme of devarshis, graced with the great prosperity of the brahman, arose to the sky and swiftly
disappeared.

'At this, Duryodhana, Karna and Soubala Shakuni thought that Drona would be their refuge and offered him the
kingdom[The Pandava kingdom.]. Drona spoke these words to the evil Duryodhana, Duhshasana, Karna and all the other Bharatas. "The
brahmanas have said that the Pandavas, sons of the gods, should not be killed[Cannot be killed, is also a possible translation. But should not be killed, seems more appropriate.]. But with all my strength, I will do
whatever I can for those who seek refuge with me. With all their hearts and devotion, the sons of Dhritarashtra and
their king have come to me and I cannot abandon them. Destiny is always supreme. In accordance with dharma,
the sons of Pandu have been defeated and have left for the forest. The Kouravas will live in the forest for twelve
years. They will practise brahmacharya. But since they will fall prey to anger and intolerance, the Pandavas will
return with enmity and be the cause of great grief to me. In a feud over friendship, I once dislodged Drupada from
his kingdom. O descendant of the Bharata lineage[This is specifically addressed to Duryodhana.]! In his anger, he performed a sacrifice to obtain a son who
would kill me. Through the austerities of Yaja and Upayaja[Sages. The story has been recounted in Volume 1.], he obtained a son named Dhrishtadyumna from the
fire and the slender-waisted Droupadi from the middle of the altar. He[Dhrishtadyumna.] was given by the gods and has radiance
like that of the fire. He was born with bow, arrows and armour. Since I am subject to the dharma of earth, I am possessed by great fear for him. This son of Prishata[Prishata is Drupada's name.], a bull among men, is now on their side. There will be great
fear to my life if I ever have to battle him. He is famous in the world because it has been heard that he will kill me.
Because of your deed, that time of destruction has arrived. Therefore, without any loss of time, do what is best for
you. This happiness will last for a short time, like the shade of a palm tree in the winter. Perform great sacrifices,
enjoy your pleasures and donate. In the fourteenth year, a great calamity will befall you. O Duryodhana! Depending on your inclinations, you have heard or understood. If you so desire, use pacification with the Pandavas." On
hearing Drona's words, Dhritarashtra said, "O Kshatta[From this it appears that Vidura is still describing the events to Dhritarashtra.]! What the preceptor[Drona.] has said is true. Go back to the
Pandavas. If they do not return, offer respect to the Pandavas. Let these fortunate sons go with arms, chariots and
infantry[Nothing happens to this instruction and there is disconnect with what happens next. The fortunate sons are
the Pandavas and Vidura doesn't go to try and bring them back. If they decide to go to the forest, Dhritarashtra is
offering the Pandavas weapons, chariots and infantry. However, this doesn't materialize. Both this chapter and the
next seem to have been added on later.]."'

Vaishampayana said, 'O great king! When the Parthas were defeated in gambling with the dice and had left for the
forest, Dhritarashtra began to worry a lot. Dhritarashtra, lord of the people, was seated, worrying, sighing and with
his mind distracted. At that time, Sanjaya[Dhritarashtra's charioteer.] told him, "O lord of the earth! You have obtained the entire earth, with
all its riches. O king! The Pandavas have left from the kingdom. Why are you grieving?" Dhritarashtra replied,
"The maharatha Pandavas are terrible in battle and have allies. Knowing that the enmity will occur, should one not
sorrow?" Sanjaya said, "O king! This great enmity is the consequence of your great deed. There will be complete
destruction of the entire world and all the relatives. Though restrained by Bhishma, Drona and Vidura, your
shameless and evil-minded son Duryodhana sent the Pratikamin, the son of a suta, to bring the Pandavas' beloved
wife Droupadi, the follower of dharma."

'Dhritarashtra replied, "When the gods wish to defeat a man, they first take his intelligence away, so that his vision becomes distorted. When destruction is nigh and intelligence is clouded, an improper course of action appears
as the proper course of action and sticks to the heart. That which is evil appears in the form of that which is good
and that which is good appears in the form of that which is evil. When destruction is near, they appear thus and one
is content. Destiny does not arrive with a club and strike one on the head with it. The strength of time is that it
makes the opposite seem to be right. By dragging the ascetic Panchali into the middle of the sabha, those evil ones
have caused this terrible calamity that makes the hair on the body stand up. She is beautiful and she is not born
from a womb[She was born from the middle of the altar.]. She has been born from the fire. She is illustrious and is knowledgeable in all dharma. Who but a
deceitful gambler[Duryodhana.] could overpower her and drag her into the middle of an assembly hall? Following the dharma
of women[Droupadi was in her menses.], the one with the beautiful hips was covered in blood. Panchali was in single garment. She looked at
the Pandavas, robbed of their riches, deprived of their thoughts, robbed of their wife, robbed of their prosperity,
deprived of all their pleasures and reduced to a state of servitude. Bound by the noose of dharma, they were unable
to exhibit their valour. Among all the assembled Kurus, Duryodhana and Karna spoke harsh and insulting words to
the angry, defiant and miserable Krishna. O Sanjaya! The earth itself would be burnt down because of those
wretched eyes. Would anything have been left of my sons? On seeing Krishna being dragged into the sabha, all the
women of the Bharata lineage, who had assembled with Gandhari, loudly cried out in anguish. No agnihotras were
offered in the evening, because the brahmanas were enraged at Droupadi's oppression. Terrible winds began to
blow, as if the destruction of the beings had arrived. Terrible meteors descended from the sky and Rahu swallowed
the sun. This was not the time of parvani. But a terrible fear was created in the minds of the subjects. Fearful fires
blazed from the places where chariots are kept. All the flagstaffs crumbled, signifying disaster for the Bharatas. In
Duryodhana's agnihotra, jackals howled in terrible tones. From all the directions, donkeys brayed back in response. O Sanjaya! Bhishma then left with Drona and so did Kripa, Somadatta and the maharatha Bahlika. At that
time, prompted by Vidura, I told Krishna that I would grant her whatever boon she desired. Panchali then chose the
Pandavas, whose energy is unlimited. I then allowed them to leave, with their chariots and their bows. It is then
that the immensely wise Vidura, who knows all the dharma, spoke, 'O descendants of the Bharata lineage! This
dragging of Krishna into the assembly hall will bring about your destruction. The daughter of the king of Panchala
is the supreme Shri. It was decreed by destiny that Panchali would marry the Pandavas. The angry Parthas will
never pardon her humiliation. Nor will the mighty archers, the Vrishnis, or the immensely energetic Panchalas.
They are protected by Vasudeva, always fixed on the truth. Surrounded by the Panchalas, Bibhatsu will return.
Among them, there will be the immensely strong and mighty archer Bhimasena. He will come whirling his club,
like the staff of death. No kings will be able to withstand the sound of the intelligent Partha's Gandiva, or the speed
of Bhima's club. Therefore, it seems to me that one should always have peace, and not war, with the Parthas. I
have always thought that the Pandavas are stronger than the Kurus. With the force of his arms, Bhima killed in battle the immensely radiant and powerful King Jarasandha. O bull among the Bharata lineage! You must ensure
peace with the Pandavas. Without any hesitation, act impartially vis-à-vis the two parties.' O son of Gavalgana[Sanjaya.]!
Thus did Kshatta utter words that were steeped in dharma and artha. But out of the affection I bear for my son, I
did not accept these words."'


