'"'The Brahmana woman said, "O sons! I have not robbed you of your eyesight. Nor am I angry with you. It is the
Bhargava who has been born from my thigh who is angry with you. O sons! There is no doubt that your eyesight
has been taken away by this great-souled one, whose anger has been aroused on remembering that you had killed
his relatives. O sons! When you destroyed even the Bhrigu sons in the wombs, I carried this child in my thigh for
100 years so that he might do that which is good for the Bhrigu lineage. All the Vedas, including their six angas,
came to him when he was in the womb. Angry at the killing of his fathers, he certainly wishes to kill you. It is
through his divine radiance that your eyesight has been destroyed. O sons! Pray to Ourva, this supreme son of
mine. If he is placated through your homage, he may restore your eyesight."'

'"Vashishtha said, 'Having been thus addressed, all the kings addressed the son who had been born from her
thigh and begged him for mercy. He was merciful. Since that supreme Brahmana rishi was born after splitting open
the thigh, he came to be known in the worlds by the name of Ourva. Regaining their eyesight, the kings returned.
But the Bhargava sage decided to bring about the destruction of the entire world. O son! That great-souled one decided to bring about the destruction of all the worlds. In order to bring honour to the Bhrigus, that descendant of
the Bhrigu lineage engaged in great austerities, so as to bring about the destruction of all the worlds. Through his
great and severe austerities, he burnt the worlds with the gods, the asuras and men, and gratified his ancestors. On
learning what the descendant of the lineage was planning to do, the ancestors descended from their world and told
him, "O Ourva! O son! We have witnessed the power of your severe austerities. Have mercy for the worlds and
control your anger. O son! The self-controlled Bhrigus weren't powerless. Nor were they indifferent to slaughter at
the hands of the violent Kshatriyas. O son! When we got tired of our long lives, we ourselves wished for our
deaths at the hands of the Kshatriyas. The riches that were buried in the ground in the dwelling place of the Bhrigus were placed there with the intention of angering the Kshatriyas and creating enmity with them. O bull among
the twice-born! What use are riches to us when we wish to attain heaven? O son! When we found that death was
completely unable to overcome all of us, we thought this would be the most pleasant way. O son! Those who kill
themselves never attain the best worlds. Remembering that, we did not kill ourselves with our own hands. O son!
That which you desire does not please us at all. Therefore, control your mind and refrain from this evil destruction
of all the worlds. O son! None of the Kshatriyas in the seven worlds[There are fourteen lokas (worlds). Seven are above the ground and seven are below. This is a reference to
the seven that are above the ground-bhurloka, bhuvarloka, svarloka, maharloka, janarloka, taparloka and brahmaloka (satyaloka).] has offended or harmed our austerities.
Win over the anger that has arisen in you."'"'


'"'Ourva said, "O ancestors! In anger, I took a vow that all the worlds would be destroyed and that cannot go in
vain. Because I cannot be one whose anger and vows come to nothing. Without a doubt, my anger will consume
me, the way fire consumes dry kindling[That is, unless something is done about the anger.]. When anger arises from a reason that is just, a man who suppresses it
cannot properly safeguard the three goals[Of dharma, artha and kama.]. Anger has the purpose of restraining the evil and protecting the
good. Kings who wish to conquer heaven use their anger for a just cause. I was lying unborn inside my mother's
thigh; I heard cries when my mothers of the Bhrigu lineage were slaughtered by the Kshatriyas. O ancestors! When
those worst of the Kshatriyas slaughtered the Bhrigus, including those in wombs and the worlds ignored this, anger
entered my heart. My mothers, heavy in their wombs, and my fathers were frightened, but did not find a protector
in all the worlds. When the women of the Bhrigu lineage did not find a single protector, my fortunate mother hid
me in one of her thighs. If there is one who punishes crimes in the worlds, no one in the worlds will dare to commit a crime. But if a crime doesn't find a punisher, many in the worlds will commit crimes. A man who has the
power to punish a crime and doesn't do so, despite knowing that a crime has been committed, is himself tainted by
the deed, even if he is the lord. The kings and others were capable of protecting my fathers, but failed to do so.
Giving themselves up to the pleasures of life, they neglected their duties. Therefore, I have justifiable reason to be
angry with the worlds and am now their lord. Yet, I am not capable of disobeying your instructions, even though I
am capable of punishing a crime. By refraining from doing so, I will once again encourage the spread of evil in the
worlds. The anger of my rage wishes to consume the worlds. If I suppress it with my own powers, it will consume
me with its energy. O lords! I know that you always strive for the welfare of the worlds. Therefore, instruct me on
what is best for the worlds and for me."

'"'The ancestors said, "This fire that is born from your anger wishes to consume the worlds. Cast it into the waters and be fortunate, because the worlds are established on water. Every juice consists of water. Indeed, the entire
universe is made out of water. O best of the twice-born! Therefore, release your anger into the water. O Brahmana!
If you so desire, let the anger of your fire be in the great ocean. Let it consume the water, because we have heard
that the worlds are made out of water. O unblemished one! In this way, your vow will remain true and the worlds,
with their gods, will not be destroyed."'

'"Vashishtha said, 'Thereupon, Ourva hurled the fire of his anger into Varuna's territory and the fire consumes
the waters of the great ocean. Those who are learned in the Vedas know that it has assumed the form of a large
horse's head[A horse is vadava and a horse's head is called vadavamukha, mukha meaning face. This submarine fire is
thus called vadavamukha. Since anala means fire, it is also called vadavanala.], which spouts fire from the mouth and consumes the waters of the great ocean. O Parashara! You
are the foremost among those who are wise. You are familiar with the higher dharma. Be blessed and refrain from
destroying the worlds.'"'


