Shounaka asked, 'At that time, what did King Janamejaya ask his ministers about his father's ascent to heaven?
Tell me that again in detail.'

Souti replied, 'O Brahmana! Hear what the king asked his ministers and all that they told him about Parikshit's
death. Janamejaya said, "You know all that happened to my father and how my greatly illustrious father came
about his death. When I have heard all about my father in complete detail from you, I shall learn all that is good
and not that which is evil."

'Being asked by the great-souled King Janamejaya, the virtuous and wise ministers replied, "Your father was
devoted to dharma, great-souled and a protector of his subjects. Hear how that great-souled one led his life. The
four varnas were respectively established in their own dharmas and the king, who was himself well versed with
dharma protected them there, in accordance with the dictates of dharma. Illustrious and with infinite might, he protected the goddess earth. He hated no one. Nor did anyone hate him. Like Prajapati himself, he treated all beings
impartially. O king! Established in their respective duties, the Brahmanas, the Kshatriyas, the Vaishyas and the
Shudras were protected impartially by the king. He maintained widows, orphans, the disabled and the poor. He was
handsome and like another moon to all creatures. Through that truthful and greatly powerful king, everyone was
content and blessed with good fortune. The king became Sharadvata's student in the science of weapons[Dhanur Veda. This is about the science of fighting and weaponry.]. O
Janamejaya! Govinda[Krishna.] loved your father. He was immensely famous and loved by all the worlds. He was born
in Uttara's womb when the Kuru lineage was almost destroyed. Therefore, Soubhadra's[Soubhadra means Subhadra's son, that is, Abhimanyu. Parikshit was Abhimanyu's son. Parikshina means
to become weak, thin, lean, emaciated. Since this is what had happened to the Kuru lineage, he came to be known
as Parikshit.] powerful son came to
be known as Parikshit. The king was learned in royal norms of dharma and artha and had all the qualities. He was
in control of his senses and of himself. He was intelligent and was served by those who were wise. He had great
wisdom and was completely familiar with the norms of righteous conduct. He had conquered the six vices[Kama (desire), krodha (anger), lobha (greed), mada (ego), moha (delusion) and matsarya (envy).].
Your father protected his subjects for sixty years. His end was preordained, through a snake, and it couldn't be
avoided. O best of men! After him, you have lawfully ascended this ancestral kingdom of the Kurus and will rule
for 1000 years. O protector of every being! You were instated when you were a child."

'Janamejaya said, "In our lineage, no king has ever been born who did not look after the welfare of his subjects
and please them. Consider especially the conduct of my grandfathers[The Pandavas.], who were always devoted to a great life.
How did my father, who was like them, come to his end? Describe it accurately to me. I wish to hear it."'

Souti said, 'Thus asked by the king, the ministers, who were always engaged in that which brought pleasure to
the king, told him everything that had happened. The ministers said, "O king! Your father was always addicted to
hunting, like the greatly fortunate warrior and great archer, Pandu. He handed over all matters concerning the running of the kingdom to us. On one occasion, he was roaming in the forest and pierced a deer with an arrow. Having
thus shot the deer, he pursued it deep into the forest, alone and on foot, with his sword, quiver and bow ready. But
your father could not find that lost deer deep inside the forest. He was sixty years old and aged and felt tired and
hungry. He then saw a great sage in that great forest. The lord of kings asked the sage, who at that time was observing a vow of silence and thus the sage did not reply to any of the questions. In his vow of silence, the sage sat
motionless and peaceful like a piece of wood, and hungry and thirsty and not knowing that the sage was observing
a vow of silence, the king became angry with the sage. Being angry, your father insulted the sage. O best of the
Bharata lineage! With the end of his bow, he picked up a dead snake from the ground and placed it around the
shoulders of that pure-souled sage. But that wise one did not utter a word, good or bad, and did not become angry.
He remained as he was, with the snake around his shoulders."'


'The ministers said, "O lord of kings! Having placed the snake around the shoulders of the sage, the king, who was
weak with hunger, returned to his own city. The rishi had an immensely famous son named Shringi, who had been
born from a cow. He was extremely powerful, with great energy and prone to extreme anger. This sage had gone to
Brahma to worship him. O tiger of the Kuru lineage! When he was given leave to depart, he was returning and
learnt from a friend how your father had insulted his father, how your father had hung a dead snake around his father's shoulders and that he still bore it, though he had done no injury. O king! His father was a great ascetic and
supreme among sages. He was pure and had control over his senses and the performer of wonderful deeds. His
soul was radiant with the power of his austerities and he had control over all his limbs. His practices were pure and
his words were also pure. He was perfectly balanced, without avarice, without pettiness and without jealousy. He
was old and he was under a vow of silence. He was the refuge of all beings. Such was the person your father
insulted.

'"However, the rishi's son cursed your father in anger. Though he was still a child, he had great energy and the
radiance that comes with age. He instantly touched water and, blazing with energy, angrily spoke about your father. 'Look at the power of my austerities. An evil one has left a dead snake around my innocent father's shoulders.
Within seven nights from now, the angry and radiant snake Takshaka will burn him down with the energy of his
poison.' Having said this, he went to where his father was. On seeing his father, he told him about the curse he had
uttered. That tiger among sages sent a message to your father. 'O lord of the earth! You have been cursed by my
son that Takshaka will burn you down with his poison. O king! Be prepared.' O Janamejaya! On hearing this terrible news, your father was alarmed and took every possible precaution against Takshaka, supreme among snakes.

'"When the seventh day arrived, a brahmarshi named Kashyapa was on his way to visit the king. Takshaka,
chief among the snakes, saw Kashaypa as he was hurrying, and asked him, 'Where are you going so swiftly? What
is it that you want to do?' Kashyapa replied, 'O Brahmana[Takshaka had assumed the disguise of a Brahmana.]! I am going to where King Parikshit, the best of the
Kurus, is. Today, he will be killed by the snake Takshaka. I am hurrying there so that I can cure him from his fever.
If I protect him, no snake can oppress him.' Takshaka said, 'O Brahmana! Why do you wish to revive the king after I have bitten him? Don't hesitate to tell me what your desire is and I will give it to you. Return home.' When he
said he was going there with the desire of acquiring riches, the snake told the great-souled one in pleasant words,
'O, unblemished one! Take from me more riches than you hope to obtain from the king and return.' Thus addressed by the snake, Kashyapa, best among men, obtained as much of riches as he obtained from Takshaka and
returned.

'"After the Brahmana returned, Takshaka disguised himself and went to your virtuous father, king and best of
kings. He was fully prepared in his palace, but he burnt him with the fire of his poison. O tiger among men! It was
after this that you victoriously ascended the throne. O best among kings! Though the account is extremely terrible,
we have told you everything in entirety, the way it was seen and heard. O supreme among kings! You have now
heard how that great king was destroyed and how the rishi Shamika was insulted. Now do what needs to be done."

'Janamejaya said, "I first wish to hear what was said between Kashyapa and the chief among snakes in that deserted forest. Who witnessed what transpired and how did you hear this? After I have heard this, I will think of a
means to destroy the snakes."

'The ministers said, "O king! Listen to how we came to know about the encounter between the chief among the
Brahmanas and the chief among the snakes. O lord of the earth! A man had climbed a tall tree, looking for dry
twigs that could be used as kindling for a sacrificial fire. Perched on the tree, he was not seen by the Brahmana or
the snake. O king! He was also reduced to ashes along with the tree. O lord of kings! The Brahmana's powers revived him, along with the tree. O chief among kings! He later returned to the city and told us the story. What we
recounted to you about the encounter between Takshaka and the Brahmana was exactly as it happened and exactly
as it was witnessed. O king! O tiger among kings! Now that you have heard it, decide what must be done."'

Souti said, 'On hearing the words of his ministers, King Janamejaya burnt in grief and wrung his hands. The lotus-eyed king heaved long and deep sighs and wept, tears streaming from his eyes. Struck with deep grief, the lord
of the earth said, "I have heard from you the account of my father's ascent to heaven. Now hear from me what my
firm decision is. I think no time should be lost in taking action against the evil Takshaka, since he is the one who
killed my father. That evil one alone burnt the king and made Shringi's curse come true. If the evil one[This is now a reference to Kashyapa.] had
gone, my father would surely have been alive. What harm could have come to him[Takshaka.] had the king been revived
through Kashyapa's blessings and the precautions taken by his ministers? It was his delusion that made him prevent Kashyapa, supreme among Brahmanas, from reviving the invincible king. The transgression of the evil Tak-
shaka is a great one. He gave riches to the Brahmana so that he might not revive the king. My father must be
avenged, to bring great pleasure to me, Utanka and all of you."'


