Arjuna said, "The brahman is the supreme object of knowledge and you should explain this to me. Through
your favours, my mind finds pleasure in these subtle aspects."

'Vasudeva replied, "In this connection, an ancient history is cited about a conversation between a disciple and a
preceptor on the question of moksha. O scorcher of enemies! There was a brahmana preceptor who was rigid in his
vows. While he was seated, his intelligent disciple asked him, 'O illustrious one! Desiring supreme benefit, I am
seeking refuge with you. What is supremely beneficial? O brahmana! I have bowed down my head and am soliciting you. Tell me and instruct me.' O Partha! The preceptor replied to the disciple. 'O brahmana! I will explain
whatever you have doubts about.' O best among the Kuru lineage! The one who was devoted to his preceptor was
thus addressed by the preceptor. He joined his hands in salutation and asked. O immensely intelligent one! Listen
to this.

'"The disciple asked, 'Where have I come from? Where have you come from? Tell me about the supreme truth.
From where do mobile and immobile creatures originate? How do creatures remain alive? What is their lifespan?
O brahmana! What is truth? What are austerities? What are the qualities of those who are virtuous? What are auspicious paths? What is happiness? What are wicked deeds? O illustrious one! O excellent one! O brahmana rishi!
There is no one other than you who knows the truth about these questions and you should tell me the truth.'"

'Vasudeva continued, "The disciple asked humbly, in the proper way. He was tranquil and possessed the qualities. He followed his preceptor like a shadow. He was a self-controlled mendicant who observed brahmacharya. O
Partha! He asked these questions. O best among those of the Kuru lineage! O scorcher of enemies! The preceptor,
who was intelligent and firm in his vows, answered them properly. 'This was stated by Brahma and is practised by
the best of rishis who are devoted to dharma. This constitutes knowledge of the Vedas. It is the truth behind the
reason why beings were created. It is a determination about the past, the present and the future and about dharma,
kama and artha. This is known to the large number of siddhas. It is eternal and was thought of in ancient times. O
immensely wise one! Using proper words, I will now tell you about it. Learned ones who possess this intelligence
have success in this world. In earlier times, the rishis wished to ask each other and assembled together-Brihaspati, Bharadvaja, Goutama, Bhargava, Vasishtha, Kashyapa, Vishvamitra and Atri. All of them had traversed along
various paths, performing their own rites, and were exhausted. With the aged Angiras leading them, they went to
Brahma's abode and saw Brahma, cleansed of sin. He was seated happily and the great-souled maharshis bowed
down before him. They humbly asked him about the supreme benefit. What deeds should a virtuous person undertake? How is one freed from sin? What are auspicious paths? What is truth? What is extremely wicked? Which
path enables one to obtain greatness? What is the final destruction of beings? What is their creation? The best
among sages spoke in this way to the great grandfather. I will tell you what he said. O disciple! Listen to what the
sacred texts have to say.

'"'Brahma said, "All mobile and immobile objects are born from the truth. O ones who are excellent in your
vows! They live through austerities. It is because of their own deeds that they are again born in their own species.
Truth is always united with the qualities and has the five manifestations[The five elements.]. The brahman is truth. Austerities are
truth. Prajapati is the truth. Creatures are born from the truth. Creatures possess the greatness of truth. That is the
reason brahmanas resort to the truth and are always devoted to yoga. They overcome anger and repentance and use
dharma as the bridge. There are other learned brahmanas who have laid down the ordinances of dharma. I will tell
you about them, the ones who have thought about the eternal worlds. There are four separate varnas and four separate ashramas. Dharma is one. But the learned have always said that it has four components. O brahmanas! I will
now tell you about the path that is auspicious and brings benefit. Earlier, learned ones who have thought about the
brahman have always traversed along this. Listen to me now. This supreme path is difficult to comprehend. O immensely fortunate ones! Listen to everything about that supreme destination. The first step is said to be the ashrama of brahmacharya. Garhasthya is the second and vanaprastha comes after that. After this, it is known as the
supreme step of adhyatma[That is, sannyasa.]. Light, space , Aditya, Vayu, Indra and Prajapati-these can only be seen as long as
one has not attained the state of adhyatma. Listen now to the means of obtaining that state. Sages reside in the forest and subsist on fruits, roots and air. This stage of vanaprastha has been laid down for the first three varnas.
Garhasthya is recommended for all the varnas. In this stage, it has been said that patience and faithfulness are the
signs of dharma. These are the paths that are known as devayana. The virtuous and the patient use these rites as the
bridge of dharma. Other than this, there is another kind of dharma for those who are rigid in their vows. Such people can always visualize the creation and destruction of beings. I will now accurately tell you the truth and the reasons as to why different essences exist separately in objects. Mahat is unmanifest. There is ego. There are eleven
senses[Five senses, five organs of action and the mind.] and the five great elements. The sacred texts of the Vedas have said that the five elements are superior.
The attributes are said to be twenty-four[Following sankhya-five senses, five objects of the senses, five organs of action, five great elements, mind, intelligence (Mahat), ego (Ahamkara) and Prakriti.]. One who understands the truth about this is patient and knows the truth
about the creation and destruction of all beings. He is not overcome by confusion. A person who know the exact
truth about the attributes and the qualities and everything about the gods, is cleansed of all sin and is freed from his
bonds. He obtains all the unblemished worlds."'"'


Brahma said, "That is unmanifest. It cannot be identified. It pervades everything. It is permanent and does
not move. It is known as a city with nine gates, with three qualities and five elements[The nine gates of the body are two eyes, two ears, two nostrils, the mouth, the anus and the genital organ. The
three qualities are sattva, rajas and tamas.]. The mind discriminates inside and pervades the eleven[Three qualities, five elements, intelligence, ego and the senses being counted as a single entity.]. Intelligence is the supreme lord over these eleven. This is repeatedly nurtured by three flows. These are the nadis[Veins, arteries, nerves.] and the qualities flow along these, known as the qualities of tamas, rajas and sattva. All of these are joined to each other in pairs and obtain support from each other. They find refuge
with each other and also follow each other. The three qualities are attached to each other and also to the five elements. Tamas is mixed with sattva. Sattva is mixed with rajas. Other than rajas being mixed with sattva, sattva is
also mixed with tamas. When tamas is restrained, rajas flows there. When rajas is restrained, sattva flows there.
Among the three qualities, tamas should be known as the night, since it has signs of confusion. It has the attributes
of adharma and is always associated with wicked deeds. Rajas is said to progressively stimulate enterprise and action. In all beings, when it flows, its signs are generation. Radiance, dexterity and faith-in all beings, these are
seen to be the forms of sattva and dexterity is respected by the virtuous. I will now tell you about the nature of
these qualities and their reasons. Understand from me the truth about these qualities, individually and collectively.
Confusion, ignorance, lack of detachment, inability to take a decision about acting, sleep, insolence, fear, greed,
sorrow, censure of good acts, lack of memory, distress, lack of belief, perverse conduct, lack of discrimination,
blindness, vileness in conduct, boasting about action even when no action has been performed, belief in knowledge
despite being ignorant, lack of friendliness, contrary action, lack of faith, stupidity in beliefs, crookedness, lack of
sense, wicked sentiments in action, heaviness, despondency, darkness and degradation-brahmanas recount these
as the qualities of tamas. There are other sentiments that constrain one in this world, laced with signs of confusion.
Wherever they cause those constraints, those are the qualities of tamas. Such people always censure the gods,
brahmanas and the Vedas. Attachment, insolence, confusion, anger, lack of forgiveness and malice towards creatures-such conduct has the attributes of tamas. People begin futile tasks. They donate in vain. They eat in vain.
Such conduct has the attributes of tamas. Speaking a lot, lack of patience, jealousy, pride, lack of faith-such conduct has the attributes of tamas. There are men in this world who perpetrate such wicked deeds. They break the ordinances. All such people are tamas. Their sentiments lead them downwards and they are born as inferior species.
They become immobile objects, animals, beasts of burden, predatory beasts, snakes, worms, insects, birds, creatures born from eggs, all the other kinds of quadrupeds, or those who are mad, deaf and dumb, or those who suffer
from other vile diseases. Because of the consequences of their deeds, these evildoers are immersed in tamas. Their
course is downwards. From one kind of tamas, they submerge into greater tamas. I will next tell you what such
people can do for their benefit. Through such means, they become the performers of auspicious deeds and can obtain worlds meant for the virtuous. Those born as inferior species should be engaged in their own deeds, bring
pleasure to brahmanas and take part in their rites[A liberty has been taken in this translation. Otherwise, the meaning wouldn't have been clear. Even if one is
born as inferior species, if one participates in rites followed by brahmanas, one is capable of uplifting one's own
self.]. If one endeavors to ensure this process of cleansing, one ascends to superior worlds. It is even possible to be with the gods in heaven. This is what is said in the sacred texts
of the Vedas. Those born as inferior species should be engaged in their own deeds. Thereby, they become human,
though they have to be born again. They obtain inferior births, like those of chandalas. Or they are dumb, or stammer. However, progressively, they obtain better and better varnas. They transcend birth as a shudra and other qualities of tamas. But those who indulge in the qualities of tamas continue to remain submerged in that flow. The attachment to desire is said to be a great delusion. Desiring happiness, even rishis, sages and gods become confused.
Darkness, confusion, great confusion, the darkness known as anger, death and blinding ignorance-of these, the
darkness of rage is said to be the worst. O brahmanas! I have recounted to you the truth about different kinds of
birth. I have also told you everything about tamas. Who is the virtuous one who understands it? Who is the virtuous one who sees it? Taking falsehood to be the truth is indeed a characteristic of tamas. The qualities of tamas
have been recounted in many ways. I have also told you about what is superior to tamas. A man who knows these
qualities will always be freed from all the qualities of tamas."'"'


