'Sanjaya said, "O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I will now tell you about the hundreds and thousands
of bouts that took place there, without showing any considerations of respect. The son did not recognize the father,
or the father the son born from his own loins. A brother did not recognize a brother there, nor a sister's son his maternal uncle. The maternal uncle did not recognize his sister's son, nor did a friend recognize his friend there. The
Pandavas and the Kurus fought as if they were possessed. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Some tigers among
men used chariots to bring down and shatter chariots, destroying their yokes. Axles of chariots clashed against
axles of chariots. Seats clashed against seats of chariots. Some united against others who were united. They all
wished to rob each other of their lives. Some chariots could not move, because they were obstructed by other chariots. Gigantic elephants had their temples shattered and fell down on other elephants. They were angry and used
their tusks to attack each other in many places. Elephants adorned with decorations[Actually, wooden structures on the elephants, howdahs.] and standards attacked the
elephants of the enemy. O great king! These were giant elephants that encountered other powerful ones. Injured by
the tusks, they were greatly distressed and roared. But these were disciplined because of their training. Urged by
pikes and goads, elephants that were in musth attacked others that were in musth. Attacked by those that were in
musth, giant elephants ran away everywhere, shrieking like cranes. There were trained elephants, with shattered
temples and mouths. These supreme elephants were wounded by swords, lances and iron arrows. Pierced in their
innards, they fell down and lost their lives. Others uttered terrible roars and ran away in different directions. The
foot soldiers who guarded the elephants were armed and possessed broad chests. They had swords, bows, unblemished battleaxes, clubs, maces, catapults[Bhindipala. Alternatively, short javelin.], lances, iron bludgeons and sharp and polished cutlasses[Nistrimsha. Rishti and nistrimsha are both swords. We have used cutlass for nistrimsha only to distinguish it
from rishti.]. O great
king! Grasping these, they could be seen to run in every direction, desirous of taking each other's lives. The resplendent cutlasses were steeped in the blood of brave men and seemed to shine brilliantly. The swords were
whirled by the arms of brave ones and made a whizzing sound. As they descended on the inner organs of enemies,
they generated a tremendous sound. They were shattered by clubs and maces and by supreme swords. They were
gored by the tusks of the tusked ones and wounded by the tusks. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In every
place, large numbers of men were oppressed and let out sounds of lamentation, like those of men who are about to
die.

'"Those who were on extremely swift horses, with tails like those of swans, attacked others on horses. They
hurled giant spears that were decorated with gold and were swift, sharp and polished. They descended like snakes.
There were some great rathas on swift horses. They sliced off the heads of other brave rathas who were on horses.
A ratha on a horse approached many who were within the shooting distance of an arrow and used straight-tufted
iron arrows to kill them. There were crazy elephants that were like mountains or clouds and were adorned with
gold. They brought down horses and crushed them with their feet. The elephants were struck on their humps and
their flanks. They were pierced by spikes and some of them roared in agony. There was terrible confusion there.
Many supreme elephants suddenly threw down horses and their riders and crushed them. Using the tips of their
tusks, elephants flung down horses and their riders. They crushed chariots and their standards and roamed around.
There were some giant male elephants, extremely energetic because of the musth strewing down their temples.
They slew horses and riders with their trunks and their feet. Some horses and chariots were flung away by the elephants. All of them were thrown away in all the directions, with a loud noise. Swift, polished and sharp arrows
were like serpents. They descended on the bodies of men and riders and pierced their iron armour. Polished
javelins were hurled by the arms of brave ones. O lord of the earth! They were terrible, like giant meteors, and descended. Blazing swords were taken out from sheaths made out of the skins of tigers and leopards. Once unsheathed, these polished swords were used to kill the enemies in battle. There were soldiers who had their sides
sliced open. Despite this, they angrily attacked with swords, shields and battleaxes. Some were pierced by javelins.
Others were cut down by battleaxes. Some were destroyed by elephants. Others were oppressed by horses. Some
were crushed by the wheels of chariots. Others were brought down by sharp arrows. O king! Thus oppressed, the
men loudly called for their relatives, their sons, fathers, brothers and kin, their maternal uncles and nephews. In
that field of battle, some others called for others[That is, other relatives.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A large number of combatants lost their weapons. Their thighs were broken and their hands and arms torn apart. Their sides were shattered. Some were still alive and could be seen to be screaming from thirst. O lord of the earth! They had only a little bit of strength left and were overcome by thirst. They had fallen down on the ground in that battle and asked for
water. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Others were weak and were covered in blood. Assembled there, they
censured themselves and your son.

'"O venerable one! But there were other brave kshatriyas. Having acted in enmity towards each other, they did
not cast away their weapons. Nor did they lament. They roared in delight towards each other. Lying there, they
could be seen to bite their teeth with their own lips. Their bows were contracted and they glanced towards each
other. There were others who suffered from wounds and had been oppressed by arrows. But even then, those extremely strong ones bore the pain silently and were firm in their hearts. There were other brave charioteers who
had lost their chariots in battle. They had been thrown down and wounded by the supreme elephants. Having been
brought down, they asked for the chariots of others. O great king! They were as beautiful as blossoming kimshuka
trees. Many terrible cries were heard in every division of the armies. It was an extremely terrible encounter that destroyed heroes. In that battle, the father killed the son and the son killed the father. The sister's son killed the maternal uncle and the maternal uncle killed the sister's son. O king! A friend killed a friend and a relative killed a
relative. Thus was the battle between the Kurus and the Pandavas. No mercy was shown in that fearful and terrible
encounter. On encountering Bhishma, the army of the Parthas trembled. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The
mighty-armed one's standard was adorned with five stars and a palm tree. It was made out of silver. O king! When
ascended on his great chariot, Bhishma looked like the moon on Meru."'


