Vaishampayana said, 'O Janamejaya! Having been thus addressed, the Pandavas headed for the southern part of
Panchala, ruled by King Drupada. On their way, the brave Pandavas met the great-souled, pure-souled, unblemished and illustrious sage Dvaipayana and paid their respects to him, in accordance with the prescribed rites. He
too showed them his respect and after their conversation was over, on his instructions, they proceeded to Drupada's palace. Those maharathas proceeded slowly, stopping when they saw beautiful forests and lakes. At last,
Kuru's descendants, devoted to learning, pure, amiable and sweet of speech, arrived in Panchala. After seeing the
city and the royal residence, the Pandavas lodged in a potter's house. Adopting the lifestyle of Brahmanas, they
begged for their food. No one recognized those warriors when they stayed there.

'Yajnasena always desired to give Krishna to Kiriti[One of Arjuna's names.], Pandu's son, but he never revealed this to anyone. O
Janamejaya! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thinking of Kunti's son, the Panchala got a very hard bow constructed, one that no one else would be able to bend. He had an artificial machine[Yantra.] set up above and onto this machine he fixed a golden target. Drupada said, "He who can string this bow and, after stringing, shoot the target
above with these arrows, will obtain my daughter." With these words, King Drupada announced the svayamvara
everywhere. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Hearing this, all the kings assembled. Many great-souled rishis
also came there, wishing to witness the svayamvara. O king! The Kouravas, led by Duryodhana, also came there,
accompanied by Karna. Many illustrious Brahmanas also came from many countries. The great-souled Drupada
duly worshipped the kings. All the citizens and all the kings took their seats, resulting in a roar like that of the
ocean full of porpoises.

'The platform was constructed on the north-east of the city, on a flat and auspicious piece of ground. The beautiful meeting place was surrounded by houses on all sides. It was enclosed by a wall and a moat on all sides, decorated with gates and covered everywhere with a colourful canopy. It echoed to the sound of many musical instruments, was scented with agaru[Agallochum, a soft, resinous wood with an aromatic smell burnt as perfume.], adorned with garlands and sprinkled with sandalwood water. Large and white
palaces that were well built surrounded it on all sides, like the peaks of Kailash when they touch the sky. The windows were covered with golden trellises and the walls sparkled with mosaic work of precious stones. The stairs
were easy to climb. The seats were covered with expensive cloth that was not like those that came from villages.
They were white like swans and scented with agaru, so that the fragrance could be smelt one yojana away. Each
palace had 100 doors and had beautiful seats and couches. The expensive beds had many metals on them, like the
peaks of the Himalayas. All the kings were seated on the many storeys of these palaces, each one decorated with
many ornaments and boastful of his success. Those tigers among kings were scented with the paste of black agaru
and were greatly fortunate, devoted to the Brahmanas, protectors of their realms and loved by all the worlds because of their good deeds. When they were seated on their royal seats, the inhabitants of the city and of the country
who had come to see Krishna also took their seats. The Pandavas took their seats with the Brahmanas and witnessed the unrivalled splendour of the king of Panchala. O king! For many days, the numbers who had assembled
increased. Many jewels were distributed and many dancers and actors provided entertainment.

'O bull of the Bharata lineage! On the sixteenth day, when there was a crowd, Droupadi bathed, wore the best of
clothing and adorned herself with many ornaments. She descended into the arena, carrying in her hand a beautifully adorned golden prize for the winner. After pouring offerings of ghee into the sacrificial fire according to prescribed rites, the priest of the Somakas[That is, those of the lunar dynasty, an epithet for the Panchalas.], a pure Brahmana, learned in the mantras, uttered salutations of peace to
the fire and to Brahmanas and stopped the playing of all musical instruments.

'O ruler of the earth! When everything was quiet, Dhrishtadyumna went to the centre of the arena and spoke, in
a thundering voice, words that were deep with meaning and sweet. "O assembled kings! Hear that this is the bow,
that is the target and these are the arrows. With these five arrows, shoot the target through the hole in the centre of
the machine. I truly say that the handsome and strong one, born in a noble family, who accomplishes this great feat
today, will obtain as his wife my sister Krishna." Having thus addressed the assembled kings, Drupada's son spoke
to Droupadi, recounting to her the lineages and deeds of the assembled kings.'


'Dhrishtadyumna said, "Duryodhana, Durvisaha, Durmukha, Dushpradharshana, Vivimshati, Vikarna, Saha,
Duhshasana, Sama, Yuyutsu, Vatavega, Bhimavegadhara, Ugrayudha, Balaki, Kanakayu, Virochana, Sukundula,
Chitrasena, Suvarcha, Kanakadhvaja, Nandaka, Bahushali, Kunduja and Vikata-these and others are the immensely powerful sons of Dhritarashtra. These warriors have come with Karna for your hand.

'"Hundreds are the famous and great-souled kings, bulls among the Kshatriyas-Shakuni, Bala, Vrishaka and
Brihadbala, all these sons of the king of Gandhara have come. Adorned with every ornament, the great-souled warriors Ashvatthama and Bhoja, skilled in the use of all weapons, have come. The kings Brihanta, Manimana and the
valiant Dandadhara, Sahadeva, Jayatsena, Meghasandhi of Magadha, Virata and his two sons Sankha and Uttara,
Vardhakshemi, Susharma, King Senabindu, Abhibhu with his sons Sudamna and Suvarchasa, Sumitra, Sukumara,
Vrika, Satyadhriti, Suryadhvaja, Rochamana, Nila, Chitrayudha, Amshumana, Chekitana, the immensely powerful
Shrenimana, Chandrasena, the powerful son of Samudrasena, Jalasamdha, the father and son Vidanda and Danda,
Poundraka, Vasudeva, the valorous Bhagadatta, Kalinga, Tamralipta, the king of Pattana, the maharatha Shalya,
king of Madra with his sons, the brave Rukmagandha and Rukmaratha, the Kourava Somadatta and his three maharatha sons Bhuri, Bhurishrava and Shala, Sudakshina, Kamboja, the Kourava Dridhadhanva, Brihadbala,
Sushena, Ushinara's son Shibi, Samkarshana, Vasudeva, Rukmini's brave son Samba, Charudeshna, Sarana, Gada,
Akrura, Satyaki, the immensely powerful Uddhava, Hridika's son Kritavarma, Prithu, Viprithu, Viduratha, Kanka,
Samika, Saramejaya, the brave Vatapati, Jhilli, Pindaraka, the brave Ushinara, all famous as descended from the
Vrishni lineage; Bhagiratha, Brihatkshetra, Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu, Brihadratha, Bahlika, the maharatha
Shrutayu, Uluka, King Kaitava, Chitrangada, Subhangada, the patient king of Vatsa, the king of Kosala.

'"O fortunate one! These and many other kings of many regions, famous on earth, have come here for you.
These brave ones will try to shoot the excellent target for your hand. O beautiful one! You will choose as a husband the one who hits it."'


Vaishampayana said, 'Those youthful kings were adorned with earrings. Each regarded himself as the most skilled
in the use of weapons. All of them stood up and brandished their weapons. They boasted at one another, insolent
with beauty, valour, lineage, virtue, riches and youth. They were like kings of elephants from the Himalayas, drunk
in the season of rut. They stared at each other in insolence. Mentally struck with desire, they suddenly stood up
from their royal seats and exclaimed, "Krishna will be mine." Assembled in that arena and eager to win Drupada's
daughter, they looked like gods who stood around Uma, the daughter of the king of the mountains. Their bodies
were pierced with the arrows of the god of love[Kandarpa, one of the names of the god of love.]. They completely lost their hearts to Krishna[Droupadi.]. They descended
into the arena, feeling hatred for their own relatives for Droupadi's sake.

'The gods came in their heavenly chariots-the rudras, the adityas, the vasus, the twin Ashvins, all the sadhyas
and all the maruts, with Yama and the god of wealth[Kubera.] at the forefront. There also came the daityas, the suparnas[The giant birds in general.],
the great uragas[The nagas.], the devarshis, the guhyakas[Semi-divine species.], the charanas[Celestial singers.], Vishvavasu, Narada, Parvata, the chief gandharvas with the apsaras, Halayudha[Halayudha is one of Balarama's names. Hala means plough, ayudha means weapon. Halayudha is one with
the plough as one's weapon.], Janardana[Krishna.] and the chiefs among the Vrishnis and the Andhakas. The chiefs
among the Yadus, always devoted to Krishna, were also there, witnessing it. On seeing the five Pandavas, like elephants in rut that had come to a lake full of lotuses, like a fire covered with ashes, the chief of the Yadus[Krishna.] began
to wonder. He told Rama[Balarama.], "That is Yudhishthira. That is Bhima and that is Jishnu[Another name of Arjuna's.] and those are the valorous
twins." Glancing at them leisurely, Rama cast a pleased glance at Janardana.

'Biting their lower lips in anger, those other warriors, the sons and grandsons of kings, had set their eyes, hearts
and natures on Krishna. Biting their lips and with faces that were like copper in colour, they only looked at her[Therefore, they did not notice the Pandavas.].
On seeing Droupadi, Pritha's mighty-armed sons and the brave and great-natured twins were struck with the arrows of the god of love[Pritha is Kunti's name and only Yudhishthira, Bhima and Arjuna were Kunti's sons. Nakula and Sahadeva
were Madri's sons.]. The place was full of gods, rishis, gandharvas, suparnas, nagas, asuras and siddhas, pervaded with divine fragrances and covered with divine garlands. A great roar arose from the drums[Dundubhi.], and the
sounds of the flute, the veena and cymbals echoed. The celestial routes were crowded with the heavenly chariots of
the gods.

'Then, one after another, those kings exhibited their valour for Krishna. But the bow was so strong that with all
their strength, they could not string it. The firm wood of the bow recoiled and flung those brave rulers of men on
the ground. They failed in their desire and could be seen on the ground, miserable and broken in spirit. That firm
bow caused them pain and shattered their bracelets and earrings. Having lost hopes of obtaining Krishna, that assembly of kings was crestfallen. In that assembly, those kings who boasted of noble birth then became objects of
derision. Kunti's brave son Jishnu then arose, wishing to string the bow and place an arrow on it.'


