'Sanjaya said, "O king! The mighty-armed Satyaki, invincible in battle, drew a supreme bow, capable of withstanding a great burden, in that battle. He discharged many tufted arrows that were like virulent serpents. He displayed the deep, light and wonderful dexterity of his hands. He drew the bow, affixed arrows to it, discharged them
and affixed others so swiftly that he seemed to be like a beautiful cloud that was showering down rain. He killed
the enemies in that battle. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! King Duryodhana saw that he was blazing and
despatched ten thousand chariots against him. But valiant Satyaki, for whom truth was valour, was a great and
supreme archer. He used divine weapons to slay all of them. Having accomplished this terrible deed, he grasped
his bow and confronted Bhurishrava, the extender of the deeds of the Kuru lineage, in that battle. On seeing that
the soldiers had been brought down by Yuyudhana, he[Bhurishrava.] angrily attacked him. He stretched an extremely large
bow that had the complexion of Indra's weapon[Indra's weapon is the rainbow.]. O great king! He displayed the dexterity of his hands and released thousands of arrows that were as virulent as serpents and were like the vajra. O king! These arrows were
like the touch of death to Satyaki's followers and they fled, leaving the invincible Satyaki alone in that fight.

'"On seeing this, Yuyudhana's ten sons advanced against Bhurishrava, the great archer, in that battle. They were
maharathas and immensely strong. They were clad in excellent armour and bore many different kinds of weapons
and standards. All of them were extremely angry in that great battle and spoke to the one who had the mark of a
sacrificial stake on his standard[Bhurishrava had a sacrificial stake on his standard.]. 'O immensely strong one! O relative of the Kouravas[Bhurishrava was the son of Somadatta and Somadatta was descended from Pratipa, who was also the ancestor
of the Pandavas and the Kouravas.]! Come and fight with
us, either singly, or together. You will obtain great fame if you vanquish us in battle. Or we will vanquish you in
battle and obtain great satisfaction.' Thus addressed, the immensely strong and brave one, who was foremost
among men and prided himself on his valour, saw them stationed there and replied, 'O brave ones! You have spoken well. If that is your desire, fight with me now. I will endeavour to kill all of you in battle.' Having been thus
addressed, the brave ones who were swift in action showered the great archer, the destroyer of enemies, with arrows. O great king! That tumultuous encounter commenced when it was afternoon. In that field of battle, there was
a single one on one side and many united ones on the other. They enveloped that single-handed and foremost warrior with arrows. O king! It was like clouds showering down on a giant mountain. When unleashed, that shower of
arrows was like Yama's staff, or like the vajra. But before they could reach him, the maharatha swiftly sliced them
down. We then beheld the extraordinary valour of Somadatta's son. He single-handedly fought with many, without
any fear. O king! The ten maharathas created a shower of arrows. They surrounded the mighty-armed one, wishing
to kill him. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O king! In that battle, Somadatta's son used ten arrows to angrily
slice down their bows. O king! When their bows had been sliced down, in that encounter, the maharatha instantly
used sharp, straight-tufted and broad-headed arrows to slice off their heads. Thus slain, they fell down on the
ground, like trees struck by lightning.

'"O king! On seeing that his brave and immensely strong sons had been killed in battle, Varshneya[Satyaki.] roared
and attacked Bhurishrava. In that battle, chariot dashed against chariot and the two immensely strong ones oppressed each other. In that encounter, they slew the horses of each other's chariot. Deprived of their chariots, the
maharathas jumped down on the ground. They grasped great swords and supreme shields and attacked each other.
As they were stationed for battle, those tigers among men were dazzling. Satyaki was wielding a supreme sword.
O king! But Bhimasena swiftly approached him and took him up on his chariot. O king! And while all the archers
looked on in that battle, your son picked up Bhurishrava on his chariot. O bull among the Bharata lineage! While
that battle raged on, the angry Pandava began to fight with maharatha Bhishma. When the sun had assumed a reddish tinge, Dhananjaya swiftly killed twenty-five thousand maharathas. They had been instructed by Duryodhana
to slay Partha. But they approached him and met their destruction, like insects before a flame. At this, the Matsyas
and the Kekayas, skilled in the knowledge of fighting, surrounded maharatha Partha and his son. At that moment,
the sun disappeared and all the soldiers were overcome with confusion. O great king! It was evening and with his
mounts exhausted, your father, Devavrata, instructed that the soldiers should withdraw. Having encountered each
other, the Pandava and Kuru troops were filled with great fear and anxiously retired to their camps. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! Having retired to their own camps, the Pandavas and the Srinjayas, and the Kurus, rested,
as was appropriate."'


'Sanjaya said, "O king! The Kurus and the Pandavas spent the time in different ways and when night had passed,
they emerged again to fight. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A great sound arose from those on your side and
theirs. The foremost among rathas prepared to do battle and elephants were readied. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! Infantry and horses were armoured. The tumultuous sound of conch shells and drums was everywhere. At
this, King Yudhishthira spoke to Dhrishtadyumna. 'O mighty-armed one! Construct the vyuha known as makara,
which is capable of tormenting the enemy.' O great king! Thus addressed by Partha, maharatha Dhrishtadyumna,
foremost among rathas, accordingly instructed the rathas. Drupada and Pandava Dhananjaya were at the head. Maharatha Sahadeva and Nakula were the eyes. O great king! The immensely strong Bhimasena was the beak. Subhadra's son, Droupadi's sons, rakshasa Ghatotkacha, Satyaki and Dharmaraja were stationed at the neck of the
vyuha. O great king! Virata, the leader of an army, was at the back, surrounded by Dhrishtadyumna and a large
army. The five brothers from Kekaya were on the left flank. Dhrishtaketu, tiger among men, and the valiant
Karakarsha were stationed on the right flank, so as to protect the vyuha. O great king! The illustrious maharatha
Kuntibhoja and Shatanika were stationed at the feet, surrounded by a large army. The great and might archer
Shikhandi, surrounded by the Somakas, and Iravat stationed themselves at the tail of the makara. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Thus did the Pandavas array themselves in the form of a great vyuha. O great king! When the
sun arose, they armoured themselves and stationed themselves for battle. They had elephants, horses, chariots and
infantry. They raised their colourful standards and umbrellas. They armed themselves with sharp and polished
weapons and swiftly advanced against the Kouravas.

'"O king! Your father, Devavrata, saw this vyuha and arranged his soldiers in the form of a giant counter-vyuha
that had the shape of a curlew[The krouncha bird.]. Bharadvaja's son, the great archer, was at its beak. O lord of men! Ashvatthama
and Kripa were the eyes. Kritavarma, foremost among men and foremost among all archers, was at the head, together with the kings of Kamboja and Bahlika. O venerable one! O great king! Shurasena and your son, Duryodhana, were at the neck, surrounded by many kings. O foremost among men! The king of Pragjyotisha was at the
chest, together with the Madras, Souviras and Kekayas, and surrounded by a large army. Together with his own
army, Susharma, the king of Prasthala[Susharma was the king of Trigarta and the capital of Trigarta was Prasthala.], armoured and stationed himself along the left wing. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! The Tusharas, Yavanas, Shakas and Chuchupas stationed themselves along the right wing of that
vyuha. O venerable one! Shrutayu, Shatayu and Somadatta's son were stationed at the rear of the vyuha, protecting
each other.

'"The battle between the Pandavas and the Kouravas commenced. O great king! When the sun had arisen, there
was a great encounter. Charioteers confronted charioteers and elephants confronted elephants. Those riding on
horses advanced against those riding on horses. But those on chariots also attacked horse-riders. O king! In that
great battle, chariot-riders not only attacked chariot-riders, but also elephants. Elephant-riders fought against chariot-riders and chariot-riders fought against horse-riders. Chariot-riders fought against infantry and horse-riders
fought against infantry. O king! They were full of wrath and attacked each other in that encounter. Protected by
Bhima, Arjuna, the twins and the other maharathas, the army of the Pandavas was as beautiful as the night sky
with stars. Your army was also resplendent with Bhishma, Kripa, Drona, Shalya, Duryodhana and the others, like
the firmament circled by planets.

'"On seeing Drona, the valiant Kounteya Bhimasena, borne by swift horses, advanced against the men who were
in the army of Bharadvaja's son. Drona was enraged in the battle. O king! In that encounter, the valiant one pierced
Bhima in his inner organs with nine iron arrows. However, though Bhima was forcefully struck in that conflict, he
despatched the charioteer of Bharadvaja's son to Yama's abode. Bharadvaja's powerful son began to control the
mounts himself. He consumed the Pandava soldiers, like a fire amidst a mass of cotton. O supreme among men!
Thus slaughtered by Drona and Bhishma, the Srinjayas and the Kekayas were defeated and began to run away.
Your soldiers were also mangled by Bhima and Arjuna. They lost their senses there, like a proud and beautiful
woman[The imagery seems to be that of a beautiful woman whose pride has been hurt.]. Both the vyuhas were penetrated and there was a destruction of the best of brave ones. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! There was terrible distress in your army and in theirs. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
We witnessed the extraordinary sight of all your soldiers and those of the enemy fighting with a single objective in
mind. O lord of the earth! The maharatha Pandavas and Kouravas fought with each other. They repulsed each other's weapons."'


'Dhritarashtra said, "Our army is supreme and possesses many qualities. It has many different components. O Sanjaya! It has been arranged in a vyuha according to the sacred texts and should be unassailable. We have sustained it
and it has always been extremely devoted to us. The soldiers are disciplined and free from vice and they have exhibited their valour earlier. They are not too old. Nor are they too young. They are not lean. Nor are they fat. They
are active and tall. Their bodies are well-developed and they are free from disease. They are armoured and trained
in the use of weapons. They possess many kinds of weapons. They are skilled in fighting with swords, bare arms
and in fighting with clubs. Lances, swords, clubs, iron maces, catapults, javelins and all kinds of maces, kampanas,
bows, kanapas, different kinds of slings, fighting with the bare fists-they are skilled in all these. They are devoted
to training. They have persevered in exercises. They have devotedly learned everything about the handling of
weapons. They have trained in mounting and descending, riding, moving forward, stepping back, striking effectively, advancing and retreating and are skilled. In many ways, they have been tested with elephants, horses, chariots and vehicles. Having been appropriately tested, they have been given the right kind of pay. This has not been
influenced by lineage, favours, relationships, the strength of friendship, or connections of birth or marriage. They
are prosperous people and noble. Their relatives have been treated well by us and are satisfied. We have shown
them many favours. They are famous and honoured. O son[The word used is tata.]! They are protected by many victorious ones who
are the foremost among men, famous in the worlds because of their prominent deeds. They are like the guardians
of the worlds. They are protected by many kshatriyas, who are honoured by all the people on earth. They have to
come because of their own wishes, with their armies and their followers. This is like a large ocean, with rivers
flowing into it from all directions. There are many elephants and chariots. Though these do not actually have
wings, they seem to possess wings. Our many warriors constitute the terrible waters. The mounts are the waves. It
is full of slings, swords, clubs, lances, bows and javelins. There are standards and ornaments that are embellished
with jewelled cloth. The advancing mounts are like the agitating force of the wind. It is like a great and roaring
ocean, without any limits. It is protected by Drona and Bhishma and also protected by Kritavarma, Kripa and
Duhshasana and others who are led by Jayadratha. It is also protected by Bhagadatta and Vikarna, Drona's son,
Soubala and Bahlika and many other great-souled ones who are the foremost warriors of the world. That this
should be slaughtered in battle can only be because of earlier destiny. O Sanjaya! Such a preparation[For war.] on earth
has never been seen before, by men, or by the immensely fortunate and ancient rishis. This large army is prosperous with every kind of weapon. If it should be killed in battle, how can that be anything other than destiny? O Sanjaya! To me, everything seems to be contrary. Such a terrible army cannot fight with the Pandavas in battle. Perhaps the gods have assembled here in the cause of the Pandavas. O Sanjaya! Perhaps they are fighting against my
soldiers and that is the reason they are being killed. O Sanjaya! Vidura had earlier spoken about what was beneficial medicine for me. But my evil-minded son, Duryodhana, did not accept it. It is my view that the great-souled
and omniscient one had known all this earlier. O son! He knew what was going to happen. It was preordained destiny. O Sanjaya! Perhaps all this is exactly as the creator had ordained it earlier. That is the reason it cannot be
countered."'


