The brahmana said, 'O beautiful one! In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about a conversation
between a brahmana and Janaka. A brahmana committed a crime. Wishing to punish him, King Janaka said,
"You will not reside in my kingdom." Thus addressed, the brahmana replied to the best of kings. "O king! Tell me.
Which is the kingdom that is under your subjugation? O lord! I wish to dwell in the territory of another king. O
lord of the earth! I wish to act in accordance with the words of the sacred texts." Thus addressed by the illustrious
brahmana, the king sighed repeatedly and did not say anything in reply. The infinitely energetic king sat down and
thought. He was suddenly immersed in great lassitude, like the sun devoured by a planet[By Rahu, during an eclipse.]. After some time, the
king reassured himself and overcame that lassitude. He spoke these words to the brahmana. "There is the ancestral
kingdom of my forefathers. There are the habitations. I thought of the entire earth. None of this is under my subjugation. When I couldn't find such a place on earth, I searched for such a place in Mithila. When I couldn't find
such a place there, I searched for it among my own offspring. When I couldn't find such a place even there, I was
overcome by lassitude. With that lassitude over, my intelligence has been aroused again. I think that nothing is under my subjugation and everything is under my subjugation. My atman is not my own. Yet, this entire earth belongs to me. Dwell here as long as you want. Enjoy it as long as you wish." The brahmana replied, "This kingdom
of your forefathers and these habitations are under your subjugation. But tell me this. Have you resorted to your
intelligence and given up a sense of ownership? On the basis of what intelligence have you determined that everything  is  under  your  subjugation?  Why  is  nothing  under  your  subjugation?  And  why  is  everything  under  your
subjugation?"

'"'Janaka said, "I have realized that all the deeds that are started in this world come to an end. Therefore, I could
not think of anything that belongs to me. Whom does this belong to? Who is the owner? These are the words of the
Vedas. Using my intelligence, I could not determine what belongs to me. Having resorted to this intelligence, I
gave up all sense of ownership. Listen to the intelligence whereby I decided that everything belongs to me. For my
own sake, I do not desire the scents that are received by my nose. It has been conquered by me and therefore, the
earth is always under my subjugation[Smell is an attribute of the earth. Since that has been conquered, the earth has also been conquered and so on for
the other senses.]. For my own sake, I do not desire what is savoured by my tongue. It has
been conquered by me and therefore, the water is always under my subjugation. For my own sake, I do not desire
the form and light received by my eyes. It has been conquered by me and therefore, the fire is always under my
subjugation. For my own sake, I do not desire what is touched by my skin. It has been conquered by me and therefore, the wind is always under my subjugation. For my own sake, I do not desire the sound that is received by my
ears. It has been conquered by me and therefore, sound is always under my subjugation. For my own sake, I never
desire my mind or what is in my mind. It has been conquered by me and therefore, the mind is always under my
subjugation. All the acts that I start are for the gods, the ancestors, the elements and the guests."'

'"The brahmana continued, 'At this, the brahmana replied and again spoke to Janaka. "Know that I am Dharma.
I have arrived here now to test you. Set in motion the wheel that does not return. Its circumference is sattva, the
brahman is the nave and intelligence constitutes the spokes."'"'


The brahmana said, 'O timid one! You have censured me according to your intelligence. But I do not roam
around in the world in that way. I am a brahmana. I am free. I dwell in the forest. Despite resorting to the
dharma of being a householder, I am a brahmachari. O beautiful one! I am not what you see with your eyes. Everything in this universe that has come and gone is pervaded by me. Know me to be the one that destroys every object
in this world, mobile and immobile, like fire consumes wood. I know that my intelligence is superior to sovereignty over everything on earth and even that in heaven. That intelligence is my wealth[The intelligence of being one with the brahman.]. This is the single path that is
traversed by all brahmanas. Whether they are in households, reside in forests, dwell in the houses of their preceptors or are mendicants, irrespective of the many kinds of signs they displace, they use their intelligence to worship
only this. They may resort to many kinds of signs, but the intelligence is based on tranquility in the soul. The destination is a single one, like that of rivers heading to the ocean. That path is traversed through intelligence. It is not a
path that is traversed by the body. All action has a beginning and an end and the body is bound down by action. O
extremely beautiful one! Therefore, you should not entertain any fear about the life hereafter. Be devoted to me[As the brahman.]
and it is into me that your atman will merge.'"'


