Bhishma said, "Having acted in accordance with his preceptor's words, Vipula performed terrible austerities.
The valiant one thought that he had accomplished a lot of austerities. O lord of the earth! He rivalled the entire earth in these deeds. He roamed around without any fear. Amongst men, he was regarded as one who had obtained great fame. O Kourvya! The lord Vipula thought that he had conquered both the worlds because of his deeds
and austerities. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! After some time had passed, an occasion arose when gifts of
riches and grain were to be made to Ruchi's sister. At that time, a celestial damsel was travelling through the sky.
Her dazzling beauty was supreme. From her body, some flowers fell down on the ground, not very far from the
hermitage. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Their fragrance was divine. O king! Ruchi, the one with the beautiful eyes, picked them up. Soon, an invitation arrived from the kingdom of Anga. O son! Her elder sister, named
Prabhavati, was the wife of the king of Anga, Chitraratha. The beautiful one braided those flowers in her hair. To
honour the invitation, Ruchi went to the house of the king of Anga. On seeing those flowers, the queen of the kingdom of Anga, possessing beautiful eyes, asked her sister to get some flowers for her. Ruchi, with the extremely
beautiful face, told her husband everything about this. She told the rishi everything that her sister had said.

'"The great ascetic, Devasharma, summoned Vipula. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He instructed him to
go in search of the flowers. Without any hesitation, the great ascetic, Vipula, accepted his preceptor's command. O
king! He agreed and went to the spot and the region where those had fallen down from the sky. He saw some other
flowers lying there and they were still not faded. He took those divine and beautiful flowers, which were divine in
scent. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He managed to get them because of his own austerities. Having obtained them, he was delighted at having been able to follow his preceptor's words. With that garland of champaka
flowers, he quickly left for the city of Champa[Champaka is a fragrant flower. The city of Champa is in Chhattisgarh. But this Champa is Champapuri, the capital of Anga. The kingdom of Anga is now what is part of the states of Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal.]. O son! In a desolate forest, he saw a human couple. Holding
each other's hands, they were dancing around in a circle. O king! One of them quickly advanced too far ahead and
a quarrel ensued between them. One said, 'You moved too fast.' The other said, 'No.' O son! They disagreed and
argued with each other. While they debated with each other, each one of them muttered an oath and in the words
that each of them mentally spoke, each named Vipula. 'If I have spoken falsely, in the world after death, may I face
the end that is destined for the brahmana Vipula.' Hearing this, Vipula's face became cheerless. 'I have undergone
terrible austerities and find this difficult to accept. Why has this couple said that I will attain an evil end? Why
have they said that my end will be the worst among all creatures?' O supreme among kings! Vipula thought along
these lines. He bowed his head down and, distressed, began to think about any wicked deed that he might have
committed. As he proceeded, he saw six men gambling with golden and silver dice, so excited that their body hair
stood up. They also took oaths just like the ones the couple had uttered and mentioned Vipula in their words. 'If
there is anyone among us, who is driven by avarice and plays unfairly, after death, may he obtain the kind of end
that Vipula will get.' O Kouravya! Hearing this, Vipula began to think about everything that he had done since
birth, but could not remember any transgression of dharma. O king! He was tormented, like a fire burning in the
midst of another fire. Because of the curse he had heard, his mind burnt in grief. O son! While he proceeded, he
thought about this for many days and nights. He then remembered the way he had protected Ruchi. 'I penetrated
her vision with my vision and her face with my face. But I did not narrate the truth to my preceptor.' O Kouravya!
This was the wicked deed that Vipula thought of. O immensely fortunate one! He thought that there was no doubt
that this was the transgression. He went to the city of Champa and gave his preceptor the flowers. Loved by his
preceptor, he followed the rites and worshipped his preceptor."'


Bhishma said, "O lord of men! On seeing that his disciple had returned, the immensely energetic Devasharma
spoke these words to him. Listen.

'"Devasharma asked, 'O Vipula! What did you see in that great forest? They know about your accomplished
soul and about Ruchi.'

'"Vipula said, 'O brahmana rishi! O lord! Who were the couple? Who were those men? They knew about me.
You should tell me the truth about this.'

'"Devasharma replied, 'O brahmana! Know that the couple was night and day. Whirling around in a circular
way, they knew the truth about your wicked deed. O brahmana! Know that the men who were cheerfully gambling
with the dice were the seasons. They too knew about your wicked deed. No one should be comforted that his
wicked deed will remain unknown. O brahmana! A man hides his wicked soul and his wicked deed. Even if a man
performs a wicked deed secretly, the seasons, night and day are witness to this. They saw that you had not told
your  preceptor  about  your  deed,  but  were  nevertheless,  cheerful.  They  thought  that  a  learned  person  like  you
should be reminded of this. Day and night and the seasons always know the wicked deeds that a man undertakes,
the auspicious, as well as the inauspicious deeds. You did not tell me the truth about what you had done, out of fear
that you had committed a transgression. O brahmana! Knowing that you had not told me, they spoke to you about
it, so that you did not go the worlds that are meant for wicked people. Having committed a deed, you did not tell
me about it. O brahmana! You were capable of protecting a woman, whose nature is evil. You did not do anything
to cause my displeasure and I am pleased with you. O supreme among brahmanas! Had I thought that you had
committed a wicked deed, without thinking about it and in anger, I would have cursed you. Women have intercourse with men and men find this to be an excellent pursuit. However, your intention was to protect her. Otherwise, your end would have been as the recipient of a curse. O son! You protected her and this is known to me. O
son! I am pleased with you. You will progress along a path that is comfortable.'"

'Bhishma said, "The great rishi, Devasharma, was pleased and spoke to Vipula in this way. With his wife and his
disciple, he cheerfully ascended to heaven. O king! In ancient times, in the course of a conversation on the banks
of the Ganga, the great sage, Markandeya, told me about this. O Partha! That is the reason I have said, women
must be protected. Both types of women can always be seen, those who are virtuous and those who are evil. The
ones who are virtuous are extremely fortunate and are revered as the mothers of the worlds. O king! They hold up
this entire earth, with its forests and groves. The ones who are evil are wicked in conduct. Having determined to
sin, they destroy the lineage. O king! They can be known through their wicked signs, naturally manifest on their
bodies. It is in this fashion that great-souled ones are capable of protecting them. O tiger among kings! There is no
other way in which one is capable of protecting women. O tiger among men! They are fierce. They are fierce in
their valour. There is nothing that they love more than sexual intercourse with men. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Even when they have agreed to live with one person, they do not act in this way. O descendant of the Pandu
lineage! They consort with other men. O  lord of  men! Men  should not act out of  affection towards  them, nor
should they be driven by jealousy. They should be enjoyed regretfully, because that is dharma. O descendant of the
Kourava lineage! If a man acts in a contrary way, he will destroy himself. O tiger among men! In every kind of situation, logic is always honoured. That is the single method Vipula used to protect a woman. O king! In this world
of men, there is no other way to protect women."'


Yudhishthira said, "O grandfather! Tell me the foundation of all dharma concerning offspring, the home, ancestors, gods and guests."

'Bhishma replied, "O lord of the earth! Those who have thought about dharma have expressed their views about
all kinds of dharma associated with the bestowing of a maiden. O Yudhishthira! A virtuous brahmana who is always devoted to dharma bestows his daughter on an excellent groom, after ascertaining his good conduct, learning,
birth and deeds. This kind of favourable bestowal is also the eternal dharma of virtuous kshatriyas and is known as
a brahma form of marriage. O Yudhishthira! When one bestows one's daughter on someone she has herself chosen, ignoring one's own wishes, those who know about dharma speak of this as a gandharva kind of dharma[That is, a gandharva marriage.]. O
king! When a lot of riches are used to tempt a girl's relatives and purchase her, the learned say that this is an asura
kind of dharma. O son! When weeping relatives are slain and their heads severed and a weeping maiden is forcibly
abducted from her house, that kind of dharma has the signs of rakshasa. O Yudhishthira! Of these five, three constitute dharma and two are adharma[The numbering is a problem, the prajapatya form of marriage not having been mentioned. Had this been included, we would have had the number five and the three acceptable ones would have been brahma, gandharva and
prajapatya. The two condemned ones are asura and rakshasa.]. The paishacha and asura forms should never be resorted to[The paishacha form has not been mentioned earlier. This happens when a girl is seduced. If the paishacha is included in the list and prajapatya excluded, the permissible ones are brahma, gandharva and rakshasa. The condemned ones are asura and paishacha.]. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! The brahma, kshatra and gandharva forms represent dharma[Since the kshatra form has not been mentioned earlier, there is another numbering anomaly. The kshatra form is
presumably prajapatya. There is a lack of consistency with the eight kinds of marriages listed in the
Dharmashastras.]. There is no doubt that
these should be resorted to, in pure or mixed form[Mixed means that a specific wedding can have elements of more than one kind of marriage.]. A brahmana can have three wives, a kshatriya can have two
wives. A vaishya should take one from his own varna. The children will be equal[In the case of more than one wife.]. The brahmana wife will be
senior and the kshatriya wife for the kshatriya[The three wives permitted for a brahmana might not be brahmana. In such cases, the brahmana wife will be senior. This is the logic for a kshatriya too.]. There are people who say that a shudra wife can be accepted for
intercourse, but others disagree. The virtuous do not praise the birth of offspring through shudras. If a brahmana
has offspring through a shudra, penance is recommended. A man who is thirty years old should wed a girl who is
ten years old, known as nagnika[Nagnika does not mean naked. It means a girl clad in a single piece of garment, that is, a girl who has not yet
attained puberty.]. Alternatively, a man who is twenty-one years old should wed a girl who is
seven years old. O bull among the Bharata lineage! If a girl has a father, but does not have a brother, she should not
be wed, since she might follow the dharma of a putrika. When a girl has attained puberty, one should wait for three
years. In the fourth year, if she is still not married, she should look for a husband herself. O bull among the Bharata
lineage! The offspring of such a girl are not tainted, nor is intercourse with her condemned. If she does not act in
this way, Prajapati does not approve of her conduct. One should wed a girl who is not of the same pinda as the
mother or the same gotra as the father[Stated simply, same pinda means the wife should not be the offspring of someone who is related to the groom's
mother, going up to three generations. Gotra is when there is a common and unbroken male line, going up to a
common male ancestor.]. In this way, one follows the dharma that Manu spoke about."

'Yudhishthira said, "Some people offer a bride price and others speak of gifts. Some speak of their bravery, others exhibit their riches. O grandfather! Others accept the hand in marriage. Whom does the maiden belong to[These shlokas are cryptic. What is probably meant is that different people might offer different things. But
when does the actual act of marriage take place?]? I
wish to ask the truth about this. You are like my sight."

'Bhishma replied, "As long as men remain in their own station, whatever action they undertake is beneficial, regardless of whether it is with mantras or without mantras. However, a lie is a grave sin[If there has been a promise that a maiden will be bestowed, then breach of contract is a grave sin.]. Some people say that if
a marriage takes place as the outcome of a falsehood, the wife, the offspring, the officiating priest, the preceptor,
the disciple and the instructor, all of these deserve to be punished. But others do not agree. Manu does not approve
of intercourse with a person one doesn't desire. This is against fame and against dharma. This is a falsehood that
causes violence to dharma[With some subjectivity in interpretation, this seems to imply that a girl should not marry someone she does not
like. Even if a promise has been made, and the girl does not like the groom, going back on the promise is not a
sin.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Whether there was a promise to give following
dharma, or whether the girl was purchased, in such an instance, there is certainly no sin if the promise to bestow is
not adhered to. With the sanction of the relatives, mantras and offerings should be resorted to. Without mantras, an
act of bestowal is never successful. When the relatives take a pledge to the accompaniment of mantras, the offspring that are obtained through such a wife are regarded as superior[This is the answer to Yudhishthira's original question. The mantras signify the act of marriage.]. It is the injunction of dharma that a husband must regard his wife as having been given to him by the gods. Whether she is a goddess or whether she is human, one must not reject someone who is the victim of a falsehood[The wife may have gone back on a pledge made by her relatives, without asking her, to bestow her on someone.]."
'Yudhishthira asked, "A bride price may have been obtained for a maiden. Thereafter, one may come across a
superior groom. If the father looks at dharma, artha and kama, should he then make his words come false? In such
instances, whatever one does seems to be inferior. In deciding on what is dharma for all of us, what are the views
of those who have thought of dharma? I wish to ask you the truth about this. You are my vision. Therefore, tell me
everything. I am not satisfied with what you have recounted."

'Bhishma replied, "One should not be firm in adhering to the bride price and the one who pays it, knows this[This probably means that the payment of a bride price is no guarantee that the maiden will be married to the
giver.].
Virtuous ones never bestow their daughters on the basis of a bride price. Relatives desire a bride price only when
the groom doesn't possess qualities. Many ornaments are willingly given. When these are given, that's not a price,
nor is this a sale. Receiving objects in this way has been eternal dharma. Some say, 'I will bestow this maiden.'

Other say nothing. Still others say, 'I will certainly bestow this maiden.' Whether it is said or not said, doesn't matter[These are references to the girl's father making promises, the point being that such promises don't amount to a
marriage.]. Therefore, there is marriage only when they accept each other's hands. We have heard that earlier, this is the
way the Maruts used to bestow their excellent daughters. The rishis have instructed that maidens should not be bestowed on those who are inappropriate. They are the foundation of desire and also the root of offspring. That is my
view. Though the practice of purchase and sale of maidens has continued, on scrutiny, it is seen to be associated
with many evils and cannot lead to marriage. Listen. Having defeated all the Magadhas, Kashis and Kosalas, I abducted two maidens for Vichitravirya[Ambika and Ambalika. This account of Vichitravirya marrying one, and not the other, has not been mentioned
earlier.]. He accepted the hand of one, but not the other, because a bride price had
been paid through the act of conquest. My father was of the view that even if her hand had been accepted, she
should have been released[Subsequent shlokas make it clear that by father, Bhishma means Bahlika, Shantanu's younger brother.]. Kourava said that one should not marry this maiden. Since I doubted my father's
words, I went and asked others, thinking that my father was overly conscious about dharma. O king! Wishing to
know the nature of good conduct, I also went to him and repeatedly addressed these words. 'I wish to know the
truth about good conduct.' O great king! My father, Bahlika, supreme among the upholders of dharma, spoke to
me in these words. 'The issue is whether marriage is contracted when a bride price is accepted, or when the hand is
accepted. If one holds that one becomes a husband from the act of acceping a bride price, this is shameless behaviour. The ones who know about dharma have said that there is no such proof in the sacred texts. Marriage results from accepting the hand and not from accepting the bride price. It is known that which is important is the act
of bestowal and not purchase and sale. People who respect purchase through a bride price are not those who know
about dharma. One should not bestow to those, nor have marriages with their likes. A wife should never be bought
or sold. People who think that she can be bought and sold, like a servant-girl, follow the conduct of those who are
wicked in intelligence and avaricious.' In this connection, people had asked Satyavan about dharma.'A person may
have paid a bride price for a maiden. But the payer subsequently dies. Can someone else then accept the maiden's
hand? We have a doubt on this score about dharma. O immensely wise one! You are revered by the wise. Please
dispel our doubt about this. We are asking you about the truth. You are like our sight.' Satyavan spoke these words
to all of them. 'She should be bestowed on someone desirable. One should not reflect about this. Since this is true
even when the payer is alive, there is no scope for doubt when he is dead.' It is also held that if the girl is a virgin,
she can torment herself through great austerities, or marry the husband's[This is not a continuation of the argument in the earlier sentence and refers to situations where a marriage has
taken place.] younger brother, follow him and have
intercourse with him. Some have written in this way, others have voiced their views strongly. The learned have not
spoken firmly about this. Even if all the prenuptial rites have been performed, with all the auspicious  mantras,
there is no sin from uttering a falsehood[In the sense of going back on the promise to marry.]. The act of accepting a hand in marriage concludes with the mantras
uttered at the seventh step[Seven steps are taken around the fire.]. The hand of the maiden is offered and accepted as a wife. A brother must give away
that maiden and following the rites, there must be circumambulation around the fire. An excellent brahmana must
not marry a maiden who is unwilling, or one who is not from a comparable family."'


