'The Brahmana said, "At the source of the Ganga, there lived a rishi of great austerities. He was always rigid in his
vows and he was extremely wise. His name was Bharadvaja. One day, the rishi went to the Ganga to have his bath
and saw there the apsara Ghritachi, who had arrived before him and now stood there, having finished her bath.
Then a wind arose from the riverbank and removed the clothing from her body. Seeing her nude, the rishi was afflicted with desire. He had been celibate[A brahmachari. Because he had been a brahmachari, he had immense powers.] since boyhood. As soon as his mind felt desire, his semen dropped and
the rishi collected it in a wooden cup[Drona. A drona was used to carry water and can also be translated as a vessel, rather than cup.]. From that was born a son, who became the learned Drona and who studied
all the Vedas and the Vedangas.

'"Bharadvaja had a king as his friend. His name was Prishata and he had a son named Drupada. Parshata[The son of Prishata, hence Drupada.], that
bull among Kshatriyas, always used to go to the hermitage and play and study with Drona. After Prishata died,
Drupada became the king. Drona heard that Rama[Parashurama.] wanted to give away all his riches. When Rama was leaving
for the forest[That is, going away to the forest after giving away all his wealth.], Bharadvaja's son went to him and said, 'O bull among Brahmanas! I am Drona and I have come
to you for some riches.' Rama said, 'O Brahmana! Now I have only my body left. Ask for either my body or my
weapons.' Drona said, 'O illustrious one! Give me all your weapons, together with the knowledge of releasing
them and recalling them.' The descendant of Bhrigu[Parashurama.] agreed and gave those to him. On receiving them, Drona
concluded that he had become successful. On obtaining from Rama that supreme weapon known as brahmastra,
Drona became extremely happy and became supreme among men. Thereupon, Bharadvaja's powerful son went to
Drupada, a tiger among men, and said, 'Know me to be your friend.' Drupada said, 'A man without learning cannot be a friend to one who is learned, nor one without chariots to one who has chariots, nor one who is not a king
to one who is a king. Why do you desire our old friendship?' Turning his mind against the king of Panchala, the
intelligent one[Drona.] went to Nagasahrya[Another name for Hastinapura.], the capital of the Kurus.

'"Thereupon, Bhishma took a lot of riches with him and offered his grandsons to the wise Drona as students.
With the intention of humiliating Drupada, Drona assembled all his students and told them, 'O unblemished ones!
When you have become skilled in the use of all weapons, as a preceptor's fee, you must promise that you will give
me what I wish for.' When the Pandavas became skilled in the use of all weapons and became successful in their
labour, Drona spoke to them and reminded them about the preceptor's fee, 'Parshata Drupada is the king in Chhatravati[Chhatravati is another name for Ahichhatra, which was the capital of the kingdom of Panchala.]. Take his kingdom away from him and give it to me quickly.' Then Pandu's five sons defeated Drupada
in battle. Taking him and his advisers prisoners, they showed them to Drona. Drona said, 'O king of men! I again
seek your friendship. One who is not a king cannot be a friend to one who is a king. O Yajnasena! Therefore, I will
divide the kingdom with you. You will be the king on the southern banks of the Bhagirathi and I on the north.' The
thought of that great insult never left the king's[Drupada.] mind for a single instant. Being miserable, the king became
thin."'


'The Brahmana said, "Being miserable, King Drupada wandered in many places where Brahmanas lived, searching for bulls among Brahmanas who were perfect in all the rites[As will become evident later, Drupada's wife accompanied him on his travels.]. He wished for the birth of a son. Afflicted with
grief and out of his mind, he always thought, 'I don't have excellent offspring.' When his sons were born, he said,
'Cursed are my relatives[That is, his sons.] who are without learning.' He kept on sighing, thinking about taking revenge on
Drona."

'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! But however much that best among kings tried, he could think of no
means to overcome Drona's influence, humility, learning and accomplishments through his Kshatriya powers.
Wandering around, the king came to a holy hermitage of Brahmanas located on the banks of the Ganga. There was
no Brahmana there who was not rigid in his vows, nor one who was not a snataka[The word snataka has many nuances. Here it means a Brahmana who has completed his first course of study.]. Prishata's son found two
brahmarshis named Yaja and Upayaja there. They were greatly illustrious, rigid in their vows, self-controlled and
given to the study of the samhitas. They were descended from Kashyapa's lineage and both of those supreme Brahmanas were capable of rescuing him[Drupada.]. Having controlled his mind, he served them in every possible way. Knowing the strength of the younger one to be greater, he worshipped Upayaja of rigid vows, giving him every object of
desire, serving at his feet and addressing him in pleasant words.

'Worshipping him in accordance with the prescribed rites, he told Upayaja, "O Brahmana! O Upayaja! If you
perform the sacrifice that will give me a son who can kill Drona, I will give you ten crore[Arbuda, which means 100 million.]cows. O best of the
Brahmanas! I will give you whatever else is in your mind and whatever pleases you. There is no doubt about this."

Having been thus addressed, the rishi refused. Thereupon, Drupada again began to worship him and serve him. O
king! After one year had passed and at the right time, Upayaja, best of the Brahmanas, spoke to the king in gentle
words, "When roaming in a forest and at a waterfall, my elder brother picked up a fruit that had fallen on the
ground, not knowing that it was impure and should be discarded. I was following him and witnessed my brother's
impure act. He never has scruples about taking that which is unclean. He did not see the impurities that were on the
fruit. One who does not see impurities in one's acts, is not expected to see it in another. When he was in his preceptor's house and was studying the samhitas, without any scruples he used to eat the leftover food of others and
repeatedly praise its qualities. Judging from this, my brother desires material fruit. O king! Go to him and he will
perform your sacrifices." Hearing Upayaja's words and thinking about them, the king, who was well versed in the
ways of dharma, went to Yaja, though he had a low opinion of him.

'Worshipping the rishi who was deserving of worship, he told Yaja, "O lord! I will give you 80,000 cows. Please
perform the sacrifice. I am inflamed with enmity for Drona. Pacify my heart. That best of men is learned in the
Vedas and is skilled in the use of brahmastra. Therefore, Drona defeated me in a quarrel that arose over our friendship. There is no Kshatriya on this earth, however great, who is superior to him and that wise son of Bharadvaja
has become the chief preceptor of the Kurus. Drona's net of arrows can kill every living creature. His bow is 6 cubits long and looks great and matchless. That great-minded and great archer, Bharadvaja's son, is undoubtedly capable of destroying the might of Kshatriyas with the might of a Brahmana. He has been created like another son of
Jamadagni[Jamadagni's son is Parashurama.] to destroy the Kshatriyas. There is no man on earth who can withstand the terrible power of his
weapons. Like a blazing fire that has been fed with sacrificial offerings, Drona's Brahmana powers consume every
Kshatriya power in battle. Though his Brahmana powers are combined with Kshatriya powers, your Brahmana
powers are superior to his. I am inferior because I only possess Kshatriya powers. Give me your Brahmana powers. I have now found you, whose Brahmana powers are superior to Drona's. O Yaja! Perform the sacrifice so that I
obtain a son who will be invincible and can kill Drona. I will give you ten crore[This inconsistency in the number of cows offered to Yaja exists in the text.] cows." Yaja agreed and began
to think of what was required for the sacrifice.

'Upayaja wished for no rewards, but was called to assist his elder. Then Yaja promised Drona's destruction. The
great ascetic Upayaja instructed the king of men[Drupada.] on the sacrificial rites that would produce a son. "O king! According to your desires, a son will be born to you, who will possess great valour, great energy and great strength."

King Drupada, wishing to obtain a son who would kill Bharadvaja's son, began to make the required preparations
for bringing success to his effort. Yaja poured offerings into the sacrificial fire and instructed the queen, "O queen
Prishati! Come here. The time for uniting has arrived[A qualification is needed for this translation. The word used is mithuna, and what seems to be suggested is an
act of intercourse between the queen and Yaja. One can also translate this sentence as, 'The time for the twins has
arrived', meaning the births of Droupadi and Dhrishtadyumna, but this doesn't seem to be very natural as a
translation.]." The queen said, "O Brahmana! My face is anointed with
divine scents. O Yaja! Wait a little. My body is not yet ready for the happy consummation that will give a son."

Yaja said, "Offerings made sacred by Upayaja's incantations have already been prepared by Yaja. Why should the
object of this sacrifice not be attained, whether you come or wait?" Saying this, Yaja poured the sanctified sacrificial offerings into the fire.

'Then a youth who resembled a god arose from the flames. His complexion was like the fire and his form was
terrible. He wore a crown on his head and his body was encased in excellent armour. He had a sword in his hand
and a bow and arrows and he let out many loud roars. As soon as he was born, he ascended a supreme chariot and
went forth. All the Panchalas were delighted and exclaimed, "Blessed!" From the sky issued the voice of an invisible and great being. "This terrible prince has been born for Drona's destruction. He will increase the fame of the
Panchalas and remove the king's grief." Then a young maiden arose from the centre of the altar. She was blessed
with good fortune and was known as Panchali. She was beautiful and her waist was shaped like an altar. She was
dark. Her eyes were like the petals of lotuses. Her hair was dark blue and curled. She was truly a goddess born in
human form. The sweet fragrance of blue lotuses emanated from her body, a full 2 miles[Krosha, a little over 2 miles.] away. Her form and
supreme beauty were such that she had no equal on earth. When the one with beautiful hips was born, the invisible
voice said, "Supreme among women, this beauty of the dark complexion will bring about the destruction of the
Kshatriyas. In time, this one with the beautiful waist will perform the objective of the gods. From her will arise terrible fear among the Kshatriyas." Hearing this, all the Panchalas roared like a pride of lions. The earth was unable
to bear their great joy.

'On seeing these two, Prishati wished to get them and came to Yaja and said, "Let these two know no one but
me as their mother." Desiring to please the king, Yaja agreed. The Brahmanas, whose desires were entirely satisfied, gave the two names. "Because of his great courage and because he has been born from lustre, let this son of
Drupada be called Dhrishtadyumna[Dhrishtata means courage and confidence, and dyumna means splendour, glory or lustre.]. Because she is dark in complexion, let her be called Krishna." Thus Drupada's twin children were born from the great sacrifice. Bharadvaja's powerful son[Drona.] took the Panchala prince
Dhrishtadyumna to his own house and taught him the use of all weapons. Thus did the illustrious Drona ensure
that his own deeds would become famous, because the immensely wise one knew that what was destined would
come to be.'


