Vaishampayana said, 'Yayati's capital resembled Indra's capital. He entered his capital and instated Devayani in
the women's quarters. There was a grove of ashoka trees nearby. With Devayani's permission, he instated Vrishaparva's daughter in a house that he built there. He honoured asuri Sharmishtha with 1000 maid servants and made
good arrangements for her food and clothing. Like the gods, the king who was Nahusha's son, passed many happy
years in Devayani's company. When her season arrived, the beautiful Devayani conceived and gave birth to a boy
as her first child.

'When a thousand years had passed, Vrishaparva's daughter Sharmishtha saw that having attained youth, her
season had arrived. She began to think, "My season has arrived, but I do not yet have a husband. What will happen? What shall I do? What is proper for me to do? Devayani has given birth, but my youth is in vain. I shall
choose as my husband the same person and in the same way as her. I am certain in my mind that the king will give
me a son. Will the one who is devoted to righteous conduct come and meet me in private?" On one occasion, the
king emerged and came to the ashoka grove. On seeing Sharmishtha there, he came and stood before her. The
sweet-smiling Sharmishtha found the king alone before her. She greeted the king with joined palms and said, "O
son of Nahusha! No one can touch the women who dwell in the inner quarters of Soma, Indra, Vishnu, Yama,
Varuna and you. O king! Know that I am beautiful, have been born in a good lineage and show good conduct. O
ruler of men! I seek your favour for my season." Yayati replied, "I know about your conduct, since you are an unblemished maiden born among the daityas. I can also see your beauty. I do not even see a blemish that is as small
as the point of a needle. However, when I married Devayani, Kavya Ushanas told me that Vrishaparva's daughter
should never be in my bed." Sharmishtha said, "O king! It is no sin to commit a falsehood in five cases-in jest, to
women, at the time of marriage, when confronting death and when all one's riches are liable to be lost. O lord of
men! It is true that he who bears false witness is demeaned. When a general purpose is sought to be attained, only
then does a falsehood harm the speaker." Yayati replied, "A king must be a role model to his subjects and if it is
proven that he lied, destruction follows. I cannot afford to lie, even when I am confronted with the greatest loss."

Sharmishtha said, "O king! It is held that one's husband and one's friend's husband are closely related. A friend's
marriage is equal to one's own. I have chosen my friend's husband as mine." Yayati replied, "The vow I have taken is that the gift should match the one who asks. You are asking my favour. Tell me what I should do?"

Sharmishtha said, "O king! Save me from sin and protect my dharma[That of giving birth to a child.]. If I conceive a child through you, I will
perform the most righteous act in the world. O king! It is decreed that three people can never own-a wife, a slave
and a son. Whatever they obtain belongs to the one who owns them. O king! I am Devayani's slave and that descendant of the Bhrigu lineage is yours. She and I are equally yours. Love me as I love you." Having been thus addressed, the king was persuaded.

'He paid honour to Sharmishtha and protected her dharma. He united with Sharmishtha and satisfied their desires. Then they lovingly bade farewell and returned to where they had come from. As a consequence of the union
with that best of kings, Sharmishtha, with the sweet smile and beautiful eyebrows, conceived her first child. O
king! In due time, the one with eyes like blue lotuses gave birth to a son. He was like the son of a god, with eyes
that had the complexion of blue lotuses.'


Vaishampayana said, 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When the sweet-smiling Devayani heard of this birth
of a son, she unhappily began to think about Sharmishtha. Devayani went to Sharmishtha and said, "O one with
the beautiful eyebrows! What sin have you committed out of desire?" Sharmishtha replied, "A rishi arrived. He
was devoted to dharma and learned in the Vedas. In accordance with dharma, I asked for a boon and he gave it to
me. O one with the sweet smile! I did not fall prey to sin so as to satiate my desire. I tell you truthfully that I obtained this son through the rishi." Devayani said, "O timid one! If that is the case, it is all right. I wish to know the
name, lineage and birth of that Brahmana." Sharmishtha replied, "O one with the beautiful smile! He was as radiant in energy as the sun. On seeing him, I was powerless to ask these questions." Devayani said, "O Sharmishtha!
If all this is true and you have indeed obtained this son from such a superior and great Brahmana, I have no reason
to be angry." They conversed and laughed happily with each other. Believing literally what she had been told,
Bhrigu's descendant[Devayani.] went home.

'O king! Yayati had two sons through Devayani-Yadu and Turvasu. Those two were like Shakra[Indra.] and Vishnu. Through that rajarshi, Vrishaparva's daughter Sharmishtha gave birth to three sons-Druhyu, Anu and Puru.

'O king! One day, the sweet-smiling Devayani went with Yayati to a great forest. She saw three divine looking
children playing there, without any care in the world. Devayani was surprised and asked, "O king! Whose children
are these handsome ones? They look like sons of the gods. They look exactly like you in form and radiance." Having asked the king, she asked the boys, "O sons! What is the name of your lineage? Which Brahmana is your father? Tell me truthfully. I wish to hear it all." The children pointed at the supreme king with their fingers and said
that Sharmishtha was their mother. Having said this, they came up to the king. But with Devayani there, the king
dared not greet them. The boys then wept in sorrow and went to their mother, Sharmishtha. On witnessing the love
the boys displayed towards the king, the queen understood and asked Sharmishtha, "You are owned by me. How
have you dared to do that which brings displeasure to me? You have reverted to the dharma of the asuras. Do you
have no fear?" Sharmishtha replied, "O one with the beautiful smile! What I told you about the rishi is true. My
acts were in accordance with dharma and propriety. Therefore, why should I be afraid of you? O beautiful one!
You chose the king as your husband. So did I. According to dharma, a friend's husband is one's own husband. You
are the daughter of a Brahmana. Therefore, as my superior, you deserve my honour and respect. But don't you
know that this rajarshi is deserving of greater honour?" On hearing these words, Devayani said, "O king! You have
caused me displeasure. I will not live here any longer." Having said this, the dusky one quickly arose, with tears in
her eyes. In a miserable state, she went to her father Kavya.

'Extremely alarmed, the king followed her, trying to pacify her wrath. But she did not return. Her eyes were red
with anger. She did not speak a word to the king. With eyes full of tears, she soon reached Kavya Ushanas. On seeing her father, she paid him homage and stood before him. Yayati followed soon after and also paid homage to
Bhrigu's descendant. Devayani said, "Evil has won over dharma. The inferior have ascended and the superior
brought down. I have been overtaken by Sharmishtha, Vrishaparva's daughter. This king, Yayati, has fathered three
sons through that wretched woman. But I have got only two sons. O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! This king is
famous for his knowledge of dharma. O Kavya! Nevertheless, I tell you that he has crossed the threshold." Shukra
said, "O great king! You know dharma well. Yet, you have committed sin for the sake of pleasure. Therefore, invincible old age will soon oppress you." Yayati replied, "O illustrious one! The daughter of the lord of the danavas
begged me to make her season bear fruit. It was with that thought, and no other, that I did what I thought was right.
Those who know the brahman say that a man who is asked by a woman for the fruition of her season must grant
her wish. Otherwise, he commits the sin of killing an embryo. A man who refuses when a desiring woman privately solicits him, is called a killer of an embryo by the learned. O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! It is for these
reasons, concerned about committing a sin, that I went to Sharmishtha." Shukra said, "O king! You are dependent
on me. You should have awaited my instructions. O son of Nahusha! By committing a falsehood, you have become
a thief in the eyes of dharma." Being thus cursed by the angry Ushanas, Yayati, son of Nahusha, was instantly deprived of his earlier youth and old age overcame him.

'Yayati said, "O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! I am not yet satiated with Devayani's youth. O Brahmana!
Therefore, show me mercy and let old age not overcome me now." Shukra replied, "I never utter a falsehood. O
ruler of the earth! You have been instantly attacked by old age. But if you wish, you can transfer this old age to another." Yayati said, "O Brahmana! Then agree to this. A son of mine who will grant me his youth will enjoy my
kingdom, my merit and my fame." Shukra replied, "O son of Nahusha! If you think of me, you will be able to
transfer your old age to whomsoever you wish. No evil will befall you from that. The son who will give you his
youth will become the king. He will have a long life and numerous offspring and will attain fame."'


Vaishampayana said, 'Having been attacked by old age, Yayati returned to his capital. He summoned his eldest and
best son Yadu and said, "O son! Old age, wrinkles and grey hair have overcome me, because of a curse imposed by
Kavya Ushanas. But I am not yet satiated with youth. O Yadu! Take upon yourself this guilt and the consequent
old age. I can then enjoy pleasures with your youth. When 1000 years have passed, I shall return your youth to you
and take over the guilt and the consequent old age." Yadu replied, "O king! White hair and beard, cheerlessness,
flabbiness, wrinkles on the body, ugliness, weakness, thinness, incapacity to work, defeat by the young and forsaking by those who depend on you-I do not wish for this old age." Yayati said, "O son! You were born from my
heart, but you will not give your youth to me. Therefore, your offspring will have no share in the kingdom. O Tur-
vasu! O son! Take upon yourself this guilt and the consequent old age. I wish to enjoy pleasures with your youth.
When 1000 years have passed, I shall return your youth to you and take over the guilt and the consequent old age."

Turvasu replied, "O father! I do not desire old age. It destroys all desire, pleasure, strength, beauty, intelligence and
even life." Yayati said, "You were born from my heart, but will not give your youth to me. O Turvasu! Therefore,
your lineage will become extinct. O foolish one! You will be a king over subjects whose conduct and practices will
be impure. Women of superior birth will marry men of inferior birth. They will live on meat and lust after and cohabit with their preceptors' wives and animals. The evil ones will follow the conduct of animals and behave like
mlecchas." Thus did Yayati curse Turvasu, his son.

'Yayati then spoke to Sharmishtha's son Druhyu. "O Druhyu! For 1000 years, take over the old age that destroys
beauty and complexion. Give me your youth. When 1000 years have passed, I will return your youth to you and
take back the guilt and the consequent old age." Druhyu replied, "One who is old cannot enjoy elephants, chariots,
horses or women. Speech fails him. Therefore, I do not desire this old age." Yayati said, "You were born from my
heart, but will not give your youth to me. O Druhyu! Therefore, the most cherished of your desires will not come
true. You and your lineage will not be kings, but will have the title of 'Bhoja[This isn't clear at all. There was a kingdom of Bhoja in the Vidarbha or Malwa region. But why should that
be a curse? Or is this appellation a reference to people who were addicted to food (bhojana)?]' in a land where the only means
of transportation will be rafts, boats and swimming. O Anu! Accept my guilt and the consequent old age. I will
have your youth for 1000 years." Anu replied, "Those who are old eat like children, drooling and unclean at all
times of the day. They cannot pour offerings into the sacrificial fire at the right time. I do not wish for such an old
age." Yayati said, "You were born from my heart, but will not give your youth to me. Since you have described so
many faults associated with old age, old age will overcome you. Your offspring will be destroyed as soon as they
attain youth. You yourself will not be able to perform any sacrifices before the fire."

'Yayati said, "O Puru! You are my youngest and most beloved son. You will be the best among them. O son!
Old age, wrinkles and grey hair have overcome me, because of a curse imposed by Kavya Ushanas. But I am not
yet satiated with youth. O Puru! Accept my guilt and the consequent old age. I will enjoy pleasures for some time
with your youth. After 1000 years have passed, I will return your youth to you and accept back the guilt and the
consequent old age." Having been thus addressed by his father, Puru replied, "O great king! I will do what you
command me to do. O king! I will take upon myself the guilt and the consequent old age. Accept my youth and enjoy pleasures as you wish. I will live as you say, attacked by old age and deprived of youth and beauty. I will give
you my youth." Yayati said, "O Puru! O son! I am extremely pleased with you. Since I am pleased, I will grant you
this. Your offspring will rule the kingdom, be prosperous and accomplish all their desires."'


