'Bhishma said, "O Indra among kings! Having spoken in this way, Narada, knowledgeable about the brahman,
went and told the wind everything that the shalmali had said. 'There is a shalmali tree and its followers on the
slopes of the Himalayas. It has a gigantic trunk and many branches. O wind! It shows you disrespect. It spoke
many words of irreverence towards you. O wind! O lord! It is not appropriate that I should repeat those words before you. O wind! I know that you are the supreme upholder of all living beings. You are best and the greatest. In
your rage, you are like Vaivasvata[Yama.].' Having heard these words of Narada, the wind went to the shalmali and angrily spoke these words. 'O shalmali! You have spoken disrespectful words before Narada. I am the wind. I will
show you my influence and my own strength. I know who you are. O tree! You are known to me. The lord, the
grandfather[Brahma.], ended his act of creation with you. Because he ended with you, he showed you favours. O evil-
minded one! O worst among trees! That is what has protected you against my valour. Since you have disrespected
me as any other natural force, I will show myself to you, so that you know who I am.' Having been thus addressed,
the shalmali tree seemed to smile when it replied. 'O wind! Go to the woods and show your enraged self to your
own self. Release your anger towards me. What will you do in your rage? O wind! I would not have been frightened of you, even if you had been the lord of beings.' Having been thus addressed, the wind said that it would exhibit its energy the next day.

'"It was night and the shalmali thought about what should be done. It saw that it was not the equal of the wind.
'I spoke inappropriate words about the wind to Narada. I cannot match the wind in strength. It is stronger than me.
Narada was right when he said that the wind is always strong. There is no doubt that I am weaker than other trees.
However, I do not think there is any other tree that is my equal in intelligence. By resorting to that intelligence, I
can free myself from the fear that comes from the wind. There is no doubt that if the trees in the forest used their
intelligence, they would always be able to save themselves from any injury on account of the enraged wind. But
they are foolish and do not know the wind. Unlike me, they do not know how the angry wind blows.' Having made
up its mind, the shalmali began to shake itself. It itself cast off its trunk, branches and smaller branches. It cast off
its branches, leaves and flowers. Having done this, the tree waited for morning and for the approach of the wind.
The wind blew and angrily brought down large trees. It came to the spot where the shalmali was standing. It was
without leaves and the tips of the branches had fallen down. The flowers had fallen down. The wind glanced at it
and smiling, cheerfully spoke these words to the shalmali tree, which was without any branches. 'O shalmali! In
my anger, I would have done exactly this to you and brought down all your branches. You have done this yourself.
You are without flowers and the tips of your branches. Your buds and foliage have been destroyed. Through your
own evil intelligence, you have come under the subjugation of my valour.' Addressed in these words by the wind,
the shalmali tree was ashamed. It remembered the words that Narada had spoken to it and was tormented.

'"O tiger among kings! In this way, if a weak person engages in hostilities with someone who is stronger, he is
foolish and will be tormented like the shalmali tree. Therefore, a weak person should have enmity with someone
who is superior in strength. If he engages in such enmity, he will sorrow, like the shalmali tree. Even against those
who cause grievous injury, great-souled ones do not display their enmity. O great king! Instead, they exhibit their
strength gradually and gently. A man without intelligence should not act in enmity towards someone who lives by
his intelligence. An intelligent person's intelligence is like a fire raging through dry grass. O king! Among men,
there is nothing that is equal to intelligence. O Indra among kings! One might think that there is nothing that is
equal to strength. O Indra among kings! O slayer of enemies! You have thus seen that one must tolerate the foolish,
the dumb, the deaf and those who are superior in strength. O immensely radiant one! O king! The eleven and seven
akshouhinis[Respectively on the Kourava and Pandava side.] were not equal in strength to the great-souled Arjuna. The illustrious Pandava, the son of the chastiser of Paka, roamed around and slew and shattered them in the battle. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You
have been told about rajadharma and apad dharma in detail. O great king! What shall I tell you about next?"'


'Yudhishthira said, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! I wish to hear about the true nature of evil's foundation and
about how sin propagates."

'Bhishma replied, "O lord of men! Hear about the foundation of evil. Greed alone is the great grasper. Evil is
propagated by greed. It is from this that evil, adharma and supreme misery flow. This is the foundation for misdeeds and makes people commit sin. Anger results from greed. Desire results from greed. Confusion and delusion
result from greed and so do pride, arrogance, malice and lack of forgiveness. Modesty is abandoned. Prosperity is
destroyed and dharma decays. Anxiety and lack of wisdom-all of these result from greed. There are also lack of
fairness, lack of reflection and the performance of perverse deeds. One becomes learned in deceit and is proud of
one's beauty and prosperity. One is distrustful of all beings. One is crooked towards all beings. One acts injurious-
ly towards all beings. One behaves inappropriately towards all beings. One steals the property of others. One ravishes other people's wives. There is violence in words and thought. There is violence in criticizing. There is turbulence in one's groin and belly. There is the terrible turbulence that is associated with death. There is the violence of
envy. The strong impulse to lie is extremely difficult to give up. It is difficult to withstand the impulse of passions.
It is impossible to withstand the impulse to hear bad words and boasting. One is malicious, wicked and perpetrates
evil deeds. One is rash in every kind of deed and action. At birth, childhood and youth, a man cannot give up the
consequences of the deeds that he has done. Though he decays, these do not decay. O extender of the Kuru lineage! One is incapable of satisfying greed through acquisitions. It is always like an ocean, incapable of being filled
by deep-flowing rivers. Greed is not satisfied. Nor is desire satiated. O king! Its true nature is not known by the
gods, the gandharvas, the asuras, the great serpents and all the large numbers of other beings. One who conquers
greed and delusion conquers his soul. O Kouravya! Insolence, hatred, criticism, maligning and malice-these are
found in greedy people who have not perfected their souls. There are those who are extremely learned, the repositories of the extremely great sacred texts. They can sever doubt. But on this, even they can have limited intelligence and are afflicted. They become addicted to hatred and anger and are cast out by those who are good in conduct. Though they are harsh inside, their words may be sweet. They are like pits that have been covered with grass.
Though they hold up the flag[Of dharma.], they are inferior and against dharma. They steal from the universe. They resort to
the strength of arguments and follow many different kinds of paths. But because they base themselves on greed
and ignorance, they destroy every kind of path. If evil-souled ones, driven primarily by greed, take over dharma,
they deform it. But that practice tends to be established. O Kouravya! Arrogance, anger, pride, laziness, delight,
sorrow, extreme vanity-these are seen among the greedy and the ignorant. Know that they have not been instructed. They are always full of greed. Ask those who have been instructed. I will tell you about the ones who are auspicious in their vows. They do not have any fear about their conduct. Nor do they fear the world hereafter. They
find no delight in flesh, nor are they addicted to the agreeable and the disagreeable. Good conduct is agreeable to
them. Self-control is established in them. They are beyond happiness and unhappiness. They are devoted to the
truth and the ultimate. Though they are compassionate, they are neither givers, nor receivers. They are always devoted to the ancestors, the gods and guests. They always exert, in every kind of way. They follow every kind of
dharma. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They are engaged in the welfare of all beings. They are prepared to
give up everything. Having reached the ultimate shore of dharma, they are incapable of being dislodged and
moved from their conduct, which was fashioned by virtuous people in ancient times. They are based on the path of
virtue and are not frightened, fickle or fierce. They are beyond desire and anger. They are without a sense of ownership and without a sense of the ego. They are good in their vows and firm in their honour. O Yudhishthira! You
should worship them and ask them. They do not seek cattle or fame, only dharma. They do perform the functions
of the body, because that is necessary. But they do not know fear, anger, fickleness and sorrow. They do not fly the
flag of dharma and there is nothing that is secret among them. They do not suffer from greed and delusion. They
are upright and devoted to the truth. O Kounteya! You should find delight in them. Their minds are attentive. They
find no delight in acquisitions. Nor do they grieve if there are no acquisitions. They are without sense of ownership
and without sense of ego. They are based on the truth and look on everything equally. O son! Gain and lack of
gain, happiness and unhappiness, pleasant and unpleasant, death and life-these are the same to them, because
they are firm in their valour. They are full of intelligence and base themselves on the truth. They are extremely
powerful. Attentively and according to your capacity, you should do what brings them happiness and is agreeable.
Words used in conversation may be good or bad. Like that, through the working of destiny, all beings may have
qualities[The suggestion seems to be that the acceptance of Bhishma's instructions depends on destiny.]."'

'Yudhishthira said, "O grandfather! You have said that greed is the foundation of everything that is injurious. O father[The word used is tata.]! I wish to hear about the true
nature of ignorance."

'Bhishma replied, "If a person commits a wicked deed as a result of ignorance, he does not know what is good for him. He hates people who observe
good conduct and people talk about him[In words of condemnation.]. Because of ignorance, he goes
to hell. Because of ignorance, he comes to an evil end. Because of ignorance, he suffers misery and is submerged in disaster."

'Yudhishthira said, "I desire to hear about wickedness-its inclination,
status, growth, increase and decrease, the source, its working, progress, periodicity, reasons and causes. O king! I wish to hear exactly and completely,
about the consequence of ignorance, since unhappiness in this earth has it as
its origin."

'Bhishma replied, "Attachment, hatred, confusion, delight, sorrow, arrogance, desire, anger, pride, procrastination, laziness, wishing, aversion, torment, suffering from the prosperity of others-these wicked acts are indicated as ignorance. You have asked about their working, their increase and
other things. O mighty-armed one! O lord of the earth! Therefore, listen to
this in detail. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O king! Know that both
ignorance and excessive greed are equal in consequences and equal in
wickedness. They are the same. The influence of greed is again increased if
ignorance increases. If one is constant, so is the other. If one decays, so
does the other. Each one has many courses. The source of greed is the great
influence of destiny. Even if one has severed greed in every way, the source
that is based on destiny remains. Thus, greed comes from ignorance and ignorance comes from greed. Greed is the source of all sins. Therefore, one
should avoid greed. Janaka, Yuvanashva, Vrishadarbhi, Prasenjit and other
lords of the earth attained heaven because they destroyed their greed. O
foremost among the Kurus! In this world, it is evident that you must cast
aside greed from your soul. Having abandoned greed, you will follow the
path of happiness in this world and the next."'


