Vaishampayana said, 'Having emerged from the capital, Virata's son, Prithivinjaya[Earlier, Uttara's name has been given as Bhuminjaya. Here, the text refers to him as Prithivinjaya. Both bhumi
and prithivi mean the earth and Bhuminjaya or Prithivinjaya mean the conqueror of the earth.], told his charioteer, "Go
where the Kurus are. Having defeated all the Kurus who have assembled in search of victory and having quickly
recovered the cattle, I will return to my city again." Then the descendant of the Pandu lineage goaded those excellent steeds. Urged by that lion among men, those horses, which were as fleet as the wind and were bedecked in
golden garlands, carried them, as if they seemed to touch the sky. Having travelled a short distance, Matsya's son
and Dhananjaya, the destroyers of enemies, beheld the powerful Kuru army. They approached the Kurus near a
cremation ground. They saw the gigantic army, which made a sound like that of the ocean and was like a forest
with many trees crawling through the sky. O supreme among men! The kings saw the dust swirling around, making it difficult for beings to see and extending up to the sky. The giant army was full of elephants, horses and chariots. It was protected by Karna, Duryodhana, Kripa and Shantanu's son[Bhishma.], and by the intelligent and great archer
Drona, together with his son[Ashvatthama.].

'On seeing this, Virata's son was frightened and his body hair stood up. He told Partha, "I cannot fight with the
Kurus. On seeing them, my body hair is standing up. There are many terrible warriors, impossible for even the
gods to vanquish. I cannot repulse the Kuru soldiers, who seem to stretch to eternity. I cannot enter the army of the
Bharatas, with its terrible bows, large numbers of chariots, elephants and horses, and full of infantry and flags. On
seeing the enemy in the battlefield, my soul has begun to tremble. Drona, Bhishma, Kripa, Karna, Vivimshati, Ashvatthama, Vikarna, Somadatta, Bahlika and brave King Duryodhana, supreme among charioteers, are there. There
are many other radiant and great archers, all skilled in fighting. On seeing the Kurus, armed and arranged in battle
formation, my body hair has begun to stand up and I have been overcome with lassitude." On saying this, the stupid one wished to return and lamented foolishly before Savyasachi, who did not withdraw. "My father has gone to
fight with the Trigartas and has left me alone in charge. He has taken all the soldiers and I have no soldiers. I am
alone against many and I am only a child. They are skilled in weapons and possess experience. I cannot fight with
them. O Brihannada! Return." Arjuna replied, "You are miserable from fear. Why are you increasing the delight of
your enemies? The enemies haven't yet done anything against you in the battlefield. You yourself told me to take
you towards the Kouravas. I will take you to the place where there are many flags flying. O mighty-armed one! I
will take you to the midst of the Kurus, who are assassins[The word used is atatayin. This has several meanings, murderer or assassin being one. But it can also be used
for thieves, ravishers and arsonists.] and like vultures looking for flesh, even if they fight
from inside the earth. You boasted of your manliness before women and men, before we set out. Why do you not
wish to fight? O brave one! If you return home without having recovered the cattle, all the men and women will
laugh at you. Sairandhri praised me because of my deeds as a charioteer. I will not be able to return to the city
without having recovered the cattle. Sairandhri praised me and you ordered me. Why should I not fight with all the
Kurus? Be steadfast." Uttara said, "Let the Kurus rob many riches from the Matsyas, as they wish. O Brihannada!
Let men and women laugh at me." Having spoken these words, the evil-souled one jumped down from the chariot.
Sporting earrings, he abandoned his pride and threw away his bow and arrows.

'Brihannada said, "Running away has never been said to be the dharma of brave kshatriyas. Dying in battle is
superior to running away in fear." Speaking these words, Kounteya Dhananjaya descended from that supreme
chariot. He pursued the prince who was running away. His long braid trailed and his red garment fluttered. On seeing him run with his trailing braid and not knowing that it was Arjuna, some soldiers laughed on seeing his strange
form. But on seeing him run swiftly, the Kurus said, "Who is disguised in this form, like a fire beneath ashes? He
seems to be partly a man and partly a woman. Though he is in the form of a eunuch, he seems to resemble Arjuna.
He has the same head and neck, and arms like clubs. His gait is also the same. This can be no one other than
Dhananjaya. Dhanajaya is to men what the lord of the gods[Indra is the lord of the gods.] is to the immortals. Who in this world, other than
Dhananjaya, will come alone to fight with us? Virata left a single son in that deserted city. He has ventured forth
because of his childish folly, not because of his manliness. That must be Partha Arjuna who is running there in disguise. Uttara made him his charioteer when he emerged from the city. It seems to us, having seen our flags, he is
frightened and is running away. It must certainly be Dhananjaya who is running after him to restrain him." Individually, all the Kurus thought in this way. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! But having seen the Pandava in disguise, they were unable to arrive at any definite conclusion. Meanwhile, Dhananjaya ran after Uttara. Within one
hundred steps, he seized him by the hair.

'Seized by Arjuna, Virata's son began to lament in many piteous words, as if he had been sorely oppressed. "I
will give you a hundred nishkas made out of pure gold[Nishka is a general term for gold, as well as a specific golden coin. As a golden coin, a nishka had different values and was not standardized.]. I will give you eight sparkling vaidurya[Lapis lazuli.] gems set in
gold. I will give you a chariot with a golden standard, drawn by well-trained horses and ten mad elephants. O Brihannada! Let me go." While the insensate one was lamenting in these words, the tiger among men laughed and
brought him to the chariot. Partha spoke to the frightened one, who had lost his senses. "O destroyer of enemies! If
you are incapable of fighting with the foes, control the horses while I fight with the enemy. Protected by the
strength of my arms, let us penetrate this unassailable and terrible mass of chariots, protected by heroes who are
maharathas. O foremost among princes! O scorcher of enemies! Do not be afraid. You are a kshatriya. I will fight
with the Kurus and recover your animals. Enter that impenetrable and unassailable mass of chariots. O best among
men! Be my charioteer while I fight with the Kurus." O bull among the Bharata lineage! Having thus spoken to Vi-
rata's son, the unvanquished Bibhatsu reassured Uttara for an instant. Then Partha, supreme among warriors, made
the unwilling and insensate one, oppressed by fear, ascend the chariot.'


Vaishampayana said, 'On seeing that bull among men ascend the chariot in the form of a eunuch and head for the
shami tree, after having made Uttara ascend the chariot, the supreme charioteers among the Kurus, with Bhishma
and Drona at the front, were all agitated in their minds out of fear of Dhananjaya. On seeing them lose their endeavour and on witnessing extraordinary omens, the preceptor Bharadvaja[Drona.], supreme among wielders of weapons,
said, "Violent and turbulent winds are blowing, rough and harsh in tone. The sky is covered in a darkness that has
the complexion of ashes. The clouds are extraordinary to look at, with a rough hue. Many weapons are coming out
of their sheaths. Jackals are lamenting and the directions are ablaze with a terrible light. The horses are shedding
tears. The flags are fluttering, though there is nothing to move them. Since many such portents can be seen, be
steadfast, because a great battle must be near. Protect yourselves and arrange yourselves in battle formations. Wait
for a slaughter and protect the wealth of cattle. This is a brave and mighty archer, supreme among those who are
skilled in all weapons. There is no doubt that it is Partha who has arrived in the form of a eunuch. This is the valorous Partha, Savyasachi, the scorcher of enemies. He will not refrain from battle, even against masses of Maruts[Maruts are gods of the wind and Indra's companions.].
The brave one suffered difficulties in the forest and was trained by Vasava[Indra.]. He is intolerant and there is no doubt
that he will do battle. O Kouravas! I do not see a warrior who is capable of repulsing him. It is said that Partha satisfied Mahadeva[Shiva. The story of this encounter has been told in Section 31 (Volume 2).] himself in a battle." Karna replied, "You always belittle us by speaking about Phalguna's qualities. But Arjuna isn't worth one kala[Kala means a small part or fraction. In addition, kala is a digit of the moon and sixteen kalas make up the entirety. Therefore, Arjuna is a small part of Karna and Duryodhana and specifically, one-sixteenth of either of them.] of me or Duryodhana." Duryodhana said, "O Radheya[Radha's son, Karna's name.]! If it is Partha, my
task will be accomplished. Once recognized, they will have to roam again for another twelve years. Or if it is some
other man in the form of a eunuch, I will soon bring him down to ground with extremely sharp arrows." When
Dhritarashtra's son, scorcher of enemies, spoke these words, Bhishma, Drona, Kripa and Drona's son honoured his
manliness.'


