'Brihadashva said, "After a long time, a brahmana by the name of Parnada returned to the city and told Bhima's
daughter, 'O Damayanti! I searched for Nishadha day and night and went to the city of Ayodhya. I presented myself before Bhangasvari[Another name for Rituparna.]. O beautiful one! In a public place, I repeated those words before the immensely fortunate Rituparna, exactly as you had asked me to. On hearing those words, Rituparna, lord of men, did not reply. Nor
did any of his courtiers respond, though those words were repeated by me several times. Then the king gave me
permission to leave. A man named Bahuka is in Rituparna's service. He is the king's charioteer and is deformed
and has short arms. He is skilled in driving vehicles swiftly and he is accomplished in cooking. When I was alone,
he spoke a few words to me. He sighed several times and wept repeatedly. He asked me about my welfare and then
addressed me in these words, "Though they confront great calamity, women of a good lineage protect themselves
through their own efforts and there is no doubt that they win heaven for themselves. Even if they are abandoned by
their husbands, they are never angry. He was trying to sustain his life and a bird stole his garment. He is tormented
by anguish and a dark one should not be angry. Whether she is treated well or whether she is treated badly, when
she sees her husband without his kingdom and without prosperity, a dark one should not be angry." On hearing
these words of his, I instantly returned here. Having heard this, you decide and inform the king.' O lord of the
earth! Damayanti listened to Parnada's words with tears in her eyes.

'"She went to her mother and secretly told her, 'O mother! Bhima should under no circumstances get to know
about these words. In your presence, I wish to employ Sudeva, supreme among brahmanas. King Bhima should not
know what my intentions are. If you wish to bring about my pleasure, you must act in this way. Let Sudeva go
quickly. Let him perform the auspicious ceremonies that united me with my relatives. Let Sudeva go without delay. O mother! Let him go to the city of Ayodhya and bring Nala back here.' Later, after Parnada, supreme among
brahmanas, had rested, the beautiful daughter of Vidarbha worshipped him and gave him a lot of riches. She said,
'O brahmana! When Nala comes here, I will give you even greater riches. O supreme among brahmanas! You have
done so much for me. No one else will ever be able to accomplish more. It is because of this that I will soon be reunited with my husband.' Thus addressed by her, the high-minded one paid her his respects and pronounced auspicious blessings over her. Having accomplished his purpose, he returned home.

'"O Yudhishthira! Then Damayanti summoned that brahmana[Sudeva.] again. In her mother's presence and engulfed
by misery and sorrow, she told him, 'O Sudeva! Go to King Rituparna who lives in the city of Ayodhya and tell
him, "Bhima's daughter Damayanti wishes for a husband again and will again hold a svayamvara. All the kings
and the princes are going there. Having computed the time, this will be held tomorrow. O destroyer of enemies! If
it is possible, go there quickly. She will choose a second husband at the time of sunrise, because it is not known
whether the valiant Nala is dead or alive."' O great king! As he had been instructed, the brahmana Sudeva then
went to King Rituparna and told him what he had been asked to."'


'Brihadashva said, "Having heard these words of Sudeva, Rituparna, lord of men, spoke these words to Bahuka, in
a comforting and soft voice, 'O Bahuka! I wish to go to Vidarbha for Damayanti's svayamvara. You are skilled
with horses. Do you think that it can be done in a single day?' O Kounteya! Having heard these words from the
king, Nala's mind was rent asunder with grief and the great-minded one was tormented with sorrow. He thought,
'If Damayanti has decided to do something like this, she must be demented with grief. Or is it that she has thought
of a great means for my sake? Why has the ascetic daughter of Vidarbha decided to perform this cruel act? I am
mean and deceitful and my intelligence has been deluded by sin. In this world, feminine nature is fickle. My sin
was also terrible. So must it then be. But will she act in this way and forget all her love? That slender-waisted one
is anxious for my sake and is despairing. But she can never act in this way, especially because she has children. It
is certain that we have to go there and truly find out what is happening. I will accomplish Rituparna's desires, because that is what I want too.' Bahuka decided this in his mind. In a dejected state of mind, he went to King Rituparna. He joined his hands in salutation and said, 'O tiger among men! O lord of men! I give you my word that we
will reach the city of Vidarbha in a single day.' O king! Having obtained King Bhangasvari's orders, Bahuka went
to the stables and inspected the horses.

'"Bahuka was repeatedly rushed by Rituparna. He then selected horses that were lean, but capable on the road.
They were energetic and strong. They had been born in a noble lineage and were good in conduct. They were
bereft of all inauspicious marks. Their nostrils were wide and their jaws were big. They were pure and possessed
the ten locks of hair[Avarta, an auspicious lock of hair on the back of a horse, curling backwards.]. They were from the region of the Sindhu and were as swift as the wind. On seeing them,
the king was a little angry and said, 'What do you wish to do? You should not jest with me. How can these horses
of mine, weak and lifeless, bear us? How can we travel such a long distance with these steeds?' Bahuka replied,
'There is no doubt that these horses will reach Vidarbha. O king! But if you so desire, tell me which ones you
would like me to yoke.' Rituparna said, 'O Bahuka! You are the one who has knowledge of horses. You are the
skilled one. Yoke the ones that you think will be swift and capable.' Then the skilled Nala yoked four horses to the
chariot. They were bred from a noble lineage and were of good conduct. Then the king swiftly ascended the chariot that had been yoked, as the supreme horses knelt down on the ground.

'"O lord of the earth! Then the handsome King Nala, supreme among men, comforted the horses, which were
endowed with energy and strength. Nala controlled the reins and made suta Varshneya ascend the chariot. Then
those supreme horses were commanded by Bahuka in accordance with the rules. The chariot seemed to rise up into
the sky, confounding the occupants. The wise king of Ayodhya was extremely surprised when he saw those horses
carry them with the speed of the wind. Having heard the roar of the chariot and the control over the horses, Varshneya began to wonder about Bahuka's mastery over horses, 'Is this Matali, the charioteer of the king of the gods?
Those great signs can be seen in the brave Bahuka. Or is this Shalihotra[A famous authority who wrote about horses.], who knows about the breeding of
horses? Has he now assumed this beautiful human form[This is strange, because Bahuka is deformed.]? Or might it be King Nala, the destroyer of enemy
cities? Has that king come here[Since Varshneya is Nala's old charioteer, he knows Nala well. The only difficulty is that Nala's form is now
different.]?' He began to think in this way, 'Or perhaps Bahuka knows some of the
knowledge that Nala possessed. The skills of Bahuka and Nala seem to be the same. Then again, his age seems to
be the same as Nala's. This is not the immensely valorous Nala, but he has the same knowledge. Sometimes, great-
souled ones roam the world in disguise, driven by destiny, or malformed because of what has been said in the sacred texts. My mind is divided because of the deformity of his body. But it is my view that I should not decide in
the absence of proof. They are equal in age. It is the form alone that is the difficulty. But then again, Bahuka has all
the qualities and I think that he is Nala.' O great king! Punyashloka's old charioteer kept on thinking in his mind.
O Indra among kings! Together with the charioteer Varshneya, King Rituparna also kept thinking about Bahuka's
expertise with horses. He was extremely delighted on witnessing his strength, valour, enthusiasm, control over
horses and diligence."'


'Brihadashva said, "Like a bird travelling in the sky, he swiftly crossed rivers, mountains, forests and lakes. As the
chariot travelled, King Bhangasvari, the conqueror of enemy cities, saw that his upper garment had fallen down.
When he saw that the garment had dropped as they were speeding, the great-souled king told Nala, 'I will go and
get it. O immensely intelligent one! Restrain these immensely swift horses. Varshneya can then go and retrieve the
garment.' Nala replied, 'Your garment fell down far behind. We have travelled more than a yojana since then. It is
not possible to get it back now.' O king! While he was thus addressed by Nala, King Bhangasvari came to a forest
where there was a vibhitaka tree laden with fruit.

'"On seeing the tree, the king immediately told Bahuka, 'O suta! Now witness my great prowess at counting.
Everyone does not know everything. Indeed, there is no one who knows everything. O Bahuka! In this tree, the
number of leaves and fruits that are still on it is more than those that have fallen down by one hundred and one. O
Bahuka! There is one more leaf and one hundred fruit. Those two branches have five crore leaves. Take those two
branches and their twigs. The fruits there will number two thousand and ninety-five.' At that, Bahuka descended
from the chariot and told the king, 'O king! O oppressor of enemies! You have stated something that is beyond my
perception. O king! If I count, nothing will be left to supposition. O great king! Witness as I count the number of
vibhitakas. I do not know whether your statement is right or wrong. O lord of men! You will see as I count the
number of fruit. Let Varshneya handle the reins of the horses for the moment.' The king told the suta[Bahuka.], 'We do
not have any time to delay.' However, Bahuka told him with great humility, 'Wait for only an instant. Or if you
wish to hurry, take Varshneya as your charioteer. From here onwards, the road is smooth.' O descendant of the
Kuru lineage! Rituparana comforted him and said, 'O Bahuka! There is no one on earth who is your equal as a
charioteer. You know about horses. I desired to go to Vidarbha with your help. I seek a favour with you. Please do
not create obstacles. O Bahuka! I will do whatever you wish, and whatever you tell me, if you take me to Vidarbha
today and show me the sunrise there.' At that, Bahuka told him, 'I will count the vibhitakas and then go to Vidarbha. Please do what I ask you to.' Unwillingly, the king asked him to proceed with the counting. He dismounted
from the chariot and swiftly cut down the tree. He was extremely surprised that, on counting, the number of fruits
was exactly what the king had told him it would be. He said, 'O king! This is extraordinary and I have seen your
powers. O king! I wish to know the learning through which you have known this.' But the king was in a hurry to
leave and replied, 'Know that I am versed with the heart of the dice and have expertise in counting.' Bahuka said,
'O bull among men! Give me that knowledge. And take from me the knowledge about handling horses.' King Rituparna desired to imbibe the knowledge about horses and there was also the urgency of his task[Of reaching Vidarbha in time.]. So he told
Bahuka, 'Let it be that way. Accept from me the supreme knowledge about the heart of the dice. O Bahuka! But let
my knowledge about horses remain in your heart as a trust.' Having said this, Rituparna gave his knowledge to
Nala.

'"When Nala had learned the knowledge of the dice, Kali emerged from his body, continuously vomiting from
his mouth Karkotaka's virulent venom. The fire of Kali's curse, which had made the king thin and had oppressed
him for a long time, making him lose control over his own self, also issued out. Kali's self was freed from the poison and he assumed his own form. Nala, lord of the nishadhas, was angry and wished to curse him. Kali was
frightened. He trembled and joined his hands in salutation. He said, 'O king! Control your anger. I will give you
supreme fame. In anger, Indrasena's mother[Meaning Damayanti.] had cursed me earlier, when you had abandoned her and I have
been sorely oppressed since then. O Indra among kings! O invincible one! I have lived inside you in great misery. I
have burnt day and night from the venom of the king of the serpents. If anyone from the world of men recounts
your deeds incessantly, he shall have no reason to be scared of danger from me.' On hearing these words, King
Nala controlled the wrath in his soul. Then the frightened Kali quickly entered the vibhitaka. When Kali had been
conversing with Nishadha, he had been invisible to others.

'"King Nishadha, the destroyer of enemy warriors, was cured of his fever. Kali had been destroyed and the king
had counted the number of fruit. He was extremely delighted and was again endowed with his earlier radiance.
Then the energetic one ascended the chariot and drove the swift steeds. Having been possessed by Kali, the vibhitaka has come to acquire a bad reputation. Nala's heart was delighted. He repeatedly urged those supreme horses
and they travelled like birds. The great-minded king proceeded in the direction of Vidarbha. When Nala had gone a
long distance, Kali also returned home. O lord of the earth! King Nala was freed from his fever. O king! But
though he was free of Kali, he was still separated from his old form."'


