Arjuna said, "O Bhima! You are my elder brother and my senior and I am not interested in saying anything
more. Rajarshi Dhritarashtra must always be honoured. Virtuous people, the best among men, remember the
good deeds that have been done to them. They do not remember crimes and the breaking of agreements. O Kshatta! Convey my words to the Kourava king. I will give him whatever he desires on account of his sons and for
Bhishma and all the others, all the well-wishers who helped our cause. O lord! It will be given from my store of
riches. Let Bhima not be greatly distressed at this."'

Vaishampayana said, 'When Arjuna spoke in this way, Yudhishthira honoured him. But Bhimasena cast angry
glances at Dhananjaya. The intelligent Yudhishthira spoke these words to Vidura. "The king should not be angry at
Bhimasena. In the forest, the intelligent Bhima was afflicted by cold, rain and heat and many kinds of hardships.
That is known to you. However, convey my words to the king who is a bull among the Bharata lineage. He can
take everything that he wishes from my house. Bhima sorrows greatly and has exhibited this intolerance. The king
should not take these words to heart. Whatever riches exist in my house and that of Arjuna's, the great king is the
owner of all of that. Tell the king these words. Let the king give to brahmanas and spend whatever he wishes. Let
him repay the debt to his sons and well-wishers. This body of mine also belongs to that lord of men. O Kshatta!
Knowing this, how can there be any doubt about the riches?"'


Vaishampayana said, 'The king spoke in this way to Vidura, supreme among intelligent ones. He went to Dhritarashtra and conveyed these words of deep import. "I first spoke about your message to King Yudhishthira.
Having listened to my words, the immensely radiant one praised them. The greatly energetic Bibhatsu has given
his houses, the riches in those houses and even his life to you. O rajarshi! Your son, Dharmaraja, has placed the
kingdom, his life, his riches and everything else at your disposal. However, Bhima remembered all the misery and
the many kinds of hardship. The mighty-armed one was filled with anger and sighed. However, because of the
brotherly affection he bears towards the king who follows dharma in his conduct and his brother Bibhatsu, the
mighty-armed one has also given his permission. Bhima remembered the enmity and the wicked deeds that were
perpetrated. Dharmaraja has said that you should not be enraged with him. 'O lord of men[This is Yudhishthira's quote.]! This is generally the
dharma of kshatriyas[Giving vent to rage.]. Vrikodara has been devoted to following the dharma of kshatriyas in battle. O king! I and
Arjuna repeatedly crave your pardon for what Vrikodara has done. You are our lord. O king! As you wish, give
whatever riches we possess. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You are the owner of all the lives in this kingdom. For the funeral rites of your sons and to give to brahmanas, here are jewels, cattle, male servants, female servants, goats and sheep. O foremost among the Kuru lineage! Bring them and give them to brahmanas, the distressed, the old, the blind and the weak. O Vidura! On the king's instructions, let an assembly hall be constructed
and let it be stocked with many kinds of juices, drinks and food. Let places for cattle to drink from be constructed.
Let diverse kinds of auspicious acts be performed.' This is what the king and Partha Dhananjaya told me. You
should tell me what needs to be done next." This is what Vidura said and Dhritarashtra applauded this. O Janamejaya! He made up his mind to give large quantities of gifts on the day of the full moon in Kartika.'


Vaishampayana said, 'Vidura spoke in this way to King Dhritarashtra. The king was delighted at what the king[Yudhishthira.]
and Jishnu had done. For the sake of Bhishma, his sons and his well-wishers, he examined and invited thousands of brahmanas and superior rishis. The supreme among kings instructed that food, drink, vehicles, spreads,
gold, gems, jewels, female servants, male servants, garments, blankets, hides, gems[Gems are mentioned more than once.], villages, fields, goats, sheep,
ornaments, elephants, horses, maidens and the best of women should be readied for the brahmanas. He named
Drona, Bhishma, Somadatta, Bahlika, King Duryodhana, his other sons and all the well-wishers, with Jayadratha
as the foremost, separately and gave these away in their respective names. With Yudhishthira's sanction, the funeral ceremony prospered, with large amounts of cattle, riches, dakshina and diverse kinds of wealth and jewels given
away. On Yudhishthira's instructions, men, enumerators and writers incessantly told the king, "Command us. What
should be given? Whom should it be given to? Everything is here." They recorded this. No sooner had he spoken,
than these objects would be seen. On the instructions of the intelligent king who was Kunti's son, a thousand was
given to the one who should be given one hundred and ten thousand was given to the one who should be given one
thousand[Yudhishthira multiplied Dhritarashtra's required amount by ten times.]. Like the monsoon showering down rain on the ground, the king[Dhritarashtra.] was like an ocean and showered
down a flow of riches on the brahmanas, thereby satisfying them. After this, the king segregated all the varnas. The
king flooded them with food and drink. The garments were like foam, the jewels were like currents, the drums
were like the roar of the waves. Cattle and horses were like whirlpools. There were extensive amounts of women
and gems. The villages were like crocodiles on the shore. The water in that ocean was made out of jewels and
gold. The ocean that was Dhritarashtra flooded the earth. O great king! Thus, he donated at that funeral ceremony
and gave for his sons, his grandsons, his forefathers, for himself and for Gandhari. After he had given away many
gifts, he became exhausted. The extender of the Kuru lineage then terminated the sacrifice of donations. In this
way, the Kouravya king performed that festival of donations. There was a lot of dakshina that was succulent[Food and drink.] and
actors and dancers performed incessantly. For ten days, the king who was Ambika's son gave away gifts in this
way. O bull among the Bharata lineage! He thus freed himself from the debt to his sons and grandsons.'


