'Vaishampayana said, "Bowing down first before my preceptor, with my mind and intellect concentrated and worshipping with devotion, reverence and single-mindedness all the Brahmanas and learned men, I shall now recite in
its entirety the account I heard from the great-souled Vyasa, a wise maharshi famous in the three worlds, infinite in
his accomplishments. O king! You are a worthy person to hear the history of Bharata. Having received the account
from my preceptor, I am delighted to be able to recite it. O king! Hear how the quarrel between the Kurus and the
Pandavas occurred. In a desire for the kingdom, hear about the exile[Exile of the Pandavas.] as a result of the game of dice. O bull of the
Bharata lineage! At your bidding, I shall recount to you how a battle ensued that destroyed the earth. On their father's death, these warriors[The Pandavas.] returned to their home from the forest. In a short while, they became skilled in the
art of archery and knowledge of the Vedas. However, the Kurus became envious of the Pandavas, who were all
gifted with immense physical strength, beauty and energy, fame and fortune. They were also loved by the citizens.

'"Thereupon, the evil-minded Duryodhana, with Karna and the son of Subala[Shakuni.], tried to banish them and oppressed them in various ways. That evil son of Dhritarashtra gave poison to Bhima with his food, but the warrior
Vrikodara[Bhima.] digested it. One day, the evil one tied the sleeping Vrikodara on the banks of the Ganga and throwing
Bhima into the water went away to the city. But when the son of Kunti woke up, he tore the ropes with which he
was tied with his strong arms and Bhima's pains disappeared. While he was asleep, he was bitten everywhere in
his body by black snakes with virulent poison, but that destroyer of enemies did not die. However, in all this oppression, the great-souled Vidura was always on guard, to neutralize the evil plans and save them from oppression.
As Shakra[Indra.] ensures happiness in heaven and the world of living beings, thus did Vidura always ensure happiness
for the Pandavas. When the Pandavas were not killed through all these means, open and hidden, since they were
protected by fate and destiny, he[Duryodhana.] consulted his advisers: Vrisha[Karna.], Duhshasana and the others. With Dhritarashtra's consent, he had a house of lac built. The Pandavas, of unlimited energy, were forced to live there and it was
burnt down by fire when they[The Pandavas.] least suspected it. Because of Vidura's warning, a trench was dug and that gave
them a wonderful means of escape and they were freed from danger.

'"Later, in a large and terrible forest, Bhima, who had fearsome strength when angered, killed a rakshasa named
Hidimba. Then, in complete agreement, those powerful warriors went to the town of Ekachakra and lived there,
with their mother, disguised as Brahmanas. Having won Droupadi, they lived there for one year. And having been
recognized, those destroyers of foes returned to Hastinapura. King Dhritarashtra and the son[Bhishma.] of Shantanu then
told them, 'Sons, so that conflict doesn't ensue between you and your brothers, we have thought and decided that
Khandavaprastha will be your abode. Therefore, give up your resentment and go and live in Khandavaprastha,
which has many towns and wide roads.' On hearing these words, they and their friends went to Khandavaprastha,
taking many jewels with them. And the sons of Pritha[Kunti.] lived there for many years. Through the force of their
weapons, they brought many kings under their vassalage. Thus they gradually increased in power, setting store to
virtue and the way of truth, not roused by anger, calm and subjugating those who wished to do them harm. The immensely powerful Bhimasena subjugated the east, the brave Arjuna the north, Nakula the west and Sahadeva, the
conqueror of brave enemies, the south. Having conquered everything, their kingdom extended over the whole
world. With five such sun-like ones and the sun himself extended, the earth seemed to have six suns with the truthful and valorous Pandavas.

'"Then, for some reason, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira sent his brother Dhananjaya[Literally, winner of riches and one of Arjuna's names.] to the forest. He lived in the
forest for one year and one month. He once went to Hrishikesha[Krishna.] in Dvaravati and there obtained as his wife Subhadra, with eyes like the blue lotus, sweet of speech and Vasudeva's younger sister. As Shachi[Indra's wife.]with the great Indra and Shri[Lakshmi.] with Krishna, Subhadra was delighted to be united with Pandu's son, Arjuna. O supreme among
kings! Kunti's son and Vasudeva then satisfied Agni by giving him Khandava[The forest Khandava. The story about why Agni was allowed to burn Khandava forest will be told later. The
fire-god had been suffering from indigestion and this was a cure.] to burn. Aided by Keshava, this
task wasn't difficult for Bibhatsu Partha, 26 just as when Vishnu sets his mind to destroying enemies, no task is too
difficult. Agni gave Partha the supreme of bows, Gandiva, an inexhaustible quiver of arrows and a chariot with a
monkey on the standard. It was on that occasion that Bibhatsu freed the great demon Maya. He[Maya.] built the divine
assembly hall, adorned with all kinds of jewels and precious stones. Seeing this, the evil-minded and deluded
Duryodhana was driven by avarice.

'"Thereupon he deceived Yudhishthira in a game of dice, played by Soubala[Shakuni.], and banished him to the forest
for twelve years, with an additional year to be spent in disguise, adding up to thirteen years. When in the fourteenth year they[The Pandavas.] returned and claimed their property, they didn't get it. O king! Then war was declared and after
destroying all the Kshatriya lineages and killing King Duryodhana, the Pandavas obtained their kingdom back,
mostly unpopulated. O great king! This is the ancient history of those whose deeds were everlasting, the account of
the conflict, the destruction of the kingdom and the victory."'


'Janamejaya said, "O supreme among Brahmanas! You have told me in brief the account known as Mahabharata,
containing stories about the great Kurus. O blameless performer of austerities! But I now feel a great desire to hear
this wonderful history in detail, with all descriptions. You should therefore recite it in its entirety. I am not satisfied
with hearing a brief account of this great story. It cannot be for a trifling reason that the virtuous Pandavas killed
those who should not be killed, and yet continue to be praised by men. Why did those tigers among men, despite
being innocent and capable of wreaking vengeance on their enemies, suffer the oppressions of those evil ones quietly? O supreme among Brahmanas! Why did Vrikodara, who in his mighty arms had the strength of 10,00030 elephants, keep his anger under control, despite being oppressed? Why did not the pure Krishna Droupadi, oppressed
by the evil sons of Dhritarashtra, burn them with her angry eyes, capable though she was of doing it? Why did
those tigers among men, the two sons[Bhima and Arjuna.] of Pritha and the two sons of Madri[Nakula and Sahadeva.], though oppressed by the evil ones,
follow Yudhishthira, addicted to the evil vice of gambling? Why did Yudhishthira, the best among righteous men
and the son of Dharma himself, suffer extreme misfortune, though he knew the path of virtuous conduct? Why did
Pandu's son Dhananjaya, with Krishna as his charioteer, and capable of dispatching many warriors to the land of
the dead with his arrows, suffer so much oppression? O blessed with the power of austerities! Tell me everything
that those great warriors did in every situation."

'Vaishampayana said, "I shall recount the entire history, that which was composed by the great-souled maharshi
Vyasa, whose powers are infinite and who is worshipped in all the worlds. This contains 100,000 sacred shlokas,
composed by Satyavati's son, Vyasa, of infinite powers. The learned man who recites it to others and also those
who hear its recital attain the world of Brahma and become the equals of the gods. This is equal to the Vedas. It is
sacred and supreme. It is the best of all that can be heard. It is a purana worshipped by the rishis. It contains all the
useful instructions on artha and kama. This immensely sacred history makes the mind desire to attain salvation.
The learned man who recites Krishna's[Krishna Dvaipayana's.] Veda to those who are noble, generous, truthful and faithful, will attain
great fortune. Even sins like the killing of embryos in wombs are destroyed. On hearing it, the most evil is freed
from the most evil of sins. This history, called jaya, should be heard by those who wish to attain victory. On hearing it, a king can bring the entire world under his subjugation and defeat all his enemies. This is the best way to obtain a son and the great path to ensure welfare. It should be heard several times by heirs apparent and their wives.

'"Vyasa, of infinite intelligence, has said that it is the sacred arthashastra and the supreme dharmashastra. It has
been said that it is also the great mokshashastra. It is recited in the present time and it will be recited in the future.
He who hears it obtains sons, descendants and servants who perform desired acts. He who hears it is immediately
freed from all sins committed in body, mind and speech. He who hears the history of Bharata, without finding
fault, is freed from all fear of disease, not to speak of fear in the next world. Krishna Dvaipayana, in a desire to
bring welfare to the world, composed this to bring wealth, fame, long life, pure deeds and attainment of heaven,
spreading in the world the fame of the great-souled Pandavas and other Kshatriyas of immense energy. It is said
that this Bharata is the treasury of jewels, like the ocean who is the lord and the great snow-clad mountain[This can also specifically be translated as Himalaya.]. The
learned man who recites it to Brahmanas during sacred parvas[Days of the full moon and days of the new moon.] is cleansed of his sins and becoming victorious
over heaven[That is, is freed from the desire of attaining heaven.] attains union with the eternal brahman. He who causes even a single line from it to be read to Brahmanas at his shraddha makes his shraddha becomes inexhaustible and his ancestors are satisfied with the offerings
that are made to them. The sins committed ignorantly by men every day are destroyed on hearing the account of
the Mahabharata. It is said that the Mahabharata is the history of the births of the Bharata lineage. He who knows
the etymology of this name is freed from all sin. The sage Krishna Dvaipayana arose regularly[In the morning.] for three years
and composed this wonderful history known as the Mahabharata. O bull among the Bharatas! Whatever is found
here on dharma, artha, kama and moksha, may be found elsewhere. But whatever is not in it, cannot be found anywhere else."'


