'Narada said, "The brahmana and the bird descended on the summit of Rishabha. They saw the brahmana lady
Shandili practising austerities there. After Suparna had greeted her and Galava had worshipped her, she welcomed
them and they seated themselves on grass that had been spread out. They quickly ate the cooked food she offered,
consecrated with mantras. Having lost their senses because of this, they slept on the ground. After some time, Suparna woke up and wished to leave. The traveller in the sky saw that his wings had fallen off. The bird became like
a lump of flesh, with only a mouth and feet. On seeing him, Galava was distressed and asked, 'How have you
come to this state? What is the cause? How long will we have to remain here? Have we thought of something that
is evil and transgressed dharma? Surely this cannot have been the result of a small transgression on your part.' Suparna told the brahmana, 'O brahmana! I did entertain the thought of taking this Siddha to where Prajapati, the god
Mahadeva, the eternal Vishnu, Dharma and sacrifices reside, so that she might live there also. O illustrious goddess[Addressing Shandili.]! For my own good, I bow down before you. I harboured this thought in my mind and have certainly come
to grief because of this. But it was only out of great respect for you that I wished to do something like this.
Whether it was a good deed, or whether it was a bad deed, you should forgive me because of your greatness.' Thus
spoken to, she was placated.

'"She told the king of the birds and the bull among the brahmanas, 'O Suparna! Do not be afraid. You will possess beautiful wings again. O son! I have been slighted by you and I do not tolerate slights. Evil ones who slight
me will be dislodged from the superior worlds. I am devoid of any inauspicious marks. I am unblemished in every
way. I have achieved supreme success. Through good conduct, one obtains dharma. Through good conduct, one
obtains riches. Through good conduct, one obtains prosperity. Through good conduct, one destroys inauspicious
portents. O lord of the birds! May you have a long life. Go wherever you wish. Never censure a woman, even if
she deserves to be censured. You will possess strength and valour, as you did earlier.' His wings grew up again and
they were stronger than before. Having taken Shandili's leave, he left in the direction from where he had come.
But they did not come across horses of that description.

'"Vishvamitra was stationed along that road and saw Galava. The most eloquent of speakers told him in the
presence of Vinata's son, 'O brahmana! You have promised me of your own volition. The time has come to meet
that pledge. Do what you think is proper. Since I have waited this long, I will wait for a little more. O brahmana!
Determine a path to accomplish success.' Galava was extremely distressed and Suparna told him, 'I have myself
heard what Vishvamitra has told you. O best of brahmanas! O Galava! Let us go and consult together. Until you
have given your preceptor what you have promised in entirety, you cannot even sit down.'"'


'Narada said, "Galava was distressed. Suparna, supreme among those who have wings, told him, 'Gold is created
in the ground and is purified by fire. It is because of this that it is known as hiranya[There is probably a sense of virility, since hiranya means both gold and semen.]. Since it supports and sustains the prosperity of the three worlds, it is always known as dhana[Dhana means wealth or riches and dharana is to support and sustain.]. Shukra is the lord of riches. When the two
constellations of Proshthapada[The twenty-fifth and twenty-sixth nakshatras, Purva Bhadrapada and Uttara Bhadrapada.] are in the ascendance, Shukra grants men the riches that they have earned. Those
riches are guarded by Aja Ekapada[Aja Ekapada is a divinity, identified with Agni, the sun and the moon. Literally, Aja Ekapada can be translated
as a one-footed goat. Aja Ekapada is also the god who presides over Purva Bhadrapada.], Ahi Budhnya[Ahi Budhnya is the god who presides over Uttara Bhadrapada. Ahi Budhnya means the serpent who lives in the
deep.] and the lord of riches. O bull among brahmanas! They cannot be obtained if they are meant to be unobtainable. Without riches, you are incapable of obtaining the horses.
Ask a king for riches, one who has been born in a lineage of rajarshis. Such a king will be able to satisfy us, without oppressing his subjects. There is a king who has been born in the lunar dynasty. He is my friend. Let us approach him. He possesses a great deal of riches on earth. He is a rajarshi named Yayati, the son of Nahusha, and
truth is his valour. When he is asked by you and requested by me, he will himself give it. He possessed wealth that
was as great as that of the lord of riches. But by giving up some of those riches, the learned one cleansed himself.'

While they were conversing and thinking in this fashion, they reached King Yayati in Pratishthana.

'"After accepting the honours, the argha and the excellent food, Vinata's son was subsequently asked about the
reason for their arrival. 'O son of Nahusha! This is my friend Galava. He is an ocean of austerities. O king! He has
been Vishvamitra's pupil for ten thousand years. When he was given permission to leave, this illustrious brahmana
wished to return the favour and asked his preceptor about what should be given as a dakshina. When he kept asking, his teacher was enraged and asked him to give, though he knew that his riches were limited. "Give me eight
hundred pure-born horses that are as white as the rays of the moon and possess one black ear each. O Galava! If
you so desire, give this to your preceptor as a gift." This is what Vishvamitra, the store of austerities, told him in
anger. It is for this reason that this bull among brahmanas is tormented by a great grief. He is incapable of returning the favour and has sought refuge with you. O tiger among men! When he has accepted alms from you, he will
be free from his miseries. He will be freed from the debt to his preceptor and will practise great austerities. He will
give you a share of those austerities. You are full of a rajarshi's austerities, but you will be filled even more. O lord
of men! O lord of the earth! Those who give away a horse obtain as many worlds as there are body hairs on a
horse. He is the right vessel to receive and you are the right person to give. This will be like milk sprinkled into a
conch shell.'"'


'Narada said, "On hearing Suparna's supreme words, the king thought repeatedly and at last made up his mind.
The lord who had performed one thousand sacrifices was generous and was the lord of gifts. Yayati, the king of all
the Vatsas and the Kashis, spoke these words. On seeing his beloved friend Tarkshya and Galava, bull among the
brahmanas, an example of austerities, and considering that this act of giving alms was praiseworthy and would
bring renown to himself, he thought, 'These two have come to me, ignoring all the other kings of the solar dynasty.' He said, 'My birth has become successful today. O Tarkshya! O unblemished one! My country has been
saved by you today. O friend! But I wish to tell you that I am no longer as wealthy as you knew me to be earlier. I
don't possess that kind of riches. O friend! My wealth is lesser now. O traveller in the sky! But at the same time, I
cannot render your arrival here unsuccessful. Nor do I dare to frustrate the desires of this brahmana rishi. I will
give him something that will make his endeavour successful. If one arrives and is frustrated in one's wishes, one
burns down the lineage. O son of Vinata! It is said that there is nothing more evil in the world of the living than
saying, "I have nothing." This destroys and frustrates the hopes of a man who has arrived for something. A man
who is thus unsuccessful causes damage to the sons and grandsons[Of the person who has been solicited.]. This daughter of mine will establish four
lineages. She is as beautiful as a daughter of the gods and follows every kind of dharma. O Galava! Because of her
beauty, this maiden has always been solicited by gods, men and asuras. Therefore, accept my daughter. Kings will
certainly give their kingdoms for her as a bride price, not to speak of eight hundred horses with black ears. Accept
Madhavi, this daughter of mine. O lord! The only boon that I ask for is that I should have grandsons through my
daughter.' Having accepted the maiden, Galava left with the bird. Saying, 'Let us look again,' he left with the
maiden. The bird said, 'The path for obtaining the horses has now been obtained.' Having said this, he took Gala-
va's leave and returned to his own abode.

'"When the king of the birds had left, Galava, travelled with the maiden, thinking about kings who had the capacity to pay the bride price. He thought of Haryashva Ikshvaku of Ayodhya, supreme among kings, immensely
valorous and with the four constituent parts[Elephants, horses, chariots and infantry.] in his army. He loved brahmanas and was the beloved of the citizens. He possessed treasuries, granaries and soldiers. He desired peace for his subjects and performed supreme
austerities. The brahmana Galava went to Haryashva and said, 'O Indra among kings! This maiden of mine will
give birth and extend lineages. O Haryashva! Accept her as your wife and give me a bride price. I will tell you
what the bride price is. Hearing this, arrive at a decision.'"'


