'Sanjaya said, "O great king! After some time, a tumultuous sound could be heard, when the warriors prepared to
fight, and it made the heart tremble. There were the sounds of conch shells and drums. Elephants trumpeted. The
wheels of the chariots thundered and the earth seemed to be torn apart. The horses neighed. The warriors roared. O
unassailable one! The armies of your sons and those of the Pandavas encountered each other and trembled. The
elephants and the chariots were decorated with gold and were seen to be radiant, like clouds with lightning. O lord
of men! Those on your side had many different kinds of standards. They were adorned with golden rings and
shone like the fire. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Those on your side 44 and those on the side of the enemy
were seen to be as pure as the great Indra's standard, in the great Indra's abode. The brave ones were clad in golden armour. They blazed like the fiery sun. Armoured, they seemed to be like the blazing planets. They held upraised weapons and wore guards on their palms. They possessed standards. They had eyes like bulls. They were
great archers and placed themselves at the forefront. O lord of men! Among your sons, there were those who protected Bhisma from the rear-Duhshasana, Durvisaha, Durmukha, Duhsaha, Vivimshati, Chitrasena and maharatha Vikarna. There were also Satyavrata, Purumitra, Jaya, Bhurishrava and Shala. They were followed by
twenty thousand chariots. Abhishaha, Shurasena, Shibi, Vasati, Shalva, Matysa, Ambashtha, Trigarta, Kekaya,
Souvira, Kitava and those from the east, west and the north Malava-all the brave ones from these twelve regions
45 advanced, ready to give up their lives. They protected the grandfather with an array of large chariots. With an
army that consisted of ten thousand swift elephants, the king of Magadha followed that array of chariots. Those
who protected the wheels of chariots and the feet of the elephants in the midst of that army numbered six million.
The infantry marched in advance, with bows, shields and swords in their hands. There were many hundreds and
thousands of them and they fought with nails and lances. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O great king! The
eleven akshouhinis of your sons looked like the Ganga separated from the Yamuna."'


'Dhritarashtra asked, "On seeing the eleven akshouhinis arranged in battle formation, how did Pandava Yudhishthira, possessing fewer soldiers, arrange his counter-formations? Bhishma knew about all vyuhas-those of
men, gods, gandharvas and asuras. How did Kounteya Pandava counter them?"

'Sanjaya said, "On seeing the soldiers of Dhritarashtra's sons arranged in battle formation, Dharmaraja Pandava,
with dharma in his soul, spoke to Dhananjaya. 'O son! 46 We know from the words of maharshi Brihaspati that a
small number of soldiers must be arranged in condensed form, while a larger number can be extended at will.
When a small number has to fight with a larger one, the arrangement should be suchimukha. 47 Compared to those
of the enemy, our soldiers are few. O Pandava! Following the words and instructions of the maharshi, arrange the
vyuha.' On hearing the words of Dharmaraja, Phalguna replied, 'O king! I will arrange a vyuha that is extremely
invincible. This immovable vyuha is known by the name of Vajra and has been designed by the wielder of the vajra. Bhima is supreme among wielders of weapons. He is like a turbulent storm. No enemy can withstand him in
battle. He will fight at the forefront. That supreme of men will pacify the energy of the enemy's soldiers. He is
skilled in all the techniques used in war. He will lead us and fight from the front. On seeing him, all the kings, with
Duryodhana at the forefront, will be confused and will retreat, like small animals at the sight of a lion. With him as
a wall, all of us will resort to him, like all the immortals resort to the wielder of the vajra, and our fear will be dispelled. Bhima is foremost among the wielders of weapons. Vrikodara is a bull among men and is the performer of
terrible deeds. Especially when he is enraged, there is no man in the world who can glance at him. Bhimasena
wields a firm club, with substance like the vajra. When he roams around with great force, he can dry up the ocean.
O lord of men! Kekaya, Dhrishtaketu and the valiant Chekitana-these advisers also look towards him. So do
Dhritarashtra's sons.' This is what Bibhatsu said. O venerable one! When Partha spoke in this way, all the soldiers
applauded the eloquent one in that field of battle. Having spoken in this way, the mighty-armed Dhananjaya did
what he had said. Phalguna arranged the forces in the form of the vyuha and advanced.

'"On seeing the advancing army of the Kurus, the mighty army of the Pandavas seemed to be like the overflowing, surging and moving Ganga. Bhimasena, Parshata Dhrishtadyumna, Nakula, Sahadeva and valiant Dhrishtaketu were in the vanguard. Surrounded by one akshouhini, the king 48 was at the rear, protecting them from the back
with his brothers and sons. Madri's immensely radiant sons protected Bhima's wheels. The swift sons of Droupadi
and Subhadra protected the rear. They were protected from the rear by maharatha Dhrishtadyumna of Panchala,
together with the brave Prabhadrakas, foremost among rathas. Shikhandi was behind them, protected by Arjuna. O
bull among the Bharata lineage! He 49 advanced, determined to bring about Bhishma's destruction. Maharatha
Yuyudhana 50 guarded Arjuna's rear and the two from Panchala, Yudhamanyu and Uttamouja, guarded his wheels.
Kunti's son, King Yudhishthira, was in the centre of the army, surrounded by large and crazy elephants that were
like moving mountains. For the sake of the Pandavas, the valorous Panchala Yajnasena 51 placed himself behind
Virata, with one akshouhini. O king! The chariots and great standards bore many signs. They were adorned with
the best of gold and looked like the sun and the moon. Asking them to advance, maharatha Dhrishtadyumna, together with his brothers and sons, protected Yudhishthira from the rear. Surpassing all the chariots and many standards on your side and those of the enemy, a giant ape was stationed on Arjuna's standard. Many hundreds and
thousands of infantry advanced in front, protecting Bhimasena. They had swords, lances and scimitars in their
hands. There were ten thousand elephants, with musth trickling from their temples and mouths. They were brave
and were adorned with glittering nets of gold. They were like moving mountains. They flowed like clouds. 52
They were like mad mountains. They possessed the fragrance of lotuses. They followed the king at the rear, like
moving mountains. Bhimasena whirled his terrible club, which was like a parigha. 53 The invincible and great-
minded one was capable of crushing a large army. He was incapable of being looked at, like the sun, and was
scorching, like the one with the rays. From a close distance, none of the warriors was capable of looking at him.
The vyuha named Vajra was difficult to penetrate and faced every direction. 54 The bows were like streaks of
lightning 55 and this terrible formation was protected by the wielder of the Gandiva. Arranging the army in this
counter formation, the Pandavas waited. Protected by the Pandavas, it was invincible in the world of men.

'"At dawn, both sets of soldiers waited for the sun to rise. A wind, with drops of water, began to blow. Though
there were no clouds, thunder could be heard. Dry winds began to blow from all directions and carried sharp stones
from the ground below. Dust arose and covered the earth in darkness. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Large
meteors fell down in an eastern direction. They struck the rising sun and were shattered, with a loud noise. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! When the armies were arranged in this way, the sun lost its luminescence and the earth
roared and trembled. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! The roar of thunder was repeatedly heard from all the
directions. O king! A thick dust arose and nothing could be seen. The giant standards, adorned with nets of bells,
golden ornaments and flags, and like the sun in their resplendence, were suddenly struck by the wind. All of them
made a jingling sound, like a forest of palm trees. Thus those Pandavas, tigers among men, were stationed, delighted at the prospect of battle. They were in a counter-formation against the army of your sons. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! They seemed to suck the marrow out from the warriors. 56 Bhimasena could be seen at the forefront, with a club in his hand."'


'Dhritarashtra asked, "O Sanjaya! My army, with Bhishma as the leader, and that of the Pandavas, with Bhima as
the leader, desired to fight. When the sun arose, which of these was cheerful when it approached the other? To
which side were the moon, the sun and the wind adverse? Against which army did predators utter inauspicious
sounds? Which were the young ones who had cheerful complexions on their faces? Tell me all this, exactly and in
detail."

'Sanjaya said, "O Indra among kings! When the two armies were equally arranged in vyuhas, they were equally
cheerful. They were equally beautiful, as resplendent as forests. They were full of elephants, chariots and horses.
Both the armies were large and terrible in form. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Each one was incapable of
withstanding the other. It was as if both had been created for conquering heaven. Both were protected by virtuous
men. Dhritarashtra's sons, the Kurus, faced the west. The Parthas were stationed facing the east, ready to fight. The
Kouravas were like the army of the Indra of the daityas, the Pandavas were like the army of the Indra of the gods.
The wind blew from behind the Pandavas. The predators howled from behind the sons of Dhritarashtra. The elephants of your son could not bear the sharp smell from the musth of those Indras among elephants. 57 Duryodhana
was on an elephant with the complexion of a lotus. It was armoured and had rent temples. It possessed a golden
girdle. He was stationed in the midst of the Kurus and the bards and the minstrels praised him. A white umbrella
with a golden chain, as brilliant as the moon, was held aloft his head. Shakuni, the king of Gandhara, followed
him, surrounded in every direction by mountainous people from the region of Gandhara. The aged Bhishma was in
front of all the soldiers. He had a white umbrella, a white bow, a conch shell, a white headdress, a white flag and
white horses, and looked like a white mountain. All the sons of Dhritarashtra were in his army and also Shala, who
came from the country named Bahlika. The kshatriyas from Ambashtha, those from Sindhu and Souvira and the
brave ones from the land of the five rivers 58 were also there.

'"The great-souled Drona was on a golden chariot with red horses. He was mighty-armed and his spirit never
waned. He was the preceptor of almost all the kings. He was like an Indra on earth, protecting from the rear. Vardhakshatri, Bhurishrava, Purumitra, Jaya, Shalva, Matsya and all the Kekayas, with their brothers, were in the midst
of all the soldiers. They possessed an army of elephants and wished to fight. Sharadvat's great-souled son 59 always fought in the front. He was the great archer Goutama, wonderful in fighting. With Shakas, Kiratas, 60 Yavanas 61 and Pahlavas, he stationed himself in the forefront of the army. That large army was protected by maharathas from Andhaka, Vrishni and Bhoja and also those from Sourashtra and the south-west, skilled in the use of
weapons. There was also Kritavarma, who advanced behind your army. There were ten thousand samshaptaka
rathas, 62 who had been created for death or for triumphing over Arjuna. O king! They were skilled in the use of
weapons. They advanced with the brave Trigartas, resolved to follow Arjuna at every step. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! There were ten thousand fierce elephants on your side. A hundred chariots were assigned to each
elephant, a hundred horses were assigned to each chariot, ten archers were assigned to each horse and ten shield-
bearers were assigned to each archer. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thus did Bhishma arrange your troops
in battle formation. From one day to another, Bhishma, the general and Shantanu's son, arranged it in human
vyuhas, or vyuhas of gods, gandharvas and asuras. With a large number of maharathas, it was like the ocean on the
night of the full moon. Arranged in a vyuha by Bhishma, the army of Dhritarashtra's son was stationed facing the
west, ready to fight. O Indra among kings! Your side was innumerable with standards. It was terrible. But though it
was not like yours, 63 it seemed to me that the one of the Pandavas was larger and invincible, with leaders like Keshava and Arjuna."'


