'Kripa said, "O Radheya! Your mind is always wicked and you are inclined towards war. You do not understand
natural objectives, nor do you consider the consequences. We should think about the many courses of action that
are laid down in the sacred texts. Those who are learned in the ancient accounts have said that a war is the worst. A
war guarantees victory only if it is at the right time and the right place. But if it is conducted at the wrong time, it
does not bring any fruits. Valour at the right place and the right time is recommended for our welfare. We must decide on a course of action in accordance with what is favourable. The learned do not gauge how much of load a
chariot can take on the words of its maker. Reflecting on all this, it is not desirable for us to encounter Partha. He
saved the Kurus alone and he satisfied Agni alone[Arjuna saved the Kurus from the gandharvas, a story told in Section 39 (Volume 3). Arjuna satisfied the fire god
Agni in Khandava, a story told in Section 19 (Volume 3).]. He alone spent five years in the pursuit of brahmacharya[This is the story of Arjuna's sojourn in heaven, recounted in Section 32 (Volume2).].
He was alone when he raised Subhadra onto a chariot and summoned Krishna to a duel[Recounted in Section 17 (Volume 2).]. In the forest, Krishna
won back Krishna when she was being abducted[As has been mentioned earlier, Krishna is one of Arjuna's names. The other Krishna in the sentence is Krishnaa
or Droupadi and the reference is to her abduction by Jayadratha, recounted in Section 42 (Volume 3).]. He alone spent five years in Shakra's abode, learning the use of
weapons[Section 32 (Volume2).]. He extended the fame of the Kurus by defeating Samyamini alone[Samyamini means the self-restrained one, or an ascetic. It is also the name of Yama's city. However, there is no
record of Arjuna having fought with Yama. Thus, it is difficult to pinpoint this.]. That destroyer of enemies swiftly vanquished Chitrasena, king of the gandharvas, in a battle, together with his invincible army[Section 39 (Volume 3).]. In a similar
way, he alone defeated the Nivatakavacha and Kalakhanja danavas, whom even the gods could not slay[Described in Section 35 (Volume 3).]. O Karna! What act have you single-handedly performed earlier? Have you, like each of them[The Pandavas.], brought lords of the
earth under your sway? Even Indra himself is incapable of facing Partha in battle. He who wishes to fight with him
had better take some medicine. You wish to extend your right hand and use your forefinger to pluck out a fang
from an angry and virulent snake. Or while roaming alone in the forest, and without a goad[Goad for the elephant, ankusha.], you wish to climb
onto a mad elephant and drive it into the city. Or smearing yourself with clarified butter and attired in bark, you
wish to pass through a blazing fire that has been kindled with clarified butter, fat and marrow. What manliness is
there in tying a giant rock around one's neck, binding oneself, and then trying to swim across the ocean? O Karna!
If one is unskilled in weapons and extremely weak, and yet wishes to fight with Partha, who is skilled in weapons
and strong, that shows foolishness. He has been deceived by us for thirteen years. He is now like a lion that has
been freed from its nooses. He will destroy all of us. We have unwittingly run into Partha waiting alone, like a fire
hidden in a well. We confront supreme danger. Although Partha is invincible in battle, we will fight him together
when he comes upon us. Let the soldiers be armed and stationed in battle formations. O Karna! Drona, Duryodhana, Bhishma, you, Drona's son and I-all of us will fight Partha. Do not be rash. Though Partha is fierce, like the
one with an upraised vajra in his hand[Indra.], if all six chariots[Drona, Duryodhana, Bhishma, Karna, Ashvatthama and Kripa.] are united together, we will be able to repulse him.
With the soldiers arranged in battle formations and with the supreme archers ready, we will fight Arjuna in battle,
like the danavas against Vasava."'


'Ashvatthama said, "The cattle have not been conquered yet. They have not crossed the boundary. Nor have they
reached Hastinapura. O Karna! Why are you boasting? Even after having won many battles, obtaining a great deal
of riches and winning many enemy lands, there is no manliness in boasting. The fire burns without a word. The sun
shines in silence. The earth bears its beings, mobile and immobile, in silence. The deeds of the four varnas have
been laid down by the learned ones, so that they may achieve the objective of wealth without committing a sin.
Having studied the Vedas, brahmanas must sacrifice and officiate at sacrifices. Kshatriyas must use the bow and
sacrifice, but officiate at the sacrifices of others. Having acquired objects, vaishyas must perform deeds for the
brahman[The supreme soul, brahman or paramatman.]. Having obtained the earth in accordance with the sacred texts, those immensely fortunate ones behaved well towards their preceptors, even if they were devoid of qualities. What kshatriya should be satisfied at
having obtained a kingdom through gambling? That is cruel and should be for other ordinary men. Having obtained riches through deceit and fraud, what wise man will boast of it, like a vendor of flesh? In which duel in battle have you vanquished Dhananjaya, Nakula or Sahadeva? Whose riches have you robbed? Has Yudhishthira, or
Bhima, supreme among strong ones, ever been defeated by you? And in which battle did you win over Krishna[Droupadi.]?
O performer of evil deeds! She was dragged into the assembly hall in a single garment, when she was in season. In
search of gain, you have severed the great root of a sandalwood tree[The sense seems to be that one was myopic and didn't allow the sandalwood tree to grow.]. O brave one! You made them perform
tasks and what did Vidura have to say then[This is a reference to Vidura's censure, described in Section 27 (Volume 2).]? We have seen that men exhibit conciliation, to the best of their ability. So do other beings, even insects and ants. The Pandavas are incapable of pardoning Droupadi's molestation.
Dhananjaya has appeared for the destruction of the sons of Dhritarashtra. Appearing as a learned one, you speak
your words repeatedly. But will Jishnu not end this enmity, leaving no vestiges left[Leaving none of us alive.]? Kunti's son Dhananjaya is
not frightened of fighting the gods, the gandharvas, the asuras or the rakshasas. When he is enraged and descends
on anyone in battle, he destroys him, like a tree is brought down through Garuda's force. He is superior to you in
valour. He is equal to the king of the gods[Indra.] in archery. He is Vasudeva's[Krishna's.] equal in battle. Who will not show
homage to Partha? He will fight and destroy divine[Divine and human weapons respectively.] with divine, human with human, weapons with other
weapons. What man is Arjuna's equal? Those who know about dharma know that a student comes only after a son.
That is the reason why Drona loves Pandava. Will you fight with Pandava the way you gambled and won Indraprastha and the way you dragged Krishna to the assembly hall? This wise uncle of yours, Shakuni of
Gandhara[Though spoken to Karna, Ashvatthama is indirectly addressing Duryodhana.], is a deceitful gambler and is learned about the dharma of kshatriyas. Let him fight here now. Gandiva
does not cast dice, not krita, nor dvapara[Other than yugas or eras, krita, treta, dvapara and kali are also the names of the number of spots when a die is
thrown. Krita is when four spots show up on top, treta is three, dvapara is two and kali is one.]. Gandiva releases flaming, sharp and pointed arrows. When released
from Gandiva, dreadful, extremely energetic and tufted with vulture feathers, they can even pierce the interiors of
mountains. Antaka, Shamana, death[Antaka and Shamana are both names of Yama, the god of death.] and the fire with the mare's head[The subterranean fire, vadava.] leave something behind, but not an enraged Dhananjaya. Let the preceptor[Drona.] fight with Dhananjaya if he wishes. I will not fight with him. Our purpose
is to fight with Matsya, if he comes here, following the footprints of the cattle."'


'Bhishma said, "Drona's son sees it well. Kripa sees it well. Karna wishes to fight, in accordance with the dharma
of kshatriyas. No learned man can find fault with the preceptor. Considering the time and the place, it is my view
that we should fight. What learned man who possesses five armed enemies, as radiant as the sun[The five Pandavas.], will not be
confused at their ascendancy? Even men, who are conversant with dharma, are confused when it comes to their
own interests. O king! That is the reason I am speaking these words, whether they please you or not. What Karna
spoke, was for the purpose of inciting enterprise in us. The preceptor's son[Ashvatthama.] should pardon us, because a great
task has to be undertaken. Kounteya has arrived and this is not the time for dissension. You[Ashvatthama.], the preceptor and
Kripa must pardon everything. You are skilled in the use of weapons, like the sun in its radiance. Just as spots can
never be removed from the moon, you have the power of brahmanas and brahmastras are established in you[Drona, Ashvatthama and Kripa are brahmanas. Brahmastras are divine weapons, immensely powerful.].
The four Vedas may be seen together in one place[The four Vedas stand for knowledge.], and the power of kshatriyas in another single place. We have
not heard of these two together in any person, other than the preceptor of the Bharatas and his son. This is my
view. Brahmastras and the Vedas are not seen together anywhere else. The preceptor's son should forgive. This is
not the time for dissension. Let us all fight in unity with the son of the chastiser of Paka[Indra killed a demon named Paka.], who has now arrived.
The learned ones have spoken about the weaknesses of an army and it is the view of the learned ones that dissension is the foremost and the worst."

'Ashvatthama replied, "Let the preceptor forgive and there should be peace here again. If the preceptor was insulted, that was done in anger."'

Vaishampayana said, 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! At that, Duryodhana asked Drona's pardon, together
with Karna, Bhishma and the great-souled Kripa.'

'Drona said, "I have already been pacified by the words that Shantanu's son Bhishma spoke first. We should
now engage and decide on a supreme course of action so that when Duryodhana is engaged, no clouds descend on
the soldiers, out of rashness or out of confusion. Dhananjaya would not have shown himself, had the period of
dwelling in the forest not been over. He will not pardon us today, without having recovered the riches[The cattle.]. Let us
follow a course of action so that he cannot confront and defeat the sons of Dhritarashtra in any way. O Gangeya[The son of Ganga, Bhishma.]!
Remember the words that Duryodhana had addressed you earlier and speak what is right."'


