Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing that his brave father had arrived, King Babhruvahana emerged in humility,
placing noble brahmanas and gifts before him[In Section 16 (Volume 1), Arjuna married Chitrangada and had a son named Babhruvahana. In that section, the
name of the city is given as Manalura.]. Dhananjaya saw that the lord of Manipura had arrived. However, remembering the dharma of kshatriyas, the intelligent one did not approve of this. Phalguna, with dharma in
his soul, was enraged and said, "This conduct of you coming out is not in accordance with the dharma of kshatriyas. I have arrived here, protecting Yudhishthira's horse. The sacrificial animal has arrived in your kingdom. O
son! Why are you not fighting with me? You are knowledgable about the dharma of kshatriyas. O extremely evil-
minded one! Shame on you. Wishing to fight, I have arrived before you and you are seeking peace. Though you
are alive on this earth, no manliness exists in you. Since you seek to receive me peacefully, you possess the intelligence of women. O extremely evil-minded one! You have cast aside your weapons and have arrived here now. O
worst of men! This is what your conduct has shown." The daughter of the serpent[Arjuna also married Ulupi, the naga princess. This has been described in Section 16 (Volume 1). Chitrangada
and Ulupi were co-wives. Babhruvahana is Ulupi's son by extension.] got to know what her husband
had said and could not tolerate it. Ulupi emerged through the earth and reached the spot. O lord! She saw her son
there, distressed and with a downcast face, since he had been reprimanded by his lord[Meaning father.], who wished to fight with
him. The serpent's daughter, beautiful in all her limbs, approached him. Ulupi was accomplished in the dharma of
kshatriyas and spoke these words. "Know me to be Ulupi. I am your mother and the daughter of a serpent. O son!
Act in accordance with my words. You will then be established in supreme dharma. O scorcher of enemies! Fight
with Dhananjaya, foremost among Kurus. There is no doubt that he will be pleased at this." O bull among the
Bharata lineage! King Babhruvahana was thus instigated by his mother and made up his mind to fight.

'He donned golden armour and a radiant helmet. The intelligent one ascended a giant chariot stocked with hundreds of quivers. It had all the necessary equipment and was yoked to horses that were as fleet as thought. The
chariot was decorated with a golden pole and possessed ornamented and excellent wheels. An excellent standard
was raised, marked with the sign of a golden lion. King Babhruvahana set out in Partha's direction. With the help
of men who were trained and accomplished about horses, the brave one seized the sacrificial horse protected by
Partha. On seeing that the horse had been seized, Dhananjaya was delighted. In the battle, his son was on the chariot, but he opposed him from the ground. The king[Babhruvahana.] showered down thousands of torrents of sharp arrows, which
were like venomous serpents, on the brave one. An unmatched encounter ensued between the father and the son.
Cheerfully, they fought against each other, like the gods and the asuras. Babhruvahana, tiger among men, pierced
Kiriti in the shoulder joint with an arrow with a drooping tuft and laughed. This was shafted with feathers and penetrated Kounteya, the way a snake enters a termite hill. It then entered the ground. Because of the great pain, the
intelligent one supported himself on his excellent bow, resorting to his divine energy. But he seemed to be dead. O
lord of the earth! When he regained his senses, Shakra's son, bull among men, praised his son in these words. "Excellent. O mighty-armed one! O son! Excellent. O Chitrangada's son! O son! On witnessing this deed, I am pleased
with you. I will now shoot arrows at you. O son! Be steady in the battle." Having said this, the slayer of enemies
showered down iron arrows. These were shot from Gandiva and were like the vajra and thunder. However, the
king severed each of those iron arrows into three fragments. His[Babhruvahana's.] divine standard was decorated with gold and
looked like a golden palm tree. Using a kshurapra arrow, Partha brought it down from his chariot. The king's horses were giant in size, valiant and extremely speedy. The bull among Pandavas laughed and killed them. The king
became extremely angry and swiftly descended from his chariot. Enraged, he fought with his father, Pandava, on
foot. The bull among the Pandus was delighted at his son's valour. The son of the wielder of the vajra did not wish
to oppress his son excessively. However, Babhruvahana thought that his father was no longer willing to fight. The
powerful one again struck him with arrows that were like virulent serpents. The young Babhruvahana powerfully
pierced his father's heart with a sharp arrow that had excellent tufts. In its energy, the arrow blazed like a flaming
fire. O king! It severely penetrated Pandava's inner organs and caused great pain. The descendant of the Kuru lineage was  severely struck by  his son. O  king! Afflicted and bereft of  his senses,  Dhananjaya fell down  on  the
ground. The brave one, the bearer of the burden of the Kouravas, fell down. At this, Chitrangada's son also quickly
lost his senses. The king was exhausted in the battle and thought that his father had been killed. Earlier, he had also
been severely struck by Arjuna's arrows. On seeing that his lord had been slain, the father fell down on the ground.
Scared, Chitrangada rushed to the scene of the battle. The beautiful one was tormented by grief in her heart and
wept. On seeing that her husband had been slain, the mother of the lord of Manipura lamented.'


Vaishampayana said, 'The timid one, with eyes like lotus petals, lamented in many ways. She was confused and
miserable. Afflicted, she fell down on the ground. The queen was divine in form. When she regained her senses, she saw Ulupi, the daughter of the serpent, and spoke these words. "O Ulupi! Behold. Our victorious husband
is lying down in the battle, slain. This is because of what you did to my young child. Are you not noble? Do you
not know dharma? Are you not devoted to your husband? Because of what you have done, our husband has been
killed and is lying down in the battle. Even if Dhananjaya has committed all manner of crimes towards you, I am
beseeching you now to forgive him. Give him his life back. O beautiful one! You are indeed noble. You  know
about dharma and are famous in the three worlds. Having caused your husband to be killed by your son, why are
you not grieving? O daughter of a serpent! I am not sorrowing because my son has been killed. I am grieving because of my husband and because of the hospitality that has been shown to him." The queen said this to Ulupi, the
daughter of the serpent. Having said this, the illustrious one went to where her husband was and said, "O foremost
among the Kurus! Arise. O beloved! Do what brings me pleasure. O mighty-armed one! I have set this horse free.
O brave one! You should indeed follow Dharmaraja's sacrificial horse. Why are you lying down on the ground? O
descendant of the Kuru lineage! My breath of life depends on you and so do those of the Kurus. How can someone
who grants others their breaths of life give up his own breath of life? O Ulupi! Behold this praiseworthy sight of
your husband having been slain in the battle. You incited the son to kill him and are not grieving. This child should
sleep as he wishes. Instead, he has been killed and is lying down on the ground. O one with the red eyes! O Gudakesha! O Vijaya! It would be good if you came back to life. O extremely beautiful one[In case Ulupi has been driven by jealousy.]! It is not a crime for a
man to have many wives. Women should be like me. Their intelligence shouldn't be like yours. This friendship[Marriage.]
was ordained by the creator. It is eternal and indestructible. Know that friendship and make that relationship come
true. My husband has been slain through my son now. If I do not see him alive now, I will cast aside my life. I am
miserable and timid, having been separated from my husband and my son. There is no doubt that while you look
on, I will fast to death[Praya, act of giving up one's life by fasting to death.]." Chaitravahini[Chitrangada, Chitravahana's daughter. Chitrangada was the daughter of King Chitravahana.] spoke in this way to her co-wife, the daughter of the serpent. O lord of
men! Then silent, she sat down, prepared to fast to death.'


