Sanjaya said, "At this time, Krishna spoke these words to Partha, pointing out to Kounteya, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira. 'O Partha! Pandava, your brother, is being swiftly pursued by the immensely strong sons of Dhritarashtra. They are great archers and wish to kill him. The angry Panchalas, invincible in battle, are also following at
great speed, wishing to save the great-souled Yudhishthira. O Partha! Duryodhana is the king of all the worlds. He
is armoured and is following the king with an array of chariots. With his brothers, the powerful one desires to kill
that tiger among men. Their touch is like that of venomous serpents and they are skilled in all manner of fighting.
Wishing to kill him, these elephants, horses, chariots and foot soldiers are also advancing. The sons of Dhritarashtra are after Yudhishthira, like those after a supreme jewel. Behold. They have been checked by Satvata and the
lord Bhima. They are like daityas desiring amrita, but held in check by Shakra and Agni. However, many of them
are again swiftly advancing towards Pandava. Those maharathas are like waters made turbulent by the wind, rushing towards the ocean during the monsoon season. They are roaring like lions, or like clouds at the end of the summer. The powerful and great archers are brandishing their bows. I think that Yudhishthira, Kunti's son, has entered
the jaws of death. The fortunate one has come under Duryodhana's subjugation and is like an oblation poured into
the fire. O Pandava! The army of the sons of Dhritarashtra has been prepared properly. Even Shakra will not be
able to escape, if he comes within the range of their arrows. Duryodhana, Drona's son and Sharadvata are brave.
The force of Karna's arrows can shatter mountains. Duryodhana is valiant and shoots a storm of arrows quickly.
When he is angry, he is like Yama. Who is capable of withstanding his force in battle? The king, the scorcher of
enemies, has already been forced to retreat by Karna, who is powerful, dexterous and accomplished, and skilled in
fighting. Radheya is capable of oppressing the best of the Pandavas in the battle. In addition, the brave one is with
the great-souled sons of Dhritarashtra. He[Yudhishthira.] is controlled in his soul. When he fought with them in the battle, other maharathas robbed Partha of his armour. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! The king is severely emaciated
because of his fasts. He is established in the strength of the brahman, but he does not possess a great deal of
strength of the kshatriya variety. O Partha! I do not think that Yudhishthira, the great king, will remain alive, even
though Bhimasena is with him and is roaring intolerantly, like a lion. O scorcher of enemies! The sons of Dhritarashtra are roaring repeatedly. Desiring victory in the battle, they are blowing on their giant conch shells. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! Pandaveya Yudhishthira will be killed. Karna will urge the immensely strong sons of
Dhritarashtra towards Partha. He will shroud the king with sthunakarna, indrajala and pashupata and the maharathas will follow him[Sthunakarna is a broad-headed arrow, while pashupata is a divine
weapon named after Pashupati or Shiva. Literally, indrajala means Indra's net and signifies magic or illusion.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It is my view that the king must be in distress.
At a time when speed is of the essence, the Panchalas and the Pandavas, supreme among all wielders of weapons,
are following him. They are like powerful ones dashing to save someone who has been submerged in the nether
regions. O Partha! The king's flags cannot be seen. They may have been brought down by Karna's arrows, while
the twins, Satyaki, Shikhandi, Dhrishtadyumna, Bhima, the lord Shatanika and all the Panchalas and Chedis
looked on. O Partha! In this battle, Karna is destroying the Pandava soldiers with his arrows, like an elephant
among lotuses. O descendant of the Pandu lineage! The rathas on your side are being driven away. O Partha! Look
at how the maharathas are retreating. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In the battle, the elephants have been
struck by Karna. They are shrieking and are running away in the ten directions. O Partha! Behold. Arrays of chariots are fleeing in different directions. They have been routed in the battle by Karna, the destroyer of enemies. In
the battle, behold the chariot of the son of the suta roaming around here and there. He is stationed on it. He has the
best of standards and it is marked with the sign of an elephant's housing. Radheya is advancing towards Bhimasena's chariot. He is showering down hundreds of arrows and slaughtering your army. Behold the Panchalas being
driven away by the great-souled one. He is like Shakra destroying the daityas in a great battle. This Karna has defeated the Panchalas, Pandus and Srinjayas. He is now searching around in all the directions for you. That is my
view. O Partha! Behold. He looks beautiful, as he is stretching the best of bows. Having defeated the enemy, he is
like Shakra, surrounded by large numbers of gods. On witnessing Karna's valour, the Kouravas are roaring. Thousands of Parthas and Srinjayas have been frightened in the battle. In this great battle, he has wholeheartedly terrified the Pandus. O one who grants honours! Radheya is addressing all the soldiers. "O Kouravas! Attack them
quickly. Advance and drive them away, so that no one among the Srinjayas can escape from this encounter with his
life. Act united in this way and we will follow you." Having said this, he is advancing behind them, showering arrows. O Partha! Behold Karna in the battle. He is under a white umbrella and is as radiant as the sun behind Mount
Asta. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A white umbrella that is like the full moon and possesses a hundred
spokes is held aloft his head in the battle. O lord of the earth! Karna is casting his glances around, looking for you.
He will certainly make the best of efforts in this battle. O mighty-armed one! Behold him brandishing his giant
bow. The immensely strong one is releasing arrows that are like venomous serpents. O one with the ape on the
banner! Radheya can be seen to be headed in this direction. He is advancing for his own destruction, like an insect
towards a lamp. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing that Karna is alone, Dhritarashtra's son has turned
his array of chariots towards him, controlling them so as to protect him. If you desire fame, the kingdom and
supreme happiness, make efforts to kill him, with all the evil-souled ones who are with him. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! You have controlled your soul. Glance towards your own self. Radheya is firm in his hatred for
the great-souled Yudhishthira. Accomplish the end that Radheya has set for himself. O noble one! Set your mind
on fighting and repel that leader of rathas. O supreme among rathas! Five foremost rathas are powerfully advancing towards you[The names of these five are not indicated.], with hundreds of others. They are strong and fierce in their energy. There are five thousand
elephants and twice that number of horses. O Kounteya! Ten thousand foot soldiers are also advancing. O brave
one! Protecting each other, that army is advancing towards you. Reveal your own self to the son of a suta, the great
archer. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Make the best of efforts and repulse them. This Karna is extremely angry and is attacking the Panchalas. Behold his flag in the direction of Dhrishtadyumna's chariot. O scorcher of enemies! I think that he will uproot the Panchalas. O Partha! O bull among the Bharata lineage! But I will tell you
something that will please you. Kouravya King Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, is alive. The mighty-armed Bhima has
returned and is stationed at the head of the army. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He is surrounded by the
Srinjaya soldiers and by Satyaki. O Kounteya! In this encounter, Bhimasena and the great-souled Panchalas are
slaying the Kouravas with sharp arrows. The soldiers of Dhritarashtra's son are retreating and running away from
the field of battle. Slain by Bhima's forceful arrows, they are being routed. With blood flowing from their wounds,
they look like the earth after a crop has been harvested. O best of the Bharatas! The army of the Bharatas[That is, the Kourava army.]
presents a miserable sight. O Kounteya! Behold. They have been forced to retreat. Bhimasena, the lord of warriors,
who is like a venomous serpent, has angrily driven away the army. O Arjuna! Yellow, red, black and white flags,
with the signs of stars, the moon and the sun, and many umbrellas are strewn around. There are golden and silver
standards and those that are made of other metals. They have been brought down and are scattered around, and so
are elephants and horses. Deprived of their lives, rathas have fallen down from their chariots. They have been slain
by many-hued arrows released by the Panchalas, who are not running away. O Dhananjaya! The army of the sons
of Dhritarashtra is without men, elephants, horses and chariots, and the Panchalas are spiritedly driving it away. O
scorcher of enemies! The enemy's army was unassailable. But ready to give up their lives and seeking refuge with
Bhimasena, they[The Panchalas.] are driving it away. The Panchalas are roaring, like clouds at the end of the summer. They are
driving away the enemy in the battle and slaying them with arrows. O scorcher of enemies! Behold the greatness
of heaven before the Panchalas[If they die in the battle, the Panchalas will ascend to heaven.]. They are angrily slaying the sons of Dhritarashtra, like lions against elephants.
Every part of the large army of the sons of Dhritarashtra has been attacked. The force of the Panchalas is like that
of swans that leave Manasa[Lake Manasa.] for the Ganga. Kripa, Karna and other brave ones are severely trying to counter the
valorous Panchalas, like bulls against bulls. However, the maharathas among the sons of Dhritarashtra are deeply
submerged in Bhima's weapons. On seeing that the rathas in the great army of the sons of Dhritarashtra are distressed, the brave ones, with Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, are slaying the enemy in thousands. Behold. The
elephants have been shattered by Bhima's iron arrows and are falling down. They are like summits that have fallen
down on the ground, after being struck by the vajra of the wielder of the vajra. Mighty elephants have been struck
by Bhimasena's straight-tufted arrows. As they are running away, they are slaying their own soldiers. Do you not
know Bhima's unbearable leonine roar? O Arjuna! Desiring victory in the battle, the brave one is roaring. Astride a
supreme elephant, the Nishada[Obviously a king among the nishadas.] is advancing against Pandava. He is angrily attacking him with javelins, like
Yama with a staff in his hand. Bhima is roaring and breaking down those javelins with his bare hands. He has then
used ten sharp iron arrows, which are like the flames of the fire, to slay him. Behold. Having slain him, the striker
has again attacked other elephants that are like blue clouds and are driven by skilled drivers. Vrikodara has slain
those elephants, seven at a time, with spears and javelins and has brought down their victorious standards. They
have been slain and mangled with sharp arrows by Partha's elder brother. Each of ten elephants has been slain by
ten sharp arrows. The roars of the sons of Dhritarashtra can no longer be heard now. They have been forced to retreat by the angry bull among the Bharata lineage[Bhima.], who is Purandara's equal. Three akshouhinis from the sons
of Dhritarashtra united against him. However, Bhimasena, lion among men, angrily countered them.' On seeing
that Bhimasena had accomplished that extremely difficult deed, Arjuna slaughtered the remaining ones with his
sharp arrows. O lord! Large numbers of samshaptakas were slaughtered in that battle. Bereft of sorrow and filled
with delight, they became Shakra's guests. With straight-tufted arrows, Partha, tiger among men, destroyed the
fourfold[Chariots, elephants, horses and infantry.] army of the sons of Dhritarashtra." '


Dhritarashtra asked, "When Bhimasena and Pandava Yudhishthira returned and my army was slaughtered by the
Pandus and the Srinjayas, when my army that was like an ocean was repeatedly distressed, what was done by the
Kurus? O Sanjaya! Tell me that in detail."

'Sanjaya replied, "O king! On seeing the mighty-armed Bhima, the eyes of the powerful son of a suta became
red with rage. He attacked Bhimasena. O king! On seeing that your army had retreated before Bhimasena, the
powerful one made great efforts to rally it. Having rallied your son's army, the mighty-armed Karna advanced
against the Pandavas, who were indomitable in battle. Radheya counter-attacked the maharatha Pandavas. He brandished his bow and showered down arrows on Bhimasena, Shini's grandson, Shikhandi, Janamejaya, the powerful
Dhrishtadyumna and all the Prabhadrakas. The Panchalas, tigers among men, angrily attacked your army from all
sides in that battle, desiring victory. O king! In that fashion, the maharathas on your side wished to kill them and
impetuously attacked the Pandava army. O tiger among men! The place was beautiful with chariots, elephants,
horses, foot soldiers and standards and the armies were wonderful to see. O great king! Shikhandi advanced
against Karna and Dhrishtadyumna against your son, Duhshasana, who was surrounded by a large army. Nakula
advanced against Vrishasena and Yudhishthira against Chitrasena[The inconsistency about Chitrasena has been mentioned earlier.]. O king! In the encounter, Sahadeva attacked
Uluka, Satyaki attacked Shakuni and Bhimasena the Kouravas. In the battle, Drona's maharatha son made endeavours against Arjuna. In the battle, Goutama attacked the great archer, Yudhamanyu, and Kritavarma advanced
against the powerful Uttamouja. O venerable one! Single-handedly, the mighty-armed Bhimasena countered all
your sons, the Kurus, together with their soldiers.

' "O great king! Shikhandi, the slayer of Bhishma, roamed around fearlessly and countered Karna with his arrows. Countered, Karna's lips quivered in rage. He struck Shikhandi between his eyebrows with three arrows. With
those arrows stuck there, Shikhandi looked exceedingly beautiful. He was like a silver mountain with three peaks.
In the battle, having been thus grievously struck by the son of a suta in the encounter, he pierced Karna with ninety
sharp arrows. Karna slew his horses and charioteer with three arrows. The maharatha then brought down his standard with a kshurapra arrow. With his horses slain, the maharatha, the scorcher of enemies[Shikhandi.], jumped down from
his chariot and angrily flung a javelin towards Karna. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In the battle, Karna cut
that down with his arrows and then mangled Shikhandi with nine sharp arrows. Shikhandi, supreme among men
and supreme among victorious ones, avoided the arrows released from Karna's bow and retreated quickly.

' "O great king! Karna then scattered the Pandu soldiers, like a mass of cotton by the speed of a mighty wind. O
great king! Dhrishtadyumna was afflicted by your son and struck Duhshasana between the breasts with three arrows. O venerable one! Duhshasana pierced his left arm with a sharp, gold-tufted and broad-headed arrow with
drooping tufts. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thus pierced, Dhrishtadyumna became fierce in his wrath and
angrily dispatched an arrow towards Duhshasana. O lord of the earth! The arrow released by Dhrishtadyuma descended with great force, but your son sliced it down with three arrows. He then used another seventeen broad-
headed and gold-decorated arrows to strike Dhrishtadyumna in the arms and in the chest. O venerable one! Becoming angry, Parshata severed his bow with an extremely sharp kshurapra arrow and people roared in applause. O
bull among the Bharata lineage! Your son picked up another bow and showered a storm of arrows from every direction on Dhrishtadyumna. On witnessing the valour of your great-souled son, the warrior, in the battle, the large
numbers of siddhas and apsaras smiled.

' "O scorcher of enemies! Thus the battle raged between those on your side and that of the enemy. It was fierce,
as terrible in form as the destruction of all beings at the end of a yuga. Vrishasena pierced Nakula with five iron
arrows and stationing himself near his father[Vrishasena was Karna's son.], pierced him again with three arrows. Nakula became angry and
laughed at Vrishasena. He then pierced him firmly in the chest with an extremely sharp iron arrow. Having been
severely struck by the powerful enemy, the destroyer of foes struck his adversary with twenty arrows and was
pierced back with five. Those two bulls among men shot thousands of arrows at each other and, supported by their
respective soldiers, enveloped each other. O lord of the earth! On seeing that the soldiers of the sons of Dhritarashtra were fleeing, the son of a suta followed them and powerfully checked them. O venerable one! When Karna had
withdrawn, Nakula advanced against the Kouravas. In the battle, Karna's son also abandoned Nakula and swiftly
went to the spot where Radheya was.

' "In the battle, the angry Uluka was checked by Sahadeva. The powerful Sahadeva slew his four horses and
conveyed his charioteer towards Yama's abode. O lord of the earth! At this, Uluka, loved by his father, descended
from his vehicle and swiftly joined the army of the Trigartas.

' "Satyaki pierced Shakuni with twenty sharp arrows and severing Soubala's standard with a broad-headed arrow, laughed. O king! The powerful Soubala became enraged in that battle. Having shattered Satyaki's armour, he
again brought down his golden standard and pierced him back with sharp arrows. O great king! He[Satyaki.] brought
down his charioteer with three arrows and swiftly used other arrows to convey his mounts to Yama's eternal abode.
O bull among the Bharata lineage! Maharatha Shakuni suddenly alighted from his chariot and swiftly ascended
that of Uluka. He was quicky borne away from Satyaki, who was skilled in fighting. O king! In that battle, Satyaki
attacked your soldiers with great force and shattered the formation. O lord of the earth! Your soldiers were enveloped by arrows shot by Shini's descendant and were quickly scattered in the ten directions. They lost their lives
and fell down.

' "Your son[Though not clearly stated, this seems to be Duryodhana.] countered Bhimasena in the battle. But in an instant, Bhima deprived that lord of men of his
horses, charioteer, chariot and standard. This satisfied the charanas. At this, he withdrew from Bhimasena's presence. Wishing to kill the single-handed Bhimasena, all the Kuru soldiers let out a mighty roar and attacked him.

' "Yudhamanyu attacked Kripa and quickly severed his bow. Kripa, supreme among the wielders of weapons,
picked up another bow. He brought down Yudhamanyu's standard, charioteer, umbrella and bow on the ground.
Maharatha Yudhamanyu withdrew on another chariot. Hardikya was terrible in his valour and Uttamouja suddenly
shrouded him with arrows, like clouds raining down on a mountain. O scorcher of enemies! O lord of the earth!
The encounter between them was extremely great and terrible. I have not seen anything like that earlier. O king! In
that battle, Kritavarma pierced Uttamouja in the chest and he sank down on the floor of his chariot. His charioteer
bore the best of rathas away on his chariot. O king! The Pandu soldiers were then quickly routed." '


