Souti said, 'When he had heard the words of the snakes, Garuda told his mother, "I am going to get the amrita. But
I wish to eat something. Tell me what." Vinata replied, "The nishadas[Hunters, fishermen. Usually, they are described as dwelling in the mountains.] have their excellent home in a remote part
of the ocean. Eat thousands of nishadas and bring back the amrita. But never set your mind on killing a Brahmana.
Among all living beings, a Brahmana is like fire and is never to be killed. When he is angered, a Brahmana is like
fire, the sun, poison or a sharp weapon. Among all beings, he is the one who obtains the first share at a sacrifice, is
supreme among the varnas and is a father and preceptor."

'Garuda said, "O mother! I am asking you. What are the auspicious signs through which I will recognize a Brahmana? You should tell me." Vinata replied, "O son! If a man goes down your throat torturing you like a swallowed
fish hook or burning it like hot coal, know him to be a bull among Brahmanas." Out of the great love she bore for
her son, Vinata again repeated the words. Vinata knew her son's valour to be unparalleled. But she nevertheless
pronounced a blessing on him. "Let the Maruts protect your wings. O son! Let the moon protect your back. Let the
fire protect your head. Let the sun protect all your body. O son! I shall always be engaged in ceremonies that bring
you peace and welfare. O son! Go in safety and accomplish your objective." Having heard his mother's words, the
bird then stretched his wings and flew up into the sky.

'The powerful one soon descended hungrily on the nishadas, like Yama himself. Determined to destroy the
nishadas, he raised a great storm of dust that covered up the sky. This dried up the water in the ocean and shook the
mountains that grew around. The king of birds opened his gigantic mouth and stopped the route of the nishadas. In
great alarm, the nishadas also entered the mouth of the eater of snakes. Like frightened birds in a forest that rise in
thousands into the sky when there is a great storm, the nishadas were blinded by the dust and in thousands entered
the wide open mouth of the giant eater of snakes. Then the hungry bird, with great strength and swift speed, the
scorcher of his enemies, closed his mouth. The traveller in the sky killed many nishadas, who depend on diverse
fish for a living.'


Souti said, 'A Brahmana and his wife had entered his throat and began to burn the bird's throat like a piece of coal.
The giant bird said, "O best among the twice-born! Come out of my open mouth quickly. A Brahmana will never
be killed by me, even if he is always associated with those who commit sin." When Garuda said this, the Brahmana replied, "My wife is a nishada. Let her come out with me." Garuda said, "Take the nishada with you and
come out immediately. Save yourself, before you are digested by the energy in my stomach." Thereupon, the Brahmana emerged with the nishada woman. Praising Garuda, he went to the country where he wished to go. When the
Brahmana and his wife emerged, the king of birds, swift as the mind, stretched his wings and rose up into the sky.

'He then saw his father[Kashyapa.], who asked him about his welfare and he replied, "I have been sent by the snakes to
steal the supreme soma. I shall bring it today, to free my mother from her slavery. My mother instructed me to eat
the nishadas. But even after eating them in their thousands, my hunger is not yet satisfied. O illustrious one! O
lord! Show me some other food that I can eat, so that I am strong enough to steal the amrita."

'Kashyapa said, "In ancient times, there was a maharshi named Vibhavasu. He became angry very easily. He
had a younger brother named Supratika[Supratika is a common name for an elephant and this elephant should not be confused with Bhagadatta's elephant Supratika.], who was a great ascetic. That great sage was unwilling to maintain their
wealth jointly with his brother and Supratika always spoke of dividing it. After some time, Vibhavasu told his
brother Supratika, 'It is from delusion that many wish to divide common property. Once it has been divided, they
are deluded from love of wealth. Ignorant from selfishness, enmity is created, though there is a disguise of friendship. Others, knowing them estranged in property matters, increase the enmity on other matters and divided relatives meet their downfall. Absolute ruin soon comes to those who are separated. That is the reason why learned
ones never approve partition among brothers. When divided, they do not have any respect for the sacred texts or
preceptors. O Supratika! You are beyond my control. Disregarding my advice and out of love for riches, you wish
for a partition. I curse you that you will become an elephant.' Thus cursed, Supratika told Vibhavasu, 'You will
become a tortoise that lives in the water.' Cursed by each other and their minds deluded by desire, they became an
elephant and a tortoise, animals of low birth. Boastful of their strengths and sizes, as earlier, they have continued in
their vice of enmity towards each other, living in this huge lake. Look at one of them, the large and handsome elephant, come towards this lake now. Hearing his trumpeting, the giant tortoise that lives under water rises out of the
lake, agitating its waters. On seeing him, the valorous elephant curls his trunk and rushes into the water, violently
moving his tusks, trunk, tail and feet. The water that is full of fishes is agitated. The valorous tortoise also raises its
head and comes up to fight. The elephant is six yojanas[A yojana is between 13 and 15 kilometres.] in height and double that in length. The tortoise is three
yojanas in height and ten yojanas in circumference. These two are maddened at the prospect of fighting each other
and wish to kill each other. Eat them up and swiftly accomplish the task you wish to perform." Hearing his father's
words, the bird swooped down from the sky and swiftly grasped the elephant and the tortoise, one in each claw.

'The bird then flew high up into the sky. It went to the tirtha[Sacred place of pilgrimage.] named Alamba and saw many celestial trees
there. Struck by the wind raised by his wings, the trees trembled in fear. Those celestial trees had golden branches
and were scared that these would be broken. Seeing that the trees bore fruit and shoots capable of granting all desires and that they were quivering in fright, the bird went to other trees, incomparable in colour and shape. Those
giant trees had fruit of gold and silver, with branches of lapis lazuli. They were washed by the waters of the ocean.

'A giant sandalwood[Alternatively, fig tree.] tree stood there and spoke to the best of the birds, as he was swiftly swooping down
with the speed of the mind. "Descend on my giant branch, which extends for one hundred yojanas, and eat the elephant and the tortoise." Then the supreme among the birds, as giant as a mountain, descended swiftly on the tree,
shaking the branches that housed a thousand birds, and broke the branch that was full of leaves.'


Souti said, 'As soon as the tree's branch was touched by the immensely powerful Garuda with his feet, it snapped.
He[Garuda.] held onto it as it was about to fall. As he wonderingly gazed at that large branch that had been broken, he
saw the valakhilyas[Rishis who number 60,000 and were generated from the creator's body. They are the size of a thumb and precede the sun's chariot.] hanging from it, their heads facing downwards. The lord of birds was scared of killing them
and carefully held the branch in his beak and ascended again. Shaking the mountains, the bird slowly circled the
sky and while doing this, passed many countries, with the elephant and the tortoise. In his compassion for the
valakhilyas, he could find no place to alight on. At last he went to the best of mountains, the indestructible
Gandhamadana.

'There he saw his father Kashyapa engaged in austerities. His father also saw the bird of divine form, with energy, valour and strength, swift as the wind and the mind, large as a mountain, like the raised staff of a Brahmana,
inconceivable, incapable of description, terrible to all beings, the possessor of the valour of delusion[Maya.], as radiant
as Agni himself, incapable of being vanquished by devas, danavas and rakshasas, capable of splintering mountain
peaks, drying up the water of rivers and whirling the worlds, as terrible as Yama himself.

'On seeing him approach and knowing his wishes, the illustrious Kashyapa told him, "O son! Do not commit a
rash act, because that can bring sudden pain. The valakhilyas sustain themselves on the sun's rays. If angry, they
can scorch you." Therefore, for his son's sake, Kashyapa propitiated the valakhilyas, accomplished performers of
austerities. He explained the reason and said, "O performers of austerities! Garuda's endeavour is for the welfare
of all creatures. He is trying to perform a great act. Therefore, please give him permission." Having been thus addressed by the illustrious Kashyapa, the valakhilyas gave up the branch and went off to the sacred Himalayas, in
search of more austerities.

'When they went away, Vinata's son[Garuda.], the branch still extending his beak, asked his father Kashyapa, "O lord!
Where will I discard this branch of the tree? O lord! Tell me of a land where there are no Brahmanas." Kashyapa
told him of a mountain that was uninhabited by men, inaccessible and incapable of being penetrated by others even
in their thoughts, covered with snow and full of caves. The great bird, Tarkshya[Garuda's epithet.], carried the branch, the elephant
and the tortoise and swiftly, with the power of his mind, entered the mountain's wide base. A thin leather strap cut
out of a hundred skins wouldn't have been long enough to encircle that giant branch the giant bird carried in his
flight. Garuda, the lord of all the birds, flew over 100,000 yojanas in the briefest possible time. As if in a moment,
he reached the mountain his father had described and released the branch, which fell down with a great roar. On
being struck by the wind unleashed by the bird's wings, the king of mountains trembled. As the trees collapsed,
they showered down flowers. The peaks of that great mountain, adorned with gold and gems, were shattered on all
sides. The falling branch struck many trees with golden flowers and they looked like clouds charged with lightning. Bright as gold, those falling trees mixed with the mountain's minerals and glowed, as if reflecting the red
rays of the sun. The best of birds sat down on the peak of the mountain and ate both the elephant and the tortoise.

'With the speed of the mind, he[Garuda.] then arose from the mountain peak. Ominous and fearful portents appeared
before the gods. Indra's vajra blazed forth in great pain. Meteors that trailed flames and smoke were loosened from
the sky and descended. The weapons of vasus, rudras, adityas, saddhyas, maruts and other classes of gods began to
fight among themselves. Such things had never occurred earlier, not even during the war between devas and asuras. Meteors showered down in all directions, tumultuous winds thundered and the cloudless sky made a tremendous roar. Even the God of the gods rained showers of blood. Garlands on the necks of the gods faded and the
sky's energy withered. Fearful masses of clouds rained down thick showers of blood. The swirling dust darkened
the splendour of crowns worn by the gods. Then Shatakratu[The performer of a hundred sacrifices, Indra.], with the other gods, was greatly alarmed and frightened. Bewildered at these terrible portents, he asked Brihaspati[Great sage and preceptor of the gods.], "O illustrious one! Why have these terrible portents suddenly arisen? I do not see any enemy who can withstand us in battle." Brihaspati replied, "O Shatakratu!
O king of the gods! It is because of your own fault and negligence. Through the power of their austerities, the
valakhilyas have created a wonderful being-the bird who is the son of the sage Kashyapa and Vinata. He is powerful and capable of assuming any form at will and is coming to take away the soma. The bird is supreme among
the strong and is capable of taking away the soma. He is capable of achieving the impossible." Hearing this,
Shakra[Indra.] spoke to the guardians of the amrita, "An immensely valorous and strong bird has decided to take the
soma away. I am warning you in advance, so that he doesn't succeed in taking it away by force. Brihaspati has told
me that his strength is unparalleled." When they heard these words, the gods were amazed.

'Carefully, they took up positions around the amrita. Shatakratu Indra also stood there, vajra in hand. They wisely clad themselves in wonderful golden armour, expensively adorned with lapis lazuli. They brandished diverse
terrible weapons in their thousands, emitting flames, sparks and smoke, the edges and points sharpened-chakras,
iron clubs, tridents, battle axes, many sharp spears, spotless swords, maces of terrible forms, weapons most appropriate for their respective bodies. Armed with these radiant weapons and decorated with divine ornaments, the
army of gods stood there, their fears pacified. With unparalleled strength, energy and radiance, capable of razing
the cities of the asuras and displaying themselves in forms as radiant as the blazing fire, the gods stood there, their
minds set upon protecting the amrita. Thus, that supreme battlefield, with the gods and with hundreds and thousands of clubs, looked like another firmament, lit up by the radiant rays of the sun.'


