'Yudhishthira said, "There are hidden beings here, powerful rakshasas. O Vrikodara! We are capable of passing
them with fire and austerities. O Kounteya! Resorting to strength, control your hunger and thirst. O extender of the
Kuru lineage! Resort to your strength and dexterity. You have heard the words of the rishi about Mount Kailasa. O
Kounteya! Use your intelligence to think about how Krishna will pass this place. O lord! Alternatively, return from
here with Sahadeva, Dhoumya, the cooks, the superintendents of the kitchen, all the servants, the chariots, the
horses and other brahmanas who cannot bear the difficulties of the road, with all of them. O Bhima! O one with the
large eyes! The three of us will go on, restrained in our food and rigid in our vows-the immensely ascetic Lo-
masha, I and Nakula. Wait carefully for my return at Gangadvara. Dwell there and protect Droupadi until I return."

'Bhima replied, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The princess is oppressed by exhaustion and miserable.
But in a desire to see Shvetavahana[Shvetavahana is literally one whose transport (vahana) is white (shveta) meaning one whose horses are
white. Arjuna's horses are white and Shvetavahana is one of Arjuna's names.], there is no doubt that she will travel. Your suffering is also acute at not being able to see him. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It will be even more without Sahadeva, I and Krishna. If
you so wish, let all the chariots return with the servants, the cooks, the superintendents of the kitchen and whoever
else you think of. I do not wish to leave you here, in these mountains infested by rakshasas, in this uneven and difficult region. This immensely fortunate princess is devoted to her vows. O tiger among men! She will not be able
to return without you. Like that, Sahadeva is always devoted to you. I know his mind and he will never return. O
great king! In addition, all of us wish to see Savyasachi. All of us are desirous and therefore, all of us will travel
together. If we cannot use our chariots to travel over these mountains with many caverns, we will travel on foot. O
king! Do not worry. I will carry Panchali wherever she is incapable of travelling on her own. This is what I have
decided in accordance with my intelligence. O king! Do not worry. I will also carry these two delicate warriors
who are the delight of Madri[Nakula and Sahadeva.]. I will bear them over difficult terrain, if they are incapable of doing it
themselves."

'Yudhishthira said, "O Bhima! Since you have spoken like this, let your strength increase, so that you are capable of carrying Droupadi on this long journey, and also the twins. O fortunate one! No one else can do it. May your
strength, fame, devotion to dharma and deeds increase. O mighty-armed one! If you are able to carry your brothers
and Krishna, may you not suffer from exhaustion. May defeat never confront you."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Then the beautiful Krishna laughed and spoke these words. "O descendant of the Bharata
lineage[Droupadi is presumably speaking to Bhima. But it could be Yudhishthira too.]! I will travel. Do not be anxious on my account."

'Lomasha said, "It is possible to traverse Mount Gandhamadana with austerities. O Kounteya! O king! Therefore, let all of us be united with austerities-Nakula, Sahadeva, Bhimasena, I and you-so that we are able to see
Shvetavahana."'

Vaishampayana said, 'O king! Having happily conversed in this fashion, they happily saw the extensive region
of Subahu, prosperous with many elephants and horses, infested with kiratas, tanganas and full of hundreds of
kunindas[Kiratas, tanganas and kunindas are all mountain-dwelling hunter races.]. This Himalayan region is frequented by the gods and has many extraordinary things. On seeing
them, Subahu, lord of the kunindas, was extremely delighted. He met them at the frontiers and welcomed them
with homage. Having been thus worshipped, all of them happily dwelt there for some time. When the sun was
clear[That is, when the sun could be clearly seen.], they left for the Himalaya mountains. O king! The servants, Indrasena being the foremost, the superintendents of the kitchen, the cooks and all of Droupadi's retinue were entrusted by the maharathas to the king who
was the lord of the kunindas. The Pandavas, the immensely valorous descendants of the Kourava lineage, then
slowly left that region on foot, together with Krishna. They were extremely happy at the prospect of seeing
Dhananjaya.'


'Yudhishthira said, "O Bhimasena! O twins! O Panchali! Listen. There exists nothing in beings that is destroyed.
Look at us roaming in the forest. We may tell each other that we are weak and oppressed, but though incapable,
must travel in a desire to see Dhananjaya. It[Arjuna's absence.] burns my body, like fire on a pile of cotton. I do not see the brave
Dhananjaya by my side. In a desire to see him, I live with my younger brothers in the forest. Because of the extreme oppression meted out to Yajnaseni, that brave one must also be burning[Referring to Arjuna. Yajnaseni is Droupadi's name.]. I do not see the infinitely energetic Partha, Nakula's elder, the terrible wielder of the invincible bow. O Vrikodara! I am tormented on that account. With a desire to see him, I have visited beautiful tirthas, forests and lakes, together with you. I have not seen
the brave Dhananjaya, devoted to the truth, for five years. O Vrikodara! Since I do not see Bibhatsu, it is consuming me. O Vrikodara! Since I do not see the dark and mighty-armed Gudakesha[Arjuna's name.], whose brave gait is like that of
a lion, I am tormented. O Vrikodara! I do not see that best of men, accomplished in the use of weapons, skilful in
battle and the equal of any archer. It is for this reason that I am tormented. Among the masses of enemies, he
strides like angry Yama, the destroyer. Dhananjaya has the shoulders of a lion and is like a maddened elephant. He
is not inferior to Shakra in strength and valour. Partha, the one with the white horses, is infinitely brave and is elder
to the twins. On not being able to see Phalguna, I am immersed in immense grief. Even when he was insulted by
an inferior man, he was always forgiving in his conduct. He gave shelter and protection to those who walked the
straight path. But to those who were crooked and to those who sought to kill him through deceitful means, even if
it happened to be the wielder of the vajra himself[Indra.], he was like virulent poison. The greatly strong Bibhatsu is
infinite in his soul. The powerful one always granted protection to an enemy who sought refuge with him. He was
always our refuge. He destroyed his enemies in battle. He robbed all their jewels and he brought all of us happiness. In earlier times, it was through his valour that I obtained many celestial jewels of different types, those that
Suyodhana now possesses. O brave one! In earlier times, through the strength of his arms, I once possessed an assembly hall. O Pandava! It was full of all kinds of gems and was famous in the three worlds. He is like Vasudeva
in his valour. He is Kartavirya's equal in war. He is invincible and unconquered in battle. I do not see Phalguna.
The one who slew enemies with his valour was born after the immensely valorous Sankarshana[Balarama.], after Bhima
who is unvanquished in battle and after Vasudeva. The strength of his arms is equal to the power of Purandara. He
is equal to the wind in his speed, to the moon in the beauty of his face and to eternal death in his anger.

'"O might-armed one! O brave one! Desiring to see that tiger among men, all of us will now enter Mount Gandhamadana. The exetensive Badari is there and the hermitage of Nara and Narayana. It is always inhabited by yak-
shas. We will see that supreme mountain. We will see Kubera's beautiful lotus pond, protected by rakshasas. Observing great austerities, we will traverse on foot. O Vrikodara! One who has failed in austerities cannot reach that
region. Nor can one who is cruel or avaricious, or one who has not calmed himself. O Bhima! In order to follow
Arjuna's footsteps, all of us will go there. We will be armed and strap our swords. We will be accompanied by
brahmanas who observe great vows. Those who are not controlled encounter flies, gnats, mosquitoes, tigers, lions
and reptiles. O Partha! But those who are controlled do not see them. Therefore, let us control our souls. Let us be
restrained in our food. We will enter Mount Gandhamadana to see Dhananjaya."'


