'Yudhishthira said, "O illustrious one! O great sage! O best among brahmanas! I wish to hear in detail about the
dharma of kings and everything about that for the four varnas. What is the policy decreed for a king in times of
distress? While resorting to the path of dharma, how can one conquer the earth? This discourse about atonement
and about what should be eaten and what should not be eaten has satisfied my curiosity and has engendered great
delight in me. Following dharma and ruling the kingdom are always opposed to each other. That is the reason I am
confused and am thinking about it all the time."'

Vaishampayana said, 'The immensely energetic Vyasa, supreme among eloquent ones, who knew everything
that was ancient, glanced towards Narada and spoke to him[That is, spoke to Yudhishthira.]. "O Yudhishthira! O mighty-armed one! If you wish
to hear everything about dharma, go to Bhishma, the aged grandfather of the Kurus. He will dispel all the doubts
that you have about the secrets. He is Bhagirathi's[Ganga's.] son and knows everything, everything about all forms of
dharma. The river which has three flows, the celestial goddess, gave birth to him. He has seen all the gods, with
Shakra at the forefront, in person. O king! The lord has honoured the devarshis, with Brihaspati at the forefront,
and having satisfied them, has studied policy[Studied policy under Brihaspati.]. Ushanas[Shukracharya, the preceptor of the demons.], the brahmana who was the preceptor of the gods and
the asuras, knew the sacred texts. All those, with their commentaries, were obtained by that supreme one among
the Kuru lineage. In addition, the immensely intelligent one received the large corpus of the Vedangas from Bhargava Chyavana and Vasishtha, who was careful in his vows. In ancient times, he studied the truth about transcendental paths from Kumara, the eldest son of the grandfather, who blazed in his energy[The grandfather is Brahma and his eldest son (born through his mental powers) was
Sanatkumara. We have translated adhyatma as transcendental.]. He obtained everything
about the dharma followed by ascetics from the mouth of Markandeya himself. O bull among the Bharata lineage!
He obtained weapons from Rama[Parashurama.] and Shakra. Though he has been born as a man, the time of his death depends
on his own wishes. Though the virtuous one has no offspring, it has been heard that he will obtain the sacred
worlds in heaven. The sacred brahmarshis are always his courtiers. There is no knowledge that deserves to be
known that is unknown to him. He is learned about dharma and the true subtleties of dharma and artha. He will tell
you. Before the one who knows about dharma gives up his life, go to him." The immensely radiant one, Vyasa, farsighted in his wisdom, spoke these words.

'Kounteya spoke these words to Satyavati's son, supreme among eloquent ones. "I have created a great carnage
among kin and it makes the body hair stand up. I have caused injury to everyone and I am the cause behind the destruction of the earth. He fought fairly and I brought him down through deceit. Therefore, what grounds do I have
to question him?" Desiring the welfare of the four varnas, the mighty-armed and immensely radiant one, foremost
among the Yadu lineage[Krishna.], again spoke to the best of kings. "It is not appropriate that you should be tied down so
much through grief now. O supreme among kings! Act in accordance with what the illustrious Vyasa has said. O
mighty-armed one! These brahmanas and your immensely energetic brothers are waiting before you, like those afflicted by the summer season wait for the rains. O great king! All the kings who remain and the four varnas from
your kingdom of Kurujangala have assembled here. O scorcher of enemies! O slayer of enemies! For the sake of
bringing pleasure to the great-souled brahmanas, instructed by the infinitely energetic Vyasa, your senior, for the
sake of the distressed well-wishers, us and Droupadi, do what brings us pleasure. Do what ensures the welfare of
the worlds." Having been thus addressed by Krishna, the king, with eyes like blue lotuses, arose for the sake of the
welfare of the immensely ascetic ones in the world. The tiger among men had been requested by Vishtarashrava[Literally, the one whom the entire world has heard of. That is, Krishna.]
himself, Dvaipayana, Devasthana[A sage.] and Jishnu. There were many others who had also entreated him. The great-
minded Yudhishthira abandoned the distress in his mind and the torment. He was accomplished in learning and
knowing what should be learnt. He was learned in his words and a store of learning. The descendant of the Pandu
lineage obtained peace in his mind.

'The king was surrounded by them, like the moon by the nakshatras. With Dhritarashtra at the forefront, he proceeded to enter his own city. Having decided this, the one who knew about dharma, Kunti's son Yudhishthira, worshipped the gods and thousands of brahmanas. He ascended a new and sparkling chariot that was covered with
blankets and hides. It was yoked to sixteen white bullocks that were marked with auspicious signs. The maharshis
praised and honoured him with sacred mantras. It was as if the moon god had ascended his immortal chariot.
Kounteya Bhima, terrible in his valour, grasped the reins. Arjuna held aloft a radiant and white umbrella. As that
white umbrella was held aloft his head, it looked like a white cloud in the sky and was as resplendent as the king of
the stars[The moon.]. Madri's brave sons grasped two whisks to fan him with and these were white, like the rays of the
moon. Ornamented, the five brothers ascended the chariot. O king! They looked as if the five elements had gathered together. O king! Yuyutsu followed the eldest of the Pandavas at the rear. He was on a white chariot, yoked to
extremely swift horses. With Satyaki, Krishna followed the Kurus. He was on a golden and sparkling chariot, to
which, Sainya and Sugriva were yoked[The names of Krishna's horses.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! With Gandhari, Partha's eldest father[Dhritarashtra.] advanced ahead of Dharmaraja, on a palanquin borne by men. With Vidura at the forefront, all the Kuru
women, with Kunti and Krishna Droupadi advanced on various vehicles, superior and inferior. There were many
chariots, ornamented elephants, foot soldiers and those on horses who followed them at the rear. As the king advanced towards the city of Nagasahvya[Hastinapura.], he was praised with sweet chants by bards, minstrels and raconteurs.
The advance of that mighty-armed one was unmatched on earth. There were delighted and healthy people, who
created a tumult of rejoicing. As Partha advanced, the men, the residents of the city, decorated the city and the royal road appropriately. There were white garlands, flags and banners. The royal road was made fragrant with incense. The king's palace was full of fragrant powders, scents, many flowers, priyangu creepers and garlands. New
and firm pots filled with water were placed at the gates of the city. Here and there, there were beautiful maidens
and goats. In this way, with his well-wishers, the descendant of the Pandu lineage entered the city through the decorated gate. He was praised through auspicious words.'


