Yudhishthira said, "O one who knows about dharma! I wish to hear the story of that rajarshi. O Dvaipayana! O
unblemished one! Tell me about Marutta's account."

'Vyasa replied, "Earlier, in krita yuga, there was the lord Manu, the wielder of the staff. His son was the great
archer, famous as Prajati. Prajati had a famous son named Kshupa. Kshupa's son was the lord, King Ikshvaku. O
king! He had one hundred sons and they were supremely devoted to dharma. The lord Ikshvaku made all of them
kings. The eldest, Vimsha, was unmatched as an archer. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Vimsha had a fortunate son named Vivimsha. O king! Vivimsha had fifteen sons. All of them were brave archers, devoted to brahmanas and truthful in speech. They were virtuous and devoted to the dharma of giving. They were always agreeable in speech. The eldest one was Khaninetra and he oppressed all the other brothers. The valiant Khaninetra conquered the kingdom and removed all its sons[Khaninetra seems to have won over the kingdoms of his brothers.]. However, he was incapable of protecting the kingdom and the subjects weren't happy. They took away the kingdom from him and gave it to his son, Suvarcha. O  Indra among
kings! They instated him and were delighted. He[Suvarcha.] saw the action taken against his father and the fact that he had
been banished from the kingdom. Therefore, he was devoted to the law and engaged in the welfare of the subjects.
He was devoted to brahmanas. He was truthful in speech and pure. He was tranquil and self-restrained. Since the
learned one was always devoted to dharma, the subjects found joy in him. Because of his devotion to dharma, the
treasury and vehicles became exhausted[Since Suvarcha was generous in giving.]. When the treasury was exhausted, the vassals oppressed him from all
directions. With his treasury and vehicles diminished, he was afflicted by many. The king, the servants and the city
faced  supreme  suffering  and  hardships.  O  Yudhishthira!  The  king  was  always  completely  devoted  to  dharma.
However, since his strength was diminished, he was incapable of offering protection. When the king and the city
faced the ultimate in hardships, he blew violently into his hand and from this, soldiers emerged. The soldiers generated in this way defeated all the kings along the boundaries. O king! It is because of this reason that he became
famous as Karandhama[From kara (hand) and pradhma (blowing violently).]. Karandhama's son was born at the beginning of treta yuga. He was supreme and handsome and like Indra. Like the gods, he was extremely difficult to defeat. All the kings were always under his subjugation. Because of his conduct and his strength, he became the emperor of all creatures. His name was Avikshit
and he possessed dharma in his soul. He was Indra's equal in valour. He was devoted to sacrifices and addicted to
rites. He possessed fortitude and was in control of his senses. He was Aditya's equal in energy and the earth's
equal in forgiveness. He was Brihaspati's equal in intelligence and like the Himalayas in steadfastness. The king
sustained the minds of the subjects through his deeds, thoughts, words, self-control and tranquility. Following the
rites, the lord performed hundreds of horse sacrifices. The learned lord Angiras himself was the officiating priest at
these sacrifices. His son surpassed the father in qualities. His name was Marutta and he was knowledgable about
dharma. He was an immensely illustrious emperor. His strength was equal to that of ten thousand elephants. He
was like a second Vishnu. Wishing to perform a sacrifice, the one with dharma in his soul accumulated a lot of
molten gold. He had thousands of sparkling vessels constructed. He went to Mount Meru, to the north of the Himalayan slopes. He performed the rites on the great golden slopes there. He had golden bowls, vessels, pans and
seats constructed and they were innumerable. The sacrificial area was arranged near that spot. Following the ordinances, the king, with dharma in his soul, performed the sacrifice there. All the other kings were also with King
Marutta."'


Yudhishthira asked, "O supreme among eloquent ones! How did the king become so valorous? O brahmana!
How did he accumulate so much gold? O illustrious one! Where are all those objects now? O one who is a
store of austerities! How can we get them now?"

'Vyasa replied, "O son! Daksha Prajapati had several offspring-asuras and gods and they challenged each other. Angiras had two sons who were equal in their vows-Brihaspati, great in energy, and Samvarta, a store of austerities. O king! They rivalled each other and went their separate ways. Brihaspati repeatedly obstructed Samvarta.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Always obstructed by his elder brother, he gave up his riches, went around
naked and evinced a desire to live in the woods. At that time, Vasava defeated and killed all the asuras. Having obtained the title of Indra of the worlds, he appointed the eldest son of Angiras, Brihaspati, best among brahmanas, as
his priest. Earlier, Angiras was King Karandhama's priest. In valour, conduct and strength, he[Karandhama.] was unmatched in
the worlds. He had dharma in his soul and was rigid in his vows. He was as energetic as Shatakratu. He possessed
many kinds of mounts, warriors and objects. O king! Through his meditations, all of these would be generated
from his mouth. Through these qualities, the king brought all the kings under his subjugation. After having lived
for as long as he wished, he went to heaven in his physical body. He had a son who was as knowledgable about
dharma as Yayati. O afflicter of enemies! His name was Avikshit and he brought the earth under his subjugation. In
valour and qualities, this king was like his father. He had a valiant son named Marutta, who was Vasava's equal.
The earth, up to the girdle of the ocean, was devoted to him. O descendant of the Pandu lineage! The king always
challenged the king of the gods and Vasava also challenged Marutta. King Marutta was pure and possessed qualities. Despite trying, Shakra wasn't able to get the better of him. So that he might surpass him, Harivahana[Indra.] summoned Brihaspati and, together with the other gods, spoke these words to him. 'O Brihaspati! Marutta never does
anything that I find agreeable. O Brihaspati! I have obtained the title of Indra in the three worlds and over the gods.
Yet, in rites for the gods and in rites for the ancestors, Marutta does what is disagreeable to me. O brahmana! You
are the officiating priest of the king of the gods. How can you be the officiating priest for a mortal? Without the
least bit of doubt, you have become the officiating priest of King Marutta, who is a mere mortal. O fortunate one!
You will have to choose me or King Marutta. Give up Marutta and come over to my side.' O Kouravya! The king
of the gods spoke in this way. Having thought for a while, Brihaspati replied to the king of the gods. 'You are the
lord of creatures. The worlds are established in you. You are the slayer of Namuchi, Vishvarupa and Bala. O brave
one! You have single-handedly obtained supreme prosperity for the gods. O slayer of Bala! You are the one who
always holds up earth and heaven. O lord of a large number of gods! O chastiser of Paka! After having acted as an
officiating priest for you, how can I be the officiating priest for a mortal like Marutta? O lord of the gods! I will
stay with you and never with a mortal. I am accepting the ladle for the sacrifice. Listen to my words. If I deviate
from this truth, may the one with the golden seed[The fire.] turn cold, may the earth begin to move and may the sun cease
to radiate heat.' On hearing Brihaspati's words, Shakra lost all sense of jealousy. Having praised him, he entered
his own abode."'


