'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanatsujata! These supreme words that you have spoken about the brahman have the form
of the entire universe. These supreme words are extremely rare among desirable objects. O young one! Therefore,
speak to me."

'Sanatsujata replied, "You have happily asked me about the brahman, but it is not something that can be obtained in a hurry. I will tell you the ancient knowledge about the one who is not manifest. This can be successfully
known through the practice of brahmacharya."

'Dhritarashtra said, "You have said that the eternal knowledge about the one who is not manifest can be successfully obtained through the practice of brahmacharya and not through the performance of acts at prescribed points
in time. How does one then obtain the immortality of the brahman?"

'Sanatsujata replied, "Those who conquer their desires in this world, while patiently establishing themselves on
the brahman, are firmly based on truth, and pluck the soul out of the body, like a stalk of munja grass[Munja is a kind of rush or grass, used to make girdles for brahmanas.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The father and the mother create the body. But the birth instructed by the preceptor is
the true birth, because that is free of age or death[The preceptor is also like a father and initiation into studies is like a second birth.]. Those who enter a preceptor's womb and become embryos
there, observing brahmacharya, become learned in the sacred texts in this world and attain supreme yoga after they
give up their bodies. The preceptor fills the ears with the truth, practises truth and confers immortality. He should
be regarded as the father and the mother. Knowing of his deeds, one should not cause him any injury. A disciple
must always show respect to his preceptor. Pure and without distraction, he should study. His pride should not be
annoyed, nor should he be angered, at tasks he is asked to perform. This is the first quarter of brahmacharya. Doing
what pleases the preceptor, in deeds, thoughts and speech, even at the expense of life and riches, is said to be the
second quarter. The conduct towards the preceptor should be the same as that towards the preceptor's wife, acting
as one is instructed and performing what is pleasant. This is said to be the third quarter. Thinking oneself to be
wise, one should never tell a preceptor that one isn't responsible for a deed. Even if one thinks this, one should not
say it. This is the fourth quarter of brahmacharya. One should dwell by presenting to the preceptor whatever objects one obtains. For those who are righteous and possess many qualities, the conduct should be the same towards
the preceptor's son. When one dwells in this way, one prospers in this world. One obtains many sons and fame. All
the directions shower down upon him and many people dwell with him in turn, for the sake of brahmacharya. It is
through such brahmacharya that the gods attained divinity, the immensely fortunate and learned rishis attained the
world of Brahma and the gandharvas and the apsaras obtained their beauty. It was with such brahmacharya that the
sun was born earlier. O king! He who lies down and torments his entire body with austerities, will transcend childishness and become learned. In due course of time, he will conquer death. O kshatriya! The worlds that people
conquer through deeds they have performed are finite. But through knowledge, one obtains the entire brahman.
There is no other path to traverse."

'Dhritarashtra asked, "Does he[The brahman or the paramatman. There is no gender in the text.] appear white or red? Is he dark, black like collyrium, or brown? In what form
does a righteous and learned brahmana visualize the seat of that immortal and undecaying one?"

'Sanatsujata replied, "He does not appear as white or red, as black, or with the complexion of iron. Nor does he
have the complexion of the sun. He is not established in the earth or the sky. He is not to be found in the waters of
the ocean. He does not resort to the stars, or the lightning. His form cannot be seen in the clouds. He cannot be
found in the wind or the gods, nor can he be seen in the moon or the sun. He is not the mantras of the Rig Veda, the
Yajur Veda or the Atharva Veda, nor can he be seen in the unblemished Sama Veda. O king! It is certain that he
cannot be seen in great vows and in rathantara and barhata[Barhata (brihati) is a kind of metre. Rathantara is a metre that particularly occurs in the Sama Veda.]. He is the darkness that is impossible to cross. He is
beyond death and beyond destruction. His form cannot be seen, it is as thin as a razor's edge, but he is also larger
in form than the mountains. He is the foundation. He is immortality. He is the worlds. He is the brahman. He is
fame. He is the source of all beings and at the time of destruction, he is the one into whom they flow. He is without
division and gigantic. His fame soars up. The words of the wise say that he is immutable. Everything in the universe is established in him. Those who know him become immortal."'


'Sanatsujata said, "He is the seed and is a great and blazing light. He is the resplendent one whose fame is great.
He is the one whom the gods worship. It is because of him that the sun shines. He is the one whom the yogis see.
He is the eternal and illustrious lord. Everything originates with the brahman's seed. It is because of the brahman's
seed that everything flourishes. It is because of the seed that stars burn in the middle of the sky and the sun obtains
its radiance. He is the one whom the yogis see. He is the eternal and illustrious lord. It is because of him that there
is water in the middle of the ocean. It is because of him that the two gods are in the firmament[The sun and the moon.]. They hold up
what flows in and what flows out, in the earth and in heaven[This shloka is especially difficult to understand and translate.]. He is the one whom the yogis see. He is the eternal
and illustrious lord. Both these gods carry earth and heaven. The seed bears the directions and the universe. The
rivers flow from those directions and the great oceans are created from these. He is the one whom the yogis see. He
is the eternal and illustrious lord. Based on the wheels, the steady chariot ceaselessly works. He has a flaming crest
and the celestial and ageless horses bear him in the sky[This is a reference to the horses and chariot of the sun.]. He is the one whom the yogis see. He is the eternal and
illustrious lord. There is no form that is similar to his. He can never be seen with the eyes. Learned ones who get to
know him through their minds and their hearts, become immortal. He is the one whom the yogis see. He is the
eternal and illustrious lord. There is a terrible river with twelve flows protected by the gods and one drinks from
it[This is another shloka which is difficult to understand and translate. The twelve probably refers to the twelve
months and the river is symbolic of life.]. He is the one whom the yogis see. He is the eternal and illustrious lord. Like a bee, there are those who drink
the honey only for half a month[The image probably is that one only enjoys half the fruit of actions and has to be reborn.]. He is the lord who has ordained oblations for all beings. He is the one whom the
yogis see. He is the eternal and illustrious lord. There is an ashvattha tree with golden foliage. They alight like
featherless birds there. Having obtained feathers, they fly out in different directions[The tree is symbolic of the brahman. The featherless birds are individual souls or atman. Originally, they are
part of the brahman. But having obtained feathers or individual characteristics, they are born as different beings.]. He is the one whom the yogis see. He is the eternal and illustrious lord. The complete is taken out from the complete. It is from the complete
that the complete universe is created. The complete is taken from the complete. But it is the complete that
remains[The brahman is complete. The universe is also complete and is created from the brahman. But even after the
universe has been created from the brahman, the complete brahman remains.]. He is the one whom the yogis see. He is the eternal and illustrious lord. The wind is created from him
and it in him that it subsides. Agni and soma were created from him. All life depends on him. One knows everything through him. One is incapable of describing him. He is the one whom the yogis see. He is the eternal and illustrious lord. Apana dissolves into prana, prana dissolves into the moon[Prana is the breath of life in general. It is also divided into five separate actions of prana (exhalation), apana
(downward inhalation), vyana (diffusion through the body), udana (upward inhalation) and samana (the breath of
digestion). When inhaled apana air fills up the space left by exhaled prana air, that is called puraka and is one of
the three components of pranayama.]. The moon dissolves into the sun. The
sun dissolves into the supreme. He is the one whom the yogis see. He is the eternal and illustrious lord. When it
ascends out of the water, the swan does not raise one foot. If it did raise it[There is a problem with the critical edition's text here, with the word ritvijam being a clear typo.], there would be no death, nor immortality[There would be no difference between death and immortality. Man is being compared to a swan and man has
four legs or parts (waking, dreaming, sleeping, turiya). Turiya is the fourth state, when one perceives union between the human soul atman and the brahman. Ordinary people only perceive the first three parts and one of the
legs is therefore hidden and not used. Wise ones perceive the fourth leg too and see no difference between death
and immortality.]. He is the one whom the yogis see. He is the eternal and illustrious lord. There is one great-souled god. He
is the being who swallows the fire. If one knows this being, one's soul will never come to any harm. He is the one
whom the yogis see. He is the eternal and illustrious lord. Even if the thousands and thousands of wings are spread
out to fly, they must return to the centre and what is in the centre, with the speed of thought[The individual souls must all return to the brahman.]. He is the one whom
the yogis see. He is the eternal and illustrious lord. His form is stationed beyond the range of sight. Only those who
are extremely pure in soul can see him. A wise one desiring welfare sees him through the mind. Those who resort
to him, become immortal. He is the one whom the yogis see. He is the eternal and illustrious lord. Because of their
own learning and their own conduct, mortal ones hide him, like snakes in their holes. But only foolish ones are deluded by this and deceived and confounded, follow the dangerous road. He is the one whom the yogis see. He is
the eternal and illustrious lord. There is neither existence, nor is there non-existence. Therefore, what source can
give rise to death or immortality? Both truth and falsehood are based on the same truth. Truth and falsehood originate in the same womb. He is the one whom the yogis see. He is the eternal and illustrious lord. Among men,
whether they are righteous or wicked, these are not seen in an equal way[Because they do not possess wisdom and do not realize there is no difference between existence and nonexistence.]. Having been united with the divine
knowledge of immortality, one should taste that honey. He is the one whom the yogis see. He is the eternal and illustrious lord. The heart is not tormented because of abuse[For such a wise man.]. Nor do lack of studying and lack of agnihotra matter.
The mind becomes as light as the brahman. Those who are wise and persevering obtain him. He is the one whom
the yogis see. He is the eternal and illustrious lord. Thus, one sees one's own soul in all beings, all engaged in various tasks. After this, why should there be any sorrow? There is a great deal of water in a well that overflows in all
the directions. Like that, brahmanas who wish to know can use all the Vedas[The Vedas are being compared to the well.]. The great-souled being is the size
of a thumb. Though he resides in the heart, he cannot be seen. He is unborn. He ceaselessly roams, throughout
night and day. Knowing this, a wise one is full of bliss. I am I. I am also the mother, the father and the son. I am
the soul of everything, whether I exist or whether I do not exist. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I am the ancient grandfather[Brahma.], the father and the son. You dwell in my soul. But you are not mine and I am not yours. The
soul is the foundation. The soul is the birth. I am the foundation without decay that the Vedas speak about. I am
subtler than the most subtle. With excellent intelligence, I am awake in all beings. Know him to be the father of all
beings, dwelling in the lotus in all beings[The word used is pushkara, meaning a blue lotus. The lotus symbolizes the heart of a being. Alternatively,
pushkara also means a cage and one might mean the cages that bodies represent.]."'

