'Bhishma said, "Then all the ascetics engaged themselves in their respective tasks. The ones who followed dharma
wondered about the maiden and thought, 'What will we do?' A few among those ascetics said, 'We should take her
back to her father's residence.' Others thought that I[Meaning Bhishma.] should be censured. Some others thought of going to the lord
of Shalva and asking him to take her back. Others said no to this, because she had been rejected by him. All the
ascetics, rigid in their vows, again said, 'O fortunate one! This having occurred, what can we learned ones do? O
fortunate one! Listen to these beneficial words. There is no need for you to wander around. O fortunate one! Depart from here and go to your father's residence. The king, your father, will know what should be done next. You
possess all the qualities. O fortunate one! Go and dwell there happily. O fortunate one! You have no refuge other
than your father. O one with the beautiful complexion! For any arya lady, the husband or the father is the refuge. A
husband is the refuge when things are smooth. A father is the refuge when things are rough. Roaming around is
extremely difficult, especially for someone who is delicate. O beautiful one! Being a princess, you are naturally
delicate. O fortunate one! O one with the beautiful complexion! There are many taints associated with dwelling in
a hermitage. There will be none in your father's residence.' The brahmanas spoke these words to the ascetic lady.

'On seeing you alone in this deserted and dense forest, kings will solicit you. Therefore, do not set your mind on
this.'

'"Amba replied, 'I cannot go again to my father's residence in the city of Kashi. There is no doubt that I will be
disrespected by my relatives. O ascetics! It was different when I dwelt in my father's residence as a child. O fortunate ones! I will not go where my father is now. O foremost among brahmanas! I wish to practise austerities under
the protection of ascetics, so that I do not confront great ill fortune, in this world or the next.'"

'Bhishma said, "When those brahmanas were reflecting on this, the ascetic rajarshi Hotravahana arrived in that
forest. All the ascetics honoured the king. They worshipped and welcomed him and offered him a seat and water.
After he had seated himself and had rested, in his hearing, those residents of the forest again spoke to the maiden.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing the story of Amba, the daughter of the king of Kashi, her mother's father[Hotravahana was Amba's maternal grandfather.] trembled and arose. O lord! He placed the maiden on his lap and comforted her. He asked her about
the entire story of the reasons behind her hardships. In detail, she told him exactly what had happened. Then the
rajarshi was overcome by great grief and misery. The extremely great ascetic thought in his mind about what
should be done next. He trembled and in great grief, told the distressed maiden, 'O fortunate one! Do not go to
your father's residence. I am your mother's father. O daughter! Depend on me. I will dispel your sorrows. O
daughter! You have become desiccated. I think you have had enough. Listen to my words and go to the ascetic
Rama[Parashurama.], Jamadagni's son. Rama will remove your extremely great unhappiness and sorrow. If he does not listen to
his words[If Bhishma does not listen to Parashurama that he should take Amba back.], he will kill Bhishma in battle. Go to the foremost among the Bhargavas, whose energy is like that of
the fire of destruction. That great ascetic will establish you on a smooth path.' She repeatedly shed many tears. She
lowered her head before Hotravahana, her mother's father, and said, 'I will follow your instructions and will go.
But will I be able to see that arya, famous in the world? How will Bhargava destroy my terrible misery? I wish to
learn about this and I will go there after that.'"'


'"Hotravahana said, 'O child! You will see Rama, Jamadagni's son, in the great forest. He is engaged in terrible
austerities.He is devoted to the truth. He is extremely strong. The rishis[Sages.], those who are learned in the Vedas, the
gandharvas[Gandharvas are celestial musicians and semi-divine.] and the apsaras[Apsaras are celestial dancers who serve Indra, sometimes regarded as wives of gandharvas.] always worship Rama on Mahendra, the foremost among mountains. O fortunate
one! Go there. He is aged in austerities and is firm in his vows. After saluting him by lowering your head, tell him
these words of mine. O fortunate one! Tell him once again about what you desire. On hearing my name, Rama will
do everything that you wish for. O child! Rama is my friend. He is affectionate towards me and is my well-wisher.
The brave one is Jamadagni's son. He is supreme among those who wield all weapons.'

'"While King Hotravahana was speaking to the maiden in this way, Akritavrana, Rama's devoted follower, appeared[Though not explicitly stated, this is clearly Bhishma speaking again.]. All the sages arose in their thousands and so did King Hotravahana from Srinjaya, aged in years. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! As is appropriate, those residents of the forest asked about each other's welfare.
Then they seated themselves around him[Akritavrana.] and conversed about delightful subjects, beautiful and celestial ones. O
Indra among kings! They were happy and delighted. When they had finished, the great-souled rajarashi Hotravahana asked Akritavrana about Rama, foremost among maharshis. 'O Akritavrana! Where is it possible to see Jamadagni's powerful and mighty-armed son, foremost among those who have knowledge of the Vedas?'

'"Akritavrana said, 'O lord! O king! Rama always speaks about you. "Rajarshi Srinjaya is my beloved friend."

It is my belief that Rama will be here tomorrow morning. You will see him when he comes here, desiring to meet
you. O rajarshi! Why has this maiden come to the forest? Who does she belong to and what is her relationship to
you? I wish to know this.'

'"Hotravahana replied, 'O lord! She is my daughter's daughter. She is the beautiful daughter of the king of
Kashi. O unblemished one! She is the eldest and, with her sisters, was at the svayamvara. She is famous by the
name of Amba and she is the eldest daughter of the lord of Kashi. O one rich in austerities! Ambika and Ambalika
are younger to her. O brahmarshi! For the sake of these maidens, all the kshatriya kings gathered in the city of
Kashi and there was a great festival. Then the immensely valorous and greatly energetic Bhishma, Shantanu's son,
slighted the kings and abducted the three maidens. O descendant of the Bharata lineage[There is a minor inconsistency, since Akritavrana is being addressed. However, Bhishma is repeating the conversation to Duryodhana.]! The pure-souled Bhishma vanquished the lords of the earth and went to Gajasahrya[Another name for Hastinapura, gaja meaning elephant.] with the maidens. The lord then handed them over
to Satyavati, for the sake of a marriage with his brother Vichitravirya. O bull among brahmanas! On seeing that
arrangements had been made for a marriage, in the midst of the ministers, this maiden told Gangeya, "In my mind,
I have chosen the brave lord of Shalva as my husband. O one who is learned about dharma! When I have thought
of someone, you should not give me to someone else." When he heard these words, Bhishma consulted with his
ministers. Bhishma made up his mind to give her up and with Satyavati's permission, gave her leave to go to Shal-
va, the lord of Soubha. O brahmana! The maiden was delighted at that time and went and told him, "I have been
given up by Bhishma. Act towards me in accordance with dharma. O bull among kings! In my mind, I have chosen
you earlier." However, suspicious of her conduct, Shalva rejected her. Deciding to undertake austerities, she came
to this hermitage. I recognized her when she recounted her lineage. She thinks that Bhishma alone is responsible
for her unhappiness.'

'"Amba said, 'O illustrious one! It is just as Srinjaya King Hotravahana, the creator of my mother's body, has
said. O one rich in austerities! I do not wish to go back to my own city. O great sage! I will be insulted there and
am ashamed. O supreme among brahmanas! I will do what the illustrious Rama asks me to. O illustrious one! It is
my view that this is what I should do.'"'


'"Akritavrana said, 'O fortunate one! O woman! O child! There are two hardships. Which of these do you actually
wish to redress? O fortunate one! If it is your view that the lord of Soubha should be urged, then, desirous of your
welfare, the great-souled Rama will ask him accordingly. Or if you wish to see Bhishma, the son of the river, vanquished in battle by the intelligent Bhargava Rama, he will do that also. O one with the beautiful smiles! We will
think about what should be done after hearing your words, and those of Srinjaya.'

'"Amba replied, 'O illustrious one! When he abducted me, Bhisma acted out of ignorance. O brahmana! Bhishma did not know that my mind was set on Shalva. Before deciding, you should bear this in mind too. Having decided in accordance with what is right, then determine what should be done. O brahmana! Decide what needs to be
done about both Bhishma, tiger among the Kurus, and the king of Shalva. I have told you exactly about the reasons
for my unhappiness. O illustrious one! In accordance with the reasons, decide on a course of action.'

'"Akritavrana said, 'O fortunate one! O one with the beautiful complexion! What you have said about dharma is
correct. Now listen to these words of mine. O timid one! If the son of the river had not taken you to Gajasahrya, on
the instructions of Rama, Shalva would have bowed down his head and accepted you. O fortunate one! O beautiful
one! But you have been won over and abducted. O one with the beautiful waist! Therefore, King Shalva has a
doubt about you. Bhishma is insolent about his manliness and victory. I think it is appropriate that action should be
taken against Bhishma.'

'"Amba replied, 'O brahmana! That has always been the great desire in my heart, if only I could kill Bhishma in
battle. O mighty-armed one! Whether you think that the fault lies with Bhishma or King Shalva, chastise the one
because of whom I have faced this extreme misery.'"

'Bhishma said, "While they were conversing in this way, the day passed. O best of the Bharata lineage! It was
night and a pleasant and cool breeze blew. Then Rama appeared, like the blazing fire in his energy. O king! He was
surrounded by his disciples. The sage had matted hair and was clad in bark. The unblemished one with an indomitable soul held a bow in his hand and a sword and a battle axe. O tiger among kings! He approached King
Srinjaya. On seeing him, all the ascetics and the immensely ascetic king arose, hands joined in salutation. So did
the ascetic maiden. They eagerly honoured Bhargava with madhuparka[A respectful offering made to guests, consisting of honey and curd.]. Having been shown homage, he seated
himself among them. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Jamadagni's son and rajarshi Srinjaya conversed about
earlier times. When this conversation was over, in due course of time, the rajarshi spoke these sweet words, full of
meaning, to the immensely strong Rama, foremost among the Bhrigus. 'O Rama! This is my daughter's daughter.
O lord! She is the daughter of the king of Kashi. O one who knows what should be done! Listen to her and decide
on an appropriate course of action.' Rama replied, 'Tell me your supreme account.' She approached Rama, who
was like a blazing fire. The beautiful one lowered her head at Rama's feet. She touched them with hands that were
like the petals of lotuses and stood before him. Her eyes were filled with tears and she wept in grief. She sought
refuge with the descendant of the Bhrigu lineage, the one who is everyone's refuge.

'"Rama said, 'O daughter of a king! You are like Srinjaya to me. Tell me about the grief in your mind and I will
act in accordance with your words.'

'"Amba replied, 'O illustrious one! O one who is great in his vows! I have sought refuge with you. I am immersed in this ocean and mud of sorrow. O lord! Save me.'"

'Bhishma said, "Rama saw her beauty, her youthful age and her extremely delicate form and began to think.

'What is she going to say?' Flooded by compassion, Rama, supreme among those of the Bhrigu lineage, thought in
this fashion for a long time. Rama spoke to the one with the beautiful smiles. 'Tell me.' She told Bhargava everything, exactly as it had happened. After having heard the words of the princess, Jamadagni's son made up his mind
and told the one with the beautiful thighs, 'O beautiful one! I will send word to Bhishma, foremost among the Kurus. When he has heard my words, in conformity with dharma, that lord of men will act accordingly. O fortunate
one! If Jahnavi's son[Bhisma. Jahnavi is another name for Ganga.] does not act in accordance with my words, I will use the energy of my weapons to burn
him down in battle, together with his advisers. O princess! Or if you are so inclined, I will force the brave lord of
Shalva to a course of action.'

'"Amba replied, 'O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! When Bhishma heard that my mind had earlier turned towards King Shalva, he discarded me. I went to the king of Soubha and spoke words that were difficult to speak[As a woman.].
But doubting my character, he did not accept me. O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! You should think about all
this and then use your own intelligence to decide on the right course of action. Bhishma, the one who is mighty in
his vows, is the root cause of my hardship. He used force to overcome and abduct me. O mighty-armed one!
Bhishma is the reason behind this unhappiness. Kill him. O tiger among the Bhrigu lineage! It is because of him
that I am wandering around in this supreme misery. O Bhargava! He is greedy and insolent because of his victory.
O unblemished one! It is appropriate that you should take revenge against him. O lord! When the descendant of the
Bharata lineage was abducting me, I thought of this resolution in my mind, that the one who is great in his vows
should be killed. O Rama! O unblemished one! Therefore, fulfil this desire of mine. O mighty-armed one! Kill
Bhishma, like Purandara[Indra.] slew Vritra.'"'


