Janamejaya asked, 'O brahmana! Why did Agni, the fire, not burn the Sharngakas when that forest was blazing?
Tell me at once. O, brahmana! You have recounted the reason why Ashvasena and the danava Maya were not
burnt. But you have not told us the reason for the Sharngakas. O, brahmana! It is extraordinary that the Sharngakas
escaped from destruction. Recount to us why they were not destroyed in the conflagaration.'

Vaishampayana said, 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I will tell you everything exactly about why Agni
did not consume the Sharngakas. O king! There was a great rishi renowned by the name of Mandapala. He was
learned in dharma, rigid in his vows and chief among ascetics. He followed the path of the rishis who held up their
seed[The term for this is urdhvareta, meaning those who hold up their semen.], was devoted to studying the sacred texts and dharma, was an ascetic and had achieved control over his
senses. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having attained the final goal of ascetism, he gave up his human
body and went to the world of the ancestors. But he did not find the fruits of his acts there. The dwellers of heaven
were seated around Dharmaraja[Yama, the god of death.] and he asked them, "Why have I not attained the worlds that should have been
the fruit of my asceticism? What have I not done that this should be the fruit of my actions? O dwellers of heaven!
I will do that which will get me the fruits of my asceticism and open that which is now closed. Tell me." The gods
replied, "O brahmana! Hear about the debts men are undoubtedly born with-to rituals, brahmacharya[In this context, this should be interpreted as a period earmarked for studying, rather than lifelong celibacy.] and offspring, and these are respectively discharged through sacrifices, austerities and progeny. You are an ascetic and you
have performed sacrifices. But you did not have any offspring. Because you did not have offspring, these worlds
are closed to you. Therefore, have progeny and you will enjoy these worlds for an eternity. O sage! A son saves a
father from the hell known as put[There are several hells (naraka). A son is named putra because he saves (trana) the father from the hell
named put. This hell is also called punnam, which means, by the name of put.]. O supreme among brahmanas! Therefore, try to obtain offspring." On hearing
these words of the dwellers of heaven, Mandapala began to wonder how he might obtain a large number of offspring swiftly. After thinking about this, he concluded that birds give birth to many offspring.

'So he became a Sharngaka bird and united with a female Sharngaka bird named Jarita. Through her, he had
four sons who were knowledgable about the brahman. While these young sons were still inside their eggs, the sage
deserted them there in that forest with their mother and went off after Lapita[The former human wife.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When the immensely illustrious one went off after Lapita, out of affection for her children, Jarita became
very thoughtful and anxious. O king! Those sons, the infant rishis still in their eggs, had undeservedly been abandoned by their father in Khandava forest. But out of love for her sons, Jarita could not discard them and after they
were born, brought them up in her own way[The way of the birds.].

'After some time, the rishi Mandapala was wandering in the forest with Lapita and he saw Agni advance towards Khandava to consume it. Knowing his resolution and knowing his sons were still young, the brahmana sage
prayed to the greatly energetic fire, lord of the world, scared about the protection of his sons. Mandapala said, "O
Agni! You are the mouth of all the gods, you are the one who carries sacrificial offerings. You are the purifier who
dwells invisibly in all living beings. The learned have said that you are one and have again said that you are
three[The sacrificial fire is of three types-garhapatya (in the household), ahavaniya (used in sacrifices) and dakshina (the one placed facing the south).]. They think of you in eight forms[The number eight has two possible interpretations. The first is the ordinary fire and the other seven consisting
of the sacrificial fire in seven different places-the wife's position at the sacrifice, the soma altar, the general altar,
the seat of the priest who maintains the sacrificial fire, the area reserved for the assisting priests, the place where
the rituals are performed and the place where the worship is performed. The second and perhaps more convincing
explanation is the ordinary aggregated fire and the seven flames or tongues a fire is supposed to have-karali
(frightful), dhumini (full of smoke), shveta (white), lohita (red), neelalohita (bluish red), suvarna (golden) and
padmaraga (red like a ruby).] and imagine you as the one who carries sacrificial offerings. The
supreme rishis say that you have created the entire universe. O fire! The universe is based on you and without you,
it will be destroyed instantly. It is after paying homage to you that the brahmanas go to the eternal worlds they
have earned through their actions, together with their wives and sons. O Agni! It is said that you are the fire in the
clouds in the sky, in their lightning. The flames that emerge from you burn down all beings. O immensely radiant
one! O Jataveda[Jataveda is one of Agni's names and means that the Vedas are born from (jata) the fire.]! You have created everything in this universe. Everything, mobile and immobile, every action
and everything that exists is based on you. You have determined the ancient waters, everything in the universe is
based on you. The offerings to the gods and the offerings to the ancestors, as prescribed, are based on you. O Agni!
You are the one who burns down, you are Dhata[Dhata means creator and is also a term used for Brahma and Vishnu.], you are Brihaspati[The preceptor of the gods. In earlier times, Brihaspati was also a term used for Indra.]. You are the two Ashvins, the two
Yamas[The word yama itself means two or a couple and can therefore also be an adjective used for the two Ashvins.
However, if it is not an adjective, the two Yamas can only mean Yama and his sister Yami.], Mitra, Soma and Anila[The god of wind or Vayu.]." O king! Having been thus prayed to by Mandapala, Agni was satisfied with
the immeasurably energetic sage. With happiness in his heart, he asked him, "What good can I do for you?" With
hands joined in salutation, Mandapala told the fire, "When you burn Khandava forest, please spare my sons." The
illustrious bearer of sacrificial offerings gave him his word and at that time, he blazed into Khandava, wishing to
consume it.'


Vaishampayana said, 'When the fire blazed up, the Sharngakas were extremely distressed, miserable and extremely
anxious, because they could not find any means of escaping. O lord of men! Listening to her young sons, their ascetic mother Jarita was stricken with grief and began to lament.

'Jarita said, "This terrible fire is burning the inside of the forest and advancing towards us. It has blazed up the
entire universe and is increasing my misery. My children still have imperfect understanding; they are without
feathers and feet. Yet they are the ultimate refuge of our ancestors and are tugging at me. The blazing fire is advancing, licking the tall trees with its tongue and creating terror. My sons still do not have strength and are unable
to escape. Nor can I escape somewhere else, taking my sons with me. I cannot abandon them and my heart is distressed. Which one of my sons will I leave and which will I take with me? What should I do? O my sons! What do
you think? Even after thinking a lot, I can find no means of escape for you. I will now cover you with my body and
die with you. In earlier times, your cruel father abandoned you, uttering these words, 'My lineage will be established on Jaritari, because he is the eldest. Sarisrikva will have offspring, extending the lineage of my ancestors.
Stambamitra will practise austerities and Drona will be supreme in knowledge of the brahman.' Who will I take
with me and leave and who will suffer the greatest of calamities?" She was bereft of judgement because she did
not know what was the right course of action. Through her own thoughts she did not see any means whereby her
sons might escape from the fire.

'When she had spoken in this way, the four Sharngakas spoke to their mother. "O mother! Give up your love for
us and go to a place where there is no fire. If we are destroyed, you will have other sons. O mother! But if you are
destroyed, there will be no progeny in our lineage. O mother! After taking into consideration these two outcomes,
the time has come for you to do that which is best for our lineage. Out of love for your sons, do not do anything
that will destroy our lineage. The act of our father, who wishes to attain the worlds, must not amount to nothing."

Jarita replied, "Near this tree, there is a rat hole in the ground. Swiftly enter the hole and you will suffer no fear
from the fire there. O sons! When you have entered it, I will cover the hole with dirt. That is the only means that I
can think of to counter the blazing fire. When the fire has died out, I will return and remove the mass of dirt. If you
wish to escape from the fire, listen to these words of mine." The Sharngakas said, "We are only masses of flesh,
without feathers, and the carnivorous rat will destroy us. On beholding this fear, we cannot enter. We do not know
how we can escape being burnt by the fire or being eaten by the rat. How can our father attain fulfilment and how
can our mother survive? The dwellers of the sky will either be destroyed in the hole by the rat or by the fire. Considering both the possibilities, it is better to be burnt than to be eaten. To die from being eaten by a rat in a hole is a
most miserable death. But destruction of the body by fire has been sanctioned by the learned."'


