'Markandeya said, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! Rama confronted incomparable misery. His wife, Janaki[Janaka's daughter, Sita.],
was forcibly abducted by a rakshasa. Having swiftly killed the vulture Jatayu by resorting to maya, Ravana, Indra
of the rakshasas, abducted her from the hermitage, travelling through the sky. Resorting to the strength of Sugriva,
Rama bound a bridge over the ocean, burnt Lanka with his sharp arrows, and obtained her back."

'Yudhishthira asked, "In what lineage was Rama born? What was his valour? How gallant was he? Whose son
was Ravana and what was his enmity with him? O illustrious one! Please tell me all this in detail. I wish to hear
Rama's account, the one whose deeds were unsullied."

'Markandeya said, "In the lineage of Ikshvaku, there was a great king by the name of Aja. His son was
Dasharatha, pure and always devoted to learning. He had four sons who were learned in dharma and artha-Rama,
Lakshmana, Shatrughna and the immensely strong Bharata. Rama's mother was Koushalya and Bharata's was
Kaikeyi. Lakshmana and Shatrughna, scorchers of enemies, were the sons of Sumitra. O lord! Janaka was the king
of Videha and his daughter was Sita. Tvashtra[Vishvakarma, the architect of the gods.] himself created her, so that she might be Rama's beloved queen. I
have thus recounted to you the births of Rama and Sita. O lord of men! I will now tell you about Ravana's birth.
Ravana's great grandfather was the god Prajapati[Brahma.] himself, the self-creating great ascetic and the lord of all the
worlds. He had a beloved son named Pulastya, born through his mental powers. Through a cow, that lord had a son
by the name of Vaishravana. But he abandoned his father and went to his grandfather. O king! His father was angered at this. He created another self, based on his own self. In great wrath, the brahmana created Vishrava from
half of himself, so that Vaishravana could be countered. But delighted, the grandfather conferred immortality on
Vaishravana. He also made him lord of riches and a guardian of the worlds. He was given friendship with Ishana
and a son named Nalakubara. His capital became Lanka, inhabited by masses of rakshasas[There is some divergence with standard accounts. In standard accounts, the sage Vishrava is the son of the
sage Pulasyta. Vishrava had two sons from two different wives-Kubera and Ravana. Both of them are thus
known as Vaishravana. Kubera is the lord of riches and also has a son named Nalakubara. He is also friendly with
Ishana (Shiva). In all accounts, Kubera originally ruled over Lanka. Kubera is also a lokapala (guardian of the
world).]."'

