'"Arjuna said, 'In this way, there are devotees who are always immersed in you and worship you and there are
those who think of the unmanifest and the indestructible. 439 Who among these is the best yogi?' 440
'"The lord said, 'Those who worship me, with minds fixed on me and always united in me with supreme devotion, in my view, they are the best yogis. But those who worship the indestructible, indescribable, unmanifest, omnipresent, unthinkable, original, 441 immovable and constant, controlling properly the senses and looking upon
everything equally, acting for the welfare of all beings, they only attain me. Those who wish to immerse their
minds in the unmanifest, find it more difficult. Because those who possess bodies 442 attain the goal of the unmanifest with great perseverance. 443 O Partha! Those who offer all action to me, are devoted to me and with singleminded yoga, meditate on me and worship me with minds rendered unto me, I become swiftly their rescuer from
this mortal world that is like an ocean. Establish your mind in me alone. 444 Fix your intellect on me. After that,
445 there is no doubt that you will live with me alone. O Dhananjaya! If you cannot steady your mind and fix it on
me, then practise yoga 446 and wish to attain me. If you don't succeed in the practice, then do only my deeds. 447
Even if you do acts for my pleasure, you attain liberation. If however, you are unable to perform these deeds also,
then control your mind, give up attachment to the fruits of all action and seek refuge in the yoga that is mine. 448
Knowledge is superior to practice. Meditation is superior to knowledge. Giving up attachment to the fruits of action is superior to meditation. After renunciation, tranquillity is attained. 449 He who has no hatred for all beings,
is friendly and also displays compassion, is without sense of ego, without pride, regards happiness and unhappiness in the same way and is forgiving, is always satisfied, a yogi and controlled in mind, firm in resolution 450 and
with mind and intellect immersed in me, such a devotee of mine is dear to me. He from whom other people are not
disturbed and he who is not disturbed by other people and he who is free from delight, dissatisfaction, 451 fear and
concern, is dear to me. Without desire, 452 pure, enterprising, neutral, without pain and one who has renounced all
fruit, 453 such a devotee is dear to me. He who is not delighted, nor hates, he who does not sorrow, nor desires, he
who has given up good and evil, 454 such a devotee is dear to me. Equal between friend and enemy, and respect
and insult, equal between cold and warmth, happiness and unhappiness and without all attachment, like between
criticism and praise, restrained in speech, 455 satisfied with whatever is obtained, without habitation 456 and controlled in mind, such a devoted man is dear to me. Those who are devoted and look upon me as the supreme goal
and worship according to this immortal dharma mentioned earlier, such devotees are extremely dear to me.'"'


'"The lord said, 'O Kounteya! This body is known as the kshetra. 458 He who knows this is called the kshetrajna
by those who have the knowledge. 459 O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In every field, know me to be the
kshetrajna. My view is that knowledge about kshetra and kshetrajna is knowledge. 460 Briefly, hear from me what
is that kshetra, its nature and its transformation, and cause and effect within it. Also that 461 and its power. The
rishis have sung this 462 in different metres in several diverse ways. The definite logical arguments are also there
in the Brahmasutra passages. 463 The great elements, 464 the ego, the intellect and the unmanifest, 465 the ten organs of sense 466 and the single one 467 and the objects of the five senses, 468 desire, hatred, happiness, unhappiness, combination, 469 consciousness, patience, these together are said to be the kshetra and its transformations.
Lack of ego, lack of arrogance, lack of injury, 470 forgiveness, humility, servitude towards teachers, purity, singlemindedness 471 and control over the self, detachment towards gratification of the senses and lack of vanity, indifference towards unhappy travails like birth, death, aging and disease, non-attachment, 472 no sense of belonging in
wife, son and home, always equality in mind whether good or evil results, faithfulness in devotion to me, fixedness
and non-deviation in yoga, habitation in secluded spots, aversion to crowds, devotion to knowledge about the atman and search for true knowledge-these are known as knowledge. Anything opposed is ignorance. I will state
that which is to be known. Knowing that, attains immortality. 473 That brahman, without origin, is my form. It is
said, both eternal and transient. 474 That 475 has hands and feet everywhere, eyes, heads and mouths everywhere,
and ears everywhere, is established in everything in this world. Manifest in the qualities of all the senses, but without any senses, alone, like the abode of everything, without qualities and the preserver of all qualities. 476 That is
outside all beings and yet inside them, moving and unmoving, beyond knowledge because of subtleness, far and
yet near. That is indivisible, but exists in every being in divided form. Know 477 as the preserver, destroyer and
creator of all beings. That is the light of all bright bodies. Said to be beyond darkness. Knowledge, that which is to
be known and attainable through knowledge, is established in the heart of everything. 478 Briefly, kshetra and that
which is knowledge, and to be known, have been stated. Knowing this, my devotee attains my nature. 479 Know
both prakriti and purusha to be without origin. And know transformations and the qualities 480 to result from
prakriti. 481 Prakriti is said to be the reason behind caus and effect, 482 purusha said to be 483 for happiness and
unhappiness in enjoyment, because purusha is established in prakriti and enjoys prakriti's qualities. 484 And its
485 good and evil birth is because of its association with these qualities. The supreme being in this body is known
as one who witnesses, one who allows, one who sustains, one who enjoys, the supreme lord and the paramatman.
He who knows the nature of purusha, and of prakriti, with the qualities, whatever be the position he is in, will not
be reborn. Some, through meditation, see the atman in the atman with the atman. 486 Others use sankhya yoga 487
and still others use karma yoga. And others, failing to know, 488 hear from others and worship. Even they, who are
devoted to hearing, transcend death. O best of the Bharata lineage! Whatever movable and immovable objects are
created, know them to result from the link between kshetra and kshetrajna. He truly sees who beholds the indestructible supreme lord equally in all beings, while everything else is destructible. He who sees the great lord
equally established in everything, he doesn't kill the atman with the atman, 489 and therefore, attains supreme liberation. He who perceives all action as being performed by prakriti and the atman as a non-agent, he truly beholds.
When he sees the different aspects of beings as established in one 490 and also everything manifested from there,
he attains the brahman. O Kounteya! Because it is without origin and without qualities, this paramatman is unchanging and although based in the body, does nothing. It is not attached. 491 As the sky that is everywhere is not
attached because of its subtlety, like that, the atman is not attached, though it is in every body. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Just as a single sun lights up the entire world, like that, a single kshetri lights up all kshetras. 492
Those who, through their eyes of knowledge, know the difference between kshetra and kshetrajna in this way and
freedom from beings and prakriti, 493 they attain the supreme goal.'"'


'"The lord said, 'I am again stating the excellent and supreme out of all types of knowledge. Knowing that, all the
sages are freed from this 495 and attain supreme liberation. Seeking refuge in this knowledge and attaining my true
nature, they are not born at the time of creation, nor suffer at the time of destruction. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! The great brahman 496 is my womb. Into that, I place the seed. 497 And from that, all the beings are created. O Kounteya! The different forms that are created in all wombs, the great brahman 498 is like their mother
499 and I am the father who provides the seed. O mighty-armed one! The qualities sattva, rajas and tamas, generated from nature, bind the indestructible atman in the body. O sinless one! Among these, 500 sattva is shining because it is pure and is without sin, but ties down the atman because of attachment to happiness and knowledge. 501
O Kounteya! Know rajas to be based on desire and the origin of thirst and attachment. 502 That 503 binds the atman 504 firmly because of attachment to action. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Know tamas to be born from
ignorance and the source of delusion in every being. That 505 binds firmly through error, 506 sloth and sleep. 507
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Sattva attaches to happiness and rajas attaches to action. Tamas veils knowledge and attaches to errors. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Sattva overcomes rajas and tamas and becomes
strong, rajas, sattva and tamas, and tamas, sattva and rajas. 508 Know that when the light of knowledge is ignited
in all the gates of this body, 509 it is only then that sattva becomes strong. O best of the Bharata lineage! Greed,
510 inclination, beginnings of action, 511 restlessness and desire-these are created when rajas becomes strong. O
descendant of the Kuru lineage! Darkness, lack of enterprise, inadvertence and delusion-these are created when
tamas becomes strong. If a being dies when sattva becomes strong, then he attains the shining 512 world reserved
for those who have the supreme knowledge. Death when rajas become strong leads to rebirth as someone addicted
to action. And death when tamas, 513 leads to rebirth as subhuman species. 514 It has been said that sattva-type
action has the fruit of pure happiness, rajas-type has the fruit of unhappiness and tamas-type has the fruit of ignorance. From sattva, wisdom results, and from rajas, greed, and from tamas, only inadvertence, delusion and ignorance result. Those with a preponderance of sattva ascend above. 515 Those with rajas stay in the middle. 516
Those with despicable tamas qualities, descend below. 517 When the seer doesn't see any agent other than the
qualities and knows that which is beyond the qualities, he attains my nature. 518 When the being transcends the
three qualities that are the origin of the body, he attains immortality, free from birth, death, old age and
unhappiness.'

'"Arjuna said, 'O lord! From what signs does one know one who has transcended? What is his conduct? And
how does he transcend these three qualities?'

'"The lord said, 'O Pandava! He who is engaged in knowledge and inclination and delusion and yet does not
hate, nor desire if these are withdrawn. 519 He is established in indifference and the qualities don't disturb him.
Knowing the action of the qualities to be of this form, he is steady and doesn't waver. Equal between happiness
and unhappiness, established in himself, 520 equal between earth, stone and gold, similar in treatment of the loved
and the hated, tranquil, similar between praise and censure. He who treats respect and insult alike, friend and enemy alike and discards all beginnings of action, 521 he is said to have transcended the qualities.' He who worships
me single-mindedly and with unwavering devotion, he transcends these qualities and is worthy of attaining the
state of the brahman. Because I am the embodiment of the brahman-indestructible, immortal, 522 and also of
eternal dharma and absolute bliss.'"' 523

