Yudhishthira said, "O supreme among those who uphold all kinds of dharma! I wish to hear about the good
conduct of virtuous women. O grandfather. Tell me the truth."

'Bhishma replied, "There was a lady named Sumana, from the Kaikeya lineage. Shandili knew about everything
and about all kinds of dharma. In the world of the gods, she asked the spirited one[Sumana asked Shandili.]. 'O fortunate one! What conduct did you follow? How did you cleanse all your sins and arrive in the world of the gods? You are blazing in
your own energy, like the flames of a fire. You seem to be like a daughter of the lord of the stars[The moon.], creating day
with your own radiance. You are clad in a white garment and you show no signs of exhaustion. You are resplendent astride a sparkling celestial vehicle and there are one thousand qualities in your energy. Your austerities, donations and rituals cannot have been minor, since you have obtained this world. Therefore, tell me the truth.' The one
with the sweet smiles was thus gently asked by Sumana.

'"In private, Shandili spoke these words to Sumana. 'I did not wear ochre robes. I did not dress myself in bark. I
did not shave my head, nor did I sport matted hair. That is not the reason I have obtained divinity. In a fit of distraction, I never addressed my husband in any hurtful or harsh words. I worshipped the gods, the ancestors and
brahmanas. I was never careless and served my father-in-law and my mother-in-law. I never allowed any calumny
to penetrate my mind. I never stood at the door, speaking to someone for a long period of time. I did not laugh
when a wicked act was performed. I did not perform any injurious acts. I never divulged a secret, or what was not
a secret. When my husband went out for work and returned home, I was controlled and honoured him by offering
him a seat. I did not eat food that he did not know about, or did not approve of. I avoided anything like that,
whether it was eaten, swallowed or licked. I arose in the morning and performed all the tasks that needed to be
done to honour the relatives. If my husband had to go elsewhere on some task, I always remained engaged in tasks
that would bring many benedictions. Until my husband returned, I did not use beautiful collyrium, wear garlands
and apply fragrances after bathing, or ornament myself. I never awoke my husband when he was happily asleep. I
satisfied my mind by undertaking tasks for the afflicted. For the sake of the family, I did not urge my husband to
exert himself. I never divulged secrets and I kept the household clean. If a woman is controlled and protects this
path of dharma, she will obtain greatness in heaven, just as Arundhati did amongst all the women.' The ascetic
goddess recited this account to Sumana. The immensely fortunate one described this dharma towards the husband
and instantly disappeared. O Pandava! A person who reads this account on an auspicious occasion obtains the
world of the gods and resides in great happiness in Nandana."'


Yudhishthira asked, "O foremost among the Bharata lineage! What is superior, conciliation or gifts? Tell me
which you think is better."

'Bhishma replied, "Some are pleased through conciliation, others are pleased through gifts. One must secure a
man's devotion after ascertaining his nature. O king! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Listen to the qualities that
are associated with conciliation. The most terrible of creatures can be pacified through conciliation. In this connection, an ancient history is recounted. In a forest, a brahmana who was seized by a rakshasa was freed. There was an
intelligent brahmana. In a desolate forest, he confronted a catastrophe because he was seized by a rakshasa who
intended to eat him. However, he possessed intelligence and learning. Despite seeing that terrible creature, he was
not confused or distressed. Instead, he resorted to conciliation. Having honoured him with his words, the rakshasa
asked the brahmana a question. 'I will free you if you can answer my question. Why am I yellowish green and
lean?' The brahmana thought for an instant about the purport of the rakshasa's anxious question.

'"He then replied, 'You reside away from home. You are alone and without any of your well-wishers, though
you command an unmatched territory. That is the reason you are yellowish green and lean. O rakshasa! Though
you  are  virtuous,  there  is  no  doubt  that  your  friends,  because  of  their  own  wickedness,  have  acted  perversely
against you. That is the reason you are yellowish green and lean. You possess an excess of prosperity and wealth
and you stupefy them with your supreme and excellent qualities. Nevertheless, they disregard you. That is the reason you are yellowish green and lean. You have performed good deeds and possess the qualities. You can see that
they don't have the qualities. You are wise. They are foolish and uncontrolled in their souls. That is the reason you
are yellowish green and lean. Though you are afflicted because of lack subsistence, you have avoided the censured
means of subsistence. This has resulted from your greatness. There is no doubt that this is the reason why you are
yellowish green and lean. You have chosen to suffer because of your own noble qualities. But you are disregarded
by the others, who think that they have defeated you. O virtuous one! That is the reason you are yellowish green
and lean. There are those who suffer because they resort to deviant paths, overcome by the desire and the anger in
their souls. I think you are reflecting about those people. That is the reason you are yellowish green and lean.
Though you have obtained everything, you have to adopt the form of one who has obtained nothing. Though you
are humble, those who are evil in conduct exhibit their intolerance towards you. That is the reason you are yellowish green and lean. There was an enemy who arrived before you, pretending to be a friend. He first acted nobly.
Subsequently, he deceived you and left. That is the reason you are yellowish green and lean. There is no doubt that
you know about the purport and progress of everything that is manifest. You are skilled in the mysteries and accomplished. But those people do not honour you. That is the reason you are yellowish green and lean. You remained among wicked people and spoke to them, clearing their doubts. Nevertheless, they did not praise your
qualities. That is the reason you are yellowish green and lean. You do not possess riches, intelligence and learning.
Despite this, on the basis of your energy, you aspire to obtain greatness. That is the reason you are yellowish green
and lean. I think that you have controlled your soul and desire to roam around in this forest in the pursuit of austerities. But your numerous friends are not prepared to accept this. That is the reason you are yellowish green and
lean. At the right time, when you spoke excellent words amidst rich people, they were not applauded. That is the
reason you are yellowish green and lean. There is a stupid and angry person whom you love from your heart.
Though you have firmly instructed him and entreated him, you have been unsuccessful. That is the reason you are
yellowish green and lean. There is no doubt that someone urged you to undertake a task. But once the objective has
been attained, he is trying to appropriate it. That is the reason you are yellowish green and lean. There is no doubt
that your well-wishers only honour you for your own sake, ignoring the qualities that you naturally possess. Knowing this, you are yellowish green and lean. There is no doubt that you are ashamed. Consequently, you are unable
to divulge your intentions and desires. Therefore, you are lax in pursuing what you want. That is the reason you are
yellowish green and lean. In this world, there are many kinds of men, with diverse intelligence and inclinations.
You wish to persuade them with your own qualities, but are unable. That is the reason you are yellowish green and
lean. You are without learning. You are timid. You possess limited riches. You seek to obtain fame on the basis of
learning, valour and donations. There is no doubt that this is the reason why you are yellowish green and lean.
There is a fruit that you have desired for a long time, but have not been able to get. What you obtained was stolen
by others. That is the reason you are yellowish green and lean. There is no doubt that you are unable to see any
taints in yourself or anything wrong in what you have done. You are abused without reason. That is the reason you
are yellowish green and lean. Your well-wishers are miserable and afflicted. They lack riches and qualities and you
wish to free them from their destitution. That is the reason you are yellowish green and lean. You see virtuous people in the householder mode and wicked people roaming around in the forest. Those who are emancipated have become attached to houses. That is the reason you are yellowish green and lean. The words you speak are full of
dharma and artha and are appropriate to the time and the place. But they are not accepted. There is no doubt this is
the reason why you are yellowish green and lean. You are learned. However, wishing to remain alive, you have accepted riches from a unaccomplished donor. There is no doubt that you are yellowish green and lean because you
accepted that. It is certain that when you are engaged in hunting, you can see wickedness flourish and the good suffer. That is the reason you are yellowish green and lean. You wish to do what is agreeable towards well-wishers
who are in conflict and act against each other. That is the reason you are yellowish green and lean. There are
learned and wise people who are unable to control their senses. I think that you reflect about their indulging in perverse deeds. That is the reason you are yellowish green and lean.' Thus honoured, the rakshasa honoured the brahmana back in return. He made him a friend, gave him riches and released him."'


Yudhishthira said, "O grandfather! O immensely wise one! O one who is accomplished in all the sacred texts!
You are the one who is famous in our lineage. There are many kinds of extensive sacred texts. They are about
the truth of dharma and artha and about how happiness can be brought. O destroyer of enemies! I wish to hear
about the wonderful worlds that can be obtained. A time has arrived when kin and friends are extremely difficult to
find. O bull among the Bharata lineage! With your exception, there is no one else who can instruct us. O unblemished one! O king! If you wish to show me and my brothers a favour, you should answer a question that I am asking you. This Narayana is handsome and is revered by all the kings. But he shows you a great deal of honour,
serves you and indulges you. In his presence and before all these kings, and for doing what is agreeable to my
brothers, you should speak to me about the nature of this affection."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Hearing his respectful words, Bhishma, Bhagirathi's son, was filled with affection and
spoke these words.

'Bhishma continued, "I will tell you about an extremely enchanting account. O king! It is about the power this
Vishnu showed in ancient times and I heard about it. Also hear from me about the power of the one who has a bull
as his sign. Hear about the doubts of Rudrani and the couple[Shiva and Parvati.]. Krishna, with dharma in his soul, observed a vow
for twelve years. When he had initiated himself, Narada and Parvata went there to see him. Krishna Dvaipayana,
Dhoumya, supreme among those who meditate, Devala, Kashyapa and Hastikashyapa were also there. There were
other virtuous and self-restrained rishis who had initiated themselves. Those stores of austerities were like the gods
and they were followed by all their disciples. Devaki's son was delighted. Taking them to be the equals of the
gods, he worshipped them with all the honours that were due to guests, befitting their lineages. Happily, the maharshis sat down on seats that were green and gold, new and made out of the feathers of peacocks. While the stores
of austerities resided there, there were pleasant conversations on topics connected with dharma, and about rajarshis
and gods. At that time, because of the vow that was being observed, Narayana's energy arose from the kindling. In
the form of a fire, it emerged from the mouth of Krishna, the performer of wonderful deeds. That fire started to
burn the mountain, with its trees, creepers and bushes, with the large numbers of birds, animals, predatory beasts
and reptiles. Many kinds of animals lost their senses and began to utter cries of lamentation. The summit of the
mountain was mangled and assumed a blazing appearance. The mighty and raging fire burnt down everything else.
It then approached Vishnu and touched his feet, like a disciple. Seeing that the forest had been burnt down, Vishnu,
the afflicter of enemies, cast his benign eye towards it and brought it back to its natural state. The mountain again
became full of blossoming trees and creepers. There were large numbers of birds and predatory beasts and reptiles.
On witnessing this extraordinary sight, the large numbers of sages began to think. They were astounded and their
body hair stood up. They showed signs of fear. Narayana, supreme among eloquent ones, saw that the rishis were
astounded. In gentle and sweet words, he asked them a question. 'What has happened to these bulls among rishis?
You are always devoid of attachment. You have renounced and are without a sense of ownership. Why are you
overcome by this wonder? O unblemished ones! I have a doubt about the precise nature of this. O rishis! O stores
of austerities! You should speak to me and explain this.'

'"The rishis replied, 'You create the worlds and you withdraw them back again. You are winter. You are summer. You are the monsoon. You are the father and the mother of every object that exists on earth, mobile and immobile. You are the lord and you are the source of creation. O Madhusudana! This itself is wonderful and praiseworthy. O benign one! However, you should explain the fire that emerged. O afflicter of enemies! That is the reason we are suffering from fright. O Hari! You should speak to us about what we have heard and what we have
seen.'

'"Vasudeva said, 'What emerged from my mouth is Vaishnava energy. It has black trails and it is the fire of destruction at the end of a yuga. The mountain was mangled by this. O rishis! Why are you afflicted? You have conquered anger. You have conquered your senses. You are the stores of austerities and are like the gods. Nevertheless, you are distressed and are seeking assurance. I am observing a vow. I am following the vow of an ascetic.
That is the reason the fire arose from me. You should not be pained by this. I came to this auspicious mountain to
observe the vow. A son who will be my equal in valour will be created through these austerities. That is the reason
the soul in my body emerged in the form of this fire. It has gone to see the grandfather of all the worlds, the granter
of boons. O best among sages! He told me that I would have a son. This son would use half of my energy and
would be born as Vrishadhvaja[One with a bull on his banner.]. It is he who assumed the form of a fire and appeared before my feet, restored to
his nature, as if he was a peaceful disciple wishing to serve me. This is the mystery about the intelligent Padmanabha[With a lotus in his navel. Vishnu's name.]. Out of affection, I have told you this. O ones rich in austerities! You should not be scared. Without any
anxiety, you can go everywhere. You are far-sighted. You are ablaze in the vow of asceticism. You are full of jnana
and vijnana. Tell me about something supremely wonderful that you have heard of, or seen, in heaven or on earth.
I wish to taste the amrita that emerges as words from your lips. O ones who reside in hermitages! Anything that
you speak about will be like that. O ones who are pure in vision! Everything wonderful and divine that I see in
heaven or on earth is part of my own supreme nature, which no one can obstruct. There is nothing that manifests
itself as wonderful unless that wonder originates in me. But everything that is spoken by the faithful and the virtuous must be heard. They have remained on earth for a long time and are like the writing on the rocks. Now that
you have assembled, that is the reason I wish to hear something from the mouths of the virtuous. You continuously
speak about topics that illuminate the intelligence of men.'"

'Bhishma continued, "At this, all those numerous sages were comforted and approached Krishna. With eyes that
were like lotus petals, they looked at Janardana. Some of them glorified him. Others worshipped him. Those eloquent ones used hymns from the Rig Veda to chant Madhusudana's praises. All the sages appointed Narada, who
could see the words and who was eloquent with words, to speak on their behalf. They said, 'O lord! There was an
extraordinary and unthinkable event on Mount Himalaya. This was experienced by a large number of sages who
had gone on a visit to the tirthas.' He was urged by those large numbers of sages. As instructed, for everyone's
welfare, he told Hrishikesha everything. The illustrious sage and rishi, devarshi Narada, spoke about the auspicious
incident that had occurred in earlier times."'


