'Vasudeva said, "O best of the Bharata lineage! Then I grasped my beautiful bow and with my arrows, began to
slice off the heads of the enemies of the gods who were on Soubha. From Sharnga, I unleashed excellently prepared arrows at King Shalva. They had the forms of virulent serpents, were infinitely energetic and were capable of
rising to great heights. O extender of the Kuru lineage! At that time, I could no longer see Soubha. It had disappeared because of the maya and I was surprised. O great king! The masses of danavas had deformed faces and dishevelled hair. They let out a great roar as I stood there. In that great battle, with the intention of destroying them, I
affixed a weapon that could only kill by sound[There was no need to see the object, which was invisible.] and the uproar ceased. All those danavas who had raised the uproar were killed by my arrows, which blazed like the sun and which could strike only by sound. O great king!
When the noise died down in one place, it arose again in another. I then shot my arrows at the other place where
the noise arose. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In this way, the asuras raised an uproar from all the ten directions, including the side and above, but I killed them.

'"O valiant one! Soubha was capable of going anywhere at will. Having gone to Pragjyotisha[Pragjyotisha is far to the east and Shalva has no association with Pragjyotisha. However, Pragjyotisha was
associated with asuras. Or perhaps the idea is that Soubha travelled to the east, not necessarily all the way to
Pragjyotisha.], it suddenly
reappeared, confounding my eyes. Then a danava in the form of a monkey, a destroyer of the world, suddenly covered me with a great shower of rocks. O Indra among kings! He repeatedly tried to kill me with this shower of
mountains. Covered with those mountains, I looked like an anthill. O king! Covered with all those mountains, I became completely invisible, with my horses, my charioteer and my flag. At that, the heroes from the Vrishni lineage
who were part of my troops became frightened and suddenly fled in all the directions. O lord of the earth! On seeing me in that state, when I became invisible, loud wails of lamentation were heard everywhere, in heaven, on the
earth and in the sky. O king! My well-wishers were miserable in their minds and cried and wept, immersed in grief
and sorrow. O brave one! O one without decay! My enemies were delighted. My friends were miserable. Later, after I had triumphed, this is what I heard. Then I took up my beloved vajra weapon. It was capable of destroying all
rocks and using it, I shattered all the mountains. O great king! My horses had been oppressed by that burden of
rocks and stood there trembling, weak in breath and effort. On seeing me appear like a sun in the sky after the net
of clouds had dispersed, all my well-wishers repeatedly raised cheers.

'"O king! My charioteer bowed to me and with hands joined in salutation, said, 'O Varshneya! Look. Shalva, the
lord of Soubha, is there. O Krishna! Do not ignore him now and take care about the task. O mighty-armed Kesha-
va! Forget all gentleness and friendship towards Shalva. Kill Shalva. Do not allow him to live. O valiant one! O
slayer of enemies! An enemy should be killed with all one's valour and even a weak enemy should not be disregarded by those who are strong, even if he is at one's feet, not to speak of one who is standing in battle. O tiger
among men! O lord! Use all your efforts to kill him. O best among those of the Vrishni lineage! Do not delay any
more. This one cannot be killed through gentleless. O brave one! Nor in my view can he be your friend, since he
fought with you and oppressed Dvaraka.' O Kounteya! On hearing these words of my charioteer and knowing
them to be true, I once again set my mind on the battle, with the intention of killing King Shalva and destroying
Soubha.

'"O brave one! I asked Daruka to hold steady for an instant. I then affixed my beloved agneya weapon to my
bow. It was irresistible and divine. It could not be cut and it was extremely energetic. It had great radiance and was
capable of destroying everything in battle-yakshas, rakshasas, danavas and perverse kings. This great one could
reduce all of them to ashes. My chakra is as sharp as a razor. It is unblemished and is like time, or Yama himself. I
invoked mantras over this unmatched destroyer of enemies[There is a sudden jump and lack in consistency and continuity over whether Krishna used the agneya
weapon or the chakra. The agneya weapon is left abruptly.]. I asked it to destroy, with its own valour, Soubha
and whatever enemies of mine were inside it. Having uttered these words, I angrily flung it, with the valour of my
arms. It arose into the sky in the form of Sudarshana[Sudarshana is the name of Krishna's chakra.] and descended, like a second sun when the destruction of
an era is near. It approached the city of Soubha, which had now lost its splendour. It sliced through the middle, just
as a saw cuts through a piece of wood. Cut into two by the force of Sudarshana, Soubha fell down, like Tripura
through Maheshvara's arrow[Maheshvara is Shiva. Shiva destroyed Tripura, which was inhabited by demons.]. When Soubha fell down, the chakra returned to my hand. I took it up once more
and hurled it, saying, 'Go to Shalva.' Shalva was about to hurl a giant club in that great battle. The chakra suddenly blazed up with its energy and cut him into two. When that brave one was killed, the danavas were frightened
and lost their senses. Chased by my arrows, they lamented and fled towards the sky. I then took my chariot close to
Soubha. I blew on my conch shell and brought great delight into the hearts of my well-wishers. On seeing that the
city, as high as Mount Meru, had been destroyed, with all its palaces and towers, and was in flames, the women
fled. Thus it was that I killed Shalva in war and destroyed Soubha. Then I again returned to Anarta and delighted
my well-wishers. O king! It was because of this that I could not go to Nagasahrya[Hastinapura, the city of the elephant.]. O destroyer of enemy warriors! Had I been there, Suyodhana would not have been alive."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having thus spoken to Kourava[Yudhishthira.], Madhusudana, the mighty-armed Supreme Being,
took his leave from the intelligent Pandavas and got ready to depart. The mighty-armed one paid his respects to
Dharmaraja Yudhishthira[Yudhishthira was his senior in age.]. The king and the mighty-armed Bhima inhaled the fragrance of his head[The king is Yudhishthira. This is a sign of affection shown towards someone younger. Both Yudhishthira
and Bhima were senior to Krishna in age.]. He
asked Subhadra and Abhimanyu to ascend his golden chariot[Subhadra and Abhimanyu left with him. Subhadra was Krishna's sister and Abhimanyu was the son of Arjuna and Subhadra.]. Having been duly shown homage by the Pandavas, Krishna then ascended the chariot. Having comforted Yudhishthira, Krishna left for Dvaraka on a chariot
that had the radiance of the sun and to which, Sainya and Sugriva had been yoked. When Dasharha[Name for the Yadavas in general. In this case, Krishna.] had left,
Dhrishtadyumna, the son of Prishata[Prishata is Drupada's name.], took Droupadi's sons with him and left for his own city. After having met
the Pandavas, Dhrishtaketu, the king of Chedi, took his sister with him and left for the beautiful city of
Shuktimati[Shuktimati was the capital of Chedi. Dhrishtaketu's sister Karenumati was married to Nakula.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The Kekayas also took their leave from the infinitely energetic Kounteya. Having paid their respects to all the Pandavas, they departed. Then the brahmanas and the
vaishyas who lived there were also repeatedly urged to go, but they refused to abandon the Pandavas. O Indra
among kings! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Those great-souled ones remained in Kamyaka and the crowd
that surrounded them was large and extraordinary. Honouring the great-souled brahmanas, in due course of time,
Yudhishthira instructed his servants to yoke the chariots.'


Vaishampayana said, 'When the lord of the Dasharhas[Krishna is the lord of the Dasharhas.] had left, Yudhishthira, Bhimasena, Arjuna, the twins,
Krishna[Droupadi.] and the priest[Dhoumya.] ascended chariots that were extremely expensive and yoked to supreme horses. In
forms that resembled that of Bhutapati[Literally, Bhutapati means the lord (pati) of beings (bhuta) and is one of Shiva's names. The Pandavas
looked like Shiva because they were dressed in skins and had matted hair.], the warriors left for the forest[They were already in the forest. So they left for another forest.]. They gave golden coins, garments
and cattle to those who were knowledgeable in studies, letters and mantras[That is, the brahmanas.]. They were led by twenty armed
servants with bows, shields, yellow arrows[This is odd. The text says pitan, which means yellow. Arrows can be yellow if they are made of brass, but
that seems unlikely. Perhaps the text should have said diptan, meaning blazing or radiant. That fits better.], bowstrings, implements and arrows. All of them followed behind.
Indrasena[Yudhishthira's charioteer.] swiftly collected the garments of the princess[Droupadi.], her nurses, maidservants and ornaments into another chariot and followed them.

'Then the citizens went to the best of the Kurus[Yudhishthira.]. With dejected minds, they circumambulated him. All the
brahmanas happily pronounced their blessings, as did all the chiefs of Kurujangala. With his brothers, Dharmaraja
happily greeted them back. The great-souled lord stood there for some time, to see the great numbers of people in
Kurujangala. The great-souled bull among the Kurus felt for them the way a father feels for his sons. For the chief
of the Bharata lineage, they too felt the way sons feel for their father. The people approached in large numbers and
stood around the chief of the Kurus. They lamented, "Oh, Protector!", "Oh, dharma!" and the like, and tears rolled
down all their shamed faces. "You are the supreme lord of the Kurus and we are subjects[The citizens are saying this.]. O Dharmaraja!
Where are you going, leaving all the inhabitants of the cities and the countryside, like a father deserting his sons?
Shame on the cruel-minded son of Dhritarashtra! Shame on the evil-minded Soubala and Karna! Those evil ones
wish for destruction. O Indra among men! You are always devoted to dharma, but they harm you. O great-souled
one! You have yourself established a great and unmatched city that is as radiant as a city of the gods.
Shatakratuprastha is unfailing in deeds. O Dharmaraja! You are ours and where are you going, leaving us and that?
Great-souled Maya built an unmatched sabha for you that was like the sabhas of the gods. It was like divine maya
and had divine mysteries. O Dharmaraja! You are ours and where are you going, leaving us and that?" Then energetic Bibhatsu, learned in dharma, kama and artha, spoke in a loud voice to the gathering, "The king will make his
home in the forest so as to rob the enemies of all their fame. With the brahmanas at the forefront, separately and
collectively, let all the ascetics approach us and bless us. Let those who are learned in dharma and artha exactly tell
us how we will attain our supreme success." O king! When these words were uttered by Arjuna, all the brahmanas
and all the varnas were delighted and rejoiced. They circumambulated the one who was supreme among all those
who uphold dharma[This is a reference to Arjuna.]. They said farewell to Partha[Yudhishthira.], Vrikodara, Dhananjaya, Yajnaseni[Droupadi.] and the twins.
Then they took Yudhishthira's permission and sorrowfully returned to the kingdom, to wherever they lived.'


