Vasudeva said, "O Yudhishthira! O mighty-armed one! V Listen to me. I will recite the names of the immensely fortunate and great-souled Rudra, who has many forms. He is spoken of as Agni, Mahadeva, Sthanu, Maheshvara, Ekaksha[The single-eyed one.], Tryambaka[The three-eyed one.],Vishvarupa and Shiva. Brahmanas who know about the Vedas say that the
god has two forms-one is terrible and the other is auspicious. Those forms are again divided into many others.
The form that is fierce and terrible is equated with fire, lightning and the sun. The form that is auspicious and benign is equated with dharma, water and the moon. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Half of his body is also said
to be the fire, while the half that is auspicious is said to follow brahmacharya. The fiercest of his forms is the one
which destroys the universe and is said to be the great lord or Maheshvara. He burns down. He is sharp. He  is
fierce. He is powerful. Since he subsists on flesh, blood and marrow, he is said to be Rudra[Rudra means the terrible one.]. He is great among
all the gods and his dominion is vast. Since he saves the great universe, he is known to be Mahadeva[The great god.]. In everything that he does, in every way, he seeks to ensure what is auspicious for men. That is the reason he is known as
Shiva[Shiva means auspicious.]. Remaining established above, he burns everything down. He is established in one place for the origins of
life. He is always immobile in the form of a lingam. That is the reason he is spoken of as Sthanu[Sthanu means immobile, firm, stationary.]. He has many
different kinds of forms. He is the past, the present and the future. He is immobile and mobile. That is the reason
be is said to be Bahurupa[One with many forms.]. He is said be Dhurjati because he has the form of smoke[This is forced. Smoke is dhumra, Dhurjati means someone who has matted hair.]. The Vishvadevas are in
him. That is the reason he is said to be Vishvarupa. He possesses one thousand eyes. He possesses ten thousand
eyes. He has eyes in every direction. His energy and power flow through his eyes. He destroys through his eyes.
He nourishes creatures and also sports with them in every way. Since he is their lord, he is said to be Pashupati[The lord of creatures.].
He is established in the form of a lingam and always practises brahmacharya. Since he ensures greatness in the
worlds, he is known as Maheshvara. A great-souled person should worship his image and his lingam. A  person
who worships the lingam always obtains great prosperity. The rishis, the gods, the gandharvas and the apsaras always worship the lingam, which is stationed, facing upwards. When worshipped, the person who provides delight
is Maheshvara. He is affectionate towards his devotees. Cheerful in his soul, he grants happiness to his devotees.
This god always resides in cremation grounds. People who worship him there obtain the regions meant for heroes.
In the bodies of creatures which face hardship, he exists in the form of death. In the form of the breath of life in the
bodies of embodied beings, he exists as prana and apana. He has many terrible and blazing forms. These are also
worshipped in the worlds and are known to learned brahmanas and the gods. He has many other names and meanings that are spoken about in the Vedas, based on his greatness, powers and deeds. Learned brahmanas recite the
supreme shatarudriya from the Vedas. The great-souled Vyasa articulated it thereafter. He is said to be the great
one who has provided all the worlds and the universe. That is the reason brahmanas and other rishis speak of him
as the first being. He is first among the gods and Agni was generated from his mouth. In creating and sustaining
many kinds of life, he faces various difficulties. He is the one who grants refuge. He saves the pure-souled ones
who seek refuge and grants long lives, freedom from disease, prosperity, riches and all the objects of desire. He
confers these on men and takes them away again. He is said to be the prosperity of Shakra and the other gods. In
addition, he is always all the good and the evil that exists in the three worlds. He is said to be Ishvara because he is
prosperity and all the objects of desire. Since he is the great lord of the worlds, he is known as Maheshvara. He
pervades the universe in many kinds of different forms. This god's mouth exists in the ocean in the form of the
mare-headed fire[The subterranean fire.]."'

Vaishampayana said,  'When  Krishna,  Devaki's  son,  spoke  these  words,  Yudhishthira  again  asked  Bhishma,
Shantanu's son. "O immensely intelligent one! O supreme among those who uphold all kinds of dharma! In determining the reason behind anything, should one depend on direct perception or the sacred texts?"

'Bhishma replied, "It is my view that there should be no scope for doubt on this. O wise one! Listen to me. I will
answer your question properly. O king! It is easy to have a doubt. It is extremely difficult to arrive at a determination. There are innumerable instances where there are doubts about what one has seen and what one has heard[What one has seen is being used for direct perception, what one has heard is being used for the sacred texts.].
There are those who are proud of their wisdom and are skilled in debating. They say that direct perception can be
the only proof. They hold that everything that cannot be perceived is non-existent and cannot be true. However,
even if they pride themselves on their learning, people who speak in this way are nothing but foolish. Or perhaps
you may doubt how a single entity[The brahman.] can be the cause. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! This is only capable
of being comprehended by those who have fixed their senses and tried for a long period of time, thinking of this
alone in the journey of life. No one other than such a person is capable of comprehending this single cause. This is
the ultimate cause. When one reaches it, one has obtained supreme knowledge. This[The brahman.] is extensive radiance that
illuminates  all  the  worlds.  O  king! When  one  reaches  that  truth,  one  reaches  the  ultimate  cause.  It  cannot  be
grasped or bound down through words and those methods must be avoided."

'Yudhishthira said, "O grandfather! Tell me about direct perception, what other people have proclaimed as leading to success, the ancient sacred texts that exist in the world and the many kinds of virtuous conduct."

'Bhishma replied, "When dharma suffers through the strength of evil-souled people, it can be re-established for
a short period of time by making efforts. Dharma, like grass, can cover the mouth of a well that is full of adharma.
O Yudhishthira! However, listen to what happens. Those who are wicked in conduct and have discarded the sacred
texts, those who are sinful and hate dharma, attack this good conduct and doubts arise because of what they say.
Those who are satisfied at this state of affairs must approach virtuous people who possess the knowledge of the sacred texts and ask them. That will lead to satisfaction. Turn your back on desire and also on greed and confusion,
which are followers. Approach learned people and ask them about dharma. Their conduct and tasks of sacrifices
and studying never suffer. These three kinds of behaviour[Conduct, sacrifices, studying.] are also the foundations of dharma."

'Yudhishthira asked, "My intelligence is again confused by a doubt. It is as if I cannot find a path to cross over
and cannot even see the distant shore. If the Vedas, direct perception[Acts and sacrificies that can be seen.] and conduct are the three yardsticks, they
are seen to be different. If dharma is one, how can it be of three different types?"

'Bhishma replied "Dharma is seen to sometimes suffer because of the strength of evil-souled ones. O king! That
is the reason you reflect and think that dharma is of three different types. Know that it flows as one, but can manifest itself in three different ways. That is the reason one's intelligence thinks of it in three different forms. Truthfully follow the three different paths that have been laid down. You should never question dharma or hear about it being reviled. O best among the Bharata lineage! There should be no doubt about this. Without any hesitation, follow
what I have said, like a person who is blind and dumb. O Ajatashatru[Yudhishthira's name.]! Non-violence, truth, lack of anger and
generosity as the fourth-following these is eternal dharma. Follow your fathers and grandfathers in behaviour towards brahmanas. O mighty-armed one! These are the methods to reach the region of heaven. An ignorant man
who is concerned with proof and lack of proof does not deserve to get any proof. He only generates debate. Respect brahmanas greatly, serve them and treat them well. Listen to me. All these worlds are established on them."'


