'"The prince said, 'O brahmana! I do not wish to live through fraud and deceit. I do not desire great riches, if they
are not obtained through the use of dharma. O illustrious one! I said at the beginning that these should be avoided.
I do not want anyone to doubt me and I desire my complete welfare. In this world, I desire to live through a dharma that does not cause injury. I am incapable of doing all this. It is not appropriate for me.'

'"The sage replied, 'O kshatriya! What you have spoken is deserving of you. O one who is wonderful in outlook! You are naturally intelligent. I will endeavour so that both of you attain your objectives. I will bring about an
eternal alliance between the two of you. You have been born in a lineage like his. You are non-violent and extremely learned. You are accomplished in ensuring the welfare of a kingdom. Who will not make someone like you
an adviser? You have confronted a supreme hardship and have abandoned your kingdom. O kshatriya! However,
you wish to live through non-violent conduct. O son[The word used is tata.]! The king of Videha is devoted to the truth and will come
to my house. There is no doubt that he will do what I ask him to.'"

'Bhishma said, "The sage summoned the king of Videha and spoke these words to him. 'This one has been born
in a lineage of kings and I know what is inside his mind. His soul is as pure as a mirror or the autumn moon. I have
tested him in every way and do not see anything crooked in him. You should have an alliance with him. Trust him
the way you trust me. O slayer of enemies! Without an adviser, you are incapable of ruling the kingdom. The adviser must be brave and full of intelligence. Both of these[Lack of valour and lack of intelligence.] cause fear for a king. Look towards the ruling of the
kingdom. In this world, a person with dharma in his soul is rare and there is no one like him. This prince is accomplished in his soul. He is established in the path of the virtuous. With dharma at the forefront, you will do well to
have him on your side. He will serve you and seize large numbers of the enemy. If he wishes to fight back against
you, he will resort to his own dharma of being a kshatriya and try to win back the kingdom of his father and grandfathers in a battle. If you are engaged in your vow of conquest, you will fight back against him. O lord of Videha!
However, if you do not fight, he will follow my instructions and remain under your control. Glance towards dharma and cast aside the inappropriate adharma. For the sake of desire or hatred, you should not abandon your own
dharma. O son[The word used is tata.]! Victory is not permanent. Nor is defeat permanent. One must give food and objects of pleasure
to an enemy who has been defeated. Think yourself to be like him, confronting victory and defeat. O son! Those
who seek to exterminate all danger end up exterminating their own selves.' He was thus addressed by that bull
among brahmanas and replied in the following words, after having honoured and treated him well and taking the
permission of the one who deserved worship. 'O immensely wise one! It is exactly as you have said. O immensely
learned one! It is exactly as you have said. As you have said, people desire what brings the most benefit. What you
have said is the best for both of us. I will follow your words and act exactly in accordance with them. This is
supremely beneficial. I do not need to reflect about this.' The king of Videha summoned the one from Kosala and
spoke these words to him. 'I have defeated you through the use of dharma, policy and strength. O supreme among
kings! However, you have conquered me through your qualities. Though you have been defeated, do not have a
low opinion of yourself. I do not disrespect your intelligence. I do not disrespect your manliness. Though you have
been defeated, do not think of yourself as having been defeated. O king! Come to my house. You will be honoured
and then go to your own house.' Having honoured the brahmana, the two of them trustingly went to the house. The
lord of Videha made the lord of Kosala enter his house and honoured him with water for washing the feet, a gift
and a mixture of honey[Respectively, padya, arghya and madhuparka, offered to a guest.]. He was honoured back in return and gave him his own daughter, with many kinds of
gems. This is the supreme dharma for kings. Both victory and defeat must be endured."'


'Yudhishthira said, "O scorcher of enemies! You have described the dharma, the conduct, the subsistence, the
means of subsistence and the fruits for brahmanas, kshatriyas, vaishyas and shudras, the conduct of kings, the treasury, the means of making the treasury great, the means of increasing the qualities of the advisers, the prosperity of
ordinary people, the six qualities[Of the kingdom.] one must think of, the policy concerning the army, the means of knowing the
wicked, the characteristics of the virtuous, the signs of those who are equal, inferior and superior, the means to satisfy neutral ones so that prosperity can be enhanced, the recommended means for sustaining those who have limited resources and about the method indicated in the texts against countries that are weaker. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! You have also described the conduct of someone who desires victory. O supreme among intelligent ones! I now wish to hear about the conduct towards ganas[The word gana has multiple meanings. In this context, it clearly means a
small assembly or body. Beyond this, the context makes it difficult to pin
it down. It could either mean an aristocracy around the king, or it could
mean smaller countries that were like federations, ruled by an aristocracy,
without a king.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! How do
ganas prosper? How can they be prevented from breaking up? How do they conquer the enemy and obtain well-
wishers? What is the cause of dissension in ganas and how do they confront destruction? It is my view that their
sorrow results from the fact that there are many and it is difficult to keep counsel a secret. O scorcher of enemies! I
wish to hear everything about this in entirety. O king! Tell me everything about how they can be prevented from
breaking up."

'Bhishma replied, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! O lord of men! Greed and intolerance ignite enmity within ganas, families and royal lineages. Avarice begins to consume and intolerance comes after that. These two unite
and reinforce each other, until everything is destroyed. They[Different components of the gana.] use spies, secret counsel, force, seizure, conciliation, gifts and dissension and other techniques of decay, destruction and fear to weaken each other. Large numbers
of ganas that work together are broken apart through gifts. Having been broken, all of them are distressed in their
minds and, because of their fear, are quickly subjugated. The ganas are destroyed because of their divisions and,
having been shattered, have to bow down before the enemy. Therefore, the ganas must always try to work together.
If they are united, their strength and manliness increases and so does their prosperity. When they act together in
this way, outsiders seek their friendship. Those who are learned and aged praise a situation where they serve each
other. Having not retreated from that object of unity, they obtain happiness in every way. The best of the ganas follow dharma in conduct, establish themselves in their sacred texts and, following these, become prosperous. They
are always engaged in good policy and do not hesitate to punish sons and brothers. The best among ganas prosper
because they accept those who are humble. O mighty-armed one! In every way, these ganas are always engaged in
ensuring prosperity through spies, secret plans, following ordinances and enhancing the treasury. O king! The
ganas are prosperous when they always revere the wise, the brave, those who are great archers and those who base
themselves on manliness in all their tasks. When ganas face difficulties and are confused-those who are wealthy,
those who are brave, those who are knowledgeable about weapons and those who are accomplished in the sacred
texts save them. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! Anger, dissension, fear, punishment, affliction, imprisonment and death immediately lead to ganas becoming subjugated. O king! That is the reason the foremost members
of the gana must be given importance. The progress of other people depends mostly on them. O afflicter of enemies! Secret counsels and information about spies must be restricted to the foremost members. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! The entire gana should not get to hear about secret plans. The foremost members of the gana must
work together for the welfare of the gana. When members of a gana act separately, have differing views or are divided in some other way, its prosperity suffers and it faces a disaster. When they have broken away from each other and base themselves on individual strengths alone, it is the task of the learned and foremost ones to swiftly restrain them. O king! If there is a conflict within the family and the aged ones in the family ignore this, this ensures
that the gotras[Clans.] break away from the gana. One must protect against internal dangers. External dangers are easier
to handle. If an internal danger is generated, it severs the roots. If there are sentiments of sudden rage, avarice and
natural confusion, and they do not speak to each other, this is a sign of defeat. They[The members of the gana.] are similar in birth. All of
them are equally noble in lineage. But they are not equal in valour, intelligence, beauty and prosperity. If ganas
suffer from the confusion of being disunited, they bow down before the enemy. That is the reason it is said that
unity is the great refuge of ganas."'


