'Dhritarashtra said, "My soldiers, and those of the others, were arranged in battle formations. Who was the first to
strike, the Kurus or the Pandavas?"

'Sanjaya said, "O king! Your son Duryodhana advanced with his brothers[In the course of the war accounts, several of Duryodhana's brothers are mentioned by name. There is a listing of
Duryodhana's brothers in Section 1 (Volume 1). However, the names of some of the minor brothers in the war
accounts are at odds with that listing in Section 1 (Volume 1).], placing Bhishma at the forefront of
the army. Delighted in their minds and wishing to fight with Bhishma, so did the Pandavas, with Bhimasena at the
forefront. There were clamorous sounds in both the armies, with krakachas, trumpets made out of the horns of
cows, drums, kettledrums, tambourines and the roars of horses and elephants. O king! With a tumultuous sound,
they rushed at us and we at them. In that great encounter and confrontation, the giant armies of the Pandavas and
the sons of Dhritarashtra trembled, like a forest stirred by the wind. The loud roar of those masses of kings, elephants, horses and chariots, dashing against each other at that inauspicious hour, was like that of the ocean agitated
by a storm. When that tumultuous sound arose and made the body hair stand up, the mighty-armed Bhimasena
roared like a bull. Bhimasena's roars transcended the sounds of conch shells and drums, the trumpeting of elephants and the lion-like roars of the soldiers. Bhimasena's loud roar surpassed the neighing of thousands of horses
in both the armies. On hearing the roar of that brave one, which was like the sound of the clouds or the sound of
Shakra's thunder, your soldiers were frightened. All the animals excreted urine and dung, like animals do at the
sound of a lion. He showed himself in a terrible form and roared like a giant cloud. He terrified the soldiers of your
sons and attacked them. O king! When that mighty archer attacked them, he was surrounded by all the brothers
who are your sons-Duryodhana, Durmukha, Duhsaha, Shala, atiratha Duhshasana, Durmarshana, Vivimshati,
Chitrasena, maharatha Vikarna, Purumitra, Jaya, Bhoja and Somadatta's valorous son[Bhurishrava.]. They showered him with
arrows, like clouds enveloping the sun. They brandished their giant bows, which were like clouds tinged with
lightning. They unleashed sharp arrows that were like virulent serpents.

'"At that, Droupadi's sons, Subhadra's maharatha son[Abhimanyu.], Nakula, Sahadeva and Parshata Dhrishtadyumna repulsed the sons of Dhritarashtra and pierced them with sharp arrows. They shattered them, like summits with the
great force of thunder. In that first encounter, with the terrible sound of bows twanging against arm-guards, neither
your side, nor that of the other, retreated. O bull among the Bharata lineage! I witnessed the dexterity of Drona's
disciples. O king! They shot many arrows, which always found their mark. The roar of the bows did not cease,
even for an instant. The flaming arrows were like stars in the sky. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the other kings were spectators, witnessing the spectacular encounter between relatives. O king! Remembering the injuries they had suffered from each other, the maharathas were enraged and challenged and strove. With elephants,
horses and chariots, the armies of the Kurus and the Pandavas were extremely beautiful on the field of battle, like
figures on a painting. Then all the kings grasped their bows. Instructed by your son, they advanced with their
armies. Thousands of kings were instructed by Yudhishthira. They roared and attacked your son's army. The encounter between the soldiers of both the armies was terrible. Because of the dust raised by the soldiers, the sun disappeared. They advanced. They retreated. They advanced again. One could not detect any difference between ours
and those of the enemy. An extremely fearful and tumultuous battle raged. But your father[Bhishma.] surpassed all the other soldiers."'


'Sanjaya said, "O lord of the earth! In the forenoon, there was an extremely fearful and terrible battle that destroyed the bodies of kings. Desiring victory in that battle, the Kurus and the Pandavas roared like lions, resounding in the sky and earth. There was a roar, the slapping of palms and the sound of conch shells. The brave ones
roared at each other, like lions. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The bows twanged against arm-guards. There
were the footfalls of the infantry and the loud roars of horses. Staffs and goads[For elephants, ankusha.] descended. Weapons resounded.
As the elephants dashed towards each other, bells jingled. There was a tremendous roar that made the body hair
stand up. There was the roar of chariots, like the sound of the clouds. Cruel in their intentions and prepared to give
up their lives, all of them[The Kurus.] raised their standards and advanced against the Pandavas.

'"O king! Grasping a terrible bow, like the staff of death, Shantanu's son himself advanced against Dhananjaya.
Arjuna grasped the bow Gandiva, famous in the world. In the forefront of that battle, the spirited one advanced
against Ganga's son. Those two tigers of the Kuru lineage wished to kill each other. Ganga's son pierced Partha in
that battle, but he did not waver. O king! Pandava did the same to Bhishma, but could not make him waver. The
great archer Satyaki dashed against Kritavarma. There was a tumultuous encounter between the two and it made
the body hair stand up. Roaring and using sharp arrows, Satyaki pierced Kritavarma and Kritavarma Satyaki. They
oppressed each other. With arrows in their bodies, those immensely strong ones were as resplendent as flowering
kimshukas[Tree with red blossoms.], blossoming in the spring. The great archer Abhimanyu fought with Brihadbala[Brihadbala was the king of Kosala.]. O lord of the
earth! In that battle, the king of Kosala sliced down the standard of Subhadra's son and brought down his charioteer. When his charioteer was brought down from the chariot, Subhadra's son was enraged. O great king! He
pierced Brihadbala with nine arrows. With a sharp and yellow arrow, he sliced off his standard. With another he
brought down his parshni[Parshni has different meanings. When four horses are attached to a chariot, it means one of the outside horses. It
can also mean one of the two charioteers who drive the outside horses, as opposed to the main charioteer
(sarathi), or someone who guards the axles. The context suggests Abhimanyu brought down a person, not a
horse.]. With yet another, he brought down his charioteer. O king! They were angry and continued to weaken each other with sharp arrows. In that battle, Bhimasena fought with your proud maharatha son
Duryodhana, who had been the cause of the enmity. Both of those tigers among men were immensely strong and
were foremost among the Kurus. In that field of battle, they enveloped each other with showers of arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing the wonderful ways those great-souled and skilled ones fought, all the
beings were astounded. Duhshasana advanced against maharatha Nakula and pierced his innermost organs with
many sharp arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Smiling, Madri's son used sharp arrows to slice down
his[Duhshasana's.] standard, bow and arrows. He then pierced him with twenty-five small arrows. Your son is unassailable. In
that great battle, he pierced and brought down Nakula's horses, arrows and standard. Durmukha attacked the immensely strong Sahadeva. He fought him in that great battle and pierced him with a shower of arrows. In that great
battle, the brave Sahadeva used an extremely sharp arrow to bring down Durmukha's charioteer. Both of them
were invincible in battle and attacked each other. Desiring to repulse each other, they used terrible arrows to create
fright. King Yudhishthira himself advanced against the king of Madra. The king of Madra sliced the revered
one's[Yudhishthira.] bow into two. When his bow was sliced, Yudhishthira, Kunti's son, took up another bow that was stronger
and more forceful. Angered, the king told the lord of Madra, 'Wait' and covered him with straight-tufted arrows.

'"O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that battle, Dhrishtadyumna attacked Drona with a firm bow that was
capable of destroying enemies. Thus angered, Drona sliced it into three and unleashed an extremely terrible arrow
that was like the staff of death. Thus despatched in that battle, it penetrated his[Dhrishtadyumna's body.] body. Taking up another bow and
fourteen arrows, Drupada's son pierced Drona in that encounter. O great king! In that battle, the violent Shankha[Virata's eldest son.]
attacked Somadatta's son[Bhurishrava.], who was also a violent warrior. Exclaiming 'Wait', 'Wait', the brave one pierced
him[Shankha and Bhurishrava respectively.] in the right arm in the battle. Somadatta's son then pierced Shankha in the shoulder. O lord of the earth! The
bout between those two proud ones was as terrible as that between Vritra and Vasava. O lord of the earth! Enraged
in that battle, maharatha Dhrishtaketu[The king of Chedi.], immeasurable in his soul, attacked Bahlika, who was also the embodiment of anger. O king! In that battle, Bahlika roared like a lion and oppressed the intolerant Dhrishtaketu with
many arrows. The king of Chedi was angered and in that encounter, swiftly pierced Bahlika with nine arrows. It
was like one mad elephant against another. They angrily attacked each other in that encounter and roared repeatedly. They fought in great rage, like Angaraka and Budha[Angaraka is Mars and Budha is Mercury. Mars and Mercury are antagonistic planets.]. The rakshasa Ghatotkacha was terrible in deeds. He attacked Alambusha, the performer of cruel deeds, like Shakra against Bala[Ghatotkacha was Bhima and Hidimba's son and was a rakshasa. Alambusha was Rishyashringa's son and was
also a rakshasa, fighting on the Kourava side.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Ghatotkacha wounded the enraged and extremely strong rakshasa with ninety sharp arrows. In that encounter,
Alambusha pierced Bhimasena's extremely strong son in many places with straight-tufted arrows. Wounded by arrows in that battle, they looked like the immensely strong Bala and Shakra in the battle between the gods and the
asuras.

'"O king! In that battle, the powerful Shikhandi attacked Drona's son. Angered at this, Ashvatthama wounded
Shikhandi with an extremely sharp iron arrow and made him tremble. O king! At this, Shikhandi struck Drona's
son with a well-crafted, extremely sharp and extremely pointed arrow. In that bout, they struck each other with
many other kinds of arrows. O king! Virata was the general of an army and in that battle, he quickly and impetuously attacked the brave Bhagadatta. Virata was extremely angry. He showered arrows on Bhagadatta, like clouds
showering on a mountain. But in that encounter, Bhagadatta, lord of the earth, quickly enveloped Virata, like
clouds around the rising sun. Sharadvat's son, Kripa, attacked Brihadkshatra from Kekaya. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Kripa shrouded him with a shower of arrows. The angry Kekaya also showered arrows on Goutama. Having killed each other's horses and having sliced down each other's bows, both of them were bereft of their
chariots. They wrathfully advanced against each other, intending to fight with swords. The battle that they fought
was terrible in form and extremely fearful. King Drupada, the scorcher of enemies, intolerantly advanced against
Jayadratha from Sindhu, who was cheerfully waiting. The king of Sindhu pierced Drupada with three tufted arrows
and in that battle, was wounded in return. They fought a bout that was terrible in form and extremely fearful. It delighted the hearts of spectators and was like that between Angaraka and Shukra[Shukra is Venus. Mars and Venus are antagonistic planets.].

'"Your son Vikarna possessed swift horses. He advanced against the immensely strong Sutasoma[Prativindhya, Sutasoma, Shrutakarma, Shatanika and Shrutasena were Droupadi's sons, respectively born from
Yudhishthira, Bhima, Arjuna, Nakula and Sahadeva.] and a battle
started. Though Vikarna pierced Sutasoma, he could not make him waver. Nor could Sutasoma make Vikarna waver and it was wonderful. In the cause of the Pandavas, maharatha Chekitana, tiger among men, angrily advanced
against the valorous Susharma[Chekitana was the son of King Dhrishtaketu from Kekaya. Susharma was the king of Trigarta.]. O great king! In that battle, Susharma repulsed maharatha Chekitana with a great
shower of arrows. Chekitana was enraged in that great encounter and enveloped Susharma with arrows, like a great
cloud on a mountain. O Indra among kings! The powerful Shakuni attacked the powerful Prativindhya, like a crazy
elephant against another crazy one. Enraged, Yudhishthira's son pierced Soubala with sharp arrows in that battle,
like Maghavan against a danava. In that battle, Shakuni also wounded the immensely wise Prativindhya with
straight-tufted arrows. O Indra among kings! In that battle, Shrutakarma[There is an error. Since this is Sahadeva's son, this should actually read Shrutasena, not Shrutakarma.] attacked the valiant maharatha, Sudakshina from Kamboja. In that battle, Sudakshina pierced Sahadeva's maharatha son, but could not make him waver,
like Mount Mainaka. At that, Shrutakarma was enraged and oppressed the maharatha from Kamboja with many
arrows, wounding him all over his body. In that battle, the angry Iravan took great care and attacked the intolerant
Shrutayusha[Iravan was Arjuna's son, through Ulupi. Shrutayusha was a rakshasa who fought on the Kourava side.]. In the encounter, Arjuna's maharatha son killed the horses of his opponent and roared loudly, being
honoured by the soldiers. In that battle, the wrathful Shrutayusha used a supreme club to kill the horses of Phalguna's son and they continued to fight. In the battle, Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti advanced against the valiant
maharatha, Kuntibhoja, who was at the head of his army, together with his son. We witnessed the extraordinary
valour of those from Avanti there. They stationed themselves calmly, though they faced a large army. Anuvinda
hurled a club at Kuntibhoja. But Kuntibhoja swiftly repulsed him with a torrent of arrows. Kuntibhoja's son
pierced Vinda with an arrow. But he also pierced him in return and it was wonderful. O revered one! In that battle,
together with their soldiers, the five brothers from Kekaya fought with the five from Gandhara, together with their
soldiers. Your son Virabahu fought with Virata's son, Uttara, supreme among charioteers, and pierced him with
sharp arrows. Uttara also pierced the steadfast one with sharp arrows. O king! In that battle, the king of Chedi attacked Uluka[Uluka was Shakuni's son.]. Uluka pierced him with sharp and feathered arrows. O lord of the earth! The battle that they
fought was terrible in form. Unable to vanquish each other, they angrily wounded each other.

'"Thus, in that battle, there were thousands of duels between chariots, elephants, horses and infantry, on their
side and on ours. For a short instant, the field of battle looked beautiful. O king! But it soon became maddening
and nothing could be seen. In that battle, elephants were against elephants and chariots against chariots. Horses
were against horses and infantry against infantry. The battle became extremely difficult and confusing. In that battle, large numbers of warriors attacked each other. The assembled devarshis, siddhas and charanas witnessed that
terrible battle, equal to that between the gods and the asuras. O revered one! Thousands of elephants and chariots
and masses of horses and foot soldiers behaved in a contrary way[Elephants should fight with elephants, horses with horses, chariots with chariots, etc. But this was not observed.]. O tiger among men! It was repeatedly seen
that chariots, elephants, cavalry and infantry fought with each other."'


'Sanjaya said, "O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I will now tell you about the hundreds and thousands
of bouts that took place there, without showing any considerations of respect. The son did not recognize the father,
or the father the son born from his own loins. A brother did not recognize a brother there, nor a sister's son his maternal uncle. The maternal uncle did not recognize his sister's son, nor did a friend recognize his friend there. The
Pandavas and the Kurus fought as if they were possessed. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Some tigers among
men used chariots to bring down and shatter chariots, destroying their yokes. Axles of chariots clashed against
axles of chariots. Seats clashed against seats of chariots. Some united against others who were united. They all
wished to rob each other of their lives. Some chariots could not move, because they were obstructed by other chariots. Gigantic elephants had their temples shattered and fell down on other elephants. They were angry and used
their tusks to attack each other in many places. Elephants adorned with decorations[Actually, wooden structures on the elephants, howdahs.] and standards attacked the
elephants of the enemy. O great king! These were giant elephants that encountered other powerful ones. Injured by
the tusks, they were greatly distressed and roared. But these were disciplined because of their training. Urged by
pikes and goads, elephants that were in musth attacked others that were in musth. Attacked by those that were in
musth, giant elephants ran away everywhere, shrieking like cranes. There were trained elephants, with shattered
temples and mouths. These supreme elephants were wounded by swords, lances and iron arrows. Pierced in their
innards, they fell down and lost their lives. Others uttered terrible roars and ran away in different directions. The
foot soldiers who guarded the elephants were armed and possessed broad chests. They had swords, bows, unblemished battleaxes, clubs, maces, catapults[Bhindipala. Alternatively, short javelin.], lances, iron bludgeons and sharp and polished cutlasses[Nistrimsha. Rishti and nistrimsha are both swords. We have used cutlass for nistrimsha only to distinguish it
from rishti.]. O great
king! Grasping these, they could be seen to run in every direction, desirous of taking each other's lives. The resplendent cutlasses were steeped in the blood of brave men and seemed to shine brilliantly. The swords were
whirled by the arms of brave ones and made a whizzing sound. As they descended on the inner organs of enemies,
they generated a tremendous sound. They were shattered by clubs and maces and by supreme swords. They were
gored by the tusks of the tusked ones and wounded by the tusks. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In every
place, large numbers of men were oppressed and let out sounds of lamentation, like those of men who are about to
die.

'"Those who were on extremely swift horses, with tails like those of swans, attacked others on horses. They
hurled giant spears that were decorated with gold and were swift, sharp and polished. They descended like snakes.
There were some great rathas on swift horses. They sliced off the heads of other brave rathas who were on horses.
A ratha on a horse approached many who were within the shooting distance of an arrow and used straight-tufted
iron arrows to kill them. There were crazy elephants that were like mountains or clouds and were adorned with
gold. They brought down horses and crushed them with their feet. The elephants were struck on their humps and
their flanks. They were pierced by spikes and some of them roared in agony. There was terrible confusion there.
Many supreme elephants suddenly threw down horses and their riders and crushed them. Using the tips of their
tusks, elephants flung down horses and their riders. They crushed chariots and their standards and roamed around.
There were some giant male elephants, extremely energetic because of the musth strewing down their temples.
They slew horses and riders with their trunks and their feet. Some horses and chariots were flung away by the elephants. All of them were thrown away in all the directions, with a loud noise. Swift, polished and sharp arrows
were like serpents. They descended on the bodies of men and riders and pierced their iron armour. Polished
javelins were hurled by the arms of brave ones. O lord of the earth! They were terrible, like giant meteors, and descended. Blazing swords were taken out from sheaths made out of the skins of tigers and leopards. Once unsheathed, these polished swords were used to kill the enemies in battle. There were soldiers who had their sides
sliced open. Despite this, they angrily attacked with swords, shields and battleaxes. Some were pierced by javelins.
Others were cut down by battleaxes. Some were destroyed by elephants. Others were oppressed by horses. Some
were crushed by the wheels of chariots. Others were brought down by sharp arrows. O king! Thus oppressed, the
men loudly called for their relatives, their sons, fathers, brothers and kin, their maternal uncles and nephews. In
that field of battle, some others called for others[That is, other relatives.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A large number of combatants lost their weapons. Their thighs were broken and their hands and arms torn apart. Their sides were shattered. Some were still alive and could be seen to be screaming from thirst. O lord of the earth! They had only a little bit of strength left and were overcome by thirst. They had fallen down on the ground in that battle and asked for
water. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Others were weak and were covered in blood. Assembled there, they
censured themselves and your son.

'"O venerable one! But there were other brave kshatriyas. Having acted in enmity towards each other, they did
not cast away their weapons. Nor did they lament. They roared in delight towards each other. Lying there, they
could be seen to bite their teeth with their own lips. Their bows were contracted and they glanced towards each
other. There were others who suffered from wounds and had been oppressed by arrows. But even then, those extremely strong ones bore the pain silently and were firm in their hearts. There were other brave charioteers who
had lost their chariots in battle. They had been thrown down and wounded by the supreme elephants. Having been
brought down, they asked for the chariots of others. O great king! They were as beautiful as blossoming kimshuka
trees. Many terrible cries were heard in every division of the armies. It was an extremely terrible encounter that destroyed heroes. In that battle, the father killed the son and the son killed the father. The sister's son killed the maternal uncle and the maternal uncle killed the sister's son. O king! A friend killed a friend and a relative killed a
relative. Thus was the battle between the Kurus and the Pandavas. No mercy was shown in that fearful and terrible
encounter. On encountering Bhishma, the army of the Parthas trembled. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The
mighty-armed one's standard was adorned with five stars and a palm tree. It was made out of silver. O king! When
ascended on his great chariot, Bhishma looked like the moon on Meru."'


