'"Arjuna asked, 'O Janardana! What objective of ours was served and what yoga did you use? How were Jarasandha and the other lords of the earth killed?'

'"Vasudeva replied, 'If Jarasandha, the king of Chedi and the immensely strong Nishadha[Ekalavya. Eklavya is both referred to as Nishadha and the son of a Nishadha. Both are correct.] had not been killed
earlier, they would have become terrible now. There is no doubt that Suyodhana would have chosen those supreme
among rathas[To be on his own side.]. They have always harboured wicked intentions towards us and would have gone to the side of the
Kouravas. All of those great-souled ones were brave, skilled in the use of weapons and firm warriors. They would
have protected the army of the son of Dhritarashtra like the immortals. Resorting to the son of a suta, Jarasandha,
the king of Chedi and the son of Nishadha, Suyodhana would have been able to conquer the entire earth. O
Dhananjaya! They were killed by me through yoga. Listen to it. Without using yoga, they could not have been defeated in a battle, not even by the gods. O Partha! Each of them was separately capable of countering the army of
the gods in a battle, even if it were to be protected by the guardians of the world. Jarasandha was angered, incited
by Rohini's son[Rohini's son is Balarama.]. To kill us, he hurled a club that was red at the tip. It was as resplendent as the fire and it divided
the sky, like a parting[Simanta, the parting on a lady's hair. Hence, a lady is called simantini.]. It was seen to descend, like the vajra released by Shakra. On seeing that the club was descending, Rohini's son wished to counter it and released the weapon known as sthunakarna[A kind of missile that is difficult to pinpoint.]. Countered by the
force of that weapon, the club fell down on the ground. It shattered the goddess earth and made the mountains
tremble. There was a terrible rakshasi[A female rakshasa. The story has been described in Section 21 (Volume 2). Jarasandha's father was Brihadratha
and he obtained a mango from a sage. He divided the mango between his two wives and each wife gave birth to
half a son. In that section, we are only told that after handing over Jarasandha to Brihadratha, Jara vanished.] named Jara and she possessed great valour. O scorcher of enemies! She
united the infant and it came to be known as Jarasandha. Two separate parts were born from the bodies of two separate mothers. Since she united them, he came to be known as Jarasandha. O Partha! That rakshasi was slain by the
club and the weapon known as sthunakarna and entered the earth, together with her son and kin. O Dhananjaya!
Jarasandha was deprived of the club in the great battle and while you watched, was killed by Bhimasena. O
supreme among men! If the powerful Jarasandha had possessed that club in his hand, the gods, together with Indra,
would not have been able to kill him in an encounter. O one for whom truth is valour! It is also for your sake that
Drona adopted the disguise of a preceptor and severed Nishadha's thumb[This incident has been described in Section 7 (Volume 1). Drona wasn't actually Ekalavya's teacher, he had refused to accept him as a student. Consequently, he shouldn't have asked for a preceptor's fee (guru dakshina).
However, Ekalavya had used an image of Drona as preceptor. That explains the reference to the disguise of a
preceptor.]. With his finger guards, the son of the
Nishadha was firm in his valour. He was as resplendent as a second Rama in the forest. O Partha! Had Ekalavya
possessed his thumb, the gods and the danavas, with the rakshasas and the serpents, would never have been able to
defeat him in a battle. His fist was firm and he could continuously shoot, throughout the day and night. How could
a mere human have looked at him? It is for your sake that I killed him in the field of battle. I killed the powerful
king of Chedi in your presence. He was capable of conquering all the gods and the asuras in a battle. O tiger
among men! I have been born to slay him and also all the others who hate the gods, with your help, and desiring
the welfare of the worlds. Hidimba, Baka and Kirmira have been brought down by Bhimasena. They were the
equals of Ravana and destroyed the sacrifices of brahmanas. Similarly, Alayudha, who used maya, was slain by
Hidimba's son. And I thought of means to get Hidimba's son killed by Karna's spear. Had he not been killed by
Karna's spear in the great battle, I would have had to kill Ghatotkacha, Bhimasena's son, in the future. I did not kill
him earlier, because I wanted to ensure your pleasure. This rakshasa hated brahmanas and hated sacrifices. Because he caused the destruction of dharma and because he was evil in his soul, he would have had to be brought
down. O unblemished one! I thought of a means through what had been given by Shakra. O Pandava! Those who
are the destroyers of dharma, deserve to be killed by me. I have taken a pledge that I will establish dharma. I am
always present wherever the brahman, truthfulness, self-control, purity, dharma, humility, prosperity, fortitude and
forgiveness exist. You should not have any anxiety about Karna Vaikartana. I will tell you the means so that you
can destroy him. In the battle, Suyodhana will also be killed by Vrikodara. O Pandava! I will tell you about the
means whereby that death can be ensured. There is a tumultuous uproar that has arisen in the direction of the enemy's army. Your soldiers are fleeing in the ten directions. Having attained their objective, the Kouravas are destroying your army. Drona, supreme among strikers, is scorching our soldiers.'"'


'Dhritarashtra said, "The son of the suta possessed a spear that could only be used to kill one person. Why did he
not forget everyone else and hurl it at Partha? Had he been slain, all the Pandavas and Srinjayas would have been
killed too. Had that brave one alone been killed, why should victory in the battle not have been ours? He is great in
his vows and does not retreat when he is challenged. The son of the suta should have challenged Phalguna himself.
O Sanjaya! Tell me. Why did Vrisha not challenge Phalguna to a duel and kill him with what he had obtained from
Shakra? There is no doubt that my son lacks both intelligence and advisers. How can he obtain victory if he is frustrated by the enemy in every way? That spear was a supreme weapon and our victory depended on it. Vasudeva has
ensured that the spear was wasted on Ghatotkacha. This is like a powerful person snatching a bilva fruit from the
hands of someone with a withered arm. In that fashion, because of Ghatotkacha, that infallible spear has been rendered fallible. In a fight between a boar and a dog, when either one dies, the hunter gains[The boar and the dog are fighting over some game.]. O learned one! Like
that, I think that Vasudeva has gained from the battle between Karna and Hidimba's son. Had Ghatokacha slain
Karna, it would have been a supreme gain for the Pandavas. And had Vaikartana slain him, it would still have been
a gain, because the spear would have been rendered useless. The wisest among wise ones thought in this way about
the encounter between Ghatotkacha and the son of a suta. Though Vasudeva, lion among men, is not fighting in
this battle, he is engaged in ensuring the welfare of the Pandavas."

'Sanjaya said, "O king! The slayer of Madhu knew what Karna desired to do. The immensely intelligent Janardana instructed the immensely valorous Ghatotkacha, lord of the rakshasas, to engage in that duel. The intention
was to make the infallible weapon useless. O king! All this happened because of your evil policy. O extender of
the Kuru lineage! We would certainly have been successful, had not Krishna protected Partha from maharatha Karna. O Dhritarashtra! In the battle, with his horses, standard and chariot, Partha would have fallen down on the
ground, but for Janardana, the lord and master of all yoga. O king! He has been protected in many different ways.
Protected by Krishna, Partha has advanced against the enemy and obtained victory. It was indeed Krishna who protected Partha from that infallible weapon. Kounteya would have been swiftly destroyed by the spear, like a tree by
thunder."

'Dhritarashtra said, "My son is proud of his wisdom. But he quarrels and has evil advisers. He has thus overlooked the means for killing Jaya[Arjuna.]. O son of Gavalgana! Why did you also forget that objective? O immensely
intelligent one! Why did you not remind him about it?"

'Sanjaya replied, "Night after night, this used to be the topic of discussion between Duryodhana, Shakuni,
Duhshasana and me. 'O Karna! Tomorrow, abandon all the other soldiers and kill Dhananjaya. We will then enjoy
the Pandus and the Panchalas, as if they are our slaves. Or, after Partha has been killed, if Varshneya appoints one
of the other sons of Pandu as the warrior, we will bring down Krishna. Krishna is the root of the sons of Pandu.
Partha is the trunk. The Parthas[Other than Arjuna.] are the branches. The Panchalas can be thought of as leaves. Krishna is the
refuge of the Pandavas. Krishna is the strength. Krishna is the protector. They are devoted to Krishna, like the stellar bodies to the moon. O son of a suta! Therefore, forget the leaves, branches and trunk. Bring down Krishna, who
has always been the root of the Pandava in every way[The text does not place this explicitly within quotes.].' O king! Had Dasharha Krishna, the descendant of the
Yadava lineage, been slain, there is no doubt that this entire earth would have come under your control. O Indra
among kings! Had the great-souled one, loved by the Yadu and Pandava lineages, been killed and made to lie
down on the ground, there is no doubt that the earth, with its mountains, oceans and forests, would have come under your control. Every morning, we arose with that resolution about the lord of the thirty gods, the immeasurable
Hrishikesha. But at the time of the battle, we forgot about it. Keshava has always protected Kounteya Arjuna. In
the battle, that is the reason he didn't allow him to be stationed before the son of the suta. Achyuta stationed other
supreme rathas there. O lord! He acted so that the infallible spear might become fallible. The mighty-armed Satya-
ki, tiger among rathas, for whom truth was his valour, had asked Krishna about maharatha Karna. 'This has been
the infinitely valorous Karna's resolution. Why did the son of a suta not use the spear against Phalguna?'

'"Vasudeva replied, 'Duhshasana, Karna, Shakuni and Saindhava always conversed about this, with Duryodhana
at the forefront. "O Karna! O Karna! O great archer! O one who is infinitely valiant in battle! O supreme among
victorious ones! This spear should not be used against anyone else, with the exception of maharatha Partha
Dhananjaya, Kunti's son. Among them[The Pandavas.], he is the most illustrious, like Vasava among the gods. If he is killed, all
the other Pandavas, together with the Srinjayas, will lose their selves, like the gods without fire[The text does not actually have this address to Karna within quotes. It has to be inferred.]." O bull among
the Shini lineage! Accordingly, Karna gave his pledge. The thought of killing the wielder of Gandiva was always
in Karna's heart. O foremost among warriors! But I confused Radheya. That is the reason he did not release the
spear at Pandava, the one with the white horses. O Yuyutsu! It would have brought about Phalguna's death. O
supreme among warriors! I could not sleep and there was no happiness in my mind. O bull among the Shini lineage! Then I saw that it had been rendered unsuccessful by Ghatotkacha. Today, I see that Dhananjaya has been
rescued from the jaws of death. In a battle, the protection of my father, my mother, you, my brothers and my life is
not as important as that of Bibhatsu. O Satvata! If there is anything that is more precious than the kingdom of the
three worlds, I do not desire it without Partha Dhananjaya. O Yuyudhana! I am extremely delighted today. I can
see that Partha Dhananjaya has returned from the dead. It is because of this that I sent the rakshasa to fight with
Karna. No one else was capable of countering Karna during this battle in the night.'"

'Sanjaya said, "This is what Devaki's son told Satyaki then. He has always been engaged in Dhananjaya's welfare and doing that which brings him pleasure."'


