Bhishma said, "At that time, Narada came to the spot where Shuka was alone[Vedavyasa had left.], engaged in studying. He wished to
ask him about the purport of the Vedas. On seeing that devarshi Narada had presented himself, Shuka first offered him arghya and then honoured him, following the rites laid down in the Vedas. Narada was delighted
and spoke these words. 'O supreme among those who know about the brahman! O son! How can I ensure what is
best  for  you?  Cheerfully,  instruct  me.'  O  descendant  of  the  Bharata  lineage!  Hearing  Narada's  words,  Shuka
replied, 'What is beneficial in this world? You should instruct me about the truth of this.'

'"Narada  answered,  'Earlier,  rishis  with  cleansed  souls  desired  to  find  out  about  the  truth.  The  illustrious
Sanatkumara spoke these words to them. "There is no sight that is like that of knowledge. There are no austerities
that are equal to learning. There is no misery that is equal to attachment. There is no bliss that is equal to renunciation. Abstention from wicked deeds, constant engagement in auspicious conduct, virtuous conduct and virtuous behaviour constitute supreme benefit. Having obtained the miserable status of being born as a man, if a person becomes attached, he is confused. Such a person will not be freed from misery. Attachment is the sign of misery. The
intelligence of someone who is attached is fickle. The net of delusion is only widened. If one is enmeshed in the
net of delusion, one obtains misery in this world and in the next. Every means must be used to restrain desire and
anger. These two arise to destroy what is beneficial and prevent observance of beneficial tasks. Austerities must
always be protected against anger, and prosperity must be protected against jealousy. Knowledge must be protected
against honour and dishonour and the atman against distraction. Non-violence is supreme dharma. Forgiveness is
supreme strength. Knowledge of the atman is supreme knowledge. There is nothing that is superior to the truth.
Truthful words are the best. However, beneficial words are preferable to the truth. It is my view that whatever
brings great benefit to creatures is the truth. A person who has renounced the fruits of all enterprise, is without desires, delinked from possessions and has renounced everything, is knowledgable and learned. If a person enjoys the
senses and the objects of the senses without his self being subjugated by them and if he is not attached, he is tranquil in his soul. He is indifferent and controlled. If a person is immersed in his atman and if he is not attached to
anything he is associated with, he has been freed. He will soon obtain the supreme benefit. O sage! If a person does
not really see, touch or converse with other creatures, he will obtain the supreme benefit. One should not act violently towards any being. One should always be affectionate. Having obtained birth, one should never exhibit enmity. A person who is content with a trifle, a person who is without hopes and not fickle-such a person is said to
have conquered himself. He knows his atman and will obtain the supreme benefit. O son[Since the rishis are being addressed, this should really be in the plural.]! Discard all possessions and conquer your senses. Be established in the place that has no sorrow and be without fear, in this world and
in the next. Those who have no desires do not grieve. Cast aside all desire from your self. Cast aside all desire and
be tranquil. You will thus free yourself from misery and calamity. A sage must control his self, be restrained and
always engage in austerities. He must conquer desire, which is difficult to vanquish. In the midst of attachments,
he must not be attached. If a brahmana is not attached to an association with any of the qualities and if he always
dwells alone, he will soon obtain supreme bliss. Creatures are addicted to the pleasure that comes from sexual congress. In the midst of this, a sage takes pleasure in himself alone. Know him to be a person for whom wisdom has
brought contentment. A person who is content with his knowledge does not sorrow. Through auspicious deeds, one
obtains  divinity  in  the  firmament.  Through  mixed  deeds,  one  obtains  birth  as  a  human.  Through inauspicious
deeds, one obtains an inferior birth. One is powerless against what has been obtained through deeds. Creatures are
cooked in the cycle of life. One is always assailed by death, old age and misery. Why do you not understand this?
Something that is not beneficial is regarded by you as beneficial. Something that is transitory is regarded by you as
permanent. Something that is undesirable is regarded by you as desirable. Why do you not understand this? Like a
silkworm, you are enmeshing yourself in these multiple strands. You are entangling yourself in this cocoon. But
you do not comprehend. There has been enough of possessions. Possessions are associated with sins. The worm
encased in a cocoon is destroyed by what it has itself done. Beings who are attached to sons, wives and families
have to suffer. They are like an aged and wild elephant that has got stuck to the mud in a pond. They have been
captured in a large net, like fish that have been dragged to the land. Behold. Creatures are entangled in the net of
affection and undergo great misery. Families, sons, wives, bodies and accumulations of objects are all transitory
and serve no purpose in the hereafter. There is nothing except one's good and bad deeds. One must certainly abandon everything and go there. Why should one then be attached to the undesirable and not be engaged in what
brings one benefit? There is no place for resting along that path, no refuge and no provisions. That region is desolate, unknown and enveloped in darkness. How will you go there alone? When you advance there, there is nothing
that will follow you from the rear. Your good and bad deeds are the only things that will follow you. One searches
for one's objectives through learning, deeds, valour and extremely great wisdom. Once one is successful in accomplishing that objective, one is freed. The attachment towards dwelling in a village[Interpreted as any habitation.] is like a noose made out of
ropes. When one has severed it, the ones with good deeds move forward. Without severing it, the ones with bad
deeds find it difficult to make progress. Beauty constitutes the banks[There js an image of a river of life.]. The mind is the current. Touch constitutes
the islands and taste is the flow. Scent is the mud. Sound is the water. The flow along the road to heaven is extremely difficult. Forgiveness constitutes the oars. Truth, patience and dharma are the ropes. Renunciation is the
wind that swiftly drives it. Using one's intelligence as a boat, one must cross that river. Abandon both dharma and
adharma[Interpreted in the narrow sense.]. Cast aside truth and falsehood. Having cast aside both truth and falsehood, cast aside everything that
must be abandoned. Abandon all resolution about dharma. Abandon adharma and violence. Having cast aside both
truth and falsehood, use your intelligence to form a resolution about what is supreme. The bones[In the body.] are the pillars.
The sinews are like strings. Flesh and blood are the external plaster. The skin is a sheath. It emits a foul smell and
is full of urine and excrement. It is pervaded by the sorrow of old age. It is an abode for disease and affliction.
Abandon this residence of creatures, full of passion and impermanent. Everything in the universe is in this universe. This universe has  originated in the five  great elements. Everything results from the atoms[The word used is paramanu.]  of  Mahat.
There are the five senses and tamas, sattva and rajas. The collection of the seventeen[The five senses, the five organs of action, the five breaths of life, mind and intelligence.] is said to be indicative of
the manifest. With the objects of the senses, the manifest and the unmanifest, there are said to be twenty-five[The five objects of the senses, ego, ignorance and prakriti added to the earlier list of seventeen.],
with the qualities of the manifest and the unmanifest. When all of these are united together, one is always described as a being[That is, the jivatman.]. If a person knows the nature of the three objectives[Dharma, artha and kama.], life and death, he knows the truth. He
knows about creation and destruction. A person who has the slightest bit of knowledge knows that prosperity exists in the hereafter. Anything that can be grasped by the senses is established in the realm of the manifest. One
must know the unmanifest and attentively comprehend it through the signs. The senses always satisfy a creature,
like a shower. However, a person who sees the atman sees that the atman is extended everywhere in the world.
Through the strength of knowledge, a person can see the supreme and he does not perceive the lack of a shore. In
every way and in every circumstance, he sees it in all beings. Even if he is associated with other creatures, he does
not suffer anything undesirable on this account. Through knowledge, one can overcome many kinds of hardship
that are due to delusion. When a person's knowledge has become manifest, he does not suffer any injury on account of the ways of the world. An illustrious person who knows about the sacred says that in its atman, a creature
is without beginning and without end. It is without decay. It is not the doer and it is without form. Because of its
own deeds, a creature is always engaged in tasks and confronts misery. In an attempt to counter this misery, it kills
many other creatures. Having performed such an act, it goes through many other births. It is tormented, and suffers
like a diseased person without any medication. There are many who are afflicted by such delusion, thinking that
unhappiness is actually happiness. Slain and crushed, it is always churned in these deeds. That is the reason one
must refrain from the bonds that are caused by deeds. One is wheeled around in this cycle of life and suffers many
kinds of pain. However, you have withdrawn from those bonds. You have restrained yourself from deeds. You
know everything. You have conquered everything. Be successful and free from all sentiments. Through restraint,
abstaining from new bonds and resorting to the strength of austerities, many people have become successful. They
have obtained unrestrained bliss."'"'


Narada said, 'There are sacred texts that dispel sorrow and destroy all grief. They lead to tranquility and are
auspicious. If one listens to them, one obtains intelligence and attains happiness. From one day to another,
there are thousands of reasons for sorrow and hundreds of reasons for fear. They pervade a foolish person, but not
one who is learned. Therefore, for the sake of destroying the undesirable, listen to the history. If one follows their
instructions, one obtains the intelligence that destroys sorrow. Through association with the disagreeable and lack
of association with the agreeable, men of limited intelligence suffer from mental grief. When things belong to the
past, one should not think about their qualities. By not having bonds of attachment with what is in the past, one can
be emancipated. Whenever there is attachment, one should look for evils in it. If one sees the undesirable in such
bonds, one is quickly separated from them. If a person sorrows over the past, he has no artha, dharma or fame.
Thinking about their absence does not make them return. Creatures obtain some qualities and are also separated
from them. All of these, and not just one, are reasons for grief. If a person grieves over the past, over something
that is dead or destroyed, he piles misery on misery and doubles the grief. On seeing the progress of the worlds,
intelligent people do not shed tears. Those who do not shed tears are the ones who see everything properly. A
calamity may lead to physical or mental grief and even if one makes the best of efforts, one may be incapable of
doing  anything  about  it.  Then,  one  should  not  think  about  it.  Not  thinking  about  it  is  the  medicine  for  grief.
Thoughts do not dispel it, but make it increase. Mental grief is destroyed through wisdom, physical through medication. Such is the capacity of learning and one must not behave like a child. Youth, beauty, life, stores of possessions, health and dwelling with loved ones are temporary. A learned person does not desire them. One should not
sorrow alone over a calamity that has affected the entire country. Instead of grieving, if one perceives a way, one
should act so as to counter it. In life, there is no doubt that there are many more reasons for misery than for joy.
There is delusion over the fondness for satisfying the objects of the senses. Death is regarded as unpleasant. A man
who casts aside both unhappiness and happiness obtains the brahman, and learned people do not sorrow over the
end that he has obtained. There is misery in abandoning riches. But there is no happiness in protecting it. There is
misery in obtaining it. Therefore, if there are no riches left, one should not think about it. Specific kinds of men obtain different types of riches. However, they are discontented and meet destruction. Learned people are content. All
stores are destroyed. Anything that goes up, falls down. Association ends in disassociation. Life ends in death.
There is no end to thirst. Contentment is supreme happiness. Therefore, learned people look upon contentment as
the greatest prosperity. One's lifespan passes in an instant. It does not tarry. When one's own body is transitory,
there is nothing that one can think of as permanent. Those who think about the nature of beings realize that everything is covered in darkness. They do not sorrow over those who have departed, but look towards the supreme objective. If a person is not satisfied with objects of desire and thinks that they are insufficient, death seizes him and
departs, like a tiger grasping an animal. Therefore, one should seek means to be freed from misery. Even if one
confronts a hardship, one should not sorrow. Even if one possesses a little riches, once one has enjoyed sound,
touch, form, scent and taste, there is nothing further to tie one down[Sensual pleasures are temporary.]. Before a creature was united with these,
there was no misery and all was well. Consequently, a separation from these results in the natural state and there is
nothing to grieve about. Fortitude must be used to control the penis and the stomach, the eyes to control the hands
and feet. The mind should be used to control the eyes and the ears and knowledge used to control the mind and
speech. If a person controls affection towards those who are superior and inferior and conducts himself in accordance with humility, such a person is learned and happy. A person who is devoted to adhyatma, is seated[In yoga.], is indifferent, without desire and depends only on the atman, is happy.'"'


Narada said, 'When happiness and misery appear and disappear, they cannot be countered through wisdom,
good policy or enterprise. Established in one's own nature, one must make efforts not to suffer from lassitude. A person who loves his atman saves himself from old age, death and disease. Physical and mental diseases
afflict the body, like sharp-pointed arrows that have been released from the bows of firm archers. A person who is
frightened and desires to remain alive, wishing to be free from the afflictions, is rendered incapable. His body is
afflicted and he is destroyed. Through nights and days, the lifespan of a mortal creature is continuously running,
like the flowing current in a river, which does not retreat. Shuklapaksha and krishnapaksha incessantly progress.
Without tarrying for an instant, they decay mortal creatures who have been born. The sun is without decay, but
continuously rises and sets. The happiness and unhappiness of creatures is like that and is subject to decay. While
he is concerned with what he has not seen earlier and what he has not obtained earlier, the desirable and undesirable aspects of a man set and depart like the night. Had a man not been dependent on the consequences of his earlier deeds, he would have obtained whatever he wished for and all his desires would have been satisfied. There are
men who are controlled, accomplished and intelligent. However, if such virtuous people have not performed their
own tasks[In an earlier life.], they are seen to be unsuccessful. There are others who are foolish, devoid of qualities and the worst
among men. But because they possess the benedictions, they are seen to obtain everything that they desire[Again, because of deeds performed in an earlier life.].
There are other creatures who are always ready to indulge in violence. Though they deceive the worlds, they age in
happiness. There is someone who doesn't exert at all, but obtains prosperity. There is another one who undertakes
all the tasks, but does not get what he should. Do you think that this is due to a transgression in a man's nature?
The semen that is generated somewhere, goes somewhere else. Even when it has been placed inside a vagina, there
may or may not be conception. It is then like the flower of a mango and it is as if there was abstinence. There are
some who desire a son and wish for offspring. They are potent and make efforts, but no embryo results. There may
be another brahmana who wishes to avoid embryos, like a venomous serpent. But he has a son with a long lifespan. Without a life after death, how could he have become a father? There are those who are miserable and desire
sons. They satisfy the gods and perform austerities. After being borne for ten months, a son who is the worst of the
lineage is born. There are others who obtain auspicious and extensive stores of riches and grain stored by their fathers and only enjoy them. When two people approach each other in an act of sexual intercourse, the vagina is invaded and an embryo results. When the body decays, the wind of life leaves and enters another body. When a creature's life is destroyed, the flesh and phlegm are rendered immobile. When the next body is burnt, movement and
lack of movement pass on to a further body. This ends in destruction. And there is an end in a further destruction.
This is like boats moving back and forth[Ferrying passengers back and forth across a river.]. Through sexual intercourse, an unconscious drop of semen is deposited in the womb. What do you see? Through whose efforts does that embryo become alive? Inside the stomach,
why is that embryo not digested? Inside the womb, there is a natural progression of urine and excrement. It[The embryo.] cannot do anything about whether it is retained or discharged. It is not independent. Some foetuses suffer a miscarriage, others are born. There are some that are destroyed as soon as they are born. When there is union with the
vagina, semen is released. Sometimes, an offspring results. In due course, that offspring is also submerged in intercourse. Among the hundreds who are born, some survive till seven or ten years of age. Some die and do not survive to be one hundred years old. There is no doubt that when men are assailed by disease, they are unable to get
up. They are crushed, like small animals by predatory beasts. They are devoured by disease and spend a great deal
of riches. But even then, despite the best efforts of physicians, the pain is not reduced. The physicians may be
skilled. They may be accomplished in the use of large numbers of herbs. However, they are themselves afflicted by
disease, like animals by hunters. They may drink astringent concoctions and diverse kinds of clarified butter. But
they are seen to be crushed by old age, like serpents by stronger serpents. When animals and birds suffer from disease, who on earth treats them? In general, among predatory beasts and poor people, there are rarely those who are
afflicted. There may be fiercely energetic kings. Even they are attacked by terrible diseases that are extremely difficult to withstand, like animals by stronger animals. Overcome by confusion and sorrow, people shriek. They are
suddenly flung into a current and borne away by something that is stronger. Those with bodies can't counter what
is  natural-through  riches,  kingdoms  or  fierce  austerities.  Otherwise,  no  one  would  have  died  or  become  old.
Everyone would have obtained everything that he desired. No one would have seen anything unpleasant and all
and the fruits would have been obtained. Every person wishes to rise upwards. They try their utmost. But it doesn't
work out that way. Even people who are not distracted by deceit and are brave without being cruel, become insolent and intoxicated because of riches and drunk and maddened with liquor. For some, hardships disappear even
before they have seen them. There are others who are searching, but do not obtain anything. A great difference is
seen between fruits and the undertaking of acts. There are some who bear palanquins. Others ride on those palanquins. Everyone desires prosperity. But only some have chariots advancing in front of them. There are men with
hundreds of wives and there are hundreds of widowed women. There is conflict and pleasure in creatures and hundreds of men face these. Therefore, look only towards the hereafter and do not get confused. Cast aside both dharma and adharma. Abandon both truth and falsehood. Having abandoned both truth and falsehood, cast aside everything that must be cast aside. O supreme among rishis! I have told you about a supreme secret. Using this, the gods
abandoned the mortal world and went to heaven.'"

'Bhishma said, "Hearing Narada's words, the extremely intelligent Shuka patiently thought about this in his
mind, but could not arrive at a conclusion. 'Sons and wives lead to great hardship. Knowledge requires great effort. What is the eternal spot that is free from hardship and leads to greatness?' Having thought about this for some
time, he made up his mind to follow the atman. He knew about supreme dharma and the supreme and beneficial
end. 'How can I be unattached and go to that supreme objective? From there, there will no return and birth in this
ocean of life. I desire that supreme state, so that I do not have to return again. I have determined in my mind that I
will cast aside all attachment and strive towards that end. I will go to the place where the atman will find peace. I
will establish myself in the eternal there and there will be no decay and destruction. Without yoga, I cannot obtain
that supreme objective. Deeds cannot lead to that unattached state of liberation. Therefore, I will resort to yoga and
cast aside this body, which is like a house. I will become a wind and enter the mass of energy in the rays of the sun.
Having gone there, there is no decay, unlike the moon and the large number of gods, who tremble and fall down on
the ground, ascending again when they have acquired merit. The moon always wanes and waxes again. The sun
heats the world with its rays. It receives all the energy and the solar disc never decays. Therefore, going to the
sun's blazing energy appeals to me. I will dwell there, without being assailed, without attachment and based on my
inner atman. I will cast my body into the sun's residence. With the rishis, I will go to the sun's energy, which is extremely difficult to withstand. I am seeking the permission of the trees, the elephants, the mountains, the earth, the
directions, the firmament, gods, danavas, gandharvas, pishachas, serpents and all the creatures in the world. There
is no doubt that I will enter there. Let all the gods and the rishis behold the power of my yoga.' Narada, the rishi
who was famous in the worlds, gave him permission. Having obtained his permission, he went to his father. Having greeted the great-souled sage and rishi, Dvaipayana, Shuka  circumambulated him. He  then  asked  the  sage
Krishna's permission. On hearing the words of the rishi Shuka, the great-souled one was delighted and said, 'O
son! Stay here today, so that my eyes are gratified at the sight of you.' Shuka had become indifferent, without affection and free from all attachment. Having thought about moksha, he had made up his mind to go. Leaving his
father, the supreme among brahmanas went away[One thus deduces that Shuka did not listen to his father's request.]."'

