Vaishampayana said, 'The brave maharatha Satyaki of the Satvatas then arrived with a large army, with the four
types of forces, before Yudhishthira. His immensely valorous warriors had arrived from many countries. They
were courageous and wielded many weapons. The army was beautiful. It had battleaxes, slings, spears, javelins,
clubs, lances, swords, axes, nooses, unblemished scimitars, swords[Different types of swords are mentioned-rishti, karavala and khadga.], bows, helmets and many different kinds of
arrows that had been washed in oil. With all these weapons, that army dazzled like a cloud. The soldiers shone,
like lightning in the midst of a cloud. O king! That akshouhini of soldiers joined Yudhishthira's army and having
entered, vanished, like a small river into the ocean. In a similar way, Dhrishtaketu, bull among the Chedis, brought
an akshouhini to the infinitely energetic Pandavas. Jayatsena of Magadha, Jarasandha's son, arrived before Dharmaraja with one akshouhini of soldiers. O Indra among kings! Pandya, who dwelt by the shores of the ocean, arrived before Yudhishthira, surrounded by many kinds of warriors. When that force arrived, the soldiers looked extremely radiant. O king! Strong and well attired, it was worthy of being looked at. Drupada had an army that consisted of soldiers from many regions. There were handsome and brave men and his maharatha sons too. King Vira-
ta of Matsya, the lord of an army, came to the Pandavas, with kings from the mountainous regions. In this way, the
great-souled sons of Pandu assembled seven akshouhinis. They had many flags. The Pandavas wished to fight with
the Kurus and this delighted them.

'The delight of Dhritarashtra's son also increased. Bhagadatta, lord of the earth, gave him one akshouhini of soldiers. That army had chinas and kiratas and was covered with gold[Kiratas are hunters who dwell in the mountainous regions. Chinas are those from China, which probably meant
Tibet, rather than China proper.]. That army looked like a forest of
karnikaras[The name of a tree and its flowers. The flowers are colourful, but have no fragrance.]. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! In a similar way, the brave Bhurishrava and Shalya arrived before Duryodhana, each with one separate akshouhini. With the forces of the Bhojas and the Andhakas, Hardikya
Kritavarma went to Duryodhana with one akshouhini. Among those tigers among men, those soldiers, with garlands of wild flowers, looked like crazy elephants sporting in the forest. Among the others, there were those from
Sindhu and Souvira, with Jayadratha at the forefront. The lords of the earth arrived and seemed to make the mountains tremble. That large akshouhini of soldiers was resplendent, like many different kinds of rain clouds stirred by
the wind. O lord of the earth! Sudakshina of Kamboja joined Kouravya with one akshouhini, together with the Yavanas and the Shakas[Respectively identified as the Greeks and the Scythians.]. Those soldiers looked like a swarm of locusts. Having joined Kouravya, they seemed to
disappear[Because the greater army was so large.]. Nila, resident of Mahishmati[The capital of the Haihaya kings. It is identified with today's Maheshwar, in Khargone district of Madhya
Pradesh.], came with Nilayudha, and with the immensely valorous lords of the
earth who lived in the southern regions. The two kings of Avanti[The two kings of Avanti were Vinda and Anuvinda. Avanti was eventually divided into two kingdoms. Ujjaini
was the capital of northern Avanti, while Mahishmati was the capital of southern Avanti.], surrounded by large forces, came to Suyodhana with one akshouhini each. The five brothers, who were kings of Kekaya and were tigers among men, came to
Kouravya with one akshouhini and delighted him[There is an inconsistency with what comes later, in Chapter 685(22). The Kekayas were divided between the
Kouravas and the Pandavas. While most of the Kekayas did fight on the side of the Kouravas, these five brothers
sided with the Pandavas.]. O bull among the Bharata lineage! From other directions,
many other great-souled lords of the earth arrived and brought three more armies[That is, three more akshouhinis.]. Thus, Duryodhana had eleven
armies. They wished to fight with the Kounteyas and were covered with many flags. O king! O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! There was no space left in Hastinapura then, not even for the foremost kings and the leaders of
their armies. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The region of the five rivers[Punjab.], Kurujangala[The region of Kurukshetra.], the forest of
Rohitaka[Near today's Rohtak.], the entire desert region, Ahichhatra[This was the capital of northern Panchala and is in Bareilly district of Uttar Pradesh.], Kalakuta, the banks of the Ganga, Varana, Vatadhana and the
mountains around the Yamuna-this entire region was extremely large and full of treasure and grain. It was completely covered by the forces of the Kouravas. This was the army that the priest, who had been sent by the king of
the Panchalas to the Kouravas, saw.'


Vaishampayana said, 'Drupada's priest went to Kouravya. Together with Bhishma and Vidura, Dhritarashtra's son
welcomed him with honours. He[The priest.] asked them about their welfare and whether they were all in good health. In
the midst of the leaders of the army, he then spoke the following words. "All of you know what the eternal dharma
of kings is. But though it is known, I will refer to it, because it leads up to the words that I will say. It is known that
Dhritarashtra and Pandu are sons of the same father. There is no doubt that they possess equal rights to what belonged to their ancestors. The sons of Dhritarashtra have now obtained those ancestral riches. Why have the sons
of Pandu not obtained a share of the ancestral riches? This is the way it is. In earlier times too, it is known that the
Pandavas did not obtain a share of the ancestral objects. The sons of Dhritarashtra gathered them. There have been
several occasions when attempts have been made on their lives. But because their lives were not over, they could
not be sent to Yama's abode. Through their own powers, the great-souled ones again obtained a kingdom. But together with Soubala, that was deceitfully taken away from them by the mean sons of Dhritarashtra. That act was
undesirable, but this one[Referring to Dhritarashtra.] approved it. With their wife, these brave ones were terribly mistreated in the assembly
hall. They went through many extremely terrible hardships in the forest. Then, in Virata's city, it was as if they
went through another birth[They assumed new identities.]. These great-souled ones went through extreme difficulties, as if they had performed
evil acts. Having left all that, and all the earlier difficulties, behind, the bulls among the Kurus[The Pandavas.] only wish for
conciliation with the Kurus. Knowing their conduct and the conduct of Duryodhana, the well-wishers of Dhritarashtra's son should entreat with him. Those brave ones do not wish to fight with the Kurus. The Pandavas want
what is theirs, without destroying the world. Whatever reasons Dhritarashtra's son cites in favour of a war, cannot
be regarded as a reason, because they[The Pandavas.] are stronger. Dharma's son has assembled seven akshouhinis. They are
eager to fight with the Kurus and are waiting for instructions. There are other tigers among men, who are equal to
thousands of akshouhinis. There are Satyaki and Bhimasena and the extremely strong twins. These eleven armies
are assembled on one side. But on the other side, there is the mighty-armed Dhananjaya, who possesses many
forms. Just as Kiriti surpasses all armies, so does the mighty-armed and immensely radiant Vasudeva. Knowing the
multitude of their armies, Kiriti's valour and Krishna's wisdom, which man will wish to fight? Since the stipulated
time has passed, in accordance with dharma, you must return what should be returned. Do not let time pass by
idly."'


