Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing Dhritarashtra's words, Bhishma and Drona again spoke in his support to Duryodhana, who was not acting according to the instructions. "As long as the two Krishnas[Krishna and Arjuna.] are not armoured, as long
as the Gandiva is resting, as long as Dhoumya[The priest of the Pandavas.] does not offer the foremost forces of the enemy into the fire of
war, as long as the modest and great archer Yudhishthira does not angrily glance at your soldiers, till then, we may
find peace. As long as we do not see the mighty archer Partha Bhimasena take his position among the divisions of
his own army, till then, we may find peace. As long as he does not roam around and increase the delight of the soldiers, as long as he does not shatter the heads of those who are fighting on elephants in the war, as long as the destroyer of enemies does not use his club, as if against fruits on trees that have been ripened with time, till then, we
may find peace. As long as Nakula, Sahadeva, Parshata Dhrishtadyumna, Virata, Shikhandi and Shishupala's son,
all skilled in the use of weapons, do not armour themselves and swiftly penetrate, like crocodiles in the great
ocean, till then, we may find peace. As long as arrows tufted with the feathers of vultures do not descend on the
delicate bodies of kings, till then, we may find peace. As long as those swift and great archers do not use great iron
arrows that can travel far to strike the breasts of warriors who have been anointed with sandalwood and aloe and
are adorned with gold plates and necklaces, till then, we may find peace. Let Dharmaraja Yudhishthira, elephant
among kings, hold you by the hands, while you bow your head down. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Let that
extremely generous one[Literally, the one who has given a lot of stipends, Yudhishthira.] place his right hand, marked with the signs of a pennant, goad, elephant and flag, on
your shoulder as a mark of peace. When you are seated, let him place his hands, adorned with gems and with jewels on the fingers, on your back. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Let the mighty-armed Vrikodara, whose shoulders are like a shala tree, embrace you and speak to you in conciliatory tones, for the sake of peace. O king! Honoured by the three, Arjuna and the twins, you will affectionately inhale the fragrance of their heads. On seeing you
united with the brave Pandava brothers, let these lords of men release tears of joy. In a spirit of fraternity, let this
be proclaimed in all the capital cities of the kings of the earth. Enjoy this and be bereft of fever."'


Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing these unpalatable words in that assembly of the Kurus, Duryodhana spoke these
words to the famous and mighty-armed Vasudeva. "O Keshava! Before speaking, you should have reflected on the
matter. Why have you spoken as if you are specially censuring me? O Madhusudana! You have said that you are
devoted to the Parthas. But have you examined the strengths and the weaknesses of the two causes? You, Kshatta,
the king[Dhritarashtra.], the preceptor and the grandfather censure only me, and not any other king. But I do not perceive that I
have done anything wrong. But all of you, including the kings, blame only me. O destroyer of enemies! O Kesha-
va! On thinking about this, I do not see the slightest bit of wrong that I have committed. O Madhusudana! The
Pandavas happily agreed to the gambling match. They lost their kingdom to Shakuni. How was this my crime? O
Madhusudana! I ordered that whatever riches the Pandavas lost then, should instantly be returned to them. O foremost among victorious ones! It was not my crime that the invincible Parthas were defeated in another gambling
match and exiled to the forest. On the basis of what disrespect do they seek the enmity now? O Krishna! The Pandavas are incapable, but are happily against us. What have we done to them? Because of what wrong do the Pandavas, together with the Srinjayas, wish to kill the sons of Dhritarashtra? Because of terrible deeds and words, we
will not tremble and bow down out of fear, not even to Shatakratu. O Krishna! O slayer of enemies! I do not see
anyone, who follows the dharma of kshatriyas, who can aspire to vanquish us in battle. O Madhusudana! Bhishma,
Kripa, Drona and their armies are incapable of being defeated in battle by the gods, not to speak of the Pandavas.
O Madhava! If observing our own dharma, we face death in the field of battle from a weapon, because our time has
come, that will ensure heaven. O Janardana! The supreme dharma for kshatriyas is that we should lie down on a
bed of arrows in the field of battle. O Madhava! If, on the field of battle, we lie down on beds meant for warriors,
without bowing down before the enemy, we will not repent it. Is there anyone born in a noble lineage, following
the dharma of kshatriyas, who will bow down out of fear, wishing to protect himself? 'Manliness lies in raising
oneself and not losing enterprise. Even if all the joints are broken, one should not bow down before anyone.' These
are the words of Matanga[Famous sage.], cherished by those who desire their own welfare. A man like me only bows down before dharma and brahmanas. Without paying attention to anyone else, that should be one's conduct, as long as one
lives. This is the dharma of kshatriyas and that has always been my view. O Keshava! As long as I am alive, they
will not obtain the share of the kingdom that my father once gave them. O Janardana! O Madhava! As long as
Dhritarashtra is the king, we will lower our weapons and sustain ourselves from him. This kingdom should not
have been given away. O Janardana! But when I was a child and not independent, it was given away, out of ignorance or fear. O descendant of the Vrishni lineage! But it cannot be obtained again by the Pandavas. O mighty-
armed one! O Keshava! As long as I am alive, I will not give to the Pandavas even that much of land that can be
held on the point of a sharp needle."'


