'Sanjaya said, "Your great army was shattered in that battle by the Pandus. On seeing this, Vrishasena exhibited the
power of his weapons and began to protect it single-handed. O venerable one! Vrishasena released arrows in the
ten directions. He roamed around and pierced men, horses, chariots and elephants. The mighty-armed one released
thousands of mighty and flaming arrows. They were like the rays of the sun during the summer. O great king!
Rathas and riders were oppressed by them and suddenly fell down on the ground, like trees broken by the wind. O
king! In that battle, masses of horses, masses of chariots and masses of elephants were brought down in every direction in hundreds and thousands. On seeing him fearlessly roam around in that battle alone, all the kings[On the Pandava side.] surrounded him and attacked him together. Nakula's son, Shatanika, attacked Vrishasena and pierced him with ten
iron arrows that penetrated the inner organs. At this, Karna's son severed his bow and brought down his standard.
Wishing to protect their brother, Droupadi's other sons rushed towards him. They made Karna's son disappear because of the shower of their arrows. Rathas, with Drona's son at the forefront, advanced towards them. O great
king! They quickly enveloped Droupadi's maharatha sons with many types of arrows, like clouds on a mountain.
Out of affection towards their sons, the Pandavas quickly countered them, together with warriors from the Pancha-
las, Kekayas, Matsyas and Srinjayas. The battle that raged between those on your side and the sons of Pandu was
fearful and tumultuous and made the body hair stand up, like that between the gods and the danavas. The Kurus
and the Pandavas fought well, excited by anger. They glanced towards each other, having earlier engendered the
animosity towards each other. Because of that wrath, those infinitely energetic ones seemed to be like the supreme
of birds[Garuda.] and the serpents, battling in the sky. With Bhima, Karna, Kripa, Drona, Drona's son, Parshata and
Satyaki, the field of battle was resplendent, as if the sun of destruction had arisen. The immensely strong ones
fiercely fought in that battle, seeking to kill each other, like Bali of the danavas against the gods. Yudhishthira's
army let out a mighty roar and began to slaughter your soldiers, driving the maharathas away.

'"On seeing that the army was routed and sorely oppressed by the enemy, Drona said, 'O brave ones! Do not run
away.' Drona possessed red horses. He was angry. He was like an elephant with four tusks. He penetrated the Pan-
dava army and attacked Yudhishthira. Yudhishthira pierced him with sharp arrows tufted with heron feathers. But
Drona severed his bow and quickly rushed against him. The illustrious Kumara from the Panchalas was protecting
his[Yudhishthira's.] wheels and countered the advancing Drona, like the shoreline against the lord of the rivers. On seeing Drona,
bull among the brahmanas, thus repulsed by Kumara, delighted leonine roars and sounds of applause were heard.
In that great battle, Kumara angrily pierced Drona in the chest with an arrow and repeatedly roared, like a lion. But
in that encounter, the immensely strong Drona repulsed Kumara. Having overcome all fatigue, he displayed the
dexterity of his hands and released many thousands of arrows. The brave one, supreme among brahmanas, devoted
to the conduct of aryas and well-versed in the use of weapons, slew Kumara, the protector of the chariot wheels.
He penetrated the midst of the army and roamed around in all the directions. Bharadvaja's son, bull among rathas,
was the protector of your soldiers. He pierced Shikhandi with twelve arrows, Uttamouja with twenty, Nakula with
five, Sahadeva with seven, Yudhishthira with twelve, each of Droupadi's sons with three, Satyaki with five and
Matsya with ten. In that battle, he agitated the warriors and rushed against them. With a desire to capture him, he
advanced towards Yudhishthira, Kunti's son. O king! Maharatha Yugandhara repulsed Bharadvaja's son, who was
enraged, like the ocean agitated by a storm. Having pierced Yudhishthira with straight-tufted arrows, he[Drona.] brought
Yugandhara down from the chariot with a broad-headed arrow. Virata, Drupada, the Kekayas, Satyaki, Shibi,
Vyaghradatta from Panchala, the valiant Simhasena and many others sought to protect Yudhishthira. They showered many arrows and obstructed his path. O king! Vyaghradatta from Panchala pierced Drona with fifty sharp arrows and the soldiers roared. Maharatha Simhasena swiftly pierced Drona, rigid in his vows, and suddenly laughed
out in delight. Drona dilated his eyes and rubbed the string of his bow. He slapped his palms loudly and attacked.
The powerful one used broad-headed arrows to sever the heads, adorned with earrings, of Simhasena and Vyaghradatta from their bodies. He used a shower of arrows to torment the maharatha Pandavas and approached Yudhishthira, like death, the destroyer. O king! A loud sound arose in Yudhishthira's army, among all the warriors,
when the one who was rigid in his vows approached him. On witnessing Drona's valour, this is what the soldiers
said. 'The king has been slain. The king who is Dhritarashtra's son will be successful today. In this battle, he will
return to us and to Dhritarashtra's son[After having captured Yudhishthira.].' While your soldiers were thus conversing, maharatha Kounteya swiftly
arrived.

'"His chariot roared. He had created a terrible river. The water was blood and the chariots were eddies. It was
full of the bodies and bones of brave ones and it conveyed beings to the world of the dead. Masses of arrows were
the giant foam and it was infested with fish in the form of javelins. Having routed the Kurus, Pandava quickly
crossed that river. Kiriti suddenly attacked Drona's army and shrouded and confounded it with a giant net of arrows. The illustrious Kounteya quickly affixed arrows and shot them incessantly, so that no one could distinguish a
gap between these[The two acts.]. O great king! The directions, the sky, the firmament and the earth disappeared, covered by
the arrows. O king! Nothing could be seen in the field of battle then. The wielder of Gandiva created a great darkness with his arrows. With the sun about to set, dust covered everything. Enemy could no longer be distinguished
from well-wisher. Drona, Duryodhana and the others announced a withdrawal. Knowing that the enemy was extremely terrified and no longer had its mind on the fight, Bibhatsu slowly withdrew his own soldiers. The Pandus,
Srinjayas and Panchalas praised Partha with pleasant words, like rishis praising the sun. Having vanquished the
enemy, Dhananjaya returned to his own camp, behind all the other soldiers. He was happy and was with Keshava.
Pandu's son was radiant on his colourful chariot, which was decorated with excellent and expensive emeralds,
crystals, gold, diamonds and quartz. He was as radiant as the moon in the sky, adorned with stars."'


'Sanjaya said, "O lord of the earth! The soldiers returned to their own camps and retired, according to their respective ranks, arrays and divisions. Having asked the soldiers to withdraw, Drona was supremely distressed. He
glanced towards Duryodhana, and in shame, spoke these words. 'I had told you earlier that if Dhananjaya is
present, even the gods are incapable of capturing Yudhishthira in the battle. All of you endeavoured against Partha,
but you were repulsed. Do not doubt my words that Krishna and Pandava are invincible. O king! But if the one
with the white horses can be taken away, then Yudhishthira will come under your control today[This is happening on the eve of the next day's battle.]. In the battle, let
someone challenge him in a different part of the field and I will not return without vanquishing Kounteya[Yudhishthira.]. O
king! While Dhrishtadyumna looks on, I will use the void, while Arjuna is absent from the battle, to penetrate the
army and capture Dharmaraja. Know that you will see me find ways to seize him. O king! If Pandava Yudhishthira,
Dharma's son, stays before me even for an instant in the battle, there is no doubt that I will forcibly seize him today, with all his men and soldiers. This will be superior to an overall victory in the battle.' O king! On hearing
Drona's words, the lord of Trigarta, together with his brothers, spoke these words. 'O king! The wielder of Gandi-
va has always treated us badly. O bull among the Bharata lineage! We have not caused him injury, but he has injured us. We remember those many instances of injury and are consumed by the fire of wrath. We can never sleep
at night. The one with the divine weapons is now before our eyes. We will do everything that your heart desires
and brings you pleasure and also brings us fame. We will draw him away from the field of battle and kill him. Let
the earth be without Arjuna today, or without the Trigartas. We swear this before you and this pledge will not be
falsified.' O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O great king! Satyaratha, Satyadharma, Satyavarma, Satyeshu and
Satyakarma-these five brothers arrived[Before Duryodhana.], with ten thousand chariots, and spoke in this way. They took the pledge
in that battle. The Malavas and the Tundirekas came with thirty thousand chariots. Susharma of Trigarta, tiger
among men and the lord of Prasthala[Prasthala is the capital of Trigarta.], came with the Machellakas, Lalitthas and Madrakas, with ten thousand
chariots and his brothers and took the oath. There were another ten thousand from many different countries. They
arrived specially, for purposes of taking the oath.

'"They brought kindling so that each one could separately light a fire. They brought garments of kusha grass and
colourful armour. They donned the armour, smeared themselves with clarified butter and clad themselves in the
garments of kusha grass. The brave ones used bowstrings as girdles. They had given away hundreds and thousands
of dakshina and had performed many sacrifices. They had sons. They had performed deeds to obtain worlds[In the hereafter.]. Having performed the deeds, they were ready to lay down their lives. They had devoted their souls to fame and victory.
Through an excellent fight, they quickly aspired to obtain worlds that can be got through sacrifices at which a lot of
dakshina is offered and rites, of which, brahmacharya and the study of the sacred texts are the foremost. Each of
them separately satisfied the brahmanas by giving them gold coins, cows and garments. Then they addressed each
other affectionately. They lit fires with black trails and took an oath for the battle. In front of the fires, firm in their
resolution, they took the pledges. They took that oath for slaying Dhananjaya and loudly spoke these words, in the
hearing of all beings. 'There are worlds for those who lie, those who kill brahmanas, drunkards, worlds for those
who have intercourse with the preceptor's wife, those who rob the property of brahmanas, those who steal a king's
grant[A royal grant is given in the expectation of a quid pro quo. Stealing means violating the conditions of the grant.], those who forsake someone who seeks refuge, those who kill someone who seeks a favour, those who are
arsonists, those who kill cows, those who are wicked, worlds for those who hate brahmanas, those who are overtaken by folly and do not have intercourse with their wives when it is the right season or have intercourse on the
day of a shraddha, those who injure their own souls, those who misappropriate something left in trust, those who
destroy learning, those who fight out of anger, those who follow inferior ones, worlds for those who are atheists,
those who abandon their fires and their ancestors and there are worlds for those who are evil in conduct. If we return from the battle without killing Dhananjaya, or if we retreat because we are afflicted by his weapons, those[Those worlds.]
will be ours. If in this battle, we accomplish feats that are difficult to perform in this world, there is no doubt that
we will obtain desirable worlds.' O king! Having spoken in this way, they advanced to do battle. The brave ones
challenged Arjuna in the southern direction[Literally translated, the text means the region inhabited by the ancestors. This is the southern direction.].

'"Partha, tiger among men and the destroyer of enemy cities, was thus challenged and quickly spoke these
words to Dharmaraja. 'I have a vow that I will not retreat if I am challenged. O king! The samshaptakas are repeatedly challenging me. Susharma, together with his brothers, is challenging me to a battle. You should give me permission to kill him, together with his followers. O bull among men! I am incapable of tolerating this challenge.
Know that these enemies have already been killed in battle. I tell you this truthfully.' Yudhishthira replied, 'O
son[The word used is tata.]! You have heard what Drona desires to do. Act so that his intentions become false. Drona is brave and powerful. He is skilled in the use of weapons and has conquered fatigue. O maharatha! He has sworn to capture me.' Arjuna said, 'O king! This Satyajit will protect you in battle today. As long as this Panchala is alive, the preceptor's
desire will not be fulfilled. If this lord Satyajit, tiger among men, is killed in the battle, you should never remain
here, even if you are surrounded by everyone on our side.' At this, the king gave Phalguna the permission and embraced him. He glanced at him affectionately and pronounced many benedictions on him. Having made these
arrangements, the powerful Partha advanced against the Trigartas. He was like a hungry lion, hunting a herd of
deer to satisfy his hunger. Duryodhana's soldiers were filled with great delight. With Arjuna gone, they were extremely wrathful at the prospect of capturing Dharmaraja. With great energy, the soldiers rushed towards each other, like the powerful Ganga and Sarayu at the time of the monsoon, when they are overflowing with water."'


'Sanjaya said, "O king! The samshaptakas were delighted. They stationed themselves and their chariots on level
ground, arrayed in a vyuha in the shape of a half-moon. O venerable one! On seeing that Kiriti was advancing towards them, those tigers among men were delighted. They roared loudly. That noise resounded in the directions
and the sub-directions and covered the sky. Because the ground was covered with only a few men, there were no
echoes. On seeing that they were extremely delighted, Dhananjaya smiled a little and addressed these words to
Krishna. 'O one who has Devaki as a mother! Behold. At a time when they should be weeping, the Trigarta brothers are delighted. They are about to be killed in the battle. Or perhaps, this is certainly a time for the Trigartas to
rejoice. They will obtain excellent worlds that cannot be obtained by those who are cowards.' Having spoken these
words to the mighty-armed Hrishikesha in the battle, Arjuna encountered the army of the Trigartas, arranged in a
battle formation. Phalguna grasped the conch shell Devadatta, embellished with gold and blew it with great force,
filling all the directions. The samshaptaka chariots were terrified at the sound. In that battle, they were motionless,
as if they were made out of stone. Their mounts dilated their eyes, with the ears, heads and lips paralysed. Their
feet did not move. They excreted urine and vomited blood.

'"When they regained consciousness, the army was arrayed again and simultaneously released arrows tufted
with heron feathers towards Pandu's son. However, Arjuna used fifteen swift arrows to counter thousands of those.
The valiant one was swift and severed the arrows before they could reach him. Each of them then pierced Arjuna
with ten sharp arrows. But Partha pierced them back with three arrows each. O king! Each of them then pierced
Partha with five arrows. But the valorous one pierced each of them back with two arrows. They became extremely
angry and enveloped Arjuna and Keshava with sharp arrows, like rain showering down on a lake. Hundreds and
thousands of arrows were released towards Arjuna, like hordes of bees descending on flowering trees in a forest.
Subahu pierced and penetrated Savyasachi's diadem with thirty arrows that were as hard as rock. Those gold-tufted
arrows stuck to Kiriti's diadem and he looked like a sacrificial post decorated with gold. In the encounter, Pandava
used a broad-headed arrow to sever Subahu's arm-guard and enveloped him with a shower of arrows. Susharma,
Suratha, Sudharma, Sudhanu and Subahu pierced Kiriti with ten arrows each. But the one with the monkey on his
banner countered each of them separately with arrows. He pierced them back and severed their golden standards
with broad-headed arrows. Having sliced down Sudhanu's bow, he killed his horses with arrows. Then he severed
his helmeted head from his body. When that brave one was brought down, his followers were terrified. In fear, they
fled towards Duryodhana's army. Vasava's son was extremely angry and slaughtered that large army with his net of
arrows, like the sun's rays dispelling darkness. The army was shattered and fled in different directions. Savyasachi
was overcome with great rage and the Trigartas were overcome with fear. They were slaughtered by Partha's
straight-tufted arrows. They remained there, bereft of their senses, like a frightened herd of deer. The angry king of
the Trigartas[Susharma.] spoke to the maharathas. 'O brave ones! Do not run away. You should not be overcome by fear.
You pledged and took a terrible oath before all the soldiers. Having gone there, what will you tell the foremost
ones among Duryodhana's soldiers? For this deed of ours in this battle, will we not be ridiculed in this world? All
of us should unite and return to our respective divisions.' O king! Having been thus addressed, those brave ones
repeatedly blew on their conch shells and gladdened each other. The masses of samshaptakas returned again, like
the Narayana cowherds[This is a reference to the incidents recounted in Section 49 (Volume 4), when both Duryodhana and Arjuna had
solicited Krishna's help. Arjuna had opted for the unarmed Krishna and Duryodhana for the cowherds known as
Narayana soldiers. The Narayana soldiers are partly being equated with the samshaptakas.] that have returned to their death."'


