Janamejaya said, 'O illustrious one! I wish to hear in detail how Partha, the one whose deeds are unsullied, obtained the weapons. What did the long-armed Dhananjaya, tiger among men, do? O one who knows about the
brahman! What did he do while he lived there? How did he satisfy the illustrious Sthanu, lord of the gods? O
supreme among brahmanas! Through your grace, I wish to hear all this. You are omniscient. You know everything,
divine and human. O immensely wise one! The ancient battle between Arjuna, supreme among warriors and unvanquished in battle, and Bhava[Shiva.] was unparalleled and extraordinary and made one's hair stand up. On hearing
about it, the hearts of the brave Parthas[The Pandavas, that is, the other four Pandavas.], lions among men, also trembled in despondency, delight and great surprise. Tell me everything about Partha's[Arjuna's.] deeds. I do not see the slightest thing to censure in Jishnu. Recount to
me everything about the character of that brave one.'

Vaishampayana said, 'O son! O tiger among the Kouravas! I will recount for you the divine, great and extraordinary story of that great-souled one. O unblemished one! Hear in detail the account of Partha's meeting with
Tryambaka[Shiva's name. Literally, the one with three eyes.], god of the gods, where there was physical contact. On Yudhishthira's instructions, the infinitely
valorous one set out to see Shakra, lord of the gods, and Shankara[Shiva.], god of the gods. To ensure that his task met
with success, the immensely strong and mighty-armed Arjuna, bull among men, took his divine bow and sword.'

'O king! With a steadfast mind, Kouravya, Indra's son[Arjuna was Indra's son.], maharatha in all the worlds, set out in a northward
direction for the peak of the Himalayas. His mind was fixed on austerities. He swiftly entered a terrible forest that
was full of thorns. It was full of many flowers and fruit and was populated by many birds. It was full of many types
of animals and was frequented by siddhas and charanas. When Kounteya entered the forest that was bereft of men,
the sounds of conch shells and drums could be heard from heaven. A great shower of flowers fell down on the
ground. A net of clouds covered everything with shade. Passing through the forest that was difficult of access, he
approached the great mountain. In all his splendour, Arjuna then lived on the peak of the Himalayas. He saw many
flowering trees there, resounding with the sweet sounds of birds. There were rivers with many currents, tinged like
blue lapis lazuli[Vaidurya.], echoing with the sounds of swans and ducks, the cries of cranes and resounding with the notes
of male cuckoos, herons and peacocks. On seeing the beautiful woods and the pure, cool and clear water, the great
warrior Arjuna was delighted. The great-souled Arjuna then engaged in terrible austerities in a beautiful region of
that beautiful forest. He clad himself in darbha grass, bark and deerskin and carried a staff. In the first month, he
ate fruits once every period of three nights was over. In the second month, it was for double the period[That is, he ate after a period of six nights was over.]. In the
third month, he ate once every fortnight, surviving on decayed leaves that fell down on the ground. When the
fourth moon arrived and the moon was full, the mighty-armed son[The word used is nandana, meaning beloved as well as son.] of Pandu survived only on air. He raised his
arms up, and without anything for support, stood on the tips of his toes. Because of the frequent baths he took, the
matted hair of that great-souled one whose energy was infinite, became as lustrous as lightning and the lotus.

'Then all the maharshis went to Pinaki[A pinaka is both a trident and a bow. In particular, pinaka means Shiva's bow. Shiva is known as Pinaki. He
wields both a bow and a trident.]. They prostrated themselves before the immensely illustrious one
with the dark throat[Shiva's throat is dark because he consumed the poison thrown up during the churning of the ocean.] and sought his favours. They told him about Phalguna's deeds, "This immensely energetic
Partha has established himself on the peak of the Himalayas. He is engaged in difficult and terrible austerities and
smoke is emerging in all the directions. O lord of the gods! None of us knows what he wishes for. He is tormenting
us. It would be better if he were to be restrained." Maheshvara replied, "In a happy frame of mind and without fatigue, swiftly return to wherever you have come from. I know the resolution that is fixed in his mind. He does not
wish for heaven, or riches, or a long life. I will accomplish today everything that he wishes for." Having heard
Sharva's[Sharva is one of Shiva's names.] words, all the truthful rishis returned to their hermitages in happy frames of mind.'


Vaishampayana said, 'When all those great-souled ascetics had departed, the illustrious lord Hara[Shiva.], the destroyer
of all sins and the one with the pinaka in his hand, assumed the form of a kirata, blazing like a kanchana tree[Kanchana means gold or golden. The word kanchana is applied to several different kinds of trees.]
and resplendent in form, like Meru among the mountains. He grasped his handsome bow and many arrows that
were like venomous serpents. He descended with great force, like a flame, like a fire consuming the undergrowth.
The illustrious one was accompanied by the goddess Uma[Shiva's consort.], attired in the same way and observing the same
vow. All the beings, in their different forms, were then greatly delighted. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In his form of a hunter, and accompanied by thousands of women, he blazed forth. In an instant, that entire
forest became silent. The sounds of streams and birds stopped.

'As he approached Partha of the unblemished deeds, he saw the extraordinary sight of Muka, a son of Diti[The sons of Diti were daityas or demons. Muka was a demon.].
He had assumed the form of a boar and the supremely evil one wished to kill Arjuna. Phalguna picked up his Gan-
diva bow and arrows that were like venomous serpents. He strung his supreme bow and as the twang of the bowstring resounded, he said, "I have come here, without causing you any injury. But since you nevertheless desire to
kill me, I will first send you to Yama's abode today." On seeing the firm-bowed Phalguna about to shoot, Shankara
in the form of the hunter suddenly restrained him, "I was the one who sought this one with the colour of a blue
cloud[Referring to the boar.] first." However, disregarding these words, Phalguna struck. At that very instant, the hunter also unleashed his immensely radiant arrow at the same target, like the crest of a fire or like lightning. The arrows shot by
those two simultaneously struck Muka's gigantic body, which was as solid as a mountain. The two arrows struck
him like the force of lightning and the roar of thunder descended on a mountain. He was pierced by more arrows
that were like serpents with flames in their mouths. Assuming the terrible form of a rakshasa, he then gave up his
life.

'On seeing the man with the golden complexion, dressed in the garb of a hunter and accompanied by women,
Kounteya Jishnu, the destroyer of enemies, was delighted and smilingly told him, "O one with the golden complexion! Who are you, wandering in this deserted forest and accompanied by women? This animal had been chosen by me. Why did you pierce it? When the rakshasa had arrived here, I was the one who had picked him first.
Whether you did this from desire or with the intention of insulting me, you will not escape with your life. What
you have done towards me today is not in accordance with the rules of hunting. O one whose refuge is the mountains! Therefore, I will kill you today." At Pandava's words, the hunter laughed at him and told Pandava
Savyasachi in soft words, "He became my target first. I was the one who chose him first. It was my shot that
robbed him of his life. Insolent about your own strength, do not blame others for your own faults. O evil-minded
one! You have insulted me. You will not escape with your life. Stay there. I will shoot arrows like thunder at you.
Do the best you can and unleash your arrows at me." Thereupon, both of them repeatedly shouted at each other.
They shot arrows that were like venomous serpents at each other. Arjuna covered the hunter with a shower of arrows. But in a happy frame of mind, Shankara received them all. For an instant, the wielder of the pinaka received
that shower of arrows, but stood there like an immobile mountain, unhurt in body. On seeing that his shower of arrows had no effect, Dhananjaya was extremely surprised and exclaimed, "Excellent! Excellent! Aha! This one with
the delicate body makes a home on the peak of the Himalayas. But he receives the iron arrows[The word used is naracha, which means an iron arrow.] unleashed from
the Gandiva and is not moved. Who is he? Is he a god? Is he Rudra himself? Is he a yaksha or the lord of the gods?
The thirty gods often frequent this best of mountains. Except the god Pinaki, there is no one who can withstand the
force of the net of thousands of arrows I have created. As long as it is anyone other than Rudra who stands here, be
it a god or a yaksha, I will send him to Yama's abode with my sharp arrows." O king! Like the sun spreads out its
rays, Jishnu then shot iron arrows by the hundreds, capable of piercing one's weak spots. But the illustrious god,
the one who brings fortune to the worlds and holds the trident in his hand, cheerfully received them, like a mountain withstands a shower of rocks. In a short while, all of Phalguna's arrows were exhausted.

'On seeing that all his arrows were exhausted, he began to tremble. Jishnu thought of the illustrious fire-god,
who had earlier given him two inexhaustible quivers in Khandava. "What will I unleash from my bow now? My
arrows have been exhausted. Who is this man who swallows up all my arrows? I will kill him with the curved end
of my bow, like a terrible spear is used on elephants. Yama wields the staff and I will send him to his abode."

Kounteya, the destroyer of enemies, then grasped him with the curved end of his bow. But the mountain-dweller
snatched away his divine bow. Bereft of his bow, Arjuna stood there, with a sword in his hand. Wishing to end the
fight, he dashed at him with great force. With all the valour in his arms, the courageous descendant of the Kuru lineage[The word used is nandana.] struck at his head with the sharp sword, one that even mountains could not resist. However, on striking his
head, it shattered into pieces. Then Phalguna began to fight with trees and rocks. But the gigantic and illustrious
god who was in the form of a hunter withstood the trees and the rocks. Smoke billowed from the immensely strong
Partha's mouth. He struck that invincible one, who was in the form of a hunter, with fists that had the force of the
vajra. However, the illustrious one who was in the form of a hunter struck Phalguna with terrible fists that were
like Shakra's thunder. As a result of this fight with fists between Pandava and the hunter, the terrible sound of slapping arose there. That great and hair-raising battle with the fists went on for some time, like that ancient battle between Vritra and Vasava. The powerful Jishnu grasped the kirata and pressed his chest and the kirata struck Panda-
va with great force. As a result of the pressure of their arms and the pressing of their chests, a fire with smoke and
embers emerged from their bodies. Then Mahadeva grasped his[Arjuna's.] body firmly and attacked him with energy and
force, so that he was deluded of his senses. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thus oppressed by the god of the
gods, Phalguna's body was bruised and became like a ball of flesh. He lost control over his body. Oppressed by the
great-souled one, his breathing stopped. He fell down unconscious and Bhava was pleased.

'The illustrious god said, "O Phalguna! I am pleased with you because of your matchless deeds. There is no
kshatriya who is equal to you in valour and endurance. O unblemished one! Your energy and valour has been equal
to mine today. O mighty-armed one! O bull among men! I am pleased with you. Behold me. O large-eyed one! I
will give you eyes[So that Arjuna can see Shiva.]. You have been a rishi earlier. You will triumph over all your enemies in battle, even if they
happen to be dwellers of heaven." At that, Phalguna saw that immensely radiant god, the god Mahadeva
Girisha[Lord (isha) of the mountains (giri), Shiva's epithet.], who wields the trident, and the goddess[Uma was with Shiva.]. He knelt down on the ground and bowed down his head in
homage. Partha, the conqueror of the cities of enemies, gratified Hara[Shiva.]. Arjuna said, "O Kapardin[Kapardin is one of Shiva's names. Kaparda or kapardaka means braided or matted hair and Shiva is named
Kapardin because his hair is matted.]! O lord of
all the beings! O destroyer of Bhaga's eyes[At the time of Daksha's yajna, Shiva uprooted the god Bhaga's eyes.]! O illustrious god! O Shankara! Pardon my transgression. O illustrious one! It was in a desire to see you that I came to this great mountain, beloved by you, lord of the gods, and
the supreme abode of the ascetics. O illustrious god, worshipped by all the beings! Be pleased. O Mahadeva! Pardon my crime and my extreme bravery. Out of ignorance and insolence, I fought with you. O Shankara! I seek
refuge with you. Pardon me." Then the immensely energetic Vrishabhadhvaja[Shiva's name, the one with a bull (vrishabha) on his banner (dhvaja).] smiled, and grasping Phalguna's
beautiful hands, said, "I have pardoned you."'


'The illustrious god said, "You were Nara in an earlier body, the companion of Narayana. You spent many
ayuta[An ayuta is ten thousand.] years in fearful austerities in Badari[The hermitage at Badari or Badarika, one of the sources of the Ganga.]. There is supreme energy in you, like that in Vishnu, supreme
among men. The universe is held up through the energy of the two of you, foremost among men. O lord! At the
time of Shakra's consecration, you and Krishna oppressed the danavas and you took up the great bow that thunders
like clouds. O Partha! This Gandiva is fit for your hands. O supreme among men! It was that which I snatched
from you, using my powers of maya. O Partha! These two quivers will again be inexhaustible, as they used to be
for you. O Partha! I am pleased with you. Truth is your valour. O bull among men! Accept a boon from me. What
is it that you desire? You are the one who shows respect. There is no one on earth who is your equal. Nor is there
anyone in heaven. O conqueror of enemies! The kshatriyas find their chief in you."

'Arjuna replied, "O illustrious god! O Vrishadhvaja[Vrishadhvaja and Vrishabhadhvaja mean the same.]! O lord! If you wish to grant me that which I desire, I
wish for the terrible and divine weapon known as pashupata[Pashupati is Shiva's name.]. It is known as brahmashira. It is fearful and is
terrible in prowess. When the terrible end of a yuga approaches, it destroys the entire world. Through this weapon,
I can burn down in battle danavas, rakshasas, spirits[The word bhuta means beings, but it also means evil spirits.], pishachas, gandharvas and pannagas[Nagas and pannagas are serpents. They are different from snakes, because they possess extraordinary powers, including that of assuming any form at will.]. When unleashed
with mantras, it releases thousands of spears, fearful clubs and arrows that have virulent poison in them. With it, I
will fight in battle Bhishma, Drona, Kripa and the son of the suta[Karna is the son of the suta.], who always speaks very harshly. O illustrious god! O destroyer of Bhaga's eyes! This is my first wish. Through your grace, let me be empowered in my
pursuit."

'The illustrious god said, "O Pandava! I will give you the great pashupata weapon, dear to me. You will be capable of bearing, releasing and withdrawing it. The great Indra, Yama, the king of the yakshas[Kubera.], Varuna and Vayu
do not know it. How can it be known to humans? O Partha! But it must not be suddenly released at any man. If it is
released at someone who lacks in energy, it will destroy the entire universe. There is no one in the three worlds,
mobile or immobile, who cannot be killed by it. It can be released through thought, eyes, words or the bow[These divine weapons were based on mantras, the physical form was immaterial.]."'
Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing this, Partha swiftly purified and composed himself. He went to the lord of the
universe, who said, "Learn." Then he taught the best of the Pandavas the mysteries of this weapon, including its
withdrawal. It was like the embodied form of death. From then on, it waited on the great-souled one[Arjuna.], as it did
on Tryaksha[Tryaksha is Shiva's name, meaning the one with three (tri) eyes (aksha).], the husband of Uma. Arjuna accepted it with a delighted heart. At that, the entire earth, with its
mountains, forests, trees, oceans, regions of groves, villages, cities and towns, began to tremble. When the moment
came, the sounds of thousands of conch shells, drums and kettledrums were heard. A great whirlwind[The word used is nirghata, which also means earthquake.] occurred.
The gods and the demons saw the embodied form of the blazing and terrible weapon by the side of the immensely
energetic Pandava. Tryambaka[Shiva, the one with three eyes.] touched the immensely energetic Phalguna and everything that was impure in
his body, was immediately destroyed. Then Tryambaka gave Arjuna permission to leave and go to heaven. Lowering his head in obeisance, Partha joined his hands in salutation and looked at the god. Then, the lord of the residents of heaven, the immensely wise Girisha, Shiva the husband of Uma, gave that supreme of men the great bow
known as Gandiva, the destroyer of demons and pishachas. In front of the eyes of that supreme of men[Arjuna.], the
great god then rose up into the sky, accompanied by Uma, leaving that supreme of mountains, with its white peaks,
sides and caverns and frequented by birds and maharshis.'


