Yudhishthira said, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! In the dharma followed at funeral ceremonies, umbrellas and footwear are given. Who started this? How did this originate and why are these given? It isn't just the
dharma of funeral ceremonies. They are given on other auspicious occasions too. O king! I wish to hear the truth
about this."

'Bhishma replied, "O king! Listen in detail to how the system of umbrellas and footwear started, about how it
originated in this world and who started it. It became an everlasting practice for those who seek an auspicious end.
O lord of men! I will tell you everything in detail. O lord of men! In this connection, listen to an ancient account.
This is a conversation between Jamadagni and the great-souled Surya. O lord! In ancient times, the illustrious one
used to play around with his bow himself. One  after another,  Bhargava would  take aim and shoot his arrows.
Renuka[Jamadagni's wife.] would bring back all the ones that the blazingly energetic one shot. She would properly bring them back
and return them to him. He would be pleased at the sound of the bowstring slapping against his palm and the sound
of  the  arrows.  He  would  cheerfully  shoot  them  and  she  would  bring  them  back.  Once,  it  was  the  month  of
Jyeshtha[Summer, May-June.] and the sun was in the middle of the sky. Having shot his arrows, the brahmana told Renuka, 'O large-
eyed one! Go and fetch the arrows that have been shot from the bow. O one with the beautiful brows! Bring them
back, so that I can shoot them again.' O lord of men! She left. But the beautiful one had to seek shade at the foot of
a tree. There, her head and feet were scorched by the sun. The beautiful one spent some time there, but she feared
that she would be cursed by her husband. The black-eyed one therefore began to collect the arrows again. The illustrious one collected the arrows and returned. But the one with the beautiful limbs was distressed and her feet
suffered from the pain. Scared and trembling, she returned to her husband. The husband, the rishi, angrily spoke
these  words  to  the  one  with  the  beautiful  face.  'O  Renuka! Why  do  you  repeatedly  take  such  a  long  time  to
return?' Renuka replied, 'O one rich in austerities! My head and feet are scorched. I suffer from the heat of the sun
and have to seek shade at the foot of a tree. O brahmana! That is the reason I take a long time to return. O lord! O
one rich in austerities! Knowing this, you shouldn't be angry with me.' Jamadagni said, 'O Renuka! The one with
the blazing rays has been the cause of your misery. Today, using the blazing energy of my weapons and my arrows,
I will destroy Surya.' He drew back his divine bow and picked up many arrows. He stood there, turning his face in
the direction of the sun. O Kounteya! On seeing that he was ready to strike, Surya approached in the form of a
brahmana and spoke these words. 'What crime has Surya committed against you? From the firmament, Surya scatters down his rays. The sun collects juices from the earth and showers them down in the form of rain. O brahmana!
Food is generated from that and this brings happiness to humans. It has been read in the Vedas that food is life. O
brahmana! Hidden in the clouds, the sun is surrounded by his rays and showers down rain on the seven dvipas. The
herbs, the creepers, the leaves and the flowers result. O lord! It is through the rain that all the food is generated.
Everything is sustained through food-the sacraments, beginning with birth, all the vows and rites, the donation of
cows, marriages, the prosperous sacrifices, the donations and all the methods for the accumulation of wealth. O
Bhargava! You know the truth about that. Everything that is pleasant and beautiful results from food. I am telling
you what you already know. O brahmana! Everything that I am telling you is already known to you. O brahmana
rishi! Be pacified. Why are you trying to bring Surya down?'"'


Yudhishthira asked, "When the sun beseeched the supreme among sages, what did the immensely energetic Jamadagni do?"

'Bhishma replied, "O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Despite the supplication, the sage Jamadagni, the lord
who was like the fire in his radiance, was not pacified. Surya again spoke to him in sweet words. O lord of the
earth! In the form of the brahmana, he bowed his head down and joined his hands in salutation. 'O brahmana rishi!
In his course, Surya is always moving. Since the sun is always moving forward, how will you strike one who is in
motion?' Jamadagni replied, 'Through the sight of my knowledge, I know who you are. Whether you are stationary or mobile, it will be my task to teach you humility today. O sun! In the afternoon, you are stationary for a brief
instant. O Surya! Without thinking about it, I will pierce you then.' Surya said, 'O brahmana rishi! O supreme
among archers! There is no doubt that you know who I am. O illustrious one! Even if I have offended you, know
that I have sought refuge with you.' At this, the illustrious Jamadagni laughed and spoke these words. 'O Surya!
Since you have sought protection with me, you should not be frightened any more. If a person who has sought
refuge with me is slain, that will cause a transgression of the uprightness of brahmanas, the stability of the earth,
the mildness of the moon, the gravity of Varuna, the resplendence of the fire, the radiance of Meru and the heat of
the sun. A person who kills a supplicant is like one who violates his preceptor's bed, kills a brahmana and drinks
liquor. O son[The word used is tata.]! Therefore, think of something against the heat. Let the paths of those who are oppressed by your
rays become comfortable.' Having said this, the extender of the Bhrigu lineage was silent. Quickly, Surya gave
him an umbrella and footwear. Surya said, 'O maharshi! Accept this umbrella as a helmet against my rays. Accept
this footwear, made out of leather, for the protection of the feet. From this day, these will be known on earth as
auspicious gifts and they will be regarded as supreme and indestructible.' Umbrellas and footwear were thus instituted by Surya. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In the three worlds, they came to be known as auspicious.
Therefore, excellent umbrellas and footwear must be given to brahmanas. This is extremely great dharma and one
should not think about this. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! If a person gives a white umbrella with one
hundred ribs to brahmanas, he obtains happiness after death. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Always honoured
by brahmanas, apsaras and gods, he dwells in Shakra's world. O mighty-armed one! If a person gives footwear to
brahmanas, snatakas and other brahmanas who are controlled and are being scorched, he obtains worlds that are
revered by the gods. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! After death, he resides happily in Goloka. O best among
the Bharata lineage! O supreme among the Bharata lineage! I have thus told you everything about the fruits from
donating umbrellas and footwear."'


