'Duryodhana said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Listen to the main treasures I saw at the Pandava's,
brought by the lords of the earth from everywhere. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing those riches,
grown and mined, I no longer feel myself to be conscious. Kamboja gave riches in the form of skins of eda[A kind of antelope.], fine
cat skins lined with gold, the best skins from deer, three hundred horses with parrot-like noses that were grey and
of mixed colours and three hundred she-camels fattened with palm[The word used is pilu.], pulses[The word used is shami.] and nuts[The inguda nut.]. All the govasana and
dasamiya brahmanas came to please the immensely fortunate and great-souled Dharmaraja[Govasana brahmanas look after cattle and dasamiya brahmanas are fit to be servants. When relating the story
to Shakuni, Duryodhana mentioned vatadhana brahmanas.]. They brought three
kharvas of tribute, but were barred entry, and stood at the gate. When they brought beautiful and golden water
pots[Kamandalu.] and offered their tribute in those, they were allowed entry. O great king! As tribute, the shudra kings who
lived in Bharukaccha[In Gujarat today.] brought one hundred thousand slave girls from the Karpasika region. They were dark and
slender, with long hair and adorned in golden ornaments. They also brought ranku[A kind of antelope.] hides, fit for the best of brahmanas, and horses from the Gandhara region. The men whose crops depend on the showers of Indra[That is, those who live in dry areas.], those who
are born near the mouths of rivers, along the shores and banks of oceans and rivers, the Vairamas, the Paradas, the
Vangas and the Kitavas, brought many riches and many jewels-goats, cattle, gold, donkeys, camels, honey from
fruit and different types of garments. But restrained, they stood at the door.

'"Maharatha King Bhagadatta, the brave ruler of Pragjyotisha and the strong ruler of the mlechhas, came with
yavanas. He brought a tribute of thoroughbred horses, as swift as the wind, but was barred and stood at the gate.
After presenting a receptacle that was like iron[The word used is ashma, meaning either iron or stone. The word also means sapphire, but that use is rarer.] and swords with handles of ivory, Bhagadatta of Pragjyotisha
left. I saw that many people from different directions were refused admission at the gate, though they brought rich
tributes of gold and silver-with two eyes, three eyes, one eye on the forehead, those who wore headdresses, those
who had no fixed abode, Bahukas, cannibals and those with only one foot. They brought horses that were as swift
as thought, with the colours of indragopas[A reddish insect, sometimes identified with a firefly.] and parrots, or with the colours of the rainbow[The text uses the word indrayudha, meaning Indra's weapon. The specific weapon in question is the bow and
the rainbow is known as Indra's bow.] or red like the
evening sky[The word used is sandhya, which can mean evening as well as dawn.]. They were of many shades and there were also seized forest horses[These were wild horses that had been seized, as opposed to domestically bred horses.], with the speed of the mind.

'"They also gave him[Yudhishthira.] rich tributes of the best quality of gold. There were Chinas, Hunas, Shakas[Identified as Scythians.],
Oudras[Inhabitants of Odra, today's Orissa.], those who live inside mountains, Varshneyas, Harahunas, dark ones and those who live in the Himalayas. I do not remember the order of those who were barred entry at the gate. They gave much tribute in many
forms. There were tens of thousands of asses, giant in form and with black necks. They were famous everywhere
and trained well, capable of killing hundreds. There were large and colourful garments pleasant to the touch, from
Bahlika[Identified as Bactria.] and China. There was wool, ranku[Ranku is a kind of antelope.] hides, silk, jute, cotton and thousands of other garments. They had
the colour of lotuses and were soft, though not made of cotton. There were hides. There were long and sharp
swords, double-edged swords[Rishti.], spears, battleaxes and a hundred battleaxes from the other side of the ocean[Implying the west.].
They brought juices, fragrances and many jewels in thousands. But despite the tribute, they were barred entry and
stood at the gate. Shakas, Tukharas, Kankas, Romashas[Identified as Romans.] and men with horns brought as tribute one hundred million[Arbuda.] horses that could travel great and long distances. With crores of tribute of many kinds and unlimited gold,
they stood at the door and were barred entry. Expensive seats, vehicles, beds, and many kinds of chariots adorned
with gems and gold, made of ivory and decorated with gold, well-trained horses covered with tiger skins, many
kinds of cushions, thousands of gems, narachas[Iron arrows.], half-narachas, many kinds of weapons-this was the great tribute paid by the king from the east[It is not clear who this king is. It could be Bhagadatta, but Bhagadatta went away without entering.], when he entered the great-souled Pandava's sacrificial arena."'


'Duryodhana said, "O unblemished one! Listen to me as I describe the large and varied tribute, full of riches, given
by the kings for the sake of the sacrifice. The kings who live along the banks of the river Shailoda, between
Mounts Meru and Mandara, and enjoy the pleasurable shade of bamboo[The text uses the expressions kichaka and venu. The latter is bamboo, while the former is hollow bamboo.]-the Khasas, Ekashanas, Jyohas,
Pradaras, Dirghavenus, Pashupas, Kunindas, Tanganas and Paratanganas brought large masses of pipilika gold in
vessels, gathered by ants[The ants dug up the gold from the earth. Pipilika is an ant. There is a reference in Herodotus to ants that dug
up gold in the desert regions.]. The strong residents of the mountains brought as tribute dark and coloured tails of
yaks and others that were as white as moonbeams, a lot of sweet honey from the flowers of the Himalayas, garlands and water from the northern Kuru region and immensely powerful herbs from northern Kailasa. They bowed
and stood at the gate of King Ajatashatru, but were denied entry. O lord of the earth! There were kings from the
other side of the Himalayas, from the mountains where the sun rises, from the banks of Varishena and Lohitya[The Brahmaputra.],
from the banks of the ocean and kiratas who live on roots and fruit and wear skins. They brought large masses of
sandal and aloe wood, kaliya[A specific type of sandalwood.], skins, jewels, gold, fragrances, ten thousand kirata slave girls, beautiful animals
and birds from distant regions and copious quantities of radiant gold from the mountains. But despite all this tribute, they were refused entry and waited at the gate.

'"O lord of the earth! Kayavyas, Daradas, Darvas, Shuras, Vaiyamakas, Oudumbaras, Durvibhagas, Paradas,
Bahlikas, Kashmiras, Kundamanas, Pourakas, Hamsakayanas, Shibis, Trigartas, Youdheyas, the kings of Madra
and Kekaya, Ambashthas, Koukuras, Tarkshyas, Vastrapas, Pahlavas[Identified as Persians.], Vasatas, Mouleyas, Kshudrakas, Malavas,
Shoundikas, Kukkuras, Shakas, Angas, Vangas, Pundras, Shanavatyas, Gayas, Sujatayas, Shrenimanas-all illustrious kshatriyas with weapons in their hands-brought hundreds of tribute for Ajatashatru. The chiefs from Vanga
and Kalinga, from Tamralipta and Pundraka, brought garments and silk from the Koushiki[A river.]. On the instructions
of the king, the gatekeepers told them, 'If you bring large and great tribute, only then will you be admitted.' So
they each gave one thousand elephants, with tusks like the shafts of ploughs, caparisoned in gold and covered in
cushions with the colour of lotuses. They were as large as mountains, always in rut and came from the shores of
Kamyaka Lake. They were covered in armour, patient and trained well. They[The kings.] then entered the gate. These and
many other masses came from all the directions. There were other great-souled ones who offered many gems. The
gandharva kin Chitraratha, Vasava's friend, gave four hundred horses with the speed of the wind. The gandharva
Tumburu happily gave one hundred horses that had the colour of mango leaves, with gold harnesses. O Kouravya!
O lord of the earth! The famous king of the Shukaras gave many hundreds of valuable elephants. As tribute, Virata
from Matsya gave two thousand rutting elephants, caparisoned in gold. O king! King Vasudana from the kingdom
of Pamshu gave twenty-six elephants and one thousand horses, all harnessed in gold. O lord of men! They had
great speed and strength and were of the right age. He offered this and many other riches to Pandava. O lord of the
earth! Yajnasena gave Pritha's sons fourteen thousand servant girls, ten thousand male servants with their wives
and twenty-six chariots pulled by elephants. He offered his entire kingdom for the sacrifice. The Simhalas offered
the best jewels found in the ocean, lapis lazuli, pearls and conch shells and hundreds of covers for housing elephants. Many dark-complexioned men, eyes copper-red and attired in garments adorned with gems, brought tribute
and waited at the gate, having been refused entry.

'"Brahmanas brought gifts out of affection, kshatriyas because they had been defeated and vaishyas and shudras
out of servitude. Out of affection and respect, they waited on Yudhishthira-all the mlecchas and all the varnas, the
superior, the middle and the inferior, arriving from many countries and many races. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! In Yudhishthira's abode, I saw the kings make such large and great offerings to my enemy that I wish to
die from grief. Now let me tell you about the servants of the Pandavas, to whom Yudhishthira supplies both raw
and cooked food. There are three hundred thousand soldiers mounted on elephants. There are a hundred million
chariots and innumerable foot soldiers. The raw food is measured out in one place, cooked elsewhere and distributed at another place. Auspicious sounds are heard. Among all the varnas, I have not seen a single one in Yudhishthira's abode who has not obtained food, is unhappy and has not been rewarded well. Eighty-eight thousand
snatakas live a householder's life, each supported by thirty servant girls provided by Yudhishthira. They are happy
and satisfied and always pray for the destruction of his enemies. In Yudhishthira's abode, ten thousand ascetics
who have controlled their seed, eat from golden plates. O lord of the earth! Yajnaseni[Yajnasena's daughter, Droupadi.] does not eat until she has
seen to it that everyone has eaten and is full, even hunchbacks and dwarfs. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
There are only two who have not paid tribute to Kunti's son-the Panchalas because of the marriage alliance[Droupadi, the princess of Panchala, was married to the Pandavas.]
and the Andhakas and the Vrishnis because of friendship."'


'Duryodhana said, "The arya kings are devoted to truth and great in their vows, complete in their knowledge, eloquent and immersed in vedanta[Vedanta is the end (anta) of the Vedas and usually refers to the Upanishads. The term is also used for the six
schools of philosophy that followed.], forbearing, modest, famous and with dharma in their hearts. Those kings who
have been anointed wait on him[Yudhishthira.]. There I saw many thousands of wild cows that had been brought by the kings
as dakshina, with brass pots for milking. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As a mark of respect and of their
own volition, the kings brought supreme vessels for the consecration there. Bahlika brought the chariot that was
inlaid with gold. Sudakshina[The king of Kamboja.] yoked it with white horses from Kamboja. In affection, the immensely strong
Sunitha[Shishupala.] fixed the axle. Willingly, the king of Chedi[Shishupala again.] himself fixed the flagstaff. The king from the south had
the armour ready, Magadha[Since Jarasandha had already been killed, this is Sahadeva.] the garland and the headdress. The great archer Vasudana[The king of Pamshu.] held the king of elephants, sixty years old. Matsya[Virata.] fixed the sides[Of the chariot.], Ekalavya held the footwear. Avanti had the many kinds of water required for the final bath. Chekitana[From the Vrishni lineage.] gave the quiver, the king of Kashi the bow and Shalya the sword with a
golden hilt and with straps inlaid with gold. Dhoumya and the immensely ascetic Vyasa performed the anointing,
after having placed Narada and the sages Devala-Asita[Alternatively, Asita-Devala. These are two ancient sages, Asita and Devala, who are always referred to
together.] at the forefront. The maharshis attended the abhisheka[The actual act of coronation or anointing by sprinkling sacred water.]
with pleasure. Just as the saptarshis approach the great Indra, lord of the gods, in heaven, with Jamadagni's son[Parashurama.],
the great-souled ones, learned in the Vedas and the mantras, came with large quantities of gifts.

'"Satyaki, with truth as his valour, held up the umbrella. Dhananjaya and Bhima fanned Pandava[Yudhisthira.]. Varuna's
conch shell had been constructed by Vishvakarma in ancient times with a thousand pieces of gold and had been
given by Prajapati to Indra in that ancient era. The ocean now brought it for him[Yudhishthira.] and Krishna anointed him with
that. At this, I felt benumbed. They went to the western, eastern and southern oceans[This is a reference to the conquest of the Pandavas.]. O father! But they did not
go to the north, which is for the birds. To make it auspicious, hundreds of conch shells were blown and when they
were blown together, my hair stood up at the roar. Kings were deprived of their own energy and fell prostrate on
the ground. But Dhristadyumna, the Pandavas, Satyaki and Krishna as the eighth were valorous and kindly disposed towards each other[These eight didn't become unconscious.]. They maintained themselves and on seeing me and the kings unconscious on the
ground, laughed at us. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Then, delightedly, Bibhatsu gave the principal brahmanas five hundred bullocks, their horns plated with gold. Like lord Harishchandra, Kounteya accomplished the
rajasuya and his prosperity was supreme. Shambara's slayer[Pradyumna killed a demon named Shambara. Pradyumna was the son of Krishna and Rukmini. However,
there is no account of this Pradyumna having undertaken any great sacrifices. But Pradyumna is also a name for
Kama, or the god of love, and he is also known as the killer of Shambara. The reference could therefore be to
Kama.], Youvanashva, Manu, King Prithu and Bhagiratha
couldn't rival this. O lord! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having witnessed Partha's prosperity like that of
Harishchandra, how should I see any good in remaining alive? O lord of men! A yoke attached by a blind man becomes loose. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The younger ones[The Pandavas.] are prospering, while the older ones[The Kouravas.]
are decaying. O supreme among the Kurus! Having witnessed all this, I find no refuge, whichever way I look. That
is the reason I am becoming thin. That is the reason I am pale and miserable."'


