'Sanjaya said, "O great king! When the night had passed and the sun had arisen, both the armies assembled to fight
again. In great rage, wishing to kill each other, they advanced against each other. All of them glanced at each other
and assembled for the encounter. O king! Because of your evil counsel, the Pandavas and the sons of Dhritarashtra
arrayed themselves in vyuhas and counter-vyuhas.They armed and arrayed themselves and attacked each other. O
king! Bhishma protected himself in every direction in the form of a makara vyuha[A makara is a mythical aquatic animal and makara can loosely be translated as shark or crocodile.]. O king! The Pandavas also
protected themselves in the form of a vyuha. Your father, Devavrata, advanced with a great army of chariots. He
was surrounded by supreme charioteers and other chariots, infantry, elephants and horse-riders, all stationed in accordance with their appropriate ranks. The illustrious Pandavas saw that they were ready for battle. They arranged
themselves for battle in the form of a shyena[Hawk.], the invincible vyuha that is the king of all vyuhas. The immensely strong Bhimasena was radiant at the mouth. The invincible Shikhandi and Parshata Dhrishtadyumna were the
eyes. The brave Satyaki, with truth as his valour, was the head. Wielding the Gandiva bow, Partha was stationed at
the neck. With an entire akshouhini, the illustrious and great-souled Drupada, together with his sons, stationed
himself for battle on the left wing. Kekaya, the leader of an akshouhini, was stationed on the right wing. Droupadi's sons and Subhadra's valiant son formed the back. The illustrious King Yudhishthira, handsome in his prowess,
was himself at the rear, with his two intelligent brothers[Nakula and Sahadeva.].

'"The battle commenced with Bhima penetrating the makara's mouth. He advanced against Bhishma in that encounter and enveloped him with arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Using great weapons, Bhishma
brought these down. In that great battle, he confounded the soldiers of the sons of Pandu, who were stationed in
arrays. On seeing that the soldiers were confounded, Dhananjaya swiftly advanced. In the forefront of that battle,
he pierced Bhishma with one thousand arrows. Having repulsed the weapons that had been released by Bhishma in
that encounter, he delighted his own soldiers, who were stationed in battle. At this, King Duryodhana spoke to
Bharadvaja's son. The supreme among strong ones had earlier witnessed the terrible slaughter of his soldiers and
the death of his brothers in the battle. Remembering this, the maharatha said, 'O preceptor! O unblemished one!
You have always had my welfare in heart. We have sought refuge with you and with Bhishma, the grandfather.
With this, there is no doubt that we can hope to vanquish even the gods in battle, not to speak of the sons of Pandu,
who are inferior in valour and power in this encounter.' O venerable one! Having been thus addressed by your son,
while Satyaki looked on, Drona penetrated the Pandava ranks. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Satyaki countered Drona's progress and a tumultuous battle commenced. It made the body hair stand up. Bharadvaja's powerful
son was enraged. In that encounter, as if smiling, he pierced Shini's descendant on his shoulders with ten sharp arrows. O king! At this, extremely enraged, Bhimasena wished to protect Satyaki from Drona, supreme among the
wielders of weapons, and pierced him. O venerable one! In that battle, Drona, Bhishma and Shalya angrily enveloped Bhimasena with arrows. O venerable one! Abhimanyu became angry, and so did Droupadi's sons. They
used sharp arrows to wound all the warriors with upraised weapons. In the great battle, the great archer, Shikhandi,
angrily advanced against the immensely strong Bhishma and Drona, who were causing this torment. The brave and
powerful one grasped a bow that had the sound of a cloud. Shikhandi swiftly showered arrows that shrouded the
sun. However, on confronting him, the grandfather of the Bharata lineage remembered that he had been a woman
earlier and withdrew from the battle. O great king! At this, instructed by your son and with a desire to protect
Bhishma, Drona rushed to battle. Shikhandi confronted Drona, supreme among the wielders of weapons, and fled
from the field of battle, as if from the fire that burns at the destruction of an era. O lord of the earth! With a large
army, your son advanced to protect Bhishma and desiring a great victory. O king! But with Dhananjaya at the forefront, the Pandavas advanced against Bhishma, firm in their resolution of ensuring victory. A terrible and extremely wonderful battle ensued, like that between the gods and the danavas. Each side desired victory and eternal
fame."'


