Bhishma said, "Having been thus addressed by the intelligent Tuladhara, the intelligent Jajali, supreme among
ascetics, replied in these words. 'O trader! You sell all the juices and all the scents, trees and herbs and their
roots and fruits. How has this steadiness in intelligence come to you? From where has this knowledge come? O
immensely wise one! Tell me everything about this.' O king! Having been thus addressed by the illustrious brahmana, the vaishya Tuladhara, who knew about the true objectives of dharma and the subtleties of dharma, spoke to
Jajali, who had performed difficult austerities, but was still not content with his knowledge. 'O Jajali! I know eternal and ancient dharma, with all its mysteries. People who know say that it is nothing but friendliness and being
engaged in the welfare of all beings. There should be no violence towards living beings, or limited violence. O Jajali! Such conduct is said to follow supreme dharma and that is the way I live. My house is built with wood and
grass that has been cut by other people. O brahmana rishi! Lac, lotus roots, lotus filaments, scents, the agents for
cleaning, superior and inferior, and the juices and many other objects, with the exception of liquor, are bought by
me from other people. I sell them again, without any deceit. O Jajali! If there is a person who regards everyone as a
well-wisher and is engaged in everyone's welfare, in deeds, thoughts and words, he knows dharma. I do not praise
or censure the deeds of others. O brahmana rishi! I look upon these colourful people, the way I look at the sky. I do
not obstruct or oppose. I do not hate or desire. O Jajali! I look upon all beings as equal. That is my vow. I have
been freed from good and bad. I have cast aside love and hatred. O Jajali! I hold up my pair of scales equally towards everyone. O Jajali! O best among intelligent ones! That is the way I look at you and at all the other people.
A lump of earth, a piece of iron and gold are the same to me. The blind, the deaf and the mad, despite being adversely affected by destiny, are always full of joy. That is the way I look at everything. Those who are old, those
who suffer from disease and those who are emaciated are indifferent towards objects of pleasure. In that way, I
have lost all interest in objects of desire and pleasure. When a person is not frightened and no one is terrified of
him, when he does not desire and does not hate, then he obtains success and becomes a brahmana. A person who
does not harbour wicked sentiments towards all beings, in deeds, thoughts and words, attains the brahman. A person who grants fearlessness to all beings attains a state that is without fear. For him, there is no past and no future
and no dharma. A person who agitates people through cruel words and harsh punishment, as if he is the face of
death, suffers from great fear. Great-souled and aged ones observe the conduct of non-violence towards their sons
and grandsons and I follow them. A person who knows, an ascetic or a powerful person can be deluded and from
that confusion, eternal dharma and good conduct can be destroyed. However, if a wise person follows good conduct, he can swiftly obtain dharma. Such a virtuous person wanders around, self-controlled, without any violence
in his consciousness. In a river, a piece of wood drifts along as it wishes and sometimes comes into contact with
another piece of wood, which is also flowing along, as it wills. There are other pieces of wood that come together
and then drift apart. Grass, wood and refuse are sometimes seen to come together. This is the nature of conduct,
seen here and there. If there is a person who does not agitate any being and if he grants fearlessness to all beings,
that person always attains the state of a sage. O learned one! There may also be a person who agitates all the people, like a wolf. Like an aquatic animal, he makes people shriek and climb onto the shore. A person who has aides
is extremely fortunate and obtains riches, in this world and hereafter. That is what wise people have spoken about
in the sacred texts. Some practise a little bit of what has been mentioned. Other accomplished ones follow it in entirety. All the fruits that are obtained through austerities, sacrifices, donations and wisdom can be obtained by ensuring fearlessness. In this world, a person who grants the dakshina of fearlessness to all beings accomplishes all
the sacrifices and himself obtains the dakshina of fearlessness. There is no dharma that is the equal of non-violence
towards beings. A person who never agitates beings and grants all beings fearlessness attains the state of a great
sage. A person who agitates beings, like a snake that has arrived inside a house, does not obtain dharma, in this
world or in the next. When a person looks on all beings as his own self and treats all beings equally, the gods themselves are confused when they try to follow his path and his footsteps. The donation of fearlessness to beings is the
supreme among all donations. O Jajali! I am telling you the truth. Listen to it with devotion. A person who is fortunate is not born again. An unfortunate person is born again. Obsessed with their tasks, people are always seen to be
asleep. There is nothing that is without a reason. O Jajali! Dharma is subtle. In the words of dharma, tasks have
been ordained for the past and the future. There are subtleties and so many contradictions that one is incapable of
knowing it. Some understand this internally. Others  only comprehend conduct. There are those who  kill bulls,
making them bear heavy burdens, binding and restraining them, inserting rings in their noses. Why aren't these
people killed? There are those who kill beings for eating them. Why are they not censured? Men make other men
slaves and enjoy the results. They kill, bind and restrain them, making them work day and night. This is despite
they themselves knowing the misery from killing and striking. The gods dwell in the five senses of all beings-
Aditya, Chandrama, Vayu, Brahma, Prana, Kratu[Intelligence or a sacrificial rite, personified.] and Yama. But there are those who kill and trade beings, without even thinking about it. O brahmana! I am not speaking about oil, clarified butter, honey, other objects and
herbs[Those are the objects Tuladhara trades in.]. There are many animals that are happily reared in regions where there are no gnats. Despite knowing that
their mothers love them, many men oppress them. They take them to regions where there is a lot of mud, with
many gnats. They make them mounts and beasts of burden. Others oppress them in other ways. I think that these
deeds are no different from killing a foetus. Agriculture is regarded as a virtuous livelihood. But it is extremely terrible. Wooden implements with iron at the mouth injure the earth and kill beings that live in the ground. O Jajali!
Look towards the bulls that have been yoked. Cows have been named as unslayable. How can this person then kill
them? The person who kills a cow for the sake of gain commits a great offence. Many rishis and ascetics spoke to
Nahusha. "A cow is a mother. You have killed a bull, which is like Prajapati. O Nahusha! You have perpetrated a
wicked deed and we are frightened on this account." They divided it[The sin.] into a hundred and one parts and inflicted it
as diseases on all living beings. O Jajali! The immensely fortunate rishis passed this on to the subjects and told
Nahusha, who had committed a sin like that of killing a foetus, "We will not be able to offer oblations at your sacrifices." This is what those great-souled ones, who knew about the truth, said. However, the rishis and the ascetics
got to know the truth and were quickly pacified[They got to know that Nahusha had not killed the bull intentionally.]. O Jajali! These are the kinds of inauspicious and terrible conduct practised in this world. These are practised even by accomplished people who know, simply because these are
norms of conduct. One should seek out the reasons behind dharma and not follow it because it is the conduct of the
world. O Jajali! Listen to the conduct I follow towards those who hurt me or praise me. They are equal before me
and I do not like or dislike either. This is the kind of dharma that is praised by the learned. This is full of reason
and is practised by the ascetics. This is always seen among those who observe dharma in their conduct and are accomplished.'"'


Jajali said, 'O Tuladhara! You have spoken about the dharma that has been laid down and about the supreme
conduct that snould be followed by beings to reach the gates of heaven. Crops results from agriculture and it
is on the basis of those that you remain alive. O trader! It is with animals and herbs that mortal beings remain
alive. Sacrifices flow from those. You speak like a non-believer. This world will not be sustained and nothing will
be left if these doctrines are followed.'

'"Tuladhara replied, 'O Jajali! O brahmana! I will speak about sustenance. I am not a non-believer. I am not criticizing sacrifices. But a person who knows about sacrifices is extremely rare. I bow down before the sacrifices of
brahmanas and before people who know about sacrifices. Having abandoned their own sacrifices, brahmanas have
resorted to the sacrifices meant for kshatriyas. O brahmana! Greedy for the riches of others, it is the non-believers
who have led to such practices. Though they know about the words of the Vedas, they have disguised falsehood
behind apparent truth. "This should be given. That should be given." There is no end to this kind of desire. O Jajali! Theft and undesirable acts result from this. An oblation obtained through good means is what satisfies the
gods, such as bowing down, oblations, studying and herbs. The worship of gods should be in accordance with what
is laid down in the sacred texts. Through their sacrifices, wicked people give rise to wicked offspring. The greedy
give birth to the greedy. The contented give birth to the contented. The resultant offspring are just like the performer of the sacrifice and the officiating priest. Through sacrifices, offspring who are like the unblemished sky
can result. O brahmana! Oblations offered into the fire rise up into the sun. Rain results from the sun. Crops result
from rain and offspring come through these. Therefore, earlier, people performed their own sacrifices and obtained
all the objects of desire. The earth yielded crops without tilling. Herbs resulted because of the benedictions. No
sacrifices were seen to be undertaken with a view to obtaining selfish fruits. However, there were some who undertook sacrifices, despite having doubts about the fruits of sacrifices. Consequently, the wicked, the cunning, the
greedy and those who felt a need for riches were born. Those who have performed wicked deeds go to the worlds
earmarked for those with inauspicious deeds. Using arguments to counter arguments, a man performs inauspicious
deeds. O supreme among brahmanas! Such people are always evil-souled and unaccomplished in wisdom. O brahmana! They take deeds to be misdeeds and the reverse. They do not also follow the deeds that Brahma laid down
for the worlds. We have also heard that if deeds without qualities are performed, they lead to no fruits. If these are
not countered, they injure all beings. Truth is sacrifice. Self-control is sacrifice. So are lack of jealousy towards
everyone, contentment with one's own riches and lack of greed for riches. That is how a renouncer results. A person who knows the truth about kshetra and kshetrajna is engaged in his own sacrifice. He studies, wishing to know
about the brahman, and is satisfied in his own self. All divinity is in the brahman. Everything finds a refuge in the
brahman. O Jajali! When such a person is satisified, the gods are satisfied. When he is not satisfied, they are not
satisfied. If a person is satisfied with all the juices, he finds no delight in anything in particular. In that way, a person who is satisified with wisdom is always satisfied and this gives rise to happiness. Dharma is comfort for him.
Dharma is happiness and everything is established on that. Such a person knows the truth about existence and
searches for wisdom. There are others who know about jnana and vijnana and can cross over to the further shore,
which is always extremely auspicious and is full of sacred people. Having gone there, one does not grieve. Nor is
there distress of any kind. That is the place of the brahman and virtuous people attain it. That is not for those who
desire heaven, or for those who sacrifice for fame and riches. It is a path followed by the virtuous and their strength
is non-violence. They know about trees, herbs, fruits and roots[That is, these are the only appropriate sacrificial offerings.]. Those who sacrifice, and their officiating priests,
are not greedy and do not desire riches. There are also brahmanas who have accomplished all their tasks. Nevertheless, driven by compassion for other subjects, they perform their own sacrifices. Subjects obtain heaven by pursuing their own dharma. O Jajali! Thus, because of my intelligence, my conduct towards everyone is identical. O
bull among brahmanas! O great sage! The wise ones always engage themselves in these kinds of sacrifices and
through these, go along the path trodden by the gods. Some have to return[Be reborn.]. But there is no return for the learned.
O Jajali! However, both types go along the path trodden on by the gods. Using the resolution in their minds, they
become successful, yoking their own selves and using their own selves as beasts of burden, and milking their own
selves. They make their own selves the sacrificial altars and thus give away a lot of dakshina. A person who has
cleansed himself in this fashion should not be greedy for cattle. O brahmana! He performs a sacrifice by bowing
down, as if he was a herb. His intelligence places renunciation at the forefront. That is what I am describing to you.
He is beyond desire and beyond starting anything. He is beyond honour and praise. His deeds have been extinguished, but he is without decay. The gods speak of such a person as a brahmana. A person who does not listen to
the sacred texts, does not perform sacrifices and does not give to brahmanas is a person who follows common conduct. O  Jajali! What end will he attain? By  following  this  path,  observed  by  the  gods,  it  is  as  if  he  performs
sacrifices.'

'"Jajali said, 'I have not heard this truth from the sages. O trader! I am therefore asking you about a difficulty.
The rishis who came earlier did not consider this[Meaning yoga.]. Nor did those who came later establish this. O trader! If animals are capable of obtaining happiness by serving the tirtha of the atman, then why do they obtain misery because
of their deeds? O immensely wise one! Instruct me about this. I have great faith in you.'

'"Tuladhara replied, 'There are some sacrifices that do not actually become sacrifices[Because they are not properly performed, and this refers to both internal and external sacrifices.]. They should not sacrifice. A cow can be used for all the oblations at a sacrifice, because of milk, curds, clarified butter, hair, horns, feet
and everything that comes from the mouth[For external sacrifices, the yield from a cow offers sufficient oblations. For those who are poor, the dust from
the hooves and the water, in which the tail and the horns have been washed, will suffice.]. It has been ordained that one should not embark on a sacrifice without a wife. The sacrificial cake has been spoken of as representing sacrifices of all animals. This is like all the
rivers being akin to Sarasvati and all mountains being sacred. O Jajali! The atman is a tirtha and one does not have
to become a guest at different places[In search of places of pilgrimage.]. O Jajali! If one follows this kind of dharma, without searching for reasons
behind dharma, one will obtain the auspicious worlds.'"

'Bhishma said, "This was the kind of dharma that was praised by Tuladhara. This is always full of reason and is
followed by the virtuous."'


