Yudhishthira asked, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! Who were the first Prajapatis? Who are the immensely
fortunate rishis and what directions do they preside over?"

'Bhishma replied, "O best among the Bharata lineage! I will tell you about what you have asked. Listen to the
Prajapatis and the directions that each of them was said to preside over. There was the single, illustrious, original
and eternal Svayambhu Brahma. The great-souled Svayambhu Brahma had seven sons-Marichi, Atri, Angiras,
Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and the immensely illustrious Vasishtha, who was like Svayambhu himself. The Puranas
refer to them as the seven brahmanas. These were the first. I will now tell you about all the other Prajapatis. In
Atri's lineage was born the illustrious, eternal and ancient Barhi, descended from Brahma himself. The ten Prachetas were descended from him and those ten only had a single son-the Prajapati named Daksha. In this world,
Daksha is known by both the names. Marichi's son, Kashyapa, is also known by two names. Some learned ones
know him as Arishtanemi[The other name being Kashyapa.]. The handsome and valiant Bhouma was born to Angiras. He performed worship for
one thousand divine yugas. O lord! The illustrious Aryama and others were his sons. They are famous as ones who
laid down ordinances and created beings. O one without decay! Shashabindu[Clearly, another of Bhouma's sons.] had ten thousand wives. Through
each of them, he had one thousand sons. In this way, the great-souled one had one million sons. These sons did not
allow anyone else to be a Prajapati. The ancient brahmanas addressed Shashabindu's offspring by this name and
from that great lineage of Prajapatis originated the Vrishni lineage. I have told you about the illustrious Prajapatis.

'"I will now tell you about the gods who are the rulers of the three worlds-Bhaga, Amsha, Aryama, Mitra,
Varuna, Savita, Dhata, the immensely strong Vivasvat, Pusha, Tvashta, Indra and Vishnu is said to be the twelfth.
These twelve Adityas were descended from Kashyapa. Nasatya and Dasra are known as the two Ashvins. They
were the sons of Martanda, the eighth of the Prajapatis[Meaning, the eighth in the list of Adityas. The eighth is Vivasvat or Martanda, the sun god, and the Ashvins
were descended from him.]. Tvashta had handsome and immensely illustrious sons-
Vishvarupa, Aja-Ekapada, Ahi, Budha, Virupaksha, Raivata, Hara, Bahurupa, Tryambaka as the lord of the gods,
Savitra, Jayanta and the unvanquished Pinaki.The immensely illustrious eight Vasus have already been mentioned
earlier. At the time of Prajapati Manu, these were the different kinds of gods. At first, they were known as both
gods and ancestors. Among the Siddhas and the Sadhyas, depending on conduct and beauty, there were different
types. The Ribhus and Maruts are categories of gods. In this way, the Vishvadevas and the Ashvins are revered.
The Adityas are kshatriyas and the Maruts are vaishyas. The Ashvins are held to be shudras and performed fierce
austerities. The gods descended from Angiras have certainly been determined to be brahmanas. I have thus recounted the four varnas among all the gods. If a person gets up in the morning and recites the names of the gods,
he is freed from all sins, regardless of whether they have been committed by him or by others[A person can also be tainted by the sins of others.]. Yavakriti, Raibhya, Arvavasu, Paravasu, Oushija, Kakshivat and Bala were the sons of Angiras. O son! These, Kanva, the son of
rishi Medhatithi, Barhishada and the saptarshis[The seven great sages.] who created the three worlds are in the east. Unmucha, Vimucha,
the valiant Svastyatreya, Pramucha, Idhmavaha, the illustrious Dridavrata and Agastya, the son of Mitra-Varuna-
these brahmana rishis always resort to the southern direction. Rushadgu, Kavasha, Dhoumya, the valiant Parivyadha, the maharshis known as Ekata, Dvita and Trita and Atri's son, the illustrious lord Sarasvata-these nine great-
souled ones resort to the western direction. Atreya, Vasishtha, the great rishi Kashyapa, Goutama, Bharadvaja,
Koushika Vishvamitra and Jamadagni, the great-souled and illustrious son of Richika-these seven resort to the
northern direction. I have recounted to you the fiercely engertic ones in all the directions. These great-souled ones
are the creators of beings and are witnesses. In this way, these great-souled ones are established in each of the directions. If one recites their names, one is freed from all sins. If a person seeks refuge in a direction that they preside over, he is freed from all sins and safely returns home."'


