'Dhritarashtra asked, "How is Kounteya Dharmaraja Yudhishthira leaving? How about Bhimasena, Savyasachi and
the two sons of Madri? O Kshatta! How about Dhoumya and the ascetic Droupadi? I wish to hear everything. Describe to me every act of theirs[One shouldn't forget that Dhritarashtra is blind.]."
'Vidura replied, "Kunti's son Yudhishthira is departing, covering his face with his garment. Pandava Bhima is
spreading his long arms, as he goes. Savyasachi is following the king[Yudhishthira.], scattering sand. Madri's son Sahadeva has
smeared his face, as he goes. Nakula, the most handsome man in this world, follows the king. His mind is despondent and he has smeared his entire body with dust. The large-eyed and beautiful Krishna follows the king. She is
weeping and has covered her face with her hair. O lord of the earth! Dhoumya is chanting terrible sama hymns
connected with Yama and as he treads the path, he is holding kusa grass in his hand."

'Dhritarashtra asked, "The Pandavas are going in many different forms. O Vidura! Please tell me why they are
going in these different ways."

'Vidura replied, "Though your sons robbed him of his kingdom and his riches through deceit, the mind of the
intelligent Dharmaraja does not deviate from dharma. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! This king is always
kind to the sons of Dhritarashtra. Though he has been deprived through deceit, he refuses to open his eyes in anger.

'I will burn these people down if I look at them through my terrible eyes.' Thinking this, the Pandava king goes
with his face covered. Now listen to me, as I tell you why Bhima is going in this way. O bull among the Bharata
lineage! 'There is no one equal to me in strength of arms.' Knowing this, Bhima spreads his long arms as he goes.
Proud of the strength of his arms, he displays his arms. He wishes to perform acts on the enemy that do justice to
those arms. Kunti's son Arjuna is capable of using both arms to shower arrows. Savyasachi follows the king, scattering sand. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Just as he scatters sand, in that fashion, he will release showers
of arrows on his enemies. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! 'Let no one recognize my face today.' Thinking
this, Sahadeva travels with a smeared face. 'Along the route, I may steal the hearts of women who look at me.'

Thinking this, Nakula travels with his entire body covered in dust. Droupadi is attired in a single garment. She is
weeping and she is in her menses. Her hair has not been braided and her garment is smeared with blood. She has
spoken these words. 'In the fourteenth year, the wives of those who have caused my present plight, will find their
husbands dead, their sons dead, their relatives dead and their beloved ones dead. Their bodies will be covered with
the blood of their relatives. Their hair will not be braided and they will be in their menses. It is only after offering
water to the dead that those aryas[Some regional versions say bharya (wife) instead of the arya of the critical edition. Given the context, wives
makes better sense.] will enter Gajasahrya. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Dhoumya is the
self-controlled priest. He is chanting sama hymns connected with Yama and is leading them from the front, towards the south-west. He holds darbha grass[Another name for the sacred kusa grass.]. 'When the descendants of the Bharata lineage have been killed in
battle, the elders of the Kuru clan will chant these sama hymns.' Dhoumya is proceeding with these words. 'Alas!
Alas! Our lords are leaving. Witness this great misery.' This is what the miserable citizens are saying in every direction. The intelligent Kounteyas are leaving for the forest in this fashion, indicating through these signs and
marks the resolutions that exist in their hearts. As those foremost among men are leaving Gajasahrya, lightning is
flashing in the cloudless sky and the earth is trembling. O lord of the earth! Rahu has swallowed the sun, though
this is not the time of parvani[Parvani means the day of the full moon or the day of the new moon.]. Meteors are descending throughout the city. Predatory animals are screaming, together with vultures, jackals and crows, in the temples of the gods, in sanctuaries and from the tops of walls and
houses. O king! These are the great and terrible portents as the Pandavas leave for the forest. They indicate the
doom of the Bharatas, since you have acted in accordance with evil counsel."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Narada now appeared in the sabha and stood before the Kurus. He was surrounded by maharshis and spoke these terrible words, "In the fourteenth year from now, because of Duryodhana's crime and
through the strength of Bhima and Arjuna, the Kouravas who are here will be destroyed." Having uttered these
words, the supreme of devarshis, graced with the great prosperity of the brahman, arose to the sky and swiftly
disappeared.

'At this, Duryodhana, Karna and Soubala Shakuni thought that Drona would be their refuge and offered him the
kingdom[The Pandava kingdom.]. Drona spoke these words to the evil Duryodhana, Duhshasana, Karna and all the other Bharatas. "The
brahmanas have said that the Pandavas, sons of the gods, should not be killed[Cannot be killed, is also a possible translation. But should not be killed, seems more appropriate.]. But with all my strength, I will do
whatever I can for those who seek refuge with me. With all their hearts and devotion, the sons of Dhritarashtra and
their king have come to me and I cannot abandon them. Destiny is always supreme. In accordance with dharma,
the sons of Pandu have been defeated and have left for the forest. The Kouravas will live in the forest for twelve
years. They will practise brahmacharya. But since they will fall prey to anger and intolerance, the Pandavas will
return with enmity and be the cause of great grief to me. In a feud over friendship, I once dislodged Drupada from
his kingdom. O descendant of the Bharata lineage[This is specifically addressed to Duryodhana.]! In his anger, he performed a sacrifice to obtain a son who
would kill me. Through the austerities of Yaja and Upayaja[Sages. The story has been recounted in Volume 1.], he obtained a son named Dhrishtadyumna from the
fire and the slender-waisted Droupadi from the middle of the altar. He[Dhrishtadyumna.] was given by the gods and has radiance
like that of the fire. He was born with bow, arrows and armour. Since I am subject to the dharma of earth, I am possessed by great fear for him. This son of Prishata[Prishata is Drupada's name.], a bull among men, is now on their side. There will be great
fear to my life if I ever have to battle him. He is famous in the world because it has been heard that he will kill me.
Because of your deed, that time of destruction has arrived. Therefore, without any loss of time, do what is best for
you. This happiness will last for a short time, like the shade of a palm tree in the winter. Perform great sacrifices,
enjoy your pleasures and donate. In the fourteenth year, a great calamity will befall you. O Duryodhana! Depending on your inclinations, you have heard or understood. If you so desire, use pacification with the Pandavas." On
hearing Drona's words, Dhritarashtra said, "O Kshatta[From this it appears that Vidura is still describing the events to Dhritarashtra.]! What the preceptor[Drona.] has said is true. Go back to the
Pandavas. If they do not return, offer respect to the Pandavas. Let these fortunate sons go with arms, chariots and
infantry[Nothing happens to this instruction and there is disconnect with what happens next. The fortunate sons are
the Pandavas and Vidura doesn't go to try and bring them back. If they decide to go to the forest, Dhritarashtra is
offering the Pandavas weapons, chariots and infantry. However, this doesn't materialize. Both this chapter and the
next seem to have been added on later.]."'

Vaishampayana said, 'O great king! When the Parthas were defeated in gambling with the dice and had left for the
forest, Dhritarashtra began to worry a lot. Dhritarashtra, lord of the people, was seated, worrying, sighing and with
his mind distracted. At that time, Sanjaya[Dhritarashtra's charioteer.] told him, "O lord of the earth! You have obtained the entire earth, with
all its riches. O king! The Pandavas have left from the kingdom. Why are you grieving?" Dhritarashtra replied,
"The maharatha Pandavas are terrible in battle and have allies. Knowing that the enmity will occur, should one not
sorrow?" Sanjaya said, "O king! This great enmity is the consequence of your great deed. There will be complete
destruction of the entire world and all the relatives. Though restrained by Bhishma, Drona and Vidura, your
shameless and evil-minded son Duryodhana sent the Pratikamin, the son of a suta, to bring the Pandavas' beloved
wife Droupadi, the follower of dharma."

'Dhritarashtra replied, "When the gods wish to defeat a man, they first take his intelligence away, so that his vision becomes distorted. When destruction is nigh and intelligence is clouded, an improper course of action appears
as the proper course of action and sticks to the heart. That which is evil appears in the form of that which is good
and that which is good appears in the form of that which is evil. When destruction is near, they appear thus and one
is content. Destiny does not arrive with a club and strike one on the head with it. The strength of time is that it
makes the opposite seem to be right. By dragging the ascetic Panchali into the middle of the sabha, those evil ones
have caused this terrible calamity that makes the hair on the body stand up. She is beautiful and she is not born
from a womb[She was born from the middle of the altar.]. She has been born from the fire. She is illustrious and is knowledgeable in all dharma. Who but a
deceitful gambler[Duryodhana.] could overpower her and drag her into the middle of an assembly hall? Following the dharma
of women[Droupadi was in her menses.], the one with the beautiful hips was covered in blood. Panchali was in single garment. She looked at
the Pandavas, robbed of their riches, deprived of their thoughts, robbed of their wife, robbed of their prosperity,
deprived of all their pleasures and reduced to a state of servitude. Bound by the noose of dharma, they were unable
to exhibit their valour. Among all the assembled Kurus, Duryodhana and Karna spoke harsh and insulting words to
the angry, defiant and miserable Krishna. O Sanjaya! The earth itself would be burnt down because of those
wretched eyes. Would anything have been left of my sons? On seeing Krishna being dragged into the sabha, all the
women of the Bharata lineage, who had assembled with Gandhari, loudly cried out in anguish. No agnihotras were
offered in the evening, because the brahmanas were enraged at Droupadi's oppression. Terrible winds began to
blow, as if the destruction of the beings had arrived. Terrible meteors descended from the sky and Rahu swallowed
the sun. This was not the time of parvani. But a terrible fear was created in the minds of the subjects. Fearful fires
blazed from the places where chariots are kept. All the flagstaffs crumbled, signifying disaster for the Bharatas. In
Duryodhana's agnihotra, jackals howled in terrible tones. From all the directions, donkeys brayed back in response. O Sanjaya! Bhishma then left with Drona and so did Kripa, Somadatta and the maharatha Bahlika. At that
time, prompted by Vidura, I told Krishna that I would grant her whatever boon she desired. Panchali then chose the
Pandavas, whose energy is unlimited. I then allowed them to leave, with their chariots and their bows. It is then
that the immensely wise Vidura, who knows all the dharma, spoke, 'O descendants of the Bharata lineage! This
dragging of Krishna into the assembly hall will bring about your destruction. The daughter of the king of Panchala
is the supreme Shri. It was decreed by destiny that Panchali would marry the Pandavas. The angry Parthas will
never pardon her humiliation. Nor will the mighty archers, the Vrishnis, or the immensely energetic Panchalas.
They are protected by Vasudeva, always fixed on the truth. Surrounded by the Panchalas, Bibhatsu will return.
Among them, there will be the immensely strong and mighty archer Bhimasena. He will come whirling his club,
like the staff of death. No kings will be able to withstand the sound of the intelligent Partha's Gandiva, or the speed
of Bhima's club. Therefore, it seems to me that one should always have peace, and not war, with the Parthas. I
have always thought that the Pandavas are stronger than the Kurus. With the force of his arms, Bhima killed in battle the immensely radiant and powerful King Jarasandha. O bull among the Bharata lineage! You must ensure
peace with the Pandavas. Without any hesitation, act impartially vis-à-vis the two parties.' O son of Gavalgana[Sanjaya.]!
Thus did Kshatta utter words that were steeped in dharma and artha. But out of the affection I bear for my son, I
did not accept these words."'


Janamejaya asked, 'O supreme among brahmanas! When the Parthas were defeated at the gambling match through
deceit by the evil-hearted sons of Dhritarashtra and their advisers and were angered, and also heard the harsh
words uttered by those who created the enmity, what did the Kouravyas, my ancestors and supreme among men,
do? Equal to Shakra in their energy, but having been suddenly dislodged from their riches and confronted with
great misery, how did the Parthas spend their time in the forest? Who followed those who had attained that great
misfortune? What did they eat? How did they conduct themselves? Where did those great-souled ones dwell? O
best among brahmanas! How did twelve years pass in the forest for those great-souled ones who were the destroyers of enemies? How did the princess[Droupadi.], supreme among women, immensely fortunate and always devoted to her
husbands, one who always spoke the truth, endure the terrible misery of living in the forest, though she did not deserve it? O one blessed with the power of austerities! I wish to hear about the characters of those greatly radiant
and energetic ones. O brahmana! Tell me, because my curiosity is great.'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having been defeated at the gamble with dice by the evil-hearted sons of Dhritarashtra
and their advisers, the Pandavas were angered and left Gajasahrya. They emerged through the gate of the city
known as Vardhamana. With Krishna[Droupadi.] and with all their weapons, they headed towards the north. Indrasena[Yudhishthira's charioteer.] and
the other servants, fourteen in number, followed them in swift chariots, accompanied by their wives. On learning
that they were leaving, the citizens were overwhelmed with great grief. They assembled together, and speaking to
each other, fearlessly censured Bhishma, Vidura, Drona and Goutama[Kripacharya, who was descended from Goutama.] repeatedly. "Everything in this lineage is
insecure. We are not secure. Our houses are not secure, when the evil Duryodhana, aided by Soubala, Karna and
Duhshasana, are covetous of the kingdom. When there is no lineage, there is no good conduct and no dharma, how
can there be happiness? Duryodhana hates his superiors. He has abandoned good conduct and his well-wishers. He
is avaricious of riches and insolent. He is mean and his character is reprehensible. Where Duryodhana is king, the
earth cannot remain healthy. Let us all go where the virtuous Pandavas are going. They are great-souled and not
given to wrath. They have control over their senses and enemies. They are modest and the performers of deeds.
Their conduct is in accordance with dharma." Having spoken these words, all together, they followed the
Pandavas.

'With hands joined in salutation, they spoke to the sons of Kunti and the sons of Madri. "O fortunate ones!
Where will you go, leaving us who share in your grief? We will follow you, wherever you are going. We are greatly distressed at learning that you have been defeated by reprehensible enemies, in ways that are not in accordance
with dharma. All of us are anxious. We have always been devoted to your happiness and well-being. We are devoted and attached to you. We have always been engaged in that which brings you pleasure. We do not wish to be
completely destroyed by living in a kingdom that is ruled by a bad king. O bulls among men! Listen. We will tell
you about merits and demerits that result from associating with those who possess good qualities and evil ones.
Garments, water, sesame seeds and the ground become fragrant through association with flowers. It is the same
from association with good qualities. Association with foolish ones gives birth to a net of delusion. Regular association with the righteous gives birth to dharma. Therefore, those who desire equanimity should associate with the
wise, the old, the good, the austere and the righteous. One should serve those who are pure in three ways-learning, birth and deeds. They are superior to the sacred texts. Without performing rites, we will obtain merit by associating with righteous and meritorious ones, just as one obtains demerit by serving evil ones. The sight and touch
of, and conversing and sitting with, evil ones, diminish those who follow dharma and make men unsuccessful. Association with mean ones diminishes the intelligence of men. Association with those who are medium gives birth
to mediocrity and association with the best makes one supreme. There are qualities that are talked about in the
world as giving rise to dharma, kama and artha. These have been mentioned in the Vedas and are sanctioned by the
good and are the sources of conduct in the world. These good qualities exist in you, separately and collectively. We
wish to ensure our welfare and desire to live among those who possess these good qualities." Yudhishthira replied,
"We are fortunate that our subjects, with the brahmanas at the forefront, driven by affection and compassion, credit
us with good qualities that we do not possess. With my brothers, I am requesting you. For the sake of that affection
and compassion, do not act otherwise. Our grandfather Bhishma, the king[Dhritarashtra.], Vidura, our mother and all our well-
wishers are there in Nagasahrya. If you wish to do something for our pleasure, all of you must unite to take care of
them and protect them. They are beside themselves with sorrow and grief. You have assembled from distant
places. Please return now. It is certain that we will meet again. Let your minds be driven by affection for our kin,
whom we leave in your care. Please perform this act, because that is the act that is placed supreme in my heart. If
you do this, you will satisfy me and show me homage." Having been thus advised by Dharmaraja, the subjects
raised a terrible sound of wailing. "Alas! O king!" They were miserable and extremely grief-stricken. Remembering the good qualities of the Parthas, though unwilling, they returned after meeting the Pandavas.

'When the citizens returned, the Pandavas ascended their chariots and went to a large banyan tree named Pra-
mana, situated on the banks of the Jahnavi[Another name for the Ganga.]. The Pandavas reached the banyan tree at the close of the day. The
brave warriors touched the pure water and spent the night there. Stricken with grief, they spent the night there, subsisting only on water. Some brahmanas had followed them out of the love they bore for them, with their disciples
and relatives. Some maintained the fire[The sacrificial fire.], while others did not. Surrounded by those who knew the brahman, the
king[Yudhishthira.] was radiant. At the hour that is both beautiful and terrible[The hour is terrible because demons are most powerful then.], the fires were lit and after chanting the name of
the brahman, conversations continued. In voices that were as soft as those of swans, the foremost among the brahmanas consoled the king, supreme among Kurus, and they spent the entire night.'


