Vaishampayana said, 'The great-spirited Kripa was supreme among wielders of weapons. He was immensely valorous and powerful. Meanwhile, in a desire to fight with Arjuna, that maharatha arrived. Those two immensely
powerful charioteers, like the sun, got ready to fight. They stationed themselves, looking like two clouds in the autumn. Partha was famous in the world. Drawing the supreme weapon of Gandiva, he discharged many iron arrows
that were capable of piercing the heart. But using sharp arrows and iron arrows that drank blood, Kripa sliced
Partha's arrows into hundreds of thousands of pieces, before they could reach him. At that, maharatha Partha was
enraged, and exhibiting many circular movements, enveloped the directions with a shower of arrows. The lord
Partha, whose soul was infinite, covered the sky with arrows and unleashed hundreds of them on Kripa. He was hit
by sharp arrows that were like the crests of fire and enraged, released one thousand arrows on the infinitely energetic Partha. The great-souled Kripa roared on the field of battle. Then the brave Arjuna released four swift arrows,
golden at the tips and with straight shafts, from Gandiva and pierced his[Kripa's.] horses. The four horses were pierced
with those excellent arrows. Struck by those sharp arrows that were like flaming serpents, all the horses suddenly
reared up and Kripa was dislodged from his place. When the descendant of the Kuru lineage[Arjuna.] saw that
Goutama[Kripa was descended from the Goutama lineage, since Sharadvat was Goutama's grandson.] had been dislodged from his place, the destroyer of enemy warriors did not pierce him, with a desire
to preserve his honour. Having regained his position, Goutama swiftly pierced Savyasachi with ten arrows that
were shafted with the feathers of herons. Then Partha sliced his bow with a sharp arrow and made it fall down
from his hand. He broke off the armour with other sharp arrows that pierced the heart. However, Partha did not
pierce the body. Freed of the armour, his body was radiant, like a snake shedding its skin at the right time. When
one bow had been cut down by Partha, Goutama grasped another and strung it. It was extraordinary. Kunti's son
cut that down too, with arrows that had smooth shafts. In this way, Sharadvat's son took up many other bows in his
hand. But Pandava, the destroyer of enemy warriors, cut them all down. With all his arrows shattered, the powerful
charioteer picked up a javelin and hurled it at Pandu's son, like flaming lightning. That javelin was embellished
with gold and descended from the sky, like a giant meteor. But Arjuna cut it down with ten arrows. When it was
brought down onto the ground by the intelligent Partha, it shattered into ten pieces. In between, Kripa grasped arrows and a bow and swiftly pierced Partha with ten sharp arrows. The greatly energetic Partha was angered in battle. He retaliated with thirteen arrows that had been sharpened on stone, as energetic as the fire. He struck down the
yoke with one and used four arrows to kill the four horses. Using a sixth, he sliced off the charioteer's head from
the body. In that battle, the immensely strong one cut down the bamboo poles with three and the axles of the
wheels with two. With a twelfth arrow, he sliced down the standard. Then smilingly, Phalguna, smote Kripa on the
chest with a thirteenth arrow that was like the vajra. His bow was shattered. He was bereft of his chariot. His horses were slain. His charioteer was dead. Kripa quickly jumped down with a club in his hand and hurled a club. But
that heavy and decorated club was repulsed by Arjuna with his arrows. To save the intolerant Sharadvat in that
field of battle, all the warriors then showered Partha with arrows from all sides. Virata's son, the charioteer, then
turned the horses to the left, executing a yamaka turn[Yamaka means double, as well as restraint. So this was some kind of double turn and could have been a figure
of eight.], so as to restrain those fighters. Extremely swiftly, those
bulls among men then took Kripa, who was without a chariot, away from Kunti's son Dhananjaya.'


'Arjuna said, "O fortunate one! O venerable one! A golden altar, as radiant as the crest of the fire, is held aloft a
golden standard, decorated with golden flags. That is Drona's army. Take me there. His horses are seen to be red
and large and they have been trained to bear well. They are quiet and have the complexion of coral. Their faces
have the hue of copper and they are pleasant to look at. They are yoked to his supreme chariot and they have been
trained in every kind of knowledge. He has long arms and is extremely energetic. He is endowed with strength and
beauty. He is famous in all the worlds. He is the powerful Bharadvaja[Drona, written better as Bhaaradvaja. He is Bharadvaja's son.]. He is the equal of Ushanas[Shukracharya, the preceptor of the demons.] in his intelligence, the equal of Brihaspati[The preceptor of the gods.] in his knowledge of policy. The four Vedas are vested in him, and brahmacharya
too. All the divine weapons, with means of withdrawing them, and the entire knowledge of archery[Dhanurveda.], are always
vested in him. Forgiveness, self-control, truthfulness, non-violence, uprightness-these and many other qualities
exist in that supreme of brahmanas. I wish to fight with that immensely fortunate one in battle. O Uttara! Therefore, swiftly bear me to the preceptor."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Thus spoken to by Arjuna, Virata's son urged the horses, with golden harnesses, in
Bharadvaja's direction. Pandava, supreme among charioteers, descended with great force. Drona advanced towards
Partha, like a mad elephant towards another. He blew his conch shell, with the roar of a hundred drums, and the
entire army was agitated like the ocean. On seeing those excellent red horses mix in battle with ones that were the
colour of swans and as swift as the mind[Drona's horses were red and Arjuna's horses were white.], all the men who were in that fight were amazed. They saw those two
charioteers, endowed with valour, in the forefront of the battle, the preceptor and the disciple, Drona and Partha.
They were undefeated, learned, intelligent and immensely strong. Each was like the other and they engaged each
other. On seeing this, the great army of the Bharatas trembled repeatedly. On reaching Drona's chariot with his
own chariot, the valorous maharatha Partha smiled in delight. The mighty-armed Kounteya, the destroyer of enemy warriors, honoured him and spoke to him in soft and conciliatory words. "We have lived the stipulated duration
in the forest. We now wish for the act in return. Do not be angry with us. You are always invincible in battle. O unblemished one! I will not strike you first, unless you strike me. I have decided this in accordance with my intelligence. Now do what you deem to be fit." Thus addressed, Drona despatched more than twenty arrows at him. But
Partha, swift of hand, sliced them down before they could reach him. Displaying his swiftness in discharge of
weapons, the valorous Drona showered Partha's chariot with a thousand arrows. Thus the duel between Bharadvaja
and Kiriti commenced. In that battle, both equally released tufted arrows, blazing in energy, at each other. Both of
them were famous for their deeds, both were as swift as the wind. Both were knowledgeable in the use of divine
weapons. Both were extremely energetic. When they unleashed their nets of arrows, they confounded the kings.
All the assembled warriors were astounded and applauded and honoured the release of arrows. "Who but Phalguna
is capable of countering Drona in battle? The dharma of kshatriyas is terrible. He has to fight with his preceptor."

These were the words spoken by those who were stationed in the forefront of that battle.

'Those two brave maharathas drew near and covered each other with arrows, to defeat the other. Bharadvaja was
angered and drew an invincible and large bow that was plated with gold at the back. He countered Phalguna. He
discharged a net of arrows towards Arjuna's chariot. They were as bright as the sun and had been sharpened on
stone. They shrouded the rays of the sun. The mighty-armed maharatha pierced Partha with extremely fast and
sharp arrows, like clouds showering a mountain with rain. Pandava happily grasped the divine bow Gandiva, capable of destroying enemies at great speed and capable of bearing a supreme burden. He released many colourful and
golden arrows from that bow and repulsed the valorous Bharadvaja's shower of arrows. It was extraordinary.
Partha Dhananjaya roamed around on his chariot and it was a sight fit to behold. He displayed all his weapons simultaneously in all directions. With his arrows, he covered the entire sky with one large shadow. Drona could no
longer be seen, as if he was enshrouded in fog. When he was covered with these supreme arrows, his form seemed
to be like that of a mountain, with fires blazing in every direction. On seeing that his chariot was covered by
Partha's arrows in that battle, he drew his beautiful bow, with a roar that was like that of the clouds. He drew that
supreme and terrible weapon, which was like a circle of fire. Drona, the adornment of assemblies, then countered
all those arrows. A great sound arose, like that when bamboos are burnt. Gold-tufted arrows were discharged from
his supreme bow. The one whose soul was immeasurable enveloped the directions and the rays of the sun. Those
arrows were golden-tufted and straight. When they traversed the sky, they were seen to be like many beings[This is difficult to understand. It probably means that the arrows looked like beings that travel in the sky, such
as birds.].
The tufted arrows were released from Drona's bow and it seemed as if there was one long and single arrow in the
sky[The arrows were released so fast that they seemed to be joined to one another.]. Thus releasing great arrows that were decorated in gold, those two brave ones covered the sky, as if with
meteors. Decorated with the feathers of herons and peacocks, the arrows looked like a flock of geese travelling in
the autumn sky. There ensued a terrible and fearful battle between the great-souled Drona and Pandava, like that
between Vritra and Vasava[Vasava (Indra) killed a demon named Vritra.]. They wounded each other, like elephants with their tusks. They shot arrows at each
other from bows that were completely stretched. They fiercely decorated that field of battle. From one part of the
battlefield to another, they released divine weapons. Arjuna, supreme among victorious ones, used sharp arrows to
counter the arrows, sharpened on stone, released by the best of preceptors. Indra's son displayed his own terrible
aspect and swiftly covered the sky with many arrows.

'Drona, foremost among teachers and supreme among the wielders of arms, began to play with the supremely
energetic Arjuna, tiger among men, who was trying to kill him in that battle. He used arrows with straight shafts.
Bharadvaja unleashed divine weapons in that great battle. Phalguna countered every weapon with another weapon.
The duel between those two angry and intolerant lions among men was like that between the gods and the danavas.
Drona released Aindra, Vayavya and Agneya weapons[Divine weapons named after Indra, Vayu and Agni respectively.] and Pandava used his own weapons to devour them.
Those two brave and great archers released sharp arrows and covered the entire sky, like a shadow, with showers
of arrows. When Arjuna released arrows and they descended on the bodies[Of enemy warriors.], the sound that was heard was like
that of lightning on mountains. O lord of the earth! Elephants, charioteers and horses looked like blossoming
kimshuka flowers[A kimshuka is a tree with red flowers.], drenched in blood. When they fell down, the arms of the maharathas were adorned with
colourful armlets and their armour and pennants were golden. Oppressed by Partha's arrows, many warriors died
there. The armies were confounded in that encounter between Drona and Arjuna. Both of them brandished their
bows, capable of withstanding great burdens. In that battle, they covered each other with arrows and bore the retaliation. A voice was heard from the sky, praising Drona. "Drona has performed an extremely difficult task of fighting with Arjuna, who is the destroyer of enemies, extremely valorous, firm in his hand and unassailable. The maharatha is the conqueror of all the gods, the daityas and the snakes." On beholding Partha's fixedness, learning,
dexterity and great reach in battle, Drona was amazed. O bull among the Bharata lineage! In that battle, Partha
raised the invincible and divine bow Gandiva and drew it with his arms. He released a shower of arrows, like a
cloud of locusts. Even the wind was not capable of gliding through those arrows. There was not even an instant between Partha's shooting an arrow and the next one, no gap could be seen. In that extremely terrible battle of swiftly
released weapons, Partha shot the arrows faster and faster. Then hundreds and thousands of straight-tufted arrows
descended simultaneously on Drona's chariot. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The wielder of the Gandiva enveloped Drona with arrows and a great lamentation arose from the army. Maghavan[Indra.] himself applauded Panda-
va's swiftness with weapons and so did the gandharvas and apsaras who had assembled there.

'Then the preceptor's son, leader of charioteers, suddenly encircled Pandava with a great number of chariots.
Though Ashvatthama was greatly enraged with Partha, in his heart, the great-souled one applauded his deeds.
Overcome by anger, he confronted Partha in that battle and showered him with arrows, like Parjanya[The god of rain, Indra.] showering
rain. The mighty-armed one turned his horses towards Drona's son and thus Partha gave Drona a chance to retreat.
His armour and flag had been shattered with supreme arrows and getting the opportunity, the brave one left on his
swift horses.'


Vaishampayana said, 'He[Ashvatthama.] arrived with great speed, showering a great net of arrows, like clouds charged with
rain. Partha countered him. There was a great battle, like that between the gods and the asuras. Like Vritra and
Vasava, they covered each other with nets of arrows. The sun did not shine then. Nor did the wind blow. The sky
was enveloped and shadowed by a net of arrows in every direction. O conqueror of enemy cities! There was a
great sound of slapping, as the two warriors fought each other and tried to kill each other, like the sound of bamboos being burnt. Arjuna destroyed his horses and only a few were left alive. O king! They were so confused that
they could not make out the directions. Partha was roaming around. Drona's immensely valorous son detected a
subtle weakness and sliced off the string of his bow with an arrow that was as sharp as a razor. On witnessing this
superhuman feat, the gods applauded. From a distance of eight bow-lengths, Drona's son, bull among men, again
pierced Partha in the heart with an arrow that was shafted with feathers of herons. The mighty-armed Partha
laughed out aloud and powerfully corded Gandiva with a new string. Partha drew it in the shape of a half-moon
and countered him, like the mad leader of a herd of elephants against another crazy elephant. Those two warriors
were unrivalled on earth. In the midst of that field of battle, an extremely great duel ensued, making the body hair
stand up. On seeing those two great-souled and brave ones, like two leaders of herds engaged in combat, all the
Kurus were astounded. Those two brave bulls among men struck each other with arrows that were like virulent
poison and like flaming serpents. The great-souled Pandava possessed two divine and inexhaustible quivers.
Therefore, the brave Partha stood on that field of battle, immobile as a mountain. But Ashvatthama's arrows were
speedily discharged in that battle and were exhausted. Thus, Arjuna proved to be superior to him.

'Then Karna grasped an extremely large bow. He drew it in great anger and a great sound of lamentation arose.
Partha looked in the direction where the bow had been drawn and seeing Radheya there, his anger increased. He
was overcome by anger and wished to kill Karna. With dilated eyes, the bull among the Kurus glanced towards
him. O king! He turned away from Drona's son, although the soldiers swiftly brought thousands of arrows to him.
The mighty-armed Dhananjaya, conqueror of enemies, ignored Drona's son and suddenly rushed towards Karna.
With eyes red in anger, Kounteya approached him, hoping for a duel in battle. He said ...'


