'Sanjaya said, "When Partha vowed to kill the king of Sindhu, the mighty-armed Vasudeva spoke to Dhananjaya.

'You consulted your brothers and took the words of the pledge[That is, you did not consult me before taking the oath.]. "I will slay Saindhava." You performed an extremely rash act. Without consulting me, you have taken up an extremely heavy burden. How can we now avoid
the ridicule of all the worlds? Spies have been sent by me to the camp of the sons of Dhritarashtra. They returned
swiftly and conveyed this information to me. After you took a pledge to kill the king of Sindhu, the sons of Dhritarashtra and Saindhava were frightened at the sounds they heard. They heard roars like lions, mingled with the
great sound of musical instruments. They thought that these roars like lions must have a reason and waited. O
mighty-armed one! A great sound arose among the Kouravas, among their elephants, horses and infantry and there
was the roar of chariot wheels. "Having heard of Abhimanyu's death, it is certain that Dhananjaya will be enraged
and will emerge in the night[To fight.]." This was their view and they waited. O one who is devoted to the truth! O one with
eyes like lotuses! While they prepared, they heard the truth about the pledge you had taken for the death of the
king of Sindhu. All of them, Suyodhana's advisers and King Jayadratha, were distressed and frightened, like small
deer. The lord of Sindhu and Souvira was extremely frightened[Jayadratha is described as the king of Sindhu, Souvira and Shibi. Souvira and Shibi were kingdoms adjacent to
Sindhu and had probably been conquered by Jayadratha.]. He arose, and with his advisers, entered his own
camp. At the appropriate time for consultation, they consulted each other about the best course of action. He then
went to the assembly of the kings and spoke these words to Suyodhana. "Dhananjaya thinks that I am the one who
has caused the death of his son. Therefore, in the midst of the soldiers, he has promised to kill me tomorrow. When
Savyasachi takes a vow, the gods, the gandharvas, the asuras, the serpents and the rakshasas are incapable of countering it. Therefore, all of you should protect me in the battle and not allow Dhananjaya to place his foot on your
heads and thereby accomplish his objective. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Therefore, make arrangements to
protect me in the battle. O king! Otherwise, grant me permission so that I can return home." Having been thus addressed, Suyodhana was miserable and hung down his head. On hearing this and learning about the great fear, he
silently began to think.

'"'On seeing that the king was distressed, Saindhava gently spoke these words, with an eye on his own self-interest and on what would be good for him. "I do not see a brave archer here who is capable of countering Arjuna's
weapons with his own weapons in the great battle. He wields the bow Gandiva and Vasudeva is his aide. Who can
stand in front of Arjuna, even if it were to be Shatakratu himself? It has been heard that Partha, on foot, fought
with the immensely energetic lord Maheshvara earlier, in the Himalaya mountains[This incident has been recounted in Section 31 (Volume 2).]. Urged by the king of the gods,
on a single chariot, he killed a thousand danavas who resided in Hiranyapura. Kounteya is now united with the intelligent Vasudeva. It is my view that he is capable of destroying the three worlds, together with the immortals. I
desire that you should give me permission to leave. Alternatively, if you so wish, the great-souled Drona and his
brave son should protect me." O Arjuna! Thus addressed by the one who was terribly afflicted, the king himself
spoke to the preceptor. "All the arrangements have been made and the chariots have been arrayed. Karna, Bhurishrava, Drona's son, the invincible Vrishasena, Kripa and the king of Madra-these six will be at the forefront.
Drona will construct a vyuha at the rear. Half of this will be in the form of a cart[Shakata.] and half in the form of a lotus.
There will be an array in the form of a needle in the midst of the pericarp of the lotus. Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu who is unassailable in battle, will be stationed there, protected by brave ones." O Partha! There is no doubt that
those six rathas are impossible to withstand, in use of the bow, in weapons, in valour, in strength and in lineage.
Without vanquishing them and their followers, one cannot reach Jayadratha. Think of the valour of each of those
six, not to speak of them united together. O tiger among men! They cannot be defeated easily. We should think
again about the best course of action for our welfare. We should consult with our advisers and well-wishers and
then determine a successful course of action.'

'"Arjuna replied, 'You think that those six rathas on the side of the sons of Dhritarashtra are superior to me in
strength. But it is seen that their valour is equal to half of my own. O Madhusudana! I will sever all their weapons
with my weapons. Desiring to kill Jayadratha, you will see me shatter them. In the sight of Drona and his lamenting followers, I will bring down the head of the king of Sindhu on the ground. O Madhusudana! This will be the
case even if the Sadhyas, the Rudras, Vasus, the Ashvins, the Maruts with Indra, the Vishvadevas, the asuras, the
ancestors, the gandharvas, the suparnas[Birds like Garuda, eagles.], the oceans, the mountains, the firmament, heaven, earth, the directions,
the lords of the directions, the villages, the forests and all mobile and immobile beings seek to protect the king of
Sindhu. Even then, in the battle tomorrow, you will see him slain by my arrows. O Krishna! I swear this truthfully,
as I touch my weapons[Arjuna is swearing by touching his weapons.]. Drona, the great archer, is the protector of that wicked and evil-minded one. O Keshava!
I will engage him first. Suyodhana thinks that this gambling match is based on him[The battle is being compared to a gambling match in which Jayadratha is the stake.]. Therefore, I will shatter him
at the forefront of the army and then assail Saindhava. Tomorrow, you will see that great archer pierced by my
fierce, energetic and iron arrows in battle, like the summit of a mountain shattered by a thunderbolt. Blood will
flow from the bodies of men, elephants and horses. They will be brought down by sharp arrows that descend on
them. The arrows released from Gandiva will be as swift as thought or the wind. They will rob the breath of life
from the bodies of thousands of men, elephants and horses. In the battle, men will behold terrible weapons descend, those that have been obtained by me from Yama, Kubera, Varuna, Rudra and Indra. All those who wish to
protect Saindhava will see their weapons routed in the battle by my brahmana astra[Divine weapon, also referred to as brahmastra.]. O Keshava! In the battle
tomorrow, you will see the earth strewn with the heads of kings, severed by forceful arrows that I release. I will
gratify carnivorous beasts and drive away the enemy. I will delight my well-wishers and bring down Saindhava.
He has performed great misdeeds. He has been a bad ally[This is ally in the sense of one with whom there is a matrimonial alliance.]. He has been born in an evil land. Having been killed
by me, King Saindhava will cause sorrow among those on his own side. Saindhava has enjoyed the best of milk
mixed with rice. But he has been evil in conduct. In the forefront of the battle, you will see him destroyed with my
radiant arrows. O Krishna! In the morning, I will accomplish that which will make Suyodhana think that there is
no archer in this world who is equal to me in battle. O bull among men! Gandiva is a divine bow and I am the warrior. O Hrishikesha! You are the charioteer. Who is incapable of being vanquished by me? Lakshmi is always
present in the moon and water is always present in the ocean. O Janardana! Like that, know that my pledge is always true. Do not disrespect my weapons. Do not disrespect my firm bow. Do not disrespect my strength. Do not
disrespect Dhananjaya's strength of arms. I will go to battle so that I am victorious and am not defeated. Know that
because of my pledge, Jayadratha has already been slain in battle. It is certain that the brahman is truth. It is certain
that there is humility in the virtuous. It is certain that there is prosperity in the wise. It is certain that there is victory
in Narayana.'"

'Sanjaya said, "Having spoken these words to Hrishikesha and having addressed them to his own self too, Vasa-
va's son once again addressed the lord Keshava in a sonorous tone. 'When night is over and it is morning, please
arrange for my chariot to be prepared. O Krishna! That is your task. The task that has to be undertaken is a grave
one.'"'


'Sanjaya said, "Both Vasudeva and Dhananjaya spent the night immersed in grief and sighed like serpents. They
could not sleep, even for an instant. Knowing that Nara and Narayana[Nara and Narayana are ancient sages. Nara is identified with Arjuna and Narayana with Krishna.] were enraged, the gods, together with
Vasava, were distressed. They began to reflect about what would transpire. Extremely terrible and harsh winds began to blow, portending of fearful calamities. A headless torso and a club could be seen on the disc of the sun.
Though there were no clouds in the sky, there were thunderstorms, tinged with lightning. The earth, with all its
mountains and forests, began to tremble. O great king! The ocean, the habitation of makaras, was turbulent. Rivers
flowed in an opposite direction, rather than towards the ocean. The lower and upper lips of rathas, horses, men and
elephants trembled. Predatory beasts seemed to be delighted, since Yama's kingdom would be extended. Mounts
wept and released excrement and urine. All these omens were terrible and made the body hair stand up. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! On beholding these, all the soldiers on your side were distressed. They heard about the
fierce vow that the extremely strong Savyasachi had taken.

'"The mighty-armed son of the chastiser of Paka[Paka was a demon destroyed by Indra and Indra is known as the chastiser of Paka.] spoke to Krishna. 'Comfort your sister, Subhadra, together
with her daughter-in-law[Abhimanyu's wife, Uttara.]. O Madhava! Dispel the sorrow from the daughter-in-law and the mother-in-law. O
lord! Comfort them with truthful words and assure them with what you say.' Thus addressed, with a distressed
mind, Vasudeva went to Arjuna's house. He comforted his distressed sister, who was overcome with grief on account of her son. 'O one born in the Varshneya lineage! Do not grieve, together with your daughter-in-law, for the
sake of your son. O timid one! All beings have an end that is determined by destiny. This is especially true of kshatriyas who are born in brave lineages. Your son has attained a death like that. Do not sorrow. This was good fortune for the brave maharatha who was like his father in valour. He has attained the objective decreed for kshatriyas, one that brave ones desire. He has conquered many enemies and sent them to their death. He has gone to the
eternal worlds that satisfy all desire, those obtained by those with meritorious deeds. These are obtained by those
with austerities, brahmacharya, learning and wisdom. The virtuous go there and your son has obtained them. You
are the mother of a hero. You are the wife of a hero. Your father-in-law is a hero and so are your kin. O fortunate
one! Do not grieve over a son who has attained the supreme objective. The inferior Saindhava, the slayer of a
child, together with his well-wishers, followers and relatives, will reap the fruits of his insolent deeds. O one with
the beautiful hips! As soon as night has passed, he will suffer for his wicked acts. Even if he goes to Amaravati[Indra's capital.],
he will not be able to escape from Partha. Tomorrow, you will hear that Saindhava's head has been severed in the
battle, in the vicinity of Samantapanchaka[Samantapanchaka is another name for Kurukshetra, usually explained because of the five (pancha) lakes created
by Parashurama. Alternatively, it is said that the land was five yojanas in every direction.]. Dispel your sorrow and do not weep. Having placed the dharma of
kshatriyas at the forefront, the brave one has attained the virtuous end. We, all the others whose livelihood is based
on arms, will also attain that. He was broad in his chest. He possessed mighty arms. He did not retreat from battle.
He killed the best. O one with the beautiful hips! Your son has gone to heaven. Overcome your fever. The valiant
one obeyed his fathers and those on his mother's side. Having killed a thousand enemies, the brave maharatha has
been slain. O queen! O kshatriya lady! Comfort your daughter-in-law and do not sorrow grievously. O one who
brings delight[The word used in the text is nandini. If Krishna is still addressing Subhadra, as seems to be the case, this is the
only way in which it can be translated. However, nandini also means daughter. And it is possible that Krishna is
also addressing Uttara, though later in the section, there is the suggestion that Uttara arrived later.]! You will hear extremely pleasant news tomorrow. Be free from sorrow. Partha accomplishes
whatever he pledges. It cannot be otherwise. Whatever your husband wishes is never unsuccessful. Even if men,
serpents, pishachas, wanderers of the night, birds, gods and asuras come to the aid of the king of Sindhu in the battle in the morning, he will no longer exist.'"'


'Sanjaya said, "On hearing these words of the great-souled Keshava, Subhadra was extremely miserable and
lamented, because of grief over her son. 'Alas, my son! I am unfortunate! You were equal to your father in valour.
O son! Having gone forth to fight, how could you have been slain? Your face was as dark as a blue lotus[Indivara.]. It possessed beautiful teeth and beautiful eyes. O son! It is now seen to be covered with the dust raised by battle. You
were brave and did not retreat from battle. You possessed an excellent head, neck and arms. Your chest was broad.
Your stomach was flat. All your limbs were decorated with ornaments. You possessed excellent eyes. You are now
mangled with wounds from weapons. On seeing you fall, there is no doubt that all the beings are glancing at you,
as if at a rising moon. Earlier, your bed used to be covered with white and expensive sheets. You were used to happiness. Pierced by arrows, how can you sleep on the bare ground now? The brave and mighty-armed one used to
be served by supreme women earlier. How can he now have been brought down on the field of battle, served by
jackals? Earlier, you used to be delighted by bards, raconteurs and minstrels. You are now served by masses of carnivorous and fierce creatures that are howling. O lord! You had the Pandavas and the brave Vrishnis as your protectors. There were also the brave Panchalas. How could you have been slain, like one without a protector? O son!
O unblemished one! I have not been satisfied from looking at you. I am wretched. It is evident that I will have to
go to Yama's eternal abode now. You possessed large eyes. The tips of your hair were excellent. Your words were
pleasant and fragrant. Your face was without any blemishes. O son! When will I see it again? Shame on Bhimasena. Shame on Partha, supreme among archers. Shame on the valour of the brave Vrishnis. Shame on the strength of
the Panchalas. Shame on the Kekayas, the Chedis, the Matsyas and the Srinjayas. When you went to fight, they did
not know how to prevent the fall of the brave one. Today, I see the earth to be empty, bereft of its beauty. Without
being able to see Abhimanyu, my eyes are full of sorrow. You were the son of Vasudeva's sister and that of the
wielder of Gandiva. O brave one! How can I see you bereft of your chariot, and brought down by others? Alas,
brave one! You are like riches seen in a dream, which have been destroyed now. Man is transient, as temporary as
a bubble in water. This is your young wife. She is overcome with grief on your account. How will I comfort her? I
am myself like a cow that has lost her calf. O son! You have left me at a wrong time, when you were about to accomplish great things. You have departed without reaping the fruits. I am yearning to see you. There is no doubt
that the ways of destiny are extremely difficult to fathom, even by those who are wise. You had Keshava as your
protector. But in the battle, you were like one without a protector. There are those who perform sacrifices, donate
and are of good conduct. There are brahmanas who control their souls. There are those who follow brahmacharya
and bathe in sacred places of pilgrimage. There are those who are grateful and generous. There are those who serve
their preceptors. There are those who give a thousand dakshinas. All these attain their ends. These ends are obtained by brave ones who fight without retreating. These ends are obtained by brave ones who are slain on the field
of battle. May you attain those ends. There are ends obtained by those who donate a thousand cows or perform
sacrifices with donations. There are ends for those who give away acceptable houses as gifts. May those ends be
yours. Sages, rigid in their vows, attain ends through brahmacharya. There are ends for women with a single husband. O son! Go to those ends. Kings with good conduct attain eternal ends and those who purify and protect
themselves and follow the four sacred ashramas in due order[The four stages (ashrama) of life followed in due sequence-brahmacharya (celibate stage when one is a student), garhasthya (householder stage), vanaprastha (dwelling in the forest) and sannyasa (renunciation).]. There are those who are always compassionate
towards the miserable and divide everything equally[Without taking the entire share alone, such as dividing it among gods, ancestors, guests and dependents.]. They refrain from wicked tendencies. O son! May you attain those ends. There are those who follow good conduct and observe dharma. There are those who serve their seniors and do not leave their guests dissatisfied. O son! May you go to those ends. Intelligent ones have intercourse
with their own wives at the right season. They do not serve the wives of others. O son! May you go to those ends.
There are those who look on all beings peacefully. They are devoid of malice and attain ends. There are those who
do not cause injury and forgive. They attain ends. There are those who abstain from liquor, meat, vanity and falsehood and those who do not cause pain to others. O son! May you attain those ends. There are those who are modest and learned in all the sacred texts. They are satisfied and have controlled their senses. There are ends obtained
by those who are righteous. O son! May you attain those ends.' Distressed and overcome by sorrow, Subhadra
lamented in this way.

'"At this time, Panchali and Virata's daughter arrived there[Droupadi and Uttara respectively.]. They wept a lot and lamented in great misery. O
king! They were mad with grief and fell down on the ground, bereft of their senses. Krishna was himself extremely
miserable. But he sprinkled water on them and spoke these beneficial words, when they had regained their senses,
but were still lamenting and weeping. Pundarikaksha[Arjuna.] spoke these words to his sister. 'O Subhadra! Do not sorrow. O Panchali! Comfort Uttara. Abhimanyu, bull among the kshatriyas, has attained an objective that is extremely desired. O ones with beautiful faces! Let other virtuous ones from our lineage also attain that. All of us will go
to the end that the illustrious Abhimanyu has achieved. All of us, with all our well-wishers, wish to accomplish the
kind of deed that he has achieved. Your son, the maharatha, has accomplished this alone.' Having comforted his
sister, Droupadi and Uttara in this way, the mighty-armed scorcher of enemies returned to Partha's side. O king!
Krishna and the lord[The lotus-eyed, Krishna's name.] took the permission of the kings and the relatives and retired to their inner quarters. The
others also went to their own abodes."'


