Vaishampayana said, 'In this way, Shura's son heard the words of his son. The one with dharma in his soul abandoned his grief and performed a supreme funeral ceremony. He[Abhimanyu.] was always loved by his father. With his
wife, the great-souled Vasudeva performed the funeral rites for him. The mighty-armed one fed six million brahmanas. He fed them many kinds of food that possessed all the qualities. The mighty-armed Krishna satisfied all the
thirst the brahmanas possessed for riches and this made the body hair stand up. There was gold, cattle, beds and
garments.  These  were  given  away  to  the  brahmanas  and  they  said,  "Let  these  increase  more."  Dasharha
Vasudeva[Krishna.], Baladeva and Satyaki, together with Satyaka[Satyaki's father.], performed the funeral rites for  Abhimanyu. They
were tormented by great grief and could not find any peace.

'In the city of Nagasahvya, the brave Pandavas were also in a similar situation. Separated from Abhimanyu,
they could not find any tranquility. O Indra among kings! Virata's daughter did not eat for many days. On account
of her husband, she suffered greatly. However, the child in her womb had to be protected. Using his divine sight,
Vyasa got to know and arrived there. Having arrived, the intelligent and greatly energetic one spoke to the large-
eyed Pritha and to Uttara. "O illustrious one! Abandon this grief. An immensely energetic son will be born to you,
because of Vasudeva's powers and because of what I have said. When the Pandavas are dead, he will protect the
earth." O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In Dharmaraja's presence, he looked towards Dhananjaya and spoke
to him, gladdening him. "O mighty-armed one! A great-minded grandson will be born to you. He will rule the
earth, up to the frontiers of the ocean. O best among the Kurus! O afflicter of enemies! Therefore, conquer your
grief. There is no need to think about this. This will truly happen. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Krishna, the
brave one among the Vrishni lineage, said this earlier and this will indeed happen. There is no need to reflect on
this. O son! You should not sorrow about him[Abhimanyu.] or any of the other Kurus. They have earned and gone to the indestructible worlds of the gods." Dhananjaya, with dharma in his soul, was thus addressed by his grandfather. O great
king! He abandoned his grief and became cheerful. O one who knows about dharma! O immensely wise one! As
time passed, your father began to grow in the womb, like the moon during shuklapaksha. Vyasa urged the king
who was Dharma's son to perform a horse sacrifice and vanished. The intelligent Dharmaraja heard Vyasa's words.
He made up his mind that a journey should be undertaken to obtain the requisite riches.'


Janamejaya asked, 'O brahmana! On hearing the words spoken by the great-souled Vyasa, what steps did the king
take towards performing the horse sacrifice? Marutta's riches were buried inside the ground. O supreme among
brahmanas! How did he obtain those? Tell me that.'

Vaishampayana said, 'At that time, hearing Dvaipayana's words, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira summoned all his
brothers and spoke these words to Arjuna, Bhimasena and Madri's sons, the twins. "O brave ones! You have heard
the words the great-souled one affectionately addressed to us. The intelligent Krishna[Krishna Dvaipayana.] said this, desiring the welfare of the Kurus. Vyasa is great in his power of austerities and is wonderful in his deeds. His conduct is full of
dharma and he desires the prosperity of his relatives. He is our preceptor. O Pandavas! Remember what the immensely wise Bhishma and the intelligent Govinda told us. I wish to properly follow those. If we act in accordance
with those words, there will be welfare for all of us. They know about the brahman and following their words will
bring benefit. O extenders of the Kuru lineage! All the riches of this earth have now been destroyed. O kings!
Therefore, Vyasa told us about Marutta's many riches. If you think that those riches are sufficient, how will we
bring them here? O Bhima! What do you think?" O extender of the Kuru lineage! The king spoke these words
then. Bhimasena joined his hands in salutation and spoke these words to the best of kings. "O mighty-armed one! I
like what you have said about bringing the riches here, citing what Vyasa had said. O lord! O great king! If we obtain the riches of Avikshit's son, we will be successful. That is my view. O fortunate one! We will bow down before the great-souled Girisha, worship Kapardin and bring the riches here. We will certainly gratify the lord who is
the god of the gods and his followers, in words, thoughts and deeds, seek their favours and bring the riches here.
The servants who protect those riches are terrible to see. However, if the one with the bull on his banner is pleased,
they will be controlled." O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing the words spoken by Bhima, the king
who was Dharma's son was pleased. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In joy, he spoke to Arjuna and the others that this is what should be done.

'All the Pandavas made up their minds that the riches should be brought. They instructed the soldiers that they
should set out under a good nakshatra and on Dhruva's day[Dhruva's day means Sunday.]. The brahmanas pronounced words of benediction
and the sons of Pandu set out. Before that, they worshipped Maheshvara, the best of the gods. They offered the
great-souled one sweetmeats, payasam, meat and cakes and left in high spirits. As they set out, the foremost among
brahmanas and the citizens cheerfully pronounced auspicious words of benediction. Pandu's sons circumambulated
the brahmanas and the sacrificial fire, bowing their heads down. They then set out. They sought the permission of
King Dhritarashtra, who was afflicted by sorrow on account of his sons, his wife and the large-eyed Pritha. They
were honoured by the citizens and learned brahmanas. Kouravya Yuyutsu, Dhritarashtra's son, remained in charge
of the capital.'


