Sanjaya said, "With nagas, asuras, large numbers of siddhas, gandharvas, yakshas, large numbers of apsaras,
brahmarshis, rajarshis and groups of birds, the sky was beautiful in form. There were pleasant sounds of musical
instruments. There were sounds of praise. There was singing and dancing. All those in the sky, and men, were
spectators. The sky assumed a beautiful form. Cheerfully, the warriors on the Kuru and Pandava sides made the
earth and the directions resound with their musical instruments, the sounds of arrows and weapons and leonine
roars. With that sound, they began to slaughter their enemies. The field of battle had many horses, elephants and
chariots and it was extremely difficult to withstand, because of the descent of supreme swords, javelins and scimitars. As they attacked, bodies were slain and it was red and beautiful because of the blood. As the battle commenced, Dhananjaya and Adhiratha's son, supreme among wielders of weapons, used their sharp and swift arrows
against the soldiers in all directions. They were armoured and showered these towards each other[Towards each other's soldiers.]. Because of
the darkness that was created by the arrows, those on one's own side could not be distinguished from that of the
enemy. Since they[The soldiers on either side.] were terrified, they sought refuge with those two rathas, who were like the extending rays of
the sun at the end of darkness. Those two countered each other's weapons with their own, like the east wind clashing against the west wind. They were as radiant as two suns, dispelling the thick darkness after the sun has arisen.
Each encouraged those on his side to take a stand against the enemy. The two maharathas were surrounded in
every direction, like the gods and the asuras around Vasava and Shambara. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Drums, smaller drums and battle drums were sounded. There was the blare of conch shells. This mingled with
roars like lions. Those two supreme among men were dazzling, like the sun and the moon amidst a thick mass of
clouds. Both of them possessed large bows drawn into circles, like radiant solar discs, with thousands of arrows as
the rays. They were extremely unassailable in battle and were like two suns that had arisen at the end of a yuga to
destroy all mobile and immobile objects in the universe. They were both invincible and capable of destroying ill-
wishers. They were accomplished and wished to kill each other. In the great battle, Karna and Pandava, supreme
among brave ones, clashed, like Indra and Jambha. Those two great archers released great weapons and terrible
arrows. As they sought to kill each other with supreme arrows, they slaughtered large numbers of men, horses and
elephants. Terrified and afflicted again by those arrows, the Kurus and Pandavas sought refuge with those two
supreme among men. Elephants, foot soldiers, horses and chariots fled in various directions, like residents of a forest out of fear for a lion.

' "Duryodhana, Bhoja, Soubala, Kripa and Sharadvata's son- these five maharathas attacked Dhananjaya and
Achyuta with arrows that could destroy the body. Dhananjaya used his arrows to destroy their bows, arrows, horses, standards, chariots and charioteers. Having countered and defeated them, he struck the son of a suta with
twelve supreme arrows. At this, one hundred chariots, one hundred elephants, riders from Shakas, Tukharas and
Yavanas and the best of Kambojas attacked Arjuna, desiring to kill him. However, Dhananjaya used razor-sharp
arrows to swiftly sever the supreme weapons in their hands, heads, horses, elephants and chariots of the large numbers of the enemy who were fighting against him. The assembled gods in the sky were delighted and applauded by
sounding their trumpets. Showers of beautiful and fragrant flowers were rained down. Auspicious winds began to
blow. O king! Gods, men and beings who witnessed that wonderful sight were amazed. However, your son and the
son of a suta certainly felt neither pain, nor wonder. Drona's son grasped your son's hand in his own hand and
comforted him. He said, 'O Duryodhana! Be pacified. Make peace with the Pandavas. There is no need for dissension. Shame on war. Your preceptor[Drona.] was Brahma's equal and knew about great weapons. He has been killed
and so have bulls among men, with Bhishma as the foremost. I cannot be killed and neither can my maternal
uncle[Ashvatthama and Kripa were immortal. There are seven immortals. In
addition to Ashvatthama and Kripa, these are Bali, Parashurama, Vibhishana, Vyasa and Hanumana.]. Together with the Pandavas, enjoy the kingdom for a long time. Restrained by me, Dhananjaya will
withdraw. Janardana does not desire a conflict either. Yudhishthira is always engaged in the welfare of beings.
Vrikodara is obedient to him and so are the twins. If there is peace between you and Partha[Yudhishthira.], all the subjects will
be fortunate and that seems to be your desire too. Let the remaining kings return to their own cities. Let the soldiers refrain from hostilities. O lord of men! If you do not listen to my words, you are certain to be slain by the enemies in the battle and will repent. This universe, and you, has seen what the one with the diadem and the
garland[Arjuna.] has single-handedly accomplished. This has not been accomplished by the destroyer of Bala[Indra.],
Yama, the illustrious Prachetas[One of the guardians of the world (Prajapati), sometimes identified
with Daksha.] and the king of the yakshas[Kubera.]. There are many other qualities that Dhananjaya
possesses. He will not transgress my words. He will act so as to follow you. O king! For the benefit of the world,
be pacified. You have always shown me great honour and I have reciprocated. I am your great well-wisher and that
is the reason I am speaking these words. If you are inclined towards affection, I will restrain Karna too. Those who
are learned say that there are four kinds of friends-those who are natural friends, those who are made such
through conciliation, those who are earned through riches and those who are subjugated through power. Towards
you, the Pandavas are all four. O brave one! They are naturally your relatives. Make them that through conciliation. O Indra among kings! If they are pacified and become friends towards you, it is certain that you should also
act in that way.' Having heard the beneficial words spoken by his well-wisher, he[Duryodhana.] thought for some time. He
sighed and, distressed in his mind, replied, 'O friend! It is as you have said. However, listen to the words that I will
tell you. Vrikodara is evil-minded. He slew Duhshasana like a tiger, and laughing, spoke many words. Those are
still lodged in my heart. They were uttered in your presence. How can there be peace? O son of my preceptor! O
unblemished one! You should not speak to Karna and try to restrain him. Phalguna is overcome by great exhaustion. Karna will kill him in a short while.' Humbly and respectfully, your son repeatedly spoke these words and instructed his soldiers, 'Attack and kill those who seek to injure us. Why is the sound of arrows not heard and why is
everything quiet?'" '


