'Sanjaya said, "O great king! While that destruction of men, horses and elephants was going on, Duhshasana
fought with Dhrishtadyumna, who was astride a golden chariot. Afflicted by Duhshasana's arrows, he became angry and pierced your son's horses with arrows. O great king! Covered by Parshata's arrows, in a short while, his
chariot, his standard and his charioteer could no longer be seen. O Indra among kings! Oppressed by that net of arrows, Duhshasana was incapable of remaining before the great-souled Panchala. Having used his arrows to force
Duhshasana to retreat, Parshata attacked Drona in the battle and showered down thousands of arrows. At that time,
Hardikya Kritavarma arrived with three of his brothers and surrounded him[Dhrishtadyumna.]. However, the twins, bulls among
men, protected his rear as he advanced towards Drona, blazing like a fire. All those seven[Kritavarma and his three brothers, Nakula, Sahadeva and Dhrishtadyumna.] maharathas began to
strike. They were angry and spirited and had set upon death as an objective. O king! They were pure in soul and
pure in conduct and had heaven as an objective. Wishing to kill each other, they performed noble deeds in the battle. Those lords of men were stainless in their deeds. They were intelligent. They fought in accordance with the
dharma of engagement, with a view to attaining the supreme objective. The weapons that were used for the battle
there were in accordance with dharma. There were no barbed arrows, or hollow ones. They were not smeared or
injected[Lipta means smeared, so such arrows were smeared with poison. It is not clear what vastaka arrows were, but
they seem to have been injected, as opposed to smeared, with poison.]. They were not needle-sharp at the tip, nor reddish brown[Kapisha means reddish brown, also probably signifying smearing with some substance.]. They were not made out of the bones of
cattle, or the bones of elephants. The arrows used were not blended together[This either means that the arrows did not have multiple heads, or that more than one arrow was not forged together to form a large arrow.]. Nor did they possess foul smells or
curved paths. All of them used weapons that were straight and pure. Desiring virtuous worlds in the hereafter and
fame, they fought fairly. There was a tumultuous battle between the four warriors on your side and the three on the
Pandava side. But it was devoid of all taints.

'"O king! Dhrishtadyumna saw that the bulls among rathas on your side had been checked by the twins. He
swiftly used his weapons to advance against Drona. Checked by those two lions among men, the four brave ones
on your side surrounded them, like winds around mountains. Each of the twins, a bull among rathas, was engaged
with two rathas. Meanwhile, Dhrishtadyumna advanced and clashed against Drona. Panchala, indomitable in battle, was advancing against Drona and the twins were engaged with those on your side.

'"O great king! On seeing this, Duryodhana went to the spot, showering arrows that drank up blood. At this,
Satyaki swiftly attacked him. Those two, of the Kuru and Madhava lineages, approached and clashed against each
other. As they clashed, those tigers among men were not frightened. They smiled. They remembered all their childhood deeds and felt affectionate towards each other. They glanced at each other and smiled repeatedly. Then King
Duryodhana censured his own self and addressed Satyaki, who had always been his beloved friend. 'O friend!
Shame on anger. Shame on avarice. Shame on delusion. Shame on intolerance. Shame on the conduct of kshatriyas! Shame on the strength in my heart. O bull among the Shini lineage! You are aiming towards me and I am
aiming towards you. You have always been dearer to me than my own life. I remember all those childhood deeds
of ours. With us facing each other in this field of battle, all those have been destroyed. O Satvata! Because of anger
and greed, I am fighting with you today.' O king! Having been thus addressed, Satyaki, who was supreme in the
knowledge of weapons, laughed and picked up some sharp arrows. He replied, 'O prince! O king! This is not an
assembly hall, nor the abode of our preceptor[This preceptor might mean Balarama, since Duryodhana studied under him.], where we used to gather together and play earlier.' Duryodhana
said, 'O bull among the Shini lineage! Where has that childhood playing of ours gone? Why does this battle face
us? Destiny is difficult to cross. We desire riches. All of us have assembled to fight, because of our greed for
wealth. What will we accomplish with that wealth?' Having been thus addressed by the king, Madhava said, 'This
has always been the conduct of kshatriyas. They have to fight, even with their preceptors. O king! If I am dear to
you, kill me without any delay. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Through your deed, I will then go to worlds
meant for those with virtuous deeds. Swiftly show me your strength and prowess. I do not wish to witness this
great calamity that confronts my friends.' O lord of the earth! Having been thus addressed and given his reply,
Satyaki quickly advanced, eager and indifferent[Indifferent towards his own life.].

'"On seeing that he was advancing, your son received him. O king! Your son countered Shini's descendant with
arrows. A battle commenced between the lions of the Kuru and Madhava lineages. They were enraged with each
other and that terrible encounter was like that between an elephant and a lion. Duryodhana drew his bow all the
way back and pierced back Satvata, indomitable in battle, with ten sharp arrows. Satyaki pierced him back with ten
arrows and pierced him again with fifty arrows, then with thirty, and again with ten. Satyaki swiftly showered him
with arrows and severed his[Duryodhana's.] bow, with an arrow still affixed to it. O great king! Duryodhana was afflicted by
Dasharha's arrows. He was severely wounded and pained and sought refuge on another chariot. Having regained
his composure, your son attacked Satyaki again. He showered a net of arrows in the direction of Yuyudhana's chariot. O king! At this, Satyaki shot arrows towards Duryodhana's chariot and because those arrows were shot and descended on all sides, the place became violent. A great sound arose, like that of a fire burning a great forest.

'"On seeing that Madhava, supreme among rathas, was proving to be superior, Karna desired to protect your son
and quickly advanced. However, the immensely strong Bhimasena could not tolerate this. He swiftly advanced
against Karna and released many arrows. Karna severed those sharp arrows and laughed. He used his arrows to
sever his[Bhima's.] bow and arrows and killed his charioteer. Pandava Bhimasena angrily grasped a club and in that battle,
used it to crush the standard, bow and charioteer of his enemy. Karna could not tolerate this and continued to fight
with Bhimasena. In that battle, he used diverse nets of arrows and many kinds of weapons.

'"When that fierce encounter was going on, the king who was Dharma's son spoke these words to the bulls
among men, the tigers among men from the Panchalas and the Matsyas. 'They are our lives. They are our heads.
They are immensely strong warriors. Those bulls among men are engaged with the sons of Dhritarasthra. Why are
all of you stationed here, like foolish people who are bereft of their senses? Go there, where the rathas on my side
are fighting. All of you should place the dharma of kshatriyas at the forefront. Get rid of your fever[Mental fever.]. Whether
you are victorious, or whether you are slain, you will go towards the supreme objective. If you win, you will perform many sacrifices and offer large quantities of donations at these sacrifices. If you are slain, you will be united
with the gods and attain sacred worlds.' Having been thus urged by the king, those brave maharathas started to
fight. They divided themselves into four formations and quickly advanced against Drona. The Panchalas advanced
from one side and struck Drona with many arrows. With Bhimasena at the forefront, others surrounded him from
another side. The sons of Pandu had three cunning maharathas-the twins and Bhimasena. They loudly addressed
Dhananjaya. 'O Arjuna! Quickly attack the Kurus who are following Drona. If the protectors are killed,
Panchala[Dhrishtadyumna.] will kill him.' At this, Partha violently attacked the Kouraveyas and Drona attacked the Panchalas,
with Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront.

'"Then Drona caused a great carnage among the Panchalas. He was like an enraged Shakra causing destruction
among the danavas in earlier times. O great king! The enemy warriors were slaughtered by Drona's weapons.
However, because those maharathas were spirited, they were not frightened of Drona in the battle. O great king!
Though they were slaughtered and confounded, the Panchalas and the Srinjayas fought against maharatha Drona.
The Panchalas surrounded him from all directions and roared loudly, as they were killed by his arrows and lances.
On seeing that the great-souled Panchalas were being killed in the battle and shattered because of Drona's
weapons, the Pandavas were overcome by fear. O great king! There was a great destruction of large numbers of
horses and men in that battle. On seeing this, the Pandaveyas lost all hope of victory. 'Drona knows about supreme
weapons. He will probably destroy all of us. He is like a raging fire amidst dry kindling, when winter is over. In
this battle, there is no one who is even capable of glancing at him[Though not explicitly stated, they conversed with each other in this way.].'
'"On seeing that the sons of Kunti were frightened and afflicted by Drona's arrows, the intelligent Keshava, who
wished to ensure their welfare, spoke these words to Arjuna. 'He is incapable of being defeated in an encounter,
even if the slayer of Vritra advances to do battle, at the head of a large number of chariots. O Pandava! Therefore,
to ensure victory, abandon dharma and resort to yoga[The word yoga has multiple meanings. Here, it is being used in the sense of a trick.]. The one with the golden horses will kill all of us in this
battle. It is my view that if Ashvatthama is killed, he will not fight. Let some virtuous man tell him that he[Ashvatthama.] has
been killed in the battle.' O king! But this idea did not please Dhananjaya, Kunti's son. However, the others accepted it. And so did Yudhishthira, after some reluctance. O king! There was a gigantic elephant in his army and it
was named Ashvatthama. With his club, the mighty-armed Bhima killed it. In the battle, Bhimasena then approached Drona, as if ashamed. He began to loudly exclaim, 'Ashvatthama has been killed.' The elephant known
by the name of Ashvatthama had been killed. Knowing this in his mind, Bhima uttered a falsehood. On hearing
these extremely unpleasant words from Bhima, Drona thought about this. His limbs swooned, like sand in water.
But knowing about the valour of his son, he doubted that this was the truth. On hearing about the death, he did not
lose his fortitude, or tremble. Having recovered his senses in a short while, Drona was comforted. He remembered
that his son was incapable of being routed by enemies.

'"He attacked Parshata, wishing to kill the one who was destined to kill him. He enveloped him with thousands
of sharp arrows tufted with the feathers of herons. Twenty thousand bulls among men from the Panchalas covered
him with arrows from every direction, as he roamed around in that battle. Drona, the scorcher of enemies, invoked
a brahmastra in great anger, for the sake of killing those brave ones. Drona roamed around, killing all the Somakas.
In that great battle, he brought down the heads of the Panchalas. He severed their arms, which were like clubs and
were adorned with golden ornaments. In that encounter, the kings were killed by Bharadvaja's son. They were
strewn around on the ground, like trees brought down by a storm. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Elephants
and large numbers of horses were brought down. The earth became impassable because of the mire resulting from
the flesh and blood. Having killed twenty thousand Panchalas, Drona roamed around on his chariot. He was stationed in that battle, flaming like a fire without smoke. Again enraged, Bharadvaja's powerful son used a broad-
headed arrow to sever Vasudana's head from his body[This doesn't quite belong. Vasudana has already been killed by Drona in Section 66 (Volume 5), thought this
might a different Vasudana.]. He next killed five hundred Matsyas, six thousand Srinjayas, ten thousand elephants and ten thousand horses. Drona was stationed in the battle, for the sake of the destruction of the kshatriyas. On seeing this, the rishis-Vishvamitra, Jamadagni, Bharadvaja, Goutama, Vasishtha,
Kashyapa, Atri, others who lived in Brahma's world, the Sikatas, the Prishnis, Garga, the Balakhilyas[Or Valakhilyas.], the
Marichis, the Bhrigus, the Angirases and other maharshis with subtle forms-quickly arrived, led by the god of
fire. All of them spoke to Drona, the adornment of a battle. 'You are fighting a battle characterized by adharma.
The time for your death has arrived. O Drona! Look at all of us assembled here and cast aside your weapons in this
battle. You should not perform cruel deeds like these yet again. You know about the Vedas and the Vedangas[There are six Vedangas-shiksha (articulation and pronunciation), chhanda (prosody), vyakarana (grammar),
nirukta (etymology), jyotisha (astronomy) and kalpa (rituals).].
You are devoted to the dharma of truth. In particular, you are a brahmana. You should not perform such acts. Cast
aside this veil of ignorance and base yourself on the eternal. The time that you were to spend in the world of men
is now over.' Having heard their words and also the words of Bhimasena, he became distressed in that battle and
looked towards Dhrishtadyumna.

'"He was tormented and pained and asked Yudhishthira, Kunti's son, whether his son had indeed been killed or
not. Drona was firm in his mind that Partha[Yudhishthira.] would not utter a falsehood, even for the sake of all the prosperity in
the three worlds. It is for this reason that he asked him and no one else. Since the days of childhood, he had always
hoped to hear the truth from Pandava. Knowing that Drona, the lord of a battle, was capable of emptying the earth
of the Pandavas, Govinda was pained and spoke to Dharmaraja. 'If Drona is enraged and fights for even half a day,
I tell you truthfully that your army will be annihilated. Save us from Drona. In this situation, falsehood is superior
to truth. If one utters a lie for the sake of saving lives, one is not touched by the taint of falsehood.' When they
were conversing, Bhimasena said, 'O great king! As soon as I heard about the means for killing the great-souled
one, I immersed myself in the Malava soldiers of Indravarma. There was an elephant named Ashvatthama and it
was like Shakra's elephant. Exhibiting my valour, I killed it in the battle and told Drona that it had been killed. "O
brahmana! Ashvatthama has been killed. Stop fighting." O bull among men! He did not believe that I had spoken
the truth. Desiring victory, pay attention to Govinda's words. O king! Tell Drona that Sharadvati's[Sharadvati is Kripi, Ashvatthama's mother and Drona's wife.] son has been
killed. O king! If those words come from you, the bull among brahmanas will not fight any more. O lord of men!
In the world of men, you are renowned as one who speaks the truth.' O great king! Hearing his words and urged by
Krishna's words, he decided to say what he had been asked to speak. Yudhishthira feared a lie, but was also immersed in the prospect of victory. O king! He said that he had been killed, but added the words elephant indistinctly[The translation of the Critical edition's text doesn't make it very clear. Yudhishthira said, 'Ashvatthama, the elephant, has been killed,' with the elephant qualification added indistinctly.]. Before this, his chariot used to be borne four fingers above the ground. However, after he uttered that falsehood, his chariot started to touch the earth. On hearing Yudhishthira's words, maharatha Drona was tormented by
sorrow on account of his son. He no longer wished to live. He thought that he had caused injury to the great-souled
Pandavas. In his mind, he thought about the words of the rishis and about what he had heard about his son's death.
He lost his senses and was supremely anxious.

'"O king! The scorcher of enemies glanced towards Dhrishtadyumna and was no longer capable of fighting as
he had done earlier. On seeing that he was extremely anxious and that he had lost his senses because of sorrow,
Dhrishtadyumna, the son of the king of Panchala, attacked him. Drupada, Indra among kings, had performed a
great sacrifice and had obtained him for Drona's destruction, from the bearer of sacrificial oblations[The fire.]. He now
picked up a terrible bow that rumbled like the clouds. The bowstring was firm and he affixed a divine arrow that
was like a venomous serpent. Wishing to kill Drona, Panchala affixed the arrow, which was like a venomous serpent, on the bow. The form of the arrow, fixed on the circle of the bow, was like that of an immensely radiant fire.
The bow looked like the sun in the sky, when summer is over. Parshata stretched that flaming bow. The soldiers
saw this and thought that the time of destruction had come. On seeing it aimed towards him, Bharadvaja's powerful son thought that the end of his bodily life had arrived. O Indra among kings! The preceptor made efforts to
counter it, but the great-souled one's weapons no longer manifested themselves[The divine weapons arrived when summoned. In this case, they did not, because Drona was destined to die.]. Though he had used them for
four days and a night, they had not been exhausted. However, with one-third of the day[The fifth day.] having passed, the arrows were exhausted. His arrows were exhausted and he was overcome by grief on account of his son. The diverse
divine weapons no longer appeared before him. Therefore, he decided to cast aside his weapons, as the sages had
asked him to. But he still possessed energy and could fight like a superman. He picked up a divine bow given to
him by Angirasa. With arrows that were like a brahmana's curse, he continued to fight with Dhrishtadyumna. Angry and intolerant, he enveloped Dhrishtadyumna with a great shower of arrows. Using his sharp arrows, Drona
severed his arrows into a hundred fragments and brought down his standard, bow and charioteer. Dhrishtadyumna
laughed and picked up another bow. Using sharp arrows, he pierced him back between the breasts. Having been
severely pierced, the great archer was frightened in that encounter. However, with a broad-headed arrow that was
sharp at the edges, he sliced down that great bow[Dhrishtadyumna's bow.]. O lord of the earth! He severed his bow and arrows and everything that the invincible one possessed, with the exception of a club and a sword. Extremely angry, the scorcher of
enemies assumed a wrathful form and pierced Dhrishtadyumna with nine sharp arrows that were capable of robbing lives. Maharatha Dhrishtadyumna, immeasurable in his soul, mixed up his horses and his chariot with the
horses and chariot of his adversary and then invoked a brahmastra. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The horses
were as fleet as the wind and those with the complexion of pigeons were mixed with those that were red[Dhrishtadyumna's and Drona's horses respectively.]. It was
beautiful. They were like clouds tinged with lightning, roaring at the advent of the monsoon. O great king! They
were thus mingled in the field of battle and looked beautiful. The brahmana, immeasurable in his soul, sliced down
the joints of Dhrishtadyumna's arrows, wheels and chariot. His bow was severed. He was without a chariot. His
horses were killed. His charioteer was slain. Facing a grave difficulty, the brave one grasped a supreme club. As it
was being hurled towards him, the angry maharatha Drona, for whom truth was his valour, used his sharp arrows
to strike it down.

'"On seeing that Drona, tiger among men, had destroyed it with his arrows, he grasped a sparkling sword that
was as radiant as the sun and was decorated with the signs of one hundred moons. The virtuous ones thought that
there was no doubt that the time had come for the great-souled Panchala to kill the foremost among preceptors.
Maharatha Dhrishtadyumna attacked with the sword that was as radiant as the sun and was decorated with the
signs of one hundred moons. He stood on the seat of his chariot and on the other chariot[Dhrishtadyumna leapt onto Drona's chariot.]. He wished to perform
an extremely difficult task and shattered the breast of Bharadvaja's son in the battle. He stationed himself on the
pole of the chariot and on the yoke. He killed half of those red horses and was applauded by the soldiers. Since he
was stationed under those red horses, Drona could not find an opportunity to strike him and it was extraordinary.
He roamed around swiftly, like a hawk desiring meat. That is how he sought to strike Drona in that encounter. Angry, the valiant Drona used iron javelins to slay, one by one, all the horses with the complexions of pigeons that
were yoked to the chariot[He killed Dhrishtadyumna's horses.]. Having been slain, Dhrishtadyumna's horses fell down on the ground. O lord of the
earth! The red horses were freed from that mingling of chariots. On seeing that the horses had been killed by the
foremost of brahmanas, maharatha Parshata, Yajnasena's son and foremost among warriors, could not tolerate this.
He was without a chariot. The supreme among wielders of the sword grasped a sword. O king! He descended on
Drona, like Vinata's son[Garuda.] swooping down on a serpent. O king! Wishing to kill Bharadvaja's son, his appearance
was beautiful. It was like Vishnu's supreme form when he killed Hiranyakashipu[Vishnu killed Hiranyakashipu in his narasimha (man-lion) incarnation.]. He traversed diverse paths and
exhibited twenty-one techniques[Dhanurveda texts mention thirty-two techniques of fighting with a sword and a shield and one doesn't know
which twenty-one have been singled out. If one counts the motions mentioned in the text, one falls short of
twenty-one.]. He whirled and leapt up. He struck and sprung forward. He lunged forward
and retreated. With the sword and the shield, he circled and turned the other way. In excitement, Parshata descended and exhibited these.

'"The brahmana shot one thousand arrows and struck down Dhrishtadyumna's sword and the shield decorated
with one hundred moons. Those arrows were called vaitastikas[Vaitastika arrows were nine inches long.] and were used for fighting at close quarters.
Drona used such arrows. Other than him, only Sharadvata, Partha, Drona's son, Vaikartana, Pradyumna, Yuyudhana and Abhimanyu possessed such arrows. The preceptor wished to kill his student[The word used in the text is more specific than student. It is antevasin, which means a student who lives in the
preceptor's house.], who was like his own
son, and carefully affixed a firm and supreme arrow. However, while your son and the great-souled Karna looked
on, the descendant of the Shini lineage sliced it down with ten sharp arrows and rescued Dhrishtadyumna, who
was about to be devoured by the preceptor's mouth. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Satyaki, for whom truth
was his valour, roamed around in the paths of the chariots and was within the reach of Drona, Karna and Kripa. On
seeing this, the great-souled Vishvaksena[Krishna.] and Dhananjaya honoured Varshneya[Satyaki.] and applauded him, since
the undecaying one had repulsed the divine weapons of all the warriors. Vishvaksena and Dhananjaya descended
on the soldiers. Dhananjaya told Krishna, 'O Keshava! Behold. Satyaki, for whom truth is his valour, and who is
the extender of the Madhu lineage, is sporting around before the preceptor. This gives me great delight and also to
Madri's two sons, Bhima and King Yudhishthira. Satyaki is roaming around in this battle, with skills acquired
through learning. The extender of the deeds of the Vrishni lineage seems to be toying with those maharathas. The
siddhas and the soldiers are astounded. On seeing that Satvata is invincible in battle, they are honouring him and
applauding him. All the warriors on both sides are honouring his deeds.'"'


'Sanjaya said, "As those kings clashed, that field of battle became cruel. It was as if an enraged Rudra was killing
animals. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Arms, heads, bows, shattered bows and whisks were strewn around
in the battle. There were shattered wheels and chariots. Giant standards were brought down. Brave riders were
killed and scattered around on the ground. O supreme among the Kuru lineage! Warriors were mangled by descending arrows. In that great battle, they were seen to make many different kinds of attempts to move. The terrible battle that raged was like that between the gods and the asuras. Dharmaraja Yudhishthira spoke to the kshatriyas there. 'O maharathas! Control yourselves and attack the one who was born in a pot. The brave Parshata has
engaged with Bharadvaja's son. To the best of his strength, he is trying to kill Bharadvaja's son. From what we can
see of his form in the great battle today, in this encounter, the angry Parshata will bring down Drona. Unite and
protect him from the one who was born in a pot.' Thus commanded by Yudhishthira, the maharatha Srinjayas
wished to kill Bharadvaja's son and attacked in unison. On seeing that all of them were descending, the maharatha
who was Bharadvaja's son powerfully attacked them, knowing that he was mortal. As he advanced, unwavering in
his aim, the earth trembled. Turbulent winds began to blow, inspiring fear in the soldiers. Giant meteors seemed to
issue from the sun and fell down. They were blazing in their heat and seemed to indicate great fear. O venerable
one! The weapons of Bharadvaja's son blazed. Chariots rattled loudly. Horses shed tears. The maharatha who was
Bharadvaja's son seemed to have been robbed of his energy. The rishis, knowledgeable about the brahman, had
spoken to him about ascending to heaven. He decided to give up his life by fighting a fair battle. Drupada's soldiers surrounded him from all four directions. But Drona roamed around in that battle, consuming the kshatriyas.
The scorcher of enemies killed twenty thousand kshatriyas. With his sharp, pointed and fierce arrows, he killed another one hundred thousand. He was stationed in that battle, like a fire without smoke. To destroy the kshatriyas, he
based himself on his brahmana qualities.

'"Bhima saw that Panchala was without a chariot. He was without his weapons and powerless. The great-souled
one was distressed. Therefore, the scorcher of enemies swiftly advanced and took Panchala up on his own chariot.
Glancing towards Drona, he said, 'With your exception, there is no other man who can venture to fight with the
preceptor. Kill him quickly. The burden of his death has been placed on you.' Thus addressed, the mighty-armed
one swiftly picked up a new, firm and supreme weapon[That is, a bow.] that was capable of bearing all loads. In that encounter,
he angrily shot arrows towards the irresistible Drona. Wishing to counter the preceptor, he enveloped him with a
shower of arrows. Those angry and foremost ones, ornaments of a battle, countered each other. They released brahmastras and many other divine weapons. O great king! Parshata covered Drona with great weapons in that battle
and destroyed all the weapons of Bharadvaja's son. The undecaying one began to kill the Vasatis, Shibis, Bahlikas
and Kouravas, who were protecting Drona in the battle. O king! At that time, Dhrishtadyumna covered all the directions with his nets of arrows. He was as resplendent as the sun in the sky, with all its rays. Drona severed his
bow and pierced him with arrows sharpened on stone. Pierced severely in his inner organs, he felt supreme pain.

'"O Indra among kings! In great anger, Bhima grasped Drona's chariot and slowly spoke these words to him.
'There are those who are brahmanas only in name[The word used is brahmabandhava, meaning someone who is only nominally a brahmana.]. They are not satisfied with their own indicated duties. They
are skilled. But had they not fought, this destruction of kshatriyas would not have occurred. It is known that nonviolence towards all beings is supreme dharma. Brahmanas are the source of this. You are supreme among all those
who know about the brahman. However, you have killed large numbers of shvapakas[Shvapaka means dog-eater or someone who cooks food for dogs. This is usually equated with chandala or
outcaste.], mlecchas and many others. O brahmana! You are ignorant and stupid. You have done this for your son and your wife and because you desire riches. For the sake of a single person, you have killed many. Though you know about dharma, you have done
this for your son. They have been engaged in their own indicated duties. But you have acted against your own indicated duties. Why are you not ashamed? He[Ashvatthama.] has been brought down and is lying down, behind your back, and
you do not know. Dharmaraja told you about this and you should not doubt his words.' Having been thus addressed by Bhimasena, Drona cast aside his bow. Wishing to cast aside all his weapons, the one with dharma in his
soul loudly said, 'O Karna! O Karna! O great archer! O Kripa! O Duryodhana! Make careful efforts in this battle. I
am saying this repeatedly. May you be safe from the Pandavas. I am going to cast aside my weapons.' O great
king! Having said this, he loudly began to call out to Drona's son. In that battle, he abandoned his weapons and
sank down on the floor of his chariot. He gave assurance to all beings and resorted to yoga.

'"On detecting that opportunity, Dhrishtadyumna arose. He leapt down from his chariot, grasped a sword and
violently attacked Drona. A great lamentation arose among all beings, humans and inferior species, when they saw
that Drona had come under Dhrishtadyumna's control. They loudly lamented and also uttered words of shame.
Having abandoned his weapons, Drona was established in supreme tranquility. Having spoken those words, the
immensely ascetic one resorted to yoga and was a mass of brightness. The preceptor ascended to heaven, which is
so difficult for even virtuous ones to attain. As he ascended, it seemed to us that there were two suns in the sky.
The entire sky seemed to be full of one mass of brightness and it seemed to be night when Bharadvaja's son disappeared. In an instant, that mass of energy vanished. Confused sounds of delight were heard from the residents of
heaven. Drona ascended to Brahma's world and Dhrishtadyumna was confused[Because he did not know what had happened.]. There were only five of us,
born in the wombs of humans, who saw the great-souled one, united with yoga, attain that supreme objective. They
were I, Partha Dhananjaya, the brahmana Kripa Sharadvata, Varshneya Vasudeva and Dharmaraja Pandava. O
great king! None of the others could see Bharadvaja's intelligent son. They did not know that the great one had departed, united with yoga. All the other men did not know that he had attained the supreme objective. None of them
saw that he had left, in the company of the bulls among the rishis. The preceptor, the scorcher of enemies, resorted
to yoga and went to Brahma's world.

'"His limbs were mangled with hundreds of arrows and he had cast aside his weapons. All the beings were
supremely pained and censured Parshata. Though they spoke to him in this way, he grasped the body, which was
bereft of life, by the hair and dragged it. With the sword, he severed the head from the body. Since Bharadvaja's
son had been brought down, he was filled with great delight. In that battle, he roared like a lion and whirled his
sword. His[Drona's.] grey hair hung down, up to his ears. He was dark. He was eighty-five years in age. But he had
roamed around on the field of battle like one who was sixteen years old. The mighty-armed Dhananjaya, Kunti's
son, said, 'O Drupada's son! Let the preceptor remain alive. Do not kill him. He should not be killed[This was said before Dhrishtadyumna severed Drona's head.].' The soldiers had also said that he should not be killed. Arjuna, overcome with compassion, had said this repeatedly. Arjuna was overcome with compassion and so were all the kings. But disregarding them, Dhrishtadyumna killed
Drona, bull among men, on the floor of his chariot. Covered with blood, that scorcher of enemies then jumped
down from the chariot. His limbs were red, he was as difficult to look at as the sun, and the soldiers and others saw
that he had been killed in the battle[The limbs being red might also be a description of Dhrishtadyumna, rather than of Drona.]. O king! Before those on your side, Dhrishtadyumna, the great archer, flung
down Bharadvaja's son's large head. O king! On seeing the head of Bharadvaja's son, those on your side lost all
enterprise. Making up their minds to run away, they fled in all the directions. Drona followed the path of the stars
and ascended to heaven. O king! I witnessed the nature of Drona's death, because of the favours of the rishi
Krishna, Satyavati's son[Satyavati's son is Krishna Dvaipayana Vedavyasa, who gave Sanjaya the boon of divine sight. Because of this
divine sight, Sanjaya could see much more than what was evident to the others about the truth of Drona's death
and about his ascent to heaven.]. He ascended like a flaming and smokeless meteor. I saw the immensely radiant one
ascend to heaven.

'"When Drona was killed, the Kurus, the Pandavas and the Srinjayas were distressed. They ran away at great
speed and the soldiers were dispersed. In that battle, many horses were killed with sharp arrows. When Drona was
killed, those on your side lost their spirits. They were defeated and suffered from great fear about what would happen next. They lost control over their selves and thought that they had lost both[This is a reference to the Kourava soldiers. The sense is that they had lost both this world and the next. They
lost this world because they were defeated. They lost the next world because they fled.]. The kings searched for the
severed body of Bharadvaja's son. O king! But because the field was covered with headless torsos, they could not
find it. Having obtained victory, the Pandavas thought about the great fame that would follow. They made loud
sounds with their arrows and roared like lions. O king! In the midst of the soldiers, Bhimasena and Parshata
Dhrishtadyumna were seen to embrace each other. Bhima spoke to Parshata, the scorcher of enemies. 'O Parshata!
I will embrace you again, as the victorious one, when the wicked son of a suta and Dhritarashtra's evil son have
been killed in the battle.' Having said this, Bhima was filled with great joy. Pandava made the earth tremble with
the slapping of his arms. Terrified by that sound, those on your side fled from the battle. They abandoned the dharma of kshatriyas and devoted themselves to running away. O lord of the earth! Having obtained victory, the Pandavas were delighted. Because their enemies were destroyed in the battle, they were overjoyed. O king! When
Drona was killed, the Kurus were afflicted with arrows. With their leader slain, they were shattered. They were
overcome with supreme sorrow. They lost their senses and lost their enterprise. With their energy destroyed, they
were full of lassitude.

'"They lamented loudly and surrounded your son. They were covered with dust. They trembled and glanced in
the ten directions. Their voices were choked with tears, like the daityas after Hiranyaksha's city was destroyed[Hiranyaksha was an asura who was killed by Vishnu in his varaha (boar) incarnation.].
They surrounded the king, like small animals that were terrified. Your son was unable to remain amidst them and
moved away. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Your warriors were overcome by hunger and thirst and were
exhausted. They were severely scorched by the sun and were cheerless in their hearts. They were enraged on seeing the fall of Bharadvaja's son, which was like the sun falling down or the ocean drying up, or Meru moving or
Vasava being defeated. O king! The Kouravas were frightened and began to run away. On seeing that the one on
the golden chariot had been killed, Shakuni, the king of Gandhara, fled with the other frightened rathas, but faster
than the others. The son of a suta also fled with his large army and the army ran away with great force, with its
standards. Shalya, the lord of Madra, glanced here and there and fled out of fear, with an army that had chariots,
elephants and horses stationed in front. While many of the foremost ones had been slain, Sharadvata fled with the
many elephants and foot soldiers that remained, saying that this was a great calamity. O king! Kritavarma fled on
swift horses, surrounded by the remnants from the divisions of the Bhojas, the Kalingas, the Arattas and the
Bahlikas. O king! On seeing that Drona had been brought down, Uluka was terrified and fled with large numbers
of frightened infantry. Duhshasana was handsome and young. He possessed valour and all the good signs. However, he was also extremely anxious and fled, surrounded by elephants. O great king! Maharatha Duryodhana fled,
surrounded by elephants, horses, chariots and infantry. The remnants of the army were routed and ran away, astride
elephants, chariots and dark horses. The men lost their enterprise and their energy and thought that the army had
been destroyed. O lord! Abandoning their armour, those on your side ran away. O bull among the Bharata lineage!
The soldiers loudly called out to each other, 'Stay. Remain.' But they themselves did not remain there. They abandoned their chariots and their ornamented charioteers. Other warriors climbed onto their horses, or swiftly fled on
foot. The soldiers were frightened and lost all their energy. They were terrified.

'"Drona's son was the only one who advanced against the enemy, like a crocodile against a current. Indomitable
in battle, he killed many kinds of Pandu soldiers. He was like a crazy elephant in his valour and freed himself from
many difficult situations. When he saw that the soldiers were running away, having made up their minds to flee,
Drona's son approached Duryodhana and spoke to him. 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Why are the soldiers
running away and why are they frightened? O Indra among kings! They are running away in the battle. Why are
you not restraining them? O lord of men! You do not seem to be your natural self either. Karna and the other kings
are also not stationed here. In no other encounter have the soldiers run away in this fashion. O mighty-armed one!
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Why have your soldiers been reduced to this state? O king! Has a lion among
rathas in your army been killed? O Kourava! Tell me everything about why this state has come to pass.' Having
heard what Drona's son said, Duryodhana, the bull among kings, was incapable of telling him the terrible and unpleasant news. Your son was immersed in an ocean of grief, like a shattered boat. On seeing Drona's son stationed
on his chariot, his voice choked with tears. The king shame-facedly told Sharadvata, 'O fortunate one! Before all
the others, you explain why all the soldiers are running away.' The king went to Sharadvata and repeatedly entreated him that he should tell Drona's son about how Drona had been brought down.

'"Kripa said, 'We placed Drona, supreme among rathas on earth, ahead of us and began to fight with only the
Panchalas. A battle with a melee of the Kurus and the Somakas then commenced. They roared at each other and
brought down weapons on each other's bodies. Drona, bull among men, released the brahmastra and killed hundreds and thousands of enemies with his broad-headed arrows. In particular, goaded by destiny, Pandavas,
Kekayas, Matsyas and Panchalas approached Drona's chariot in that battle and were destroyed. With his brahmas-
tra, Drona consumed and sent one thousand lions among rathas and two thousand elephants to the land of the dead.
His grey hair hung down up to his ears. He was dark. He was eighty-five years old. However, in that encounter, the
aged Drona roamed around like one who was sixteen years old. He destroyed the soldiers and killed the kings.
Though the Panchalas were angered, they were made to retreat. Part of the forces was shattered and retreated. The
conqueror of enemies[Drona.] invoked a divine weapon that was as resplendent as a sun that has arisen. The powerful
one reached amidst the Pandus, with his arrows as rays. Your father was like the midday sun and was difficult to
look at. They were scorched by Drona, as if by the blazing sun. Their valour was scorched. They lost their enterprise. They were bereft of their senses. On seeing that they were afflicted by Drona's arrows, Madhusudana, who
wished for the victory of the sons of Pandu, spoke these words. "He is supreme among the wielders of weapons.
He is like the leader of a herd of leaders. He is incapable of being vanquished by the enemy in battle, even if it
were to be the slayer of Vritra himself. O Pandavas! Therefore, abandon dharma and seek to ensure victory. Otherwise, the one on the golden chariot will kill all of you in the battle. It is my view that he will not fight if Ashvatthama has been killed. Therefore, let someone utter a falsehood and tell him that he[Ashvatthama.] has been killed in the
battle." Dhananjaya, Kunti's son, did not approve of these words. But all the others approved, Yudhishthira with
great difficulty. Bhimasena shame-facedly told your father that Ashvatthama had been killed, but your father did
not believe him. Suspecting that this was a lie, your father, who was devoted to his son, asked Dharmaraja whether
you had actually been killed or not. Yudhishthira was scared of speaking a lie, but was addicted to the prospect of
victory. He said that Ashvatthama had been killed and indistinctly added that it was an elephant. This belonged to
Indravarma from Malava and was as large as a mountain. It was killed by Bhima. He[Yudhishthira.] approached Drona and
spoke these words. "You are wielding weapons for Ashvatthama's sake. You live for the sake of beholding him. He
has always been your beloved son. But he has been brought down." On hearing this extremely unpleasant news,
the preceptor was distressed. He gave up his divine weapons and no longer fought, as he had earlier. He was extremely anxious and his senses were numb with grief. On seeing this, the son of the king of Panchala, the performer of cruel deeds, attacked. The one who knew about the nature of the worlds[Drona.] saw the one who was destined to be the cause of his death. In the battle, he abandoned his divine weapons and decided to die[The translation doesn't capture the nuance. The practice in question is prayopavesa. While this does mean voluntary fasting to death, it is adopted by someone who has no worldly desires left.]. Parshata
grasped his hair with his left hand. Ignoring the loud words spoken by the brave ones, he severed his head. Everyone said, "Do not kill the one who should not be killed." Arjuna jumped down from his chariot and quickly ran,
with his arms raised. He repeatedly exclaimed, "O one who knows about dharma! Let the preceptor remain alive.
Do not kill him." O bull among men! But though he was restrained by the Kouravas and by Arjuna, he cruelly
killed your father. That is the reason all the soldiers are running away, afflicted by fear. O unblemished one! With
your father slain, we have also lost all initiative.'"

'Sanjaya said, "On hearing of his father's death in the battle, Drona's son was overcome by fierce rage, like a
snake that has been stepped on, by the foot."'


'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! On hearing that his aged brahmana father had been killed by Dhrishtadyumna
through adharma, what did Ashvatthama say? Human, varuna, agneya, brahma, aindra and narayana weapons were
always vested in the valiant one[Divine weapons respectively named after Varuna, Agni, Brahma, Indra and Narayana.]. O Sanjaya! He was always devoted to dharma. On hearing that the preceptor had
been killed by Dhrishtadyumna through the use of adharma, what did Ashvatthama say? The great-souled one obtained his knowledge of Dhanurveda from Rama[Rama is Parashurama, Dhanurveda is the science of fighting.]. Wishing to be like a preceptor towards his son, he gave him all
these divine weapons. There is only one person in the world whom men desire to possess qualities that are superior
to those in their own selves. That is the son. There is no one else. All great-souled preceptors pass on the secrets to
their sons and to their devoted students. O Sanjaya! He especially obtained all those skills. In a battle, Sharadvati's
brave son has become like a second Drona. He is like Rama in knowledge of the sacred texts and like Purandara in
battle. He is Kartavirya's equal in valour and Brihaspati's equal in intelligence[Kartavirya is Kartavirya Arjuna and Brihaspati is the preceptor of the gods.]. The young one is like a mountain
in his fortitude and like the fire in his energy. He is like the ocean in gravity and like a serpent's venom in his
anger. He is firm in wielding the bow and has conquered exhaustion. He is the foremost among rathas in the world.
He is as swift as the wind in speed. He roams around like an enraged Yama. When he is stationed in battle, the
earth itself seems to suffer. Truth is his valour and the brave one is not distressed in battle. He has learnt the Vedas.
He knows about sacrifices. He is skilled in Dhanurveda. Like the great ocean and like Rama, Dasharatha's son, he
is not agitated. In the battle, a person who followed dharma was killed by Dhrishtadyumna through the use of adharma. On hearing about the preceptor's death, what did Ashvatthama say? The great-souled one was created for
Dhrishtadyumna's death, just as Panchala, Yajnasena's son, was generated for Drona's destruction. He[Drona.] was killed
violently by a cruel and wicked one who did not possess foresight. On hearing about the preceptor's death, what
did Ashvatthama say?"

'Sanjaya replied, "O bull among men! On hearing that his father had been killed through deception by the
wicked one, Drona's son's eyes filled with tears and he was angry. O Indra among kings! Because of the rage, his
body seemed divine. It was like that of the Destroyer, wishing to consume beings at the end of a yuga. He repeatedly wiped his eyes, which were full of tears. He sighed in anger and spoke these words to Duryodhana. 'My father was brought down by inferior ones after he had cast aside his weapons. A wicked act has been committed by
those who should have upheld the standard of dharma. Dharma's son acted ignobly and cruelly. I have heard
everything about all that now. If one is engaged in a battle, there will either be victory, or there will be defeat. O
king! Of the two, death is always praised. If death results in a battle where the fight is according to norms of fairness, there should not be sorrow. This is what brahmanas have said. There is no doubt that my father has gone to
the world reserved for heroes. I should not sorrow for that tiger among men because he has been slain. However,
though he was engaged in dharma, his hair was seized while all the soldiers looked one. That is tearing out my vitals. Because of desire, anger, ignorance, insolence and folly, acts of adharma are performed to subdue others. In
that way, Parshata has performed this great act of adharma. The evil-souled one has acted cruelly and has certainly
disregarded me. Dhrishtadyumna will witness the extremely terrible consequences of that. He has performed an
extremely ignoble deed and so has the liar Pandava. They resorted to deception against the preceptor, when he had
cast aside his weapons. That is the reason the earth will drink Dharmaraja's blood today. I will use every means to
kill Panchala. I will kill Dhrishtadyumna, the perpetrator of a wicked deed, in the battle, whether the task be a gentle or a violent one. O Kourava! Having killed Panchala, I will obtain peace. O tiger among men! This is the reason
men desire sons, so that they may be saved from great calamities in this world and the next. My father was reduced
to a miserable state, as if he had no relatives, and this was while I, his son and his student, was still alive, like a
mountain. Shame on my divine weapons. Shame on my arms. Shame on my valour. Though he possessed a son,
Drona's hair was seized. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! I will act so that I am freed of the debt I owe to
my father, who has now gone to the world hereafter. Noble ones never praise themselves. However, because I am
angry at my father's death, I am now speaking about my manliness. The Pandavas, with Janardana, will witness
my valour today. I will crush all the soldiers, as if it is the end of a yuga. O bull among men! While I am stationed
on my chariot, gods, gandharvas, asuras and rakshasas will be incapable of defeating me in the battle today. In the
world, there is no one superior to me and Arjuna in use of weapons. I will blaze amidst the soldiers, like the rays of
the sun, and use weapons created by the gods. In the battle today, I will use them against the son of the one with
the lean horses[Drupada is being described as the one with the lean horses.]. I will exhibit my valour and crush the Pandavas. O king! Today, all the directions will be enveloped with showers of my sharp arrows and those on our side will see this. I will shroud everything with nets of
arrows that make a fearful noise. I will bring down the enemy, like trees uprooted by a violent storm. O Kouravya!
Bibhatsu, Janardana, Bhimasena, the twins, King Yudhishthira, the evil-souled Parshata, Shikhandi and Satyaki do
not know the weapons that I possess, or techniques for releasing and withdrawing them. In earlier times, Narayana
appeared before my father in the form of a brahmana, who worshipped him in accordance with the proper rites and
tendered him offerings. Having received them himself, the illustrious one offered to grant him a boon. My father
asked for the supreme narayana weapon. O king! The illustrious one, supreme among the gods, told him[Drona.], "There
will never be another man who will be as great a warrior as you. O brahmana! However, you must never use this
suddenly. This weapon never returns without killing the enemy at whom it has been aimed. O lord! But it is impossible to know whom it will not kill. It might even slay those who should not be killed. Therefore, it should not be
used[That is, it should not be used without proper care.]. O scorcher of enemies! In a battle, this great weapon must not be used to kill those who are running away,
those who have cast aside their weapons, enemies who have yielded and those who have sought refuge. In a battle,
if it is used to kill those who should not be slain, it will always oppress the user himself." My father received it.
The lord also told me, "In a battle, with this weapon, your energy will blaze and you will be able to shower down
many divine weapons." Having said this, the illustrious lord went to heaven. That is how my relative[Meaning Drona, his father.] obtained the
narayana weapon. With it, I will drive away the Pandavas, Panchalas, Matysas and Kekayas in the encounter, like
Sachi's consort[Indra. Sachi is Indra's wife.] against the asuras. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! With this, my arrows will be showered
wherever I wish and destroy the valour of the enemy. I will be stationed in the battle and bring down innumerable
showers of stones and use arrows with iron heads to drive away the maharathas. There is no doubt that I will bring
down many different kinds of battleaxes. O scorcher of enemies! With the great narayanastra, I will destroy the
enemy and repulse the Pandavas. The wicked Panchala hates his friends, brahmanas and his preceptor. He has performed an extremely despised deed and will not escape from me with his life.' Having heard Drona's son, the army
returned.

'"Those supreme among men blew on giant conch shells. Cheerfully, they sounded drums and thousands of
smaller drums. The earth roared with the sound of hooves and wheels. That tremendous sound echoed on earth, the
sky and heaven. The Pandavas heard that sound, which was like the thunder of clouds. Those best of rathas united
and consulted each other. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having spoken those words, Drona's son touched
water and invoked the divine narayana weapon."'


