'Vasudeva said, "Arjuna has exhibited the mind of one born in the Bharata lineage, especially of one who is Kunti's son. We do not know the time of our death, whether it will be night or day. Nor have we heard of anyone attaining immortality by avoiding battle. For any man, the act that pleases the heart is one of attacking enemies in
accordance with principles that are laid down. Any encounter guided by good policy attains success. However, if
both sides are equal, there is uncertainty[That is, if both sides are guided by good policy.]. But equality between the two never happens. If that is the case, why
should we not adopt a policy to approach the enemy and destroy him like a river destroying a tree? We will cover
our weaknesses and exploit those of the enemy. It is the policy of the intelligent not to attack stronger enemies with
battle formations and armies. This appeals to me too. If we can enter the enemy's abode without armies, attack him
and attain our objective, we will not be blamed. O bull among men! He[Jarasandha.] alone enjoys eternal royal fortune, like
the soul of all beings. But if he perishes, his forces perish. Desiring to free our relatives, even if we are killed by
his survivors after we have killed him in battle, we will attain heaven."

'Yudhishthira asked, "O Krishna! Who is this Jarasandha? What is his valour and his prowess that he has not
been burnt up when he touched you, like a moth before a flame?"

'Krishna replied, "O king! Listen to Jarasandha's valour and prowess. Learn why he has been spared by us,
though he has caused us displeasure in many ways. There was a king named Brihadratha. He was the powerful
ruler and lord of Magadha. He was proud in battle and had three akshouhinis[An akshouhini is an army and consists of 21,870 chariots, 21,870 elephants, 65,610 horses and 109,350
infantrymen.]. He was handsome, valorous, fortunate and extremely powerful. His body always had sacrificial marks and he had the appearance of a second
Shakra. He was like the sun's energy, like the earth in forbearance, like the destroyer Yama in his anger and like
Vaishravana[Son of Vishrava. In this context, Kubera.] in prosperity. O supreme among those of the Bharata lineage! Like the rays of the sun, the entire
earth was covered by qualities his noble lineage brought. O bull among those of the Bharata lineage! That immensely valorous one married the twin daughters of the king of Kashi, blessed with beauty and riches. That bull
among men had a contract in the presence of his wives that he would love them equally and not show preferences.
O lord of men! This king then shone with his beloved and suitable wives, like elephant with two she-elephants.
Between them, the lord of the earth was resplendent, like the embodied ocean between the Ganga and the Yamuna.
His youth passed away, immersed in pleasures. But no son was born to him to carry forward his lineage, though he
performed many auspicious rites, oblations and sacrifices, so as to obtain a son. But the best of kings did not obtain
a son to extend his lineage. One day, he heard that Chandakoushika, the son of the great-souled Kakshivat, descended from Goutama, had become tired of ascetic pursuits. Roaming as he willed, he had come and had sought
shelter under a tree. The king and his wives satisfied him with offerings of all kinds of jewels. That supreme
among rishis was always truthful and devoted to the truth. He spoke to the king thus. 'O king! I am satisfied with
you, you who are devoted to your vows. Ask for a boon.' Brihadratha and his wives bowed down before him. In a
voice choked with tears of despair, since there was no prospect of setting eyes on a son, Brihadratha said, 'O illustrious lord! I am about to give up my kingdom and depart for the austerities of the forest. I am unfortunate. What
will I do with a boon or with the kingdom?' On hearing this, the sage, seated under the shade of a mango tree, controlled his senses and began to meditate.

'"A mango fell into the lap of the seated sage. It was whole, without holes and without being touched by the
beaks of birds. That supreme among sages picked it up, and pronouncing a mantra over it, handed the king that unblemished fruit, as means of obtaining a son. The immensely wise great sage spoke to the king. 'O king! Depart.
Your wish has been fulfilled. O lord of men! Return.' O bull among the Bharata lineage! Remembering the contract, that supreme of kings gave the single fruit to his two wives. Dividing the fruit into two equal parts, the beautiful ones ate it. The sage always spoke the truth and what he had said was certain. They both conceived as a result
of eating the fruit. On seeing them, the king became extremely happy. O king! O immensely wise one! After some
time, when the appropriate time arrived, the two queens gave birth to two half-bodies. Each had one eye, one arm,
one leg, half a stomach, half a face and half a buttock. At the sight of these half-bodies, the two of them were miserable and trembled. The anxious sisters consulted each other. In great misery, they abandoned the two half-bodies,
though they had life in them. The two midwives carefully wrapped up those imperfectly born half-bodies and left
the inner quarters through a back gate. Discarding them, they returned in haste.

'"O tiger among men! There was a rakshasa woman named Jara and she noticed them, where they had been
thrown at a crossroad. She lived on flesh and blood. Driven by destiny, that rakshasa woman united the two bodies,
as it would become easier to carry. O bull among men! As soon as the two halves were united, they became one
body and a brave child emerged. O king! The rakshasa woman's eyes widened in amazement. She was no longer
able to carry the child, whose body was as hard as a vajra. The child balled his copper-red hands into fists, inserted
them in his mouth and began to roar, like a monsoon cloud heavy with rain. O tiger among men! O destroyer of
enemies! Extremely alarmed at this sound, the inmates of the inner quarters rushed out, together with the king.
Weak and jaded, though their breasts were full of milk, the two queens suddenly came out and reclaimed their son.
On seeing them in that condition and on seeing the king, who was so desirous of obtaining a son, and also on seeing the strong child, the rakshasa woman reflected, 'I live in the kingdom of a king who desires to obtain a son.
Therefore, I should not carry off this small child, like a strip of cloud hides the sun.' Assuming human form, she
spoke to the lord of men. The rakshasa said, 'O Brihadratha! This is your son. Accept him from me as a gift. He
was born in the wombs of your two wives, as a result of the boon granted by the brahmana. He was abandoned by
the midwives, but has been saved by me.' O supreme among those of the Bharata lineage! At that, on obtaining the
son, the beautiful daughters of the king of Kashi sprinkled him with the milk that was gushing out. Having seen all
this and understood, the king was delighted. In human form, with a complexion like that of pure gold, the rakshasa
woman did not look like a rakshasa at all. The king asked, 'Who are you, as golden as the womb of a lotus? You
have given me my son. O fortunate one! You appear to me like a goddess. Please speak.'"'


