Vaishampayana said, 'On his way to King Virata, who was seated in his assembly hall, Yudhishthira first fastened
the dice, made of lapis lazuli and gold, to his side and gathered his garments around him. The immensely famous
lord of men, extender of the Kourava lineage, went to the extremely generous lord of the kingdom[Yudhishthira and Virata respectively.]. He was worshipped by kings among men and was as difficult to approach as a venomous serpent[These are references to Yudhishthira.]. He was a bull among men
in his strength and beauty. He was grand and radiant, like an immortal. He was like the sun, enveloped in a great
mass of clouds. The brave one was like the fire, covered in ashes. The Pandava approached, like the moon shrouded in clouds. On seeing this, King Virata questioned the advisers, brahmanas and vaishyas who were seated there.

"Who is the one who has approached me, setting his eyes on my assembly hall for the first time? This supreme
among men cannot be a brahmana. It seems to me that he must be a lord of the earth, though he doesn't possess a
servant, a chariot or an earring. When he nears, he is as resplendent as Indra. It is my view that the marks on his
body indicate that he is one whose head has been anointed[As a king.]. He approaches me without any hesitation, the way a
rutting elephant nears a pond full of lotuses." While he was thus reflecting, Yudhishthira, bull among men, approached Virata and spoke to him. "O emperor! Know that I am a brahmana who has lost everything and has come
here in search of a livelihood. O unblemished one! O lord! I wish to live here with you, following your instructions." On hearing this, the king happily welcomed him.

'Thereafter, he spoke to him[Yudhishthira.]. "Please accept our homage. O son[The word used is tata.]! I am welcoming you with delight. Now tell
me. From which king's dominion have you arrived here? Tell me truthfully, your name and your lineage. Which is
the art that you wish to pursue here?" Yudhishthira replied, "In earlier times, I used to be Yudhishthira's friend. I
am a brahmana from Vyaghrapada's lineage. I am skilled at throwing the dice and gambling. O Virata! I am known
by the name of Kanka." Virata said, "I grant you the boon that you desire. Rule over Matsya and I will serve you. I
have always loved skilled and shrewd gamblers. You are like a god and deserve a kingdom." Yudhishthira replied,
"O lord of the earth! O Matsya! If there is ever a great dispute, I will never accept the views of anyone who is inferior. But no one whom I defeat will retain his riches. Through your favours, please grant me this boon." Virata
said, "If anything unpleasant is done towards you, I will kill even those who should not be killed. If it is a brahmana, I will exile him from my kingdom[Since a brahmana cannot be killed.]. Let all the assembled citizens hear that Kanka is as much a lord of the
kingdom as I am. You will be my friend and ride on the same vehicle. You will have many garments and a lot of
food and drink. You will always look towards my inner and outer affairs. My door will always be open for you.
When oppressed people approach you in search of work, you can always give them word on my behalf. There is
no doubt that I will give them everything that has been promised. In my presence, you will not find anything to be
scared of." Having thus met King Virata and obtained the boon from him, the brave bull among men began to
dwell there happily. He was shown the ultimate honours. No one there got to know about his true intentions.'


Vaishampayana said, 'After that, another one arrived. He was terrible in strength and his beauty was resplendent.
His gait was as easy as that of a valorous lion. He held a spoon and a ladle in his hands. He also had an unsheathed
black and iron sword that was devoid of any blemishes. He was in the form of a cook, but his radiance was
supreme. He was like the sun illuminating the world. He was attired in extremely dark garments and was like the
king of the mountains[The Himalayas.]. He approached the king of Matsya and stood there. On seeing the supreme one arrive, the
king spoke to the assembled citizens. "Who is this handsome and young one whom we see? He is like a bull
among men. His shoulders are as large as that of a lion. I have not seen a man like him before. He is like the sun.
Though I have been reflecting, I am unable to determine correctly the intentions of this bull among men." Pandava
then approached Virata. The great-minded one spoke in words that seemed to be despondent. "O Indra among
men! I am a cook named Ballava. Appoint me and I will cook you supreme dishes." Virata replied, "You are one
who offers honour. I do not believe that you are a cook. You seem to be the equal of the thousand-eyed one[Indra.], in
your radiance, your beauty and your valour. O son[The word used is tata.]! You are radiant and supreme among men." Bhima said, "O
Indra among men! I am a cook and your servant. I only know the best of dishes. O king! In earlier times, King
Yudhishthira used to taste all of them. There is no one who is equal to me in strength. O king! I have always been
skilled at wrestling. O unblemished one! I will bring you pleasure by fighting with elephants and lions." Virata
replied, "I grant you the boon that you will be employed in the kitchen. You will work there, since you have said
that you possess those skills. However, I do not think that this work is appropriate for you. You deserve the entire
earth, girded by the ocean. But let it be the way you desire. You will be appointed the chief chef in the kitchen,
heading the men who have been appointed there earlier by me." Thus Bhima was instated in the kitchen. He became a great favourite of King Virata's. O king! While he lived there, no one, not even the servants, got to know
who he was.'


Vaishampayana said, 'Then the unblemished Krishna braided her hair, with curls at the tips. The mild and dark-
eyed one hid it on the right side and donned a garment that was long, dark and extremely dirty. She thus assumed
the garb of a sairandhri and began to roam around, as if she was in great trouble. On seeing her wandering around,
men and women rushed to her and asked, "Who are you and what do you desire?" O Indra among kings! She then
told them, "I am a sairandhri. I have come here, wishing to work for anyone who will feed me." On seeing her
beauty, her attire and the gentleness of her speech, they did not believe that she was a maidservant who had come
in search of food.

'Virata's wife was the daughter of Kekaya and was greatly honoured. She looked down from the palace and beheld Drupada's daughter. On seeing her in that state, without a protector and clad in a single piece of garment, she
summoned her and said, "O fortunate one! Who are you and what do you wish to do?" O Indra among kings! She
told her[Droupadi and Virata's queen respectively.], "I am a sairandhri and I have arrived here in search of work. I will work for anyone who feeds me."

Sudeshna[Virata's wife.] replied, "O beautiful one! Those you speak of[Sairandhris.] do not possess the beauty you have. Those like you
have many and varied servant maids and servants. Your ankles are concealed. Your thighs are firm. You are deep in
three places[Speech, intelligence and navel.] and high in six[Nose, eyes, ears, nails, breasts and neck.]. You are red in the five places that should be red[Soles of the feet, palms of the hand, tongue, lips and nails.]. Your voice is as slow as that of
a swan. You have beautiful hair and beautiful breasts. You are dark[The word used is shyama, meaning dark. Shyama is also a term for a woman who hasn't had children. While
Droupadi has had children, the sense could also be that she is as beautiful as one who has not.]. Your buttocks and breasts are full. You are
endowed with all the qualities, like a mare from Kashmira. Your eyelashes curl gracefully. Your lips are like
bimbas[The bimba tree has fruit that is red when ripe. Ripe bimba fruit is a standard comparison for the lips of beautiful
women.]. You are slender at the waist. Your neck is lined like a conch shell. Your veins are hidden. Your face is
like the full moon. O fortunate one! Tell me truthfully who you are. You cannot be a servant maid. Are you a yak-
shi, a goddess, a gandharvi or an apsara[Apsaras are celestial dancers who serve Indra, sometimes regarded as wives of gandharvas.]-Alambusha, Mishrakeshi, Pundarika, Malini, Indrani, Varuni, or the
consort of Tvashtra, Dhata or Prajapati[Alambusha, Mishrakeshi, Pundarika and Malini are the names of apsaras. Indrani is Indra's consort, while
Varuni is Varuna's. Tvashtra is Vishvakarma, the architect of the gods. Dhata is best translated as the creator of the
worlds and Prajapati as the guardian.]? These goddesses are famous among the gods. Which of these are you?"

'Droupadi replied, "I am not a goddess, or a gandharvi, or an asuri, or a rakshasi. I tell you truthfully that I am a
sairandhri. I know how to dress hair and am skilful at grinding unguents. I can weave extremely beautiful and
colourful garlands. I served Satyabhama, Krishna's beloved queen and Krishna[Droupadi, or Krishnaa, as opposed to Krishna.], the wife of the Pandus and the
solitary beauty in the Kuru lineage. I go wherever I can obtain a good life. I am happy as long as I can obtain excellent garments. The goddess herself used to call me by the name of Malini[The goddess in question is Droupadi. Mala is a garland and Malini is one who collects flowers and weaves
garlands.]. O goddess! O Sudeshna! I have arrived thus in your house."

'Sudeshna said, "There is no doubt that I can place you on my head, as long as the king does not desire you with
all his heart and go to you. Behold! The ladies of the royal lineage and those who live in my abode are gazing at
you with attachment. What man will you not infatuate? Behold! Even the trees that are established in my abode are
bending down over you. What man will you not infatuate? When King Virata sees your superhuman beauty, with
the beautiful buttocks and the beautiful hips, he will forsake me and go to you with all his heart. Your limbs are
flawless. Your eyes are soft and long. O one with the beautiful smiles! On looking at you, any man who sees you
will become attached and be overcome with desire. You are unblemished in all your limbs and he will come under
the sway of the god of love. A she-crab conceives and brings about her own death[Reflecting the belief that a she-crab dies after giving birth.]. O one with the beautiful
smiles! I think that if I grant you residence, I will bring about my own destruction."

'Droupadi replied, "O beautiful one! Neither Virata, nor anyone else, can ever obtain me. I have five young
gandharvas[Gandharvas are semi-divine, celestial musicians.] as my husbands. They are the sons of a gandharva king who is extremely powerful. They always protect me. Any conduct that brings me grief ensures destruction. My gandharva husbands allow me to live in a house
where I am not served any leftover food and where I am not asked to wash anyone's feet. If any man desires me,
like any other common woman, before the night is over, he will enter another body[That is, he will be killed.]. O beautiful one! No one is
capable of making me stray. Those powerful gandharvas always protect me from unhappiness."

'Sudeshna said, "O beloved one! I will then offer you residence, according to your desires. You will not wash
the feet of others. Nor will you ever eat leftover food."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Krishna was thus comforted by Virata's wife. O Janamejaya! No one there got to know
who she actually was.'


