'Narada said, "On witnessing this great destruction, all the devarshis, the siddhas[Siddhi means accomplishment. Siddhas are semi-divine species who have attained these superhuman accomplishments or faculties.] and the supreme rishis were
extremely distressed. They were ones who had conquered anger, mastered their souls and senses. Stirred by compassion for the universe, they went to the grandfather's abode. There they saw the grandfather seated with the
gods, surrounded by siddhas and brahmarshis[Rishis who know the nature of the brahman, the supreme being.]. The god Mahadeva[Literally, great god. Shiva.] was there, with Agni[The god of fire.] and Vayu[The god of wind.]. The
moon[The moon-god Chandra.] and the sun[The sun-god Aditya.] were there and Dharma and Parameshthi[Parameshthi is an epithet for various gods-Brahma, Shiva, Vishnu and Agni. Since Brahma, Shiva and Agni
have been separately mentioned, here it probably means Vishnu.] and Budha[Budha is someone who is wise, it is also a name for Mercury.]. The vaikhanasas[Hermits.] were there
and the valakhilyas[Sages, numbering 60,000  who were the sizes of thumbs. They preceded the sun's chariot.], those who had resorted to the forest, the marichipas[This must be a class of sages, but the meaning is unclear. Perhaps it means those who were descended from
Marichi, one of Brahma's mental sons, that is, a son born through Brahma's mental powers.], the unborn ones, those who were
not deluded and other ascetics who were born from energy. All these rishis were paying homage to the grandfather.
All the maharshis[Great sages.] went there and recounted the deeds of Sunda and Upasunda-what they had done, how they
had done it, and in what order. Having recounted everything to the grandfather, all the masses of gods and the
supreme rishis pressed him to act.

'"On hearing all their words, the grandfather thought for an instant, trying to decide what should be done. Determining how they might be killed, he summoned Vishvakarma[The architect among the gods.]. When he saw Vishvakarma, the grandfather ordered, 'O, great ascetic! Create a lady who will be desired.' Paying homage to the grandfather and listening attentively to his words, he thought about it and carefully created a divine damsel. First he carefully collected whatever
was beautiful in the three worlds, mobile or immobile. He placed millions of gems on her body. The divine beauty
that he created was the essence of gems. She was created by Vishvakarma with a great deal of diligence and was
unmatched in beauty among all the women in the three worlds. There wasn't the tiniest part of her body that
wasn't perfect in the wealth of its beauty and that failed to attract the gaze of the beholder. She was like Shri[Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth and prosperity.]
herself, beautiful and desirable. She captivated the eyes and the hearts of all beings. Because she had been created
bit by bit from the essence of all gems, the grandfather gave her the name of Tilottama[Tila means a small particle, while uttama means best or excellent. The best of the small bits had been used in
creating Tilottama.]. The grandfather said, 'O
Tilottama! Go to the asuras Sunda and Upasunda. O fortunate one! Seduce them with your desirable beauty. Act in
a way so that you create dissension among the two of them, when they see how perfect your beauty is.' She agreed
to do this.

'"Paying homage to the grandfather, she circumabulated the gods assembled there. The illustrious one[Brahma.] faced
the east, Maheshvara[Mahadeva or Shiva.] faced the south. The other gods faced the north, while all the rishis faced various directions. But while she was thus circumabulating the gods, only Indra and the illustrious god Sthanu[Shiva.] managed to
maintain their composure. But so great was his[Shiva's.] desire to see her as she passed by his side, that another face with
eyes having curved lashes emerged from the southern side. When she went behind him, another face emerged from
the western side and when she went north, another face emerged on the northern side. For the great Indra too, one
thousand large and red-tinted eyes appeared everywhere, on his back and on his sides. Thus, in ancient times, Mahadeva Sthanu came to possess four faces and the slayer of Bala[Bala was a demon and Indra killed him. Thus, Indra is the slayer of Bala.] came to possess a thousand eyes. As Tilottama
walked around, all the masses of gods and the rishis turned their faces in the direction that she followed. But for
the god who was the grandfather, the eyes of all the great-souled ones were on her body. When the one with richness of beauty left for her appointed task, all the gods and the supreme rishis thought that the act had already been
accomplished. After Tilottama had departed, the one with the welfare of the worlds in his mind[Brahma.], asked all the
gods and the rishis to leave."'


'Narada said, "After conquering the earth, the two daityas had no other enemies or concerns. Having subjugated
the three worlds, their desire had been attained. They were delighted at having robbed the gods, the gandharvas[Semi-divine species, musicians of the gods.],
yakshas, nagas, kings and rakshas of all their gems and when they saw that they had not a single rival left, they
were supremely content. Like the immortals, they gave up all endeavours and spent their time in pleasures, with
women, garlands, fragrances, food, and delicacies in copious quantities, drink and various other objects that give
rise to enjoyment. Like the immortals, they sported in their inner quarters, gardens, mountains and groves and in
whatever region that struck their fancy.

'"One day, they went to sport in a rocky plain on the Vindhya Mountains that was dense with shala[Tall tree.] trees
crested with blossoming flowers. After every divine object of desire had been brought, the two contentedly sat on
supreme seats, with beautiful women around them. Wishing to please the two, the women danced to the sound of
music and delighted them with songs sung in their praise.

'"It was then that Tilottama appeared, plucking flowers in the forest. She was dressed in a single red garment, an
attire that was very seductive. Gathering karnikara flowers along the banks of the river, she slowly approached the
place where the two great asuras were. They had drunk the best of wine and their eyes were red. On seeing the one
with the beautiful hips, they were struck by desire. They instantly left their seats and went to where she was. Filled
with desire, they both asked for her favours. Sunda grasped the right hand of the one with the beautiful brows. Upasunda grasped Tilottama's left hand. They were intoxicated with the boon they had received, with their physical
strength, with the riches and gems they possessed and with the wine they had drunk. Intoxicated with this madness
and with the madness of desire, they contracted their brows and spoke to each other. 'She is my wife and your superior,' said Sunda. 'She is my wife and your sister-in-law,' replied Upasunda. In their anger, they shouted at each
other, 'She is mine, not yours.' Overcome by desire for her, they grasped their terrible clubs. Uttering the words, 'I
was the first[That is, first in grasping Tilottama's hand.],' they attacked each other. Struck by those terrible clubs, both of them fell down on the ground.
With blood streaming from their bodies, they looked like two suns dislodged from the sky. Then the women and
the masses of daityas fled. Miserable and shuddering with fright, all of them took refuge in the nether regions.

'"Then the pure-souled grandfather arrived, with the gods and the maharshis and praised Tilottama. Brahma was
pleased to grant her a boon. Delighted with her, the grandfather said, 'O, fortunate one! You will roam in the world
of the adityas[The word aditya has four different meanings. First, Aditya is the sun-god. Second, all the sons of Aditi are
known as adityas. Hence, aditya is a term for gods in general. Third, Aditya is also sometimes used as an epithet
for Vishnu. Fourth, there are twelve manifestations of the sun-god, known collectively as adityas. These shine together when the universe is destroyed. In this context, either the fourth or the second meaning is indicated, probably the fourth.]. Your energy will be so great that no one will be able to look at you for a long time.' Having
granted this boon to her, the grandfather of all the worlds, instated Indra in the three worlds. The illustrious one
then departed for Brahma's world.

'"Those two were always together, they were always united with the same objective. But in their anger, they
killed each other over Tilottama. O, supreme among the Bharata lineage! Out of my affection for you, I am telling
you, so that there is no dissension among you because of Droupadi. O, fortunate ones! If you wish to please me,
act accordingly."'

Vaishampayana said, 'O, king! Having been thus addressed by the great-souled maharshi Narada, they consulted
with each other and arrived at a rule, in the infinitely energetic devarshi Narada's presence. If any one of them set
eyes on Droupadi when she was lying with any one of the others, he would retire to the forest and live the life of a
brahmachari[Brahmacharya is the first of the four stages (ashramas) of life, the other three being garhasthya (householder
stage), vanaprastha (retirement to the forest) and sannyasa (renunciation). One who is in the brahmacharya stage
is a brahmachari. Brahmacharya is usually translated as celibacy, though anyone who follows the path of the brahman is a brahmachari.] for twelve years. After the Pandavas, who always followed dharma, had established this rule, the
great sage Narada was happy and went where he wished to go. O, descendant of the Bharata lineage! In earlier
times, thus requested by Narada, they established a rule and no dissension arose between them.'


Vaishampayana said, 'After having established an agreement in this way, the Pandavas lived there. With the
strength of their weapons, they brought under their sovereignty many kings. Krishna followed the wishes of all the
five sons of Pritha, who were lions among men and immeasurable in their energy. She was extremely happy with
the five valourous ones as her husbands, like Sarasvati[The goddess of learning, also a river.] with her elephants[Sarasvati is often depicted with elephants anointing her.], and they were also delighted with
her. Since the great-souled Pandavas abided by dharma, all the Kurus[The Pandavas were also descended from Kuru.] increased in prosperity, were bereft of sin
and were happy.

'O, lord of the earth! O, supreme among kings! After a long time had passed, thieves robbed a brahmana's cattle. When his wealth was thus stolen, the brahmana lost his senses in anger. He went to Khandavaprastha and angrily reproved the Pandavas. "O Pandavas! Mean, cruel and mindless thieves are forcibly robbing me of my wealth
of cattle in your kingdom. Pursue them. The sacrificial offerings of a peaceful brahmana are being carried away by
crows. The inferior jackal has invaded the deserted cave of a tiger. A brahmana's riches are being taken away by
thieves. Dharma and artha[The four pursuits in life are dharma (righteous conduct), artha (riches), kama (desire) and moksha (salvation).] will be destroyed. I am crying for help. Take up your arms." As the miserable brahmana cried out to the Pandavas, Kunti's son Dhananjaya[Arjuna's name.] heard his words.

'On hearing the words, the mighty-armed one told the brahmana not to fear. But Dharmaraja Yudhishthira was
then lying with Krishna in the room where the great-souled Pandavas kept their weapons. The Pandava[Arjuna.] was unable to enter the room. But he was also unable to go away as the wailing brahmana repeatedly urged him with his
words. Kunti's son reflected in sorrow, "This ascetic brahmana's riches are being robbed. It is certainly my duty to
dry his tears. If I do not protect someone who is weeping at our door, the great adharma of negligence will taint
the king[Yudhishthira.]. If I fail to protect, the adharma of our failing to protect will certainly be established in all the worlds.
But it is also certain that if I enter the room without the permission of King Ajatashatru[One without enemies, Yudhishthira's name.], I will do him a great injury and I must be banished to the forest. There will either be great adharma or death in the forest. But dharma
must be upheld, even if there is destruction of the body." O lord of the earth! Having thus resolved, Kunti's son
Dhananjaya entered the room and took the king's permission.

'Grasping his bow, he happily told the brahmana, "O brahmana! Let us go quickly, so that those mean thieves do
not go too far away and I can return your riches to you, from the hands of the robbers." The mighty-armed one,
with bow and armour and riding a chariot with flags, pierced the thieves with arrows and recovered the riches.
Thus helping the brahmana and returning his riches of cattle to him, the Pandava obtained fame. The valorous
Savyasachi[Arjuna's name. Savyasachi means someone who is left-handed.], scorcher of enemies, returned to the city. He paid his homage to all his superiors and was in turn
praised by them. He then told Dharmaraja, "O, lord! Grant me permission to observe my vow. On seeing you, I
have violated the rule and I must go and dwell in the forest, because that is the rule we made." On suddenly hearing these unpleasant words, Dharmaraja was afflicted by grief and in a sorrowful voice, asked, "Why?" Yudhisthira
told his brother Gudakesha[Arjuna's name.], a brother who never suffered from decay, "O unblemised one! If I am one with authority, listen to my words. O brave one! I know all the reasons why you entered the room and caused me displeasure and I have not felt any injury. There is no sin if a younger brother enters where the elder brother is lying with
his wife. However, if an elder brother enters a room where the younger brother is lying with his wife, that is improper. O mighty-armed one! Refrain, listen to my words and do as I say. Your dharma has not suffered and no injury has been done to me." Arjuna replied, "I have also heard from you that dharma must not be observed through
pretences. I will not waver from the truth. The truth is my weapon." With the king's permission, he was consecrated in the rites of brahmacharya and went away to live in the forest for twelve years.'


