'Bhima said, "I think I will present myself before King Virata as a superintendent of the kitchen and give my name
as Ballava. Since I possess culinary skills, I will cook him dishes. I will surpass all the skilled chefs who have
cooked dishes for him earlier and thus generate affection in his mind. I will fetch large loads of wood for him. The
king will be pleased on witnessing my great deeds. O king! If there are powerful elephants, or immensely strong
bulls, that need to be overpowered by me, I will pacify them too. If there are warriors who need to be fought in the
assembly, I will vanquish them also and increase his affection towards me. But I will never slay any of those fighters. I will bring them down so that they do not perish. If asked, I will say that I was cook, cattle-tender, chef and
wrestler to Yudhishthira. O lord of the earth! I will act so as to protect myself on my own. I promise that I will carry myself in this way."

'Yudhishthira said, "He is foremost among men. In a desire to burn down Khandava, he was the one before
whom Agni appeared in the disguise of a brahmana in earlier times. He was accompanied by Dasharha then[This has been described in Section 19. Dasharha is Krishna's name.]. He
is immensely strong and mighty-armed. He is the invincible descendant of the Kuru lineage. What duty will
Kounteya Dhananjaya undertake? He confronted the conflagration and satisfied the fire. Ascended on a single
chariot, he vanquished Indra and killed the serpents and the rakshasas. He is supreme among warriors. What will
Arjuna do? The sun is foremost among those that heat. The brahmana is supreme among bipeds, a poisonous one
among snakes. Agni is supreme among those with energy. The vajra is supreme among weapons. A bull with a
hump is supreme among cattle. The ocean is foremost among stores of water. Parjanya[The god of rain, that is, Indra. Alternatively, parjanya can also be translated as a rain-cloud.] is supreme among those
who shower down. Dhritarashtra is supreme among nagas and Airavata[This Dhritarashtra is a king of the nagas and is not to be confused with the Dhritarashtra who was Duryodhana's
father. Airavata is the name of Indra's elephant.] among elephants. The son is supreme
among those who are loved and the wife among well-wishers. O Vrikodara! Just as there is a foremost among each
specific category, this young Gudakesha[Gudakesha is Arjuna's name.] is foremost among all archers. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He
is not inferior to Indra or Vasudeva. He is the wielder of the bow Gandiva and has white horses. What will Bibhatsu do[Bibhatsu means the one who terrifies and is one of Arjuna's name. Because he has a bow (dhanu) named Gandi-
va, Arjuna is also known as Gandivadhanva.]? He lived for five years in the abode of the one with a thousand eyes[Indra is the one with a thousand eyes. Arjuna's residence in heaven is described in several sections, such as Section 32 (Volume 2).]. In a form that was as radiant as that
of the gods, he obtained divine weapons. I think that he is the twelfth Rudra and the thirteenth Aditya[The Rudras and Adityas are gods. There are eleven Rudras and twelve Adityas.]. His arms
are smooth and long. His skin is tough, both on the right and the left[Arjuna was ambidextrous and was therefore known as Savyasachi.], from drawing the string of the bow and
marked like bulls that bear loads. The armed Arjuna is supreme, like Himalaya among the mountains, the ocean
among stores of water, Shakra[Indra.] among the thirty gods, Agni among the Vasus, the tiger among animals and Garuda among winged ones. What will he do?"

'Arjuna replied, "O lord of the earth! I promise that I will undertake the duties of a eunuch. O king! It is difficult
to conceal these great marks that the string of the bow has left. I will wear earrings as radiant as the fire on my
ears. O king! I will wear a braid on my head and name myself Brihannada[Alternatively, Brihannala.]. I will repeatedly recount stories and
observe the characteristics of a woman. I will please the king and the others who live in the inner quarters through
different forms of singing and dancing and the playing of varied kinds of music[In addition to obtaining celestial weapons, Arjuna had learnt these skills in heaven.]. O king! I will teach the women
in Virata's abode these arts. I will recount the many deeds, fruits and conducts of people. O Kounteya! I will disguise myself in this way. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If I am asked by the king, I will say that I was
Droupadi's attendant in Yudhishthira's house. O Indra among kings! In this way, I will pleasantly spend my time in
Virata's abode, disguising myself through deceit, just as Nala had done[King Nala's story has been told in Section 32 (Volume 2).]."'

