'Kunti said, "Do not grieve because of this fear. I see a means through which you can escape from that rakshasa.
You have an only son who is a child and an only daughter who is engaged in austerities. It does not seem right to
me that they, you or your wife should go there. O Brahmana! I have five sons. One of them will go, taking on your
behalf the offerings to that evil rakshasa."

'The Brahmana said, "In order to live, I can never do this. For the sake of saving my own life, I cannot cause the
death of a Brahmana and a guest. Even those who are of low birth and sinful refuse to do this. One should sacrifice
oneself and one's children for the sake of a Brahmana. I consider this principle to be the best for me and I would
like to follow it. Between the death of a Brahmana and my own, it seems to me that the latter is better. There is no
salvation from the great sin of killing a Brahmana. Even if I do it without the right frame of mind, it is better for
me to sacrifice myself. O fortunate lady! In sacrificing myself, I will not commit the crime of self-destruction, because there is no sin if someone else does the killing. But if I deliberately kill a Brahmana, I will commit a cruel
and vile act, from which there is no means of atonement. The learned have said that the sacrifice of someone who
has come to your house or has sought your protection or the killing of a supplicant are cruel and sinful deeds.
Great-souled ones, learned in principles that should be followed at times of distress, have earlier said that one
should never commit cruel deeds capable of censure. It is best for me that I should perish today with my wife, than
that I should ever cause the killing of a Brahmana."

'Kunti said, "O Brahmana! It is also my firm view that Brahmanas must always be protected. If I had 100 sons, I
would not love any one of them less. But this rakshasa will not be able to kill my son. My son is full of energy, valorous and has knowledge of the mantras. He will deliver all that food to the rakshasa, but it is my firm conviction
that he will be able to save himself. Earlier, I have myself seen that powerful and gigantic rakshasas have fought
with that brave one and have been killed, one after another. O Brahmana! But do not reveal this to anyone through
any means. For people, curious and wishing to learn[Wishing to learn the secret of the power.], will trouble my sons. The learned have said that if my son
parts with this knowledge without the permission of his preceptor, the receiver will not gain from it."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Hearing these words of Pritha[Kunti.], the Brahmana and his wife were very happy and agreed
to her words, which were like ambrosia[In the sense of restoring life.]. Then, Kunti and the Brahmana went to Anila's son[Bhima. Anila is the wind-god.] and said, "Do
this." "So shall it be," was his reply.'


Vaishampayana said, 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Bhima said that he would do it before all the Pandavas
returned there after collecting their alms[The other Pandavas had gone out, in search of alms. From the subsequent conversation, Yudhishthira had not
gone out either. It was only Arjuna, Nakula and Sahadeva who were absent.]. Looking at his[Bhima's.] appearance, Pandu's son Yudhishthira guessed and
sitting down with his mother, alone and privately, asked her, "What is the exploit that the immensely powerful Bhi-
ma wishes to undertake? Is it something he wishes to do on his own or is it something you have commanded?"

Kunti replied, "On my instructions, the scorcher of enemies[Bhima.] will perform this great task, for the sake of the
Brahmana and in order to save this town."

'Yudhishthira said, "What have you done in your extreme rashness? This is a difficult task. The learned have
certainly never praised the sacrifice of one's own son. Why do you wish to sacrifice your own son for the sake of
someone else's? You have performed an act of abandoning your son. This is not approved by the worlds and by the
Vedas. Through the strength of his arms all of us sleep in peace and hope to recover the kingdom that the evil ones
have deprived us of. It is because of his infinite powers that Duryodhana, Shakuni and all the others spend sleepless nights of worry. Through his valour we escaped from the burning of the house of lac and other dangers when
Purochana was killed. It is through dependence on his valour that we believe that we have already acquired this
earth and its riches and have killed Dhritarashtra's sons. What came to your mind that you deliberately decided to
sacrifice him? Have you lost your senses and your intelligence because of the miseries?"

'Kunti said, "O Yudhishthira! You need not lament over Vrikodara[Bhima.]. I did not take my decision because of the
weakness of my intelligence. O son! We have lived happily in the house of this Brahmana. O son! I wish to regard
this as our compensation. A man is true to the extent he recognizes a good deed. Having witnessed Bhima's valour
in the house of lac and in the killing of Hidimba, I have great confidence in Vrikodara. The strength in Bhima's
arms is as much as that in 10,00020 elephants. It is because of this that he was able to carry us, as heavy as elephants, from Varanavata. There has been no one, nor will there be any one, as strong as Vrikodara. In battle, he is
the equal of the best, the wielder of the vajra[Indra's weapon.] himself. Earlier, as soon as he was born, he fell from my lap on a
mountain. Through the hardness of his body, he shattered the rock into pieces. O Pandava! From that day, I have
known Bhima's strength and, remembering it, I wished to repay the Brahmana. I have not done this from folly,
delusion or desire for gain. I have consciously desired to perform this act because it is what dharma requires. O
Yudhishthira! Two objectives will be attained in this way. We will repay the Brahmana for his lodging us and we
will obtain great religious merit. I have heard that a Kshatriya who helps a Brahmana in any way obtains the fortunate worlds after death. A Kshatriya who saves the life of another Kshatriya obtains great fame in this world and
the next. A Kshatriya who helps a Vaishya on this earth is certainly loved by the subjects in all the worlds. A king
who frees a Shudra who comes to him for protection is reborn in a wealthy family in his next life and is revered by
other kings. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Earlier, the illustrious and extremely wise Lord Vyasa told me this.
That is why I want to act in this way."

'Yudhisthira said, "O mother! What you have intelligently decided to do, driven by compassion for the poor
Brahmana, is indeed right. It is certain that Bhima will kill that maneater and return alive. But the Brahmana must
carefully be told that he must restrain himself, so that the inhabitants of this town do not find out."'


Vaishampayana said, 'Thereafter, when night had passed, Pandava Bhimasena took the food with him and left for
the place where the maneater lived. Reaching the forest where the rakshasa lived, the immensely strong Pandava
began to eat the food himself and called out to the rakshasa by name. Then, on hearing Bhimasena's words, the
rakshasa was greatly enraged and came to where Bhima was. His body was huge and his speed was swift, as if he
was breaking up the ground. His forehead was furrowed into three lines and he bit his lips. On seeing Bhimasena
eating the food, the rakshasa dilated his eyes and angrily said, "Who are you, stupid one, who dares to eat these offerings meant for me, that too in front of my own eyes? Do you wish to go to the land of the dead?" O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! On hearing this, Bhimasena began to laugh. Ignoring the rakshasa, he turned his head away
and continued to eat.

'Uttering a terrible roar and raising both arms high, the maneater rushed at Bhimasena, with the intention of
killing him. Even then, Pandava Vrikodara, the killer of enemy warriors, ignored the rakshasa. Casting only a
glance, he went on eating. Greatly enraged, the rakshasa struck a mighty blow with both his hands on the back of
Kunti's son. Though Bhima was powerfully struck by those arms, he did not even look up, and continued to eat.
Thereupon, the rakshasa became even more enraged. He uprooted a tree and powerfully dashed at Bhima, so as to
strike him again. Bhima, bull among men and immensely strong, slowly finished eating all the food. He washed
himself and then cheerfully stood up to fight. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The valorous Bhima laughingly
caught the tree that had been angrily hurled in his left hand. Then that powerful one hurled many other trees at
Bhimasena and the Pandava Bhima also hurled many at him. O great king! The terrible and great fight between
Baka and the Pandava with trees went on, denuding the forest of its trees. Announcing his name, Baka dashed at
the Pandava and grasped the immensely powerful Bhimasena in both his arms. Bhimasena also grasped the rakshasa in his great arms and began to violently drag the swift and strong one[The rakshasa.].

'Dragged by Bhima and also dragging the Pandava, the maneater was gradually overcome by great fatigue. The
earth shook because of their violent movements. Giant trees that stood there were shattered into pieces. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! On seeing the rakshasa fading away, Vrikodara pressed him down on the ground and
began to strike him with his arms. Powerfully pushing the middle of his[The rakshasa's.] back down with one knee, the Pandava
grabbed his neck with his right hand and his loincloth with the left, and then ripped the rakshasa into two with
great force. O ruler of the earth! Uttering a terrible roar, the fearsome rakshasa was torn into two by Bhima and
vomited blood.'


