'Markandeya said, "O Yudhishthira! O lord of men! At these words of the brahmana, the hunter who knew about
dharma replied to the brahmana. Listen."

'"The hunter said, 'O supreme among brahmanas! The mind first operates in men and leads to perception. Because of this, they serve desire and anger. For that purpose, they undertake great endeavours. They form the habit
of serving the desires of beauty and smell. Then comes attachment and from this follows hatred. Avarice comes
after that, followed by delusion. When they are overcome by avarice and battered by attachment and hatred, dharma is not generated in the intelligence. Instead, there is pretence about following dharma. Dharma is practised in
deceit. One finds pleasure in acquiring artha through deceit. O supreme among brahmanas! One becomes successful in obtaining riches through deceit. The mind finds pleasure in this and evil becomes attractive. O supreme
among brahmanas! Well-wishers and learned ones urge for restraint. But one is ready with replies from the shrutis
and speaks of what is sanctioned by the shrutis. However, because of attachment, three sins of adharma are committed. There is sin in thought, speech and deed. Addicted to adharma, all the good qualities are destroyed. Only
those who are similar in conduct remain friends with such an evil-acting one. As a consequence, unhappiness is
reaped in this world and there is destruction in the next. All evil-souled ones are like this. Now hear about the
gains from dharma. Through one's wisdom, one can foresee the sins. One is skilful in differentiating happiness
from unhappiness and consorts with righteous ones. By practising virtuous deeds, one's intelligence turns to
dharma.'

'"The brahmana said, 'You have truthfully described dharma. There is no one else who can speak about it in this
way. It is my view that you are an extremely great rishi and your power is divine.'

'"The hunter replied, 'The immensely fortunate brahmanas are always rendered offerings first, together with the
ancestors. In this world, with all one's soul, a learned one does that which is pleasing to them. O supreme among
brahmanas! I will tell you what brings pleasure to them. After bowing in obeisance to brahmanas, I will tell you
about the knowledge of brahmanas. Listen to me. O brahmana! This entire universe, everything in this universe
and everything that cannot be vanquished and the great elements have the brahman in the soul. There is nothing
beyond that. The great elements are the sky, the wind, the fire, the water and the earth. Sound, touch, shape, taste
and smell are their properties. These properties have all the sub-properties, related to one another. In due order, all
the properties have a hierarchy consisting of the three qualities. It is said that the sixth property is consciousness,
also called the mind. The seventh is intelligence and pride follows that. There are five senses. There is sattva, rajas
and tamas[The three qualities (guna) are sattva, rajas and tamas.]. These are the seventeen that constitute what is not manifest[The five elements, the five senses and the seven properties.]. The manifest and the unmanifest
are concealed well within the organs of sense. Including the manifest and the unmanifest, there are twenty-four
traits[To the list of seventeen, one adds the five organs of action-organ of generation, organ of excretion, hands,
feet and tongue. This makes it twenty-two and one adds pride (ego) and the soul.]. I have told you everything. What else do you wish to hear?'"'


'Markandeya said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! This is what the hunter who knew about dharma said and
after hearing this, the brahmana again asked about things that are pleasant to the mind. 'O supreme among those
who uphold dharma! It is said that there are five great elements. Please tell me about the exact qualities of these
five.'

'"The hunter answered, 'The earth, the air, the fire, the water and the sky have separate qualities and I will tell
you everything about their qualities. O brahmana! The earth has five qualities, the water has four qualities, the fire
has three qualities and the air and the sky together have three qualities. Sound, touch, form, taste and smell-these
are the five qualities of the earth, which has more qualities than the others. O supreme among brahmanas! O brahmana! O one who is rigid in his vows! Sound, touch, form and taste have been said to be the qualities of the water.
Sound, touch and form are the three qualities of the fire. Sound and touch are the two properties of the air. The sky
only has sound. O brahmana! Together, these fifteen qualities exist in the five elements and they are in all the beings on whom the worlds are established. O brahmana! They do not stand in opposition to one another, they exist
as a combination. But when mobile and immobile objects become unbalanced, then, over a period of time, the soul
moves from one body to another. In due order, they are destroyed. They are created again, in sequence. The five
elements can be seen in everything, mobile and immobile, that this entire universe is encompassed by. Whatever is
created by the senses is known as the manifest. Whatever cannot be grasped by the senses bears the mark of the
unmanifest. Sound and the others grasp an embodied body and make him subjugate to the senses. But if he can
transcend this, he can see the world extended in his soul and his soul extended in the world. He is then capable of
seeing the higher and the lower, and though still attached, can see all beings. He always sees all the elements in all
their states. He is united with the brahman and is never attached to that which is unholy. Delusion that is enveloped
in difficulties is overcome and the root of this is knowledge of the soul. The world is illuminated with intelligence
and the road of knowledge can be seen. The intelligent ones have said that the illustrious one is without a beginning and without an end. He creates himself and does not decay. He is without compare and without manifestation.
O brahmana! Everything that you have asked me has its base in austerities. Everything about heaven and hell is
based on our senses. When restrained, they lead to heaven. When uncontrolled, they lead to hell. This subjugation
of the senses is the key to yoga. This is the root of austerities. It is also the root of hell. By indulging in the senses,
there is no doubt that one reaps sin. But by bringing them under control, one can attain salvation. If one can control
these six[The five organs of sense and the mind.] in one's soul, one never suffers a decline and one is not visited by sin or calamity. One has then conquered one's senses. It has been seen that a man's body is like a chariot. The senses are like horses and the soul
controls them. When these good horses are skilfully controlled, one is self-controlled and happy, like a steady
charioteer. When the six senses are always controlled in the soul, one is like a supreme and steady charioteer,
wielding the reins in one's hand. When the senses are uncontrolled like horses on a road, the charioteer must
steadily rein them in and it is certain that victory will be achieved. But if the mind is overpowered by these senses
running wild, one loses one's intelligence, like a boat tossed on water by the wind. O brahmana! But one who perseveres steadily on these six and is not deluded about outcomes and fruit, concentrating on the insight of learning,
reaps the fruits that are the outcome of his meditation.'"'


'Markandeya said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The hunter who knew about dharma explained these subtle matters. Extremely attentively, the brahmana again asked him about a subtle matter. The brahmana said, 'Now
tell me exactly about the qualities of sattva, rajas and tamas. I am asking you, tell me exactly about their
characteristics.'

'"The hunter replied, 'Yes, I will tell you what you have asked me. Because you have asked, I will tell you exactly about the characteristics of these qualities. Tamas is characterized by ignorance, while rajas motivates to action. It is said that sattva is the greatest because of its immense powers of illumination. One who is extremely ignorant, foolish, prone to dreaming, insensible, ugly, dark, prone to anger and lazy, is under the influence of tamas. O
brahmana rishi! An excellent man who is ready in action and speech, affectionate, without enmity, industrious,
steady and proud is under the influence of rajas. A man with illumination, persevering, without attachment and
without enmity, without anger, wise and self-controlled, is under the influence of sattva. When one with the illumination of sattva suffers from the difficulties of the world, when one has learnt everything that has to be learnt, one
hates the ways of the world. Then a form of detachment makes itself felt. Pride becomes milder and uprightness
becomes stronger. Then all the conflicts[Between contrary sentiments.] are pacified. Any restraint in anything then becomes unnecessary. O
brahmana! One may be born as a shudra. But if he is established in his good qualities, he will become a vaishya,
and even a kshatriya. Similarly, one who follows worthy conduct[The text says, one who behaves like an arya.] can become a brahmana. Thus, I have told
you everything about the qualities. What else do you wish to hear?'

'"The brahmana asked, 'What happens to the fire in the body when it is combined with the elements of the
earth? Depending on where it is, how does the wind motivate?'"

'Markandeya said, "O Yudhishthira! When the brahmana addressed this question to the hunter, the hunter
replied to the great-souled brahmana.

'"The hunter answered, 'The fire resides in the head and protects the body. The fire is in the head and in
prana[Prana is the breath of life or the life force. Prana draws breath into the body, apana exhales it. Vyana distributes it through the body and samana assimilates it. Udana gives rise to sound.] and motivates all action. Everything in the past, the present and the future is based on prana. It is the
best that exists in beings and we worship this radiance of the brahman. It is the life force of all beings. It is the
eternal being. It is the mind. It is intelligence. It is the ego. It is the seat of all beings. While residing in this way,
everything is protected through prana. Later it goes in different directions, supported by samana. There is a fire in
the bladder and the anus and this is known as apana. It bears the excrement and urine. Learned ones who know
about the soul say that the three elements of endeavour, action and power are controlled by udana. It has been said
that the breath that exists in every human joint is known as vyana. The fire that is there in the elements of the body
is distributed by these winds. It triggers the juices, the elements and the humours and makes them circulate.
Through the combination of the pranas, a fire is created. This is the digestive fire, which enables beings to digest
food. Prana and vyana are placed between apana and udana and the fire resulting from this leads to the digestion. It
extends itself up to the anus and bears the urine and the excrement. It has the three elements of endeavour, action
and power and ones who are knowledgeable about the body know this by the name of udana. When the fire is
present in all the joints of the human body, it is known by the name of vyana. The internal heat is distributed and
supported by these different winds and they transform the juices, the constituents and the humours. Through the
combination of prana and the other winds, a reaction is created. This gives rise to an internal heat in the body and
facilitates digestion. Prana and vyana are established between apana and udana. The fire generated from this mingling facilitates digestion[There seems to be some repetition in the text.]. This extends up to the anus and is near the anus. The streams created from this are
all the pranas in a body. Through the force of the fire, prana strikes at the root of the anus and recoiling, the fire ascends upwards again. The area above the navel is the region of undigested food. All the pranas are located at the
centre of the navel in the body. Ten arteries radiate from the heart, upwards, downwards and sideways, and driven
by the pranas, bear the essence of food. This is the path that practitioners of yoga traverse for the supreme objective. They are seated, having conquered difficulties. They are patient and their souls reside in their heads. In this
way, prana and apana are established in all beings. The different components of a body go through eleven transformations[This is a reference to the five senses, the five organs of action and the mind.]. Know that though a being is always embodied, it is subject to its earlier deeds. Know that the fire that
is always inside is like the fire purified in a pan and is the atman[The human soul, as opposed to the divine and universal soul, brahman or paramatman.]. It is always subject to yoga. Know that the
god is inside it, like a drop inside a lotus. Know that he is always the kshetrajna and can be known through
yoga[Kshetra is the field, that is, the body. Kshetrajna is one who knows the body, that is, the soul, both human
and universal.]. Know that sattva, rajas and tamas are the attributes of life. Know that these qualities are an attribute of
life and that the atman is in the paramatman. It is said that consciousness is the quality of life. It is the actor, and
action marks everything. Those who know about the kshetra say that the supreme one created the seven worlds[There are actually fourteen worlds (lokas), seven above and seven below. This is a reference to the seven
above-bhurloka, kharloka, svarloka, maharloka, janarloka, taparloka and satyaloka (brahmaloka).].
In this way, the eternal being is not manifest in all beings. It can be seen by those who are learned and possess the
subtle knowledge of insight. One can purify one's heart and destroy the fruits of good and evil deeds. Through establishing one's soul in serenity, one can attain infinite bliss. The signs of serenity are that one sleeps happily and
contentedly, like the radiance of a lamp that has been trimmed by one who is skilled in handling lamps. One should
control one's mind, late in the evening and at night. After eating lightly, with a purified soul, one sees the supreme
soul in one's own self. This is like seeing the light of a lamp with the lamp of one's mind. One who sees the
supreme soul, beyond the human soul, such a person is liberated. Avarice and anger must be controlled through all
means. This is the purifying ritual for austerities and is the means of crossing over. One must always protect austerities from anger. One must protect one's riches from envy, one's learning from vanity and insults and one's soul
from distraction. Mildness is the greatest dharma. Forgiveness is the greatest strength. Knowledge of the self is the
supreme knowledge. Truthfulness is the supreme vow. True speech is superior. The knowledge of truth ensures
welfare. But the welfare of all beings is known as the supreme truth. One whose acts are always performed without
being tied down by self-interest, one who has sacrificed everything, is wise and is one who has renounced. This is
yoga with the brahman, something that cannot be taught or disturbed by a preceptor. This renunciation is known as
yoga. There must not be violence to any being. One must traverse the path of friendliness. In this present life, one
must never practise enmity. Self-negation, extreme satisfaction, selflessness and steadfastness lead to the supreme
knowledge. The knowledge of the self is the supreme learning. One should give up one's possessions. One should
use one's intelligence to be steady in one's vows. One then attains a firm place that is without sorrow, in this world
and the next. The self-controlled sage who has restrained his mind, and is always engaged in austerities, will be
unvanquished if he gives up the desire to win and becomes detached from attachments. Those that are regarded as
qualities are no longer qualities in him. He then continuously embarks on a single task. O brahmana! He is only
engaged in the task of achieving supreme bliss. Such a man renounces both happiness and unhappiness. He transcends all attachment and achieves the brahman. O supreme among brahmanas! I have briefly told you everything
that I have heard, exactly as I have heard it. What else do you desire to hear?'"'


