Vaishampayana said, 'Maya then spoke to Partha Arjuna, supreme among victorious ones. "With your permission,
I will now go away. But I will be back soon. To the north of Kailasha and near Mount Mainaka, where all the
danavas perform sacrifices near the beautiful lake Bindu, I have collected jewels and treasure[The word used in the text is bhanda, which means a vessel, as well as treasure. If the word is translated as
vessel, the jewels have been kept in a vessel. But the word transalted as treasure, seems more appropriate given the
context.]. Vrishaparva[Vrishaparva is the king of the danavas. Since he is faithful to his promises, he would not have appropriated
the treasure.] is
always faithful to his promises and I have kept it in his sabha. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If it is still
there, I will go and bring it. I will then build a sabha for the Pandavas that will be famous, beautiful, pleasing to the
heart and adorned with all the gems. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! There is a supreme club in lake Bindu,
kept there by King Youvanashva[Yuvanashva's son. His name was Mandhatri and he was born from Yuvanashva's belly.] after he slew his enemies in battle. It is heavy and firm and is embellished with
golden knobs, equal to one hundred thousand clubs and is capable of killing everything. That will be for Bhima
what the Gandiva is for you. There is also Varuna's great conch shell, with an excellent sound, and named Deva-
datta. There is no doubt that I shall give you all these." Having told Partha this, the asura left towards the northeast.

'To the north of Kailasa, near Mount Mainaka, there is an illustrious peak named Hiranyashringa, filled with
great gems. There is the beautiful lake Bindu, where King Bhagiratha lived for a long time, in his desire to see the
Ganga, since known as Bhagirathi[Bhagiratha was King Sagara's great grandson and needed to bring the celestial river Ganga down to earth, so
that his 60,000 ancestors, Sagara's sons, might be freed. Accordingly, he performed penances.]. O supreme among those of the Bharata lineage! The great-souled one, lord
of all beings, performed one hundred great sacrifices. There were many golden sacrificial stakes at the spot, encrusted with gems. This was for the sake of beauty and not to set an example[That is, the sacrificial stakes need not have been thus ornamented.]. It was there that the thousand-
eyed one, Shachi's husband, attained success. It was there that the eternal lord of all beings, whose energy is piercing, was worshipped by thousands of beings after creating all the worlds. It is there that Nara, Narayana, Brahma,
Yama and Sthanu, as the fifth, perform sacrifices after the end of one thousand yugas. It is there that Vasudeva always faithfully performed sacrifices for one thousand years, for the sake of those who are good. It was there that
Keshava placed thousands and tens of thousands of splendid sacrificial stakes and altars, garlanded in gold.

'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Arriving there, he took the club and the conch shell and the crystal objects
that were with Vrishaparva and were required for the sabha. He brought all this with the assistance of the servant
rakshasas. Bringing all this back, the asura built a matchless sabha. It was beautiful, divine, encrusted with jewels
and famous in the three worlds. He gave the supreme club to Bhimasena and the supreme conch shell Devadatta to
Partha. O great king! The supreme assembly hall had golden pillars and a circumference of ten thousand kishku.
Its beautiful form was radiant and divine, like the fire, the sun or the moon. Its splendour seemed to challenge the
blazing splendour of the sun. Its radiance was divine, as if it was on fire with divine energy. It was like the sky covered with a mountain or a cloud-spacious, large, smooth, without blemish; a remover of fatigue. It had the best
objects in it and its walls were garlanded with gems. It had many jewels, many treasures and had been built well by
Vishvakarma[Meaning, Maya.]. The unrivalled beauty Maya gave it was such that Sudharma of the Dasharhas or Brahma's palace
was no match. On Maya's instruction, eight thousand rakshasas, known as kimkaras[The word kimkara means servant. Literally, a kimkara is someone who asks what (kim) he should do (kara).], guarded and protected the
sabha. They could travel in the sky, were terrible and had large forms and great strength. Their eyes were red and
yellow, their ears were like conch shells and they were armed.

'Inside the sabha, Maya built a matchless tank full of lotuses. Their leaves were made of vaidurya[Lapis lazuli.], and their
stalks were made out of brilliant gems. There was the fragrance of lotuses and there were many fish[This may not be what is meant. The text uses the word dvija, which means any oviparous animal and can refer to fish, snakes or birds. Most translators have interpreted the word as bird (aquatic). But fish seems more
plausible.] in the water.
There were flowering lotuses and it was adorned with fish and turtles. Gentle steps led down into clear and pure
water that was always present and was stirred by the wind. It was decorated as with dots of pearls[This may also be a metaphor. The water on the lotus leaves may have been compared with dots of pearls.]. On seeing the
tank decorated with gems and precious stones, some kings did not recognize and fell into it, out of ignorance[They mistook it for land.].
Around the sabha, there were giant trees that were always flowering. They were beautiful and dark, and cast cool
shade. All the gardens were fragrant. All the ponds were adorned with swans, karandavas[Ducks.] and chakravakas[Geese.].
The wind carried the fragrance of the flowers in the water and those on land everywhere and pleased the Pandavas.
Such was the sabha that Maya built in fourteen months. When it was completed, he informed King Dharmaraja.'


Vaishampayana said, 'King Yudhishthira then entered. The lord of men fed ten thousand brahmanas with ghee,
payasa, roots and fruits and gave them unused garments and many garlands. The lord gave each of them one thousand cows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The cries of "what an auspicious day" seemed to touch heaven.
The supreme among the Kurus worshipped the gods with music, diverse songs and many fragrances. Then, for
seven nights, the great-souled Yudhishthira was served by wrestlers, dancers, fighters, raconteurs and minstrels.
When the homage had thus been paid, the Pandava and his brothers pleasured in that beautiful sabha, like Shakra
does in heaven.

'Rishis and kings from many countries were seated with the Pandavas in that sabha-Asita, Devala, Satya,
Sarpamali, Mahashira, Arvavasu, Sumitra, Maitreya, Shunaka, Bali, Baka, Dalbhya, Sthulashira, Krishna Dvaipayana and we ourselves, Vyasa's disciples-Shuka, Sumantu, Jaimini and Paila. Then there were Tittira, Yajnavalkya, Lomaharshana and his son Apsuhomya, Dhoumya, Animandavya, Koushika, Damoshnisha, Traivani,
Parnada, Ghatajanuka, Mounjayana, Vayubhaksha, Parasharya, the two Sarikas, Balavaka, Shinivaka, Sutyapala,
Kritasharma, Jatukarna, Shikhavana, Subala, Parijataka, the immensely fortunate Parvata, the sage Markandeya,
Pavitrapani, Savarni, Bhaluki, Galava, Janghabandhu, Raibhya, Kopavegashrava, Bhrigu, Haribabhru, Koundinya,
Babhrumali, Sanatana, Kakshivana, Oushija, Nachiketa, Goutama, Painga, Varaha, Shunaka, the immensely ascetic Shandilya, Karkara, Venujangha, Kalapa and Katha. These sages were immersed in dharma, were self-controlled and had their senses under restraint. There were many others who were learned in the Vedas and the Vedangas. All these supreme rishis waited upon the great-souled one in the sabha. They were learned in dharma and immaculate and discoursed about pure tales. In that same way, the best of kshatriyas also waited on Dharmaraja-the
fortunate, great-souled, righteous and prosperous Munjaketu, Samgramajit, Durmukha, the valorous Ugrasena, the
lord of the earth Kakshasena, the undefeated Kshemaka, Kamala the king of Kamboja, the mighty Kampana who
alone made the Yavanas[The Greeks, but can also be applied to all foreigners or barbarians.] tremble the way the Kalakeya asuras were made to tremble by the wielder of the
vajra[Indra.], King Jatasura beloved by the Madras, kings Kunti and Kuninda of the Kiratas, Anga, Vanga and Pundra,
Pandya, Udraja, Andhraka, King Sumana of the Kiratas, the king of the Yavanas, Chanura, Devavrata, Bhoja, Bhi-
maratha, Shrutayudha of Kalinga, Jayatsena of Magadha, Susharma, Chekitana, Suratha the destroyer of enemies,
Ketumana, Vasudana, Kritakshana of Videha, Sudharma, Aniruddha, the immensely strong Shrutayudha, the invincible Anuparaja, the great alms-giver Kshemajit, Shishupala and his son, the king of Karusha, the invincible Vrishni princes who were like the gods, namely, Ahuka, Viprithu, Gada, Sarana, Akrura, Kritavarma, Shini's son Satya-
ki, Bhishmaka, Ahriti, the valorous Dyumatsena, the great archers from Kekaya, Yajnasena of the Somakas. O
king! There were all the immensely powerful princes of the Vrishnis who had learnt the science of archery from
Arjuna and were dressed in deer and antelope hides[The words used in the text are rourava and ajina. Ruru is a deer and rourava is its skin. Ajina can be used to
mean the hide of a tiger, lion or elephant too, but is commonly used for the hide of a black antelope.] and other princes who had been similarly taught-Rukmini
son[Pradyumna.], and Samba and Yuyudhana Satyaki[Yuyudhana is one of Satyaki's names.]. O ruler of the earth! These and many other kings were there.
Dhananjaya's eternal friend Tumbaru was there, Chitrasena with his advisers and many other gandharvas and apsaras, skilled in singing and music, knowledgeable in the beating of tala[Time. The word also means a cymbal. So an alternative translation is, knowledgeable in the playing of
cymbals.] and kinnaras, who were excellent
pupils of laya[Keeping time in music.]. At Tumbaru's command, those learned ones sang in celestial tones, as was laid down in the rules,
and pleasured and paid homage to Pandu's sons and the rishis who were assembled in the sabha, rigid in their vows
and devoted to the truth. They paid homage to Yudhishthira the way the gods do so to Brahma in heaven.'


