Yudhishthira said, "O grandfather! Tell me the foundation of all dharma concerning offspring, the home, ancestors, gods and guests."

'Bhishma replied, "O lord of the earth! Those who have thought about dharma have expressed their views about
all kinds of dharma associated with the bestowing of a maiden. O Yudhishthira! A virtuous brahmana who is always devoted to dharma bestows his daughter on an excellent groom, after ascertaining his good conduct, learning,
birth and deeds. This kind of favourable bestowal is also the eternal dharma of virtuous kshatriyas and is known as
a brahma form of marriage. O Yudhishthira! When one bestows one's daughter on someone she has herself chosen, ignoring one's own wishes, those who know about dharma speak of this as a gandharva kind of dharma[That is, a gandharva marriage.]. O
king! When a lot of riches are used to tempt a girl's relatives and purchase her, the learned say that this is an asura
kind of dharma. O son! When weeping relatives are slain and their heads severed and a weeping maiden is forcibly
abducted from her house, that kind of dharma has the signs of rakshasa. O Yudhishthira! Of these five, three constitute dharma and two are adharma[The numbering is a problem, the prajapatya form of marriage not having been mentioned. Had this been included, we would have had the number five and the three acceptable ones would have been brahma, gandharva and
prajapatya. The two condemned ones are asura and rakshasa.]. The paishacha and asura forms should never be resorted to[The paishacha form has not been mentioned earlier. This happens when a girl is seduced. If the paishacha is included in the list and prajapatya excluded, the permissible ones are brahma, gandharva and rakshasa. The condemned ones are asura and paishacha.]. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! The brahma, kshatra and gandharva forms represent dharma[Since the kshatra form has not been mentioned earlier, there is another numbering anomaly. The kshatra form is
presumably prajapatya. There is a lack of consistency with the eight kinds of marriages listed in the
Dharmashastras.]. There is no doubt that
these should be resorted to, in pure or mixed form[Mixed means that a specific wedding can have elements of more than one kind of marriage.]. A brahmana can have three wives, a kshatriya can have two
wives. A vaishya should take one from his own varna. The children will be equal[In the case of more than one wife.]. The brahmana wife will be
senior and the kshatriya wife for the kshatriya[The three wives permitted for a brahmana might not be brahmana. In such cases, the brahmana wife will be senior. This is the logic for a kshatriya too.]. There are people who say that a shudra wife can be accepted for
intercourse, but others disagree. The virtuous do not praise the birth of offspring through shudras. If a brahmana
has offspring through a shudra, penance is recommended. A man who is thirty years old should wed a girl who is
ten years old, known as nagnika[Nagnika does not mean naked. It means a girl clad in a single piece of garment, that is, a girl who has not yet
attained puberty.]. Alternatively, a man who is twenty-one years old should wed a girl who is
seven years old. O bull among the Bharata lineage! If a girl has a father, but does not have a brother, she should not
be wed, since she might follow the dharma of a putrika. When a girl has attained puberty, one should wait for three
years. In the fourth year, if she is still not married, she should look for a husband herself. O bull among the Bharata
lineage! The offspring of such a girl are not tainted, nor is intercourse with her condemned. If she does not act in
this way, Prajapati does not approve of her conduct. One should wed a girl who is not of the same pinda as the
mother or the same gotra as the father[Stated simply, same pinda means the wife should not be the offspring of someone who is related to the groom's
mother, going up to three generations. Gotra is when there is a common and unbroken male line, going up to a
common male ancestor.]. In this way, one follows the dharma that Manu spoke about."

'Yudhishthira said, "Some people offer a bride price and others speak of gifts. Some speak of their bravery, others exhibit their riches. O grandfather! Others accept the hand in marriage. Whom does the maiden belong to[These shlokas are cryptic. What is probably meant is that different people might offer different things. But
when does the actual act of marriage take place?]? I
wish to ask the truth about this. You are like my sight."

'Bhishma replied, "As long as men remain in their own station, whatever action they undertake is beneficial, regardless of whether it is with mantras or without mantras. However, a lie is a grave sin[If there has been a promise that a maiden will be bestowed, then breach of contract is a grave sin.]. Some people say that if
a marriage takes place as the outcome of a falsehood, the wife, the offspring, the officiating priest, the preceptor,
the disciple and the instructor, all of these deserve to be punished. But others do not agree. Manu does not approve
of intercourse with a person one doesn't desire. This is against fame and against dharma. This is a falsehood that
causes violence to dharma[With some subjectivity in interpretation, this seems to imply that a girl should not marry someone she does not
like. Even if a promise has been made, and the girl does not like the groom, going back on the promise is not a
sin.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Whether there was a promise to give following
dharma, or whether the girl was purchased, in such an instance, there is certainly no sin if the promise to bestow is
not adhered to. With the sanction of the relatives, mantras and offerings should be resorted to. Without mantras, an
act of bestowal is never successful. When the relatives take a pledge to the accompaniment of mantras, the offspring that are obtained through such a wife are regarded as superior[This is the answer to Yudhishthira's original question. The mantras signify the act of marriage.]. It is the injunction of dharma that a husband must regard his wife as having been given to him by the gods. Whether she is a goddess or whether she is human, one must not reject someone who is the victim of a falsehood[The wife may have gone back on a pledge made by her relatives, without asking her, to bestow her on someone.]."
'Yudhishthira asked, "A bride price may have been obtained for a maiden. Thereafter, one may come across a
superior groom. If the father looks at dharma, artha and kama, should he then make his words come false? In such
instances, whatever one does seems to be inferior. In deciding on what is dharma for all of us, what are the views
of those who have thought of dharma? I wish to ask you the truth about this. You are my vision. Therefore, tell me
everything. I am not satisfied with what you have recounted."

'Bhishma replied, "One should not be firm in adhering to the bride price and the one who pays it, knows this[This probably means that the payment of a bride price is no guarantee that the maiden will be married to the
giver.].
Virtuous ones never bestow their daughters on the basis of a bride price. Relatives desire a bride price only when
the groom doesn't possess qualities. Many ornaments are willingly given. When these are given, that's not a price,
nor is this a sale. Receiving objects in this way has been eternal dharma. Some say, 'I will bestow this maiden.'

Other say nothing. Still others say, 'I will certainly bestow this maiden.' Whether it is said or not said, doesn't matter[These are references to the girl's father making promises, the point being that such promises don't amount to a
marriage.]. Therefore, there is marriage only when they accept each other's hands. We have heard that earlier, this is the
way the Maruts used to bestow their excellent daughters. The rishis have instructed that maidens should not be bestowed on those who are inappropriate. They are the foundation of desire and also the root of offspring. That is my
view. Though the practice of purchase and sale of maidens has continued, on scrutiny, it is seen to be associated
with many evils and cannot lead to marriage. Listen. Having defeated all the Magadhas, Kashis and Kosalas, I abducted two maidens for Vichitravirya[Ambika and Ambalika. This account of Vichitravirya marrying one, and not the other, has not been mentioned
earlier.]. He accepted the hand of one, but not the other, because a bride price had
been paid through the act of conquest. My father was of the view that even if her hand had been accepted, she
should have been released[Subsequent shlokas make it clear that by father, Bhishma means Bahlika, Shantanu's younger brother.]. Kourava said that one should not marry this maiden. Since I doubted my father's
words, I went and asked others, thinking that my father was overly conscious about dharma. O king! Wishing to
know the nature of good conduct, I also went to him and repeatedly addressed these words. 'I wish to know the
truth about good conduct.' O great king! My father, Bahlika, supreme among the upholders of dharma, spoke to
me in these words. 'The issue is whether marriage is contracted when a bride price is accepted, or when the hand is
accepted. If one holds that one becomes a husband from the act of acceping a bride price, this is shameless behaviour. The ones who know about dharma have said that there is no such proof in the sacred texts. Marriage results from accepting the hand and not from accepting the bride price. It is known that which is important is the act
of bestowal and not purchase and sale. People who respect purchase through a bride price are not those who know
about dharma. One should not bestow to those, nor have marriages with their likes. A wife should never be bought
or sold. People who think that she can be bought and sold, like a servant-girl, follow the conduct of those who are
wicked in intelligence and avaricious.' In this connection, people had asked Satyavan about dharma.'A person may
have paid a bride price for a maiden. But the payer subsequently dies. Can someone else then accept the maiden's
hand? We have a doubt on this score about dharma. O immensely wise one! You are revered by the wise. Please
dispel our doubt about this. We are asking you about the truth. You are like our sight.' Satyavan spoke these words
to all of them. 'She should be bestowed on someone desirable. One should not reflect about this. Since this is true
even when the payer is alive, there is no scope for doubt when he is dead.' It is also held that if the girl is a virgin,
she can torment herself through great austerities, or marry the husband's[This is not a continuation of the argument in the earlier sentence and refers to situations where a marriage has
taken place.] younger brother, follow him and have
intercourse with him. Some have written in this way, others have voiced their views strongly. The learned have not
spoken firmly about this. Even if all the prenuptial rites have been performed, with all the auspicious  mantras,
there is no sin from uttering a falsehood[In the sense of going back on the promise to marry.]. The act of accepting a hand in marriage concludes with the mantras
uttered at the seventh step[Seven steps are taken around the fire.]. The hand of the maiden is offered and accepted as a wife. A brother must give away
that maiden and following the rites, there must be circumambulation around the fire. An excellent brahmana must
not marry a maiden who is unwilling, or one who is not from a comparable family."'


Yudhishthira asked,  "There  may  be  a  situation  where  a  bride  price  has  been  given  for  a  maiden,  but  the
prospective husband no longer exists[The prospective husband may have died, or simply gone away.]. O grandfather! What should be done then? Tell me that."

'Bhishma replied, "She must be maintained like a son, in case the husband returns. Alternatively, the bride price
can be returned. If it is not returned, the maiden belongs to the one who has paid the price. Therefore, she is also
capable of having offspring through means that have been sanctioned[In certain situations, a wife was allowed to have progeny through others, not just her husband.]. However, no person can use mantras for
this purpose[As long as she is married to another, she cannot be married again.]. Instructed by her father, Savitri had herself done this[Instructed by her father, Ashvapati, Savitri chose her own husband, Satyavan.]. Some people who know about dharma
have praised this, but not others. There are some who have not acted in this way. There are some who do not hold
this to be virtuous. There are those who hold that the best sign of dharma is the conduct of the virtuous. About this
kind of conduct, Sukratu spoke the following words. He was the grandson of the king of Videha, the great-souled
Janaka. 'How can one praise conduct that is along a path followed by the wicked? There should be no questioning
or doubt about the conduct of the virtuous. The dharma of the wicked is the confused dharma of asuras. We have
not heard of anything like this in the lives of those who have come before us.' The relationship between a wife and
a husband is not comparable to mere intercourse between a woman and a man. The latter is the ordinary dharma of
desire. This is what that king[Sukratu.] said."

'Yudhishthira asked, "What are the rules whereby a man's riches are inherited? For a father's property, a daughter should be no different from a son."

'Bhishma replied, "The son is like one's own self and the daughter is like the son. As long as these offspring are
alive, no one else should inherit the riches. Unmarried daughters have a share in their mother's youtaka[Youtaka is exclusively the property of a woman. If consists of the dowry, gifts and property she has obtained at
the time of marriage.]. If a father dies without leaving any sons, then the daughter's son inherits the ancestral property. He is the one who offers
the funeral cakes to both his father and his maternal grandfather. The sacred texts of dharma have said that there is
no  special  difference  between  a  son  and  a  daughter's  son.  Even  if  offspring  has  been  generated  by  someone
else[Other than the mother's husband.], he is said to be a son. There is no special difference between a son and a daughter's son who has been generated by someone else. However, in cases where a daughter has been sold by the father, I see no reason in dharma
that allows a daughter's son to inherit. Such sons are malicious and addicted to adharma. They are deceitful and
appropriate other people's possessions. They are the result of an asura form of marriage, a conduct that is contrary
to the dictates of dharma. There are those who are knowledgable about the ancient accounts, devoted to dharma
and the sacred texts of dharma, binding themselves down to the ordinances of dharma. They recount a chant that
was sung by Yama. 'In a desire for riches, if a man sells his own son, or bestows his daughter through a bride price
for the sake of earning a living, he has to progressively pass through seven terrible hells known as Kalasahvya.
After death, he feeds on sweat, urine and excrement.' There is a form of marriage called arsha. In this, a cow and a
bull are given and some rishis have spoken of this as a bride price. O king! But whether it is small or large, this[Something that is a gift.]
should not be regarded as a sale. However, though some people act in this way, it should never be regarded as
dharma. Other kinds of marriage are seen, indulged in by those who are greedy. There are some who bring maidens under their subjugation and enjoy them. These are evildoers and have to lie down in hell. A man must never be
sold, not to speak of one's own offspring. If riches are obtained with adharma as a foundation, no artha can ever be
gained from it."'


Bhishma said, "Those who know about the ancient accounts recite the words of Prachetas. 'Gifts given to relatives cannot be regarded as a sale. Anyone who is not cruel should receive a maiden and, in particular, show
her honour by giving the girl gifts.' If they desire a great deal of welfare, the father, brothers, father-in-law and
brothers-in-law should honour and sustain her in this way. If the wife does not appeal to a man or does not cause
men pleasure, or if a man is not attracted to her, he should not have offspring. O lord of men! A wife must always
be honoured and cherished. When women are not honoured, all the rites become unsuccessful. When daughters-inlaw grieve, the family is destroyed. O king! When daughters-in-law curse a household, all the performed rites become undone. The houses do not dazzle and grow and their prosperity is destroyed. Before Manu ascended to
heaven, he handed over women to men, since they were weak, lightly clad, kind and devoted to the truth[The text uses the word svalpakoupina, which translates as lightly clad. The suggestion is that women need to be
protected, because they can be easily seduced.]. There
are others who hold that they are jealous, desire honour, are fierce, lack affection and lack learning. However,
women deserve to be honoured and men must show them respect. Dharma is in trusting women, not just in sex and
pleasure. Tend to them, honour them and give them what they want. Behold. The generation of offspring, the nurturing of offspring and pleasure in the way of the world-all these are tied to women. By respecting and honouring
them, one becomes successful in all the tasks. The daughter of the king of Videha sung a shloka. 'There are no sacrifices for women. There are no funeral ceremonies they have to observe. Their dharma is to serve their husbands
and that is the way they conquer heaven. The father protects her when a child, the husband protects her in youth.
The son protects her when she is aged. A woman does not deserve to be independent.' A person who desires affluence and prosperity must treat women well. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Whether she is nurtured or oppressed, a woman is like Shri and this is therefore reflected in one's prosperity."'


