The preceptor said, 'A person who does not know about those four things does not know supreme dharma[The number four is left dangling and it's not immediately obvious which four are meant. In all probability, this
means the brahman with qualities, the brahman without qualities, that which is manifest and that which is not
manifest.].
The supreme rishi obtained the manifest, and that which is not manifest, as tattvam[As will soon be evident, this supreme rishi is the sage Narayana. Tattvam means the truth, the real state, the
essence.]. That which is manifest is in the jaws of death. Know that which is not manifest is the immortal objective. The rishi Narayana has spoken about the signs of inclination[Inclination towards, and attachment for, action and its fruits, pravritti.]. Everything in the three worlds, the mobile and the immobile, is established on
this. The traits of the dharma of renunciation[Detachment from fruits and renunciation of action, nivritti.] are that this leads to the eternal brahman, who is not manifest. Prajapati  has  spoken  about  the  characteristics  of  the  dharma  of  pravritti.  From  pravritti,  one  has  to  return
again[Rebirth.].Nivritti leads to the supreme objective. A supreme sage who is engaged in nivritti attains that supreme
end. He is devoted to knowledge and always discriminates between what is auspicious and what is inauspicious.
For that, one must know both the unmanifest and purusha. One must also know the one who is greater than the unmanifest and the purusha. One who is accomplished must specially look towards the differences between them.
The signs of both of them[Purusha and prakriti.] are that they are without beginning and without end. They are both always subtler
than the subtlest and greater than the greatest. They are similar in this way. But there are also differences between
them. Prakriti's dharma is creation and it has three kinds of traits[Sattva, rajas and tamas.]. Know that the traits of the kshetrajna are the
converse[In the sense that the kshetrajna or purusha is inactive and is beyond the three qualities.]. Because of the qualities, prakriti is seen to have transformations. But purusha and the more powerful
one[The brahman.] are incapable of being comprehended. Creation results from the union[Between purusha and prakriti.] and the attributes of action enable
one to understand. A doer is characterized by action and withdrawal from action. Though words like 'who', 'I' and
'this' are used, they are meaningless. It is like a person who wears a headdress made out of three pieces of cloth.
The embodied being is enveloped in sattva, rajas and tamas. Therefore, one must understand four subjects and aspects[Similarities between purusha and prakriti, differences between them, similarities between purusha and the brahman and differences between them.]. Someone who knows this will not be confused, even when his time draws to an end. If one desires the celestial prosperity of the brahman, one must be pure in words and mind. For the body, one must observe fierce rituals and be engaged in unblemished austerities. The three worlds are illuminated and pervaded by austerities performed by the inner being. The radiance of the sun and the moon in the sky is because of austerities. The power of
austerities is in knowledge. Austerities are praised in the world. Because of its attributes, austerities free a person
from acts committed because of rajas and tamas. Brahmacharya and non-violence are said to be the austerities of
the body. Control over words and the mind and tranquility are said to be austerities of the mind. In particular, following the ordinances, one must receive food from brahmanas. If one is restrained in food, the sins that result from
rajas are destroyed. In one's mind, one must withdraw from material objects and action. Thus, one must only accept that much of food as is necessary.

'"'When one is afflicted by old age and one's end has arrived, one must act without any distress. One must confront it by fixing one's mind on knowledge. Divested from rajas and the body, the embodied being silently moves
around. When one is freed from action and one's intelligence turns to lack of attachment, one is based in prakriti[Freed from the senses. But this does not mean that one has attained moksha.].
When one is freed from the distraction of the body, one can also be freed from what comes after the end of the
body[There are subtleties left implicit in the text. These concern transitions, after death, from the gross body to the
subtle body and so on. When one is truly emancipated, one is freed from these subtler forms of the body too.]. The creation and destruction of beings always has a reason. However, if one has belief in the supreme reason behind creation, one is freed from the compulsion to return[Rebirth.]. But there are those who are ignorant about the
forces behind the end of the world and creation and destruction. They use their patience to hold up their bodies and
use their intelligence to withdraw their minds. They withdraw from places and objects that are destructible and
worship what is subtle. They know everything that should be known from the sacred texts. After death, some of
them, with cleansed souls, attain the ultimate resort. Some virtuous ones worship the object of meditation[The text uses the word dharana, which is concentrated meditation. Dharana is one of the steps in the eight components of yoga.]. The
supreme god cannot be destroyed and has been described as a flash of lightning. When the end comes, some have
burnt their sins through austerities. All these great-souled ones go towards the supreme objective. The attributes[Of the brahman.]
are subtle and one must look at them with sight gained from the sacred texts. Freed from all possessions, one
knows that supreme body. One has fixed one's mind on dharana and has penetrated into what is inside. With the
mind united with knowledge, one is then freed from the mortal world. Pure and having obtained the brahman, one
attains the supreme objective. One obtains the knowledge that is free from folly and cannot be dislodged. This is
the divine and illustrious one, without origin. This is Vishnu, who has the attributes of not being manifest. Those
whose sentiments are pure have no desires and become content with that knowledge. With that knowledge, they
base themselves in Hari. They suffer no decay and do not return. They obtain the supreme resort and take delight
in the one who is without decay and without destruction. This is said to be knowledge and there is nothing else.
The entire universe is bound down by thirst and is whirled around on a wheel. The strands of a lotus plant penetrate everywhere within the lotus. In that way, for those who are thirsty[With desire.], it always penetrates everything in the
body, from the beginning to the end. This is like a weaver using his needle and thread to move around everywhere
in a garment. Like that, the threads of this cycle are bound down by the needle of desire. Prakriti is subject to transformation. Purusha is eternal. A person who knows this is freed from desire. The illustrious rishi Narayana, the
refuge of the universe, revealed all this, driven by compassion for beings and for the welfare of the universe. This
is immortality.'"'


Yudhishthira asked, "O one who knows about conduct! O one who knows about dharma! After discarding human objects of pleasure, what conduct did Janaka, the lord of Mithila[This Janaka is not to be confused with Sita's father. This Janaka was descended from that Janaka's lineage and is
also referred to as Janaka.], follow, so as to advance towards
emancipation?"

'Bhishma replied, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted. By following this conduct, the one who
knew about conduct, advanced towards great happiness. In Mithila, there was a lord of men named Janadeva and
he was descended from Janaka. He thought about the dharma that would uplift him beyond the body. One hundred
preceptors always dwelt in his residence. They showed him different kinds of dharma and some of them were
heretical. But basing himself on the sacred texts, he was not satisfied with what they repeatedly told him about
their determinations about death, birth after death and the nature of the atman. There was a great sage named Panchashikha, the son of Kapila. Having travelled the entire earth, he came to Mithila. He had ascertained the true
knowledge about all kinds of dharma connected with renunciation. He had settled all the meanings, was free from
opposite sentiments[Like pleasure and pain, happiness and unhappiness.], and all his doubts had been dispelled. He was said to be the only rishi who was beyond the
desire that characterizes humans. He desired the ultimate and eternal happiness that was so difficult to obtain. People  were  astounded  at  his  form  and  thought  that  he  was  the  supreme  rishi,  Prajapati  Kapila,  who  expounded
samkhya[One of the six schools of philosophy.], himself. He was the first disciple of Asuri and was said to be immortal. For one thousand years, he[As will be evident, this is a reference to Asuri and not to Panchashikha. Kapila was also known as Asuri.]
had performed the sacrifice known as panchasrota[Literally, the one with five flows, a description of the mind.]. There was a circle of the followers of Kapila and they were
seated. They wished to hear from him about the supreme being, who was not manifest. Because of his own sacrifices and austerities, the sage had become successful. He had obtained divine sight and had understood the difference between kshetra and kshetrajna. The single Akshara of the brahman is seen in many different forms. In that
circle, Asuri spoke about the one who is not manifest. There was a brahmana lady by the name of Kapila[That is, Kapilaa.] and she
was Asuri's wife. Panchashikha became his[Asuri's.] disciple and suckled milk at her breast. Because he suckled milk
from the breasts of Kapila's wife, he came to be known as his son and obtained supreme intelligence. The illustrious one told me about how he became Kapila's son[It is not clear who told Bhishma the story. It is presumed to have been Markandeya or Sanatkumara.]. He also told me about how Kapila's son obtained every kind
of supreme prosperity.

'"Kapila's son knew about supreme forms of dharma and also knew that those one hundred ordinary preceptors
were confused about the reasons. Kapila[Panchashikha.] therefore presented himself there and Janaka became devoted to him.
He abandoned those one hundred preceptors and started to follow him. For the sake of supreme welfare, following
dharma, he bowed down before him. He taught him about supreme emancipation, described as samkhya. He spoke
to him about being free from birth and about being free from action. Having spoken to him about being free from
action, he spoke to him about being free from everything. He spoke about being attached to action, and about the
fruits  those  acts  lead  to.  'These  cannot  be  trusted,  since  they  are  certain  to  be  temporary  and  subject  to
destruction[The text does not indicate this clearly. But this seems to be the place where Panchashikha's quote begins.]. There are some who argue that people can directly witness the destruction. They therefore say that
the supreme words of the sacred texts have evidently been defeated[Since the body is destroyed, nothing beyond the body can exist.]. They say that there is no atman and one's
self is subject to death, hardship, death[The word death is used twice, one for the body, the second for the atman.], old age and decay. A person who holds the view that the atman is different is completely confused. If something that does not exist is thought of as without decay and without death, then
the king should also be thought of in that way[If a non-existent entity is thought of in that way, an existent entity must also be thought of in a similar way.]. Whether something exists or does not exist should be determined
by the signs of its existence. How can the progress of people be determined to be based on such an object? The
foundations of a conclusion must be based on what can be directly seen. Even if the sacred texts hold a different
view, without direct evidence, one cannot arrive at such a conclusion. One's sentiments cannot be influenced by
guesses. Thus, the view that there is another being in the body should actually be held to be the view of non-believers[Instead of the other way round. The word used is nastika. The various arguments advanced here are those of
non-believers, specifically, some aspects of Buddhism.]. A banyan tree results from a single seed. Clarified butter results from the process of cooking. These are
said to be properties of different species. Lodestone and the sun-crystal[Ayaskanta and suryakanta respectively.] drink up water[These instances illustrate that though there are tranformations, there is some direct evidence.]. When one is dead,
why should there be a being that approaches the gods? There is certain proof that once one is dead, there is a cessation of action. However, these are not valid arguments for something that does not have a form. The immortal cannot be realized by ordinary mortals. There are some who say that rebirth is because of ignorance and because of
the attempt to undertake action. The reasons are avarice and confusion and inclination towards sin. Ignorance is
said to be the field, and deeds performed earlier are like the seed. Thirst generates affection and that leads to rebirth. It lies hidden in the consciousness. When the mortal body is burnt, it is born again in a different body, preserving the spirit[As distinct from the atman.]. This has been heard from some as the truth. However, since the body that one is born in may
be a completely different one, how can there be an association between the two? In this case, what desire can there
be for donations, learning and the strength of austerities, since the results of all such deeds are held to be obtained
by someone else[The next body.]? There are others who are miserable because of the deeds that they have performed earlier. One
must arrive at a determination after looking towards this misery and joy. When the body is crushed by a club and is
born again, it is sometimes held that the consciousness that results is a different one. This is held to be like seasons, years, lunar days, cold, heat, the pleasant and the unpleasant. Like these, one passes on[From one body to another.], but the spirit is
preserved. However, this[The spirit, distinct from the atman.] will be overcome by old age and be destroyed by death. Like a house that is progressively weakened, it will eventually be destroyed. The senses, the mind, the wind, the blood, the flesh and the bones
are all progressively destroyed and enter the elements that created them. There are many reasons that arise in the
mind about the paths followed by people, the obtaining of the fruits from the dharma of donations, the meaning of
the words in the Vedas and the conduct of people. But none of these would be valid[If one believed the non-believers.]. Reflecting on such things,
different people head in different directions. Some submerge in them and obtain intelligence. Others age like trees.
Every being is made miserable because of good and bad deeds. The sacred texts bring them back, like elephants by
those who control elephants. Thus, there are many who desire happiness, but are unwilling to pay the price. They
are overcome by greater misery and like people who have been separated from their meat[There is an implicit image of carnivores craving for meat.], come under the subjugation of death. Everyone is certain to be destroyed. What is the point of relatives, friends and possessions? If one
abandons these in an instant and then departs, one does not return. Earth, space, water, fire and the wind always
nourish the body. If one thinks of this, how can one be freed of desire? However, these are also destroyed and there
is no happiness in these.' These words were supreme and were without deception. With the atman only as a witness, they were beyond disease. Hearing them, the king was astounded. He glanced towards him[Panchashikha.] and got ready
to ask him once again."'


Bhishma said, "Janadeva, Janaka's descendant, was thus instructed by the supreme rishi. He again asked him
about existence and non-existence after death. 'O illustrious one[The text does not clearly indicate the beginning of a quote. But it is obvious.]! If there is indeed a consciousness after
death, then what is ignorance and what is knowledge? What does one do? O supreme among brahmanas! If it is
seen that all good deeds are destroyed, then what is the difference between being distracted and not being distracted? Whether there is attachment, or whether there is lack of attachment, a being is destroyed. Why should one undertake acts? What should one determine and resolve? What is the truth about this?' He was thus confused, foolish
and enveloped in darkness[The darkness of ignorance.].

'"The wise Panchashika pacified him by speaking these words to him. 'There is no destruction in that excellence[A reference to the state of emancipation.]. Nor is there any existence in that excellence. This is an accumulation of the body, the senses and consciousness. They circle independently, but also influence each other and lead to action. The five branches are the
elements of space, wind, fire, water and earth. They follow their own natures and are naturally distinct. Space,
wind, heat, liquids and earth-these five come together in the body and become one. Knowledge, heat and wind-
these are the three that give rise to action. The senses, the objects of the senses, natural consciousness, the mind,
prana, apana and transformations flow from the elements. Hearing, touch, taste, sight and scent are the five senses
and their qualities result from consciousness. When this is united with knowledge, three kinds of pain are said to
be certain-happiness, unhappiness and the absence of both unhappiness and happiness. Sound, touch, form, taste
and smell-these five exist in the body until the time of death. With the sixth quality of knowledge, they bring
about everything. All acts, renunciation and all determinations about the truth depend on these. Intelligence is said
to be the supreme, great and imperishable seed[Because it leads to emancipation.]. If a person sees the atman in this accumulation of qualities, then
his sight is faulty and his infinite misery will not be destroyed. If a person looks on these as not being the atman,
then he has no sense of ownership. In such a case, sorrow lacks a foundation to which it can attach itself. That is
the reason there is the supreme sacred text known as samyangamana[Literallly, the right state of mind.]. I will expound this to you. For the sake of
your moksha, listen attentively. Renunciation is recommended for all those who wish to be free of their deeds.
However, those who have always been versed in false views have to undergo hardship and sorrow. Deeds are for
renouncing objects. Vows are for renouncing objects of pleasure. The yoga of austerities involves the renunciation
of happiness and terminates in the renunciation of everything. I will tell you about what the learned have described
as the path for renouncing everything. That leads to the alleviation of misery. Anything else leads to hardship. The
five senses of knowledge, and the mind as the sixth, are based in consciousness. I have spoken of the mind as the
sixth and there are the five organs of action. Know that the two hands are the organs of action and the two feet are
the organs of movement. The penis is the organ for procreation and pleasure and the anus is the organ for release.
The mouth is specially for uttering words. Know the movements of these five. With intelligence, there are eleven[Five organs of sense, five organs of action, and intelligence.]
and these must be cast away from the mind. The ears, sound and consciousness-these three are required for hearing. It is the same for touch, form, taste and smell. These fifteen[Each of the five senses being associated with three attributes. Consciousness is a constant. In addition, there is
an organ and something that triggers the organ.] are required for the reception of the qualities.
Three kinds of sentiments also present themselves. These three are sattva, rajas and tamas. In all kinds of attempts,
they lead to three kinds of pain. Jubiliation, delight, happiness, joy, tranquility in consciousness, irrespective of
whether a reason is present or absent for this state of consciousness-these are the qualities of sattva. Dissatisfaction, repentance, sorrow, avarice, lack of forgiveness, irrespective of whether a reason is present or absent-these
are the signs of rajas. Lack of judgement, confusion, distraction, dreaming and excessive sleep, irrespective of how
these have been caused-these are the many qualities of tamas. If there are any signs of delight in the body or the
mind, these should truly be known as the attributes of sattva. If there is any association of repentance or sorrow in
a person, without any reflection, this can be identified to have been caused by rajas. Thus, if there is any confusion
in the body or in the mind, even if it is incomprehensible or indiscernible, that has been caused by tamas. Hearing
originates with sound and the ears base themselves on it. In the science of hearing, one cannot discern any difference between the two[Hearing and sound.]. The skin, the eyes, the tongue and the nose, as the fifth, are also like that. Touch, form,
taste, smell and consciousness are based on the mind. The ten[Five organs of sense and five organs of action.] undertake their own tasks, separately and collectively. Know that consciousness is the eleventh and intelligence is the twelfth. As long as these work together,
tamas cannot be destroyed.Their simultaneous operation is commonly known as conduct. The learning of the sacred texts has earlier determined the working of the senses and the three kinds of qualities have been thought of.
Confused by them, consciousness swiftly roams around amidst what is impermanent. Even at the best of times, this
is said to be tamas happiness. If one does not serve what has been described in all the sacred texts, then one is enveloped in darkness and serves what is false and manifest. These are the thoughts on how dependence on the qualities  leads  to  individual  action.  Some  follow  them  completely  and  some  not  at  all.  There  are  those  who  have
thought about adhyatma. They speak of this accumulation as kshetra and what exists in the mind as kshetrajna.
This being the case, what is destroyed? What is eternal? All beings are driven by these reasons and their natures.
Once a river has entered an ocean, it gives up its name. The spirit is destroyed in that way and no longer has an individuality. This being the case, after death, how can consciousness again be born? The jivatma merges and nothing in the middle can be grasped[Most of this is directed at Buddhist philosophy. The middle is a reference to consciousness, as distinct from the
atman.]. If a person possesses intelligence and knowledge about moksha, without any
distraction, he then desires his own atman and does not get tainted by the fruits of any evil acts. He is like the leaf
of a lotus, sprinkled with water. He is freed from the many firm bonds, whether these arise from offspring or from
the gods[Sacrifices performed for the gods.]. He abandons both happiness and unhappiness. He is freed and goes to the foremost one, who is without any signs. This is the auspicious one. Accepting the proofs of the sacred texts, he then lies down, beyond old
age, death and fear. His good deeds are destroyed. He is beyond the sins too. Therefore, the fruits of these are also
destroyed. The great one is pure, free and without signs. He sees and gets attached to that greatness. When the
strands are severed, a spider that has been stationed there, falls down. Like that, he is freed from his miseries,
which are crushed like rocks on a mountain. A ruru deer casts aside its old horns and a snake its old skin. Like
that, he goes beyond what can be seen and casting aside his miseries, is free. When a tree is about to fall down on
water, a bird abandons it. In that way, he casts aside his happiness and unhappiness. He is free and goes to the
supreme one, who is without any signs. A song is sung about the king of Mithila[This king was Janaka, Janadeva's ancestor.]. When he saw that his city was
being burnt by a fire, he said, "Not even a chaff of mine is being burnt here[Janaka had renounced everything.]." The lord of the earth had himself
said this.' Having heard these words about the immortal objective, spoken by Panchashikha himself, the king of
Videha looked at everything. He ascertained the truth about everything and roamed around in great happiness,
bereft of sorrow. He who reads this, determined to pursue moksha, always considers this and never decays. He
does not suffer miseries because of any calamities. He is freed, like the lord of Mithila after meeting Kapila."'


