'Sanjaya said, "Arjuna's son robbed the brave ones of their lives and was like Death robbing all beings of their
lives, when the time arrives. The powerful one was the son of Shakra's son and was Shakra's equal in valour. Agitating your army, Abhimanyu was seen to be extremely resplendent. O Indra among kings! That killer of the best
of kshatriyas was like Death when he penetrated. He descended on Satyashrava, like a tiger descending on deer.
When Satyashrava had been thus attacked, the other maharathas quickly grasped a large number of different
weapons and rushed against Abhimanyu. 'I will be the first. I will station myself in the forefront.' Those bulls
among kshatriyas rivalled each other and spoke thus. They attacked Arjuna's son together, wishing to kill him. On
seeing that army of kshatriyas advance against him, he received them, like a whale grasping small fish in the
ocean. Like rivers do not return once they head towards the ocean, not a single one who approached wished to run
away. That army was like a boat in the ocean, when it has been grasped by a mighty storm and is tossed around by
the force of the wind. It was oppressed by fear, trembled and was destroyed.

'"The powerful Rukmaratha was the son of the lord of Madra[That is, he was Shalya's son.]. He wished to assure the frightened soldiers and
fearlessly spoke these words. 'O brave ones! You should not be terrified. As long as I am stationed here, he is nothing. There is no doubt that I will capture him alive.' Having spoken thus, the valiant one advanced against Subhadra's son. He was borne on a dazzling chariot that was constructed well and was well-stocked[With implements of war.]. He pierced Abhimanyu in the chest with three arrows and roared. He pierced him in the right arm with three and in the left with
three sharp arrows. However, Phalguna's son severed his bow, and his left arm and his right. He swiftly severed his
head, with beautiful eyes and eyebrows, and made it fall down on the ground. Rukmaratha was Shalya's revered
son. He had desired to capture alive, or destroy, Subhadra's illustrious son. O king! On seeing him killed, the
friends of Shalya's son, armed princes who were unassailable in battle and had standards decorated in gold, surrounded Arjuna's son from every direction. The maharathas stretched bows that were as long as palm trees and
showered down arrows on him. Subhadra's unvanquished son was brave and alone. In that battle, he was surrounded by these brave ones, who were skilled, powerful, youthful and extremely intolerant. They enveloped him with
their storm of arrows. On seeing this, Duryodhana was delighted and thought that he would go to Vaivasvata's
abode[Vaivasvata is Yama. That is, Abhimanyu would die.]. Those sons of kings used excellent gold-tufted arrows that were of many different kinds and forms and
Arjuna's son disappeared in the twinkling of an eye. O venerable one! He, his charioteer, his horses, his standard
and his chariot were seen by us to be covered with arrows, like locusts. He was severely pierced and wounded and
became as angry as a goaded elephant. He affixed the gandharva weapon and its powers of maya. After tormenting
himself with austerities, Arjuna had obtained it from gandharvas, Tumburu being the foremost. He[Abhimanyu.] confounded
them with this. O king! He was sometimes seen as one, or hundreds, or thousands. He was like a circle of fire in
that battle, exhibiting the swiftness of his weapons. The scorcher of enemies confounded them with the skill with
which his chariot was driven and with the maya of his weapons. O king! He pierced the bodies of the kings in a
hundred places. O king! In that battle, his sharp arrows took out the breath of life away from living bodies and they
attained the other world, their bodies falling down on the ground. Phalguna's son used his sharp and broad-headed
arrows to sever their bows, horses, charioteers, standards, arms decorated with bracelets and heads. They were like
five-year-old mango trees that were destroyed, though they were ready for yielding fruit. One hundred princes
were killed by Subhadra's son. They were delicate and deserved happiness, but were slain by him alone, with angry and virulent serpents[A reference to the arrows.]. On seeing this, Duryodhana was terrified. Duryodhana saw that his chariots, elephants, horses and infantry were shattered and quickly rushed at him, in intolerance. The battle that commenced
lasted only for a short instant. Your son was oppressed by hundreds of arrows and retreated."'


'Dhritarashtra said, "O suta! You have told me about the battle between the one and the many. It was extremely
terrible and the great-souled one triumphed. The valour of Subhadra's son was extraordinary and impossible to believe. But this wonderful deed is possible for those who resort to dharma. When the one hundred princes were
slain, Duryodhana retreated. What did those on my side do to counter the influence of Subhadra's son?"

'Sanjaya replied, "Their faces were dry and their eyes lolled out. They perspired and their body hair stood up.
They were interested in running away. They were no longer interested in defeating the enemy. They abandoned
their slain brothers, fathers, well-wishers, relatives and those with whom they had matrimonial alliances. They
swiftly urged their horses and elephants and fled. On beholding that they were shattered, Drona, Drona's son, Brihadbala, Kripa, Duryodhana, Karna, Kritavarma and Soubala angrily attacked Subhadra's unvanquished son. O
king! Most of them were beaten back by your grandson. There was only one who had been reared in happiness. He
was a child, but proud and fearless. Lakshmana[Duryodhana's son.] was extremely energetic and used his arrows and weapons to
attack Arjuna's son. Out of anxiety and affection for the son, the father returned. Other maharathas also returned
and followed Duryodhana. They drenched him with a cloud of arrows, like clouds pouring down rain on a mountain. But he countered them single-handed, like a dry wind driving away the clouds. Your grandson Lakshmana
was invincible and handsome. The brave one was stationed near his father, the outstretched bow in his hand. He
had been reared in great happiness and was like a son of the lord of riches[Kubera is the lord of riches. Lakshmana was like Kubera's son.]. Krishna's son encountered him in
battle, like a crazy elephant clashing against another crazy elephant. Subhadra's son, the destroyer of enemy heroes, approached Lakshmana and was pierced on his arms and his chest by extremely sharp arrows that were released from the bow[Lakshmana's bow.]. The mighty-armed one was enraged, like a serpent that has been struck with a staff. O
great king! Your grandson spoke to your grandson[Abhimanyu and Lakshmana respectively.]. 'Glance well at this world. You will soon go to the other
world. In the sight of your relatives, I will convey you to Yama's abode.' Saying this, Subhadra's mighty-armed
son, the destroyer of enemy heroes, used a broad-headed arrow. It looked like a snake that had just cast off its skin.
It was released from his arms and severed Lakshmana's beautiful head, with an excellent nose, eyebrows and beautiful hair, and adorned with earrings. On seeing that Lakshmana had been slain, the people let out sounds of woe
and lamentation. When his beloved son was brought down, Duryodhana was enraged. The bull among the kshatriyas loudly urged the kshatriyas to kill him. Six rathas surrounded him-Drona, Kripa, Karna, Drona's son, Brihadbala and Kritavarma, Hridika's son. But Arjuna's son pierced them with sharp arrows and drove them back.
Angrily and forcefully, he then descended on Saindhava's large army. The armoured Kalingas, Nishadas, and
Kratha's valiant son obstructed his path with an array of elephants. O lord of the earth! The engagement between
them was extremely fierce. Arjuna's son crushed that army of elephants, like a wind courses in every direction in
the sky and drives away hundreds of clouds. Kratha's son enveloped Arjuna's son with a storm of arrows. In addition, other rathas, with Drona at the forefront, also returned. They attacked Subhadra's son, using supreme and other weapons. Arjuna's son repulsed them with his arrows and swiftly afflicted Kratha's son with a continuous flood
of arrows, wishing to kill him. He brought down his bow, arrows, armlets, arms, diademed head, umbrella, standard, charioteer and horses. He[Kratha's son.] was born in a noble lineage and possessed the strength of learning. He was the
performer of deeds and possessed the strength of weapons. When such a brave one was killed, most of the others
fled from the field of battle."'


'Dhritarashtra said, "Subhadra's unvanquished son was young. He performed deeds that befitted his lineage. He
never fled from the field of battle. He was borne on three-year-old horses that were extremely strong and born from
good lineages. They seemed to glide along the sky. When he penetrated there, which brave ones countered him?"

'Sanjaya replied, "Abhimanyu, the descendant of the Pandu lineage, penetrated your soldiers. He used his sharp
arrows and made all the kings retreat. At this, Drona, Kripa, Karna, Drona's son, Brihadbala and Kritavarma,
Hridika's son-these six rathas surrounded him. O great king! On seeing that Saindhava had assumed an extremely
heavy burden, your soldiers attacked Yudhishthira[Jayadratha was entrusted with the task of preventing the Pandavas from following Abhimanyu. Barring those
six rathas, all the other soldiers now supported him in this task.]. There were those who stretched bows that were as long as
palm trees. They showered down many arrows on Subhadra's brave son. But Subhdra's son, the destroyer of enemy heroes, used arrows in that battle to counter all those great archers, who were skilled in all forms of learning.
He pierced Drona with fifty arrows and Brihadbala with twenty, Kritavarma with eighty and Kripa with sixty arrows. Arjuna's son stretched his bow up to his ears and used ten extremely forceful and gold-tufted arrows to
pierce Ashvatthama. In the midst of the enemy, Phalguna's son used a yellow, sharp and tufted arrow to pierce
Karna in his ear. He brought down Kripa's horses and the two charioteers who guarded his flanks[Known as parshnis.]. He then
pierced him between the breasts with ten arrows. While your brave sons looked on, the powerful one then killed
the valiant Vrindaraka, the extender of the fame of the Kuru lineage[This Vrindaraka cannot be Duryodhana's brother. The brother Vrindaraka was killed by Bhima.]. While he was thus fearlessly slaughtering
the foremost among the enemy, Drona's son pierced him with twenty-five small arrows. O venerable one! However, while all the sons of Dhritarashtra looked on, Arjuna's son swiftly pierced Ashvatthama back with sharp arrows. But Drona's son pierced him with sixty extremely energetic arrows that were terrible, fierce and sharp. However, though pierced, he was like Mount Mainaka and did not tremble. The immensely energetic and powerful one
pierced Drona's son, who had caused him injury, with seventy-three gold-tufted and straight-flying arrows. Wishing to protect his son, Drona pierced him with one hundred arrows. Desiring to protect his father in the battle, Ashvatthama pierced him with sixty arrows. Karna pierced him with twenty-two broad-headed arrows, Kritavarma
with fourteen, Brihadbala with fifty and Sharadvata Kripa with ten. He pierced them back with ten arrows each.
Subhadra's son mangled all of them with sharp arrows. The lord of Kosala[Brihadbala.] pierced him in the chest with a
barbed arrow. But he[Abhimanyu.] brought his[Brihadbala's.] arrows, standard, bow and charioteer down on the ground. Bereft of his
chariot, the king of Kosala grasped a sword and a shield and wished to sever the head, decorated with earrings, of
Phalguna's son from his body. But he pierced the lord of Kosala, Prince Brihadbala, in his heart with an arrow.
With his heart shattered, he fell down. At this, ten thousand great-souled kings ran away, shouting words of abuse,
though they wielded swords and bows[It is not clear who these kings were abusing. They might have abused Abhimanyu. Or they might have abused
Duryodhana, for having brought this on.]. Having slain Brihadbala, Subhadra's son roamed around in the field of
battle. With a shower of arrows that were like rain, he paralysed the great archers and warriors on your side."'


