'Sanjaya said, "Those lords of men spent the night happily, engrossed in sleep. Then the Kurus and the Pandavas
again emerged to fight. A great sound arose from both the armies, as they emerged to do battle. It was like the
great ocean. King Duryodhana, Chitrasena, Vivimshati, Bhishma, supreme among rathas, and the brahmana who
was Bharadvaja's son united themselves and arrayed the great army of the Kouravas. O king! They armoured
themselves and formed a vyuha to counter the Pandavas. O lord of the earth! Your father, Bhishma, constructed a
great vyuha. It was as terrible as the ocean, with the mounts as its waves. Bhishma, Shantanu's son, advanced at
the forefront of all the soldiers. He was supported by the Malavas, those from the south and those from Avanti.
Bharadvaja's powerful son was next to him. The Pulindas, the Paradas and the lesser Malavas were with him. O
lord of the earth! The powerful Bhagadatta was next to Drona, together with the Magadhas, the Kalingas and the
Pishachas. Brihadbala, the king of Kosala, was behind Pragjyotisha, together with the Mekalas, the Tripuras and
the Chichchilas. Next to Brihadbala was the brave Trigarta, the lord of Prasthala. He was accompanied by a large
number of Kambojas and thousands of Yavanas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Drona's brave son was next
to Trigarta and advanced to do battle. He roared like a lion and made the earth resound. Surrounded by his brothers, Duryodhana was next to Drona's son and Kripa Sharadvat was behind him. It was thus that the great vyuha advanced, like an ocean. O lord! There were resplendent flags and dazzling umbrellas. There were colourful bracelets
and extremely expensive bows.

'"On seeing the great vyuha of your soldiers, maharatha Yudhishthira quickly addressed Parshata, the supreme
commander. 'O great archer! Behold the vyuha that has been constructed. It is like an ocean. O Parshata! Without
any delay, create a counter vyuha.' Having been thus addressed, the brave Parshata constructed an extremely terrible vyuha. O great king! It was called Shringataka[Meaning that it had cusps or horns.] and it was destructive of the vyuhas of enemies. Bhimasena
and maharatha Satyaki were at the two horns, with many thousands of chariots, horses and infantry. The foremost
of men, the one with the white horses and the ape on his standard, was next to them. King Yudhishthira was in the
centre, with the Pandavas who were Madri's sons. Other kings who were great archers, skilled in the use of
weapons, filled up the vyuha with their soldiers. Abhimanyu was at the rear, with maharatha Virata, Droupadi's delighted sons and the rakshasa Ghatotkacha. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thus did the Pandavas array
themselves in the form of a gigantic vyuha. The brave ones stationed themselves in that battle, wishing to fight and
desiring victory. The tumultuous sound of drums mingled with the sound made by conch shells. Armpits were
slapped and a terrible noise arose in all the directions.

'"In that battle, the brave ones then confronted each other. O king! They glanced at each other in rage, without
blinking their eyes. O Indra among men! They challenged each other, summoning each other by name first. A battle commenced. The battle that started was terrible in form and fearful. Those on your side, and those of the enemy, sought to kill each other. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Sharp iron arrows descended in that battle.
They were like fearful snakes with gaping mouths. There were polished and extremely energetic lances that had
been washed in oil. O king! They were as radiant as lightning[The word used is shatahrada. Literally, this means something with a hundred rays of light.] in the clouds. There were polished and thick
clubs, covered in cloth and decorated with gold. They were seen to descend, like beautiful summits of mountains.
There were radiant swords, as clear as the sky. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were shields made out
of the hides of bulls, with a hundred moons marked on them. O king! They were resplendent in that battle, as they
descended in every direction. O lord of men! The two armies encountered each other in that battle. They dazzled
like the armies of the gods and the daityas, when arrayed against each other. In that battle, they clashed against
each other in every direction. In that supreme battle, chariots quickly clashed against chariots. As those bulls
among men fought, the yokes of one got entangled with the yokes of another. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! Tuskers fought with tuskers and because of the friction, flames were seen in every direction, mingled with
smoke. In all directions, struck by lances, some warriors on elephants were seen to fall down, like the summits of
mountains. Infantry was seen to kill each other. The brave ones fought in many colourful ways and used lances and
bare nails. Thus did the soldiers of the Kurus and the Pandavas attack each other. Many terrible weapons were used
in that battle, to despatch others to the eternal worlds[The land of the dead.]. The chariot of Bhishma, Shantanu's son, roared in that
battle. He advanced against the Pandus and confounded them with the twang of his bow. The chariots of the Pandavas also emitted a terrible roar. With Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, they advanced together. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Thus did the battle between you and them commence. Men, horses, chariots and elephants got
entangled with each other."'


'Sanjaya said, "In that battle, the powerful Bhishma was enraged. Like the sun, he tormented in every direction
and the Pandavas were incapable of glancing towards him. On the instructions of Dharma's son, all the soldiers
rushed towards Gangeya, who was causing oppression with his sharp arrows. But the great archer Bhishma prided
himself in battle. With his arrows, he brought down the Somakas, together with the Srinjayas and the Panchalas.
Though they were slaughtered by Bhishma, the Panchalas and the Somakas gave up their fear of death and quickly
attacked Bhishma. O king! In that battle, the brave Bhishma, Shantanu's son, powerfully sliced off the arms and
the heads of those rathas. Your father, Devavrata, deprived the rathas of their chariots. The heads of horse-riders
fell down from the horses. O great king! Confounded by Bhishma's weapons, we saw elephants lying around like
mountains, deprived of their riders. O lord of the earth! Among the Pandavas, there was no one other than the immensely strong Bhimasena, foremost among rathas, who could resist him. In that encounter, he was the one who
engaged Bhishma. There was a terrible battle between Bhishma and Bhima and an extremely terrible and fearful
roar arose from all the soldiers[Meaning the soldiers on the Kourava side.]. The delighted Pandavas also roared like lions. Surrounded by his brothers,
King Duryodhana protected Bhishma in that battle, which resulted in a destruction of men. Bhishma was supreme
among rathas. But Bhima slew his charioteer. The horses were no longer controlled and dragged the chariot away
in all directions.

'"With a swift arrow, the destroyer of enemies sliced off Sunabha's head. He was slain by that extremely sharp
kshurapra and fell down on the ground. O great king! When your maharatha son was killed in that battle, seven of
his brothers could not tolerate this. Adityaketu, Bahvashi, Kundadhara, Mahodara, Aparajita, Panditaka and the
invincible Vishalaksha attacked Pandava in that encounter. They were clad in colourful armour and sported diverse
standards. Those scorchers of enemies attacked in that battle, wishing to fight. In that encounter, Mahodara pierced
Bhimasena with nine arrows, like the killer of Vritra against Namuchi. Each was like the vajra. Adityaketu pierced
him with seventy, Bahvashi with five, Kundadhara with ninety and Vishalaksha with seven. O great king! Maharatha Aparajita, the vanquisher of enemies, pierced the immensely strong Bhimasena with many arrows. In that
encounter, Panditaka also pierced him with three arrows. But in that battle, Bhima did not tolerate the attacks of his
enemies. The destroyer of enemies grasped the bow in his left hand. Your son, Aparajita, possessed an excellent
nose. In that battle, he used an arrow with a drooping tuft to slice off his head. In that encounter, he was defeated
by Bhima and his head fell down on the ground. While all the people looked on, he used another broad-headed arrow to despatch maharatha Kundadhara to the land of the dead. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that battle,
the one with the immeasurable soul then grasped another arrow and despatched it towards Panditaka[The text says Pandita. But Pandita is the same as Panditaka.]. The arrow killed Panditaka and penetrated the ground. It was like a serpent that kills a man whose time has come. Remembering his earlier hardships, the one whose soul is not depressed then used three arrows to slice off Vishalaksha's head and make it fall down on the ground. The great archer then struck Mahodara between the breasts with
an iron arrow. O king! Pierced in the battle, he was slain and fell down on the ground. In the encounter, he sliced
off Adityaketu's standard with an arrow. He used an extremely sharp and broad-headed arrow to slice off the enemy's head. The angry Bhima then used an arrow with a drooping tuft to despatch Bahvashi towards Yama's abode.
O lord of the earth! Your other sons fled. They remembered the words that he had spoken in the assembly hall[The promise that he would kill Duryodhana and his brothers.].

'"Because of his brothers, King Duryodhana was distressed. He spoke to all the warriors, 'There is Bhima. Let
him be killed in battle.' O lord of the earth! Having been thus addressed, your sons, the great archers, saw that their
brothers had been killed and remembered the beneficial words that the immensely wise Kshatta[Vidura.] had spoken.
The words of the one who could foresee were now coming true. O lord of men! You were overcome by avarice and
confusion, because of affection towards your sons. In earlier times, you did not understand the purport of those
great and beneficial words. Given the way the powerful Pandava is killing your sons, it seems that the mighty-
armed one has been born for the sake of killing the Kouravas. O venerable one! King Duryodhana was overcome
by great grief and distress. He went to Bhishma and began to lament. 'My brave brothers have been killed by Bhimasena in battle. All the soldiers are fighting to the best of their capacity. But they are being killed. You seem to be
neutral and are constantly disregarding us. I have chosen to traverse an evil path. Behold my destiny.' On hearing
Duryodhana's cruel words, your father, Devavrata's, eyes filled with tears and he spoke these words. 'O son[The word used is tata.]! I
uttered these words earlier, and so did Drona, Vidura and the illustrious Gandhari. But you did not understand. O
destroyer of enemies! It was decided by me earlier that I will not escape from this battle with my life. Neither will
the preceptor. I tell you truthfully that whichever son of Dhritarashtra Bhima sets his eyes on in this battle will be
killed by him in the encounter. O king! Therefore, be patient. Be firm in your resolution to fight. Fight with the
Parthas in this battle, setting your sights on heaven as the objective. No one is capable of vanquishing the Pandavas, the gods with Indra, or the asuras. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Therefore, fix your mind on the battle. Be patient and fight.'"'


