'Yudhishthira said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He[The king.] may be weak. He may be a procrastinator. He may be excessively affectionate towards his relatives. The citizens of the city and the
countryside may be disenchanted. He may be without supplies of stores. He may suspect the foremost people[His advisers.]. His secret counsel may be divulged. He may be assailed by the enemy. All his advisers may be divided. Despite being weak, he may have to advance against a stronger enemy. When
his senses are agitated, tell me what else he can do."

'Bhishma replied, "The external one who seeks to conquer him may be pure and may be accomplished in dharma and artha. He should swiftly conclude an agreement and try to free those parts
that have already been conquered. Even if the other person wishes to conquer through adharma, is
more powerful and is wicked in his intentions, there should be an attempt to conclude a pact, even if
this leads to restrictions on himself[These restrictions might amount to giving up some more territory.]. Alternatively, he can abandon the capital and use other means
to avoid the calamity. Though that situation[Of running away.] continues, as long as he is alive, he can accumulate objects again. There are some calamities that can only be handled by giving up everything. However,
no one who knows about artha and dharma should give up the more expensive possession of one's
own life[This can be interpreted as an injunction against suicide.]. One must protect oneself against being taken captive. How can one find compassion
amidst the enemy's riches? If it is possible, one must never give oneself up."

'Yudhishthira said, "Those inside may be enraged and those outside may cause oppression. The
treasury may be exhausted. The secret counsel may be divulged. What remains to be done then?"

'Bhishma replied, "One should be swift in concluding a pact, or one must be swift in exhibiting
one's fierce valour. Or one can swiftly retreat and protect oneself. O lord of the earth! A king can
conquer the entire earth with a few soldiers, if they are devoted, nourished and cheerful. If he is
slain, he will ascend to heaven. If he is victorious, he will gain the earth. If he gives up his life in the
battle, he will obtain Shakra's world. When he has conquered all the people, he must tread gently. If
he cannot inspire trust in them through his humility, he should use his shoes[To run away.]. He should retreat only
when he wishes to. Should he desire to use conciliation, he should remove all signs from his own
self and advance with a friend[Advance towards the enemy with a friend, removing all signs of royalty.]."'

'Yudhishthira said, "The supreme forms of dharma may not be available and people of diverse kinds may
transgress it. Every means of sustenance on earth may have been taken over by bandits. O grandfather! When
that worst of times arrives, how will a brahmana survive, assuming that out of affection, he does not abandon
his sons and grandsons?"

'Bhishma replied, "When such a time arrives, he should survive through the strength of his ability to differentiate[The word used is vijnana, not jnana. Therefore, it isn't quite straightforward knowledge.]. Everything is for the virtuous. There is nothing for the wicked. If someone takes from the wicked and
gives it to those who are virtuous, he is knowledgeable about all forms of dharma and ensures a passage for
himself. O king! He can seize things that have not been given, thinking, 'These riches are mine and I will give
them away,' as long as he does not do this wrathfully and does not cause outrage in the kingdom. If a person
uses vijnana to purify his strength, even if he should be censured, he will not be censured, because he is patient
and his conduct is based on vijnana. Those whose conduct depends on the exercise of strength find no other
means appealing. O Yudhishthira! Their strength is enhanced through the use of energy. Medium people serve
the dictates of the ordinary sacred texts, without any discrimination[The sacred texts are meant for normal situations.]. However, those who are intelligent adopt
something that is beyond this. Officiating priests, priests, preceptors and brahmanas must always be treated
well and worshipped. Acting contrary to this is a sin[The idea is that even in times of adversity, they must not be taxed.]. These are the norms of the world and the eternal foresight. This is the standard in which one must be submerged to determine if one is virtuous or wicked. Many
who live in villages will angrily say things about each other. A king should not pay attention to these words
and act on that basis[Reward and punishment should not be based on hearsay and slander.]. Slander must never be spoken, nor heard. The ears must be covered, or one should go
somewhere else. The conduct of virtuous people does not encompass slander and calumny. O Yudhishthira!
Those who are virtuous only speak about the qualities of righteous people. Two well-trained draught animals,
tamed and both capable of bearing an equal load, are good at bearing a burden. The king should be like that.
He is the one who really bears the burden, aides come after that. Some think that conduct is the most important
indication of dharma. Others do not like this and prefer Shankha and Likhita instead[The scrupulous adherence to dharma on the part of Shankha and Likhita,
also involving a king punishing a brahmana.]. They do not speak such
words out of malice or greed. There are rishis who have held that the perpetrators of wrong deeds must be exiled[Even if they are brahmanas.]. However, if someone is like a rishi, there are no norms for this. Perhaps the gods should punish these
worst among men, who perpetrate perverse acts. If something is obtained through deceit, dharma suffers.
Those who are virtuous must be honoured in every way, because they are the reason for prosperity. This must
be accepted in one's heart and it establishes dharma. He who knows about the four qualities that establish
dharma is one who truly knows about dharma[The four qualities are metaphysics/logic, the Vedas, economic
welfare/prosperity and dandaniti. Alternatively, the Vedas, the smriti
texts, customary law and what one personally regards to be dharma.]. Like following a snake, it is extremely difficult to determine
the path of dharma. When a deer is pierced, a hunter of deer follows in its footsteps by tracking drops of blood
in the grass. That is the way one must follow the path of dharma. O one without decay! O Yudhishthira! You
must follow the path of the virtuous with humility. Follow the conduct observed by the rajarshis."'


