'"Arjuna said, 'In this way, there are devotees who are always immersed in you and worship you and there are
those who think of the unmanifest and the indestructible. 439 Who among these is the best yogi?' 440
'"The lord said, 'Those who worship me, with minds fixed on me and always united in me with supreme devotion, in my view, they are the best yogis. But those who worship the indestructible, indescribable, unmanifest, omnipresent, unthinkable, original, 441 immovable and constant, controlling properly the senses and looking upon
everything equally, acting for the welfare of all beings, they only attain me. Those who wish to immerse their
minds in the unmanifest, find it more difficult. Because those who possess bodies 442 attain the goal of the unmanifest with great perseverance. 443 O Partha! Those who offer all action to me, are devoted to me and with singleminded yoga, meditate on me and worship me with minds rendered unto me, I become swiftly their rescuer from
this mortal world that is like an ocean. Establish your mind in me alone. 444 Fix your intellect on me. After that,
445 there is no doubt that you will live with me alone. O Dhananjaya! If you cannot steady your mind and fix it on
me, then practise yoga 446 and wish to attain me. If you don't succeed in the practice, then do only my deeds. 447
Even if you do acts for my pleasure, you attain liberation. If however, you are unable to perform these deeds also,
then control your mind, give up attachment to the fruits of all action and seek refuge in the yoga that is mine. 448
Knowledge is superior to practice. Meditation is superior to knowledge. Giving up attachment to the fruits of action is superior to meditation. After renunciation, tranquillity is attained. 449 He who has no hatred for all beings,
is friendly and also displays compassion, is without sense of ego, without pride, regards happiness and unhappiness in the same way and is forgiving, is always satisfied, a yogi and controlled in mind, firm in resolution 450 and
with mind and intellect immersed in me, such a devotee of mine is dear to me. He from whom other people are not
disturbed and he who is not disturbed by other people and he who is free from delight, dissatisfaction, 451 fear and
concern, is dear to me. Without desire, 452 pure, enterprising, neutral, without pain and one who has renounced all
fruit, 453 such a devotee is dear to me. He who is not delighted, nor hates, he who does not sorrow, nor desires, he
who has given up good and evil, 454 such a devotee is dear to me. Equal between friend and enemy, and respect
and insult, equal between cold and warmth, happiness and unhappiness and without all attachment, like between
criticism and praise, restrained in speech, 455 satisfied with whatever is obtained, without habitation 456 and controlled in mind, such a devoted man is dear to me. Those who are devoted and look upon me as the supreme goal
and worship according to this immortal dharma mentioned earlier, such devotees are extremely dear to me.'"'


