'Bhishma said, "O king! On the third day after he had established himself on that level terrain, the one who is great
in his vows sent word to me, saying that he had arrived. On learning that the immensely strong lord, the store of
energy, had arrived on the outskirts of my kingdom, I was delighted. O Indra among kings! With a cow in front of
me and surrounded by brahmanas, sacrificial priests who were the equals of the gods and other priests, I went
there. On seeing me arrive, Jamadagni's powerful son received the homage and spoke these words to me. 'O
Bhishma! What were your thoughts when you abducted the daughter of the king of Kashi against her wishes? You
then abandoned her later. You have dislodged her from both inferior and superior dharma[The inferior dharma of remaining with Bhishma against her wishes and the superior dharma of going to Shalva.]. Who can now go to
someone who has been touched by you? O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Because she has been abducted by
you, she has been refused by Shalva. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O tiger among men! Therefore, following my counsel, take her back and let the princess abide by her own dharma. O king! O unblemished one! You do
not deserve to treat her with such neglect.' On seeing that his mind wasn't that agitated[Parashurama's tone was conciliatory.], I spoke to him. 'O brahmana! There is no way that I can give her to my brother again. O Bhargava! She has told me that she has given
herself to Shalva earlier. Having obtained my permission, she went to the city of Soubha. Because of fear, compassion, avarice or gain, I cannot abandon the dharma of kshatriyas. That is the vow that I follow.'

'"Rama's eyes dilated with anger and he said, 'O bull among the Kurus! If you refuse to act in accordance with
my words, I will kill you today, together with your advisers.' In great rage, Rama spoke these words repeatedly.
His eyes were wide with anger. I repeatedly tried to pacify that scorcher of enemies with sweet words. But I was
incapable of pacifying that tiger of the Bhrigu lineage. I then bowed my head down before that supreme among
brahmanas and asked, 'What is the reason behind your desire to fight with me? When I was a child, you yourself
taught me the four kinds of weapons[The five types of weapons are mukta (those that are released from the hand, like a chakra), amukta (those that
are never released, like a sword), muktamukta (those that can be released or not released, like a spear), yantra-
mukta (those that are released from an implement, like an arrow) and mantramukta (magical weapons unleashed
with incantations). When four types of weapons are mentioned, the mantramukta category is excluded.]. O mighty-armed one! O Bhargava! You have instructed me and I am your
student.' His eyes red with anger, Rama told me, 'O Bhishma! You know that I am your preceptor. O Kouravya! O
lord of the earth! Yet, to bring about my pleasure, you are refusing to take back the daughter of Kashi. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! I am not interested in peace with you. O mighty-armed one! Take her back and save
yourself and your lineage. Since you have tainted her, she will not find a husband.'

'"When he spoke in this way, I told Rama, the destroyer of enemy cities, 'O brahmarshi! Since this cannot be
done, what is the point of striving towards it? I see my earlier teacher, Jamadagni's son. O illustrious one! I seek
your favours, like in earlier times. Who will allow a woman to dwell in his house, established like a snake, knowing that she desires another? This is the great taint associated with women. O immensely radiant one! Even the fear
of Vasava will not make me give up dharma. Without any delay, show me your favours, or do whatever you must
do. O pure-souled one! O lord! An ancient shloka has been heard, chanted by the great-souled and immensely intelligent Marutta. "If a preceptor does not know what should be done and what should not be done, if he deviates
from the right path and if he is arrogant, it is one's duty to abandon him." Because you are my preceptor, I have
been affectionate and have greatly honoured you. But you are not acquainted with the conduct of a preceptor and I
will therefore, fight with you. However, I cannot kill a preceptor in battle, especially one who is a brahmana, especially one who is rich in austerities. I am at peace with you. If one sees a brahmana with an upraised weapon, as if
he is the kin of a kshatriya, and angrily kills him in the field of battle, without running away from the fight, dharma
is clear that no sin is committed from killing a brahmana. O one rich in austerities! I am a kshatriya. I am established in the dharma of kshatriyas. A man does not commit adharma if he reacts in response to what another person
has done. Instead, his welfare is ensured. If a person knows about artha and dharma and about the time and the
place, even if he has doubts about what ensures artha, there is no doubt that he should do that which ensures welfare. In this case, there is doubt about where artha lies. But you are acting as if you know what is right. O Rama!
Therefore, I will fight with you in a great battle. You will witness the valour of my arms and my superhuman bravery. O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! Given this, I will do whatever I can. O brahmana! I will fight with you in
Kurukshetra. O Rama! O great sage! Prepare yourself for the duel. O Rama! You will be killed by hundreds of my
arrows. Sanctified by my weapons in that great battle, you will obtain the worlds that you have earned for yourself.
O one who is in love with war! Return from here and go to Kurukshetra. O mighty-armed one! O one rich in austerities! I will fight with you there. O Rama! That is the place where you had once sanctified your father[Parashurama was the son of Jamadagni. Jamadagni was killed by King Kartavirya Arjuna. In consequence,
Parashurama exterminated kshatriyas from the earth twenty-one times. This blood created a lake in Kurukshetra
and Parashurama offered oblations to his father there.]. O
Bhargava! I will kill you there and sanctify you there. O Rama! O one who is unassailable in war! Go there swiftly.
You have boasted in the past, saying that you are a brahmana. O Rama! You have often boasted in assemblies that
you have exterminated kshatriyas from the world. But listen to my words. At that time, Bhishma had not been born
and there were no kshatriyas like me, who could dispel your insolence about war and your love for fighting. O
mighty-armed one! But Bhishma, the destroyer of enemy cities, has been born now. O Rama! There is no doubt
that I will destroy your insolence in war.'"'


'Bhishma said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Then Rama began to laugh and spoke to me. 'O Bhishma! It
is your good fortune that you wish to fight with me in battle. O Kouravya! Together with you, I will go to Kurukshetra. O scorcher of enemies! I will do what you have asked me to and you should also go there. O Bhishma! Let
your mother Jahnavi watch me kill you with hundreds of arrows, so that you become the food of vultures, crows
and cranes. O king! Let the goddess[Ganga.], worshipped by siddhas[Siddhi means accomplishment. Siddhas are semi-divine species who have attained these superhuman accomplishments or faculties.] and charanas[Celestial singers.], be miserable when she sees you
slain by me today and weep. The immensely fortunate river, the daughter of Bhagiratha, does not deserve to see
this[Ganga was brought down from heaven by Bhagiratha and is called Bhagiratha's daughter, Bhagirathi.]. But she has given birth to an evil and diseased one like you, who cherishes war. O Bhishma! Come with me
and let us go together. Let there be a battle today. O Kouravya! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Take everything, chariots and other things.' Rama, the vanquisher of enemy cities, spoke these words to me. O king! I bowed
my head before him and said that it would be this way.

'"After speaking these words, desirous of fighting, Rama went to Kurukshetra. I entered the city[Hastinapura.] and told
Satyavati everything. I performed the propitiatory rites and was blessed by my mother. O immensely radiant one!
The brahmanas pronounced sacred words of benediction. I mounted a beautiful and silver chariot, yoked to white
horses. It had been constructed well and had been prepared well. It was strewn with the hides of tigers. It was
loaded with great weapons and every kind of implement. O king! It was driven by a brave charioteer born in a noble lineage, skilled in the knowledge of horses. He had often witnessed my deeds. I was covered in beautiful and
white armour. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! I grasped a white bow. O lord of men! A white umbrella was
held aloft my head and white whisks were brandished. I was attired in white. My headgear was white. All my ornaments were white. Applauded with benedictions of victory, I left Gajasahrya. O bull among the Bharata lineage! I
arrived in Kurukshetra, the field where the battle would be fought. O king! Goaded by the charioteer, the horses,
with the speed of the mind and the wind, swiftly bore me to the supreme field of battle. Like me, the powerful
Rama also swiftly reached Kurukshetra. O king! In battle, we wished to show our valour to each other. I stood before the supreme ascetic Rama, so that he could see me. I grasped my supreme conch shell and began to blow on it.
O king! All the brahmanas, the ascetics who lived in the forest, the gods and the masses of rishis assembled to witness the divine battle. Celestial garlands manifested themselves repeatedly. Divine musical instruments sounded.
There was the rumbling of masses of clouds. All the ascetics who followed Bhargava surrounded the field of battle
as witnesses.

'"The goddess who is my mother desires the welfare of all beings. O king! She manifested herself before me
and said, 'What is it that you wish to do? O extender of the Kuru lineage! I will go to Jamadagni's son and plead
with him. I will repeatedly tell him, "Do not fight with Bhishma, your student." O son! O king! And you should
not behave so obstinately towards a brahmana. Why do you wish to fight with Jamadagni's son in a battle?' She
censured me. 'O son! Do you not know that Rama, the destroyer of kshatriyas, is equal to Hara[Shiva.] in valour? Why
do you wish to fight with him?' I joined my hands in salutation before the goddess. O foremost among the Bharata
lineage! I accurately told her everything that had transpired at the svayamvara. O Indra among kings! I told her
how I had tried to obtain Rama's favours earlier and about the ancient love of the daughter of the king of Kashi.
My mother, the great river, then went to Rama. For my sake, the goddess sought to pacify the rishi Bhargava. She
said, 'Do not fight with Bhishma, your student.' He replied to her, 'It is Bhishma that you should restrain. I am
here because he is not doing what I desire.'"

'Sanjaya[There is a conversation within a conversation, because Sanjaya is recounting the story to Dhritarashtra.] said, "Out of affection towards her son, Ganga then returned to Bhishma. But his eyes were red with
anger and he did not pay heed to her words. The great ascetic, foremost among the Bhrigus, with dharma in his
soul, then appeared. The supreme among the brahmanas challenged him again to the battle."'


