Sanjaya said, "The soldiers slaughtered each other and were agitated. The warriors were driven away and the
tuskers shrieked. In the great battle, the foot soldiers lamented loudly. O great king! The horses ran away in many
directions. For all living beings, there was terrible destruction and carnage. Many weapons descended and chariots
and elephants were mangled. Those who found joy in battle were delighted. The fear of cowards increased. Wishing to kill each other, the warriors immersed themselves in this. They gave up their lives in that extremely terrible
gambling match. The fierce battle extended Yama's kingdom. The Pandavas slaughtered your soldiers with sharp
arrows. In that way, your warriors killed the Pandava soldiers. The battle continued and terrified cowards. It was
the morning, after the sun had arisen. Unwavering in their aim, the great-souled Pandavas protected the king[Yudhishthira.] and
killed the enemy. They were powerful and proud strikers and did not miss their objective. They fought against your
soldiers, preferring death to retreat. O Kouravya! Your forces weakened, like deer when there is a fire.

' "The army was weakened, like a cow submerged in mud. On seeing this, Shalya wished to rescue it and advanced towards the Pandu army. The king of Madra was angry and picked up a supreme bow. In the battle, he
rushed against the Pandava assassins. O great king! The Pandavas desired victory in the encounter. They attacked
the king of Madra and pierced him with sharp arrows. While Dharmaraja looked on, the immensely strong king of
Madra afflicted those soldiers with hundreds of sharp arrows. O king! At that time, many different kinds of portents manifested themselves. The earth, with its mountains, moved and made a noise. From the solar disc in the firmament, meteors descended on the earth in every direction. They were fierce at the tip, like spears with handles. O
lord of the earth! O king! Many deer, buffaloes and birds kept your soldiers to the right[That is, they were to the left of the army, an inauspicious omen, because
the left is inauspicious.]. O lord of men! As large
numbers descended on each other and attacked with all their divisions, there was a fierce encounter. The Kouravas
attacked the Pandava divisions.

' "Spirited in his soul, Shalya attacked Yudhishthira, Kunti's son, showering down arrows, like the one with one
thousand eyes[Indra.] pouring down rain. The immensely strong one used gold-tufted arrows that were sharpened on
stone to pierce Bhimasena, all of Droupadi's sons, the two Pandavas who were Madri's sons, Dhrishtadyumna,
Shini's descendant and Shikhandi, striking each of them with ten arrows. He rained down arrows, like Maghavan
showering rain at the end of summer. O king! Because of Shalya's arrows, thousands of Prabhadrakas and Somakas were seen to fall down, or falling down. They were like flights of bees or locusts, driven by the wind.
Shalya's arrows descended, like lightning from clouds. Elephants, horses, foot soldiers and rathas were distressed.
Because of Shalya's arrows, they fell down, or wandered around, shrieking. They were afflicted by the lord of
Madra's anger and manliness. In the battle, he enveloped the enemy, like Yama bestirred by destiny. The immensely strong lord of Madra roared, like lightning in the clouds. The Pandava soldiers were slaughtered by Shalya, with
his dexterity and his sharp arrows, and ran towards Kounteya, Ajatashatru Yudhishthira. In the battle, they were
oppressed by that great shower of arrows and sought refuge with Yudhishthira. On seeing that he[Shalya.] was angrily
descending with foot soldiers and horses, King Yudhishthira countered him with sharp arrows, like a crazy elephant checked with a goad. Shalya released a terrible arrow that was like a venomous serpent. It pierced the great-
souled one with force and fell down on the ground. At this, Vrikodara wrathfully pierced him with seven arrows,
Sahadeva with five and Nakula with ten arrows. Droupadi's sons showered down arrows on Artayani, the immensely fortunate slayer of enemies, like clouds pouring down on a mountain. On seeing that Shalya was assailed
from every side by the Parthas, Kritavarma and Kripa attacked angrily. Uluka attacked like a bird[The text says patatri, bird. This may be a typo.] and so did
Shakuni Soubala. Maharatha Ashvatthama smiled gently. All your sons protected Shalya in the battle.

' "Kritavarma used three arrows with iron heads to pierce Bhimasena. Assuming an angry form, he repulsed him
with a great shower of arrows. Kripa angrily afflicted Dhrishtadyumna with a shower of arrows. Shakuni attacked
Droupadi's son and Drona's son attacked the twins. Duryodhana, best of warriors, was fierce in his energy and
strong. In the battle, he advanced against Keshava and Arjuna and attacked them with arrows. There were hundreds of duels between those on your side and the enemy at various spots. O lord of the earth! It was fierce in form
and wonderful. In the battle, Bhoja slew Bhima's brown horses. When the horses were slain, Pandu's descendant
descended from his chariot and fought with a club in his hand, like Yama with an upraised staff. In his sight, the
king of Madra slew Sahadeva's horses. At this, Sahadeva killed Shalya's son with his sword. The preceptor,
Goutama, again fought with Dhrishtadyumna. Both of them were fearless and made efforts against each other. The
preceptor's son[Ashvatthama.] wasn't very angry. He smiled and pierced each of Droupadi's brave sons with ten arrows. O
king! Shalya angrily slaughtered the Somakas and the Pandavas. He again afflicted Yudhishthira with sharp
arrows.

' "The valiant Bhima was angry in the battle and bit his lower lips in rage. To destroy him[Shalya.], he hurled a club. It
was like Yama's staff and was raised, like the night of destruction. It was capable of destroying the lives of elephants, horses and men. It was bound in golden cloth and blazed like a meteor. It was like the vajra to the touch
and was completely made out of iron. It was as fierce as a she-serpent and was slung in a noose. It was smeared
with sandalwood paste and unguents, like a desired woman. It was smeared with fat and marrow and it was like
Yama's tongue. There were bells attached to it and it was like Vasava's vajra. It was smeared with the fat of elephants and it was like a snake that had cast off its skin. It frightened the enemy soldiers and delighted the soldiers
on one's own side. It was famous in the world of men and was capable of shattering the summit of a mountain. It
was one with which powerful Kounteya had challenged the lord of Alaka, Maheshvara's friend, in his abode in
Kailasa[The lord of the yakshas is Kubera and his capital is Alaka, in Kailasa.
Kubera is Maheshavara's (Shiva's) friend. Bhima fought with the yak-
shas. The incident has been described in Section 35 (Volume 3). Bhima
went in search of a flower, because Droupadi wanted it.]. For the sake of the mandara flower, the immensely strong one had proudly killed many guhyakas, who
used their powers of maya, in the abode of the lord of the riches. To ensure Droupadi's pleasure, he had countered
many. It[The club.] was famous as the vajra and possessing eight sides, it was embellished with diamonds, gems and jewels. Raising it, the mighty-armed one attacked Shalya in the battle. He was skilled in fighting and grasped that fearful club. He brought down Shalya's four horses, which were extremely fast. At this, Shalya became angry in the
battle. He hurled a javelin towards his broad chest and roared. It pierced the brave one's armour and penetrated.
However, Vrikodara wasn't frightened. He plucked the javelin out and pierced the king of Madra's charioteer in
the heart with it. With the armour penetrated, he was distressed in his mind and began to vomit blood. He fell
downwards and the king of Madra looked on, in sorrow. On seeing that his own deed had been countered, Shalya
wondered in his mind. Serene in his soul, he grasped a club and glanced towards his opponent. On beholding his
deed in the battle, the Parthas were delighted in their minds and honoured Bhimasena, the performer of terrible and
unblemished deeds." '


Sanjaya said, "O king! Shalya saw that his charioteer had been killed. He quickly picked up a club that was completely made out of iron and stood immobile, like a mountain. He was like the blazing fire of destruction, or like
Yama with a noose in his hand. He was like the summit of Kailasa, or Vasava with the vajra. He was like the
tawny-eyed one[Shiva.] with a trident, or like a crazy elephant in the forest. Bhima grasped a mighty club and swiftly
dashed towards him. At that time, thousands of conch shells and trumpets blared. The brave ones roared like lions
and this increased one's delight. All the warriors saw them fight against each other, like giant elephants. Those on
your side, and on the side of the enemy, uttered words of praise. With the exception of the lord of Madra, Rama[Parashurama.]
and the descendant of the Yadu lineage, who else was capable of withstanding Bhimasena's force in an encounter?
With the exception of the great-souled lord of Madra and the force of his club, which other warrior was capable of
fighting against Vrikodara? They roared like bulls and circled each other. With clubs in their hands, the king of
Madra and Vrikodara wheeled around each other. In the circles that they executed, or in the way they roamed
around with the clubs, there was nothing to differentiate those two lions among men in the encounter. Shalya's
club was made of gold. It was radiant and sparkling and increased one's terror. It was tied in cloth that looked like
a net of fire. The great-souled Bhima roamed around in circles with a radiant club that looked like clouds tinged
with lightning. O king! The king of Madra struck Bhima's club with his club and this generated blazing sparks of
fire. In that way, Bhima struck Shalya's club with his club and this released a shower of flames. It was extraordinary. They were like giant elephants with tusks, or gigantic bulls with horns. They struck each other with the
tips of their clubs, wishing to kill each other. Struck by the clubs, in a short while, blood began to flow from their
bodies. They were beautiful to behold, like two flowering kimshukas. Bhimsena was struck on the right and the left
by the king of Madra's club. However, the mighty-armed one was immobile, like a mountain. O king! In that fashion, Shalya was repeatedly struck by the force of Bhima's club. But he did not waver, like a mountain struck by a
tusker. The sounds generated by those two lions among men could be heard in all the directions. The clubs descended and struck, with a sound like that of the vajra. Those two immensely valorous ones stopped for a while
and then again attacked with their clubs. They again roamed around, executing circular motions. Raising those iron
staffs, they advanced eight steps forward and struck each other, performing a superhuman deed. They roamed
around, executing circular motions and seeking to strike each other. Those accomplished ones exhibited great
deeds. They raised those terrible clubs, which were like the summits of mountains. They struck each other, like
mountains at the time of an earthquake. They were severely struck from the force of each other's clubs. Both of
those brave ones simultaneously fell down, like Indra's standards. Sounds of lamenation arose from the brave ones
in both armies. They were severely struck in their inner organs and lost their senses. Shalya, bull among the
Madras, was severely struck by the club and Kripa used his chariot to swiftly bear him away from the field of battle. Bhimasena was also weakened and senseless. However, he raised himself in an instant. With the club in his
hand, he challenged the king of Madra.

' "The brave ones on your side raised many kinds of weapons. To the sound of diverse kinds of musical instruments, they fought with the Pandu soldiers. They held weapons in their hands and made a great noise. O great
king! With Duryodhana at the forefront, they attacked. On seeing those soldiers, the sons of Pandu roared like lions and advanced, wishing to kill Duryodhana. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On seeing that they were swiftly
descending, your son severely pierced Chekitana[The prince of Chedi, Dhrishtaketu's son.] in the heart with a javelin. Struck thus by your son, he fell
down from his chariot. With blood flowing from his body, he was submerged in great darkness. On seeing that
Chekitana had been killed, the maharatha Pandavas engaged and showered down arrows on the different divisions.
O great king! The Pandavas could be seen to roam around and attacked your soldiers from every direction, desiring
victory. With the king of Madra at the forefront, Kripa, Kritavarma and the immensely strong Soubala fought with
Dharmaraja. O great king! Duryodhana fought with Dhrishtadyumna, who was the slayer of Bharadvaja's son and
great in his valour and bravery. O king! Goaded by your son, with Drona's son at their head, three thousand rathas
on your side fought Vijaya.

' "O king! Setting their minds on victory and ready to give up their lives, those on your side penetrated, like
swans into a large lake. As they sought to kill each other, an extremely terrible battle raged on. They wished to kill
each other and were delighted at being able to strike each other. O king! The battle that led to the destruction of the
best among brave ones continued. The earth was covered with a terrible dust that arose in the air. We could ascertain who the Pandavas were, only when they called out to each other. We fought fearlessly. O tiger among men!
That dust was pacified by the blood. When the dust was pacified, the directions could clearly be seen. The fearful
battle, terrible in form, continued between those on your side and the enemy. No one wished to retreat. With Brahma's world as the supreme objective, they wished for victory in the battle. Wishing to go to heaven, those brave
men fought an excellent war. Setting their minds on the tasks of their masters, they wished to repay the debts of
their masters. With their minds set on heaven, they fought and clashed against each other. The maharathas released
many different kinds of weapons. They roared at each other and struck each other. 'Strike. Pierce. Seize. Hit. Sever.' These were the words that were heard amongst the armies on your side and that of the enemy.

' "O great king! Wishing to kill maharatha Dharmaraja Yudhishthira, Shalya pierced him with sharp arrows. O
great king! However, Partha knew about the inner organs. He smiled and struck him in the inner organs with fourteen iron arrows. The immensely illustrious one wished to kill Pandava and repulsed him with arrows. In the battle,
he angrily pierced him with many arrows tufted with the feathers of herons. O great king! While all the soldiers
looked on, he again struck Yudhishthira with an arrow with a drooping tuft. Dharmaraja became extremely angry.
The immensely illustrious one pierced the king of Madra with sharp arrows that were tufted with the feathers of
herons and peacocks. The maharatha then struck Chandrasena with seventy arrows, his charioteer with nine and
Drumasena with sixty-four[As the next sentence makes clear, Chandrasena and Drumasena were
guarding Shalya's chariot wheels.]. O king! When the protectors of his chariot wheels were slain by the great-minded
Pandava, Shalya killed twenty-five Chedis. He pierced Satyaki with twenty-five sharp arrows, Bhimasena with five
and Madri's two sons with one hundred. O supreme among kings! While he was thus roaming around in the battle,
Partha shot sharp arrows at him and these were like venomous serpents. In the battle, with a broad-headed arrow,
Yudhishthira, Kunti's son, brought down the tip of his adversary's standard from his chariot, while he looked on.
Severed by the great-souled son of Pandu, the standard was seen to fall down, like the summit of a mountain. On
seeing that his standard had been brought down and on seeing Pandava stationed, the king of Madra angrily showered down arrows. Shalya showered down arrows, like Parjanya pouring down rain. The bull among the kshatriya
lineage, immeasurable in his soul, showered down arrows on the kshatriyas-Satyaki, Bhimasena and the two Pandavas who were the sons of Madri. He pierced each of them with five arrows and afflicted Yudhishthira. O great
king! We saw a net of arrows spread over Pandava's chest, like a mass of clouds that had risen. In the battle, maharatha Shalya angrily used straight-tufted arrows to envelop the directions and the sub-directions. King Yudhishthira was afflicted by that net of arrows. He seemed to have been deprived of his valour, like Jambha by the
slayer of Vritra." '85

