Vaishampayana said, 'Having been thus addressed, the sage Narada, supreme among eloquent ones, recounted
everything about how the son of a suta had been cursed.

'"O mighty-armed one[Though not explicitly stated, this is Narada speaking.]! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It is exactly as you have said. There is nothing
that could have stood against Karna and Arjuna in a battle. O king! What I am about to tell you is unknown to even
the gods. O great king! O lord! Therefore, listen to what happened in earlier times, about how the kshatriyas would
be cleansed by weapons and would go to heaven. To engender that dissension, he was created in a virgin womb.
He was energetic as a child and came to be known as the son of a suta. He went to the best of the Angirasa lineage,
your preceptor[Drona.], to learn about the science of war[Dhanurveda.]. O Indra among kings! He thought of Bhima's strength, Phal-
guna's dexterity, your intelligence, the humility of the twins, the friendship that the wielder of Gandiva has had
with Vasudeva since childhood and the devotion of the subjects and was tormented. From childhood, he formed a
friendship with King Duryodhana. This is because of the enmity he always bore towards you and natural destiny.
He saw that Dhananjaya was superior to everyone in learning about dhanurveda. Karna secretly went to Drona and
spoke these words. 'I wish to know about brahmastra and the secrets of releasing and withdrawing it. It is my view
that I should become Arjuna's equal in battle. It is certain that the affection you bear towards your disciples is
equal to what you bear towards your son. Because of your favours, make me accomplished and skilled in the use
of weapons.' Drona was partial towards Phalguna. He also knew about Karna's wickedness. Having been thus addressed by Karna, he replied, 'The brahmastra can only be known by a brahmana who is observant of the vows, or
by a kshatriya who has performed austerities, and by no one else.' Having been thus addressed by the best of the
Angirasa lineage, he honoured him and took his leave. He then quickly went to Rama[Parashurama.] on Mount Mahendra. Having approached Rama, he lowered his head in obeisance before him and said, 'O Bhargava! I am a brahmana.' This
earned him respect. Rama welcomed him and asked him everything about his gotra[Gotra can loosely be translated as family lineage.]. He was extremely delighted
at this warm welcome. Karna resided on Mahendra, supreme among mountains, and met gandharvas, rakshasas,
yakshas and gods there. There, in the proper way, he obtained all the weapons from the best of the Bhrigu lineage.
Because of this, he was loved by the gods, the gandharvas and the rakshasas.

'"Once, near that hermitage, he was roaming around on the shores of the ocean. The son of the suta was wandering around alone, with a sword and a bow in his hand. O Partha! There was a person who was knowledgeable
about the brahman and who performed the aghnihotra sacrifice every day. Unwittingly, he killed his homadhenu[Agnihotra is a sacrifice where oblations are offered to the fire. A homadhenu is a cow that yields milk for the oblations.].
Having unwittingly performed this deed, Karna went and repeatedly told the brahmana, so that he might be pacified, 'O illustrious one! I have unwittingly killed your cow. Please show me your favours.' However, the brahmana
censured him and angrily spoke these words, 'O wicked one! O evil-minded one! You should be killed. Therefore,
reap this fruit. You have always sought to rival someone[Arjuna.] and you have been striving against him every day. Because of this crime, when you are fighting with him, the earth will swallow up the wheel of your chariot. O worst
of men! When you clash against your foe and are distracted because the wheel of your chariot has been devoured
by the earth, he will exhibit his valour and sever your head. O stupid one! Leave this place. Just as you were distracted when you acted against me, another person will sever and bring down your head while you are distracted.'

He again tried to secure the favours of that supreme among brahmanas. He gave him cattle, riches and jewels.
However, he[The brahmana.] again said, 'Nothing in all the worlds will be able to falsify the words spoken by me. You can go, or
stay, or do whatever else you wish to.' Having been thus addressed by the brahmana, Karna was distressed and
hung his head down. Terrified, he returned to Rama and thought about this in his mind."'


'Narada said, "The tiger among the Bhrigu lineage[Parashurama.] was pleased with the strength of Karna's arms, affection, selfcontrol and the service he showed towards his preceptor. He was also excellent in austerities. Therefore, in the
proper way, that supreme of ascetics[Parashurama.] taught him everything about brahmastra, about its release and means of
withdrawal. Having obtained this knowledge, Karna was delighted and dwelt in the hermitage of the one descended from the Bhrigu lineage. His valour was extraordinary and he strove to learn dhanurveda.'

'"One day, the intelligent Rama was wandering around near the hermitage, with Karna. He was afflicted because
of the fasting and was also confident of Karna's affection. Therefore, Jamadagani's descendant went to sleep with
his head on his lap. While the tired preceptor was sleeping, a terrible worm approached Karna. It fed on phlegm,
fat, flesh and blood and was terrible to the touch. With blood-stained teeth, it penetrated his thigh. Because of fear
on account of his preceptor[Fear of waking up Parashurama.], he was unable to kill it, or fling it away. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! His
thigh was pierced by that worm. But scared that his preceptor would wake up, the son of a suta ignored it. Karna
bore that pain with fortitude and ignored it. He did not tremble and continued to bear Bhargava. Eventually, the
blood from the limbs touched the extender of the Bhrigu lineage. The energetic one awoke and in torment, spoke
these words. 'Alas! I have become impure. What have you done? Cast aside your fear and tell me the truth about
what has happened.' Karna then told him how the worm had bitten him. Rama also saw that the worm looked like
a pig. It had eight feet and sharp teeth and was covered with bristles that were like needles. It was known as Alarka
and it shrivelled[Alarka is a mythical animal that looks like a boar and has eight legs.]. As soon as Rama looked at it, the worm gave up its breath of life. It shrunk in the blood that it
had drunk and it was extraordinary.

'"At that time, a rakshasa was seen in the sky. It was gigantic in form and was terrible in visage. Its neck was
red, its limbs were dark and it was riding on the clouds. Its wishes having been satisfied, it joined its hands in salutation and addressed Rama. 'O tiger among the Bhrigu lineage! May you be well. I will go where I had come from.
O supreme among sages! You have saved me from this hell.' Jamadagni's mighty-armed and powerful son replied,
'Who are you? How did you descend into hell? Tell me about it.' He said, 'Earlier, in the yuga of the gods[Meaning satya yuga.], I was
a great asura named Praggritsa. O father[The word used is tata.]! I was of the same age as Bhrigu. I forcefully abducted Bhrigu's
beloved wife. Because of the maharshi's curse, I became a worm and fell down on earth. Your great grandfather[Meaning, Bhrigu. Bhrigu's son was Chyavana, Chyavana's son was Our-
va, Ourva's son was Richika, Richika's son was Jamadagni and Jamadagni's son was Parashurama.]
angrily spoke these words to me. "You will subsist on urine and phlegm. O wicked one! You will live a life that is
like hell." I asked him, "O brahmana! When will this curse come to an end?" At this, Bhrigu told me, "There will
be Rama, born of the Bhrigu lineage, and he will free you." It is because of this that I attained such a wicked end.
O virtuous one! But having met you, I have been freed from that evil birth.' Having said this, the giant asura
bowed before Rama and departed.

'"Rama angrily spoke these words to Karna. 'O foolish one! No one who has been born as a brahmana can endure such great suffering. Your patience is like that of a kshatriya. I wish to hear the truth.' Karna was frightened
of being cursed. He sought his favours and said, 'O Bhargava! Know me to be between a brahmana and a kshatriya, born as a suta[A suta was born from a kshatriya father and a brahmana mother.]. People on earth speak of me as Radheya Karna. O brahmana! O Bhargava! Pardon me. I
was greedy for the weapons. A father isn't just the biological one. The lord, who is a preceptor and gives one the
Vedas and learning, is also one such. That is the reason why, in your presence, I described myself as a Bhargava.'

The foremost among the Bhrigu lineage was incensed at this and he[Karna.] had fallen down on the ground, trembling,
distressed and hands joined in salutation. However, he[Parashurama.] smiled and said, 'You acted in this false way because of
your greed for weapons. O stupid one! In a different place, when the time for your death has come, you will be engaged in a fight with someone who is your equal and the brahmastra will not manifest itself before you. The qualities of a brahmana will never remain with someone who is not a brahmana. Leave this place, since this is not
meant for an untruthful one like you. There will be no kshatriya on earth who will be your equal in battle.' Having
been thus addressed by Rama, he took his leave and departed. He went to Duryodhana and said, 'I have become
accomplished in the use of weapons.'"'


'Narada said, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! Having thus obtained weapons from the descendant of the Bhargava lineage, together with Duryodhana, Karna amused himself. On one
occasion, many kings assembled at a svayamvara ceremony organized by Chitrangada, the
king of Kalinga. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There was a prosperous city named Rajapura there. For the sake of the maiden, hundreds of kings assembled there. On hearing that
all the kings had gathered there, Duryodhana also went there on his golden chariot, accompanied by Karna. At that svayamvara, a great festival was organized. O supreme among kings!
Many kings came there for the sake of the maiden. O great king! Shishupala, Jarasandha,
Bhishmaka, Vakra, Kapotaroma, Nila, Rukmi, firm in his valour, Srigala, who ruled over a
kingdom of women, Ashoka, Shatadhanva and the valiant Bhoja were among them. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were many others who resided in the southern directions,
preceptors from among the mlecchas[Barbarians, those who do not speak Sanskrit.] and kings from the east and the north. All of them
were adorned in golden armlets and were decorated in garlands made out of molten gold. All
of them possessed radiant bodies and were crazy in their pride, like tigers. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! When all those kings had seated themselves, the maiden entered the arena
with her nurse, guarded by eunuchs. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! While the names of
the kings were being recounted, the beautiful maiden passed by the son of Dhritarashtra[In a svayamvara, the princess passed by all the kings, choosing the one
she wanted. By going past Duryodhana, she rejected him.].
Kouravya Duryodhana could not tolerate that he had been passed by. Ignoring all the kings, he
asked the maiden to stop. Protected by Bhishma and Drona, he was intoxicated by his valour.
He lifted the maiden up onto his chariot and challenged the kings. O bull among men! Karna
wielded a sword and had donned arm-guards and finger-guards. Riding on a chariot, the best
among all wielders of weapons guarded him[Duryodhana.] from the rear. O Yudhishthira. There was a tumult and a loud sound arose among the kings, as body armour was donned, chariots were
yoked and they angrily attacked Karna and Duryodhana. They released showers of arrows,
like clouds on a mountain. With razor-sharp arrows, Karna brought each of their bows, with
arrows affixed to them, down on the ground. Deprived of their bows, some advanced, raising
other bows. Some attacked with arrows. Others grasped javelins and clubs. Karna was
supreme among strikers and oppressed them with his dexterity. He slew many charioteers and
defeated the kings. At this, they themselves picked up the reins of their mounts and said, 'Go
away.' Devastated in their hearts, the kings abandoned the battle. Protected by Karna, Duryodhana was assured. Bringing the maiden with them, they cheerfully returned to the city of Nagasahvya."'


