'"Utathya said, 'When the king follows dharma, Parjanya showers down at the right time. There is prosperity and
the subjects rejoice in happiness. He[The careless king.] is like a washerman who does not know how to wash dirty clothes, or
washes away the dye in the process. It is the same with brahmanas, kshatriyas, vaishyas and shudras who are no
longer established in the various tasks of the four varnas. Labour is for shudras, agriculture for vaishyas and dandaniti for kings. Brahmacharya, austerities, mantras and truth are for brahmanas. The kshatriya who knows good
conduct and about how to restrain bad conduct is like a father and a lord of beings. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Krita, treta, dvapara and kali are all dependent on the conduct of kings. It is said that the king makes the
yuga. When the king is careless, the four varnas and the four Vedas and ashramas are all confused. The king is the
one who makes beings. The king is their destroyer. The one with dharma in his soul is a maker. The one with adharma in his soul is a destroyer. When the king is careless, the king's wives, sons, relatives and well-wishers all
sorrow together. O king! When the king follows adharma, all the elephants, horses, cattle, camels, mules and asses
suffer. O Mandhata! It is said that the creator created strength for the sake of the weak[So that the weak could be protected.]. The foundation of everything is immensely weak. O king! When the king bases himself on adharma, the beings who depend on the king
and others who depend on those beings, all suffer. I think that the glances of one who is weak, that of a sage and
that of a virulent snake cannot be tolerated. Therefore, do not oppress the weak. O son[The word used is tata.]! Know that the weak
should never be thought of as those who should be disregarded. Otherwise, the glances of the weak will burn you
down, together with your relatives. If a family is burnt down by the weak, it is burnt down to the roots and nothing
grows there. Therefore, do not oppress the weak. Weakness is superior to strength, since greater strength is superior to strength. When the strong is burnt down by the weak, there is nothing left. If a humiliated and struck person
cries out for succour and fails to find a man to help him, the consequent punishment slays the king. O son! When
you base yourself on strength, do not oppress the weak. Otherwise, the glances of the weak will burn you down,
like a fire that consumes its foundation. The tears shed by those who weep because they have been falsely accused
slay the sons and animals of those who have made those false accusations. If not on one's own self, it descends on
the son. If not on the son, it descends on the son's son or the daughter's son. Like a cow, the fruits of an evil deed
are not immediately reaped[One has to wait for a cow to have a calf, before it can be milked.]. When a weak person is slain and cannot find a protector, the gods have arranged
that a great and terrible punishment should descend[Descend on the king.]. Though they should not beg, when the residents of the
countryside are forced to beg like brahmanas, that sin of begging slays the king. When the many royal officers employed by the king in the countryside are engaged in wrong deeds, a great sin devolves on the king. When those
employed for good policy are overcome by reasons of desire and greed from riches and extract from those who are
distressed and pleading, that is a great sin on the part of the king.

'"'A large tree sprouts and then grows. It offers refuge to beings. When it is severed or burnt down, those who
have sought refuge in it are also rendered homeless[The king is being compared to the tree and the royal officers to those
who have made homes in the tree.]. When those in the kingdom practise the foremost kinds of
dharma and follow good conduct, the qualities of the king are spoken about. When they practise adharma and are
confused about dharma, his good deeds swiftly turn to bad deeds. When the wicked are known to roam around
among the virtuous, the king suffers from kali[In the sense of strife and discord.] there. O lord of the earth! When the king punishes those who
should not be punished, the kingdom does not prosper. When advisers are honoured in accordance with what they
deserve and are engaged by the king for policy and war, the kingdom of that king prospers. He enjoys the entire
earth for a long period of time. The king who looks towards good deeds and honours them with pleasant words obtains supreme dharma. When the king enjoys his own share and does not disregard others and slays those who are
strong and insolent, that king is said to follow dharma. When the king saves everyone in speech, body and deeds
and does not pardon his own son, that king is said to follow dharma. When the king protects those who seek
refuge, like his own sons, and does not deviate from any agreements, that king is said to follow dharma. When the
king performs rites and sacrifices and faithfully gives away dakshina, disregarding his own desire and hatred, that
king is said to follow dharma. When he wipes away the tears of the distressed, those without protectors and the
weak, and generates delight among men, that king is said to follow dharma. When his friends prosper and his enemies are brought down, when he honours the virtuous, that king is said to follow dharma. When he protects the
truth and always gives away land, honouring guests and servants, that king is said to follow dharma. When favours
and chastisement are both established in him, that king obtains fruits in this world and in the next. O Mandhata!
The king is Yama. He is the supreme lord of those who follow dharma. When he restrains himself, he supports life.
When he does not restrain himself, he is wicked. When he receives officiating priests, priests and preceptors well,
honouring them and not insulting them, that king is said to follow dharma. Yama controls all beings, without differentiating between them. It is the king's task to duly control the subjects in this way. O bull among men! In every
way, the king is like the thousand-eyed one[Indra.]. What he sees as dharma is dharma. You must be careful, learned,
forgiving, intelligent, patient and wise, always questioning the spirit of people and separating the good from the
evil. You must assuage all the people through gifts and pleasant words. You must protect the residents of the city
and the countryside as if they are your own sons. O son! A king who is not accomplished is incapable of protecting
the subjects. O son! What is known as the kingdom is an extremely great and difficult burden to bear. Wielding the
rod, only a wise and brave one is capable of protecting it. One who is a eunuch and devoid of intelligence cannot
wield the rod.

'"'There must be handsome ones born in noble lineages[As ministers and advisers.]. They must be accomplished, faithful and extremely
learned. You must examine the intelligence of all of these and also that of ascetics who live in hermitages. In this
way, you will know the supreme dharma of all beings and your dharma will not be destroyed, in your country, or in
the lands of others. Among dharma, artha and kama, dharma is the best. The one who knows dharma enjoys happiness in this world and in the next. When men are honoured well, they abandon their chief wives. People should be
cultivated through gifts and pleasant words. O son! Great purity follows from care and purity. O Mandhata! Always pay attention to these. The king must be careful and look for weaknesses in his own self and that of the enemy. The enemy should not be able to see his weaknesses. But he must strike at the weak spots of the enemy. This
was the conduct followed by Vasava, Yama, Varuna and all the rajarshis. Follow that. O great king! Act in accordance with this conduct, followed by the rajarshis. O bull among the Bharata lineage[This is again an inconsistency.]! O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Follow this divine path. In this world and the next, the devarshis, ancestors and gandharvas praise
the conduct of infinitely energetic kings who act in accordance with dharma.'"

'Bhishma said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Mandhata was thus addressed by Utathya. Without any
hesitation, he acted accordingly and obtained the earth for his own. You should also act well, like King Mandhata.
Observe dharma, protect the earth and obtain a place in heaven."'


'Yudhishthira asked, "How should a king who is devoted to dharma, and who
wishes to establish himself in dharma, behave? O best among the Kuru lineage! O grandfather! I am asking you. Please tell me."

'Bhishma replied, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted. The
intelligent Vamadeva saw the exact truth about this and sang it. There was a
king named Vasumana from Kosala. He was powerful and pure. He asked the
illustrious maharishi Vamadeva. 'O illustrious one! Instruct me with words
that are full of dharma and artha, so that I conduct myself in accordance with
them, I remain established and do not deviate from my own dharma.' The
supreme among those who meditated, the ascetic Vamadeva, replied to him,
as he[Vasumana.] was seated there, golden in complexion, like Yayati, the son of
Nahusha. 'Follow dharma alone. There is nothing that is superior to dharma.
Basing themselves on dharma, kings conquered the entire earth. The king
who thinks that dharma is superior to success in the matter of artha, and who
makes his intelligence truthful, is radiant with dharma. If a king looks towards adharma and acts on the basis of force alone, he is swiftly dislodged
from both the first and the second[Dharma and artha respectively.]. Because his advisers are wicked and
evil, he is a slayer of dharma and deserves to be killed by the people, together
with his relatives. He will swiftly perish. If he does not seek artha and is addicted to kama, and if he is boastful, even if he obtains the entire earth, he
will swiftly perish. However, if a king concentrates on what is beneficial, is
devoid of malice, conquers his senses and is intelligent, he flourishes, like an
ocean into which rivers flow. For dharma, artha and kama, he must always
think that he is not yet full[That is, he must want more of these.]. The progress of the worlds is based on all
these. If he listens to this, he will obtain fame, glory, prosperity and subjects.
A person who is proud about dharma, who thinks about dharma and artha,
who undertakes action only after thinking about artha, is certain to obtain
greatness. If the king is not generous, is not extremely affectionate, if he always wields the rod over his subjects and if he is naturally violent, he will
swiftly perish. The stupid one does not use his intelligence to see that he has
committed a wicked deed. He is covered in ill fame and, after death, attains
hell. If he shows honour, is generous, pure and discriminating about good
taste, men seek to destroy any hardships that he confronts, as if those are their
own. If he does not have a preceptor to tell him about dharma, if he does not
ask others, if he only concentrates on happiness and obtaining riches, his
greatness does not last long. If he shows importance to his preceptor in matters connected with dharma, if he himself glances towards the objectives, if
he places dharma at the forefront when dealing with people, his greatness
lasts for a long time.'"'


