Dhritarashtra said, "Shantanu ruled this entire earth. In that way, protected by Bhishma, so did Vichitravirya.
There is no doubt that you know about that protection. I loved my brother Pandu. It is known to you that he
also protected you in that way. O unblemished ones! I have also sought to serve you well. O immensely fortunate
ones! If I have failed to do it properly, or if I have been distracted in this, you should forgive me. After all, without
any thorns, Duryodhana also enjoyed this kingdom. He was foolish and evil in intelligence. However, he also protected you. Because of the crimes of that evil-minded one and his insolence, and because of what I myself did,
there has been this great carnage of kings. Whether I have done something good or whether I have done something
bad, you should not bear it in your heart and you should grant me permission. This king is aged and miserable. His
sons have been slain. He is the son of your earlier kings. Because of these reasons, you should grant me permission. This aged ascetic is miserable. Her sons have been slain. Gandhari is afflicted on account of her sons. Like
me, she is also asking you. You know that our sons have been killed. We are aged and unhappy. O fortunate ones!
We have sought refuge with you. Grant us leave. This Kourava king, Yudhishthira, is Kunti's son. You must look
after him, in prosperity and in adversity. However, he will never face any adversity. His four brothers are greatly
energetic and are his advisers. All of them know about dharma and artha and are like the guardians of the world.
The illustrious Brahma is the lord of all creatures in the universe. The greatly energetic Yudhishthira will protect
you, like him. I have now said what I should certainly have said. I am handing all of you over to Yudhishthira as a
trust. I have handed you over to this brave one as a trust. If there is anything disagreeable that my sons have done,
or anything else by anyone on our side, you should forgive that. Earlier, you have never harboured any anger towards me. Your devotion towards me is exceedingly great. I join my hands in salutation and bow down before you.
Their[Duryodhana's and his brothers'.] intelligence was fickle. They were greedy and acted as they willed. O unblemished ones! With Gandhari, I
seek forgiveness for everything."'

Vaishampayana continued, 'The king spoke in this way to the inhabitants of the city and the countryside. Their
voices were choked with tears. They looked at each other and said nothing.'


Vaishampayana said, 'Thus addressed by the aged Kouravya king, the inhabitants of the city and the countryside
were almost senseless. The king saw that they were standing in silence, their voices choked with tears. King
Dhritarashtra again spoke to them. "O excellent ones! I am aged. My sons have been slain. I am lamenting in many
ways. I am distressed. With my lawful wife, who knows about dharma, I have obtained the permission of my father, Krishna Dvaipayana to go to the forest. The king, who knows about dharma, has also agreed. O unblemished
ones! With my head bowed down, I am again beseeching you, along with Gandhari. You should grant us permission." O king! Hearing the piteous words of the king of the Kurus, all those who had assembled from Kurujangala
wept. They covered their faces with their hands and their upper garments. Tormented by grief, like fathers and
mothers[Like fathers and mothers about to be separated from their sons.], they wept for a while. At the prospect of Dhritarashtra's departure, their hearts were empty. Because of
the misery they bore, it was as if they had lost their senses, at the prospect of being separated from the king of the
Kurus. But they made a great deal of effort and controlled it. They spoke softly to each other. O king! All of them
then got together, chose a brahmana, and charged him with the task of conveying their own words to the king. He
was aged, revered and accomplished about artha. O king! He was learned about many hymns. His name was Samba and he sought to speak.

'The brahmana was intelligent and eloquent. He took the permission of the great king and the entire assembly
and spoke to the king. "O king! These people have entrusted their words to me. O brave one! O lord of men! I am
telling you those words. Listen. O Indra among kings! O lord! Everything that you have said is true. There is no
falsehood in your words. We wish each other well. In this royal lineage, there has been no king who has not protected the subjects or has not been loved by the subjects. You have protected us like a father and like a brother. O
king! Nor has Duryodhana done anything that is improper. O great king! Act in accordance with what the sage
who is Satyavati's son, who knows about dharma, has said. He is our supreme preceptor. Abandoned by you, we
will soon be overcome with sorrow and grief. O king! We will be without your hundreds of qualities. O king! We
were protected by Shantanu, King Chitrangada and by your father, Bhishma, whose valour was deep. With the help
of your intelligence, King Pandu also protected us in that way. In that fashion, King Duryodhana also protected us
well. O king! Your son has not committed the slightest bit of falsehood. We trusted that king as if he was our own
father. You know that perfectly well. O king! Protected by Kunti's intelligent son and sustained by his fortitude, we
have enjoyed happiness for thousands of years[Naturally, this is not to be taken literally.]. Your lineage has come down from ancient rajarshis and has Kuru,
Samvarana, the intelligent Bharata and others[Samvarana was a king from the lunar dynasty, a few generations below Bharata. Kuru was his son.]. The one with dharma in his soul[Yudhishthira.] followed good conduct and
gave away large quantities of donations. O great king! One cannot speak about the slightest bit of deviation in him.
Protected and nurtured by you, we have always lived in great happiness. There has not been the slightest bit of
falsehood in you and your son. You have spoken about Duryodhana's role in the destruction of the kin. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! In that connection, this is what I have to convey to you."'


