'"Bhrigu said, 'Brahma is truth. Austerities are truth. Subjects are created through truth. The world is sustained
through truth. It is through truth that one goes to heaven. Falsehood is the form of darkness. Darkness takes one
downwards. When one is grasped by darkness, one cannot see the light, because one is enveloped in darkness. It is
said that heaven is light and hell is darkness. Those who roam around in this universe can obtain both truth and
falsehood. In this world, different kinds of conduct can lead to truth and falsehood, dharma and adharma, light and
darkness, joy and misery. That which is truth is dharma. What is dharma is light. What is light is joy. That which is
false is adharma. What is adharma is darkness. What is darkness is misery. It is said-those who are discerning see
that this created world is full of physical and mental misery and that joy also ends in misery. They are not confused. The discerning person seeks to free himself from misery. For living beings, joy is temporary, in this world
and in the next[Happiness in heaven lasts only till one's merits are not exhausted.]. When Rahu devours the moon, the moonlight is no longer radiant. In that way, darkness overcomes beings and the joy of beings is destroyed. It is indeed said that there are two types of joy, physical and mental. In this world and in the next, every kind of conduct is prescribed for the sake of happiness. There is nothing
superior to the fruits of the three objectives. These are the specific qualities of dharma, artha and kama. All acts are
undertaken with the specific purpose of obtaining happiness.'

'"Bharadvaja said, 'You have said that happiness is the supreme objective behind these three. But I don't accept
this. The great rishis do not base themselves on these qualities. Nor do they desire these. It has been heard that the
illustrious lord Brahma, the creator of the three worlds, is established as a brahmachari. He does not want the happiness of kama for himself. The illustrious lord, the consort of Uma, overcame kama and pacified Ananga[Kama is the god of love. Shiva burnt him down to ashes. Since he no
longer possessed a body, Kama came to be known as Ananga.].
Therefore, great-souled ones do not want this. This is evidently not a specific quality that the illustrious ones want.
O illustrious one! I cannot accept what you have said, that happiness is the supreme objective behind those three.
In this world, it is said that there are two kinds of fruits-happiness from good deeds and unhappiness from bad
deeds. This is what is commonly said.'

'"Bhrigu said, 'Indeed, darkness results from falsehood. Those who are devoured by darkness follow adharma,
not dharma. Those who are enveloped by anger, avarice, confusion and falsehood do not obtain happiness in this
world, or in the next. It is said that they suffer from many kinds of disease and hardships. They are oppressed by
death, imprisonment and disease. They are tormented by hunger, thirst and other kinds of exhaustion. They suffer
from turbulent winds, burning heat, extreme cold and fear and are tormented by many kinds of physical grief. They
are also overcome by many kinds of mental grief-the destruction of relatives and wealth and separation from
these. There are also old age and death. A person who is not touched by physical and mental grief experiences happiness. None of these blemishes is experienced in heaven. Instead, there are extremely pleasant breezes and extremely fragrant scents in heaven. There is no hunger, thirst or exhaustion. There is no old age and no sin. There is
only happiness in heaven. In this world, there are both happiness and unhappiness. It is said that there is only unhappiness in hell. Therefore, that[Happiness.] is the supreme objective. The earth is the womb of all beings and women represent the earth. Man is like Prajapati. Know that semen is full of energy. This is the way Brahma created the worlds
in ancient times and determined their conduct. Subjects wander around, engaged in their own respective tasks."'


'"Bharadvaja asked, 'What are said to be the fruits of donations? What about dharma and conduct? What about
austerities, extremely severe austerities, studying and oblations?'

'"Bhrigu replied, 'Sins are pacified through oblations. Studying leads to supreme peace. It is said that one obtains objects of pleasure through donations. Everything is obtained through austerities. It is said that donations are
for two purposes, for the sake of the next world and for this one. Out of whatever is given to the virtuous, something accrues in the next world. Whatever one gives to those who are not virtuous leads to objects of pleasure in
this world. One obtains fruits in accordance with the donations one has given.'

'"Bharadvaja asked, 'In the conduct of dharma, who should follow what? What are the signs of dharma? How
many kinds of dharma are there? You should tell me this.'

'"Bhrigu replied, 'Those who are engaged in following their own dharma are learned. They obtain the fruits of
dharma. If one doesn't act in this way, one is deluded.'

'"Bharadvaja said, 'O brahmana rishi! Four kinds of ashramas were ordained in earlier times. You should tell
me about the conduct that is prescribed for each of these.'

'"Bhrigu replied, 'In ancient times, the illustrious one[Brahma.] laid down four ashramas for the sake of protecting dharma and for the welfare of the worlds. Of these, residing in the household of the preceptor is said to be the first
ashrama[Brahmacharya.]. He must cleanse himself properly. He must be humble and follow the prescribed rituals. He must be
modest in his soul. He must worship the two twilights[Morning and evening, sandhya.], the sun, the fire and the gods. He must give up excessive
sleep and laziness. He must worship the preceptor. He must study the Vedas and listen to them. He must purify his
soul. He must perform ablutions thrice[Morning, noon and evening.]. He must follow brahmacharya. He must tend to the fire. He must always
serve his preceptor. He must always subsist on begging and single-mindedly give him[The preceptor.] everything that has been
obtained. He must receive all the instructions the preceptor favourably bestows on him[The student must not ask the preceptor for instruction, but wait for the
instruction.]. He must attentively meditate on whatever has been obtained through the preceptor's favours. On this, there is a shloka. "A brahmana who
obtains the Vedas by serving his preceptor obtains the fruits of heaven and is successful in his desires." Indeed,
garhasthya is said to be the second ashrama. I will tell you in detail about all the conduct and signs for this. It is
recommended that those who have returned[After studying in the preceptor's household.] follow the ashrama of the householder. With a view to attaining
fruits, such a person should marry and observe the conduct of dharma with her. All the three objectives of dharma,
artha and kama can be obtained through this mode. One must look towards these and obtain riches through beneficial deeds. The householder should follow garhasthya and obtain riches from the mountains and the oceans. These
will be obtained if he studies well and serves the cause of the brahmana rishis. He must offer oblations and practise
rituals. Through the favours of the gods, riches will then be obtained. This is said to be the foundation of all the
ashramas. There are those who dwell in the residences of their preceptors. There are others who are mendicants.
There are also those who have resolved to follow the vows and rituals of dharma. All these enjoy sustenance
through shares in alms and sacrifices[Offered by householders.]. Those in vanaprastha must renounce and not store objects. These righteous and virtuous people generally look for medication in being devoted to studying, visiting the tirthas for the
purpose of seeing different countries and in roaming around the earth. Without any malice, one must stand up and
greet them with pleasant words and gifts, depending on one's capacity. One must give them the best of seats and
beds. This must be one's conduct and action. On this, there is a shloka. "If a guest returns from a house with his
wishes unsatisfied, he takes away all the good deeds[Of the householder.] and leaves him with his bad deeds." Therefore, sacrifices
must be performed[This goes back to the duties of the householder.]. The gods must be pleased and the ancestors must be satisfied. One must study the Vedas,
listen to them and tend to the rishis. For the sake of Prajapati, one must have offspring. On this, there are two
shlokas. "One must be affectionate towards all beings, with pleasant words that are agreeable to hear. Censure, the
inflicting of hardships and harshness are reprehensible. Disrespect, pride and insolence are condemned. There must
be non-violence, truthfulness, lack of anger and austerities, recommended for all the ashramas." A person in the
householder stage must always observe the qualities of the three objectives. Wearing garlands, ornaments and garlands, the smearing of the body with unguents, taking pleasure from singing, dancing and musical instruments,
pleasant and cheerful objects that bring delight to hearing and sight, the enjoyment of food and drink that is swallowed, licked, drunk and sucked, satisfaction with many kinds of desirable objects and the gratification of sexual
desire with one's own wife are allowed. Such a person enjoys happiness and obtains the objective of the virtuous.
There may be a householder who follows his own dharma, but observes unchhavritti[There are grains left after a crop has been harvested, or after grain has
been milled. If one subsists on these leftovers, that is known as
unchhavritti.]. He gives up all exertion
that is for the pursuit of desire and happiness. The attainment of heaven is not at all difficult for him.'"'


'"Bhrigu said, 'Those who are in vanaprastha follow the dharma of rishis. They go to sacred tirthas, rivers and
streams and deserted and desolate forests frequented by deer, buffaloes, boars, srimaras[A variety of young deer.] and elephants. They
practise austerities. They abandon ordinary garments and objects of food. They are controlled, limited and wonderful in their diet and subsist on wild herbs, roots, fruits and leaves. They sit and lie down on the bare ground, rocks,
gravel, pebbles, sand and ashes. They cover their limbs with kasha, kusha[Both kasha and kusha are kinds of grass.], hides and bark. They do not cut their
hair, beards or nails. They perform their ablutions at the right time. They offer food, oblations and sacrifices at the
right time. They do not rest until they have collected the required kusha, flowers and other ingredients required for
oblations to the fire. Their skin is cracked everywhere, because of the cold, the heat, the wind and the rain. They
observe different kinds of vows and yoga recommended by dharma. Because of these observances, they are nothing but flesh, blood, skin and bones. They are full of fortitude and spirited in their yoga. They bear their bodies in
this way. If a person observes these rituals and conduct, recommended by the brahmana rishis, his sins are burnt, as
if by a fire. He conquers worlds that are difficult to win. The conduct of a mendicant[Parivrajaka.] is the following. He frees
himself from attachment to the fire, riches, wives and family. He casts aside the bond of affection and wanders
around. Stone, iron and gold are the same to him. He is not interested in pursuing the three objectives. His intelligence frees him from these attachments. Towards enemies, friends and neutrals, his conduct is the same. In words,
deeds and thoughts, he does not injure immobile objects, those born from wombs, those born from eggs, those
born from sweat and beings that are in the nature of herbs and plants. He has no abode. He roams around mountains, islands, the roots of trees and temples. He may go to a city or a village for residence. But he will not dwell in
a city for more than five nights and in a village for more than one night. For the sake of sustaining life[Alms.], he will
only present himself at the houses of brahmanas who are generous in their deeds. He should not ask for alms that
are more than what has been placed in his vessel. He will restrain anger, insolence, delusion, avarice, miserliness,
pride, slander, vanity and violence. In this connection, there is a shloka. "If a sage roams around, without causing
fear to any being, he never faces fear from any being." He performs the agnihotra sacrifice with his own body. The
body is the fire that offers oblations into his mouth. That fire is fed oblations that are obtained through begging.
Because of this fire, he transcends the world. As stated, he observes the ashrama of moksha. His resolution and intelligence are properly turned towards purification. He is as tranquil as a blazing body that has no kindling. Such a
brahmana obtains Brahma's world.'

'"Bharadvaja said, 'There is a world beyond this world. I have heard about it, but have not seen it. I wish to
know about it. You should tell me.'

'"Bhrigu replied, 'There is a sacred spot towards the north, on the slopes of the Himalayas. It has all the qualities. It is said that this is a supreme world-sacred, tranquil and desirable. The men there have abandoned greed
and delusion and do not suffer from any difficulties. They do not perform wicked deeds. They are pure and extremely clean. It is said that this region has such auspicious qualities that it is like heaven. Death comes at the right
time and disease does not touch them. Men are devoted to their own wives and do not desire the wives of others. It
is amazing that they do not kill each other and do not desire each other's possessions. Since dharma is clearly followed, there is no scope for any doubt. The fruits of all acts are directly obtained there. They possess beds, vehicles, seats, palaces and mansions that have all the objects of desire. Some are adorned in golden ornaments. However, there are also some who only eat enough to remain alive. So as to remain alive, some perform great exertions.
In this world, some men are devoted to dharma, while others practise deceit. Some are happy, while others are unhappy. Some are poor, while others are rich. In this world, exertion, fear, delusion and hunger are fierce. There is
greed for riches among men and this confuses even those who are learned. There are many kinds of thoughts in
this world, about deeds of dharma and adharma. A wise person knows the difference between the two and sin does
not touch him. There is fraud, deceit, theft, slander, jealousy, injury towards others, violence, verbal abuse and
falsehood. If someone practises these, then his austerities are diminished. However, if a person knows this and acts
righteously, his austerities are enhanced. This world is the arena for action. In this world, auspicious and inauspicious deeds can be performed. Good deeds lead to good gains. If one performs inauspicious deeds, the opposite occurs. In ancient times, in this world, Prajapati[Brahma performed austerities in Pushkara, in Rajasthan.] and the gods, along with masses of rishis, performed sacrifices
and austerities, thus attaining Brahma's world. The northern part of the earth is the most sacred and auspicious.
People who perform auspicious deeds in this world are born there. There are others who perform wicked deeds and
are born as inferior species. There are others who have short lifespans and are destroyed on the surface of the
earth. They are addicted to devouring each other and are full of avarice and confusion. They circle around here and
do not go to the northern direction. If a person serves his preceptor, is controlled and follows brahmacharya, the
learned know that he follows the path indicated for all the worlds. I have briefly told you about the dharma that has
been ordained by Brahma. A person who knows about dharma and adharma in this world is intelligent.'"

'Bhishma said, "O king! Thus did Bhrigu speak to the powerful Bharadvaja. The one with supreme dharma in
his soul[Bharadvaja.] was astounded and worshipped Bhrigu back. O king! Thus, everything about the creation of the universe has been recounted to you. O immensely wise one! What do you wish to hear again?"'


