Vaishampayana said, 'The intelligent and enraged Vishvamitra cursed her. In that supreme tirtha, the auspicious
one's flows were made out of blood. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Rakshasas went there. In
delight, all of them drank that blood. They were extremely satisfied, delighted and devoid of anxiety. They danced
and laughed, as if they had won heaven for themselves. O lord of the earth! After some time had passed, rishis,
rich in austerities, went on a visit of tirthas to the Sarasvati. Those bulls among sages went and bathed in all the
tirthas. Those accomplished ones were supremely delighted and wished to obtain greater austerities. O king! They
went to the other tirthas. Those immensely fortunate ones went to the terrible tirtha[Vasishthapavaha, where the river flowed in the form of blood.]. O supreme among kings!
They saw that the waters of the Sarasvati were covered in blood and that these were being drunk by a large number
of rakshasas. O king! On seeing this, the sages, rigid in their vows, made supreme efforts to save Sarasvati from
the rakshasas. Those immensely fortunate ones, great in their vows, assembled and jointly summoned the river
with these best of words. "O fortunate one! Tell us the reason why this lake of yours has been reduced to this
plight[Saras means lake or pool and Sarasvati was so named because the river
had many lakes or pools.]. We have heard the reason behind your state of hardship. We will try to rescue you." Having been addressed, she looked at them. Trembling and miserable, she told them what had transpired. Those stores of austerities said, "O unblemished one! We have heard about the reason. We know why you have been cursed. All of us,
rich in austerities, will make the best of efforts." Having thus spoken to the best of rivers, they consulted among
themselves. "All of us will free Sarasvati from the curse." O king! They gave their word that Sarasvati would be
returned to her natural state and indeed, the waters became clean, as they had been earlier. Freed, the best of rivers
became as resplendent as she had been earlier.

'O king! Seeing what the sages had done to the waters of the Sarasvati, the rakshasas were overcome by hunger.
They joined their hands in salutation and repeatedly requested all the sages for compassion. "All of us are hungry.
We have been dislodged from our eternal dharma[Of feeding on blood.]. It is not of our own desire that we are the performers of
wicked deeds. It is because you do not show us favours that we perform these wicked deeds. Those among us who
are especially bad become brahma-rakshasas[A wicked brahmana becomes a brahma-rakshasa. In this, a varna-based
classification is being made of rakshasas.]. In a similar way, those among vaishyas, shudras and kshatriyas,
who hate brahmanas, also become rakshasas. Those beings who disrespect preceptors, officiating priests, elders
and the aged, also become rakshasas. Wickedness increases through the sexual transgressions of women[The text uses the word yonidosha. More literally, this is sexual defilement, or a defect in the female genital organ.]. O
supreme among brahmanas! You should therefore act so as to show us compassion. You are capable of saving all
the worlds." On hearing these words, the sages praised the great river. They controlled their minds. To save the
rakshasas, they said, "Food in which there are insects and worms, food that has been mixed with leftovers, food
that is mixed with hair, food that is mixed with grain that has not been broken and food that has been touched by
dogs-these will constitute the share of rakshasas. Knowing this, the learned will always avoid such kinds of food.
Those who partake of such food will eat food that is meant for rakshasas." Thus did those stores of austerities purify that tirtha. They instructed the river to save those rakshasas. O bull among men! Knowing the views of the maharshis, that supreme of rivers thought of a new form in her body, known as Aruna. Bathing there, the rakshasas
gave up their bodies and went to heaven. O great king! He who bathes in Aruna is saved from the crime of killing
a brahmana. Knowing the purport of all this, Shatakratu, the king of the gods, bathed in that best of tirthas and was
freed from a great sin.'

Janamejaya asked, 'How did the illustrious Shakra commit the offence of killing a brahmana? How was he freed
from his sin by bathing in that tirtha?'

Vaishampayana replied, 'O lord of men! Listen to that account, exactly as it happened. In ancient times, Vasava
broke his treaty of peace with Namuchi. Because of his fear of Vasava, Namuchi hid inside one of the sun's rays.
Indra entered into a pledge of friendship with him and told him, "O best of asuras! O friend! I will not kill you
with anything that is wet, or with anything that is dry, nor during the day or during the night. I swear this to you
truthfully." Having thus entered into an agreement, the lord created a mist. O king! Vasava severed his head with
the foam of water[Foam is neither wet, nor dry. Because of the mist, it was neither day,
nor night.]. Namuchi's severed head pursued Shakra from the rear and said, "O friend! You have committed a crime." He was repeatedly spoken to by the head. In torment, he went to the grandfather and told him
what had happened. The preceptor of the worlds said, "O Indra of the gods! You have committed the crime of
killing a brahmana[Because Namuchi was descended from the sage Kashyapa.]. Perform a sacrifice in accordance with the decreed rites and bathe in Aruna." O Janamejaya! Having been thus addressed, the slayer of Bala performed a sacrifice in the grove of Sarasvati and bathed in
Aruna. He was freed from the crime of killing a brahmana. Cheerfully, the lord of the thirty gods returned to heaven. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O supreme among kings! Namuchi's head was submerged in those waters
and he[Namuchi.] obtained many eternal worlds that grant every object of desire.

'The great-souled Bala bathed there and gave away many different kinds of gifts. Devoted to dharma and the
performer of supreme and noble deeds, he then went to the great tirtha of Soma. O Indra among kings! In earlier
times, in accordance with the prescribed rites, Soma had himself performed a royal sacrifice there. In that best of
sacrifices, the intelligent and great-souled Atri was chief among the officiating priests. When it was over, there was
a great clash between the danavas, daityas and rakshasas on one side and the gods on the other. That extremely terrible battle is known as Taraka and in this, Skanda killed Taraka. Mahasena[Skanda or Kartikeya's name. Kumara is another of his names.], the destroyer of the daityas, became the commander of the gods there. Kartikeya himself lives at that spot. Kumara always dwells there and there
is a king of plaksha trees there.'


Janamejaya asked, 'O supreme among brahmanas! You have told me about the powers of Sarasvati. O brahmana!
You should tell me about Kumara's consecration. O supreme among eloquent ones! Tell me about the time and
the place where it happened. O illustrious one! How was the lord consecrated according to the proper rites? How
did Skanda create great carnage among the daityas? Tell me everything about this. I have great curiosity.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'Your curiosity is characteristic of someone belonging to the Kuru lineage. O Janamejaya! My words will generate delight in you. O lord of men! I will tell you about that wonderful account, about the
great-souled Kumara's consecration and powers. Listen. In earlier times, Maheshvara's seed fell down into fire[Skanna means something that has trickled down or fallen. The word Skanda is derived from that. The
story is left implicit. Shiva was interrupted by the god of love. The seed fell down and was conveyed by
Agni.].
The illustrious one who devours everything[Meaning Agni.] was incapable of destroying that eternal seed. Instead, because he
was bearing that energetic seed, the one who bears oblations became energetic and radiant. On Lord Brahma's instructions, he went to the Ganga and flung that divine seed, as energetic as the sun, there. However, Ganga was
also not capable of bearing that seed and flung it on the beautiful slopes of the Himalayas, worshipped by the immortals. Agni's son[Because Agni had borne the seed.] began to grow there, pervading the worlds. The Krittikas saw the blazing womb there[Krittika (Pleiades) is the third of the twenty-seven nakshatras. Krittika is actually a star cluster, not a
single star. There are believed to be six Krittikas in that cluster.].
The lord, the great-souled son of the fire god, was lying down in a clump of reeds. Desiring a son, all of them exclaimed, "This is mine." Discerning the sentiments of the mothers, the illustrious lord assumed six mouths and
drank milk from all their breasts. Seeing the powers of the child, the divine goddesses, the Krittikas, celestial in
their forms, were filled with great wonder. O supreme among the Kuru lineage! Since Ganga had cast the illustrious one on the peak of the mountain, that mountain is beautiful and golden everywhere. The child began to grow
and made the earth beautiful. It is because of this that all the mountains began to yield gold. The immensely valorous Kumara is known by the name of Kartikeya[After the Krittikas.]. Before this, with his great powers of yoga, he had been
known by the name of Gangeya. The god possessed prowess and austerities. O Indra among kings! He began to
grow and was as handsome as the moon. Surrounded by prosperity, he lay down on that divine and golden clump
of reeds. As he lay down there, he was praised by the gandharvas and the sages. Thousands of celestial maidens
danced around him. They were beautiful and skilled in dancing. They played on divine musical instruments and
praised him. The celestial river Ganga, supreme among rivers, also worshipped him. The earth, assuming the most
beautiful of forms, bore him. Brihaspati performed the rites, including those connected with birth. The four Vedas
presented themselves before him, hands joined in salutation. The four branches of dhanurveda and collections of
weapons, not just arrows, presented themselves before him.

'The immensely valorous one saw that Uma's consort, the lord of the gods, was seated, surrounded by a large
number of bhutas[They had come to see Skanda.]. The daughter of the mountains was with him[Uma's consort is Shiva. The daughter of the mountains is Uma or Parvati. The bhutas are demons, Shiva's followers.]. Those large numbers of bhutas were without bodies and were extremely wonderful to behold. They were hideous, with distorted bodies. Their ornaments
and standards were ugly. Their faces were like tigers, lions and bears. Some of them had faces like cats and
makaras. There were those with faces like cats[Cats have already been mentioned. The text uses the word vrishadamsha. Vrisha means rat or mouse.
Therefore, vrishadamsha is something that bites rats/mice, hence it means cat. However, the word can be
used for any animal that has strong teeth.]. There were others with faces like elephants and camels. Some
had faces like owls. Others looked like vultures and jackals. Others had faces like curlews, pigeons and herons.
Others had bodies like those of dogs, porcupines, lizards and mules. They assumed all these kinds of forms. Some
were like mountains, others were like oceans. Some held chakras, maces and other weapons. Some looked like
large masses of collyrium. Others possessed the complexion of white mountains. O lord of the earth! The seven
matrikas and their followers were also there[The matrikas are mother goddesses, originally identified with the Krittikas. They have both malign and
benign aspects, vis-à-vis infants. Usually, the matrikas are said to be seven-Brahmani, Vaishnavi, Maheshvari, Indrani, Koumari, Varahi and Chamundi (or Narasimhi).]. So were the Sadhyas, the Vishvadevas, the Maruts, the Vasus and
the ancestors. The Rudras, the Adityas, the Siddhas, the serpents, the danavas, the birds, the illustrious and self-
creating Brahma and his sons[The sages who were created through Brahma's mental powers.], Vishnu and Shakra went there, desiring to see the supreme and undecaying Kumara. There were the best of gods and gandharvas, with Narada at their head. There were the devarshis and the
Siddhas, with Brihaspati at their head. There were the lords of creation, supreme among the gods. Aryama[The sun god.] and
all the worlds went there. Though he was yet a child, the illustrious one possessed great powers of yoga. He advanced towards the lord of the gods[Shiva.], who wielded the trident and pinaka in his hands. On seeing him advance,
Shiva, the daughter of the mountain, Ganga and Agni simultaneously wondered, "Whom will the child approach
and show honours to first? He will come to me[All four had some claim to parentage. There are varying stories about Kartikeya's birth. In some of
these, Parvati is the mother.]." All of them thought in this way. Discerning their thoughts, he
simultaneously divided himself into four bodies. The illustrious lord assumed these four bodies in an instant-
Skanda, Shakha, Vishakha and Naigamesha as the last. Thus did the illustrious lord divide himself into four parts.
Skanda, extraordinary in form, went to where Rudra was. Vishakha went to the goddess who was the daughter of
the mountain. Shakha, the illustrious one's form as the wind, went to Vibhavasu[Agni.]. Naigamesha, Kumara's form
that was as radiant as the fire, went to Ganga. All the four blazing bodies were similar in appearance. They advanced forward and it was wonderful. On beholding this great and wonderful sight, which made the body hair
stand up, great sounds of lamentation arose among the gods, the danavas and the rakshasas. Rudra, the
goddess[Parvati.], Agni and Ganga-all of them bowed down before the grandfather, the lord of the worlds. O bull
among kings! O king! Having bowed down in different ways and to ensure Kartikeya's welfare, they said, "O illustrious one! O lord of the gods! For the sake of our pleasure, grant this child some kind of sovereignty that is appropriate for him." The illustrious and wise one, grandfather of all the worlds, thought about this. What could be
given to him? All the riches had already been given away to the gods, the gandharvas, the rakshasas, the bhutas,
the yakshas, the birds, the serpents and great-souled ones without any bodies. The immensely intelligent one
thought about what prosperity might be bestowed on him. With the welfare of the gods in mind, he thought for an
instant. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He then made him the general of all the beings. The grandfather of
all the beings instructed all the gods, and the lords among them, to serve him. Together with Kumara, all the gods,
led by Brahma, went to the king of the mountains, so as to consecrate him there. That sacred spot was on the
slopes of the Himalayas, where the goddess Sarasvati, best among rivers, flowed. It is famous in the three worlds
by the name of Samantapanchaka. That sacred bank of the Sarasvati possesses all the qualities. Cheerful in their
minds, all the gods and the gandharvas seated themselves there.'


Vaishampayana said, 'In accordance with the sacred texts, they collected everything that was required for a consecration. In accordance with the decreed rites, Brihaspati kindled a fire and offered oblations. The Himalayas
provided a celestial, golden and supreme seat, decorated with the best of jewels and divine gems. All the auspicious objects were brought by the masses of gods, objects required for the consecration. The required mantras were
chanted. The immensely valorous Indra, Vishnu, the sun god, the moon god, Dhata, Vidhata, the wind god, the fire
god, Pusha, Bhaga, Aryama, Amsha, Vivasvat[The sun god.], the immensely wise Rudra, Mitra, Varuna, the Rudras, the Va-
sus and the Adityas surrounded the handsome lord. With the ancestors, there were the Vishvadevas, the Maruts and
the Sadhyas. There were gandharvas, apsaras, yakshas, rakshasas, serpents and large numbers of devarshis and
brahmarshis. There were Vaikhanasas[Hermits.], Valakhilyas, those that lived on air and those that lived on the rays of
the sun. There were great-souled sages descended from Bhrigu and Angiras. There were all the Vidyadharas[Semi-divine species.],
surrounded by Siddhas with sacred powers of yoga. O lord of the earth! The grandfather was there and Pulastya,
the immensely ascetic Pulaha, Angiras, Kashyapa, Atri, Marichi, Bhrigu, Kratu, Hara, Prachetas, Manu, Daksha,
the seasons, the planets and the stellar bodies. O lord of men! In personified form, the rivers were there and the
eternal Vedas, the oceans, the lakes, the many kinds of tirthas, the earth, the firmament, the directions and all the
trees. Aditi, the mother of the gods, Hri, Shri, Svaha, Sarasvati, Uma, Shachi, Sinivali, Anumati, Kuhu, Raka,
Dhishana and all the wives of the residents of heaven were there[Hri is modesty personified. Shri can be interpreted as prosperity personified, or Lakshmi. Sinivali is the first day of the new moon, when the crescent is barely visible.
Anumati is the fifteenth day of the moon. Kuhu is the day of the new moon. Raka is the
day of the full moon. Dhishana is intellect personified.]. The Himalayas, the Vindhyas, Meru and
many other mountains were there. O king! Airavata and his followers were there and Kala, Kashtha[Kala and Kashtha are small measures of time.], the fortnights, the months, the seasons, night and day. Ucchaihshrava, best among horses, was there and Vamana, king
among elephants. They were with Aruna, Garuda, the trees and the herbs. The illustrious god Dharma came there,
with Destiny, Yama, Death and Yama's followers. There were many others from the large numbers of gods that I
have not named. They arrived there, for the purpose of Kumara's consecration. O king! All the residents of heaven
came there. They carried many auspicious vessels for the consecration. O king! There were golden pots filled with
divine objects. They came to the divine and sacred waters of the Sarasvati. The residents of heaven were delighted
that the great-souled Kumara, a terror to the asuras, would be consecrated as the general. O great king! In that ancient age, the illustrious Brahma, the grandfather of the worlds, consecrated him by pouring Varuna, the lord of the
waters, over him. So did the immensely ascetic Kashyapa and the others who have been named.

'The lord Brahma was delighted and gave him great companions who were powerful and as swift as the wind.
They were successful and possessed valour that could be increased at will. They were Nandisena, Lohitaksha and
Ghantakarna. The fourth companion was known by the name of Kumudamali. Sthanu gave him a great companion
by the name of Kratu. He was immensely forceful and could summon a hundred different kinds of maya at will.
He possessed valour and strength that could be increased at will. O Indra among kings! He was the destroyer of the
enemies of the gods and he gave him to Skanda. In the battle between the gods and the asuras, he[Kratu.] angrily killed
fourteen million terrible daityas with his bare hands alone. The god also gave him soldiers that were full of
demons[Nairritas.]. They destroyed and defeated the enemies of the gods and possessed all kinds of earthy forms. With
Vasava, all the gods uttered roars of victory. So did the gandharvas, the yakshas, the rakshasas, the sages and the
ancestors. Yama gave him two companions who were like Death and Destiny. They were Unmatha and Pramatha.
They were immensely valorous and greatly radiant. Surya cheerfully gave the powerful Kartikeya two companions
who were Surya's followers. They were Subhraja and Bhaskara. Soma gave him companions named Mani and
Sumani. They were like peaks of Kailasa. They wore white garlands and were smeared with white unguents.
Hutashana[Agni.] gave him two brave companions named Jvalajihva and Jyoti. They were ones who crushed enemy
soldiers. Amsha gave the intelligent Skanda five companions-Parigha, Vata, the immensely strong Bhima, Dahati
and Dahana. They were fearsome and full of valour. Vasava, the destroyer of enemy heroes, gave Agni's son two
companions named Utkrosha and Pankaja. They were armed with the vajra and a staff. In battle, they had killed
many enemies of the great Indra. The immensely famous Vishnu gave Skanda three companions named Chakra,
Vikrama and Samkrama. They were immensely strong. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The Ashvins cheerfully
gave Skanda companions named Vardhana and Nandana. They were skilled in all the arts. The immensely illustrious Dhata gave the great-souled one companions named Kundana, Kusuma, Kumuda, Dambara and Adambara.
Tvastha gave Skanda supreme companions named Vakra and Anuvakra. They were strong, proud of their valour
and had mouths like those of sheep. They had great powers of maya. The lord Mitra gave the great-souled Kumara
two great-souled companions, Suvrata and Satyasandha. They possessed austerities and learning. Vidhata gave
Kartikeya two handsome companions who were famous in the three worlds. They were Suprabha and the great-
souled Shubhakarma. They were the granters of boons and the performers of auspicious deeds. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Pusha gave Kartikeya two companions, Palitaka and Kalika. They possessed great powers of
maya. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! Vayu gave Kartikeya Bala and Atibala. They were immensely powerful and possessed large mouths. Varuna, devoted to the truth, gave Kartikeya Ghasa and Atighasa. They had
faces like whales and were immensely strong. O king! The Himalayas gave Hutashana's son the great-souled Suvarchasa and Ativarchasa. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Meru gave Agni's son two companions-the
great-souled Kanchana and Meghamali. Meru also gave Agni's great-souled son two others-Sthira and Atisthira.
They were immensely strong and powerful. The Vindhyas gave Agni's son two companions named Ucchrita and
Atishringa. They fought with large boulders. The ocean gave Agni's son two great companions, Samgraha and Vi-
graha. They were the wielders of clubs. The beautiful Parvati gave Agni's son Unmada, Pushpadanta and
Shankukarna. O tiger among men! Vasuki, the lord of serpents, gave the son of the fire two serpents named Jaya
and Mahajaya.

'In that way, the Sadhyas, the Rudras, the Vasus, the ancestors, the oceans, the rivers and the immensely strong
mountains gave him the leaders of soldiers, armed with spears and battleaxes. They wielded divine weapons and
were attired in many kinds of garments. Listen to the names of the other soldiers that Skanda obtained. They were
armed with many kinds of weapons and attired in colourful ornaments and armour. O king! O Indra among kings!
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They were[Some names are repeated more than once.] Shankukarna, Nikumbha, Padma, Kumuda, Ananta,
Dvadashabhuja, Krishna, Upakrishna, Dronashrava, Kapskandha, Kanchanaksha, Jalamdhama, Akshasamtarjana,
Kunadika, Tamobhrakrit, Ekaksha, Dvadashaksha, the lord Ekajata, Sahasrabahu, Vikata, Vyaghraksha, Kshitikampana, Punyanama, Sunama, Suvaktra, Priyadarshana, Parishruta, Kokanada, Priyamalyanulepana, Ajodira, Gajashira, Skandhaksha, Shatalochana, Jvalajihva, Karala, Sitakesha, Jati, Hari, Chaturdamshtra, Ashtajihva,
Meghanada, Prithushrava, Vidyutaksha, Dhanurvaktra, Jathara, Marutashana, Udaraksha, Jhashaksha, Vajranama,
Vasuprabha, Samudravega, Shailakampi, Putramesha, Pravaha, Nanda, Upanandaka, Dhumra, Shveta, Kalinga,
Siddhartha, Varada, Priyaka, Nanda, the powerful Gonanda, Ananda, Pramoda, Svastika, Dhruvaka, Kshemavapa,
Sujata, Siddha, Govraja, Kanakapida, the lord of great companions, Gayana, Hasana, Bana, the valiant Khadga,
Vaitali, Atitali, Katika, Vatika, Hamsaja, Pankadigdhanga, Samudronmada, Ranotkata, Prahasa, Shvetashirsha,
Nandaka, Kalakantha, Prabhasa, Kumbhabhandaka, Kalakaksha, Sita, Bhutalonmatha, Yajnavaha, Pravaha, Devayaji, Somapa, Sajala, Mahateja, Krathakratha, Tuhana, Tuhana[Tuhana and Tuhaana.], the valiant Chitradeva, Madhura, Suprasada,
the immensely strong Kiriti, Vasana, Madhuvarna, Kalashodara, Ghamanta, Manmathakara, the valiant Suchivakrta, Shvetavaktra, Suvaktra, Charuvaktra, Pandura, Dandabahu, Subahu, Raja, Kokila, Achala, Kanakaksha, the lord
Balanamayika, Samcharaka, Kokanada, Gridhravaktra, Jambuka, Lohashvavaktra, Jathara, Kumbhavaktra, Kunda-
ka, Madgugriva, Krishnouja, Hamsavaktra, Chandrabha, Panikurma, Shambuka, Shakavaktra and Kundaka. There
were other great-souled ones who possessed powers of yoga and were always devoted to brahmanas. O Janamejaya! These great companions were given to him by the great-souled grandfather and they were children, youths
and the aged. Thousands of companions presented themselves before Kumara.

'O Janamejaya! They had many different kinds of faces. Listen to this. Some had faces like tortoises and cocks,
others mouths like hares and owls. Some had faces like asses and camels, others faces like boars. Some had
mouths like men and sheep, others faces like jackals. Some had terrible faces like makaras, others mouths like alligators[Shishumara, alternatively, dolphins or porpoises.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Some had faces like cats and rabbits, others had long faces. Some
had faces like mongooses and owls, others faces like dogs. Some had mouths like rats, others faces like peacocks.
Others had faces like fish and sheep, while still others had faces like goats and buffaloes. Some had faces like bears
and tigers, others faces like leopards and tigers. Some had terrible faces like elephants, others mouths like crocodiles. Some had faces like Garuda, others mouths like rhinoceros, wolves and crows. Others had mouths like cows
and mules, still others mouths like cats[Vrishadamsha again.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Some had large stomachs and
feet, with eyes like stars. Others had mouths like pigeons, and still others mouths like bulls. There were those with
faces like cuckoos and others with faces like hawks and partridges. Some had mouths like partridges[Tittira and krikala are mentioned. Both are types of partridges.], others
were dressed in white garments. Some had faces like serpents, others mouths like porcupines. Some had terrible
mouths, others one hundred faces. Some were attired in snakeskin. Others wore snakes as garments. There were
large stomachs and thin bodies, as there were thin stomachs and large bodies. There were short necks and large
ears, dressed in many kinds of snakeskin. Some wore garments made out of elephant skin, others were attired in
black deerskin. O great king! Some had mouths on their shoulders, others had mouths on their stomachs. Some had
mouths on their backs. Some had mouths on their cheeks. Some had mouths on their thighs. Many had faces on
their flanks and others had mouths all over the body. There were other lords of ganas[Followers of Shiva.] who looked like worms
and insects. There were those with mouths like carnivorous beasts. They had many arms and many heads. Some
had arms like trees. Others had heads around their waists. Some had faces like the bodies of snakes, others dwelt
on many creepers. Some covered their bodies with deerskin, others attired themselves in bark. There were many
different kinds of garments, including those made of hides. There were headdresses and crowns. They had necks
like conch shells and were extremely radiant. Some were diademed. Some had five tufts of hair on their heads.
Some had stiff hair. There were those with three, two or seven tufts of hair on their heads. Some had tufts, others
wore crowns. Some were shaved, others had matted hair. Some were adorned in colourful garments. Some others
had hair on their faces. Some donned divine garlands and garments and always loved the prospect of fighting.
Some were dark, with no flesh on their faces. Some had long backs, without stomachs. Some had long backs, others had short backs. Some had elongated stomachs. Some were long-armed, others were short-armed. Some were
short in stature and were dwarfs. Some were hunchbacked. There were those with long thighs and ears and heads
like those of elephants. There were noses like elephants and noses like tortoises. Others had noses like wolves.
Some had long lips and long tongues. Others had terrible visages and their faces looked downwards. There were
long teeth and short teeth. Some only had four teeth. O king! There were thousands who were as terrible as the
kings of elephants. Some had proportionate bodies that blazed and were ornamented. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! There were those with tawny eyes, with conical ears and bent noses. There were broad teeth, large teeth,
stout lips and tawny hair. There were many kinds of feet, lips and teeth. There were many kinds of hands and
heads. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were many kinds of armour and many kinds of speech. Those
lords were skilled in the languages of different countries and spoke to each other. Those great companions were
seen to cheerfully descend there. They were long in the neck, long in the nails and long in the feet, heads and arms.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They were tawny-eyed, blue in the throat and long in the ear. Some had
stomachs like wolves. Others were like masses of collyrium. Others had white limbs, red necks and tawny eyes. O
king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Many were dappled in colourful hues. There were ornaments that were
like whisks, white, red and silver. These were of many different colours. Some were golden, or had the complexion
of peacocks.

'Let me recount the weapons that were grasped and wielded by the companions who came last. Listen. Some
wielded nooses in their hands. Others had faces like asses, with gaping mouths. Some had large eyes, blue throats
and arms like clubs. They had shataghnis and chakras in their hands. Others had clubs in their hands. There were
bludgeons and catapults in their hands. Some had spears in their hands. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
While some had spears and swords in their hands, others held staffs in their hands. Those great-souled ones possessed many kinds of terrible weapons. They were swift in speed. They were immensely strong and immensely
forceful. Such were the great companions who were seen at Kumara's consecration. They were cheerful and loved
to fight. Nets of bells were fastened to their bodies and they were immensely energetic. O king! There were many
other great companions like these. They presented themselves before the great-souled and illustrious Kartikeya.
They were from heaven, the firmament and earth and some were like the wind. Instructed by the gods, those brave
ones became the companions of Skanda. There were many others like them, in thousands, millions and tens of millions. They surrounded the great-souled one at his consecration.'


