Chyavana said, 'O bull among men! I should certainly tell you this. O lord of men! That is the reason I came
here, wishing to exterminate your lineage. O lord of men! Kshatriyas always have the assistance of the
Bhrigus in the performance of sacrifices. However, because of reasons determined by destiny, there will be conflict
between them. O lord of men! The kshatriyas will slay all the Bhrigus. Struck by the rod of destiny, they will not
even spare those who are in the wombs. Then, in our lineage, a person will be born to extend the line. His name
will be Ourva and he will be greatly energetic. His resplendence will be like that of the blazing fire. The flames of
his anger will be such that they will be capable of destroying the three worlds. He will be capable of reducing the
earth, with its mountains and oceans, to ashes. He will control the fire of his anger for some time. That supreme of
sages will hurl it into the ocean, in the form of the subterranean fire. However, the descendant of the Bhrigu lineage  will  have  an  immensely  fortunate  son  named  Richika.  O  unblemished  one!  The  entire  dhanurveda  will
present itself before him. Because of reasons determined by destiny, so as to destroy the kshatriyas, he will receive
it and pass it on to his son, Jamadagni, who will be immensely fortunate and will clease his soul through austerities. But that tiger among the Bhrigu lineage will still hold that knowledge. O supreme among kings! The one with
dharma in his soul will unite with a maiden from your lineage, for spreading that knowledge on. The great ascetic
will obtain your granddaughter and Gadhi's daughter. He will give birth to Rama, who will be a brahmana, but will
follow the dharma of kshatriyas. In your lineage will be born Visvamitra, as Gadhi's son. He will be extremely devoted to dharma and will be like Brihaspati in his energy. He will be a kshatriya, but will follow the dharma of
brahmanas. O immensely radiant one! Gadhi will have this son, who will be devoted to great austerities. There will
be a mixing up because of women[The charus were mixed up, a story that has already been told.
]. This has been determined by the grandfather. It will happen and there can be
no reversal. In the third generation from you, there will be a brahmana. The Bhrigus, cleansed in their souls, will
be your matrimonial allies.'"

'Bhishma continued, "Hearing the words of the sage, the great-souled Chyavana, Kushika was delighted. The
king, with dharma in his soul, replied in the following words. 'Let it be this way.' O supreme among the Bharata
lineage! The greatly energetic Chyavana again spoke to the king. He urged the king to ask for a boon, who said, 'O
great king! I will accept it and let my desire truly come true through you. Let my lineage have the status of brahmanas and let their minds always be fixed on dharma.' The sage, Chyavana, replied that it would indeed be this
way. Having taken the king's permission, he then departed for a visit to the tirthas. O king! I have told you everything, exactly as it occurred. This is the reason for the matrimonial alliance between the Bhrigus and the Kushikas.
O king! Everything happened exactly as the sage had said. The births of Rama and the sage, Vishvamitra, occurred
in that way."'

Volume 9 ends here. Section 87 will be concluded in Volume 10.
The final volume ends the instructions of the Anushasana Parva. The horse sacrifice is held, and Dhritarashtra,
Gandhari, Kunti, Vidura and Sanjaya leave for the forest. Krishna and Balarama die as the Yadavas fight among
themselves. The Pandavas leave on the great journey with the famous companion-Dharma disguised as a dog.
Refusing to abandon the dog, Yudhishthira goes to heaven in his physical body and sees all the Kurus and the Pandavas are already there.

Yudhishthira said, "On listening to your words now, I am confused and am thinking repeatedly. The earth has
been deprived of a large number of kings who were prosperous. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I have
conquered the earth and have obtained hundreds of kingdoms. O grandfather! I am tormented because I have killed
crores of men. What will now happen to the best of women? They are deprived of their husbands, sons, maternal
uncles and brothers. We have slain our seniors, our kin and our well-wishers. There is no doubt that we will descend into hell, with our heads facing downwards. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I wish to yoke my body to
fierce austerities. O lord of the earth! I desire that you should instruct me about the truth."'

Vaishampayana replied, 'Hearing what Yudhishthira had said, the great-minded Bhishma used his accomplished
intelligence to examine them. He then spoke to Yudhishthira. "This is wonderful and a mystery. Listen. I will tell
you the truth. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! This is about the ends that are obtained after death. Heaven is
obtained through austerities. Fame is obtained through austerities. O lord! A long life and objects of pleasure are
obtained through austerities. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Jnana, vijnana[Jnana is knowledge one learns from one's teachers or from the sacred texts. Vijnana is a special type of jnana and
is knowledge one picks up through introspection, meditation and self-realization.], recovery from disease, beauty,
wealth and good fortune are obtained through austerities. Riches are obtained through austerities. Refraining from
speech provides knowledge. Through donations, one obtains objects of enjoyment. One obtains life through brahmacharya. The fruits of non-violence are beauty. Through an act of initiation, one obtains birth in a good family.
Those who subsist on fruits and roots obtain kingdoms. Those who subsist on leaves obtain heaven. A person who
only drinks water goes to heaven. By bathing, one obtains even greater riches. Through serving the preceptor, one
obtains knowledge. Through always performing funeral ceremonies, one obtains offspring. Through initiating oneself into a vow that one will only eat vegetables, one obtains a large number of cows. One is said to obtain heaven
by subsisting on grass. By bathing thrice a day, one obtains women. If one only subsists on air, one obtains the
fruits of a sacrifice. A brahmana who bathes every day and performs meditation in the morning and the evening,
becomes like Daksha. One obtains kingdoms by observing austerities in a desert. A person who fasts to death obtains the vault of heaven. If one lies down on the bare ground, one obtains beds and houses. If one is attired in bark
and tattered rags, one obtains garments and ornaments. Those who are rich in austerities and engaged in yoga obtain beds, seats and vehicles. It has been said that a person who enters the fire goes to Brahma's world. By refraining from savouring good tastes, one obtains good fortune. By refraining from flesh, one obtains offspring who
have long lives. If a person dwells in udvasa[A vow of udvasa can mean a life of exile, or it can mean a vow where a person does not wear any clothes.], he becomes a lord of men. O best among men! A person who speaks
the truth finds delight with the gods. Fame results from donations. Non-violence results in recovery from disease.
By serving brahmanas, one obtains a kingdom and the status of becoming a brahmana. By donating things to drink,
one obtains eternal fame. By donating food, one satisfies all the desires that one possesses. A person who assures
all beings is freed from all kinds of sorrow. Through serving the gods, one obtains kingdoms and celestial beauty.
By offering the light of lamps, a man obtains vision. If one gives beautiful objects, one obtains memory and intelligence. By refraining from fragrances and garlands, one obtains great fame. Those who sport long hair and beards
obtain offspring. O king! If a person is initiated and consecrated in a vow that involves fasting for twelve years, he
obtains the special region meant for heroes. O bull among men! If one bestows one's daughter according to the
brahma form of marriage[There were eight forms of marriage. In the brahma form, the father chooses an appropriate groom and bestows the
ornamented daughter on him.], one obtains female servants, male servants, ornaments, fields and houses. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! If a person performs sacrifices and fasts, he goes to heaven. A man who renders offerings
of flowers obtains the eternal spot. A man who gives away one thousand cows whose horns have been decorated
with gold, obtains the auspicious world of the gods in heaven. This was stated in an assembly of the sages and the
gods. A man may give away a kapila[Brown.] cow and her calf, with gold entrusting the tips of her horns and with a brass
vessel to milk her. Because of the qualities of the cow, he will obtain all the objects that he desires. A person who
donates a cow in this way obtains fruits as long as she possesses hair on her body. In the world hereafter, he saves
all the sons and grandsons of his lineage, for seven generations[Seven generations above and seven generations below.]. With dakshina, a person may give away a cow
with beautiful horns that are decorated with gold, along with a brass vessel to milk her, an expensive upper garment and sesamum seed to a brahmana. Such a person obtains the world of the Vasus with ease. In the world hereafter, a man may be tied down by his own deeds in this world and descend into the terrible darkness of hell. The
donation of a cow saves him, like a boat with the wind saves in the great ocean. A person who bestows his daughter according to the brahma form of marriage, donates land to a brahmana, or donates food in the proper way, obtains Purandara's world. A person who donates a house with all the qualities to a brahmana who is engaged in
studying and possesses the qualities and character, obtains the world of Uttara Kuru. By donating bulls that can
bear the burden, a man obtains the world of the Vasus. It is said that heaven can be obtained through donations of
gold, though the gift of pure gold is superior to this. By donating an umbrella one obtains an excellent house. By
giving shoes one obtains a vehicle. By giving clothes one obtains the fruits of excellent beauty. By giving fragrances a man becomes famous among the gods. If a person touches a tree full of flowers or a tree full of fruits and
gives it to a brahmana, he obtains an excellent house that is full of many jewels and beautiful women.
A person who donates food, drink and juices obtains all the kinds of fruits that he desires. There is no doubt that
a  person  who  gives  houses  and  covers  gets  those  objects  back.  If  a  man  gives  garlands,  incense,  fragrances,
unguents, objects required for a bath and wreaths to a brahmana, he is without disease and obtains a place in the
worlds meant for kings. O king! A man who gives a house full of seeds and beautiful beds to a brahmana, obtains
an excellent and auspicious house that is full of many jewels. A man who gives a fragrant bed, covered with a
colourful spread, to a brahmana, easily obtains a beautiful and pleasant wife who is faithful. A man who lies down
on a bed of heroes follows the grandfather[This grandfather can only mean Brahma. It is possible that it is meant to be outside quotes, in which case it can
refer to Bhishma.]. There is nothing superior to this. This is what the supreme rishis have
said." On hearing these words, the descendant of the Kuru lineage was delighted. He desired the path meant for
brave ones and no longer found the ashrama of a householder disagreeable. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O
lord! Yudhishthira spoke to the other Pandavas. "You should find the grandfather's words acceptable." All the Pandavas and the illustrious Droupadi agreed and applauded Yudhishthira's words.'


