'Brihadashva said, "After the night had passed, King Nala adorned himself in ornaments. With Vidarbha's daughter by his side, he went and met the king at the right time. Then Nala paid his respects to his father-in-law. Then
the beautiful Damayanti also offered her respects to her father. Extremely delighted, Bhima welcomed him like a
son. The lord also showed him due homage and comforted Nala, together with his devoted wife Damayanti. Thus
honoured, King Nala also returned the honour in the proper way and offered his services to him[To Bhima.]. A great roar of
joy arose in the city. The people were delighted to see Nala return in this way. The city was decorated with flags,
flagstaffs and garlands. The streets were watered and the royal roads cleaned and adorned with flowers. At every
door, the citizens placed flowers that had been cut. The gods were worshipped in all the temples.

'"When King Rituparna heard that Bahuka was Nala and that he had been reunited with Damayanti, he was delighted. King Nala had him brought and begged forgiveness of the king. He who was intelligent begged forgiveness because of several reasons. Thus honoured, the surprised king spoke to Nishadha, 'I congratulate you that you
have been happily reunited with your wife. O Nishadha! O lord of Nishadha! If I committed any crime when you
lived in disguise in my house, if I committed an offence, knowingly or unknowingly, please pardon me.' Nala
replied, 'O king! You have not committed the slightest crime. Even if you had, I would not have been angered and
would have forgiven you. O lord of men! You have always been my friend and my relative. I have lived happily in
your house and you have always provided me with every object of desire, more in your house than in my own. O
king! Please exhibit your friendship in future too. Your knowledge about horses vests with me[Nala had held it in trust.]. O king! If you
so wish, I will happily impart it to you now.' Having said this, Nishadha gave that knowledge to Rituparna. Having
performed the prescribed deeds, he accepted it. When King Bhangasvari had obtained the knowledge about horses,
he appointed another charioteer and left for his own city[Bahuka (Nala) could no longer be his charioteer. Varshneya was Nala's charioteer and would therefore stay
on with Nala.]. O lord of the earth! After Rituparna had left, King
Nala did not reside in the city of Kundina for a long time."'


'Brihadashva said, "O Kounteya! Nishadha lived there for a month. Then, with Bhima's permission, he left for
Nishadha with a small number of attendants. He left with a single radiant chariot, sixteen tusked elephants, fifty
horses and six hundred infantry. The earth trembled when the lord of the earth travelled speedily. Then the great-
minded one entered, swiftly and wrathfully.

'"Virasena's son, Nala, went before Pushkara and said, 'O Pushkara! Let us play with dice again. I have acquired a lot of riches. Damayanti, and everything else that I have acquired, will be my stake. The kingdom will be
yours. It is my certain resolution that the game of dice must occur again. O fortunate one! Let there be a single
stake. Let us offer our lives as stakes. When the other's possessions, kingdom and riches, have been won, it has
been said that it is supreme dharma to have a counter-stake as the last one. If you do not wish to have a duel with
dice, let there be a duel with chariots. O king! Let either you or I find peace. The aged have laid down the ordinance that an ancestral kingdom must be obtained back, through whatever means. O Pushkara! Choose one or the
other, according to your intelligence. Choose the game of dice, or bend your bow in battle.' Having been thus addressed by Nishadha, Pushkara began to laugh. He was certain in his mind that he was going to win and replied to
the lord of the earth, 'O Nishadha! It is your good fortune that you have obtained riches for a counter-stake. It is
your good fortune that Damayanti's difficult times have now come to an end. O king! O uprooter of your enemies!
It is your good fortune that you are still alive with your wife. I will win Vidarbha's daughter, with all her ornaments and all these riches. She will then serve me, the way an apsara serves Shakra in heaven. O Nishadha! I have
always remembered you and have been waiting for your return. I find no pleasure in gambling with those who are
not my well-wishers. Having won the beautifully-hipped and unblemished Damayanti today, I will have accomplished my objective. She has always been in my heart.' Having heard the words of the mad and insolent one, Nala
was angered and desired to slice off his head with his sword.

'"But though his eyes were copper-red with anger, the king smiled and said, 'Let us stake. Why do you talk?
Talk after you have won.' Then the gamble between Pushkara and Nala commenced. O fortunate one! With a single stake, he was defeated by Nala. Thus, in the stake, he lost his entire store of treasures and his life. Having defeated Pushkara, the king laughingly told him, 'This entire kingdom is now mine. All its thorns have been removed. O stupid one! O sinful king! You will not be able to set your eyes on Vidarbha's daughter. You and your
family have been reduced to the state of slaves. That I was earlier defeated by you was not because of your deeds.
That deed was done by Kali. But fool that you are, you did not understand this. I will never ascribe to you the offences committed by others. May you live in happiness. I grant you your life. O brave one! Let there be no doubt
about my affection for you. The fraternal love I have for you will never decrease. O Pushkara! You are my brother.
Live for a hundred years.' Having thus comforted his brother, Nala, for whom truth was his valour, embraced him
repeatedly and sent him off to his own city. O king! Having been thus comforted by Nishadha, Pushkara joined his
hands in salutation and replied to Punyashloka, 'May your fame be without decay. May you live happily for ten
thousand[The word used is ayuta, meaning ten thousand. But here, many years, rather than a precise number, are
meant.] years. O lord of the earth! You have granted me my life and a place to live in.' Thus honoured by the
king[Nala.], the king[Pushkara.] lived there for a month. O king! Then Pushkara happily left for his own city, surrounded by
his relatives, with a large army and accompanied by humble servants. O bull among men! His appearance was like
that of the resplendent sun. After having sent Pushkara, the prosperous king, shorn of disease and laden with riches, entered his own city, which had been gorgeously decorated. Having entered, the lord of the Nishadhas comforted the citizens."'


