'Sanjaya said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When night had passed and it was morning, Shantanu's son,
Bhishma, instructed that a battle formation should be created. Wishing to ensure victory for your sons, Shantanu's
son, Bhishma, the grandfather of the Kurus, formed the great vyuha known as Garuda. Your father Devavrata stationed himself on Garuda's mouth and Bharadvaja's son and Satvata Kritavarma were the eyes. Ashvatthama and
the famous Kripa were the head, supported by Trigartas, Matsyas, Kekayas and Vatadhanas. O venerable one!
Bhurishrava, Shala, Shalya, Bhagadatta, Madrakas, Sindhus, Souviras and those from the land of the five rivers,
together with Jayadratha, constituted the neck. King Duryodhana, together with his brothers and followers, constituted the back. O great king! Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti, together with the Kambojas and the Shakas and the
Shurasenas, constituted the tail. Magadhas and Kalingas, together with masses of Dasherakas, were armoured and
stationed themselves on the right wing of the vyuha. Kananas, Vikunjas, Muktas, Pundravishas, together with Brihadbala, were stationed on the left wing.

'"On seeing this battle formation of your soldiers, Savyasachi, the scorcher of enemies, together with Dhrishtadyumna, arranged a counter vyuha for the encounter. This vyuha was in the form of a half-moon and this vyuha
was extremely terrible. Bhimasena stationed himself on the right horn. He was surrounded by kings from many
countries, wielding many different kinds of weapons. Maharatha Virata and Drupada were next to him. Next to
him was Nila, accompanied by Nilayudha. Next to Nila was maharatha Dhrishtaketu. He was surrounded by the
Chedis, the Kashis, the Karusha and the Pouravas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Dhrishtadyumna,
Shikhandi, the Panchalas and the Prabhadrakas were stationed in the midst of the large army, ready for battle.
Dharmaraja was also there, surrounded by an army of elephants. O king! Satyaki was also there, together with
Droupadi's five sons. Abhimanyu was there and beyond him was Iravan. O king! Bhimasena's son[Ghatotkacha.] was there,
together with the maharatha Kekayas. Next to him, on the left flank, was the foremost of men[Referring to Arjuna.]. His protector
was Janardana, the protector of the entire universe. It was thus that the Pandavas formed a giant vyuha as a counter
vyuha, for the death of your sons and of those who have assembled on your side. The battle between those on your
side and those of the enemy then commenced, seeking to kill each other in a melee of chariots and elephants. O
lord of the earth! Masses of horses and masses of chariots were seen there. They were seen to descend on each other, seeking to kill each other. Masses of chariots dashed towards each other, or engaged each other individually.
They created a tumultuous sound, mixed with the sound of drums. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As they
sought to kill each other in that tumultuous battle, the shouts of the brave men on your side, and on theirs, seemed
to touch heaven."'


'Sanjaya said, "Your soldiers and those of the others were arranged in battle formation. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! After that, Dhananjaya slaughtered a large number of charioteers on your side. In that battle, he used his
arrows to bring down large numbers of charioteers. They were thus killed by Partha, like death at the time of the
destruction of a yuga. But in that encounter, the sons of Dhritarashtra endeavoured to repulse the Pandavas. They
strove for blazing fame and preferred death to retreat. O king! Thus single-minded in their objective in that battle,
they broke through the Pandava ranks in many places and were themselves broken. Both the Pandava and the
Kourava were broken and fled, reassembling again. Nothing could be seen. A cloud of dust arose from the ground
and shrouded the sun. No one was in a position to distinguish the directions or the sub-directions. The battle raged
everywhere, through inferences drawn on the basis of signs, names and family names[A trifle inaccurately, we have translated gotra as family name. Since nothing could be seen, the identities of the
two sides had to be determined on the basis of such indications.]. However, in that encounter, the vyuha of the Kouravas was protected by Bharadvaja's intelligent son, who was devoted to the truth,
and it could not be broken. In that fashion, nor could the great vyuha of the Pandavas, protected by Savyasachi and
guarded well by Bhima.

'"O king! Men, infantry, chariots and elephants emerged from the heads of both the armies and engaged in fighting with each other. In that great battle, those riding horses brought down those riding horses, using polished and
sharp swords and lances in that encounter. In that terrible battle, charioteers used gold-decorated arrows to bring
down charioteers. Those riding on elephants used iron arrows, arrows and spikes against those riding on elephants
and used these to bring each other down. In that battle, large numbers of infantry engaged against infantry and happily cut each other down with catapults and battleaxes. In that battle, in both the armies, infantry brought down
charioteers and charioteers brought down infantry, using sharp weapons. Those riding elephants brought down
those riding horses. Those riding horses brought down those stationed on elephants and it was extraordinary. Here
and there, the supreme among those riding on elephants brought down foot soldiers and warriors riding on elephants were seen to be brought down by them in return. Large numbers of infantry were slaughtered by those riding horses and large numbers of those riding horses were brought down by foot soldiers. They were seen to be
brought down in hundreds and thousands. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! The ground was strewn with destroyed standards, bows, lances, javelins, clubs, maces, kampanas[Unidentified weapon that makes the enemy tremble.], spears, colourful armour, kanapas[A kind of lance.],
goads, polished swords, gold-shafted arrows, cushions, carpets and extremely expensive coverlets and seemed to
be strewn with garlands of flowers. In that great battle, the bodies of men, horses and fallen elephants made the
ground impassable and mud was created by flesh and blood. The dust that had arisen from the ground settled down
because of the blood from the battle. O lord of men! Because of this, the directions again became clearly visible. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! Many headless torsos were seen to arise from the ground, as a portent that all
the beings in the universe would be destroyed. In that extremely terrible and fearful battle, charioteers could be
seen to flee in every direction.

'"Bhishma, Drona, Saindhava Jayadratha, Purumitra, Vikarna and Shakuni Soubala were invincible in battle and
were like lions in their valour. They repeatedly broke the Pandava ranks in battle. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that way, Bhimasena, the rakshasa Ghatotkacha, Satyaki, Chekitana and Droupadi's sons oppressed your
sons, together with all the kings, like the gods against the danavas. Those bulls among kshatriyas killed each other
in that battle. Drenched in battle, they assumed terrible forms, like dazzling danavas. In both the armies, brave
ones triumphed over their enemies and seemed to be like the best of planets in the firmament. With one thousand
chariots, your son Duryodhana advanced to do battle with the Pandavas and the rakshasa Ghatotkacha. All the Pandavas, together with a large army, advanced to do battle with Drona and Bhishma, the brave scorchers of enemies.
The enraged Kiriti advanced against the best of kings. Arjuna's son and Satyaki advanced against Soubala's army.
An extremely terrible battle commenced between those on your side and those of the enemy, each trying to defeat
the other, and it made the body hair stand up."'


