Yudhishthira asked, "What is said to be without decay and something from which one does not return? What is
said to be the one with decay and something from which one has to return? O slayer of enemies! I wish to
know the difference between that which is without decay and that which is with decay. O mighty-armed one! O descendant of the Kuru lineage! I wish to realize the truth about this. Brahmanas who know about the Vedas speak of
you as an ocean of knowledge. So do the immensely fortunate rishis and the great-souled ascetics. There are only a
few days left for the sun in dakshinayana. When the illustrious sun turns, you will go to your supreme objective.
When you have departed, where will we hear what is best for us? You have been like a lamp for the lineage of the
Kurus and have always illuminated with your knowledge. O extender of the Kuru lineage! That is the reason I
wish to hear the truth about this. O Indra among kings! I am not satisfied with hearing amrita like this."

'Bhishma replied, "In this connection, there is an ancient history, about a conversation between Vasishtha and
Karala, of Janaka's lineage. Vasishtha, best among the rishis and with the resplendence of the sun, was seated.
King Janaka asked him about the knowledge that was supremely beneficial. Maitravaruni[Vasishtha's name.] was seated. He was
accomplished about the knowledge of supreme adhyatma and had determined the progress of adhyatma. In ancient
times, King Karala, of Janaka's lineage, greeted him. Joining his hands in salutation, he asked the supreme of rishis
in words that were articulated well, humble, sweet and devoid of arguments. 'O illustrious one! I wish to hear
about the supreme and eternal brahman, on obtaining whom, learned ones do not return. What is that which decays, into which the universe is itself destroyed? What is said to be without decay, auspicious, beneficial and without any taint?'

'"Vasishtha said, 'O lord of the earth! Listen to how this universe is destroyed and about that which has not been
destroyed earlier and will never be destroyed. Know that twelve thousand years constitute a yuga and four such,
taken one thousand times, are said to make up a kalpa, one of Brahma's days[This isn't stated very clearly. A mahayuga consists of a cycle of satya yuga, treta yuga, dvapara yuga and kali
yuga, made up of twelve thousand years of the gods. One thousand mahayugas make up one kalpa, one of Brahma's days.]. O king! Understand that Brahma's
night is of the same duration. When he is destroyed, Svayambhu Shambhu, the performer of infinite deeds, creates
a great being, who is the first among creatures[This is a description of the great destruction, not temporary cycles of creation and destruction. Therefore, Brahma is himself destroyed.]. This has form, though he[Svayambhu Shambhu.] is without form. This is Ishana and
he is resplendent and without decay. Anima and laghima are in him[Yoga leads to eight major siddhis or powers. These are anima (becoming as small as one desires), mahima (as
large as one desires), laghima (as light as one wants), garima (as heavy as one wants), prapti (obtaining what
one wants), prakamya (travelling where one wants), vashitvam (powers to control creatures) and ishitvam (obtaining divine powers).]. The extremities of his hands and feet extend
in all the directions. His eyes, head and mouth are everywhere. His ears are everywhere in the world and he is stationed, enveloping everything. This illustrious Hiranyagarbha[Equated with Ishana.] is said to be intelligence. In the texts of yoga, he is
known as Mahat and Virincha. He is addressed by many different names in the sacred texts of sankhya. He has
many different forms and he is the soul of the universe. He is known as Ekakshara[Literallly, the single one and the one without decay.]. The three worlds have been
created by him and he pervades everything with his atman. He  is also known  as  Bahurupa and Vishvarupa[Respectively, the one with many forms and the one with the universe as his form.].
Through transformations, he creates himself from his own atman. The immensely energetic one creates consciousness[Ahamkara. This also means self-consciousness or ego.] and Prajapati is created from that consciousness. The manifest[Hiranyagarbha.] is created from the unmanifest and this is
said to be the creation of knowledge. Mahat and Ahamkara also represent the creation of ignorance. Those who
have thought about, and know the purport of the sacred texts, have said that knowledge and ignorance came about
through these contrivances[This is a terse shloka and the meaning isn't obvious. The sense seems to be something like the following. While
there was knowledge initially, ego and consciousness cloud it and lead to ignorance.].  O  king!  Know  that  the  elements  are  created  from  consciousness  as  the  third[The first being Hiranyagarbha and the second being Ahamkara.].
Know that transformations lead to a fourth kind, ego in creatures and wind, light, space, water and earth and their
attributes of sound, touch, form, taste and scent. There is no doubt that the ten categories were created in this way.
O Indra among kings! Know that there is a fifth kind of creation that resulted from the elements-the ears, the
skin, the eyes, the tongue, the nose as the fifth, speech, the two hands, the two feet, the anus and the genitals. These
are the senses of knowledge and the organs of action. O king! They were created at the same time as the mind. It is
the truth that these twenty-four exist in all creatures[The five senses, the five objects of the senses, the five organs of action, the five elements, mind, intelligence, ego
and consciousness.]. A brahmana who knows and has seen the truth about this
does not sorrow. These are said to be in the bodies of everything in the three worlds. O best among men! Know
that they exist in gods, men, danavas, yakshas, demons, gandharvas, kinnaras, giant serpents, charanas, pishachas,
devarshis, travellers in the night[Rakshasas.], gnats, insects, mosquitoes, filthy worms, rats, dogs, svapachas, vaineyas[There is probably a typo here, which is difficult to figure out. As stated, vaineyas can only be interpreted as
those who have been converted back to the true religion.],
chandalas, pulkasas, elephants, horses, mules, tigers, trees and cattle. These manifestations are seen in everything
that has form, in the water, on earth and in the sky. We have heard that it has been determined that these are the
only regions where those with bodies exist. O son[The word used is tata.]! Everything that has the sign of manifestation is destroyed. It
has been said that, from one day to another, all creatures are destroyed. It has been said there is Akshara and there
is the universe, which is destroyed. The universe has signs of the manifest and the unmanifest, but is enveloped in
illusion. Mahat, the one who was created first, is also always referred to as an example of one who is destroyed. O
great king! I have told you what you asked me. However, there is also a twenty-fifth. This is Vishnu. He is the truth
and his manifestations are the truth. The learned ones have said that it is true that he is the refuge of all truth.
Everything that is manifest and has form is based on that which has no form. Those twenty-four are manifest.
However, the twenty-fifth has no form. He is in the heart of all beings and his form is established in his own atman. Consciousness and lack of consciousness always exist in all bodies that have form. They follow the characteristics of creation and destruction, but he[Vishnu.] is without creation and without destruction. Although he is without
qualities, he can always be perceived and is the one who invests qualities. Those who know about creation and destruction have said that this is the way that the intelligent Mahat acts, having united with Prakriti. In that womb, he
is united with tamas, sattva and rajas. He dwells in the atmans of creatures and does not think that there is anything
else. Though he possesses knowledge, because of loss of memory, he is conveyed into ignorance. Restrained by
the qualities, he says, "I am this," or "I am that." Having been enveloped by the darkness of tamas, he is overcome
by sentiments of ignorance. In that way, rajas and sattva lead to the sentiments of rajas and sattva. There are the
three complexions of white, red and black[Respectively associated with sattva, rajas and tamas.]. Know that prakriti gets associated with these three complexions.
Tamas conveys to hell and rajas to the status of humanity. With sattva, one enjoys happiness and goes to the world
of the gods. If one is helpless and indulges in wicked deeds, one obtains birth as inferior species. Men have both
good and wicked deeds, gods have good ones only. The learned ones have spoken about these objects as those that
are destructible. But it is the twenty-fifth that those with knowledge follow.'"'


