'Bhishma said, "Having been thus addressed, Janamejaya replied to the sage. 'You are censuring someone who deserves to be censured. You are condemning someone who deserves to be condemned. You are shaming someone
who deserves to be shamed. Nevertheless, show me your favours. All this has come about because of what I have
myself done. I am being burnt, as if I am in the midst of a fire. It is not as if my mind is delighted at being associated with my deeds. I certainly suffer because of my terrible fear of Vaivasvata[Yama.]. Without uprooting that stake, how
can I possibly remain alive? O Shounaka[Shunaka's son, Indrota.]! Suppress all your anger towards me and instruct me. There used to be
a great kitchen for brahmanas[Before Janamejaya killed the brahmana.] and I will accomplish that objective again. There must be a remnant to this lineage. This lineage cannot be destroyed. But if we are cursed by brahmanas, if we do not have access to the sacred
texts and if we are not conscious of what has been determined in the Vedas, there will be no remnant left. I am in
great despair. I am telling you again about what confronts me. Those who are without dharma and without meditation are repeatedly not acknowledged[A minor liberty has been taken with the text here. As it stands, a translation is difficult.]. In the hereafter, their foundation is like that of the Pulindas and the
Shabaras[As examples of barbarians.]. Those who do not perform sacrifices do not obtain any worlds. O extremely learned one! I am ignorant. Impart wisdom to me, like that to a child, like a father to his son. O brahmana! O Shounaka! Be gratified with
me.'

'"Shounaka said, 'There is nothing surprising in a wise person performing many appropriate acts. A learned person is not concerned with what has happened or what will happen[He is concerned with the present.]. Having obtained the favours of wisdom, he
does not grieve about what other people sorrow over. As if he is stationed on the top of a mountain, he looks on the
entire universe with wisdom. Someone who is fickle, someone who is degraded in his soul and someone who is
shamed by all the virtuous people and hides himself, does not see the course of action. Knowing that there is freedom from fear, vigour and greatness in the Vedas and the sacred texts, perform a great rite of pacification. The
brahmanas are your refuge. If the brahmanas are no longer enraged with you, this will ensure your welfare in the
hereafter. This is on the assumption that you are repenting your wicked deed and are looking towards dharma.'

'"Janamejaya replied, 'I am repenting my wicked deed and I will never follow adharma again. O Shounaka! I
am looking for someone who will be affectionate and desire my welfare.'

'"Shounaka said, 'O king! Since you have given up your arrogance and pride, I desire to be affectionate towards
you. Remain established in the welfare of all beings and remember dharma. I am not summoning you[To perform a sacrifice.] because
of fear, weakness or avarice. The gods and the brahmanas will hear the truthful words I speak to you. I do not desire anything from anyone. I am summoning you to a rite of dharma, even though all the beings are uttering words
of shame towards you. They will say that I am ignorant about dharma and people who are not well-wishers will
speak in this way. If I hear such words from a well-wisher, I will be extremely anxious. There will be some immensely wise ones who will recognize that this is the right course of action[The performance of the sacrifice.]. O son[The word used is tata.]! O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Know that I am doing this for the sake of brahmanas. For my sake, act so that they may obtain
peace. O lord of men! Pledge that you will not show hatred towards brahmanas.'

'"Janamejaya replied, 'O brahmana! I touch your feet and pledge that I will never again injure brahmanas, in
words, thoughts and deeds.'"'


'"Shounaka said, 'Therefore, since your senses have been agitated, I will speak to you about dharma. You are prosperous, immensely strong and content and are looking towards dharma. Having been terrible earlier, you have now
become extremely distinguished. O king! Favour all beings through your own conduct. In this world, there is good
and bad in everything. You were like that earlier. But you are now looking towards dharma. O Janamejaya! You
gave up extremely wonderful food and objects of pleasure and resorted to austerities. These things seem extraordinary to beings. There is nothing extraordinary in a weak person becoming generous, or in a miserable person resorting to the store of austerities. It is said that this conduct is close to their state of being. This
wretchedness[That Janamejaya has voluntarily reduced himself to. He is neither weak,
nor miserable (in riches).] has not been considered properly. Therefore, one must examine it properly. Only then will one appreciate its qualities. O lord of the earth! Sacrifices, donations, compassion, the Vedas and truth-these are the five
things that purify. Extremely severe austerities constitute the sixth. O Janamejaya! This is the supreme form of purification for kings. If you accept this completely, you will obtain supreme dharma. Visiting auspicious spots is
said to be the supreme purifier. On this, the song sung by Yayati is recounted. "A mortal can obtain a long life, or
even live again, by attentively performing sacrifices alone. Thereafter, having renounced, he should observe austerities." Kurukshetra is said to be an auspicious region and Prithudaka[Pehowa in Kurukshetra district.], on the banks of the Sarasvati. If a person
bathes or drinks there, he need not be tormented about premature death[Literally, death the next day.]. You must go to the great lakes,
Pushkara, Prabhasa and Manasa, to the north. Having gone to Kaloda[Also known as Kalodaka, Mundkol lake in Kashmir.], one obtains one's breath of life again.
You should go to the confluence of the Sarasvati and the Drishadvati. You must study and observe good conduct in
all these places, touching the waters there. He[Yayati.] said that renunciation and sannyasa is sacred and supreme dharma. On this, a song composed by Satyavat is recited. "Be as truthful as a child, without any auspicious or wicked
deeds. Then, since there will be no unhappiness for all the beings in this world, how can there be happiness[Both unhappiness and happiness are transitory illusions.]?
This is the natural state of all beings. In general, this is characteristic of the lives of those who give up all kinds of
association and abandon both good and wicked deeds." I will now tell you about the tasks that are best for a king.
Use your strength and generosity to again conquer heaven. A man who possesses strength and energy becomes the
lord of dharma. For the sake of the happiness of brahmanas, roam around this earth. Since you disrespected them
earlier, placate them now. This is despite being condemned and abandoned by many of them. O learned one! Have
knowledge of your own self. Do not be enraged and injure them. Be engaged in your own tasks and work towards
supreme welfare. A king can be as cold as ice, or as fiery as the fire. O scorcher of enemies! Others can be like a
plough or thunder[A plough uproots enemies, thunder scorches them.]. Do not think that there will be no remnants[Of the lineage.], or that treatment is not possible. Thinking that
there is nothing left of your existence, do not associate with those who are wicked. If one repents one's wicked
deed, one is freed from one-fourth of the sin. If one decides that one will not act in this way again, one is freed
from a second one-fourth. If one resolves to follow dharma, one is freed from a third one-fourth. A man who desires prosperity should only think about welfare. Those who smell good fragrances also smell like that. Those who
smell foul smells also smell like that. A person who devotes himself to austerities is immediately freed from his
sins. A person who has been accused is freed if he worships the fire for a year. A person guilty of feticide is freed
if he worships the fire for three years. If a person guilty of killing foetuses, saves as many living beings as would
naturally have been killed[The number saved is equal to the number of foetuses killed.], he is freed. Manu has said that if one immerses oneself in the water and chants
Aghamarshana three times[This is a reference to the Aghamarshana suktam (after the sage
Aghamarshana) from the Rig Veda. This is used for consecration ceremonies, ablutions and at times of bathing.], one obtains the benefits equal to those from the final bath after a horse sacrifice. One
is swiftly freed from sins and obtains great reverence. Beings seek his favours, as if they are dumb and mute. O
king! Once, all the gods and the asuras assembled and asked Brihaspati, the preceptor of the gods. "O maharshi!
You know about the fruits that result from dharma and also about those that lead to hell, the world of the wicked.
When a person has performed both of these well, which of these triumphs over the other? O maharshi! Tell us
about the fruits of deeds. How does a person with auspicious conduct dispel evil?"

'"'Brihaspati replied, "Having ignorantly performed wicked deeds earlier, if a person deliberately performs auspicious deeds, his auspicious conduct dispels that evil, just as a dirty garment is cleansed with a caustic substance.
A man who has committed a wicked deed should not think that he has been destroyed. Without any malice and
with devotion, he should desire to ensure welfare, just as a hole in a garment can be covered with a good piece.
Even after having performed a wicked deed, a man can obtain welfare, just as the sun arises again and drives away
all the darkness. If one acts so as to ensure welfare, all sins can be driven away."'"

'Bhishma said, "Indrota spoke in this way to King Janamejaya. Having said this, following the prescribed rites,
Shounaka performed a horse sacrifice. After this, the king's sin was cleansed. He was full of prosperity and his
form was like that of a blazing fire. The destroyer of enemies entered his own kingdom, like the full moon rising in
the sky."'


