Sanjaya said, "On seeing that the army was shattered, the powerful king of Madra urged his charioteer, 'Quickly
drive these extremely swift horses towards the spot where King Yudhishthira, Pandu's son, is stationed. He is resplendent, with a white umbrella held aloft his head. O charioteer! Take me there swiftly and behold my might.
The Parthas are incapable of remaining stationed before me in the battle today.' Having been thus addressed, the
charioteer of the king of Madra departed for the spot where Dharmaraja King Yudhishthira, unwavering in his aim,
was. In the battle, Shalya violently descended on the large army of the Pandavas, like the shoreline holding back
the rolling waves of the ocean. O venerable one! The Pandava troops clashed against Shalya and stationed themselves in that battle, like a mountain against a flood of water. On seeing that the king of Madra was stationed in the
battle, the Kurus returned, preferring death over retreat. O king! They returned and positioned themselves in different arrays. An extremely terrible battle commenced and blood flowed like water.

' "Nakula, invincible in battle, clashed against Chitrasena[Karna's son.]. Wielding colourful bows, those two clashed
against each other. They were like two clouds that had arisen to the south and the north, and showered down. In the
battle, they rained down arrows on each other. I could not differentiate between Pandava and his adversary. Both of
them were strong and skilled in the use of weapons. They were knowledgeable about the conduct of rathas. They
endeavoured to kill each other and tried to seek out each other's weaknesses. O great king! Using a yellow, sharp
and broad-headed arrow, Chitrasena severed Nakula's bow in his hand. Having severed his bow, he then used three
gold-tufted arrows that had been sharpened on stone to fearlessly strike him on the forehead. He used sharp arrows
to dispatch his horses to the land of the dead and then brought down his standard and charioteer with three arrows
each. O king! The three arrows released from his enemy's arm were affixed to his forehead and Nakula looked as
beautiful as a mountain with three peaks. His bow was severed and he was without a chariot. The brave one
grasped a sword and a shield and jumped down from his chariot, like a lion from the summit of a mountain. As he
advanced on foot, arrows were showered down on him. However, Nakula was fierce in his spirit and dexterous in
his valour. He received them on his shield. He was colourful in fighting and conquered his exhaustion. While all
the soldiers looked on, the mighty-armed one approached Chitrasena's chariot and climbed up. Pandava severed
Chitrasena's head, with its earrings and crown, excellent nose and large eyes, from his head. Resplendent as the
sun, he fell down from his chariot. On seeing that Chitrasena had been killed, all the maharathas there roared loudly like lions and uttered words of praise.

' "On seeing that their brother had been killed, Karna's maharatha sons, Sushena and Satyasena, released sharp
arrows[There is an inconsistency, because both Sushena and Satyasena have
been killed in Section 73.]. They swiftly attacked Pandava, supreme among rathas. O king! They wished to kill him, like two tigers
against an elephant in the large forest. Both of them attacked the maharatha with sharp arrows. They flooded him
with arrows, like clouds showering down rain. Though he was pierced with arrows all over, Pandava was cheerful.
The valiant one grasped another bow and ascended his chariot. The brave one was stationed in the battle, like an
enraged Yama. O king! O lord of the earth! Those two brothers used straight-tufted arrows to shatter his chariot.
However, in the battle, Nakula laughed. He used four sharp and pointed arrows to slay Satyasena's four horses. O
Indra among kings! Pandava affixed a gold-tufted iron arrow that had been sharpened on stone to sever Satyasena's
bow. Satyasena grasped another bow and ascended another chariot. He and Sushena attacked Pandava. O great
king! In the forefront of the battle, without any fear, Madri's powerful son pierced each of them with two arrows.
Maharatha Sushena became enraged. He laughed in the battle and used a kshurapra arrow to sever Pandava's large
bow. Nakula became senseless with rage and picked up another bow. He pierced Sushena with five arrows and severed his standard with another one. O venerable one! In the encounter, he spiritedly severed Satyasena's bow and
arm-guard. At this, the people roared. He grasped another bow that was forceful and capable of bearing a great
load. From every direction, he enveloped Pandu's descendant with arrows. Nakula, the slayer of enemy heroes, repulsed those arrows and pierced both Satyasena and Sushena with two arrows each. O Indra among kings! Each of
them separately pierced him back with arrows. They next pierced his charioteer with sharp arrows. The powerful
Satyasena displayed the dexterity of his hands. Using separate arrows, he severed Nakula's chariot and bow. However, the atiratha[Nakula.] remained stationed on his chariot. He picked up a spear[Rathashakti.] that possessed a golden handle and
was sharp at the tip. It was washed in oil and was extremely bright. It was as radiant as the flickering tongue of an
immensely poisonous serpent maiden. In the battle, having grasped it, he hurled it towards Satyasena. O king! In
the encounter, it pierced his heart and shattered it into one hundred fragments. Deprived of his life and bereft of his
senses, he fell down from the chariot onto the ground. On seeing that his brother had been slain, Sushena became
senseless with rage. He swiftly showered down arrows on Pandu's descendant, who was fighting on foot. On seeing that Nakula was without a chariot, Droupadi's immensely strong son, Sutasoma, wished to save his father[Father by extension.] in
the battle and attacked. Nakula climbed onto Sutasoma's chariot. The foremost among the Bharata lineage looked
as beautiful as a lion on a mountain. He picked up another bow and started to fight with Sushena. They showered
down arrows on each other and looked dazzling. Those two supreme maharathas made great efforts to slay each
other. Sushena angrily struck Pandava with three arrows and pierced Sutasoma in the arms and the chest with
twenty arrows. O great king! Nakula, the destroyer of enemy heroes, became angry at this. The valiant one covered
all the directions with his arrows. In the battle, he grasped an extremely energetic arrow that was in the shape of a
half-moon and was pointed at the tip. With great force, he shot it towards Karna's son. O supreme among kings!
While all the soldiers looked on, it severed his head from his body and it was extraordinary. O king! He was slain
by the great-souled Nakula and fell down, like a large tree on a bank that is destroyed by the force of a river. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! On seeing that Karna's son had been killed and on beholding Nakula's valour, your
soldiers were frightened and fled.

' "O great king! The powerful king of Madra saw that the soldiers were running away in the battle. The brave
one, the commander who was a scorcher of enemies, sought to restrain the terrified troops. O great king! He roared
loudly like a lion and fiercely twanged his bow. O king! The one with the firm bow protected those on your side in
the battle. The ones who were running around in different directions returned. From every direction, they surrounded the king of Madra, the great archer. O king! The large army was stationed there, wishing to fight on every
side. Satyaki, Bhimasena and the Pandavas who were Madri's sons placed the modest Yudhishthira, the scorcher of
enemies, at their head. Those brave ones surrounded him in the battle and roared like lions. There was the fierce
sound of arrows whizzing. They let out many kinds of roars. In that way, all those on your side angrily surrounded
the lord of Madra, desiring to fight again. A battle commenced and it increased the terror of cowards. Those on
your side, and that of the enemy, preferred death to retreat and were without fear. O lord of the earth! It was like
that between the gods and the asuras in earlier times. It extended Yama's kingdom.

' "O king! Having killed the samshaptakas in the battle, the descendant of the Pandu lineage, with the ape on his
banner, attacked the Kourava soldiers. The remaining Pandavas, with Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, attacked
those soldiers and shot sharp arrows. They[The Kourava soldiers.] were overwhelmed and confused by the Pandavas and could not distinguish the directions and the sub-directions. The Pandavas covered them with sharp arrows. In every direction,
the foremost ones among the Kourava army were slaughtered and they were routed by the maharatha sons of Pandu. O king! In that way, in the battle, hundreds and thousands of Pandava soldiers were killed by your sons, who
shot arrows from every direction. Those two armies slaughtered each other and were tormented. They were anxious and agitated, like rivers during the monsoon. O Indra among kings! In the great battle, those on your side were
overcome by a sharp and great fear and so were the Pandavas." '


Sanjaya said, "The soldiers slaughtered each other and were agitated. The warriors were driven away and the
tuskers shrieked. In the great battle, the foot soldiers lamented loudly. O great king! The horses ran away in many
directions. For all living beings, there was terrible destruction and carnage. Many weapons descended and chariots
and elephants were mangled. Those who found joy in battle were delighted. The fear of cowards increased. Wishing to kill each other, the warriors immersed themselves in this. They gave up their lives in that extremely terrible
gambling match. The fierce battle extended Yama's kingdom. The Pandavas slaughtered your soldiers with sharp
arrows. In that way, your warriors killed the Pandava soldiers. The battle continued and terrified cowards. It was
the morning, after the sun had arisen. Unwavering in their aim, the great-souled Pandavas protected the king[Yudhishthira.] and
killed the enemy. They were powerful and proud strikers and did not miss their objective. They fought against your
soldiers, preferring death to retreat. O Kouravya! Your forces weakened, like deer when there is a fire.

' "The army was weakened, like a cow submerged in mud. On seeing this, Shalya wished to rescue it and advanced towards the Pandu army. The king of Madra was angry and picked up a supreme bow. In the battle, he
rushed against the Pandava assassins. O great king! The Pandavas desired victory in the encounter. They attacked
the king of Madra and pierced him with sharp arrows. While Dharmaraja looked on, the immensely strong king of
Madra afflicted those soldiers with hundreds of sharp arrows. O king! At that time, many different kinds of portents manifested themselves. The earth, with its mountains, moved and made a noise. From the solar disc in the firmament, meteors descended on the earth in every direction. They were fierce at the tip, like spears with handles. O
lord of the earth! O king! Many deer, buffaloes and birds kept your soldiers to the right[That is, they were to the left of the army, an inauspicious omen, because
the left is inauspicious.]. O lord of men! As large
numbers descended on each other and attacked with all their divisions, there was a fierce encounter. The Kouravas
attacked the Pandava divisions.

' "Spirited in his soul, Shalya attacked Yudhishthira, Kunti's son, showering down arrows, like the one with one
thousand eyes[Indra.] pouring down rain. The immensely strong one used gold-tufted arrows that were sharpened on
stone to pierce Bhimasena, all of Droupadi's sons, the two Pandavas who were Madri's sons, Dhrishtadyumna,
Shini's descendant and Shikhandi, striking each of them with ten arrows. He rained down arrows, like Maghavan
showering rain at the end of summer. O king! Because of Shalya's arrows, thousands of Prabhadrakas and Somakas were seen to fall down, or falling down. They were like flights of bees or locusts, driven by the wind.
Shalya's arrows descended, like lightning from clouds. Elephants, horses, foot soldiers and rathas were distressed.
Because of Shalya's arrows, they fell down, or wandered around, shrieking. They were afflicted by the lord of
Madra's anger and manliness. In the battle, he enveloped the enemy, like Yama bestirred by destiny. The immensely strong lord of Madra roared, like lightning in the clouds. The Pandava soldiers were slaughtered by Shalya, with
his dexterity and his sharp arrows, and ran towards Kounteya, Ajatashatru Yudhishthira. In the battle, they were
oppressed by that great shower of arrows and sought refuge with Yudhishthira. On seeing that he[Shalya.] was angrily
descending with foot soldiers and horses, King Yudhishthira countered him with sharp arrows, like a crazy elephant checked with a goad. Shalya released a terrible arrow that was like a venomous serpent. It pierced the great-
souled one with force and fell down on the ground. At this, Vrikodara wrathfully pierced him with seven arrows,
Sahadeva with five and Nakula with ten arrows. Droupadi's sons showered down arrows on Artayani, the immensely fortunate slayer of enemies, like clouds pouring down on a mountain. On seeing that Shalya was assailed
from every side by the Parthas, Kritavarma and Kripa attacked angrily. Uluka attacked like a bird[The text says patatri, bird. This may be a typo.] and so did
Shakuni Soubala. Maharatha Ashvatthama smiled gently. All your sons protected Shalya in the battle.

' "Kritavarma used three arrows with iron heads to pierce Bhimasena. Assuming an angry form, he repulsed him
with a great shower of arrows. Kripa angrily afflicted Dhrishtadyumna with a shower of arrows. Shakuni attacked
Droupadi's son and Drona's son attacked the twins. Duryodhana, best of warriors, was fierce in his energy and
strong. In the battle, he advanced against Keshava and Arjuna and attacked them with arrows. There were hundreds of duels between those on your side and the enemy at various spots. O lord of the earth! It was fierce in form
and wonderful. In the battle, Bhoja slew Bhima's brown horses. When the horses were slain, Pandu's descendant
descended from his chariot and fought with a club in his hand, like Yama with an upraised staff. In his sight, the
king of Madra slew Sahadeva's horses. At this, Sahadeva killed Shalya's son with his sword. The preceptor,
Goutama, again fought with Dhrishtadyumna. Both of them were fearless and made efforts against each other. The
preceptor's son[Ashvatthama.] wasn't very angry. He smiled and pierced each of Droupadi's brave sons with ten arrows. O
king! Shalya angrily slaughtered the Somakas and the Pandavas. He again afflicted Yudhishthira with sharp
arrows.

' "The valiant Bhima was angry in the battle and bit his lower lips in rage. To destroy him[Shalya.], he hurled a club. It
was like Yama's staff and was raised, like the night of destruction. It was capable of destroying the lives of elephants, horses and men. It was bound in golden cloth and blazed like a meteor. It was like the vajra to the touch
and was completely made out of iron. It was as fierce as a she-serpent and was slung in a noose. It was smeared
with sandalwood paste and unguents, like a desired woman. It was smeared with fat and marrow and it was like
Yama's tongue. There were bells attached to it and it was like Vasava's vajra. It was smeared with the fat of elephants and it was like a snake that had cast off its skin. It frightened the enemy soldiers and delighted the soldiers
on one's own side. It was famous in the world of men and was capable of shattering the summit of a mountain. It
was one with which powerful Kounteya had challenged the lord of Alaka, Maheshvara's friend, in his abode in
Kailasa[The lord of the yakshas is Kubera and his capital is Alaka, in Kailasa.
Kubera is Maheshavara's (Shiva's) friend. Bhima fought with the yak-
shas. The incident has been described in Section 35 (Volume 3). Bhima
went in search of a flower, because Droupadi wanted it.]. For the sake of the mandara flower, the immensely strong one had proudly killed many guhyakas, who
used their powers of maya, in the abode of the lord of the riches. To ensure Droupadi's pleasure, he had countered
many. It[The club.] was famous as the vajra and possessing eight sides, it was embellished with diamonds, gems and jewels. Raising it, the mighty-armed one attacked Shalya in the battle. He was skilled in fighting and grasped that fearful club. He brought down Shalya's four horses, which were extremely fast. At this, Shalya became angry in the
battle. He hurled a javelin towards his broad chest and roared. It pierced the brave one's armour and penetrated.
However, Vrikodara wasn't frightened. He plucked the javelin out and pierced the king of Madra's charioteer in
the heart with it. With the armour penetrated, he was distressed in his mind and began to vomit blood. He fell
downwards and the king of Madra looked on, in sorrow. On seeing that his own deed had been countered, Shalya
wondered in his mind. Serene in his soul, he grasped a club and glanced towards his opponent. On beholding his
deed in the battle, the Parthas were delighted in their minds and honoured Bhimasena, the performer of terrible and
unblemished deeds." '


