Bhishma said, "O mighty-armed one! It is exactly like that. O Kouravya! O lord of men! There is no falsehood
in what you have said about women. In this connection, there is an ancient history about how, earlier, the
great-souled Vipula was able to ensure protection. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O son! O lord of the earth! I
will also tell you the truth about how and why women were created by Brahma. O son! There is no one who is
more evil than women. O lord! A woman is the flame of a fire. She is Maya's maya[Maya is the architect of the demons.]. She is the sharp edge of a
razor. She is the poison of a snake. A woman is all these, and death, come together. O mighty-armed one! We have
heard that these subjects were once devoted to dharma. They themselves obtained divinity. The gods were alarmed
at this. O scorcher of enemies! The gods went and met the grandfather. They told him what was in their minds.
They stood there silently, with downcast faces. The grandfather discerned what was in the hearts of the gods. For
the sake of confusing men, the lord created women. O Kounteya! In an earlier creation, all the women were virtuous. In this creation, Prajapati created those who were wicked. The grandfather gave them desire and, driven by
desire, they started to pursue each other. Driven by desire and greed, women tormented the men. The lord, the lord
of the gods, also created anger as an aide of desire. Under the subjugation of desire and, anger, all the subjects
were submerged. There is no special act of dharma that has been laid down for women. The sacred texts say that
they are without senses and without mantras and are prone to falsehood[They have no rites to follow, including the restraint of the senses.]. Prajapati gave women beds, seats, ornaments, food, drink, ignoble behaviour, immoderation in speech and addiction to desire. Men are incapable of
ever restraining them. O son! Even the creator of the universe is incapable of doing that, how can men do it?
Words, the prospect of being killed, imprisonment and many kinds of hardships are incapable of keeping women
within bounds. They are always without restraints.

'"O tiger among men! However, earlier, I have also heard how, in ancient times, Vipula was able to restrain his
preceptor's wife. There was an immensely fortunate and famous rishi by the name of Devasharma. His wife was
named Ruchi and her beauty was unmatched on earth. O Indra among kings! All the gods, gandharvas and danavas
were attracted to her beauty, in particular, the slayer of Vritra and Paka. The great sage, Devasharma, knew about
feminine nature. As best as he could, to the best of his ability, he sought to protect his wife. He knew that Puran-
dara coveted other people's wives. That is the reason he made efforts to protect his wife. O son! On one occasion,
the rishi made up his mind to undertake a sacrifice. He began to think about how his wife's protection might be ensured. The immensely ascetic one thought and thought about a method for protection. He summoned his beloved
disciple, Vipula, who was from the Bhargava lineage. 'O son! I will depart to undertake a sacrifice. The lord of the
gods has always desired Ruchi. You must protect her, to the best of your ability. Be attentive and always watch out
for Purandara. O extender of the Bhrigu lineage! He can assume many different kinds of forms.' O king! The ascetic, Vipula, controlled in his senses and always fierce in his austerities, with a resplendence that was like the fire
and the sun, was thus addressed. He was knowledgable about dharma and truthful in speech. He signified his assent. O great king! As his preceptor was about to leave, he again asked him, 'O sage! What are the forms in which
Shakra appears? What kind of body and energy does he assume? You should explain this to me.' O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! The illustrious one described the truth about Shakra's maya to the great-souled Vipula. 'O
brahmana rishi! The slayer of Bala and chastiser of Paka has many kinds of maya. Repeatedly, he assumes all these
diverse forms. He sports a diadem and wields a vajra or bow. Or he may wear a crown and adorn himself with earrings. In a short instant, he may assume a form like that of a chandala. O son! Yet again, he may have a crest and
matted locks and attire himself in rags. His body may be large and thick, or it can again become thin. He can also
assume compexions that are fair, dusky or dark. He may be ugly or handsome, young or old. He can be wise, stupid, dumb, short or tall. Shatakratu can appear like a brahmana, a kshatriya, a vaishya or a shudra. He can belong
to a superior varna, or an inferior one. He may appear in the form of a parrot or a crow, or in the form of a swan or
a cuckoo. He can also assume the form of a lion, a tiger or an elephant. He can appear as a god, a daitya or a king.
He may seem to be extremely thin, as if the wind can break down his limbs. He can also appear like a malformed
bird. Sometimes, he assumes many forms which are those of quadrupeds. He may also seem to be foolish. He can
assume the form of a fly or a mosquito. O Vipula! One is incapable of comprehending the form that he has assumed. O son! The creator of the universe, the one who has created this entire world, cannot understand it. Shakra
can also disappear and only be seen with the sight of knowledge. The king of the gods can also transform himself
into the form of the wind. O Vipula! Therefore, you must make great efforts in protecting the one with the slender
waist. O supreme among the Bhrigu lineage! You must ensure that Indra of the gods does not molest Ruchi. That
would be like sacrificial oblations being licked by an evil-minded dog.' Having said this, the sage departed, to undertake the sacrifice. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! The immensely fortunate Devasharma went away.

'"Hearing his preceptor's words, Vipula began to think. 'I will make supreme efforts to protect her from the immensely strong king of the gods. But what can I possibly do to protect my preceptor's wife? Indra of the gods is
well versed in may a. He is valiant and unassailable. What efforts will I make to protect her from the chastiser of
Paka? He can assume many kinds of forms and enter this cottage. Shakra is capable of assuming the form of the
wind to molest my preceptor's wife. Therefore, the best thing I can do now is to penetrate Ruchi's body. In that
way, I can protect her through my manliness. The illustrious Harivahana is capable of deception through his many
disguises. I will use the strength of my yoga to protect her from the chastiser of Paka. I will penetrate her body
with my body and protect her. My preceptor will return and see that his wife, Ruchi, has been defiled. There is no
doubt that he will curse me in rage. The great ascetic possesses divine sight. But this lady cannot be protected
through techniques adopted by other men. Indra of the gods has the power of maya and I am confronted with a
dilemma. I must certainly obey my preceptor's instructions. If I am able to protect her, that will be extraordinary. I
will use yoga to penetrate the body of my preceptor's wife. She will be free from taint and no sin will attach to me.
On his journey, a traveller seeks shelter in a deserted house. In that way, I will reside in the body of my preceptor's
wife. A drop of water moves, but does not touch the lotus leaf that it is on. In that way, I will dwell inside the body,
detached.' Knowing everything about the Vedas, this is the way he looked at dharma. Vipula considered his own
austerities and those of his preceptor. Having made up his mind, Bhargava resorted to this technique of protection.
O king! He made great efforts. Listen. The great ascetic, Vipula, seated himself near his preceptor's wife. When
the one with the unblemished limbs was also seated, he distracted her by telling her stories. He fixed his eyes on
her eyes and the vision that emerged from him on her vision. Vipula entered her body, like the wind entering the
sky. His attributes mixed with her attributes. His face merged into her face. Like an immobile shadow, the sage remained inside her. Vipula numbed the body of his preceptor's wife. He resided there and protected her and she herself didn't get to know. O king! He continued to do this until his great-souled preceptor returned to his house. He
protected her for the duration that the sacrifice took."'


Bhishma said, "One day, Indra of the gods assumed a divine form. Sensing an opportunity, he arrived at the
hermitage. O lord of men! He assumed a form that was attractive and handsome and in that disguise, he entered the hermitage. He saw that Vipula's body was seated immobile. His eyes were visionless, as if he was a portrait. Ruchi was beautiful in her limbs. Her hips and breasts were full. Her eyes were as large as lotus petals. Her
face was like the full moon. She was also seated. On seeing him, she wished to stand up. She was astounded at his
form and wished to ask him who he was. O Indra among men! But though she wished to rise, she was restrained
by Vipula, who was inside her. She was incapable of movement. In extremely sweet and gentle words, Indra of the
gods addressed her. 'O one with the beautiful smiles! Know that I am Indra of the gods and I have come here for
you. I am afflicted by the god of love and desire you. O one with the beautiful brows! Therefore, accept me. A
long period of time has already elapsed[Since Devasharma's departure.].' The sage, Vipula, heard Shakra's words. From inside the body of his
preceptor's wife, he saw the lord of the gods. O king! However, the unblemished one was incapable of rising. O
king! Since Vipula had penetrated her, she was also incapable of speaking. Through the signs, the extender of the
Bhrigu lineage understood what his preceptor's wife intended[That she was kindly disposed towards Indra.]. O lord! Using his powers of yoga, the immensely energetic one restrained her. Using the bonds of yoga, he tied down all her senses.

'"Seeing that she was indifferent, Shachi's consort addressed her again. O king! Restrained by the strength of
yoga, she was ashamed that she couldn't speak. She wished to reply, 'Come to me. Welcome.' However, Vipula
restrained the words his preceptor's wife desired to speak. Instead, the words that emerged were, 'Hello. Why have
you come here?' From a mouth that was as beautiful as the moon, these refined words emerged[Refined words probably means Sanskrit, the implication being that women didn't customarily speak in Sanskrit.]. Under someone
else's subjugation, she shame-facedly spoke these words. Purandara was terrified at this and became distracted. O
lord of the earth! The king of the gods glanced at her again. The one with the one thousand eyes glanced at her
with his divine sight. He thus saw the sage inside her body. Inside the body of the preceptor's wife, he was like an
image in a mirror. Purandara saw that he was terrible in his austerities. O lord! Scared of being cursed, he trembled. The immensely great ascetic, Vipula, released his preceptor's wife. He entered his own body and addressed
the terrified Shakra. 'O Purandara! You have not conquered your senses. You are wicked in your soul. Gods and
men will not worship you for long. O Shakra! Have you forgotten? Is that incident no longer in your mind? You
were marked with the signs of vaginas and freed from those because of Goutama. I know that you are foolish in
understanding and that you have not cleansed your soul. You are fickle. O stupid one! She is protected by me. O
wicked one! Go wherever you have come from. O foolish one! If you do not, I will instantly burn you down with
my own energy. O Vasava! It is only out of pity towards you that I am not burning you down. O evil-minded one!
My preceptor is intelligent and terrible in his austerities. If he sees you, his eyes will blaze in rage and he will burn
you down. O Shakra! Never again, should you disrespect brahmanas in this way. If you do not depart, through the
power of brahmanas, your sons and your advisers will be destroyed. You think yourself to be immortal and conduct yourself in this way. But that is not true and there is nothing that cannot be obtained through austerities.'

Hearing  the  great-souled  Vipula's  words,  Shakra  did  not  say  anything  in  reply.  Overcome  by  shame,  he
disappeared.

'"Soon after Shakra had departed, the great ascetic, Devasharma, returned to his hermitage, having completed
the sacrifice he had desired to undertake. O king! Vipula was engaged in doing what brought his preceptor pleasure. As soon as he returned, he handed over his preceptor's unblemished wife, whom he had protected, to him.
Devoted to his preceptor and tranquil in his soul, he greeted his preceptor. Without any fear, Vipula greeted him
and stood there. When he had rested and was seated with his wife, Vipula told him what Shakra had done. Hearing
Vipula's words, the powerful sage was satisfied with his good conduct, austerities and control. The lord saw the
Vipula was devoted to his preceptor and was virtuous. On seeing that he was devoted to dharma, he uttered words
of praise. The one with dharma in his soul applauded his disciple, who was devoted to dharma. He wished to grant
a boon to the one who was devoted to his preceptor. Having obtained his preceptor's permission, he asked that he
might be able to perform supreme austerities. From that day, Devasharma, the great ascetic, dwelt there with his
wife. In that desolate forest, he no longer had any fear from the slayer of Bala and Vritra."'


