Souti said, 'Having crossed the ocean, Kadru of swift speed, accompanied by Vinata, quickly arrived before the
horse. Seeing many black hairs stuck to the tail, Kadru made the dejected Vinata her slave. Then, having lost the
wager, Vinata became a slave who was stricken by grief.

'Meanwhile, when the time came, Garuda of great energy broke open the egg without his mother's help and
emerged. He looked like a mass of blazing fire and was fearful in appearance. As soon as he was born, the bird increased to a gigantic size and rose into the sky. On seeing him, all the beings[As will be evident, this really means the gods.] sought the refuge of Vibhavasu[Agni.].
They bowed down before the god who has a universal form and who was seated on his seat, and addressed him
thus. "O Agni! Do not extend your body. Have you decided to burn us? Look, the huge mass of flames is spreading." Agni replied, "O persecutors of the demons! It is not what you think. It is the mighty Garuda, equal to me in
energy." Thus addressed, the gods and all the sages approached Garuda and from a distance praised him in these
words. "O lord of the birds! You are a rishi. You obtain the greatest share in a sacrifice. You are a god. You are our
supreme protector. You are the ocean of strength, you are purity. You are beyond qualities and darkness. You are
the possessor of all anger. You cannot be conquered. We have heard that you are the performer of all great acts.
You are all that has not been and all that has been. You are the supreme knowledge. Surpassing the rays of the sun,
you produce all that is permanent and all that is transient. Darkening the splendour of the sun, you are the destroyer of everything. You are all that perishes and all that does not perish. O god! With the splendour of fire, you consume everything, just as the sun burns all beings in his anger. You are like the terrible fire which destroys everything at the end of a yuga, when all is consumed in the cycle of destruction. O king of the birds! Having come to
you, we seek refuge in you. You move in the sky, you have unbounded energy, you are as powerful as the fire. You
are the mighty bird Garuda, you reach the clouds. We have approached you. You are the granter of boons and unparalleled in strength." Having been thus praised by the gods and all the sages, Suparna[Another name for Garuda, meaning the one with beautiful feathers.] then decreased his energy and his splendour.'


Souti said, 'Then that bird, capable of travelling everywhere at will and capable of summoning energy at will, went
to his mother's house, on the other side of the ocean. Vinata lived there, tormented by grief, having lost the wager
and having become a slave. Some days later, when her son was present, Vinata was summoned by Kadru and when
Vinata bowed before her, Kadru said, "Dear Vinata, take me to the beautiful and lovely abode of the nagas situated
in the heart of the ocean." Then Suparna's mother took up the mother of the snakes. On his mother's request, Garuda took the snakes on his back. Vinata's son, the bird, began to rise up towards the sun and scorched by the rays of
the sun, the snakes became unconscious.

'Seeing the state of her sons, Kadru began to praise Shakra[Indra.] in these words. "O lord of the gods! I bow before
you. O slayer of Bala! I bow before you. O slayer of Namuchi! I bow before you. O thousand-eyed husband of
Shachi[Indra's wife.]! The snakes are being burnt by the rays of the sun. Save them with your showers. You are our supreme
protector. O best of the gods! O Purandara[The word means destroyer of cities.]! You can pour forth water in torrents. You are Vayu[The wind-god.], you are the
clouds. You are Agni. You are the lightning in the sky. You drive the masses of clouds and therefore you are known
as the dense cloud. You are the unparalleled thunder, you are the roaring clouds. You are the creator and the destroyer of all the worlds. You are invincible. You are the light of all beings. You are the sun and the fire. You are
supreme knowledge, you are wonderful. You are the king. You are the best of the gods. You are Vishnu, you have
one thousand eyes. You are the God and the last refuge. You are the soma[Drink of the gods.] that is the most worshipped. You are
the instants[Muhurta.]. You are the tithis[Lunar days.]. You are lava and you are again kshana[A kshana is a small interval of time, the time it takes for a twinkling of the eye and is equal to four-fifths of a
second. A lava is even smaller, because it is one-sixth of a kshana.]. You are shuklapaksha[The bright half of the lunar month.], you are
krishnapaksha[The dark half of the lunar month. The term used in the text is bahula.], you are kala[The daily increase or decrease in the size of the moon. A kala is the span of a zodiac sign divided by 1800.
So it is roughly around 1 minute, as in minutes and degrees. Measured in time, a kala is variously defined as 1
minute, 48 seconds or 8 seconds.], you are kashtha[One-thirtieth of a kala.] and you are also truti[Very small interval of time, equal to half of a lava.]. You are the year, the seasons, the
months, the nights and the days. You are the beautiful earth with its mountains and forests. You are the bright sky
with the sun. You are the great ocean and its waves, with whales[Timi.], creatures that swallow whales[Timingila.], crocodiles[Makara. However, a makara is actually a mythical being.]
and diverse other fish. You are immensely famous. You are always worshipped by the wise, whose intelligence has
been awakened, and the maharshis. You are the drinker of the soma juice that is offered at sacrifices with sacred
incantations and other offerings. You are always worshipped in sacrifices by Brahmanas who desire the fruits. Your
incomparable strength is praised in the Vedas. It is for this reason that the best of the Brahmanas, who are engaged
in sacrifices, study the Vedangas with great diligence."'


