'Sanjaya said, "In that battle, the rakshasa made all those on your side retreat from battle. O best of the Bharata lineage! He then rushed at Duryodhana, wishing to kill him. On seeing him forcefully descend on the king, many on
your side, unassailable in battle, attacked him, wishing to kill him. Those immensely strong ones twanged bows
that were as long as palm trees. They roared like a group of lions and together, attacked the one who was alone.
They surrounded him from every direction and showered down arrows. It was like the slayer of Bala showering
rain on mountains during the autumn. He was severely pierced and wounded, like an elephant with a goad. He
quickly rose up into the sky, like Vinata's son[Garuda.]. Stationed there, he uttered mighty roars, like clouds during the
autumn. His terrible roars echoed in the sky, the directions and the sub-directions. O best of the Bharata lineage!
On hearing the sounds emitted by the rakshasa, King Yudhishthira spoke these words to Bhimasena. 'The rakshasa
is certainly fighting with the maharatha sons of Dhritarashtra. That is the reason we are hearing the sounds of these
terrible roars. O son[The word used is tata.]! I see that the burden he has taken on is too much. The angry grandfather is ready to kill
the Panchalas. For the sake of protecting them, Phalguna is fighting with the enemy. O mighty-armed one! Two
tasks now present themselves[Fighting with the enemy and protecting Ghatotkacha.]. Having heard this, go and protect Hidimba's son. He confronts a great danger.'

Obeying the words of his brother, Vrikodara swiftly advanced. He roared like a lion, frightening all the kings. O
king! He proceeded with great force, like the ocean at the time of the new moon or the full moon. He was followed
by Satyadhriti and Souchitti, invincible in battle, Shrenimat, Vasudana and the lord who was the son of the king of
Kashi. There were many other maharathas, with Abhimanyu at the forefront, Droupadi's sons, the valiant Kshatradeva, Kshatradharma and Nila, the lord of the marshy regions, together with his own soldiers. They surrounded
Hidimba's son with a large number of chariots. There were six thousand elephants that were always crazy, with
riders prepared to strike. They advanced to protect Ghatotkacha, Indra among the rakshasas. They roared like lions. There was a great sound from the wheels of the chariots. There was a roar from the sound of the hooves. The
earth began to tremble. On hearing the sounds of those advancing ones, the faces of your soldiers paled. They were
anxious because of their fear of Bhimasena. O great king! They abandoned Ghatotkacha and fled from the field of
battle.

'"A battle then commenced between the great-souled ones on your side and those of the enemy. Neither side
wished to retreat from the encounter. The maharathas used many different kinds of weapons. They attacked each
other and struck each other. That extremely terrible battle struck terror in the minds of those who were cowards.
Horse-riders encountered elephant-riders, infantry clashed with chariot-riders. O king! In that encounter, they challenged each other and attacked each other. Because of that clash, a terrible and great dust arose, from chariots,
horses, elephants, infantry, footsteps and wheels. That dust was thick, like red smoke, and covered the arena of the
battle. O king! It was impossible to distinguish those on one's own side from those of the enemy. The father did
not recognize the son. The son did not recognize the father. No mercy was shown in the encounter and it made the
body hair stand up. O best of the Bharata lineage! There was the sound of weapons and the roar of men. There was
an extremely large din, like that of bamboos being burnt. A river of blood began to flow there and the waves were
elephants, horses and men. The hair[Of the fighters.] constituted the weeds and moss. The heads and bodies of men fell down in
that battle and a great sound was heard, like that of stones falling down. The earth was strewn with the torsos of
men, the mangled bodies of elephants and the mutiliated bodies of horses. The maharathas released many different
kinds of weapons. They attacked each other and struck each other. Urged by horse-riders, horses clashed against
horses. In that battle, they dashed against each other and fell down, devoid of life. Men attacked men, their eyes
extremely red with rage. They struck each other with their chests and thus killed each other. Urged by the trainers,
elephants attacked the elephants of the enemy. And in that encounter, they slew the others with the points of their
tusks. They were adorned with pennants and were covered in blood. In that clash, they looked like clouds tinged
with lightning. Some had their trunks sliced into two. Others had their bodies lacerated. They fell down in that tumult, like mountains with their wings sliced off[Mountains are believed to possess wings, until Indra lopped them off. Mount Mainaka was the only one which
escaped.]. Some supreme elephants had their sides ripped open by other
elephants. They shed large quantities of blood, like mountains exuding minerals. Some were slain through iron arrows, others were pierced by javelins. Without their riders, they were seen to be like mountains without summits.
Some of them were blind with anger and madness. No longer controlled, they crushed hundreds of chariots, horses
and infantry in that encounter. Horse-riders pierced horses with spears and javelins. They rushed against each other, confused about the directions. Rathas born in noble lineages fought with other rathas, ready to give up their
bodies. They resorted to the best of their strength and acted without any fear. O king! Those skilled in battle sought
fame, or heaven, and fought each other, as if in a svayamvara. Thus the battle raged there, and it made the body
hair stand up. The great army of the sons of Dhritarashtra were generally made to retreat."'


'Sanjaya said, "On seeing that his own soldiers had been killed, King Duryodhana angrily attacked Bhimasena, the
destroyer of enemies. He grasped a giant bow, which had a sound like that of Indra's vajra. He covered Pandava
with a great shower of arrows. He was full of rage. He affixed an extremely sharp arrow that was in the shape of a
half-moon and was tufted with hair. He sliced down Bhimasena's bow with this. Thereafter, the maharatha saw an
opportunity. He affixed an extremely sharp arrow that was capable of shattering a mountain. With this, the mighty-
armed one struck Bhimasena in the chest. He was severely pierced and wounded and licked the corners of his
mouth. The energetic one sought the support of his standard, which was decorated with gold. On seeing Bhimasena in that dispirited state, Ghatotkacha blazed up in anger, like a fire that can consume everything. With Abhimanyu at the forefront, all the maharatha Pandavas dashed angrily towards the king, roaring loudly. On seeing
them advance, in fury and rage, Bharadvaja's son spoke these words to the maharathas on your side. 'O fortunate
ones! Go swiftly and protect the king. I think he confronts a great danger and is submerged in an ocean of distress.
These maharatha Pandavas are great archers and are angry. With Bhimasena at the forefront, they are attacking
Duryodhana. With victory in mind, they are using many different kinds of weapons. They are uttering terrible roars
and are terrifying the kings[Obviously, on the Kourava side.].' On hearing the words of the preceptor, with Somadatta at the forefront, many on
your side attacked the army of the Pandavas-Kripa, Bhurishrava, Shalya, Drona's son, Vivimshati, Chitrasena,
Vikarna, Saindhava, Brihadbala and the two great archers from Avanti. They surrounded Kourava. They advanced
only twenty steps and began to strike each other. The Pandavas and the sons of Dhritrashtra sought to kill each
other.

'"Having spoken those words, Bharadvaja's mighty-armed son stretched his own gigantic bow and pierced Bhi-
ma with twenty-six arrows. Yet again, the mighty-armed one quickly enveloped him with arrows. It was like the
slayer of Bala showering rain on a mountain during autumn. However, Bhimasena was extremely strong. The great
archer swiftly pierced him back on the left side with ten arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He was severely pierced and wounded. He was also elderly in years. He became unconscious and suddenly sat down on the
floor of his chariot. On seeing that the preceptor was wounded, King Duryodhana himself, and Drona's son, became angry and attacked Bhimasena. Each of them was like Yama at the end of a yuga. On seeing them advance,
the mighty-armed Bhimasena quickly grasped a club. He instantly descended from his chariot and stood, as immobile as a mountain. That heavy club looked like Yama's staff, raised in battle. On seeing him with the upraised
club, like the summit of Kailasa, Kourava and Drona's son rushed at him, together. Vrikodara also swiftly rushed
at those supreme among strong ones, as they forcefully advanced against him. On seeing him advance in rage, terrible in his visage, many Kourava maharathas quickly attacked him. With Bharadvaja's son[This actually means Ashvatthama, the word son being used in a loose sense.] at the forefront, all
of them wished to kill Bhimasena. They hurled many different kinds of weapons towards Bhima's chest. Together,
all of them oppressed Pandava from every direction. On beholding that the maharatha was oppressed and faced a
great danger, Abhimanyu and the other Pandava maharathas advanced to rescue him, ready to give up their lives.
The brave lord of the marshy regions was Bhima's beloved friend. Nila possessed a complexion that was blue like
the clouds and in anger, he attacked Drona's son. The great archer had always sought to challenge Drona's son. He
drew his large bow and pierced Drona's son with arrows. O great king! It was like Shakra piercing the invincible
danava Viprachitti, who was the terror of the gods, in earlier times. Through his anger and energy, he had terrified
the three worlds. In that way, Nila pierced him with arrows that were well-tipped[Viprachitti was a famous demon and was the son of Kashyapa and Danu. Kashyapa and Danu had 100 sons
and Viprachitti is described as the most powerful of the lot.]. Drona's son was wounded
and covered with blood and overcome with rage. He drew his colourful bow, with a roar like that of Indra's vajra.
The supreme among intelligent ones made up his mind to destroy Nila. He affixed polished and broad-headed arrows that had been crafted by a blacksmith and slew his[Nila's.] four horses and brought down his standard. With a
seventh broad-headed arrow, he pierced Nila in the breast[Some non-critical versions mention the charioteer too. In that event, we have a tally for the seven arrows-four
for the horses, one for the charioteer, one for the standard and one for Nila.]. He was severely pierced and wounded and sat down
on his chariot.

'"King Nila possessed the complexion of the clouds. On seeing that he was unconscious, Ghatotkacha became
angry. Surrounded by his brothers, he impetuously rushed towards Drona's son, who was the ornament of any battle. In that fashion, many other rakshasas, invincible in battle, also advanced. On seeing that rakshasa, terrible in
form, advance towards him, Bharadvaja's spirited son became angry and killed many rakshasas, who were terrible
in form, especially those enraged rakshasas who were leading from the front. On seeing that they were repulsed as
a consequence of the arrows released from the bow of Drona's son, Ghatotkacha, Bhimasena's son who was gigantic in size, became angry. He resorted to great maya that was fearful in form and extremely terrible. In that encounter, the lord of the rakshasas, skilled in the use of maya, confounded Drona's son. Because of that maya, all
those on your side retreated. They saw each other lying down immobile on the face of the ground, writhing in convulsions, miserable and covered in blood. Drona, Duryodhana, Shalya, Ashvatthama and the other great archers
who were generally regarded as the foremost among the Kouravas were also in that state. All the chariots seemed
to be shattered, the elephants brought down. Horses and horse-riders were cut down in thousands[All of this was the outcome of an illusion and wasn't real. But the Kourava soldiers didn't see it that way.]. On seeing
this, all the soldiers on our side fled towards their camps. O king! I[Sanjaya saying this is unusual. However, the text allows for no other translation.] and Devavrata shouted, 'Fight. Do not run
away. This is the maya of rakshasas in battle. It has been applied by Ghatotkacha.' But they were confounded and
did not stay. Though both of us shouted in this way, they were frightened and did not pay attention to our words.
On seeing that they were running away, the Pandavas thought that they were victorious. Together with Ghatotkacha, they roared like lions. The roars and the sounds of conch shells and drums resounded in every direction.
Thus all your soldiers were routed by Hidimba's evil-souled son and fled in different directions. It was time for the
sun to set."'


