Yudhishthira asked, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! What is the one that is known  as  the donation of
lamps? How did it originate and what are its fruits? Tell me about this."

'Bhishma  replied,  "O  descendant  of  the  Bharata  lineage!  In  this connection, an ancient history is recounted
about a conversation between Prajapati Manu and Suvarna. There was an ascetic who was known by the name of
Suvarna. His complexion was golden. That is the reason he was known as Suvarna[Suvarna means gold.]. He possessed the qualities of
noble lineage and good conduct. He was supremely devoted to studying. Through his own qualities, he surpassed
many who were descended from excellent lineages. On one occasion, the brahmana saw Manu wandering around.
They asked each other questions about their respective well-beings. Resolved to obtain success, they sat down together on the mountainous slopes of the golden mountain of Meru. Seated there, they conversed with each other on
various topics-the brahmana rishis, the gods, the daityas and the ancient great-souled ones. Suvarna spoke these
words to the lord, Svayambhu Manu. 'For the welfare of all beings, you should answer my question. O lord of the
subjects! There are many beautiful objects that are offered to the gods. How did this originate and what are the
fruits that result? Please instruct me about this.'

'"Manu replied, 'In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about a conversation between Shukra and
Bali when they met. Bali, Virochana's son, ruled the three worlds. He quickly approached Shukra, the extender of
the Bhrigu lineage. The lord of the asuras honoured Bhargava with arghya and after he had sat down, seated himself. In the proper way, he then offered him a large quantity of dakshina. They then conversed about what you have
spoken about, about the fruits of donating beautiful objects like incense and lamps. The Indra among the daityas
asked the Indra among wise ones this supreme question. "O supreme among those who know about the brahman!
What are the fruits from donating beautiful objects like incense and lamps? O foremost among brahmanas! You
should tell me this."

'"'Shukra said, "Austerities were created first and dharma evolved after that. During  the intervening period,
creepers and herbs were generated. They had soma as their essence and many of these were created on earth. Some
of this species were like amrita, while others were like poison. There were others that were neither. Amrita instantly provided pleasure and nourishment to the mind. The terrible stench of poison makes the mind suffer in every
way. Know that amrita is auspicious and poison is extremely inauspicious. All the herbs constitute amrita. The energy of poison is generated from the fire. Whatever delights the mind is beneficial. That is the reason men who are
performers of good deeds describe them as beautiful. A pure man gives the gods these beautiful objects. Whatever
satisfies the gods is said to be beautiful. O lord! O king of the daityas! When a person gives beautiful objects to the
gods, with an auspicious end in mind, they are pleased with him. Herbs possess many kinds of valour and have
many different forms. It should be known that they have separate categories of fierce, mild and energetic. There
are trees that can be used at sacrifices and those that should not be used at sacrifices. Listen to me. There are garlands that ensure welfare for the asuras and for the gods. I will progressively tell you what is loved by rakshasas,
gods, yakshas, ancestors and humans and what ensures benefit. There are those[This is a description of flowers.] that are wild, those that naturally
grow in villages, those that have to be cultivated, those that are grown in mountainous regions, those with thorns,
those without thorns and those that have fragrance, beauty and taste. The scent of flowers is said to be of two types
-agreeable and disagreeable. Flowers with an agreeable fragrance must be offered to the gods. O lord! The gods
always desire flowers that come from trees without thorns and those that are generally white in complexion. A person who knows about donations should give garlands of aquatic flowers, lotuses and the like, to gandharvas, serpents and yakshas. Flowers which are extremely difficult to touch, those with thorns and those that are mostly red
or black, must be offered to creatures that are fierce in their valour[Such as evil spirits.]. O lord! It has been said that beautiful and
agreeable flowers, those that delight the mind and are sweet when crushed, should be offered to humans. Flowers
that have grown in cremation grounds or temples should not be used in any activity that involves nourishment,
such as marriages or secret pleasures. Mild flowers from slopes of mountains should be offered to the gods. Following the ordinances of the sacred texts, mild flowers that have grown and have been plucked properly can be offered. They please gods with their fragrance, yakshas and rakshasas with their sight and serpents with their touch.
Men are pleased in all three ways. Gods are pleased instantly. They are capable of satisfying all the desires and
wishes of mortals. When the gods are pleased, they always honour those who revere them. When they are ignored
and disrespected, they destroy those inferior men. I will now tell you the fruits from offering incense. There are
many kinds of incense-good and bad. Listen to me. There are three kinds-extractions, wood that naturally burns
and incense that is artificially created. There are auspicious and inauspicious fragrances. Listen in detail. With the
exception of sallaki[Frankincense, Boswellia serrata.], all extractions can be given to the gods. It is certain that guggulu[Resin of guggul tree, agar wood.] is the best among these.
Aguru[Aloe, kind of agar wood.] is the best among extractions and is desired by yakshas, rakshasas and serpents. The daityas love sallaki
and such similar extractions. O king! Fragrances from sarja[Resin of shala tree.] and the essence of similar wood, mixed with the fermented juice of sugar cane are recommended for men. The gods, the danavas and demons are said to be instantly
satisfied. Men are said to use these[Incense.] for pleasure. These are the qualities and reasons why these beautiful objects
are said to be given. These different kinds of incense lead to an enhancement of pleasure. I will tell you about the
supreme fruits associated with giving lamps-whom these lamps should be given to, when, and in what form.
Light is a manifestation of energy and it is described as moving upwards. Therefore, when energy is given, it increases the energy of men. Dakshinayana is mixed with a period of intense darkness. Therefore, the donation of
lamps is praised during uttarayana[To save people who have died during dakshinayana.]. Light moves upwards and it is an antidote to darkness. Therefore, it has been
determined as something that moves upwards. It is because of light that the gods are energetic, powerful and radiant. Rakshasas obtain these through darkness. Thus, lamps should be given. Through giving light, a man obtains
the radiance of eyesight. Such a donor should not be injured and the lamp must not be stolen or destroyed. A person who steals a lamp becomes blind. He is shrouded in darkness and loses his radiance. The donor of a lamp goes
to heaven and is surrounded by an array of lights there. The best lamps are those in which ghee is burnt. Next are
those in which the juices of herbs[Interpreted as oil from mustard and castor seeds.] are burnt. A person who desires prosperity must never give a lamp in which
the essence of fat, marrow and bones is being burnt. A person who desires his own prosperity must always place
lamps on the slopes of mountains, along deserted roads, near sanctuaries and crossroads. A man who gives lamps
always saves his lineage and purifies his soul. He becomes radiant and obtains the world of the stellar bodies. I will
tell you about the qualities and fruits associated with rendering offerings to gods, yakshas, serpents, men, ghosts
and rakshasas. Know that rakshasas are those who eat first, without feeding brahmanas, gods, guests and children.
They are inauspicious and do not pronounce vashatkara. Therefore, one must single-mindedly bow  one's  head
down and respectfully first render offerings to the gods. The gods accept these and always praise the house. It is
through  such  offerings  that  brahmanas,  other  guests,  yakshas,  rakshasas,  serpents,  gods  and  ancestors  are  sustained. When they are gratified, they please the offerer with a long life, fame and riches. Along with the offerings,
flowers, curds and well-cooked food, auspicious, fragrant and agreeable to see, must be rendered to the gods. Offerings made to yakshas and rakshasas must have blood and meat, mixed with liquor[Two kinds of liquor are mentioned, sura and asava. The former is undistilled, while the latter is distilled.] and decorated with parched
rice. What is given to the serpents must always be mixed with lotuses. The ghosts accept sesamum seed and molasses. Someone who eats only after honouring the gods with a first share becomes strong and noble. Therefore,
they must be given an offering first. One's house is radiant because of the gods who are present in the house. For
the sake of prosperity, one must worship them and give them the first share."'"

'Bhishma continued, "This is what Kavya Bhargava told the Indra among the asuras. Manu told Suvarna this
and Suvarna told Narada. O immensely radiant one! Narada told me about these qualities. O son! Therefore, you
should also follow all these kinds of conduct."'


Yudhishthira asked, "O best among the Bharata lineage! I have heard about giving flowers, incense and offerings, about the rites to be followed and the fruits. However, you should tell me about this again. What are the
fruits from giving incense and lamps? Why do householders hurl offerings down[On the ground.]?"
'Bhishma replied, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about a conversation between Nahusha
and Agastya and Bhrigu. O great king! Rajarshi Nahusha was an extremely great ascetic. Through his excellent
and good deeds, he obtained the kingdom of heaven. O king! Though Nahusha went to heaven and resided there,
he performed many kinds of human and divine rites. O king! Though the great-souled one was in heaven, he performed all the human rites and the eternal divine ones. He ignited the fire, collected kindling, kusha grass and
agreeable objects. He made offerings of food, parched grain, incense and lamps. All of these continued to be practised in the great-souled king's house. Though he dwelt in heaven, he performed the sacrifice of meditation and the
sacrifice of mental control. The lord of the gods[Nahusha, who had dislodged Indra from his throne.] worshipped all the gods in the proper way. O scorcher of enemies! He continued to do everything in the indicated way, just as he had done earlier. But after some time, the fact
of having become Indra, led to insolence penetrating him. O king! He ignored all the rites and began to suffer. Intoxicated at having been granted a boon[From Brahma.], he made the rishis carry him. Since his observance of the rites had diminished, he also became weak. When it was time for the foremost among sages, stores of austeries, to bear him,
he became overcome with a great deal of insolence. One after another, the rishis carried him. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! It was then time for Agastya to bear him. At that time, the immensely energetic Bhrigu, supreme
among those who knew about the brahman, had gone there. He reached Agastya's hermitage and asked, 'O great
sage! Why do we have to tolerate Nahusha? Since he has become Indra of the gods, the evil-minded one shows us
disrespect.'

'"Agastya replied, 'O great sage! How can I curse him? You know that the granter of boons has given him a
boon. When he arrived in heaven, he asked for a boon from that god. "Anyone that my eyes turn towards will
come under my subjugation." This boon was granted. Therefore, there is no doubt that I won't be able to burn him
down. That is also the reason why the other supreme rishis have not been able to curse him or bring him down. O
lord! In earlier times, the great-souled gave him amrita to drink. That is the reason we can't bring him down. It is
evident that the god has granted this boon to cause misery to all beings. That is the reason the worst among men
displays this adharma towards brahmanas. O supreme among eloquent ones! The time has arrived. Tell me what
should be done. All of us will act exactly as you tell us to.'

'"Bhrigu said, 'I have come here because I have been asked to do so by the grandfather. This is to counter
Nahusha's strength and insolence. Today, the extremely evil-minded king of the gods will yoke you to his chariot.
Today, I will use my energy to uproot him from the status of Indra. Behold. Today, I will establish Shatakratu as
Indra again. That extremely evil-minded and wicked person will be dislodged from his status as Indra. Today, the
evil Indra of the gods will strike you with his foot. His consciousness will be affected by destiny and that evil-
minded one will destroy himself. He will transgress dharma and I will thus be able to strike the one who causes the
injury. O best among brahmanas! In my anger, I will curse him, "May you become a snake." I will thus shame that
extremely evil-minded one. O great sage! While you look on, I will bring him down to earth. Nahusha is the performer of wicked deeds. He is intoxicated because of his prosperity and strength. O sage! If it pleases you, I will
act in this way.'"

'Bhishma continued, "Thus addressed by Bhrigu, the undecaying son of Mitravaruna, Agastya, was extremely
pleased and his anxiety was dispelled."'


Yudhishthira asked, "How did he face a calamity and how was he brought down on the ground? How did he
lose his status of Indra? You should tell me about this."

'Bhishma replied, "Those two great-souled ones conversed about what they should do. I have told you everything about how humans go to heaven. In that way, the great-souled one became the king of the gods by giving
lamps and all the other required objects, observing all the rites for rendering offerings and performing all the other
separate tasks that are meant for auspicious days. O Indra among kings! The learned say that in the world of the
gods and in the world of men, a householder who practises good conduct obtains prosperity. This is through offering incense and lamps and prostrations. When food is cooked, the first share must be offered to brahmanas. When
offerings are rendered to gods who reside in the house, they are pleased. The householder obtains satisfaction by
rendering such offerings. However, through such an act, the gods are pleased a hundred times more. This is also
the way virtuous people give incense and lamps, prostrating themselves. Such acts are praised and possess many
qualities. After bowing down, learned people perform many acts of ablutions and these please the gods. When they
are worshipped in accordance with the rites, the gods accept the offerings and are delighted. This is the kind of intelligence Nahusha, lord of men, resorted to. Having performed these wonderful rites, he obtained the great status
of Indra of the gods. But after some time, his good fortune started to decline. He no longer followed all the rites
and started to ignore them. The Indra among the gods was negligent in observing the rendering of offerings and in
following the ordinances and giving incense, lamps and water. The rakshasas started to obstruct his sacrificial rites.

'"He yoked Agastya, foremost among rishis, to his vehicle. The immensely strong one smiled and instructed that
the vehicle should be swiftly conveyed from the banks of the Sarasvati. The immensely energetic Bhrigu spoke to
the son of Mitravaruna. 'Until I have entered your matted hair, do not shut your eyes.' While he entered the matted
hair, the undecaying one[Agastya.] stood immobile. The immensely energetic Bhrigu prepared to bring the king down. The
king of the gods approached the rishi and the vehicle. O lord of the earth! Agastya spoke these words to the lord of
the gods. 'O Indra! Yoke me swiftly. What region will I bear you to? O lord of the gods! I will convey you wherever you tell me to.' Thus addressed, Nahusha yoked the sage. Bhrigu, who was inside the matted hair, became extremely delighted. However, Bhrigu took care not to look at the great-souled Nahusha, since he knew about the
power that the boon had given him. Though he was yoked by Nahusha, Agastya did not display any rage. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The king struck him with a goad. But even then, the one with dharma in his soul
wasn't angered. The king of the gods then angrily kicked Agastya on the head with his left foot. Bhrigu was inside
the matted hair. When the head was thus struck, the powerful one angrily cursed Nahusha, evil in his intelligence.
Bhrigu said, 'In your rage, you have kicked the head of this great sage. O extremely evil-minded one! Therefore,
you will quickly fall down on earth and become a snake.' O bull among the Bharata lineage! As soon as he said
this, he[Nahusha.] became a snake and fell down on earth, on the surface of the ground. This was done by Bhrigu, who had
not looked at him. O lord of the earth! Had Nahusha been able to see Bhrigu, he wouldn't have been able to use his
energy to bring him down. O great king! However, because of his gifts, austerities and rituals, though he fell down
on the ground, he still retained his memory. To bring an end to the curse, he sought to pacify Bhrigu. O great king!
He[Bhrigu.] felt compassion and sought to bring an end to the curse. Bhrigu said, 'There will be a king named Yudhishthira, an extender of the Kuru lineage. He will free you from the curse.' Saying this, he vanished.

'"The immensely energetic Agastya thus accomplished Shatakratu's purpose. Worshipped by the brahmanas, he
returned to his own hermitage. O king! You have saved Nahusha from that curse. O lord of men! While you looked
on, he went to Brahma's abode. Bhrigu thus brought Nahusha down to earth and went to Brahma's abode and told
Brahma what had happened. The grandfather summoned Shakra and the gods. 'O gods! It is because of my boon
that Nahusha obtained this kingdom. However, because of Agastya's anger, he has been dislodged and has gone to
earth. The gods are incapable of continuing without a king. Therefore, again consecrate Shakra in the kingdom of
heaven.' O Partha! The gods were thus addressed by the grandfather. Cheerfully, they replied to the grandfather
that it would be that way. The illustrious Vasava was consecrated in the kingdom of heaven by Brahma and conducted himself as earlier. O tiger among kings! This is the ancient account about Nahusha's transgression. But because of his deeds, Nahusha regained his success. Therefore, in the evening, a householder must offer lamps. After
death, a person who gives lamps obtains divine eyesight. The donor of a lamp becomes like the full moon in his
resplendence. A man who gives a lamp obtains beauty and riches for as many years as the number of nimeshas[A small measure of time, an instant, a twinking, a minute, the time it takes to blink the eye.]
for which the lamp is ablaze."'


