'Sanjaya said, "Dhananjaya was seen to roam around in that battle and he seemed to be simultaneously everywhere. He exhibited his wonderful weapons. He was like the midday sun, scorching everything from the sky. None
of the beings were capable of glancing at Pandava. A torrent of arrows issued from the great-souled one's Gandiva.
In that battle, they seemed to be like an array of swans in the sky. He countered all those brave ones with his
weapons. Through his fierce deeds, he exhibited his terrible self. O king! Arjuna passed all those rathas and confounded them with his iron arrows, wishing to kill Jayadratha. With his charioteer, Dhananjaya was seen to swiftly
course around in that field of battle, releasing arrows in all the directions. Hundreds and thousands of arrows were
shot by the brave and great-souled one and these torrents traversed the sky and made it invisible. The great archer
picked up an arrow, affixed it and shot it. But we did not notice any gap between Kounteya Pandava doing these. O
king! Having covered all the directions and having afflicted all the rathas in that battle, Kounteya attacked
Jayadratha. He pierced him with sixty-four arrows with straight tufts. Saindhava was thus pierced by arrows shot
by the wielder of Gandiva. He became extremely enraged, like an elephant struck by a goad, and could not tolerate
this. The one with the boar on his banner[Jayadratha.] used arrows that were tufted with the feathers of vultures. They were
like venomous serpents and had been prepared by artisans. In that battle, he released these sharp arrows towards
Savyasachi. He pierced Gandiva with three arrows and struck Arjuna with six iron arrows. He pierced his horses
with eight arrows and his standard with one. Arjuna countered the arrows shot by Saindhava with his own sharp
arrows. Simultaneously, with a couple of arrows, he severed the head of Saindhava's charioteer from his body and
brought down the well-ornamented standard. The king of Sindhu's standard was marked with the sign of a boar
and was extremely large. Its pole was broken and it was shattered by those arrows. It fell down, like a fiery flame.

'"Meanwhile, the sun was descending quickly. Janardana hastily spoke to Pandava. 'O Dhananjaya! Cut off the
head of the evil-souled Saindhava. The sun is about to set on Asta, the best of mountains. But listen to the words I
have to say about killing Jayadratha. Saindhava's father, Vriddhakshatra, is famous in the world. He obtained
Jayadratha Saindhava, the scorcher of enemies, as his son after a long period of time and an invisible voice, with a
rumbling tone like that of the clouds, spoke to the king then. "O lord! In this world, your son will possess lineage,
conduct and qualities that are equal to those of two lineages[Referring to the solar (surya) and lunar (chandra) dynasties.]. He will be foremost among kshatriyas in the
world and will be revered by brave ones. But when he is fighting against an enemy in a battle, that enemy archer,
famous on earth, will sever his head." Having heard this, the king of Sindhu, the scorcher of enemies, reflected for
a long time. Afflicted by affection towards his son, he summoned all his relatives and told them, "The person who
fights with my son in an encounter and brings his head down on the ground will bear a great burden. There is no
doubt that his head will shatter into a hundred fragments." Having said this, he established Jayadratha on the
throne. Vriddhakshatra went to the forest and immersed himself in austerities. The energetic one is still tormenting
himself with terrible and extremely difficult austerities. O one with the ape on your banner! He is just outside
Samantapanchaka[Samantapanchaka is another name for Kurukshetra, usually explained because of the five (pancha) lakes created by Parashurama. Alternatively, it is said that the land was five yojanas in every direction.]. O slayer of enemies! Therefore, once you have severed Jayadratha's head in this great battle, use your divine weapons that are terrible and perform wonderful deeds. O younger brother of the son of the
wind god! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! With its earrings, quickly convey the head of the king of Sindhu to
Vriddhakshatra's lap and bring it down there. If you bring his head down on the ground, there is no doubt about the
consequence that your head will shatter into a hundred fragments. O best of the Kurus! Resort to your divine
weapons and do this, so that the king[Vriddhakshatra.], the lord of the earth, does not know. O son of Vasava! There is no deed
in the three worlds that you cannot perform.' Having heard these words, he[Arjuna.] licked the corners of his mouth.

'"He used mantras to invoke a divine weapon that was like Indra's vajra to the touch. He used an arrow that was
capable of bearing a great load and had always been worshipped with fragrances and garlands. To bring about
Jayadratha's death, Arjuna quickly released it. Released from Gandiva, that arrow was as swift as a hawk snatching a bird from the top of a tree. It severed Saindhava's head. With other arrows, Dhananjaya bore it up again[So that the head did not drop down on the ground.],
thus causing grief to his ill-wishers and delight to his well-wishers. At that time, Pandava made the head look like
a kadamba flower and used arrows to convey it to Samantapanchaka. O venerable one! The energetic King Vriddhakshatra, with whom you have a matrimonial alliance[Jayadratha was married to Dhritarashtra's daughter, Duhshala.], was engaged in his evening prayers then. He was
seated. The head of the king of Sindhu, with dark hair and earrings, was thrown down on his lap. The head, with its
beautiful earrings, was brought down on his lap. O scorcher of enemies! But King Vriddhakshatra did not notice it.
When the intelligent Vriddhakshatra stood up, after having finished his meditation, the head was suddenly flung
down on the ground. O scorcher of enemies! As soon as his son's head fell down on the ground, the king's head
shattered into a hundred fragments. At this, all the beings were overcome by supreme wonder. All of them praised
Vasudeva and maharatha Bibhatsu.

'"On seeing that Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu, had been killed, your sons were miserable and their eyes filled
with tears. So that Pandava[Yudhishthira.] might know, in that battle, Bhimasena roared loudly like a lion and filled up heaven
and earth[Rodasi.]. On hearing that loud roar, Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, understood that Saindhava had been killed by
the great-souled Phalguna. He sounded musical instruments and delighted his warriors. Wishing to fight, he advanced in the battle against Bharadvaja's son. O king! After the sun had set, a battle commenced between Drona
and the Somakas and it made the body hair stand up. O king! After Saindhava was slain, those maharathas made
every effort to kill Bharadvaja's son. When Saindhava was slain, the Pandavas obtained victory. Intoxicated with
victory, they fought with Drona. O great king! Having killed King Saindhava, in that encounter, Arjuna also fought
with the supreme of rathas and warriors on your side. The one with the diadem and the garland was like the king of
the gods, fighting with the enemies of the gods and slaughtered them, like the rising sun destroying darkness. The
brave one fulfilled the pledge he had taken earlier."'


