'Droupadi said, "I have a duty to perform, an act that I had not performed earlier, because dragged through the
force of this powerful one, I had lost my senses. I offer my homage to all my superiors who are in this assembly of
Kurus. Let it not be my crime that I have not done this before."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Dragged with even greater force, the ascetic lady was even more miserable. She did not
deserve this. She fell down on the ground and lamented in the sabha.

'Droupadi said, "The assembled kings set their eyes on me in the arena of the svayamvara. Until being brought
to this sabha, I have never been seen by anyone since, anywhere. One who has earlier not seen the wind or the sun
in her house, has today been seen by this assembly of Kurus in the middle of the sabha. Earlier, the Pandavas have
not allowed the wind to touch me in my house. They now bear it when I am touched by this evil-hearted one. Time
has deviated. The Kurus permit their daughter and daughter-in-law, unworthy of such treatment, to be thus oppressed. Earlier, it has been heard that pure and chaste wives are not brought into the middle of a sabha. Where is
the dharma of the lords of the earth? According to dharma, it has earlier been heard that wives are not brought into
an assembly hall. That earlier eternal dharma has been lost among the Kouravas. How is it that the chaste wife of
the Pandus, the sister of Parshata's son[Parshata is Drupada and his son is Dhrishtadyumna, Droupadi's brother.] and a friend to Vasudeva, has been brought into this assembly of kings?
O Kouravas! I am Dharmaraja's wife and I was born in the same varna as he. Tell me whether I am a slave or not a
slave, and I will act accordingly. O Kouravas! This mean one, the bringer of ill repute to the Kouravas, is firmly
molesting me and I cannot bear it any longer. O kings! O Kouravas! I want you to answer, whatever you might
think, and I will act accordingly. Have I been won or have I not been won?"

'Bhishma replied, "O fortunate one! I have already said that the course of dharma is supreme. Even the great-
souled brahmanas in this world are incapable of comprehending its course. When a powerful man uses force, that
is perceived as dharma by the world. But if a feeble one speaks about dharma, that is not regarded as dharma by
others. I am incapable of answering your question certainly. The issue is subtle, deep, complicated and important.
It is certain that all the Kurus have become addicted to avarice and delusion. Without a doubt, the destruction of
the lineage will occur soon. O fortunate one! The lineage into which you have been born and the one in which you
are established as a daughter-in-law, never deviates from the path of dharma, regardless of the disaster that might
befall. O Panchali! Since you look at dharma, even though you are suffering, it is conduct that you yourself follow.
Drona and the other elders, knowledgeable in dharma, sit here with lowered heads, as if their bodies are
hollow[The spirit or soul has departed from these bodies.]. It is my view that Yudhishthira is the supreme authority on the question. He should himself say
whether you have been won or have not been won."'

Vaishampayana said, 'The kings who were there were scared of Dhritarashtra's son. They said nothing, good or
bad, though they witnessed these many events and saw her crying, like a female osprey that has been hurt. On seeing that the sons and grandsons of the kings were silent, Dhritarashtra's son[Duryodhana.] smiled and spoke these words to
the daughter of the king of Panchala, "O Yajnaseni! Let the question now be placed before the immensely powerful
Bhima, Arjuna, Sahadeva and your husband Nakula. Let them reply to your words. O Panchali! Let them declare
before all these aryas that Yudhishthira is not your lord. They must establish Dharmaraja as a liar[If Yudhishthira has been won and has no independent identity or property, he uttered a lie in staking
Droupadi. On the other hand, if Yudhishthira has not been won and has independent identity and property, he uttered a lie in staking himself. In either event, he is a liar.]. You will
then be freed from servitude. The great-souled son of Dharma is always established in dharma. He is the equal of
Indra. Let him himself declare whether he is your lord or not. When he has spoken, you must quickly decide whom
to love. All the Kouravas who are in this sabha are immersed in your affliction. Though they are aryas at heart,
they cannot appropriately resolve the issue. They therefore look to your husbands for an answer." Hearing these
words of the king of the Kurus, all those who were present in the assembly loudly applauded him. Some happily
waved their garments. But sounds of "alas" were also heard. On hearing these pleasant words, all the kings in the
assembly applauded the righteous act of the foremost among the Kurus. Turning their faces, all the kings looked at
Yudhishthira. He was learned in the principles of dharma. What would he say? What would Bibhatsu, the Pandava
who was undefeated in battle, say? What would Bhimasena and the twins say? They were curious and wondered.
When the noise had died down, Bhimasena grasped his large arms, smeared with sandalwood paste, and spoke.

"Had Dharmaraja Yudhishthira not been our superior and had he not been our lord of our lineage, we would not
have tolerated this. He owns the merit of our austerities and he is even the lord of our lives. If he considers himself
to have been won, then all of us have been won. But for that, no one who walks the ground of the earth with his
feet would have escaped with his life after touching Panchali's hair. Look at my long and round arms, like iron
clubs. Once inside them, not even Shatakratu can escape. But bound in the noose of dharma, out of respect for
him[Yudhishthira.] and restrained by Arjuna, I am not doing anything dreadful. If I am once freed by Dharmaraja, I will make
my arms perform the act of swords and kill these evil sons of Dhritarashtra, the way a lion kills small animals." At
that, Bhishma, Drona and Vidura spoke and said, "Restrain yourself. With you, everything is possible."'


'Karna said, "There are three who can own no property-a slave, a student and a woman. O fortunate one! You are
the wife of a slave and have nothing of your own. You have no lord and are like the property of slaves. Enter[Dhritarashtra's household.]
and serve us. That is the task for you in this household. O Princess! All the sons of Dhritarashtra are now your
masters and not the sons of Pritha. O beautiful one! Choose another one for your husband, one who will not make
you a slave through gambling. Remember the eternal rule among slaves. Sexual acts with one's masters are never
censured. Nakula, Bhimasena, Yudhishthira, Sahadeva and Arjuna have been won over. O Yajnaseni! Enter as a
slave. The ones who have been won over can no longer be your husbands. Valour and virility are of no use to
Partha[Meaning Yudhishthira.] now. In the middle of the sabha, he has gambled away the daughter of Drupada, the king of Panchala."'

Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing these words, Bhimasena couldn't bear it any more. Like a man tormented, he
breathed deeply. But he was devoted to the king[Yudhishthira.] and tied down in the noose of dharma. He tried to burn
him[Karna.] down with the anger in his eye. Bhima said, "I cannot be angry at the words of the son of a suta[Karna was brought up by a suta, though he was Kunti's son.]. It is
truly the case that the dharma of slaves is upon us. O lord of men[Yudhishthira.]! Our enemies would not have dared hold me
down, had you not staked her." Hearing Radheya's words, King Duryodhana then spoke to Yudhishthira, who sat
silent, as if he had lost his senses. "O king! Bhima, Arjuna and the twins always follow your instructions. Answer
the question as to whether you think Krishna has been won." Having thus spoken to Kounteya, he became insolent
with arrogance. He looked invitingly at Panchali and grasped his garment. Smiling at Radheya and tormenting
Bhima, he exposed his left thigh to Droupadi, who was looking at him[Duryodhana was inviting Droupadi to come and sit on his left thigh, since the left thigh is the seat of the
wife. The right thigh is the seat of daughters and daughters-in-law.]. It was like the stem of a plantain tree,
like the trunk of an elephant, as proud as the vajra and was marked with all the auspicious signs. On witnessing
this, Vrikodara enlarged his red eyes. Among all the kings in the sabha, he spoke to them in compelling words. "If
he fails to break that thigh with a club in a great battle, let Vrikodara not go to the worlds where his ancestors have
gone." When he was thus enraged, sparks of fire issued out of every opening in his body, as if from the hollow of a
tree that is on fire.

'Vidura said, "O kings! Look out for the extreme danger that emanates from Bhimasena. Watch, for this is like
Varuna's noose. The great calamity that the gods had destined for the descendants of the Bharata lineage in ancient
times, has come to pass. Dhritarashtra's sons have transgressed in gambling. They are now quarrelling about a lady
in a sabha. There is great danger to what you have already obtained and what you wish to obtain[The expression used is yogakshema. Both these words have diverse meanings. However, kshema means preserving what has already been acquired and yoga means obtaining that which has not yet been acquired.]. The counsel
of the Kurus is now based on evil advice. O Kurus! Know this to be dharma. If it is wrongly diagnosed, this entire
assembly will be tainted. If this gambler had staked her before, he would not have been won and would have still
been her master. But if a man puts up a stake when he is not the lord of anything, winning that stake is like obtaining riches in a dream. O Kurus! You have listened to Gandhari's son[Duryodhana.]! But do not deviate from the path of
dharma."

'Duryodhana responded, "I am willing to abide by Bhima's words, Arjuna's words and the words of the twins. O
Yanjanseni! If they say that Yudhishthira wasn't their lord, then you will be freed from slavery."

'Arjuna said, "This great-souled King Dharmaraja, Kunti's son, was certainly our master when he first played
with us as stake. But whose lord was he, once he had lost himself? O assembled Kurus! All of you should decide
that."'

Vaishampayana said, 'At that time, in King Dhritarashtra's house, a jackal cried at the agnihotra[As an ill omen. The agnihotra is the maintenance of the sacred fire in a house.]. O king!
Donkeys brayed in response and from every direction, terrible birds joined in. Vidura, who was knowledgeable in
everything, heard these terrible sounds, and so did Subala's daughter[Gandhari is Subala's daughter.]. Bhishma, Drona and the learned Goutama[Kripacharya, who was descended from Goutama.] heard and said, "Peace! Peace!" On hearing those terrible omens, Gandhari and the learned Vidura became
miserable and told the king[Dhritarashtra. Clearly, only Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Vidura and Gandhari understood these to be ill omens.]. Then the king spoke these words. "O evil-minded Duryodhana! You have been destroyed. In this assembly hall of the bulls among the Kurus, in this sabha, you have used insolent words against a
woman, especially a lawfully wedded wife like Droupadi." Having spoken these words, the intelligent Dhritarashtra stopped, for he was concerned about the welfare of his relatives. Using his knowledge and intelligence, he
spoke these words, so as to pacify Krishna Panchali.

'Dhritarashtra said, "O Panchali! Choose from me whatever boon you desire. You are a chaste lady who follows
supreme dharma and you are the most special of my daughters-in-law."

'Droupadi replied, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! If you wish to grant me a boon, I will choose this. The
illustrious Yudhishthira, who follows all the ways of dharma, should not be a slave. Let these young boys, who do
not know of Prativindhya's[Yudhishthira and Droupadi's son.] intelligence, refer to him as the son of a slave when he arrives. He has been the son
of a king earlier, like no man anywhere and ever. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He will die if he is brought
up as the son of a slave."

'Dhritarashtra said, "O fortunate one! Ask for a second boon from me and I will grant it to you. My heart has
convinced me that you do not deserve to obtain only a single boon."

'Droupadi replied, "With my second boon, I desire that Bhimasena, Dhananjaya, Nakula and Sahadeva, together
with their chariots and their bows, should not be slaves."

'Dhritarashtra said, "O one who always follows the path of righteousness! Two boons do not honour you
enough. Ask for a third. You are the best among all my daughters-in-law."

'Droupadi replied, "O illustrious one! Avarice destroys dharma and I am disinclined. O supreme among kings! I
am not deserving of a third boon from you. It is said that the vaishya has one boon and a kshatriya and his wife can
have two. O Indra among kings! A king can have three boons and a brahmana one hundred. O king! My husbands
were reduced to an evil state, but have been rescued. They will obtain riches and prosperity through their own sacred deeds."'


