'Sanjaya said, "O tiger among men! There were kings who were following Susharma's lead and Arjuna used sharp
arrows to dispatch them to the abode of the king of the dead. In that battle, Susharma pierced Partha with arrows.
He again pierced Vasudeva with seventy and Partha with nine. The maharatha who was Shakra's son repulsed
them with his own shower of arrows. In that battle, he dispatched Susharma's warriors to Yama's abode. They
were slain by Partha, like the fire at the destruction of a yuga. O king! Those maharathas were overcome with fear
and fled from the field of battle. O venerable one! Some abandoned their horses. Others gave up their chariots. And
still others discarded their elephants and fled in the ten directions. Others fled from the field of battle, with their
horses, elephants and chariots. O lord of the earth! They ran away with great speed. In that great battle, foot soldiers threw away their weapons. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As they ran away, they ignored everything
else. They were repeatedly restrained by Susharma of the Trigartas and by other chiefs among the kings. But they
did not stay in that battle.

'"On seeing that his army was being routed, your son, Duryodhana, placed Bhishma at the forefront of the battle, ahead of all the soldiers. Using the best of his great endeavour, he attacked Dhananjaya, for the sake of protecting the life of the lord of Trigarta. He alone remained stationed in the battle, together with all his brothers, and
showered many different kinds of arrows. The remaining men ran away. O king! The Pandavas were armoured.
For Phalguna's sake, they used their best endeavours to go to the spot where Bhishma was. They knew that the
wielder of Gandiva was invincible. But cries of lamentation had arisen in all directions from the spot where Bhishma was. In that encounter, the brave one with the palm tree on his standard used straight-tufted arrows to shroud
the army of the Pandavas. All the Kurus and the Pandavas seemed to be one single mass. O great king! They
fought and the sun reached midday. Satyaki pierced Kritavarma with five iron arrows. The brave one remained stationed in the battle, releasing thousands of arrows. King Drupada pierced Drona with sharp arrows. He again
pierced him with seventy arrows and his charioteer with seven. Bhimasena pierced his great-grandfather, King
Bahlika, and emitted a loud roar, like a tiger in a forest[Bahlika is the name of a kingdom, rather than of a specific king. Pratipa had three sons, Devapi, Bahlika and
Shantanu. Shantanu became a king because his elder brothers, Devapi and Bahlika could not, or did not. This
passage suggests that the Bahlika who took part in the war was Shantanu's elder brother and was thus Bhima's
great-grandfather. Given the age, this seems unlikely. Somadatta, Bhurishrava and Shala were descended from
this Bahlika and they are more likely candidates as the Bahlika who took part in the war.]. Arjuna's son pierced Chitrasena with many fast arrows.
Chitrasena was severely pierced in the chest with three arrows. These two great ones among men encountered each
other in the battle and were radiant. O king! They were like the extremely terrible Budha and Shanaishchara in the
sky[Mercury and Saturn respectively.]. Subhadra's son, the destroyer of enemy heroes, roared powerfully, after having slain his horses with four
arrows and his charioteer with nine. O lord of the earth! With his horses slain, the maharatha swiftly descended
from his chariot and climbed onto Durmukha's chariot. Drona pierced Drupada with straight-tufted arrows and the
valorous one also swiftly pierced his charioteer. At the head of his soldiers, King Drupada was thus oppressed. Remembering his earlier hostility, he retreated on swift horses. In an instant, Bhimasena deprived King Bahlika of his
horses, charioteer and chariot, while all the soldiers looked on. O great king! Bahlika, supreme among men, was
overcome by panic and confronted a great danger. He swiftly climbed onto maharatha Lakshmana's chariot. Satya-
ki repulsed maharatha Kritavarma. O king! He attacked the grandfather with many arrows. He pierced Bharata[Bhishma.]
with sixty sharp arrows that were tufted with hair and seemed to be dancing around on his chariot, brandishing his
large bow. The grandfather hurled a giant and iron javelin towards him. It was decorated with gold and was extremely swift. It was as beautiful as a maiden of the serpents. On seeing it suddenly descend, extremely energetic
and like death, the immensely famous Varshneya destroyed it with his dexterity. That extremely terrible javelin
could not touch Varshneya. It fell down on the face of the ground, like a giant meteor that has lost its brilliance. O
king! At this, Varshneya forcefully grasped and hurled a javelin towards the grandfather's chariot. It was terrible to
behold. In that great battle, it was hurled through the force of Varshneya's arms. It advanced with great force, like a
fatal night advancing towards a man. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing it suddenly descend,
Gangeya used two extremely sharp kshurapra arrows to slice it into two, so that it fell down on the ground. Having
severed the javelin, he angrily struck Satyaki on the chest with nine arrows and the destroyer of enemies smiled as
he did this. O Pandu's elder brother! The Pandavas surrounded Bhishma in that battle, with their chariots, elephants and horses, so that Madhava[Satyaki.] might be rescued. A tumultuous battle commenced and it made the body
hair stand up. In that encounter, both the Pandavas and the Kurus desired victory."'


'Sanjaya said, "O great king! Duryodhana saw that Bhishma was angry in the battle. O great king! He also saw
that he was surrounded by the Pandavas, like clouds in the sky surrounding the sun after summer is over. He addressed Duhshasana. 'This brave and great archer, Bhishma, is the destroyer of enemies. O bull among the Bharata
lineage! He has been covered on all sides by the brave Pandavas. O brave one! It is your duty to protect the extremely great-souled one. In this battle, protect Bhishma, our grandfather, so that he can kill the Panchalas and the
Pandavas in this encounter. I think that it is our duty to protect Bhishma. Bhishma, the great archer, is our protector
and is also our grandfather. With all your soldiers, surround the grandfather. If you protect him, you will perform a
difficult task in this battle.' In the encounter, having been thus addressed, your son, Duhshasana, stationed himself
around Bhishma, surrounding him with a large army. Subala's son had many hundreds and thousands of horses.
The riders had polished spears and wielded swords and spikes. They were proud and extremely swift. This was a
force with standards. These supreme among men were trained and skilled in battle. They surrounded Nakula, Sahadeva and Pandava Dharmaraja from every direction and repulsed those best of men. King Duryodhana sent ten
thousand brave horse-riders to restrain the Pandavas. They penetrated with great force, like Garudas advancing to
do battle. O king! The earth was struck with the hooves and trembled because of the sound. A great noise from the
hooves of the horses could be heard then. It was like a large forest of bamboos being burnt on a mountain. As they
advanced there, a great cloud of dust arose. It rose up into the path of the sun and shrouded the sun. The army of
the Pandavas was agitated because of the force of these horses, as if a flock of swans had descended onto a large
lake with great force. Nothing could be heard because of the sounds of neighing.

'"O great king! In that battle, King Yudhishthira and the Pandavas who were Madri's sons spiritedly checked the
force of those horse-riders, like the shoreline checks the forceful waves of the great ocean on the night of the full
moon, when the waters are full because of the rains. O king! The rathas used straight-tufted arrows to sever the
heads of the horse-riders from their bodies. O great king! They were slain and brought down by those who wielded
firm bows. It was like elephants killed by mighty elephants and hurled into mountainous caverns. They[The Pandava warriors.] roamed
around in the ten directions and used extremely sharp javelins and straight-tufted arrows to slice off the heads. O
bull among the Bharata lineage! The horse-riders were struck by swords. Their heads fell down, like fruit from
large trees. O king! Horses and their riders were seen to be slain there. They fell down and were falling down, in
hundreds and thousands. Having been thus slaughtered, the horses were overcome by fear and fled. It was like deer
trying to protect their lives at the arrival of a lion. O great king! In that great battle, the Pandavas vanquished the
enemy. Having driven the enemy away in the battle, they blew on their conch shells and sounded their drums.

'"In the midst of the soldiers, Duryodhana was seen to be distressed. O best of the Bharata lineage! He spoke
these words to the king of Madra. 'This eldest son of Pandu has vanquished my maternal uncle. O mighty-armed
one! While you have looked on, the powerful one has driven my soldiers away. O mighty-armed one! Repulse him,
the way the shoreline beats back the abode of makaras. On account of your strength and valour, you are known to
be irresistible.' Having heard the words of your son, the powerful Shalya advanced with a large number of chariots
to the spot where King Yudhishthira was stationed. Shalya suddenly descended with an extremely large force, with
the thrust of the great ocean. Pandava countered him in that battle. In that encounter, maharatha Dharmaraja used
ten arrows to swiftly strike the king of Madra between the breasts. Nakula and Sahadeva struck him with three arrows that were aimed straight. The king of Madra pierced each of them with three arrows. He again pierced Yudhishthira with sixty sharp arrows. Overcome with anger, he struck the two sons of Madri with two arrows. The
mighty-armed Bhima then beheld the king in that battle. He approached the king of Madra, as if advancing into the
jaws of death. The vanquisher of enemies advanced to the spot where Yudhishthira was stationed in the battle. An
extremely terrible and fearful battle raged. The sun was blazing in the other direction then[Noon had passed and the sun was in the western horizon.]."'

'Sanjaya said, "Your father was enraged. In that battle, he used supreme and sharp arrows to pierce the Parthas and
their soldiers in every direction. He pierced Bhima with twelve arrows and Satyaki with nine, Nakula with three
arrows and Sahadeva with seven. He struck Yudhishthira with twelve arrows in his chest and arms. The immensely
strong one then pierced Dhrishtadyumna and roared. Nakula pierced him with twelve arrows and Madhava[Satyaki.]
with three. Dhrishtadyumna pierced the grandfather back with seventy arrows, Bhimasena with five and Yudhishthira with twelve. Having pierced Satyaki, Drona pierced Bhimasena. He pierced each of them with five sharp
arrows that resembled Yama's staff. But each of them pierced the bull among brahmanas back with three arrows
that were straight in their aim and were like giant snakes. The Souviras, the Kitavas, those from the east, those
from the west, those from the north, the Malavas, the Abhishahas, the Shurasenas, the Shibis and the Vasatayas did
not avoid Bhishma in that battle, though they were slaughtered by his sharp arrows. Other great-souled ones on the
side of the Pandaveyas were slaughtered. The Pandavas were attacked by those who wielded many weapons in
their hands. O king! But the Pandavas still surrounded the grandfather. The invincible one was surrounded on all
sides by a large number of chariots. Consuming the enemy, he blazed up like a fire engendered in a deserted forest.
His chariot was the source of the fire. The bow, swords, javelins and clubs were the kindling. His arrows were the
sparks. Bhishma was himself the fire that consumed the bulls among the kshatriyas. His arrows had golden tufts
and the feathers of vultures. They were extremely energetic. He enveloped the enemy force with barbed, hollow
and iron arrows. He used sharp arrows to bring down elephants and chariots. That large number of chariots looked
like a forest of palm trees with the heads lopped off. O king! In that battle, the mighty-armed one, supreme among
all wielders of weapons, deprived chariots, elephants and horses of their riders. The twang of his bow-string and
the slapping of his palms were like the clap of thunder. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the beings were
agitated and trembled. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Your father's arrows were incapable of being countered.
Released from Bhishma's bow, those arrows did not only strike the armour on the bodies. O king! Brave ones were
slain on their chariots. O great king! With the swift horses still yoked, we saw them[The chariots.] being dragged around all
over the field of battle. There were fourteen thousand maharathas from the Chedis, the Kashis and the Karushas.
They were famous, born in noble lineages and were ready to give up their lives. Their standards were decorated
with gold and all of them refused to retreat from the field of battle. They clashed against Bhishma in that battle, as
if against Death with a gaping mouth. All of them were submerged in the world of the hereafter, together with their
horses, chariots and elephants. O king! We saw hundreds and thousands of chariots. Some had their floors and
axles chattered. Others had completely broken wheels. The bumpers of the chariots were fragmented and the charioteers were brought down. O lord of the earth! O venerable one! Arrows, excellent armour, spikes, clubs, maces,
swords, arrows with iron heads, the floors of chariots, quivers and wheels were broken and were strewn around.
There were arms that still held bows and swords. There were heads with earrings. There were palm-guards and finger-guards and standards that had been brought down. There were bows shattered into many fragments. All these
were scattered on the ground. O king! There were elephants with the riders slain and horses devoid of riders. They
lay there, in hundreds and thousands. The brave ones[The Pandavas.] made every effort to restrain the maharathas who were
running away. But they did not succeed, because of the oppression created by Bhishma's arrows. With valour like
that of the great Indra, he slaughtered that large army. O great king! It was destroyed in such a way that no two
people ran away together. Chariots, elephants and horses were pierced and standards and seats brought down.
There was lamentation in the army of the sons of Pandu and they lost their senses. Father killed the son and the son
killed the father. Driven by the force of destiny, a friend attacked a beloved friend. Many soldiers in the army of
the sons of Pandu tore apart their armour. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! With disheveled hair, they were
seen to run away. They were like a herd of cattle, crazy with fear and running around. Chariot-riders, elephants and
soldiers in the army of the sons of Pandu were seen to be shrieking in piteous tones.

'"On seeing that the army was routed, the descendant of the Yadava lineage controlled the supreme chariot and
spoke to Partha Bibhatsu. 'O Partha! The moment that you have wished for, has now arrived. O tiger among men!
Strike and free yourself from this confusion. O brave one! O Partha! Earlier, in the assembly of kings, in Virata's
city and in Sanjaya's presence, you said, "I will slay all the soldiers in the army of the sons of Dhritarashtra, with
Bhishma and Drona at the forefront. I will kill them and their followers and all those who fight against me in the
battle." O Kounteya! O destroyer of enemies! Do this and make your words come true. O bull among the Bharata
lineage! Remember the dharma of kshatriyas and fight.' Thus addressed by Vasudeva, Bibhatsu lowered his face
and cast a sideways glance. As if unwillingly, he spoke these words. 'Having killed those who should not be killed,
I will obtain the kingdom, with hell as the ultimate objective. Or is it better to suffer the misery of dwelling in the
forest? Which will be better for me? Drive the horses towards Bhishma. I will do what you have asked me to. I
will bring down the aged and invincible grandfather of the Kurus.' At this, Madhava urged the horses that had the
complexion of silver. O king! He took them to the spot where Bhishma was, difficult to look at, like the sun with
its rays. On seeing the mighty-armed Partha ready to fight with Bhishma in that battle, Yudhisthira's large army
returned again. Bhishma, best of the Kuru lineage, roared repeatedly like a lion. He swiftly showered down arrows
on Dhananjaya's chariot. In an instant, because of that great shower of arrows, nothing could be seen of the chariot
or the charioteer. However, Vasudeva was without fear. Satvata resorted to patience and goaded the horses, which
had been wounded by Bhishma's arrows. Partha grasped his divine bow that roared like the clouds. He used sharp
arrows to sever Bhishma's bow and made it fall down. With the bow severed, Kouravya again grasped a giant bow.
In only an instant, your father strung the bow, which made a sound like that of the clouds. But in his anger, Arjuna
sliced down this second bow too. At this, Shantanu's son praised his dexterity. 'O Partha! Well done. O mighty-
armed one! O Kunti's son! Well done.' Having thus addressed him, he grasped another beautiful bow. In that battle, Bhishma released many arrows towards Partha's chariot. Vasudeva displayed supreme skill in handling the
horses. He executed circular motions and avoided all those arrows. Wounded by arrows, Bhishma and Partha,
tigers among men, looked beautiful. They were like two angry bulls, marked with the signs of horns.

'"Vasudeva saw that Partha was fighting mildly. Bhishma was continuously showering down arrows in the battle. Stationed between the two armies, he was as scorching as the sun. He was killing the best of the best in the
army of Pandu's son. Against Yudhishthira's forces, Bhishma was like the destruction at the end of a yuga. The
mighty-armed Madhava, the destroyer of enemy heroes, could not tolerate this. O venerable one! He abandoned
Partha's horses, which had the complexion of silver. Full of anger, the great yogi descended from the great chariot.
The powerful one advanced towards Bhishma, with his arms as weapons. The spirited one had a whip in his hand
and roared repeatedly like a lion. The lord of the universe seemed to make the earth shatter with his footsteps.
Krishna's eyes were coppery red with anger. The infinitely radiant one wished to kill him. In the great battle, those
on your side lost their senses. They saw Madhava advance against Bhishma in that battle, as if he would swallow
him up. 'Bhishma has been slain. Bhishma has been slain.' Such lamentations were uttered by the soldiers. All the
men were frightened at the sight of Vasudeva advancing. Janardana was dressed in yellow garments. He was dark
blue, like a jewel. As he advanced against Bhishma, he was as beautiful as a cloud with a garland of lightning. It
was like a lion advancing on an elephant, or the leader of a herd advancing against another bull. The spirited bull
among the Yadava lineage roared and advanced. On seeing Pundarikaksha descend on him in the battle, Bhishma
was not frightened. He stretched his great bow in the encounter and addressed Govinda without any fear in his
heart. 'O Pundarikaksha! Come. O god of the gods! I bow down before you. O best of the Satvata lineage! Bring
me down in this great battle. O god! O unblemished one! Slain by you in this battle, I will obtain supreme welfare
in this world and in the next world. O Govinda! In the three worlds, I have obtained great honour in the battle today.' The mighty-armed Partha ran after Keshava and embraced him in his two arms. But despite being grasped by
Partha, the lotus-eyed Purushottama Krishna still proceeded with great force, dragging him along. Partha, the destroyer of enemy heroes, now grasped Hrishikesha's legs with force and managed to stop him at the tenth step.
His[Krishna's.] eyes were full of rage and he was sighing like a serpent. Arjuna, the destroyer of enemy heroes, spoke
these words of distress to him. 'O mighty-armed one! Refrain. You should not do this. O Keshava! You earlier said
that you would not fight in this war. O Madhava! The world will say that you have uttered a falsehood. Let the entire burden be on me. I will kill the one who is rigid in his vows. O Madhava! If it is otherwise in this battle, let
there be a curse on my truth and my good deeds. O destroyer of enemies! I will do everything so that the end of the
foes is ensured. Behold. As I wish, I will bring down the invincible one who is great in his vows today, like the full
moon at the end of an era.' Madhava heard these words of the great-souled Phalguna. He did not say anything. But
in great rage, he again ascended onto the chariot.

'"Those two tigers among men were stationed on the chariot. Bhishma, Shantanu's son, again showered down
arrows, like clouds raining down on a mountain. Your father, Devavrata, took the lives of the warriors, like the rays
of the sun absorb energy from everything after winter has passed. Just as the Pandavas had shattered the ranks of
the Kurus in battle, your father shattered the ranks of the Pandava soldiers in battle. The soldiers were slain and
routed. They lost their enterprise and were bereft of their senses. In that battle, they were incapable of looking at
Bhishma. Scorching them with his own energy, he was like the midday sun. They were slain by Bhishma, as if he
was Death at the time of the destruction of a yuga. O great king! The Pandavas were afflicted with fear and
glanced at him. They could not find a protector, like cattle that had sunk into mire. In the battle, they were like
weak ants afflicted by a strong person. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The maharatha was unassailable. He
scorched the kings with his arrows. They were incapable of looking at Bhishma. His arrows scorched like the rays
of the sun. While the soldiers of the Pandus were routed, the one with the thousand rays[The sun.] began to set. The soldiers were overcome by fatigue. Their hearts were set on withdrawing."'


