Yudhishthira said, "O foremost among the Kuru lineage! Tell me again about the supreme ordinances associated  with  donations.  O  immensely  fortunate  one!  Especially  tell  me  about  gifts  of  land.  Through  his  own
deeds[Having conquered the earth first.], a kshatriya must donate the earth to brahmanas and they must receive it, following the rites. No one else[Other than a kshatriya.]
should donate it. Desiring the fruits, all the varnas must donate according to their capacities. The Vedas have enumerated this and you should explain it to me."

'Bhishma replied, "There are three gifts that have the same name and lead to the same kind of fruits. They lead
to all the fruits of desire being met and they are a cow, the earth and Sarasvati. A person who tells his disciple
about the dharma of Brahmi Sarasvati obtains fruits that are equal to those obtained from donating the earth and
cows[This requires explanation. The word go means speech, the earth and cow. Hence, all three have the same name.
Brahmi means holy or divine and Brahmi Sarasvati is holy speech, or the teachings of the Vedas. Teaching this
to a disciple is like donating speech.]. Cows are also praised in that way and there is no gift that is superior. O Yudhishthira! From their donation,
one can also reap the best fruits. Cattle are the mothers of all creatures and yield all kinds of happiness. A person
who desires his prosperity must always give cows as dakshina. They are the auspicious abodes of divinity and
must always be worshipped. Earlier, when gods used cattle to till the land, they goaded them. Therefore, it is permissible to goad them in such a task, but never for anything else. When cows are grazing, drinking water or lying
down, they must not be disturbed. When they are thirsty, even by looking at a man, they are capable of killing him
and his relatives. The seats of the ancestors and the seats of the gods are purified with cow dung. What can be
more pure than them? Before he himself eats, if a person gives someone else's cow a handful of grass daily, for an
entire year, that is like performing a vow that satisfies all the objects of desire. He obtains sons, fame, riches and
prosperity. Everything inauspicious is destroyed and his nightmares melt away."

'Yudhishthira asked, "What are the signs of cattle that can be given and which are the ones to be avoided? Who
is a good recipient and who are the ones to whom one shouldn't give?"

'Bhishma replied, "A cow must never be given to a person who is wicked in conduct, sinful, greedy, untruthful
in speech and one who does not render offerings to the ancestors and the gods. If a person gives ten cows to a
learned  brahmana  who  seeks  alms,  has  many  sons  and  makes  offerings  to  the  fire,  the  donor  obtains  supreme
worlds. If a person performs acts of dharma with possessions he has obtained from someone else, then both the actor and the original owner get a share of the auspicious merits. A person who is the biological father, a person who
saves from great fear and a person who provides means of subsistence-these are the three types of fathers. Sins
are destroyed by serving a preceptor. Insolence destroys great fame. If one has three sons, then one is no longer a
person without a son[At least three sons are required before a person can be said to have sons.]. Ten cows ensure a means of subsistence. Means of sustenance must be created for a brahmana who is devoted to Vedanta, is extremely learned, is content in his wisdom, has conquered his senses, is virtuous and self-controlled, is pleasant in speech towards all beings, is one who will not perform a perverse deed out of
a  minor  fear,  is  mild  and  generous,  is  always  attentive  towards  guests,  has  sons  and  wives  and  is  equal  in
conduct[To the donor.]. The merits obtained from giving a cow to a recipient who possesses the qualities are equal to the demerits substracted if one seizes a brahmana's possessions. In every situation, one must avoid taking away a brahmana's
possessions and one must maintain a distance from his wives."'


Bhishma said, "O extender of the Kuru lineage! In this connection, there is the recital of the extremely difficult
hardship Nriga had to face when he took away the possession of a virtuous brahmana. O Partha! On an earlier
occasion, it has been heard that some people entered the city of Dvaravati and saw a giant well that was covered
with grass and creepers. They made efforts, seeking to obtain water from the well. Since the water was extensively
covered, they had to struggle a lot. After clearing this, they saw a giant lizard there. They made thousands of attempts to remove it from that place. It was as large as a mountain and they used ropes made of leather to bind and
drag it away. However, not succeeding in these attempts, they went to Janardana. 'There is a giant lizard that has
completely covered the mouth of the well. We have been unable to remove it.' They reported this to Krishna.

'"Vasudeva removed it from there and wished to know who it actually was. Thus asked, it reported itself to be
King Nriga, who, in earlier times, had performed one thousand sacrifices. When it answered in this way, Madhava
said, 'You performed auspicious deeds, not wicked ones. Why did you then face this hardship? O Indra among
kings! Tell me. How did you attain this state? We have heard that in ancient times, you repeatedly gave brahmanas
hundreds of thousands of cows one hundred times. Then you again gave hundred and eight thousand of cows a
hundred thousand times. Why did this happen to you?' Nriga told Krishna, 'There was a brahmana who practised
agnihotra. While he was away, it was led astray and mixed with my herd of cows. That animal got included in
thousands of cattle I possessed. Desiring prosperity after death, I gave it away to a brahmana. The brahmana returned and saw that his wayward cow was in another brahmana's house. He said, "This belongs to me." They disputed the matter and, extremely anxious, appeared before me. Both of them spoke to me. One said, "You gave me
this." The other said, "You stole this from me." I told the one I had given the cow to, "In exchange for this cow,
accept these hundreds and hundreds of cows." However, he replied, "The one I got is appropriate for the time and
the place. She yields a lot of milk. She is quiet and affectionate. Her milk is sweet. She has always been praised in
my house. I have a weak son who has just been weaned and this cow has nourished him. I am incapable of giving
her away." Having said this, he left. So I spoke to the other brahmana and proposed an exchange. "Instead of this
cow, accept these hundred thousand other cows." But the brahmana replied, "I am established on my own path and
am incapable of accepting gifts from kings. Therefore, swiftly return the cow that is mine." O Madhusudana! I offered him gold, horses, silver and chariots. However, the bull among brahmanas did not accept these. Meanwhile,
urged by the dharma of time, I obtained the world of the ancestors[Nriga died.] and was brought before Dharmaraja. Yama
worshipped me and spoke these words. "O king! There is no end to the number of auspicious deeds you have performed. But there is a sin, even if you committed it inadvertently. Do you wish to suffer for the sin earlier or later?
It shall be as you wish. You promised that you would protect. You took a false pledge. You seized the possession
of a brahmana. These are the three aspects to the sin you committed." I replied, "O lord! I shall suffer from the sin
first. Let the auspicious benefits come later." As soon as I said this to Dharmaraja, I fell down on the surface of the
earth and could hear the words that Yama spoke to me. O Janardana! He said, "Vasudeva will save you. When one
thousand years are over, the fruits of your evil deed will wear thin. Because of the other deeds that you have yourself performed, you will then conquer and obtain the eternal worlds." I fell down, head downwards, and found myself inside this well. Though I was born as an inferior species, my memory did not desert me. You have saved me
today. This can be nothing other than the strength of your austerities. O Krishna! Grant me permission. I wish to go
to heaven now.' O scorcher of enemies! He took Krishna's permission. He bowed down to Janardana and ascending a celestial vehicle, went to heaven. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! O descendant of the Kuru lineage!
After Nriga reached heaven, Vasudeva recited this shloka. 'No man should willingly seize something that belongs
to a brahmana. If seized, a brahmana's property causes destruction, just as the brahmana's cow destroyed Nriga.' O
Partha! A meeting with the virtuous is never fruitless. Behold Nriga's encounter with a virtuous person. He was
freed from hell. There are fruits from donations. There are also evil fruits from violence. O Yudhishthira! Therefore, you should avoid acts of injury towards cows."'


Yudhishthira said, "O unblemished one! O mighty-armed one! Tell me in detail about the fruits that can be obtained from donating cattle. I am not satisfied with what you have said."

'Bhishma replied, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about the words the rishi Uddalaki and
Nachiketa spoke to each other. Having initiated himself for a rite, the rishi Uddalaki told his son, Nachiketa, 'Serve
me.' When those rituals were completed, the maharshi again told his son, 'I have been engaged with my ablutions
and have focused on studying. Since my mind was on those, I have forgotten to bring the firewood, the darbha
grass and the pot full of water that I had collected. They are on the banks of the river. Go and bring them.' However, having gone there, he saw that all these had been washed away by the force of the river's current. The sage
went and told his father, 'I did not see them there.' At that time, the sage Uddalaki was overcome by hunger, thirst
and exhaustion. The immensely ascetic one cursed his son, 'You will see Yama.' Struck by the vajra of his father's
words, he joined his hands in salutation and asked for pacification. However, he lost his life and fell down on the
ground. His father saw that Nachiketa had fallen down and became senseless with grief. He exclaimed, 'What have
I done?' He also fell down on the ground. He was overcome with supreme grief at his son having been killed
through his own acts. The day passed and the terrible night arrived. O extender of the Kuru lineage! Nachiketa lay
down on a mat of kusha grass. As his father's tears fell on him, he began to move, like crops reviving when they
are showered with rain. His body was smeared with divine fragrances and he was still weak, as if he had woken up
from sleep. His father praised this phenomenon of his son reviving and asked, 'O son! Have you conquered the
worlds through your auspicious deeds? It is good fortune that I have got you back. Your body isn't human any
longer.' The great-souled one had directly witnessed everything and was thus asked by his father.

'"In the midst of the maharshis, he clearly told his father what had happened. 'Following your instructions, I
quickly went to Vaivasvata's abode. It was large, beautiful and resplendent. I saw a multi-storeyed assembly hall
that was golden and one thousand yojanas[Measure of distance, between two and three miles. Originally, a yojana was a distance that could be travelled by
one yoking of horses to a chariot.] wide. As soon as he saw me advance towards him, Vaivasvata instructed that a house and a seat should be given to me. He offered arghya 64 and the other signs of welcome. For
your sake, he honoured me. I was thus surrounded and honoured by his attendants. I gently spoke these words. "O
Dharmaraja! I have come to your dominion. Grant me the worlds that have been earmarked for me." Yama told
me, "O amiable one! You are not dead. Your ascetic father told you to see Yama. He is like a blazing fire in his energy. O brahmana! I am incapable of rendering his words false. O son[The word used is tata.]! I have seen you now. Return. The one
who created your body is sorrowing. What can I give you? What does your mind desire? You are my beloved
guest. I will grant the boon you desire." Thus addressed, I replied, "I have obtained your dominion and it is extremely difficult to return from here. If you think that I am deserving of a boon, I wish to see the prosperous worlds
meant for those who perform auspicious deeds." The god asked me to ascend a vehicle. It was yoked to horses and
was extremely radiant, like the sun. O Indra among brahmanas! He showed me all the worlds meant for the performers of auspicious deeds. There, I saw the dazzling residences meant for those who have cleansed their souls.
They had different foundations and forms. They were full of many kinds of jewels. They sparkled like the lunar
disc. They were decorated with nets of bells. There were hundreds that had many floors and there were lakes and
groves inside them. They dazzled like lapis lazuli and were decorated with silver and gold. Everything there, mobile and immobile, possessed the complexion of the rising sun. There were mountains of objects to eat and swallow. There were garments and beds. In those residences, there were trees that granted all the objects of desire.
Everywhere, there were rivers, roads, assembly halls, lakes and tanks. Thousands of vehicles were yoked and they
thundered. There were rivers that flowed  with milk. There were mountains of  ghee. The  water  sparkled.  With
Vaivasvata's permission, I saw many such countries that I had never seen before. Having seen all this, I addressed
the ancient and powerful Dharmaraja. "These rivers have eternal flows of milk and ghee. Whose food have these
been decreed as?" Yama replied, "Know that these objects of food are for the virtuous ones who donate milk.
There are other eternal and pervasive worlds, bereft of all misery, for the virtuous ones who are devoted to donating cows. The gifting of cows alone is not praised. There are ordinances about the time and the recipient. O brahmana! One should give after knowing these. Know that if a cow is kept inside a place where it suffers from the fire
or the sun, this leads to hardship[This can happen if the recipient isn't worthy.]. If a brahmana is firm in studying, is extremely ascetic and is devoted to sacrifices, he is a worthy recipient. Cows which have been rescued from a situation of distress and have thereafter been
nourished, are especially praised. One should fast for three nights and sleep on the ground. After that, contented,
one should give cows away. Cows should cheerfully be given away, with their calves, with all the other accompaniments. They should be ones that yield good calves. Having given them, for three days, the donor should only
subsist on the milk of cows. One must donate a cow after following good vows. A brass vessel must be given for
milking. It should be one that has easy birth and should also be one that does not run away. In that event, the donor
enjoys the world of heaven for as many years as there are hair on the cow's body. A bull must be controllable and
capable of bearing a burden. It must be strong and young. It must be large, brave and of noble birth. A donor who
gives to a brahmana in this way, enjoys the worlds, like the donor of a cow. A forgiving and grateful person who
has no means of subsistence and depends on cows for a living is said to be a worthy recipient. The donation of a
cow is praised when there is fear about means of subsistence, for some great purpose, for the sake of agriculture, or
for the sake of a sacrifice. The gift of a beloved cow is especially praised when it is for the preceptor or when it is
for the sake of nurturing a child. The time and the place are important. Cows that are given should have been born
internally[Calves of cows owned.], purchased, obtained as a price for learning, obtained in exchange for other animals, conquered[Through arms.] or obtained in marriage." Hearing Vaivasvata's words, I spoke to him again. "If people do not own cattle, how can they
go to worlds that are meant for the donors of cattle?" At this, the intelligent Yama replied, "By donating cattle, one
goes to the supreme destination. In the absence of cattle, one can go to the regions where donors of cattle go, by
giving what is regarded as equivalent to cows. In the absence of cows, one can carefully observe vows and create a
cow made out of ghee. That flow of ghee is like a milk-yielding cow with a calf. In the absence of ghee, one can
carefully observe vows and donate sesamum. Like a cow, that will save from all kinds of hardship and one will
find delight, as with a river of milk. In the absence of sesamum, one can carefully observe vows and donate water.
That will be like a flowing river of cool water and will satisfy all the objects of desire." These were the instructions
that Dharmaraja gave me then. O undecaying one! On seeing all this, I was filled with supreme delight. I will now
report something that you will find agreeable. There is a great sacrifice that only requires a little bit of wealth. O
father! It has been obtained by me and it will flow from me. It can also be observed by those who follow the ordinances of the Vedas. The curse that you imposed on me was actually a favour. Through that, I was able to see
Yama. I witnessed the great gains that can be reaped through donations. Without any doubt, I will practise dana
dharma. O brahmana rishi! This is what Dharmaraja repeatedly told me, cheerfully. "O son! A person who always
donates, should specially gift cows. Be pure in pursuing this artha and do not ignore your own dharma. Depending
on the time and the place, donate to a worthy recipient. Therefore, always donate cows. You should not entertain
any doubts about this. In ancient times, there were those who were tranquil in their souls. They remained on the
path of donations and always gave gifts. They were scared of engaging in terrible austerities. Hence, to the best of
their capacities, they practised donations. In due course of time, they abandoned all malice. They purified their
souls.  They  were  faithful  and  good  in  conduct.  Those  performers  of  auspicious  deeds  tormented  themselves
through donations and obtained blazing worlds in the vault of heaven. Lawfully obtained objects must be given to
brahmanas, after examining whether the recipient is worthy. They should be given on kamyashtami[The eighth lunar day (ashtami), regarded as prosperous and desirable (kamya).]. After donating, for ten days, one should subsist on cow's milk, cow dung and cow's urine. The donor of a bull follows the
vows of the Vedas. The donor of a couple of bulls becomes skilled in knowledge of the Vedas. By giving a vehicle
yoked to cattle, one obtains the merit of bathing in tirthas. By giving a kapila cow, one is cleansed of all sins. If the
owner of a kapila obtained through legitimate means gives it away, he is purified of all sins. There is nothing that is
superior to the milk of cows. It is said that greatness is obtained from donating cows. Through their milk, cows
hold up the world. Cows produce the food that sustains the worlds. Knowing about what cattle do, if a person oppresses them, he is evil in his consciousness and goes to hell. If a person donates one thousand cows, one hundred,
fifty or even ten, or even if one gives a single cow that properly gives birth to calves, to a virtuous brahmana, that
cow becomes like a river that is full of sacred tirthas, yielding benefits. In prosperity, nourishment and protecting
the worlds, cows are like the rays of the sun that descend on earth. The word is the same for both[Go means cow and the word also means one particular ray of the sun, known as sushumna.]. The donor of a
cow enjoys extensive offspring. Therefore, a cow shines like the sun. In donating cows, for a disciple, the preceptor is the best recipient. He is the eloquent and controlled speaker who grants heaven. The knowledge of the ordinances is extremely great dharma. This is the first ordinance and all other ordinances result from this[The choice of an appropriate preceptor is the first ordinance.]. Thus, legitimately earned objects must be given to brahmanas, after ascertaining the worthiness of the recipient. When praising, the immortals, men and we say, 'May the auspiciousness of your deeds extend.'" O maharshi! This is what
Dharmaraja told me. I bowed my head down before the one who has dharma in his soul. O illustrious one! Having
taken Vaivasvata's permission, I have returned here, at your feet.'"'


