Janamejaya said, 'O brahmana! You have narrated a great account. On hearing this, all these sages are overcome
by great wonder. This has been churned from the excellent and extensive ocean of knowledge known as the Mahabharata, consisting of one hundred thousand[Shlokas.], like getting butter from curds, sandalwood from Mount Malaya,
the Aranyakas from the Vedas and amrita from herbs. O brahmana! O store of austerities! You have raised it like
excellent amrita and stated it, based on accounts about Narayana. The illustrious lord and god has created the at-
mans of all creatures. O supreme among brahmanas! Narayana's energy is impossible to look at. Brahma and all
the other gods, the rishis, the gandharvas and everything mobile and immobile merge into him at the end of a
kalpa. I do not think that there is anything in heaven that is more sacred than him. Visiting all the hermitages and
bathing in all the tirthas do not yield as many fruits as listening to Narayana's account does. Hari is the lord of the
universe and is the one who destroys all sins. There is nothing colourful that was done by the noble Dhananjaya.
Nor is there any excellent victory that was accomplished by him. After all, he had Vasudeva as his aide. I think that
someone who has Vishnu, the protector of the three worlds, as his friend, is capable of obtaining anything in the
three worlds. O brahmana! All these ancestors of mine were blessed. Janardana was engaged in their welfare and
prosperity. The illustrious one is revered in the worlds and cannot be seen through austerities. However, they directly saw the one adorned with the shrivatsa mark on his chest. Narada, Parameshthi's son, was even more fortunate. Narada is known as the undecaying rishi whose energy is significant. He went to Shvetadvipa and saw Hari
himself. It is through that god's favours that he obtained that vision. There, he saw the god in the form of Aniruddha. Thereafter, he again went to the hermitage of Badari to see Nara and Narayana. Why did the sage do that?
Having returned from Shvetadvipa, the rishi Narada, Parameshthi's son, again went to the hermitage of Badari.
After returning from Shvetadvipa, the extremely great-souled one went there. How long did he dwell there and
what did he ask them? What did the great-souled rishis, Nara and Narayana, say? Tell me the truth about this. You
should tell me everything.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'I bow down to the illustrious and immensely energetic Vyasa. I will narrate this account about Narayana through his favours. Having reached the great Shvetadvipa, he saw the immutable Hari. O
king! Narada then swiftly returned to Meru. The brahmana bore in his heart the words spoken by the paramatman.
O king! Thereafter, he thought to himself that he had achieved great success. He had travelled a long distance and
had returned safe. From Meru, he went to Mount Gandhamadana. He travelled through the sky and quickly descended on the extensive region of Badari. There, he saw the ancient gods, the supreme rishis. They were engaged
in extremely great austerities and were following wonderful vows, basing themselves on their own atmans. Their
energy illuminated all the worlds and was greater than that of the sun. Those revered ones bore the srivatsa mark
and their hair was matted. They had the marks of a jalapada on their palms[A jalapada is a web-footed bird, like a swan. This is an auspicious sign.].  Their feet bore the auspicious
marks of a chakra. Their chests were broad. Their arms were long. They possessed four arms each. They possessed
sixty teeth each and their voices rumbled like the clouds. Their faces were beautiful and their foreheads were
broad. Their jaws were beautiful and their eyebrows and noses were excellent. Their heads were like umbrellas.
These were the signs that those two great beings were marked with. On seeing them, Narada was delighted. He
worshipped them and was honoured back in return. They welcomed him and asked him whether he was well. On
seeing them, Narada thought within himself, "These two Purushottamas, revered by all creatures, are just like the
supreme rishis I saw in Shvetadvipa." Thinking this in his mind, he circumambulated them and sat down on an
auspicious seat that was made out of kusha grass. They were the abodes of austerities. They were illustrious and
full of energy. Those rishis were tranquil and self-controlled. Having performed their ablutions, they calmly honoured Narada with water for washing the feet and a gift. O king! After observing the rites to welcome a guest, they
sat down on two wooden seats. When they sat down there, the entire area was illuminated. It was just like a sacrificial altar, blazing with large flames of the fire, when oblations have been offered. Narada was happily seated. He
was rested and having been received with hospitality, was cheerful. Narayana spoke to him. "The original and eternal paramatman is illustrious. He is the supreme form of our Prakriti and you have seen him in Shvetadvipa."

'Narada replied, "I have seen that illustrious and immutable Purusha. The universe is his form. All the worlds
and the gods and the rishis are in him. Having seen the two of you now, I see that eternal one in you. The unmanifest Hari did not possess a form. But the signs he possessed are the signs that exist in you, in manifest and embodied forms. There, I saw you on both sides of the god. Having taken the permission of the paramatman, I have come
here. With the exception of you two, born as Dharma's sons, who in the three worlds can possess energy, fame and
prosperity like his? Earlier, he has told me the signs of the kshetrajna. He has also told me how he will manifest
himself in the future. In Shveta, there were men who were devoid of their five senses. Their knowledge has been
awakened and they are Purushottama's devotees. They always worship the god and he finds pleasure in them. The
illustrious  paramatman  is  affectionate  towards  his  devotees  and  loves  brahmanas.  He  always  finds  pleasure  in
those who are devoted to the illustrious one. The god enjoys everything in the universe and is friendly and affectionate towards his devotees. He is the doer. He is the cause and the effect. He is immensely powerful and radiant.
That supreme one in Shvetadvipa represents austerities and sacrifices for those who are united with their atmans.
He is famous for his energy. He is illuminated through his own radiance. For successful ones in the three worlds,
who have cleansed their souls, he is tranquility. There, the devoted ones have resorted to vows, using their auspicious intelligence. The lord of the gods performs very difficult austerities in a spot where the sun does not heat, the
moon does not shine and the wind does not blow. The enjoyer of the universe has constructed an altar on the
ground and it measures the length of eight palms. The god is stationed there, standing on a single foot and with his
arms raised. He faces the eastern direction. He performs those extremely difficult austerities, chanting from the
Vedas and the Vedangas. Brahma, the rishis, Pashupati himself, the other best among gods, daityas, danavas, rakshasas, serpents, birds, gandharvas, siddhas and rajarshis always offer havya and kavya, following the ordinances.
All of these present themselves at that god's feet. Intelligent ones perform rites with single-minded attention. That
god himself receives all these on his head. There is no one he loves more in the three worlds than learned and
great-souled ones who are single-minded in their devotion to him. Having been given permission to leave by the
paramatman, I have come here. The illustrious god, Hari, himself told me that I should always reside with you, obtaining supreme benedictions."'


Nara and Narayana said, "You are blessed, since you have seen and have been favoured by the lord himself.
The one who has been born from the lotus[Brahma.] has himself been unable to see him. The illustrious Purushottama has an unmanifest origin and is extremely difficult to see. O Narada! The words we are speaking to you are entirely true. O best among the brahmanas! There is no one in the worlds that he loves as much as a devotee. That is
the  reason  he  has  shown  himself  to  you.  The  paramatman  torments  himself  through  austerities  in  a  region.  O
supreme among brahmanas! With our exception, no one is capable of going there. Because of his radiance, that
place seems to be illuminated by one thousand suns together. That place shines through his own resplendence. O
brahmana! He is the lord behind the creation of the universe. The quality of forgiveness, and the best among those
who forgive, the earth, arose from him. For the welfare of all creatures, the quality of taste also arose from that god
and the attribute of fluidity that is associated with the water. It is from that god that light, and the quality of form
with which it is associated, arose. United with this, the sun radiates the worlds. It is from the supreme god Purushottama that touch has arisen. United with the wind, this makes the worlds feel. Sound arose from the god who
is the lord of the universe. This is attached to space, which extends unconstrained in all the directions. Mind arose
from that god and is inside all beings. This becomes attached to the moon and assumes the quality of showing
things. That place, associated with the Vedas, is known as the region where the six elements arose[The five elements and mind.]. The illustrious one, the devourer of havya and kavya, resides there, accompanied by knowledge. O supreme among brahmanas! There are people who have been cleansed from sin and are disassociated from good and bad deeds. They
are capable of going to that sacred region. That is a region which frees the worlds from delusion and Aditya is said
to be the door to that. On entering Aditya, the bodies of such people are consumed. Others are rendered invisible.
Becoming  like  atoms[Paramanu.],  such  people  merge  into  the  god.  They  are  thus  emancipated  and  are  established  in
Aniruddha. After that, they only retain the attributes of the mind and merge into Pradyumna. Freed from Pradyumna, the being next enters Samkarshana. The best among brahmanas, those who know about sankhya and are devoted, merge there. O best among brahmanas! When the three qualities[Sattva, rajas and tamas.] are completely extinguished, they merge
into the paramatman, the kshetrajna who is devoid of qualities. Truly know that Vasudeva, the refuge of everything, is kshetrajna. There are those who have controlled their minds, are restrained and have checked their senses.
Single-minded in devotion, they enter into Vasudeva. O supreme among brahmanas! We have been born in Dharma's house. Dwelling in this beautiful spot, we have practised fierce austerities. O brahmana! We have done this
for the welfare of the three worlds, so that the supreme one, beloved by the gods, can manifest himself. O supreme
among brahmanas! We have observed rites that have not been witnessed earlier. We have properly observed all the
wonderful vows of hardship. O store of austerities! In Shvetadvipa, you saw us too. Having met the illustrious one,
you formed a resolution and we know about it. We know everything in the three worlds of mobile and immobile
objects, everything that has happened, is happening and will happen, good or bad."'

Vaishampayana said, 'They were engaged in fierce austerities. Having heard their words, Narada, devoted to
Narayana, joined his hands in salutation. He meditated on many kinds of mantras, all of which had originated with
Narayana. He spent one thousand divine years in the hermitage of Nara and Narayana. The immensely energetic
and illustrious rishi, Narada, dwelt there. He worshipped the gods, Nara and Narayana.'


