Sanjaya said, "O lord! Your soldiers placed the king of Madra at their head. In that great battle, they again powerfully attacked the Parthas. Though they were afflicted, all those on your side were intoxicated at the prospect of
war. In a short while, they agitated the Parthas in many ways. While Krishna and Partha looked on, the Pandavas
were slaughtered by the Kurus and were incapable of remaining stationed there, though they were restrained by
Bhima. Dhananjaya became angry at this. He covered Kripa and his followers and Kritavarma with a storm of arrows. Sahadeva countered Shakuni and his soldiers. Stationed on a flank, Nakula glanced at the king of Madra.
Droupadi's sons repeatedly repulsed many kings. Panchala Shikhandi countered Drona's son. With the club in his
hand, Bhimasena held back the kings. Kunti's son, Yudhishthira, countered Shalya and his soldiers. As those on
your side and the enemy engaged, refusing to retreat from the battle, duels commenced here and there.

' "In the great battle, we witnessed Shalya's supreme deed. He single-handedly fought against all the soldiers on
the Pandava side. We saw Shalya stationed near Yudhishthira in the battle, like the planet Saturn near the moon. He
afflicted the king with arrows that were like venomous serpents. He again attacked Bhima and covered him with
showers of arrows. On witnessing the lightness of his hands and his skill in the use of weapons, the soldiers on
your side and those on the side of the enemy, applauded him. The Pandavas were severely oppressed and wounded
by Shalya. Ignoring Yudhishthira's cries, they abandoned the field of battle. The Pandava soldiers were slaughtered
by the king of Madra. Dharmaraja Yudhishthira was overcome with intolerance. He resorted to his manliness and
oppressed the king of Madra. The maharatha made up his mind to win or be killed. He summoned all his brothers
and Krishna Madhava and said, 'Bhishma, Drona, Karna and all the other brave kings fought in the battle for the
sake of the Kouravas and went to their death. All of you have resorted to your manliness and used your enterprise
to take care of your shares[The Pandavas had apportioned out the Kouravas amongst themselves.
Shalya was Yudhishthira's share.]. There is a single share that is left. Maharatha Shalya is mine. I wish to fight against
the lord of Madra and defeat him today. I will tell all of you what is in my mind now. Madravati's[Madri's.] brave sons
will guard my chariot wheels. They are revered as brave ones in battle and cannot be vanquished by Vasava. They
will place the dharma of kshatriyas at the forefront and virtuously fight against their maternal uncle. They deserve
honour and are devoted to the truth. They will fight back, for my sake. O fortunate ones! Either Shalya will be
killed by me in the battle, or I will be killed by him. O brave ones in the world! Listen to my words. I am telling
you truthfully. O kings! I will resort to the dharma of kshatriyas and fight against my maternal uncle today. I have
determined that I will be victorious, or be defeated. Therefore, equip me with a larger store of weapons and all the
implements. Let the chariot be quickly equipped for the battle, in accordance with the decrees of the sacred texts.
Let Shini's descendant guard my right wheel and Dhrishtadyumna the left. Let Partha Dhananjaya protect my rear
today. Let Bhima, supreme among wielders of weapons, advance in front of me today. In the great battle, I will
then be superior to Shalaya and will drive him away.' Having been thus addressed by the king, all the well-wishers
did as they had been asked to. O king! The soldiers were again filled with delight. This was especially true of the
Panchalas, the Somakas and the Matsyas. Having taken the pledge, Dharmaraja set out to accomplish it in the
battle.

' "Hundreds of conch shells, trumpets and drums were sounded by the Panchalas and they roared like lions.
Spiritedly and angrily, they rushed towards the king of Madra. The bulls among the Kurus were also filled with
great delight and roared. There was the noise of bells on elephants and the blare of conch shells. The earth resounded with the great sounds of trumpets. Your son and the valiant king of Madra received them. They were like
large mountains, receiving rain pouring down from giant clouds. Shalya prided himself in battle and showered
down arrows on Dharmaraja, the scorcher of enemies, like Maghavan pouring down rain. The great-minded king
of the Kurus also grasped a beautiful bow and displayed the diverse kinds of learning that he had been taught by
Drona. He showered down arrows, colourful, dexterous and skilled. As he roamed around in the battle, no weakness could be discerned in him. They wounded each other with many kinds of arrows. In the battle, those valorous
ones were like tigers fighting over a piece of meat. Bhima clashed against your son, who found delight in a battle.
In every direction, Shakuni and the other brave ones received Panchala[Dhrishtadyumna.], Satyaki and the Pandavas who were the
sons of Madri. They desired victory and fought tumultuously again. O king! The enemy and those on your side
fought because of your evil policy.

' "In the battle, Duryodhana used an arrow with a drooping tuft to sever Bhima's gold-decorated standard. It was
large and beautiful to see, adorned with nets of bells. Having brought Bhimasena's standard down, he roared like a
lion. With a razor-sharp arrow, pointed at the tip, the lord of men then severed his[Bhima's.] colourful bow, which was like
the trunk of a king of elephants. When his bow was severed, the spirited one resorted to his prowess and hurled a
javelin[Rathashakti.] towards your son. It pierced his chest and made him sink down on his chariot. When he was bereft of his
senses, Vrikodara again used a kshurapra arrow to sever his charioteer's head from his body. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! O king! When the charioteer was slain, the horses dragged the chariot away in different directions
and loud sounds of lamentation arose. For the sake of rescuing your son, Drona's maharatha son, Kripa and Kritavarma followed. The soldiers were agitated and the followers were terrified. The wielder of Gandiva used his
bow and arrows to slaughter them.

' "Yudhishthira intolerantly attacked the lord of Madra. He himself controlled his horses, which were as swift as
thought and as white as ivory. When we saw Kunti's son, Yudhishthira, it was extraordinary. He was mild and controlled earlier, but assumed a fearful form. Kounteya dilated his eyes in rage and trembled in anger. He mangled
hundreds and thousands of warriors with his arrows. Wherever the soldiers fought back, the eldest Pandava was
there. O king! He brought them down with his arrows, like the best of mountains shattered by thunder. Many horses, charioteers, standards, chariots and rathas were brought down. He sported with them, like a violent wind toying
with clouds. In the battle, he angrily brought down thousands of horse riders, horses and foot soldiers, like an enraged Rudra among animals. With showers of arrows shot in every direction, he emptied the field of battle of warriors. He attacked Shalya, the lord of Madra, and asked him to wait. On witnessing him roam around in the battle,
terrible in his deeds, all those on your side were terrified. However, Shalya countered him. Extremely enraged,
those two blew on their conch shells. They challenged each other and censured each other. Shalya countered Yudhishthira with a shower of arrows. Kounteya also countered the king of Madra with a shower of arrows. O king! In
that battle, those two brave ones, the king of Madra and Yudhishthira, were seen to be covered with blood, because
of the arrows shafted with the feathers of herons. They were as beautiful as flowering shalmali or kimshuka trees
in the forest. Those great-souled ones blazed. They were ready to give up their lives and were unassailable in battle. On seeing them, none of the soldiers knew which one would be victorious, whether Partha would kill the lord
of Madra and enjoy the earth today, or whether Shalya would kill Pandava and give the earth to Duryodhana. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! The warriors there could not make up their minds on this. As he fought, Dharmaraja kept all of them to his right[He placed the enemy on the right.]. Shalya swiftly shot one hundred arrows towards Yudhishthira. He severed
his bow with an arrow that was sharp at the tip. He picked up another bow and piercing Shalya with three hundred
arrows, severed his bow with a razor-sharp arrow. He then slew his four horses with arrows with drooping tufts.
With two arrows that were sharp at the tips, he killed the two parshni charioteers. Stationed in front of him, he used
a blazing, yellow, sharp and broad-headed arrow to sever his standard. O scorcher of enemies! At this, that army of
Duryodhana's scattered. Drona's son rushed towards the king of Madra and picking him up on his chariot, swiftly
fled. After they had travelled a short distance, they heard Yudhishthira roar. The lord of Madra stopped and ascended another chariot. It sparkled and had been duly prepared. It roared like the clouds. It had been equipped with all
the implements and made the body hair of enemies stand up." '


Sanjaya said, "The lord of Madra picked up another bow that was more powerful and capable of bearing a greater
load. He pierced Yudhishthira and roared like a lion. He showered down arrows, like Parjanya pouring down rain.
The bull among the kshatriyas, immeasurable in his soul, showered arrows on the kshatriyas. He pierced Satyaki
with ten arrows and Bhimasena with three. He pierced Sahadeva with three and afflicted Yudhishthira. He afflicted
all the other great archers, with their horses, chariots and elephants. The supreme among rathas destroyed elephants and elephant riders, horses and horse riders and chariots and rathas. He severed arms, weapons and flags.
He scattered the earth with warriors, like a sacrificial altar strewn with kusha grass. He slaughtered the soldiers,
like Death, the Destroyer. The Pandus, Panchalas and Somakas angrily surrounded him. Bhimasena, Shini's grandson and Madri's sons, foremost among men, challenged him and clashed against him in turn, while he was fighting
with the king, terrible in his strength. Those brave Indras among men, supreme among warriors, reached the lord
of Madra. In the battle, those brave ones among men struck him with arrows that were fierce and powerful. The
king was protected by Bhimasena, Madri's sons and Madhava. Dharma's son struck the lord of Madra between the
breasts with fierce and powerful arrows. Those on your side saw that the lord of Madra was afflicted by arrows in
the battle. On the instructions of Duryodhana, those supreme ones surrounded him with an array of chariots from
all sides. In the encounter, the lord of Madra speedily pierced Yudhishthira with seven arrows. O king! In the tumultuous battle, the great-souled Partha pierced him with nine arrows. Those two maharathas, the lord of Madra
and Yudhishthira, drew their bows back up to their ears and covered each other with arrows that had been washed
in oil. The two maharathas swiftly glanced towards each other in the battle. Those two supreme among kings were
immensely strong. They attacked the enemy and severely pierced each other. A great sound arose because of the
twanging of bows and the slapping of palms. It was like the roar of the great Indra's vajra. Those two brave and
great-souled ones, the lord of Madra and Pandu, showered down large numbers of arrows on each other. They circled around, like young tigers in a great forest in search of meat. They insolently gored each other, like the best of
elephants using their tusks. The great-souled lord of Madra struck the brave Yudhishthira, whose valour was terrible, in the chest with a powerful arrow that was like the sun or the fire in its splendour. O king! Yudhishthira, the
bull among the Kuru lineage, was grievously struck by that well-aimed arrow. He struck the great-souled lord of
Madra back and was delighted. In a short instant, the Indra among kings regained his senses. His eyes were red
with rage. He was like the one with one thousand eyes[Indra.] in his prowess. He swiftly struck Partha with one hundred arrows. Dharma's great-souled son wrathfully struck Shalya with nine arrows. These pierced his golden armour and he struck him again with another six arrows. The lord of Madra was delighted at this. He stretched his
bow and released two razor-sharp arrows towards the king, severing the bow of the bull among the Kuru lineage.
The great-souled king picked up another bow in that encounter, one that was more terrible. From every direction,
he pierced Shalya with sharp arrows that were pointed at the tip, like the great Indra against Namuchi. Shalya used
nine arrows to sever the golden armour of Bhima and King Yudhishthira and then struck the great-souled ones in
their arms. He then used another razor-sharp and flaming arrow, as resplendent as the sun, to sever the king's bow.

' "At this, Kripa used six arrows to slay his[Yudhishthira's.] charioteer, who fell down in front of him. The lord of Madra
used his arrows to slay Yudhishthira's four horses. Having slain the horses, the great-souled one began to destroy
the warriors who were on the side of the king, Dharma's son. When the king was reduced to this state, the great-
souled Bhimasena quickly attacked the king of Madra and severed his bow with a powerful arrow. He then severely pierced that Indra among men with two arrows. With another arrow, he severed the head of his charioteer
from his armoured body. Extremely enraged, Bhimasena swiftly killed his four horses. The foremost among all
archers[Shalya.] was single-handedly roaming around in that field of battle, with great force. Bhima enveloped him with
one hundred arrows and so did Madri's son, Sahadeva. On seeing that he was confounded by these arrows, Bhima
severed Shalya's armour with his arrows. When his armour was severed by Bhimasena, the lord of Madra picked
up a shield that was marked with the signs of one thousand stars. The great-souled one jumped down from his
chariot. Grasping a sword, he dashed towards Kunti's son. Terrible in his strength, he destroyed Nakula's chariot
and advanced towards Yudhishthira. He angrily descended on the king, like an advancing Yama. Dhrishtadyumna,
Droupadi's sons, Shikhandi and Shini's descendant swiftly advanced to the rescue. The great-souled Bhima used
ten arrows to sever his unmatched shield. He used a broad-headed arrow to sever the sword in his hand and roared
in the midst of the soldiers. On witnessing Bhima's deed, the foremost of the rathas on the Pandava side were delighted. They roared in applause and blew on conch shells that were as white as the moon. At that terrible sound,
the soldiers on your side were tormented and distressed. They were covered in sweat and their limbs were covered
in blood. They were miserable and lost all sense of enterprise.

' "However, the lord of Madra violently attacked the foremost of Pandava warriors, with Bhima at their head.
He swiftly advanced against Yudhishthira, like a lion advancing in search of deer. Dharmaraja's horses and charioteer had been slain. He blazed in anger, like the fire. On seeing the lord of Madra advance swiftly, he also rushed
forward with great force. He swiftly thought of Govinda's words and made up his mind to destroy Shalya. Though
his horses and charioteer had been slain, Dharmaraja remained stationed on his chariot and wished to pick up a
javelin. The great-souled one thought about Shalya's deeds and the remaining share that had been allotted to him.
Remembering this, he set his heart on killing Shalya, just as Indra's younger brother[Vishnu, that is, Krishna.] had asked him to.

' "Dharmaraja picked up a javelin that was golden in complexion. It was bejewelled and possessed a golden
handle. His eyes blazed and were dilated. With an angry heart, he glanced towards the lord of Madra. The king was
a god among men. He was pure in his soul and all his sins had been cleansed. O king! Though he glanced at the
lord of Madra, he was not reduced to ashes[That is, Shalya could have been reduced to ashes because of Yudhishthira's sight alone.]. This was extraordinary. That javelin possessed a beautiful tip and
handle. With coral and gems, it flamed and dazzled. The great-souled one flung it with great force towards the lord
of Madra, foremost among the Kurus. It blazed as it was flung with great force. It descended violently, emitting
sparks. While all the assembled Kurus looked on, it was like a giant meteor at the time of the destruction of a yuga.
It was like the night of destruction and like Yama with a noose in his hand. It was fierce in form, like the midwife
of destruction. It was like Brahma's staff and was invincible. Dharmaraja had preserved it carefully for the battle.
The sons of Pandu had taken great care to worship it with the best of fragrances, garlands and seats, food and
drink. It flamed like the fire of destruction. It was as fierce as rites performed by Atharvan and Angirasa. Tvashtra
had created it for Ishana's use[Ishana is Shiva and Tvashtra is Vishvakarma, the architect of the gods.]. It was capable of consuming the lives and bodies of enemies. Through it,
Isha[Shiva.] was capable of destroying all beings on earth, the firmament and bodies of water. It was adorned with
bells, flags, jewels and diamonds. It was decorated with lapis lazuli and had a golden handle. Tvashtra had constructed it with great care, after controlling himself and observing rites. It was invincible and could destroy all
those who hated brahmanas. He[Yudhishthira.] hurled it with great force, strength and care, after having chanted terrible
mantras over it. For the sake of destroying the lord of Madra, he dispatched it towards the enemy along the best of
paths. Dharmaraja seemed to be dancing around in anger. He extended his firm arm, with the excellent hand. He
loudly exclaimed, 'O wretched one! You are dead.' It was like Rudra shooting an arrow. That javelin was hurled
by Yudishthira with force. Shalya roared loudly and used all his strength to try to seize and repulse it. It was as if a
fire was leaping up to catch clarified butter over it. It pierced through his inner organs, his broad chest and his
sparkling armour. It then penetrated the earth, as if it was slicing through water. The king's[Shalya's.] great fame was taken away. Blood began to flow from his wounds and covered his nose, eyes, ears and mouth. His limbs were covered with blood. He was like the giant mountain Krouncha, when it had been shattered by Skanda[Skanda (Kartikeya) shattered Mount Krouncha, when he killed the
demons who hid there. The Krouncha mountain is in the Bellary district of
Karnataka.]. He stretched
out his arms and fell down from his chariot onto the ground. His armour was shattered by the descendant of the
Kuru lineage. The great-souled one was like the great Indra's mount. But he was like the summit of a mountain
that had been shattered by thunder. The king of Madra extended his arms in Dharmaraja's direction. He then fell
down on the ground, like Indra's standard. All his limbs were mangled and covered with blood. The bull among
men fell down affectionately on the ground, like a beloved wife who falls down on the chest of her dear husband.
The lord had enjoyed the earth for a long time, like a beloved wife. He seemed to go to sleep now, clasping her
with all his limbs. The one with dharma in his soul had fought in accordance with dharma and was killed by Dharma's son. He was like a fire that had been pacified on a sacrificial altar. The javelin shattered his heart and he was
deprived of his weapons and standard. Though he had been pacified, prosperity[Lakshmi, alternatively, beauty.] did not desert the lord of
Madra.

' "Yudhishthira picked up his bow, which was as dazzling as Indra's bow. In the battle, he began to slaughter the
enemy, like the king of birds against serpents. In a short instant, he used sharp and broad-headed arrows to deprive
the bodies of the enemies of their lives. Your soldiers were completely covered by Partha's arrows. With their eyes
closed and distressed, they began to strike each other in fear. The armour was displaced from their bodies and they
lost their weapons and their lives. The younger brother of the king of Madra was youthful. He was his brother's
equal in all the qualities. When Shalya was brought down, the ratha attacked Pandava. He swiftly pierced that best
of men with many iron arrows. He was invincible in battle and wished to observe the last rites of his brother. Dharmaraja quickly pierced him back with six swift arrows. With a couple of razor-sharp arrows, he severed his bow
and his standard. While he was stationed in front of him, he used a blazing, extremely firm, sharp and broad-headed arrow to sever his head. With the earrings, the head was seen to fall down from the chariot. This was like a resident of heaven falling down, after the store of good deeds has been exhausted. With the head severed, the torso fell
down from the chariot. The limbs were covered with blood. On seeing this, the soldiers[The Kourava soldiers.] ran away. The younger
brother of the king of Madra was clad in colourful armour. On seeing that he had been slain, sounds of lamentation
arose among the Kurus and they fled swiftly. On seeing that Shalya's younger brother had been killed, those on
your side gave up all hope of remaining alive. They were terrified because of their fear of the Pandavas and, covered with dust, ran away.

' "O bull among the Bharata lineage! While the terrified Kouravas were running away, Satyaki, Shini's grandson, pursued them and shot arrows. He was a great archer and extremely difficult to withstand. O king! However,
Hardikya received him fearlessly and spiritedly. Those two great-souled and unvanquished ones from the Vrishni
lineage[Both Satyaki and Kritavarma were from the Vrishni lineage.], Hardikya and Satyaki, clashed against each other. They were like maddened lions. They showered
down sparkling arrows, which were like the rays of the sun, on each other. Both of them were like the sun in their
radiance. Those lions among the Vrishni lineage shot powerful arrows from the circles of their bows and they
seemed to be like swift insects in the sky. Hardikya used ten arrows with drooping tufts to pierce Satyaki and
struck his horses with three. He then severed his bow with a single arrow. The bull among the Shini lineage cast
aside the best of bows that had been severed. He picked up another powerful weapon[Another bow.] that was even more forceful. Picking up the best of bows, the supreme among all archers pierced Hardikya back between the breasts with
ten arrows. He used well-aimed broad-headed arrows to shatter his chariot and his yoke. He then swiftly slew his
horses and his two parshni charioteers. O king! When the king of Madra was slain and Kritavarma deprived of his
chariot, all of Duryodhana's soldiers again retreated from the battle. Because they were covered in dust, the soldiers could no longer distinguish the enemy. The troops who were still alive retreated from the battle. A dust had
arisen from the earth. O bull among men! But in a short while, it was seen that this was pacified because of the
several streams of blood that flowed.

' "From a close distance, Duryodhana saw that his troops had been shattered. He advanced with great speed and
single-handedly countered all the Parthas. He saw the Pandavas on their chariots and Parshata Dhrishtadyumna
and the invincible one from Anarta[Satyaki.]. He countered them with his sharp arrows. At that time, the enemy did not
attack him, like mortal beings avoiding death. Hardikya ascended another chariot and returned. Maharatha King
Yudhishthira swiftly slew Kritavarma's four horses with four arrows. He pierced Goutama with six broad-headed
arrows that were extremely energetic. Ashvatthama saw that Hardikya had been deprived of his chariot by the king
and that his horses had been slain. He bore him away on his own chariot, away from Yudhishthira. Sharadvata
pierced Yudhishthira back with eight arrows and also pierced his horses with eight other sharp arrows that had
been sharpened on stone. O great king! At this time, the remnants of the battle raged on. O king! O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! All this happened because of your evil policy, together with that of your sons. When Shalya,
supreme among great archers, was slain in the midst of the battle by the bull among the Kuru lineage, all the assembled Parthas saw this and were greatly delighted. In a short while, they blew on their conch shells. They
praised Yudhishthira, just as in ancient times, the gods had praised Indra after Vritra had been killed. They roared
and sounded many kinds of musical instruments. This resounded, from every side of the earth." '


Sanjaya said, "O king! When Shalya was killed, seven hundred brave rathas, followers of the king of Madra, advanced in a large army. Duryodhana was astride an elephant that was like a mountain. An umbrella was held aloft
his head and he was fanned with whisks. He restrained the ones from Madra, 'Do not go. Do not advance.' Duryodhana repeatedly tried to restrain those brave ones. However, wishing to kill Yudhishthira, they penetrated the Pandu army. O great king! Those brave warriors had made up their minds to fight. They loudly twanged their bows
and fought with the Pandavas. On hearing that Shalya had been killed, they afflicted Dharma's son. Those maharathas from Madra were devoted to ensuring the welfare of the king of Madra. Partha advanced there, stretching
the bow Gandiva. The maharatha again filled the directions with the clatter of his chariot. Arjuna, Bhima, the Pandavas who were Madri's sons, Satyaki, tiger among men, all of Droupadi's sons, Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi, the
Panchalas and the Somakas desired to protect Yudhishthira and surrounded him from every direction. Surrounding
him, the bulls among the Pandavas agitated that army, like makaras in an ocean. It was as if the great river Ganga
was agitated by a mighty wind. O king! But those maharathas were ready to give up their lives and again agitated
the great army of the Pandus and their standards. Those on your side made it tremble, like trees by a giant storm.
They loudly exclaimed, 'Where is King Yudhishthira? Why are his brave brothers not seen? Where are the immensely valorous Panchalas, maharatha Shikhandi, Dhrishtadyumna, Shini's descendant and all the sons of
Droupadi?' While they were roaring in this way, Droupadi's brave and maharatha sons and Yuyudhana attacked
the followers of the king of Madra. Some of them were crushed by the wheels. Others were mangled and the giant
standards destroyed. In the battle, those on your side were seen to be slain by the enemy. O king! O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Though they were restrained by your son, on seeing the Pandavas in the battle, those warriors
powerfully rushed against them from every side. Duryodhana tried to restrain and calm those brave ones. But not a
single one of those maharathas would listen to him.

' "O great king! Shakuni, the son of the king of Gandhara, capable of speaking eloquently, spoke these words to
Duryodhana. 'The army of the Madras is being slaughtered. Why are we looking on? O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! While you are stationed in the battle, this is not proper. At that time, we took a decision that we would
fight together. O king! The enemy is slaughtering us. Why are you tolerating this?' Duryodhana replied, 'I tried to
restrain them earlier. But they did not listen to my words. Having penetrated the Pandu army, this is the reason they
are being killed.' Shakuni said, 'When they are enraged in a battle, valiant ones do not listen to their master. You
should not be angry with them. This is not the time to ignore this. All of us should advance with our horses, chariots and elephants and rescue the great archers who are the followers of the king of Madra. O king! We will take
great care and protect each other. Let all of us think along those lines and ask the soldiers to advance.' Having been
thus addressed, the king surrounded himself with a large army. He roared like a lion, made the earth tremble and
advanced. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Among your soldiers, there were tumultuous sounds like, 'Slay.
Pierce. Seize. Strike. Sever.' In the battle, the Pandavas beheld the followers of the king of Madra. They advanced,
uniting in a moderate formation[The word used is madhyama, meaning mild or moderate. The word used
for formation is gulma, not vyuha. The entire army is arrayed in the form
of a vyuha, while a gulma is a smaller division, something like a battalion. The suggestion probably is that the Pandavas did not take this attack
very seriously.]. O lord of the earth! In a short instant, those brave ones engaged in hand-to-hand
combat in the battle and the followers of the king of Madra were seen to be killed. While we were advancing, we
saw that the enemy had spiritedly killed their foes and were cheerfully uttering roars of delight. In every direction,
headless torsos were seen to rise up and fall down, like giant meteors from the solar disc at midday. The chariots
and yokes were shattered. The maharathas were slain. Horses fell down. The earth was strewn with these. O great
king! Steeds that were as fleet as the wind were still yoked. In the battle, they were seen to drag the warriors
around. In the encounter, some horses dragged around chariots with shattered wheels. Some others fled in the ten
directions, dragging along halves of chariots. Here and there, yokes were seen to be attached to the horses. O
supreme among men! Rathas were seen to fall down. They were like siddhas dislodged from the sky, after their
store of good deeds had been exhausted. The brave followers of the king of Madra were slaughtered.

' "The maharatha Parthas saw that we were advancing towards them[The Kouravas who were trying to rescue the followers of the king of
Madra.]. Wielding weapons and desiring victory,
they attacked powerfully. They created a whizzing sound with their arrows and this mixed with the blare of conch
shells. Unwavering in their aim, those strikers again clashed against us. They brandished their bows and arrows
and roared like lions. On seeing that the large army of the king of Madra had been slain and that the brave king of
Madra had been brought down in the battle, all of Duryodhana's soldiers again retreated. O great king! They were
slaughtered by the Pandavas, firm archers, who desired victory. Frightened and terrified, they fled in different directions." '


