Vaishampayana said, 'Daruka, Keshava and Babhru left and followed Rama's footsteps. They saw the infinitely
valorous Rama seated in a desolate spot, at the foot of a tree. Krishna approached the great one and gave Daru-
ka the following instruction. "Swiftly go to the Kurus and tell Partha about this great destruction of the Yadus. On
hearing about how the Yadavas have died because of the curse of brahmanas, let Arjuna come here quickly." Thus
addressed, Daruka, who was senseless in grief, left on a chariot for the Kurus. After Daruka left, Keshava saw that
Babhru was still near him and spoke these words. "Go quickly and protect the women. Greedy for riches, let the
bandits not cause any violence to them." He was still intoxicated with liquor and distressed because of the slaughter of his relatives. However, instructed by Keshava, he departed. Babhru had gone only a short distance away
from Keshava. He has also been covered in the curse of the brahmanas. Suddenly and swiftly, a club released from
a hunter's hand arrived and slew him. On seeing that Babhru was now dead, Krishna spoke these words to his elder brother. "O Rama! Wait here for me, until I have handed over the care of the women to our kin." Janardana entered the city of Dvaravati and spoke these words to his father. "Wait for Dhananjaya's arrival and protect all these
women. Rama is waiting for me on the outskirts of the forest. I have to go to him now. I foresaw this slaughter of
the Yadus even before I foresaw that of the kings and the bulls among the Kuru lineage. Without the Yadus, I am
incapable of looking at this city of the Yadavas. Listen to me. I will go to the forest and practise austerities, together with Rama." Having said this, Krishna touched his feet with his head and quickly departed.

'Loud sounds of lamentation arose from the women and the children who were in the city. Hearing the sounds of
the weeping women, Keshava returned and said, "Savyasachi will arrive in the city. That foremost among men will
free you from your grief." Keshava went and saw Rama in that desolate spot in the forest. He saw him immersed in
yoga and a giant serpent was emerging from his mouth. Its complexion was white and that great being headed towards  the great ocean. It possessed  one thousand heads, was  as  large as  a mountain and was  an inhabitant of
Bhogavati[The city of the nagas.]. Its face was red and it freed itself from the former body. It moved towards the ocean. Divine serpents
and  sacred  rivers  were  there  to  receive  it.  O  king!  Karkotaka,  Vasuki,  Prithushrava,  Varuna,  Kunjara,  Mishri,
Shankha, Kumuda, Pundarika, the great-souled naga Dhritarashtra, Hrada, Kratha, Shitikantha, Agrateja, the nagas
Chakramanda and Atishanda, Durmukha and Ambarisha, the best among nagas and King Varuna himself came forward to welcome and honour it[These are names of nagas and the first Varuna is a naga, not the lord of the ocean. Dhritarashtra is also a naga, not
Duryodhana's father.]. They worshipped it with padya, arghya and other rites.

'Vasudeva possessed divine sight. When his brother had departed, he knew that everyone was gone. For some
time, he wandered around in that desolate forest, thinking. The greatly energetic one then sat down on the ground.
He thought about all the words that the excellent Gandhari had spoken to him earlier. Krishna also remembered
what Durvasa had said when his body had been smeared with payasam[Payasam (payasa) is rice boiled in milk. Durvasa visited Krishna and Rukmini and was offered some payasam.
Satisfied, Durvasa granted Krishna the boon that he would be able to choose the time of his death. He also offered the leftover payasam to Krishna, who smeared it all over his body, except the legs. He did not wish to taint
what the sage had given by smearing it on his legs. Thus, except for the legs, every other part of Krishna's body
became invulnerable.]. The great one thought about the destruction of the Andhakas and the Vrishnis and the destruction of the Kurus. Having decided that the time had come, he
restrained his senses. He restrained his senses and his speech. Krishna lay down, immersed in great yoga. A fierce
hunter named Jara arrived at that spot, searching for deer[Jara also means old age and decrepitude.]. The hunter saw Keshava lying down in yoga and took
him to be a deer. With an arrow, Jara swiftly struck him on the sole of the foot. He then quickly advanced, desiring
to seize what he had struck. The hunter saw a man immersed in yoga, with many arms and attired in yellow garments. He thought he had committed a grave sin and severely distressed, touched his feet with his head. The great-
souled one comforted him. Enveloping heaven and earth in his prosperity, he rose upwards. He reached heaven and
was welcomed by Vasava, the Ashvins, Rudra, the Adityas, the Vasus, the Vishvadevas, the sages, the siddhas, the
foremost among gandharvas and the apsaras. O king! Then, the fiercely energetic, powerful, undecaying, great-
souled and illustrious Narayana went to his own region, which is impossible to fathom. O king! Krishna met the
gods, the rishis and the charanas. The best among gandharvas and apsaras and the siddhas and the sadhyas bowed
down and worshipped him. O king! The gods, the best among sages and their eloquent followers worshipped the
lord of everything. The gandharvas served and praised him. Delighted, Puruhuta[Indra.] also honoured him.'


Vaishampayana said, 'Daruka went to the Kurus and met the maharatha Parthas. He told them how the Vrishnis
had destroyed each other with clubs. On hearing that the Varshneyas, the Bhojas, the Kukuras and the Andhakas had been destroyed, the Pandavas were tormented by grief and their minds were terrified. Arjuna, Keshava's
beloved friend, took their leave and went to see his maternal uncle, saying, "Nothing remains." With Daruka, the
lord went to the abode of the Vrishnis. The brave one saw Dvaraka, which looked like a woman with her husband
dead. Earlier, the protector of the world used to be the protector of those women. Partha saw them shrieking there,
without a protector and bereft of protection. There were sixteen thousand of Vasudeva's wives. When they saw Arjuna arrive, they began to wail loudly. On seeing them, Kouravya Arjuna's eyes became full of tears. They were
without Krishna and without their sons and he was incapable of looking at them. The Vrishnis and the Andhakas
were like water[Dvaraka is being compared to a river.]. The horses were fish and the chariots were rafts. The sounding of musical instruments and the
clatter of chariots were like the roar of the currents. The houses were tirthas and giant crocodiles. The jewels were
accumulations of moss. The firm fortifications were like garlands. The roads were like flowing whirlpools in the
water. The crossroads were large lakes. In the river of Dvaraka, Rama and Krishna were giant crocodiles. Devoured by the noose of destiny, that river was now terrible, flowing towards Vaitarani[The river that flows in the nether regions, in Yama's world.]. The intelligent Arjuna saw
that it was now without the bulls among the Vrishnis. It was without prosperity and cheerless, like a lotus during
the winter. Partha saw Dvaraka and Krishna's wives. He wailed loudly, eyes overflowing with tears, and fell down
on the ground, senseless. O lord of the earth! Satya[Satyabhama.], Satrajit's daughter, and Rukmini also wept and fell down,
alongside Dhananjaya. They raised him and made him sit on a golden seat. They surrounded the great-souled and
spoke words of praise about Govinda. They spoke to Pandava, who comforted the women and then left, wishing to
meet his maternal uncle.'


Vaishampayana said, 'The brave and great-souled Anakadundubhi[Vasudeva's name.] was lying down. The bull among the Kurus
saw him, tormented by grief over his son. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Partha's chest was broad and
his arms were mighty. With his eyes overflowing with tears and with his voice afflicted with grief, he seized his
feet. The mighty-armed and aged one embraced Arjuna with his arms. Remembering his sons, his brother's sons,
and all his sons' sons, daughters' sons and friends, he was extremely distracted and wept. 'Vasudeva said, "O Arjuna! There were hundreds of times when they conquered kings and daityas. O Arjuna! Though I am alive, I do not
see them. Death will come to me with great difficulty. Those two[Satyaki and Pradyumna.] were your disciples. O Arjuna! You always
loved them and showed them a great deal of respect. O Partha! It is because of their sins that the Vrishnis have
faced  destruction.  Among  the  best  of  the  Vrishnis,  those  two  were  held  to  be  atirathas.  In  speaking  about
Pradyumna and Yuyudhana, you used to boast. O tiger among Kurus! In addition to Krishna, they were always like
my sons. O Dhananjaya! Those two are the main reason behind the destruction of the Vrishnis. O Arjuna! However, I do not censure Shini's descendant or Hardikya, or for that matter, Akrura or Rukmini's son. The curse was the
true reason. The lord of the universe used his valour to defeat Keshi and Kamsa. O Partha! He beheaded the lord of
Chedi[Shishupala, described in Section 26 (Volume 2).], who was proud of his valour. Madhusudana defeated the nishada Ekalavya, Kalingas, Magadhas, Gandharas, the king of Kashi, kings from the desert regions and kings from the east, the south and the mountainous regions. Why did he disregard what was going to happen? On seeing his sons, grandsons, brothers and friends slain
and lying down, he told me, 'O bull among men! The time for the end of our lineage has arrived. Bibhatsu will
come to this city of Dvaravati. Tell him about the great carnages that has happened among the Vrishnis. O lord!
When that greatly energetic one hears about the destruction of the Yadus, without thinking about it, he will swiftly
arrive here. Know that I am Arjuna and Arjuna is me. O Madhava! Know that you must do whatever he asks you
to. Pandava will know what the occasion demands for the women and the children. Bibhatsu will also perform
your funeral rites. When Dhananjaya has left, this city, with its walls and mansions, will instantly be swallowed up
by the ocean. I will go to some sacred spot and resort to the rituals. With the intelligent Rama, I will wait for the
right time.' Hrishikesha, whose valour is unimaginable, told me this. The lord then left me with the children and
went to whichever direction he desired. I have thought about those two great-souled brothers[Balarama and Krishna.] and about the terrible destruction of the kin. Afflicted by grief, I have not eaten. O Pandava! I will not eat. Nor will I live. It is
through good fortune that I have met you. O Partha! Do everything that Krishna spoke about. O Partha! This kingdom, these women and these jewels are yours. O slayer of enemies! I wish to cast aside my breath of life."'


