Vaishampayana said, 'Having offered water to all the well-wishers, the descendants of the Pandu lineage, Vidura,
Dhritarashtra and all the women of the Bharata lineage, dwelt there. The great-souled sons of the Kuru lineage
wished to spend a month of mourning outside the city[This was a period of purification.]. When King Dhritarashtra, with dharma in his soul, had
performed the water-rites, the great-souled siddhas, supreme brahmarshis, Dvaipayana, Narada, the great rishi De-
vala, Devsthana and Kanva, with their supreme disciples, and many other brahmanas who were accomplished in
wisdom and learned in the Vedas and all the snatakas[Snatakas are those who have completed their studies (the brahmacharya
stage) and are about to enter the householder stage (garhasthya).] in the householder stage, came to see the supreme among
the Kuru lineage. When they came, the great-souled one[Yudhishthira.] worshipped them, in accordance with the prescribed
rites. The maharshis seated themselves on extremely expensive seats. They accepted the honours that were appropriate for the occasion[This was a time of mourning.]. In due order, they seated themselves around Yudhishthira. The king was on the sacred
banks of the Bhagirathi and his senses were overcome with grief. Hundreds and thousands of brahmanas consoled
him.

'At that time, Narada consulted the sages and spoke words that were appropriate for the occasion to Yudhishthira, with dharma in his soul. "O Yudhishthira! Through the valour of your arms and the favours of Madhava, you
have resorted to dharma and have conquered the entire earth. It is through good fortune that you have escaped
from this battle, which was fearful for the worlds. O Pandava! It is perhaps because you are devoted to the dharma
of kshatriyas that you have not rejoiced. O king! Once you have slain your enemies, will you not please your well-
wishers? Having obtained this prosperity, I hope that grief is not standing in the way."

'Yudhishthira replied, "Resorting to the strength of Krishna's arms, the favours of the brahmanas and the
strength of Bhima and Arjuna, I have conquered the entire earth. But this great grief is always circulating in my
heart. Because of my avarice, I have caused a great carnage of my relatives. I have caused the death of Subhadra's
son and Droupadi's beloved sons. O illustrious one! To me, this victory seems to be a defeat. What will my sister-
in-law, Varshneyi[Subhadra, Abhimanyu's mother, descended from the Varshneya lineage.], tell me? When Hari Madhusudana returns, what will the residents of Dvaraka tell Krishna?
With her sons slain and her relatives killed, Droupadi is distressed. She has always been engaged in our welfare.
This is grieving me exceedingly. O illustrious one! O Narada! Let me tell you about something else. Kunti kept
this as a secret and this is also a reason for my sorrow. He possessed the strength of ten thousand elephants and on
this earth, was an atiratha in battle. His gait was like that of a sporting lion. He was wise and compassionate. He
was generous and endeavoured about his vows. He was the refuge of the sons of Dhritarashtra. He was proud and
fierce in his valour. He was intolerant and always arrogant. From one encounter to another, he flung us away. He
was swift in the use of weapons and colourful in fighting. He was accomplished and extraordinary in his prowess.
He was secretly born from Kunti's womb. He was our brother, from the same womb. When the water-rites were
performed, Kunti said that he was the son of the sun god. He possessed all the qualities, and in earlier times, was
cast into the water. The world thought of him as Radheya, the son of a suta. But he was Kunti's eldest son and our
brother from the same mother. Greedy for the kingdom, I have ignorantly caused him to be killed in the battle. This
is consuming my limbs, like a mass of cotton in a fire. Partha, the one with the white horses, did not know that he
was a brother. Nor did Bhima and the twins know this. However, the one who was excellent in his vows knew this.
We have heard that Pritha went to him earlier[This has been described in Section 55 (Volume 4).]. She wished to ensure our welfare and told him, 'You are my son.'

But that great-souled one did not listen to Pritha's wishes. Much later, we have heard that he spoke these words to
his mother. 'I am incapable of abandoning King Duryodhana in the battle. If I do that, I will be ignoble, cruel and
an ingrate. If I act according to your wishes and conclude an alliance with Yudhishthira, people will say that I am
frightened of the one with the white steeds in a battle. Having defeated Vijaya[Arjuna.] and Keshava in the battle, I will
then conclude an agreement of peace with Dharma's son.' This is what we heard. Pritha again spoke to the one
with the broad chest. 'Then fight with Phalguna, but grant me safety for my other four sons.' The intelligent one
joined his hands in salutation and told his trembling mother, 'Even if the other four sons come under my control, I
will not kill them. O mother! Whether Partha is slain by Karna, or whether I am slain by Arjuna, it is certain that
you will continue to have five sons.' Out of great affection for her sons, the mother told the son, 'As you desire
their safety, ensure the safety of your brothers.' Having said this, Pritha took his leave and returned home. Our
brave brother has been slain by Arjuna, a brother by a brother. O sage. Neither Pritha, nor he, ever divulged the secret. The brave and great archer was brought down by Partha. O supreme among brahmanas! I only got to know
later that he was our brother. O lord! Pritha told us that Karna was our eldest brother. I have caused my brother to
be slain and this is greatly paining my heart. Had Karna and Arjuna both been my aides, I would have been able to
defeat even Vasudeva. When I was oppressed by the evil-souled sons of Dhritarashtra in the assembly hall, my
anger was suddenly pacified on seeing Karna. This is despite the harsh and bitter words we heard from him in the
assembly hall at the time of the gambling match, spoken for the sake of bringing Duryodhana pleasure. When I
glanced at his feet, my wrath was destroyed. It seemed to me that Karna's feet were like those of Kunti's. I wished
to determine the reason for this similarity between Pritha and him. But in spite of thinking about this, I did not understand. During the battle, why did the earth swallow up the wheel of his chariot? Why was my brother cursed?
You should tell me this. O illustrious one! I wish to hear everything, exactly as it happened. You know everything
that is to be known in this world, that which has happened, and that which will occur."'


Vaishampayana said, 'Having been thus addressed, the sage Narada, supreme among eloquent ones, recounted
everything about how the son of a suta had been cursed.

'"O mighty-armed one[Though not explicitly stated, this is Narada speaking.]! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It is exactly as you have said. There is nothing
that could have stood against Karna and Arjuna in a battle. O king! What I am about to tell you is unknown to even
the gods. O great king! O lord! Therefore, listen to what happened in earlier times, about how the kshatriyas would
be cleansed by weapons and would go to heaven. To engender that dissension, he was created in a virgin womb.
He was energetic as a child and came to be known as the son of a suta. He went to the best of the Angirasa lineage,
your preceptor[Drona.], to learn about the science of war[Dhanurveda.]. O Indra among kings! He thought of Bhima's strength, Phal-
guna's dexterity, your intelligence, the humility of the twins, the friendship that the wielder of Gandiva has had
with Vasudeva since childhood and the devotion of the subjects and was tormented. From childhood, he formed a
friendship with King Duryodhana. This is because of the enmity he always bore towards you and natural destiny.
He saw that Dhananjaya was superior to everyone in learning about dhanurveda. Karna secretly went to Drona and
spoke these words. 'I wish to know about brahmastra and the secrets of releasing and withdrawing it. It is my view
that I should become Arjuna's equal in battle. It is certain that the affection you bear towards your disciples is
equal to what you bear towards your son. Because of your favours, make me accomplished and skilled in the use
of weapons.' Drona was partial towards Phalguna. He also knew about Karna's wickedness. Having been thus addressed by Karna, he replied, 'The brahmastra can only be known by a brahmana who is observant of the vows, or
by a kshatriya who has performed austerities, and by no one else.' Having been thus addressed by the best of the
Angirasa lineage, he honoured him and took his leave. He then quickly went to Rama[Parashurama.] on Mount Mahendra. Having approached Rama, he lowered his head in obeisance before him and said, 'O Bhargava! I am a brahmana.' This
earned him respect. Rama welcomed him and asked him everything about his gotra[Gotra can loosely be translated as family lineage.]. He was extremely delighted
at this warm welcome. Karna resided on Mahendra, supreme among mountains, and met gandharvas, rakshasas,
yakshas and gods there. There, in the proper way, he obtained all the weapons from the best of the Bhrigu lineage.
Because of this, he was loved by the gods, the gandharvas and the rakshasas.

'"Once, near that hermitage, he was roaming around on the shores of the ocean. The son of the suta was wandering around alone, with a sword and a bow in his hand. O Partha! There was a person who was knowledgeable
about the brahman and who performed the aghnihotra sacrifice every day. Unwittingly, he killed his homadhenu[Agnihotra is a sacrifice where oblations are offered to the fire. A homadhenu is a cow that yields milk for the oblations.].
Having unwittingly performed this deed, Karna went and repeatedly told the brahmana, so that he might be pacified, 'O illustrious one! I have unwittingly killed your cow. Please show me your favours.' However, the brahmana
censured him and angrily spoke these words, 'O wicked one! O evil-minded one! You should be killed. Therefore,
reap this fruit. You have always sought to rival someone[Arjuna.] and you have been striving against him every day. Because of this crime, when you are fighting with him, the earth will swallow up the wheel of your chariot. O worst
of men! When you clash against your foe and are distracted because the wheel of your chariot has been devoured
by the earth, he will exhibit his valour and sever your head. O stupid one! Leave this place. Just as you were distracted when you acted against me, another person will sever and bring down your head while you are distracted.'

He again tried to secure the favours of that supreme among brahmanas. He gave him cattle, riches and jewels.
However, he[The brahmana.] again said, 'Nothing in all the worlds will be able to falsify the words spoken by me. You can go, or
stay, or do whatever else you wish to.' Having been thus addressed by the brahmana, Karna was distressed and
hung his head down. Terrified, he returned to Rama and thought about this in his mind."'


