Vaishampayana said, 'Dhritarashtra granted them leave. All the brothers, bulls among the Kurus,
together with Keshava, went to Gandhari. The unblemished Gandhari was oppressed by grief on
account of her sons. When she recognized Dharmaraja Yudhishthira[Gandhari was blindfolded.], who had slain his enemies,
she wished to curse him. However, the rishi who was Satyavati's son[Vedavyasa.] got to know in advance
about her wicked intentions towards the Pandavas. He touched the fragrant and pure waters of the
Ganga. With the speed of thought, the supreme rishi then arrived at the spot. With his divine sight,
he could see and understand what was in the minds of all living beings. The immensely ascetic one
blessed his daughter-in-law and told her that this was not the time for cursing. It was the time for
peace. "O Gandhari! You should not have anger towards the Pandavas. Obtain peace and control
your passion. Listen to my words. Desiring victory, your son spoke to you eighteen days ago. 'O
mother! I am going to fight with the enemy. Pronounce auspicious blessings on me.' Desiring victory, he repeatedly beseeched you. O Gandhari! You said, 'Where there is dharma, there is
victory.' O Gandhari! Earlier, I cannot remember your words ever having come false. You are prudent. O spirited one! Remember those words of dharma that you uttered earlier. O one who always
speaks the truth! Control your anger and do not behave in this way."

'Gandhari replied, "O illustrious one! I do not hate them. Nor do I desire that they should be destroyed. But the sorrow on account of my sons is powerful and I am distracted. I must protect the
Kounteyas now, just as Kunti does, and just as Dhritarashtra will protect them. This destruction of
the Kurus has come about because of the crimes of Duryodhana, Shakuni Soubala, Karna and
Duhshasana. Bibhatsu[Arjuna.] has committed no crime, nor have Partha Vrikodara, Nakula and Sahadeva, and certainly not Yudhishthira. Wishing to fight, the Kouravyas destroyed each other. They
fought with each other and killed each other. However, what I find unpleasant is the deed Bhima
undertook while Vasudeva looked on. The great-minded one challenged Duryodhana to a duel
with the clubs. As they roamed around in many ways in the encounter, he realized that he was superior in skills[Bhima realized that Duryodhana was superior in skills.]. He struck him below the navel and my anger increases because of that. The
great-souled ones were knowledgeable about dharma and have been instructed about dharma. To
save their lives, how could those brave ones have abandoned it in the encounter?"'


Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing her words, Bhimasena was frightened. Entreating Gandhari, he spoke these
words to her. "Whether I acted in accordance with dharma or in accordance with adharma there, it was because of
fear and with a desire to save myself. Therefore, you should forgive me. If I fought in accordance with dharma,
there was no way I could have stood up to your immensely strong son. Hence, I acted in an unfair way. The valiant
one was the only one left from among the soldiers and having killed me in the encounter with the clubs, would
have obtained the kingdom. That is the reason I did what should not have been done. The princess Panchali was in
her season and was in a single garment. You know everything about what your son told her then. Without taking
care of Suyodhana, we would not have been able to enjoy the earth, with its oceans, unfettered. That is the reason I
did what should not have been done. Your son caused us injury, when he exposed his left thigh to Droupadi in the
assembly hall[At the time of the gambling match, described in Section 27 (Volume 2).]. O mother! Your son acted in a wicked way and that is the reason he had to be killed by us. At that
time, we abided by the instructions of Dharmaraja. O queen! It was your son who generated that great enmity. We
are the ones who always suffered in the forest. That is the reason I did what I did. Having seen the end of that enmity and having killed Duryodhana in the battle, Yudhishthira has obtained the kingdom and we have overcome
our rage."

'Gandhari said, "O son! You have praised my son and this is not about your killing him. He did everything that
you have recounted. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When Vrishasena killed Nakula's horses in the battle,
you drank the blood from Duhshasana's body[Vrishasena was Karna's son. This wasn't quite the way it happened.
These incidents are from Section 73 (Volume 7), Karna Parva. Vrishasena
killed Nakula's horses after Bhima had drunk Duhshasana's blood. The
incidents occur in different chapters; Vrishasena killed Nakula's horses in
the subsequent chapter.]. This was a terrible deed, befitting those who are not aryas, and
condemned by those who are virtuous. You performed a cruel deed. O Vrikodara! How could you have done it?"

'Bhimasena replied, "One should not drink the blood of someone else, not to speak of one's own. There is no
difference between one's own self and one's brother. O mother! Do not sorrow. His blood did not pass beyond my
teeth and my lips. Vaivasvata[Yama.] knows this. My hands were smeared with his blood. I cheered my brothers, who
were terrified on seeing that Nakula's horses had been slain by Vrishasena in the battle. At the time of gambling
with the dice, he had seized Droupadi by the hair. I had spoken words in anger then and those were in my mind[Bhima swore to drink Duhshasana's blood, described in Section 27 (Volume 2).].
O queen! Had I not accomplished my pledge, I would have been dislodged from the dharma of kshatriyas till eternity. That is the reason I did what I should not have done. O Gandhari! You should not believe that this was a
crime and censure me. In earlier times, when your sons injured us, you did not restrain them."

'Gandhari said, "You were not defeated and you killed one hundred of this aged one's sons. Why did you not
spare one, one who had committed the least crimes? O son! We are aged and have lost our kingdom. He would
have been our successor[There is a nuance that a translation cannot capture, the word in question
being santana. This means son or daughter. But it also means continuous
flow, which is the reason an offspring is called santana, ensuring the continuous line of succession.]. For these blind and aged ones, why could you not have saved a single one? O son! Had
you left one, I would not have felt this sorrow at your having slain our sons, as long as you acted in accordance
with dharma."'


Vaishampayana said, 'Gandhari was angry. She was afflicted at the slaughter of her sons and grandsons. Having
said this, she asked, "Where is King Yudhishthira?" Trembling and with his hands joined in salutation, Yudhishthira, Indra among kings, approached and spoke these gentle words to her. "O queen! I am Yudhishthira, the violent
slayer of your sons. I deserve to be cursed. I am the reason behind this destruction on earth. Curse me. After
slaughtering my well-wishers in this way, there is no purpose to my life, or in this kingdom and these riches. I am
foolish and a slayer of my well-wishers." Having spoken these words, he was frightened and approached close.
Gandhari said nothing, but sighed, long and deep. Yudhishthira lowered his body down and fell at her feet. She
was knowledgeable about dharma and could see dharma. Through the band of cloth, the queen could see the tips of
the king's fingers[Because Dhritarashtra was blind, Gandhari always wore a blindfold.]. The king's nails had been handsome, but now became malformed. On seeing this, Arjuna hid
behind Vasudeva. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They[All the Pandavas.] were restless and moved around. However, Gand-
hari's rage was gone and she comforted them, like a mother.

'Those broad-chested ones took her leave and together, went to see their mother Pritha[Kunti.], the mother of brave
ones. Having not seen her sons for a long time, she had been anxious about her sons. The queen covered her face
with a piece of cloth and wept. Thus, with her sons, Pritha shed tears. She saw that they had been wounded from
the blows of many weapons. In many ways, she repeatedly touched her sons. She sorrowed for the grief-stricken
Droupadi, who had lost her sons. She saw that Droupadi had fallen down on the ground and was weeping. Droupadi said, "O noble lady! Where have all your grandsons, together with Subhadara's son[Abhimanyu.], gone? You are an ascetic
and they have not seen you for a long time. They have not come to you now. Without my sons, what good will the
kingdom be to me now?" The large-eyed Pritha comforted her. She raised Yajnaseni[Droupadi.], who was weeping and was
afflicted by grief. With her, and with her sons following her, Pritha, who was suffering herself, went to Gandhari,
who was suffering even more. With her sister-in-law, Gandhari spoke to the illustrious one[Droupadi.]. "O daughter! Do not
grieve. Behold. I am also miserable. I think that this destruction of the worlds has been goaded by destiny. It came
about inevitably and naturally, and made the body hair stand up. When Krishna was unsuccessful in his
entreaties[A reference to Krishna's mission of peace, described in Section 54 (Volume 4).], the immensely intelligent Vidura had spoken some great words and those have come to pass. One
should not sorrow over something that is inevitable, especially something that has already occurred. One should
not sorrow over those who have been killed in a battle. I am in the same state as you are. Who will comfort me? It
is because of my crimes that the best of our lineage have been destroyed."'


