Sanjaya said, "When Drona, the great archer, was killed, your maharatha sons became pale
in their faces. They grieved and were bereft of their senses. O lord of the earth! All of them
held weapons in their hands, but were silent. They were oppressed by grief and did not look
at each other, or speak to each other. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing that
they were so distressed, your soldiers were also miserable and glanced upwards, extremely
terrified. O Indra among kings! The weapons of those who remained were smeared in blood.
On seeing that Drona had been brought down, these dropped from their hands. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! O great king! But some[Weapons.] still hung down from their hands and were
seen to be like stars in the firmament. O great king! They were stationed there, dispirited and
bereft of enterprise. On seeing his own army in that state, King Duryodhana spoke these
words. 'I am fighting on the basis of the valour in your arms. Depending on this, I have challenged the Pandaveyas to this battle. With Drona having been killed in the battle, I discern
that you are distressed. All the warriors who are fighting in the battle are being killed. When
fighting in a battle, there may be victory, or there may be death. What is strange about this?
Face all the directions and fight. Behold the great-souled warrior Karna Vaikartana in the
battle. The immensely strong and great archer is roaming around, possessing divine
weapons. Dhananjaya, Kunti's son, is frightened of fighting with him. He always retreats before that wrathful one, like small animals before a lion. The immensely strong Bhimasena
possesses the strength of ten thousand elephants. But in a human battle, he was reduced to a
miserable state[Karna subdued Bhimasena without resorting to divine weapons. This has
been described in Section 69 (Volume 6).]. The brave Ghatotkacha knew the use of maya. Using the divine weapon,
the invincible spear, in the battle, he killed him and roared loudly[This has been described in Section 70 (Volume 6). Karna killed Ghatotkacha with the invincible spear.].
The intelligent one's valour is difficult to cross. He is unwavering in his aim. You will witness the inexhaustible strength in his arms in the battle today. You will behold both the
great-souled Radheya and Drona's son act against the Pandu and Panchala soldiers. All of
you are brave, wise and born in noble lineages. You will witness each other's good conduct
and skill in the use of weapons today.' O great king! When the king had spoken in this way,
the immensely strong Vaikartana Karna roared like a lion. As all of them looked on, he
fought with the Srinjayas, Panchalas, Kekayas and Videhas and caused great destruction, releasing hundreds of showers of arrows from his bow. They seemed to be linked head to tail,
like a flock of bees. The spirited one afflicted the Panchalas and Pandavas. He killed thousands of warriors and was brought down by Arjuna." '


Vaishampayana said, 'O great king! On hearing this, Dhritarashtra, Ambika's son,
was seen to be overcome by great grief. He thought that Suyodhana had already
been killed. He lost his senses and fell down on the ground, like an elephant that had
lost its consciousness. That supreme among kings was senseless and fell down on the
ground. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! A great lamentation arose among the
women. That sound filled the earth, everywhere. The Bharata women were immersed
in a great and terrible ocean of grief. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Gandhari approached the king. All those from the inner quarters[The women.] lost their senses and fell down
on the ground. O king! At this, Sanjaya comforted those distressed ones. Miserable,
copious quantities of tears flowed from their eyes. He repeatedly assured the trembling women. In every direction, they were like plantain trees that had been whirled
by a storm. Vidura sprinkled the Kourava king, the lord who had wisdom for his
sight[Dhritarashtra was blind.], with water and comforted him. O king! He slowly regained his senses and
saw the ladies. O lord of the earth! The king seemed to be mad and stood there,
silently. He reflected for a long time and sighed repeatedly. He censured his sons in
many ways and applauded the Pandavas. He censured his own intelligence and that
of Shakuni Soubala. He thought for a long time and trembled repeatedly. The king
then used his mind to restrain himself. Resorting to patience, he asked Sanjaya, the
suta who was the son of Gavalgana. "O Sanjaya! I have heard the words that you
have spoken to me. O suta! Has my son, Duryodhana, already gone to Yama's
abode? O Sanjaya! Tell me everything accurately, even if you have told it to me earlier." O Janamejaya! Having been thus addressed by the king, the suta replied, "O
king! The great archer, Vaikartana, was killed, with his maharatha sons and brothers
and so were the sons of other sutas[Karna was brought up by a charioteer named Adhiratha and is known as
the son of a suta.]. In the battle, Duhshasana was killed by the illustrious and angry Pandava Bhimasena, who drank his blood." '


