The brahmana said, 'O extremely beautiful one! In this connection, there is an ancient history about the ordinances followed by the five officiating priests. Those who are knowledgable and learned know the supreme
-prana, apana, udana, samana and vyana are the five officiating priests.'

'"The brahmani said, 'Earlier, it was my view that there are seven natural officiating priests. But tell me about
the supreme principle, whereby, there are five officiating priests.'

'"The brahmana replied, 'The breath of life is nurtured by prana and gives birth to apana. The breath of life is
nurtured by apana and makes vyana flow. The breath of life is nurtured by vyana and makes udana flow. The breath
of life is nurtured by udana and makes samana flow. In earlier times, they went to Prajapati, who was born first,
and asked, "Tell us who is the eldest among us. He is the one who will be the foremost."

'"'Brahma responded, "In all creatures that have bodies and are alive, there is a breath of life. When that is destroyed, the creature is destroyed. When it is destroyed, the creature can no longer move. That is the best among
you. Now go wherever you wish."

'"'Prana said, "When I  am destroyed, the creature also heads towards  destruction. Therefore, among all the
breaths that sustain life in a body, I am foremost. When I am destroyed, the creature can no longer move. Behold. I
am going to destroy myself."'

'"The brahmana continued, 'Prana was destroyed. But the creature continued to move. O beautiful one! At this,
samana and udana spoke up. "You do not pervade everything. You are not established like us. O prana! You are not
the foremost. Apana alone is under your control." Prana began to move around again and apana said, "When I am
destroyed, the creature also heads towards destruction. Therefore, among all the breaths that sustain life in a body,
I am foremost. When I am destroyed, the creature can no longer move. Behold. I am going to destroy myself."

Vyana and udana spoke these words. "O apana! You are not the foremost. Only prana is under your subjugation."

Apana began to move again and vyana now said, "I am the foremost among all of us. Listen to the reason. When I
am destroyed, the creature also heads towards destruction. Therefore, among all the breaths that sustain life in a
body, I am foremost. When I am destroyed, the creature can no longer move. Behold. I am going to destroy myself." Vyana was destroyed. But the creature continued to move. Prana, apana, udana and samana said, "O vyana!
You are not the foremost. Samana alone is under your subjugation." Vyana began to move again and samana said,
"I am the foremost among all of us. Listen to the reason. When I am destroyed, the creature also heads towards destruction. Therefore, among all the breaths that sustain life in a body, I am foremost. When I am destroyed, the
creature can no longer move. Behold. I am going to destroy myself." Samana was destroyed. But the creature continued to move. At this, prana, apana, udana and vyana said, "O samana! You are not the foremost. Vyana alone is
under your subjugation." Samana began to move again and udana said, "I am the foremost among all of us. Listen
to the reason. When I am destroyed, the creature also heads towards destruction. Therefore, among all the breaths
that sustain life in a body, I am foremost. When I am destroyed, the creature can no longer move. Behold. I am going to destroy myself." Udana was destroyed. But the creature continued to move. Prana, apana, samana and vyana
said, "O udana! You are not the foremost. Vyana alone is under your subjugation." At this, Brahma Prajapati spoke
to the assembled ones. "All of you are foremost. Yet, not a single one is foremost. All of you follow different kinds
of dharma. All of you are foremost in your own area. All of you are protected by each other. There are superior
five breaths of life. They are both mobile and immobile. My atman is one, but is experienced in many different
forms. Be affectionate towards each other and make each other prosper. O fortunate ones! Depart in peace. Sustain
each other."'"'


The brahmana said, 'In this connection, an ancient history is recounted, about a conversation between Narada
and the rishi Devamata.

'"'Devamata asked, "When a creature is born, which comes first-prana, apana, samana, vyana or udana?"

'"'Narada replied, "When a being is created, it is the other one that comes first[This probably means that the breath of life comes before the physical body.]. Know that the breath of life
has two components-one that moves diagonally and one that moves upwards."

'"'Devamata asked, "When a being is created, who creates the other one that comes first? Who determines the
two breaths of life, one that moves diagonally and one that moves upwards? Tell me."

'"'Narada replied, "Delight is generated from resolution. It[Delight.] is also generated from sound. It is also generated
from taste. It is also generated from form. It is also generated from touch. It is also generated from smell. These are
the types that result from udana. Delight results from physical intercourse. Semen results from desire. Juices flow
from desire[This is a reference to the menstrual flow.]. Usually, the mixture of semen and blood results from the union of samana and vyana. When semen
and blood are mixed, the first result is that of prana. When the semen is transformed by prana, apana results. The
pair of prana and apana are said to move upwards. The pair of vyana and samana are said to move diagonally. Agni
represents all the gods. This is the instruction of the Vedas. This[Agni.] generates knowledge in brahmanas and confers
them with intelligence. Smoke is its terrible tamas form, the potent ashes represent rajas. Sattva is generated from
it when oblations are offered into it. Those who are learned and knowledgable about sacrifices say that samana and
vyana form the foundation. Prana and apana are the offerings of  clarified butter and the fire  is between them.
Learned brahmanas know that this is the supreme form of udana. I will also tell you about the pairs and what is
separate from them. Listen. Day and night are a pair and the fire is between them. Learned brahmanas know that
this is the supreme form of udana. The two ayanas[Uttarayana and dakshinayana.] constitute a pair and the fire is between them. Learned brahmanas know that this is the supreme form of udana. Existence and non-existence constitute a pair and the fire is
between them. Learned brahmanas know that this is the supreme form of udana. Good and bad constitute a pair
and the fire is between them. Learned brahmanas know that this is the supreme form of udana. Truth and falsehood
constitute a pair and the fire is between them. Learned brahmanas know that this is the supreme form of udana.
Samana comes first and the pervasive vyana undertakes its task. The third is the pervasive samana. Vamadeva[It is not quite clear what this means. There was a rishi named Vamadeva. However, Vamadeva is also equated
with the Rudras, that is, an aspect of Shiva.] is
for the sake of tranquility. Tranquility is the eternal brahman. Learned brahmanas know that this is the supreme
form of udana."'"'


The brahmana said, 'In this connection, there is an ancient history about the ordinances for chaturhotra[Sacrifice with four officiating priests.],
explaining why the rites are like that. All those ordinances and rites are now being recounted to you. O fortunate one! I will tell you. Listen to this supreme mystery. O beautiful one! The agent, the action, the instrument
and emancipation-these are the four officiating priests that envelope the universe. Listen to the means that are
used by all these officiating priests. The nose, the tongue, the eyes, the skin, the ears as the fifth, mind and intelligence-these seven are known to be qualities associated with the agent. Smell, taste, form, sound, touch as the
fifth, what is thought and what is understood-these seven are qualities associated with the action. The one who
smells, the one who eats, the one who sees, the one who touches, the one who hears as the fifth, the one who thinks
and the one who understands-these seven are known as qualities associated with the instrument. They possess
qualities, good or bad, and are consumed by their own qualities. A person who knows himself to be beyond the
seven and devoid of qualities has reason for emancipation. Learned ones know that these qualities occupy their respective places. They are the forms of the gods and always enjoy the oblations. Ignorant ones eat and develop a
sense of ownership[The senses consume, not the atman. Learned ones know the difference between the senses and the atman.]. Such a person only cooks for himself and is always destroyed by this sense of ownership.
He eats what he should not eat and he is also destroyed by the drinking of liquor. He destroys the food he has eaten. Having destroyed the food, he also destroys his sense of knowledge. However, a learned lord eats the food for
the sake of being born again. Because of the food he has eaten, there is not the slightest bit of transgression in him.
What is thought by the mind, what is spoken in words, what is heard by the ears, what is seen by the eyes, what is
touched by the skin, what is smelt by the ears-all these six are like oblations and must be controlled by the mind.
These qualities must be offered to the blazing fire that rages inside the body[The atman is being compared to a fire.]. This is the sacrifice of yoga that I
am engaged in. This knowledge about the brahman emanates from the mind. Prana is the hymn for that sacrifice
and apana is the weapon that is used. Renouncing everything is the excellent dakshina. The action and the doer are
both the officiating priest with which I praise the beloved brahman. I praise him with the rules of the sacred texts
and offer dakshina. Those who know about Naryayana praise him with a hymn from the Rig Veda. "In ancient
times, animals were slaughtered in the name of the god Narayana." Hymns chanted from the Sama Veda are also
cited as an illustration. O timid one! Listen to me. The god Narayana is the soul of everything.'"'


