'Narada said, "Galava was distressed. Suparna, supreme among those who have wings, told him, 'Gold is created
in the ground and is purified by fire. It is because of this that it is known as hiranya[There is probably a sense of virility, since hiranya means both gold and semen.]. Since it supports and sustains the prosperity of the three worlds, it is always known as dhana[Dhana means wealth or riches and dharana is to support and sustain.]. Shukra is the lord of riches. When the two
constellations of Proshthapada[The twenty-fifth and twenty-sixth nakshatras, Purva Bhadrapada and Uttara Bhadrapada.] are in the ascendance, Shukra grants men the riches that they have earned. Those
riches are guarded by Aja Ekapada[Aja Ekapada is a divinity, identified with Agni, the sun and the moon. Literally, Aja Ekapada can be translated
as a one-footed goat. Aja Ekapada is also the god who presides over Purva Bhadrapada.], Ahi Budhnya[Ahi Budhnya is the god who presides over Uttara Bhadrapada. Ahi Budhnya means the serpent who lives in the
deep.] and the lord of riches. O bull among brahmanas! They cannot be obtained if they are meant to be unobtainable. Without riches, you are incapable of obtaining the horses.
Ask a king for riches, one who has been born in a lineage of rajarshis. Such a king will be able to satisfy us, without oppressing his subjects. There is a king who has been born in the lunar dynasty. He is my friend. Let us approach him. He possesses a great deal of riches on earth. He is a rajarshi named Yayati, the son of Nahusha, and
truth is his valour. When he is asked by you and requested by me, he will himself give it. He possessed wealth that
was as great as that of the lord of riches. But by giving up some of those riches, the learned one cleansed himself.'

While they were conversing and thinking in this fashion, they reached King Yayati in Pratishthana.

'"After accepting the honours, the argha and the excellent food, Vinata's son was subsequently asked about the
reason for their arrival. 'O son of Nahusha! This is my friend Galava. He is an ocean of austerities. O king! He has
been Vishvamitra's pupil for ten thousand years. When he was given permission to leave, this illustrious brahmana
wished to return the favour and asked his preceptor about what should be given as a dakshina. When he kept asking, his teacher was enraged and asked him to give, though he knew that his riches were limited. "Give me eight
hundred pure-born horses that are as white as the rays of the moon and possess one black ear each. O Galava! If
you so desire, give this to your preceptor as a gift." This is what Vishvamitra, the store of austerities, told him in
anger. It is for this reason that this bull among brahmanas is tormented by a great grief. He is incapable of returning the favour and has sought refuge with you. O tiger among men! When he has accepted alms from you, he will
be free from his miseries. He will be freed from the debt to his preceptor and will practise great austerities. He will
give you a share of those austerities. You are full of a rajarshi's austerities, but you will be filled even more. O lord
of men! O lord of the earth! Those who give away a horse obtain as many worlds as there are body hairs on a
horse. He is the right vessel to receive and you are the right person to give. This will be like milk sprinkled into a
conch shell.'"'


'Narada said, "On hearing Suparna's supreme words, the king thought repeatedly and at last made up his mind.
The lord who had performed one thousand sacrifices was generous and was the lord of gifts. Yayati, the king of all
the Vatsas and the Kashis, spoke these words. On seeing his beloved friend Tarkshya and Galava, bull among the
brahmanas, an example of austerities, and considering that this act of giving alms was praiseworthy and would
bring renown to himself, he thought, 'These two have come to me, ignoring all the other kings of the solar dynasty.' He said, 'My birth has become successful today. O Tarkshya! O unblemished one! My country has been
saved by you today. O friend! But I wish to tell you that I am no longer as wealthy as you knew me to be earlier. I
don't possess that kind of riches. O friend! My wealth is lesser now. O traveller in the sky! But at the same time, I
cannot render your arrival here unsuccessful. Nor do I dare to frustrate the desires of this brahmana rishi. I will
give him something that will make his endeavour successful. If one arrives and is frustrated in one's wishes, one
burns down the lineage. O son of Vinata! It is said that there is nothing more evil in the world of the living than
saying, "I have nothing." This destroys and frustrates the hopes of a man who has arrived for something. A man
who is thus unsuccessful causes damage to the sons and grandsons[Of the person who has been solicited.]. This daughter of mine will establish four
lineages. She is as beautiful as a daughter of the gods and follows every kind of dharma. O Galava! Because of her
beauty, this maiden has always been solicited by gods, men and asuras. Therefore, accept my daughter. Kings will
certainly give their kingdoms for her as a bride price, not to speak of eight hundred horses with black ears. Accept
Madhavi, this daughter of mine. O lord! The only boon that I ask for is that I should have grandsons through my
daughter.' Having accepted the maiden, Galava left with the bird. Saying, 'Let us look again,' he left with the
maiden. The bird said, 'The path for obtaining the horses has now been obtained.' Having said this, he took Gala-
va's leave and returned to his own abode.

'"When the king of the birds had left, Galava, travelled with the maiden, thinking about kings who had the capacity to pay the bride price. He thought of Haryashva Ikshvaku of Ayodhya, supreme among kings, immensely
valorous and with the four constituent parts[Elephants, horses, chariots and infantry.] in his army. He loved brahmanas and was the beloved of the citizens. He possessed treasuries, granaries and soldiers. He desired peace for his subjects and performed supreme
austerities. The brahmana Galava went to Haryashva and said, 'O Indra among kings! This maiden of mine will
give birth and extend lineages. O Haryashva! Accept her as your wife and give me a bride price. I will tell you
what the bride price is. Hearing this, arrive at a decision.'"'


'Narada said, "King Haryashva thought about many things. He released warm sighs at the lack of offspring. Then
the supreme among kings said, 'She is high in the six high points[Nose, eyes, ears, nails, breasts and neck.]. She is slim in the seven places that should be
slim[Other than the obvious waist, ankles, wrists and neck, it is difficult to pinpoint this number seven. It is not mentioned in any of the standard treatises.]. She is deep in the three places[Speech, intelligence and navel.] that should be deep. She is red in the five places that should be red[Soles of the feet, palms of the hand, tongue, lips and nails.].
She is fit to be seen in many worlds of gods and asuras and by many gandharvas. She has many auspicious marks.
She is capable of giving birth to many. I am capable of giving birth to a son who will be an emperor[Chakravarti, an universal monarch or sovereign, whose wheels (chakra) travel as far as the frontiers of the
ocean.]. O foremost
among brahmanas! Tell me the bride price, remembering the state of my riches.' Galava replied, 'Give me eight
hundred horses that have one black ear each. They must be as white as the moon. They must be built well and they
must have been born in this country. Then this beautiful and long-eyed one will be the mother of your children,
just as kindling is the womb of fires.' On hearing these words, King Haryashva, who was overcome with desire,
was miserable. The rajarshi told Galava, supreme among rishis, 'I only have two hundred horses of the sort that
you desire, though there are hundreds of other sacrificial horses that are roaming around. O Galava! I will give
birth to a single son through her. Grant me this desire as a boon.' When the maiden heard these words, she told
Galava, 'One who knows about the brahman once granted me a boon. After each time that I give birth, I will become a virgin again. Therefore, give me to the king and accept those supreme horses. By going to four kings in
succession, you will obtain all the eight hundred horses. I will also have four sons. O supreme among brahmanas!
Act in this way for the sake of your preceptor. I think that this is wise. O brahmana! What do you think?' Having
been thus addressed by the maiden, the sage Galava told King Haryashva, 'O Haryashva! O best of men! Accept
this maiden. Give birth to a single son through her, for one quarter of the bride price.' He[Haryashva.] applauded Galava and
accepted the maiden. At the right time and the right place, he obtained the son that he had wished for. He was
named Vasumana. He was greater in riches than the Vasus. That lord of men resembled one of the Vasus and he became a great granter of riches.

'"After some time, the intelligent Galava presented himself again. He met Haryashva, who was delighted in his
mind, and told him, 'O king! A son has been born to you and he is like the young sun in his radiance. O lord of
men! It is now time for me to go to another king in search of alms.' Haryashva was truthful in his words and truthful in his manliness. Since those horses were extremely rare, he returned Madhavi. Madhavi gave up the radiant
prosperity of the king. Of her own will, she became a virgin again and followed Galava. The brahmana said, 'Let
the horses remain with you for the moment.' With the maiden, he went to Divodasa, the lord of his subjects."'


