The illustrious one said, "Surya and Chandra and their eternal rays are said to be my hair. They are known to
separately exist and heat up the universe. Since they heat up the universe in this way, they cause delight. O
descendant  of  the  Pandu  lineage!  It  is  because  of  these  deeds  of  Agni  and  Soma  that  I  am  known  as
Hrishikesha[There is a play on barsba (delight) and kesha (hair), to provide another convoluted explanation for the name
Hrishikesha.].  I  am  Ishana,  the  granter  of  boons  and  the  creator  of  the  worlds.  When  I  am  invoked  through
prayers at a sacrifice, I accept the share. Since my complexion is the best one of tawny, I am known as Hari[Hari means tawny, or reddish-brown.].
Those who have thought about it regard me as amrita and the refuge of all the worlds. Since I am the truth, brahmanas praise me as Ritadhama[The abode of truth.]. In earlier times, the earth had disappeared and was hidden. Since I found her
out and raised her,  the gods  praise me as  Govinda[Vinda means finding or getting and go means the earth.].  I  am known  as  Shipivishta, since I  am devoid of  body
hair[Sbipi means skin, so Shipivishta is someone who is only covered in skin.]. Someone who is only covered in skin is known as Shipivishta. This is the only name in which the rishi
Yaska  anxiously  chanted  my  name  in  sacrifices.  Thus,  I  came  to  hold  the  secret  name  of  Shipivishta.  Having
praised me through the name of Shipivishta, the intelligent rishi, Yaska, could use my favours to recover the nirukta, which had got submerged[Yaska is a grammarian who is regarded as the author of nirukta.]. I was not born earlier. I have not been born now. I will never be born. I  am
kshetrajna in all creatures. That is the reason I am known as Aja[Aja means without birth.]. I have never spoken anything that is inferior
or obscene. The goddess, Sarasvati, Brahma's daughter, is the truth and is always with me. O Kounteya! The existent and the non-existent are immersed in my atman. In Pushkara, in Brahma's abode, the learned rishis addressed
me as Satya[Meaning truth.]. I have never deviated from sattva. Know that sattva has been created by me. O Dhananjaya! In this
life too, as earlier, I have resorted to sattva. Those who act, but without any desires, think of me as Satvata. I can
be seen by those who have the knowledge of sattva. I am Satvata, the lord of the Satvatas. O Partha! Assuming the
form of a plough made up of black iron, I till the earth. O Arjuna! It is because of my dark complexion that I am
known as Krishna[Krishna means dark.]. I have united the earth with space, the space with wind and wind with energy. The quality of
Vaikuntha[Without hesitation.] is in me. Emancipation is supreme felicity and dharma is said to be superior to both of these. Since I
have never deviated from these in my deeds, I am known as Achyuta[Someone who has not deviated or been dislodged.]. People on earth know that the earth and
the firmament extend in all directions. Since I hold all of them up, I am known as Adhokshaja[Someone who prevents things from falling down.]. Those who are
learned about nirukta and the Vedas and have thought about the purport of words have sung my praises, giving me
the first share, and addressing me as Adhokshaja. The supreme rishis have invoked me by that single name too.
With the exception of the lord Narayana, there is no one else in the world who can be addressed as Adhokshaja.
Clarified butter, which sustains the life of creatures in this world, represents my rays. That is the reason concentrated ones who know about the Vedas address me as Ghritarchi[Someone for whom, clarified butter represents the rays or radiance.]. There are said to be three elements-bile, phlegm
and the wind. Their union is said to constitute all deeds. It is said that when these are weak, creatures are also
weakened. In  Ayurveda, I  am therefore spoken  of  as  Tridhatu[The three elements.].  O  descendant of  the Bharata lineage! In  the
world, the illustrious Dharma is known by the name of Vrisha. Thus, in the words of Nighantuka, I am known as
the supreme Vrisha[Nigbantu or Nighantuka was a glossary of obscure terms used in the Vedas.]. Kapi is said to be the best among boars and Vrisha is said to be the best among dharma.
Therefore, Prajapati Kashyapa has addressed me as Vrishakapi[The word means man-ape and is a term used for both Agni and Surya.]. I am without beginning, without middle and
without end. The gods and the asuras have never been able to comprehend my beginning, my middle, or my end. I
have been praised as the lord, the lord who is a witness to the worlds. O Dhananjaya! I do not hear, or cause to be
heard, anything that is inauspicious. I do not accept anything that is wicked. Hence, I am Shuchishrava[One who nears auspicious things.]. In earlier times, I assumed the form of a boar and it possessed a divine form, with a single horn. In that form, I raised up
the earth. That is the reason I am Ekashringa[One with a single horn.]. When I assumed that form of a boar, I had three humps. As a
measure of my body, I became famous as Trikakud[One with three humps.]. Those who have thought about the knowledge propounded
by Kapila speak of me as Virincha[Virincha is Brahma's name.]. I am Prajapati, the consciousness that created all the worlds. With knowledge as a companion, I am established in the eternal Aditya. Those who have arrived at conclusions about sankhya
also refer to me as the preceptor, Kapila. I am praised in the chants as the radiant Hiranyagarbha. I am always worshipped by yogis and I am known as Vibhu[The powerful, excellent and omnipresent one.]. I have been spoken about in the twenty-one recensions of the Rig
Veda[Only one major one survives now.]. Those learned in the Vedas have spoken about me in one thousand branches of the Sama Veda. Devoted
brahmanas who sing about me in the Aranyakas are extremely rare. The adbvaryu priests have spoken about me in
one hundred and one branches of the Yajur Veda. The brahmanas who know about the Atharva Veda have thought
of me as the five kalpas and the rituals of the Atharva Veda[In this context, it is not obvious what kalpa means. Period is logical, but part makes better sense.]. Know that all the recensions, divisions, knowledge,
branches, songs, vowels and pronunciation have been fashioned by me. O Partha! Hayashira, the granter of boons,
arose. I am he and all the subsequent sections, divisions and syllables are based on me. It is through the instructions of Rama and my favours that the great-souled Panchala progressively obtained that eternal being[Panchala is a reference to the rishi Galava. It is not clear who the Rama in question is.]. He was
born  in  the  Babhravya  gotra  and  progressively  became  accomplished.  Through  Narayana's  boon,  he  attained
supreme yoga. Thus, Galava was progressively led on to set out rules on shiksha[As in the Vedanga of phonetics and phonology.]. Kandarika and King Brahma-
datta repeatedly kept thinking about the misery that comes through birth and death[Brahmadatta was a king of Panchala. Brahmadatta is believed to have rearranged some parts of the Rig Veda
and the Atharva Veda. His minister Kandarika did the same for the Sama Veda.]. Through their efforts, they
obtained supreme prosperity for seven births. O Partha! In earlier times, for a certain reason, I was born as Dharma's son. O tiger among the Kuru lineage! I was therefore known as Dharmaja. Earlier, I performed undecaying
austerities as Nara-Narayana. On the slopes of Mount Gandhamadana, I ascended on that vehicle that leads to
dharma. There was a time when Daksha performed a sacrifice. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He refused to
earmark a share for Rudra. Following Dadhicha's instructions, he repeatedly hurled his blazing spear and uprooted
Daksha's sacrifice. The spear reduced Daksha's entire sacrifice to ashes and violently advanced towards us in the
hermitage of Badari. O Partha! It descended with great force on Narayana's chest. Narayana's hair became suffused with energy and assumed the complexion of munja grass. That is the reason I am known as Munjakesha. The
great-souled Narayana repulsed the whirling spear with the sound of 'Hum' and it returned to Shankara's hand. At
this, Rudra attacked the rishis who were engaged in austerities. When he attacked in this way, Narayana, the soul
of the universe, seized his throat with his hand, and he became Shitikantha. To destroy Rudra, Nara picked up a
blade of grass. He swiftly invoked mantras and it became a giant battle axe. He hurled it violently, but Rudra shattered it into fragments before it reached him. Since the battleaxe was shattered, I came to be known as Khandaparashu[Literally meaning shattered battleaxe. Nara and Narayana are often regarded as the same person.]."
'Arjuna said, "O Varshneya! That encounter was capable of devastating the three worlds. O Janardana! Who
was victorious? Tell me."

'The illustrious one replied, "An encounter started between the souls of Rudra and Narayana. All the worlds
suddenly became anxious. The fire god no longer accepted the auspicious oblations offered at sacrifices. The Vedas
no longer manifested themselves before the rishis who possessed cleansed souls. Rajas and tamas penetrated the
gods. The earth trembled and the firmament started to waver. All the energy diminished and Brahma was dislodged
from his seat. The oceans dried up and the Himalayas were shattered. O descendant of the Pandu lineage! Ominous
portents manifested themselves. Brahma, surrounded by large numbers of gods and the great-souled rishis, swiftly
went  to  the  spot  where  the  battle  had  commenced.  The four-faced one[Brahma.]  can  only  be  comprehended  through
nirukta. Because of those portents, he joined his hands in salutation and spoke to Rudra. 'Let everything in the
worlds  be  auspicious.  O  lord  of  the  universe!  For  the  welfare  of  the  universe,  you  should  thrown  down  your
weapon. He is indestructible. He is unmanifest. He is the lord who has created the worlds. He is subtle. He is the
doer. He is beyond opposites. He is the learned one. He has assumed this manifest form. Nara and Narayana have
been born in Dharma's lineage and actually have a single and auspicious form. These best of gods are engaged in
great austerities and major vows. For a different reason, I have also been generated from them. O son! Though you
are eternal, in an earlier cycle of creation, you have been born from his rage. O one who is the granter of boons!
With the gods and the maharshis, I am soliciting your favours. Let there quickly be peace in the worlds.' Thus addressed by Brahma, Rudra withdrew the fire of his anger and sought to please the lord god Narayana. He sought
the refuge of the one who should be worshipped, the granter of boons, Hari. The god, the granter of boons, was in
control of his rage and had vanquished his senses. He cheerfully met Rudra. He was worshipped by the rishis,
Brahma and the gods. Hari, the lord of the universe, spoke to the god Ishana. 'He who knows you, knows me. He
who follows you, follows me. There is no difference between you and me. Do not think otherwise. Your spear will
leave the srivatsa mark on my chest. My hand will leave a beautiful mark on your throat, to be known as shrikantha[Literally, beautiful throat.].' They thus left marks on each other. Rudra and the rishis exhibited a great deal of friendliness towards each
other. Giving permission to the residents of heaven to go, they[Nara and Narayana.] engaged in austerities again. O Partha! I have
told you how Narayana was victorious in that encounter. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I have also told you
about the secret names and their meanings. The rishis speak about these and recount them. O Kounteya! In this
way, I roam around the earth in many forms and also in the world of Brahma and eternal Goloka[Vishnu's world.]. You were protected by me in the great battle and obtained victory. O Kounteya! When the battle presented itselft, there was a
being who advanced in front of you. Know him to be Rudra Kapardin, the god of the gods. He is also known as
Kala[Death, destruction, destiny, in addition to meaning time.] and he was born out of my rage. He had already slain all your enemies. Uma's consort, the god of the
gods, is immeasurable in his power. Bow down before that god. He is the lord of the universe and he is the undecaying Hara[Hara is Shiva's name.]."'

Janamejaya said, 'O brahmana! You have narrated a great account. On hearing this, all these sages are overcome
by great wonder. This has been churned from the excellent and extensive ocean of knowledge known as the Mahabharata, consisting of one hundred thousand[Shlokas.], like getting butter from curds, sandalwood from Mount Malaya,
the Aranyakas from the Vedas and amrita from herbs. O brahmana! O store of austerities! You have raised it like
excellent amrita and stated it, based on accounts about Narayana. The illustrious lord and god has created the at-
mans of all creatures. O supreme among brahmanas! Narayana's energy is impossible to look at. Brahma and all
the other gods, the rishis, the gandharvas and everything mobile and immobile merge into him at the end of a
kalpa. I do not think that there is anything in heaven that is more sacred than him. Visiting all the hermitages and
bathing in all the tirthas do not yield as many fruits as listening to Narayana's account does. Hari is the lord of the
universe and is the one who destroys all sins. There is nothing colourful that was done by the noble Dhananjaya.
Nor is there any excellent victory that was accomplished by him. After all, he had Vasudeva as his aide. I think that
someone who has Vishnu, the protector of the three worlds, as his friend, is capable of obtaining anything in the
three worlds. O brahmana! All these ancestors of mine were blessed. Janardana was engaged in their welfare and
prosperity. The illustrious one is revered in the worlds and cannot be seen through austerities. However, they directly saw the one adorned with the shrivatsa mark on his chest. Narada, Parameshthi's son, was even more fortunate. Narada is known as the undecaying rishi whose energy is significant. He went to Shvetadvipa and saw Hari
himself. It is through that god's favours that he obtained that vision. There, he saw the god in the form of Aniruddha. Thereafter, he again went to the hermitage of Badari to see Nara and Narayana. Why did the sage do that?
Having returned from Shvetadvipa, the rishi Narada, Parameshthi's son, again went to the hermitage of Badari.
After returning from Shvetadvipa, the extremely great-souled one went there. How long did he dwell there and
what did he ask them? What did the great-souled rishis, Nara and Narayana, say? Tell me the truth about this. You
should tell me everything.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'I bow down to the illustrious and immensely energetic Vyasa. I will narrate this account about Narayana through his favours. Having reached the great Shvetadvipa, he saw the immutable Hari. O
king! Narada then swiftly returned to Meru. The brahmana bore in his heart the words spoken by the paramatman.
O king! Thereafter, he thought to himself that he had achieved great success. He had travelled a long distance and
had returned safe. From Meru, he went to Mount Gandhamadana. He travelled through the sky and quickly descended on the extensive region of Badari. There, he saw the ancient gods, the supreme rishis. They were engaged
in extremely great austerities and were following wonderful vows, basing themselves on their own atmans. Their
energy illuminated all the worlds and was greater than that of the sun. Those revered ones bore the srivatsa mark
and their hair was matted. They had the marks of a jalapada on their palms[A jalapada is a web-footed bird, like a swan. This is an auspicious sign.].  Their feet bore the auspicious
marks of a chakra. Their chests were broad. Their arms were long. They possessed four arms each. They possessed
sixty teeth each and their voices rumbled like the clouds. Their faces were beautiful and their foreheads were
broad. Their jaws were beautiful and their eyebrows and noses were excellent. Their heads were like umbrellas.
These were the signs that those two great beings were marked with. On seeing them, Narada was delighted. He
worshipped them and was honoured back in return. They welcomed him and asked him whether he was well. On
seeing them, Narada thought within himself, "These two Purushottamas, revered by all creatures, are just like the
supreme rishis I saw in Shvetadvipa." Thinking this in his mind, he circumambulated them and sat down on an
auspicious seat that was made out of kusha grass. They were the abodes of austerities. They were illustrious and
full of energy. Those rishis were tranquil and self-controlled. Having performed their ablutions, they calmly honoured Narada with water for washing the feet and a gift. O king! After observing the rites to welcome a guest, they
sat down on two wooden seats. When they sat down there, the entire area was illuminated. It was just like a sacrificial altar, blazing with large flames of the fire, when oblations have been offered. Narada was happily seated. He
was rested and having been received with hospitality, was cheerful. Narayana spoke to him. "The original and eternal paramatman is illustrious. He is the supreme form of our Prakriti and you have seen him in Shvetadvipa."

'Narada replied, "I have seen that illustrious and immutable Purusha. The universe is his form. All the worlds
and the gods and the rishis are in him. Having seen the two of you now, I see that eternal one in you. The unmanifest Hari did not possess a form. But the signs he possessed are the signs that exist in you, in manifest and embodied forms. There, I saw you on both sides of the god. Having taken the permission of the paramatman, I have come
here. With the exception of you two, born as Dharma's sons, who in the three worlds can possess energy, fame and
prosperity like his? Earlier, he has told me the signs of the kshetrajna. He has also told me how he will manifest
himself in the future. In Shveta, there were men who were devoid of their five senses. Their knowledge has been
awakened and they are Purushottama's devotees. They always worship the god and he finds pleasure in them. The
illustrious  paramatman  is  affectionate  towards  his  devotees  and  loves  brahmanas.  He  always  finds  pleasure  in
those who are devoted to the illustrious one. The god enjoys everything in the universe and is friendly and affectionate towards his devotees. He is the doer. He is the cause and the effect. He is immensely powerful and radiant.
That supreme one in Shvetadvipa represents austerities and sacrifices for those who are united with their atmans.
He is famous for his energy. He is illuminated through his own radiance. For successful ones in the three worlds,
who have cleansed their souls, he is tranquility. There, the devoted ones have resorted to vows, using their auspicious intelligence. The lord of the gods performs very difficult austerities in a spot where the sun does not heat, the
moon does not shine and the wind does not blow. The enjoyer of the universe has constructed an altar on the
ground and it measures the length of eight palms. The god is stationed there, standing on a single foot and with his
arms raised. He faces the eastern direction. He performs those extremely difficult austerities, chanting from the
Vedas and the Vedangas. Brahma, the rishis, Pashupati himself, the other best among gods, daityas, danavas, rakshasas, serpents, birds, gandharvas, siddhas and rajarshis always offer havya and kavya, following the ordinances.
All of these present themselves at that god's feet. Intelligent ones perform rites with single-minded attention. That
god himself receives all these on his head. There is no one he loves more in the three worlds than learned and
great-souled ones who are single-minded in their devotion to him. Having been given permission to leave by the
paramatman, I have come here. The illustrious god, Hari, himself told me that I should always reside with you, obtaining supreme benedictions."'


Nara and Narayana said, "You are blessed, since you have seen and have been favoured by the lord himself.
The one who has been born from the lotus[Brahma.] has himself been unable to see him. The illustrious Purushottama has an unmanifest origin and is extremely difficult to see. O Narada! The words we are speaking to you are entirely true. O best among the brahmanas! There is no one in the worlds that he loves as much as a devotee. That is
the  reason  he  has  shown  himself  to  you.  The  paramatman  torments  himself  through  austerities  in  a  region.  O
supreme among brahmanas! With our exception, no one is capable of going there. Because of his radiance, that
place seems to be illuminated by one thousand suns together. That place shines through his own resplendence. O
brahmana! He is the lord behind the creation of the universe. The quality of forgiveness, and the best among those
who forgive, the earth, arose from him. For the welfare of all creatures, the quality of taste also arose from that god
and the attribute of fluidity that is associated with the water. It is from that god that light, and the quality of form
with which it is associated, arose. United with this, the sun radiates the worlds. It is from the supreme god Purushottama that touch has arisen. United with the wind, this makes the worlds feel. Sound arose from the god who
is the lord of the universe. This is attached to space, which extends unconstrained in all the directions. Mind arose
from that god and is inside all beings. This becomes attached to the moon and assumes the quality of showing
things. That place, associated with the Vedas, is known as the region where the six elements arose[The five elements and mind.]. The illustrious one, the devourer of havya and kavya, resides there, accompanied by knowledge. O supreme among brahmanas! There are people who have been cleansed from sin and are disassociated from good and bad deeds. They
are capable of going to that sacred region. That is a region which frees the worlds from delusion and Aditya is said
to be the door to that. On entering Aditya, the bodies of such people are consumed. Others are rendered invisible.
Becoming  like  atoms[Paramanu.],  such  people  merge  into  the  god.  They  are  thus  emancipated  and  are  established  in
Aniruddha. After that, they only retain the attributes of the mind and merge into Pradyumna. Freed from Pradyumna, the being next enters Samkarshana. The best among brahmanas, those who know about sankhya and are devoted, merge there. O best among brahmanas! When the three qualities[Sattva, rajas and tamas.] are completely extinguished, they merge
into the paramatman, the kshetrajna who is devoid of qualities. Truly know that Vasudeva, the refuge of everything, is kshetrajna. There are those who have controlled their minds, are restrained and have checked their senses.
Single-minded in devotion, they enter into Vasudeva. O supreme among brahmanas! We have been born in Dharma's house. Dwelling in this beautiful spot, we have practised fierce austerities. O brahmana! We have done this
for the welfare of the three worlds, so that the supreme one, beloved by the gods, can manifest himself. O supreme
among brahmanas! We have observed rites that have not been witnessed earlier. We have properly observed all the
wonderful vows of hardship. O store of austerities! In Shvetadvipa, you saw us too. Having met the illustrious one,
you formed a resolution and we know about it. We know everything in the three worlds of mobile and immobile
objects, everything that has happened, is happening and will happen, good or bad."'

Vaishampayana said, 'They were engaged in fierce austerities. Having heard their words, Narada, devoted to
Narayana, joined his hands in salutation. He meditated on many kinds of mantras, all of which had originated with
Narayana. He spent one thousand divine years in the hermitage of Nara and Narayana. The immensely energetic
and illustrious rishi, Narada, dwelt there. He worshipped the gods, Nara and Narayana.'


