'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! Hear about Vasudeva's divine deeds. Govinda performed them and no other man
can ever replicate them. O Sanjaya! When the great-souled one was brought up as a child in a family of cowherds,
he made the strength of his arms known to the three worlds. When he dwelt in the forests along the Yamuna, he
killed the king of horses[This is the demon Keshi, sent by Kamsa to kill Krishna. Keshi adopted the form of a horse. Having killed Keshi,
Krishna came to be known as Keshava.], who was like the wind in speed and Uchchaishrava's equal in strength. There was a
terrible danava in the form of a bull[Arishtasura, also sent by Kamsa to kill Krishna.]. He arose among the cows, like death. Though still a child, he killed him
with his arms. The one with lotus eyes also killed great asuras like Pralamba, Naraka, Jamba, Pitha and Muru, who
was like a mountain. The immensely energetic Kamsa was protected by Jarasandha. But with his valour alone[That is, without using any weapons.],
Krishna killed him and his followers in battle. The brave Sunama, the king of Shurasena, was the leader of an entire akshouhini. The valiant one was the second brother of Kamsa, the king of Bhoja. With Baladeva as his second,
Krishna, the slayer of enemies, spiritedly consumed him in a battle, with all his soldiers. The brahmana rishi Dur-
vasa was extremely prone to rage. He worshipped him with his wife and obtained a boon from him[The wife in question is Rukmini. There is a story about Durvasa visiting Krishna and Rukmini and their worshipping him with rice and milk. Durvasa asked Krishna to smear the remnants all over his body. Krishna did
this, leaving out the feet. Durvasa granted Krishna the boon that he would not be killed through any part of the
body that had been smeared with the remaining rice and milk.]. The lotus-
eyed and brave one vanquished many kings at the svayamvara of the daughter of the king of Gandhara[Satyabhama was the princess of Gandhara.]. As if
they were born horses, the intolerant kings were yoked to the wedding chariot and lacerated with whips. The
mighty-armed Jarasandha was the leader of an entire akshouhini. Janardana thought of a way so that he might be
killed by someone else[Jarasandha was killed by Bhima, but Bhima was instigated by Krishna. The incident has been described in Section 22 (Volume 2).]. The brave and powerful king of Chedi was the leader of kings. In the dispute over the
arghya, he was killed like an animal[The king of Chedi is Shishupala. The incident has been described in Section 25 (Volume 2).]. Soubha, the city of the daityas, was established in the sky. It was protected
by Shalva and was invincible. Through his valour, Madhava brought it down into the ocean[This has been described in Section 31 (Volume 2).]. He defeated in battle Anga, Vanga, Kalinga, Magadha, Andhaka, Kasi, Kosala, Vatsa, Garga, Karusha and Pundra. O Sanjaya! Avanti, the south, the mountains, Dasheraka, Kashmiraka, Ourasaka, Pishacha, Samandara, Kamboja, Vatadhana, Chola,
Pandya, Trigarta, Malava and Darada were difficult to conquer. Ashvas, Shakas and Yavanas and their followers
arrived from different directions. But Pundarikaksha vanquished them. In earlier times, he penetrated the abode of
makaras, inhabited by aquatic creatures. In the midst of the waters, he vanquished Varuna in battle[Nanda (Krishna's foster-father) was abducted by Varuna's servants and rescued by Krishna and Balarama.]. Hrishikesha
slew Panchajana, who resided in the nether regions of patala and obtained the divine conch shell Panchajanya[The sage Sandipani was Krishna's teacher and Sandipani's son was abducted by the demon Panchajana. Krishna
killed Panchajana the conch shell Panchajanya was made out of Panchajana's bones.].
Together with Partha, the immensely strong one satisfied Agni in Khandava and obtained the invincible agneya
weapon, the chakra[Sudarshana chakra.]. He rode on Vinata's son and caused terror in Amaravati[Vinata's son is Garuda and Amaravati is Indra's capital.]. The brave one brought parijata
from the great Indra's residence. Knowing his valour, Shakra tolerated this. We have not heard of any king who
has not been vanquished by Krishna. O Sanjaya! Pundarikaksha performed an extremely wonderful deed in my assembly hall[This is a reference to Krishna manifesting his own self. The incident has been described in Section 54 (Volume
Four).]. Who else can do this? Because of that, I have sought refuge with him in devotion. I look upon
Krishna as the lord. I know everything about it, having witnessed it myself. There is no end to his valour, or to his
intelligence. O Sanjaya! Nor can anyone reach the limit of Hrishikesha's deeds.

'"Gada, Samba, Pradyumna, Viduratha, Agavaha, Aniruddha, Charudeshna, Sarana, Ulmuka, Nishatha, Jhalli,
the valiant Babhru, Prithu, Viprithu, Samika, Arimejaya-these and other powerful Vrishni heroes are skilled in
striking. They will station themselves in battle, in the ranks of the Pandava army. They will be summoned by the
great-souled hero among the Vrishnis, Keshava. It is my view that everything will then confront a great danger.
Where Janardana is, the brave Rama will be there[Balarama. However, Balarama decided to remain neutral and went away on a pilgrimage.]. He wields the plough and wears a garland of wild flowers.
His strength is like that of ten thousand elephants. He is like the summit of Kailasa. The brahmanas describe Vasudeva as the father of everything. O Sanjaya! Will he fight for the cause of the sons of Pandu? O son[The word used is tata.]! If Kesha-
va dons his armour for the sake of the Pandavas, there is no one in our army who can withstand him. If all the Kurus manage to defeat all the Pandavas, for their sake, Varshneya will take up his supreme weapons. That mighty-
armed tiger among men will kill all the kings and the Kouravas in battle and give the earth to the sons of Kunti.
Hrishikesha is the charioteer and Dhananjaya is the warrior in that chariot. Where is the ratha in our army who will
confront them in battle? There is no means whereby the Kurus can be seen to obtain victory. Tell me everything
about how the battle continued. Arjuna is Keshava's soul and Krishna is Kiriti's soul. Arjuna is always victorious
and Krishna's deeds are eternal. All the qualities are vested in Keshava, beyond measure. Because of his delusion,
Duryodhana does not know Krishna Madhava. Because of his delusion and because he is driven by destiny, the
noose of death is in front of him and he does not know Dasharha Krishna and Pandava Arjuna. Earlier, those great-
souled ones were the gods Nara and Narayana. They were a single soul and are seen by men on earth as divided
into two. They are famous and invincible. If they wish, they can destroy the army with their minds. But because
they are humans, they do not wish that[Having been born as men, they resort to human means alone.]. The destruction of the yuga is near and the people are deluded. O son!
That is the reason for the death of Bhishma and the great-souled Drona. Death can never be prevented through
brahmacharya, the study of the Vedas, rites or weapons. Those brave ones were revered by the worlds. They were
skilled in the use of weapons and were invincible in battle. O Sanjaya! On hearing that Bhishma and Drona have
been slain, why should I remain alive? After learning about the death of Bhishma and Drona, we will now have to
seek refuge with Yudhishthira, about whose prosperity we used to be jealous earlier. This destruction of the Kurus
has come about because of my deeds. O suta! When one is ripe for slaughter, even a blade of grass is like the vajra.
Yudhishthira will obtain unmatched prosperity in this world. It is because of his anger that the great archers, Bhishma and Drona, have been brought down. Dharma is naturally on his side, though humans typically have adharma.
Destiny is cruel and it is time for everything to be destroyed. O son! Even learned men cannot think of means to
counteract it. Everything progresses because of destiny. That is my view. Therefore, tell me everything, exactly as
it happened, about that supreme hardship, without discarding anything. It cannot be crossed and leads to grievous
reflection."'


'Sanjaya said, "I will describe everything to you, exactly as I saw it, about how Drona was made to sit down and
was brought down by the Pandus and the Srinjayas. Having been appointed the commander, in the midst of all the
soldiers, Bharadvaja's maharatha son spoke these words to your son. 'O king! You have shown me great honour by
appointing me the commander today, after that bull among the Kouravas, the son of the one who goes to the ocean.
O king! You will obtain fruits that are commensurate with your action. What desire of yours can I satisfy today?
Tell me what you desire.' At this, Duryodhana thought and consulted Karna, Duhshasana and the others. He told
the invincible preceptor, foremost among victorious ones, 'If you wish, grant me the boon that you will capture
Yudhishthira, foremost among charioteers, alive and bring him before me.' On hearing your son's words, the preceptor of the Kurus, spoke these words, bringing delight to all the soldiers. 'The king, Kunti's son, whom you wish
to be captured, is fortunate. O extremely invincible one! You have only asked for the boon that he should be captured, not that he should be killed. O tiger among men! Why did you not desire that he should be killed? O Duryodhana! There is no doubt that you know about what should be done. It is wonderful that Dharma's son should not
have an enmity like that towards you. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! If you wish to remain alive and protect your own lineage, then after vanquishing the Pandavas in battle, give them a share of the kingdom and act according to fraternal relations. The king who is Kunti's son is fortunate. The intelligent one has been born auspiciously. He is truly Ajatashatru[Ajatashatru is Yudhishthira's name and means someone who has no enemies.]. Even you are affectionate towards him.' O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Thus addressed by Drona, your son suddenly displayed the sentiments that always course through him. Even
someone like Brihaspati is incapable of controlling his countenance. O king! Therefore, your son joyfully spoke
these words. 'O preceptor! If Kunti's son is killed by you, I will not be able to obtain victory. If Yudhishthira is
slain, there is no doubt that the Parthas will slaughter all of us. They are incapable of being killed in battle, even by
all the immortals. The one among them who is left, will destroy us. But he[Yudhishthira.] is truthful in his pledges. When he is
brought here, we will defeat him again in a gambling match. The Kounteyas will follow him again to the forest.
Thus my victory will manifest itself for a long time to come. That is the reason I do not desire Dharmaraja's
death.' Drona was intelligent and was knowledgeable about artha. Having ascertained his crooked intention, he
thought about this for some time and then granted him the boon.

'"Drona replied, 'If Yudhishthira is not protected by the brave Arjuna in battle, you can think that the eldest Pan-
dava has already been brought under your control. O son[The word used is tata.]! But Partha is incapable of being repulsed in battle,
even by Indra and the gods and the asuras. That is the reason I cannot advance against him. In the knowledge of
weapons, there is no doubt that he has been my disciple earlier. He is young and has accomplished many deeds. He
is single-minded in purpose. He has obtained many weapons from Indra and Rudra. O king! You have also incensed him and I cannot advance against him. Let Partha be removed from the field of battle, by whatever means
that are possible, and Dharmaraja will be vanquished. O bull among men! Once he has been captured, you think
that victory will be yours. Think of means, so that his capture is beyond doubt. I will capture the king, who is devoted to truth and dharma. O king! There is no doubt that I will bring him under your control today, as long as he
is stationed in the battle before me, even for an instant. But let Dhananjaya, Kunti's son and tiger among men, be
removed. With Phalguna present, Partha Yudhishthira is incapable of being captured in battle, even by Indra and
the gods and the asuras.'"

'Sanjaya said, "After Drona promised the king's capture, your extremely foolish sons thought that he had been
already captured. Your son knew that Drona was partial towards the Pandavas. Therefore, to make him stick to the
pledge, he made the counsel generally known. O destroyer of enemies! Duryodhana proclaimed among all the soldiers that Pandava would be captured."'


'Sanjaya said, "The soldiers heard that Yudhishthira would be captured. They roared like lions and this mingled
with the sounds of their arrows and their conch shells. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Dharmaraja got to
know everything about this through his spies, and about what Bharadvaja's son desired to do. He summoned all his
brothers and all the soldiers. Dharmaraja spoke these words to Dhananjaya. 'O tiger among men! You have heard
about what Drona wishes to do today. Let all appropriate measures be taken accordingly. O destroyer of enemies!
It is true that Drona has taken a pledge. But it is not infallible and everything depends on you. O mighty-armed
one! Therefore, fight near me today, so that Duryodhana cannot obtain what he desires from Drona.'

'"Arjuna replied, 'O king! Just as I can never act so as to bring about the preceptor's death, I will never forsake
you. O Pandava! I would rather give up my life than fight against my preceptor and kill him. O king! Dhritarashtra's son wishes to capture you in the battle. He will never accomplish his desire in the world of the living. As long
as I am alive, Drona will never be able to capture you. Even if the wielder of the vajra himself, together with the
gods and the daityas, were to try to capture you in battle, they will fail. O Indra among kings! As long as I am
alive, you should not be frightened. Drona is foremost among wielders of weapons and among those who wield all
weapons. I do not remember having ever uttered a falsehood. I do not remember ever having been vanquished. I do
not remember having not fulfilled a pledge I have made, even partially.'"

'Sanjaya said, "O great king! Conch shells, drums, cymbals and tambourines were then sounded in the residence
of the Pandavas. The great-souled Pandavas roared like lions. The fearful twang of bowstrings and the slapping of
palms rose up into heaven. On hearing the conch shells sounded by the great-souled Pandavas, your army also
caused musical instruments to be played. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The arrays and divisions, on your
side and theirs, slowly advanced towards each other, wishing to fight in the battle. A tumultuous battle commenced
between the Pandavas and the Kurus and Drona and the Panchalas, and it made the body hair stand up. O king!
Though they made every endeavour, the Srinjayas were unable to drive back Drona's army, because it was protected by Drona himself. The armed and mighty rathas of your son were unable to drive back the Pandava soldiers, because they were protected by Kiriti. Protected thus, the respective soldiers seemed to be subdued, like blossoms
that are asleep in the forests in the night. O king! He[Drona.] was on a golden chariot, as radiant as the sun. He shattered
the divisions and roamed around, amidst the ranks. He was on a single chariot. But he acted so quickly in that battle, that the terrified Pandus and Srinjayas thought there were several of him. He released terrible arrows that travelled in every direction. O great king! There was fright in the army of the Pandaveyas. He seemed to be like the
sun when it has attained midday, radiating a hundred rays and quickly drawing out sweat. That is what Drona
looked like then. O venerable one! The Pandaveyas were incapable of glancing towards him in that battle, like the
danavas towards the great Indra, when enraged. Bharadvaja's powerful son confounded the soldiers. He swiftly
pierced Dhrishtadyumna's army with his sharp arrows. He seemed to cover and obstruct all the directions and the
sky with his arrows. He crushed the army of the Pandus, even where Parshata was."'


