Vaishampayana said, 'The sacrifice started. Eloquent ones who knew about debating argued and spoke about
many kinds of logic, seeking to defeat each other[The sacrifice was an occasion for debating and arguing.]. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! The kings saw  the
supreme arrangements that had been duly made for the sacrifice by Bhima, as if they had been made by the king of
the gods himself. They saw the golden gates and the seats and beds made for relaxing, decorated with large numbers of jewels. There were pots, vessels, jars, jugs and pans. The kings did not see anything there that was not
made out of  gold. Sacred texts were recited and sacrificial altars set up. These  were  made  of  wood,  but  were
adorned with gold. At the right time and following the rites, these radiant altars were consecrated. O lord! The
kings saw that all the animals, from the land and from the water, had been brought. There were cattle, buffaloes,
aged women, aquatic creatures, predatory beasts and birds. There were those born from wombs, eggs, sweat and
plants and herbs. They also saw creatures from the mountainous regions. All the kings saw that the sacrificial arena
was full of animals, cattle and grain and were filled with supreme wonder. Large numbers of excellent sweets were
prepared for the brahmanas and the vaishyas. More than one hundred thousand brahmanas were fed. Kettledrums
were repeatedly struck and made a noise like the roar of clouds. Every day, this sound signified the welcome accorded. In this way, the intelligent Dharmaraja's sacrifice was performed. O king! Piles of food, as large as mountains, were offered. There were tanks of curds and lakes of clarified butter. There are many countries in Jambudvipa. O king! Residents from all of these were seen to come to the king's great sacrifice. There were men from
thousands of races. O bull among the Bharata lineage! They received the copious gifts of wealth that were made.
The king's servants wore garlands and were adorned in jewels and earrings. They served the hundreds and thousands of foremost of brahmanas. These men followed them around with many kinds of food and drink. They offered food and drink that was fit for kings to the brahmanas.'


Vaishampayana said, 'The kings and lords of the earth, knowledgable about the Vedas, arrived. On seeing this,
King Yudhishthira spoke to Bhimasena. "Make arrangements for honour to be shown to these tigers among
men and lords of the earth. These lords of men deserve to be honoured." O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Thus addressed by the illustrious Indra among men, the greatly energetic Bhimasena, together with the twins, acted
in that way. Govinda, supreme among all those who are alive, arrived before Dharma's son with the Vrishnis, placing Baladeva ahead of them. He was also with Yuyudhana, Pradyumna, Gada, Nishatha, Samba and Kritavarma.
The mighty-armed Bhima showed them supreme respect too. The bulls among men entered their bejewelled residences. Conversing in Yudhishthira's presence, Madhusudana told him that Arjuna was exhausted because of the
many battles. Kounteya repeatedly asked him about that scorcher of enemies and the lord of the universe told
Dharmaraja about his brother, Jishnu. "O king! A messenger, a resident of Dvaraka, came to me. He had seen that
the best among Pandavas had been exhausted because of numerous battles. O lord! He also said that the mighty-
armed one is near. O Kounteya! Now perform the acts that must be undertaken to make the horse sacrifice successful." Thus addressed, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira replied, "O Madhava! It is through good fortune that Jishnu is returning safely. O descendant of the Yadu lineage! I wish to hear from you whatever has been said about Pandava,
foremost among strong ones." O tiger among kings! Thus addressed, the lord of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas, the
eloquent one, spoke these words to Yudhishthira, who had dharma in his soul. "O great king! That man reported
Partha's words to me. 'At the right time, my words should be reported to Yudhishthira and Krishna[The text doesn't have this within quotes. But these are clearly Arjuna's words, being reported by the messenger.]. All the
kings are coming towards Kourava. Since we are capable, it is our task to exhibit many kinds of honour towards
them. O one who shows honours[This seems to be addressed to the messenger.]! However, also convey to the king these words of mine. We should avoid a
calamity at the time of offering the arghya[This is a reference to the dispute in Section 24 (Volume 2), when the arghya offered to Krishna after the rajasuya
sacrifice was contested.]. The king must ensure that there is no display of intolerance. O king!
Because of enmity between the kings, let the subjects not be destroyed again.' O Kounteya! These are the words
that man reported to me. O king! I will tell you Dhananjaya's words. Listen. 'The king who is the lord of Manipura
will come to the sacrifice. He is my extremely energetic and beloved son, Babhruvahana. Out of consideration towards me, honour him in the appropriate way. O lord! He has always been devoted towards me and faithful.' On
hearing these words, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira honoured these words. He replied in the following words."'


Yudhishthira said, "O Krishna! I have heard your agreeable words. They are indeed words that you should
speak. O lord! They are like amrita and gladden my mind. Vijaya has indeed fought many battles with the
lords of men, here and there and repeatedly. O  Hrishikesha! I  have heard that. Vijaya is extremely intelligent.
However, it oppresses my mind that Partha is always separated from happiness. What is the mystery behind that?
O Varshneya! I always think about Kunti's son[Arjuna.]. O Krishna! His body possesses all the auspicious marks that are
revered. What is the inauspicious mark, because of which, he always suffers misery? That son of Kunti has always
borne a disproportionate share of sorrow. I do not see anything on Bibhatsu's body that can be censured. If you
think I deserve to hear this, you should explain it to me."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having been thus addressed, Hrishikesha reflected for a very long time. Vishnu, the extender of the king[Yudhishthira.] and the king of Bhoja, replied. "O king! No inauspicious marks can be seen in him, but for the
fact that the lion among men has cheekbones that are exceedingly large. That is the reason the tiger among men is
perpetually fighting. I do not see any other reason why Jaya should have his share of misery." O lord! Thus addressed by the intelligent Krishna, the foremost among the Kurus told the tiger among the Vrishnis that this was
indeed true. However, Krishnaa Droupadi cast a sidelong glance towards Krishna[We have used Krishnaa for Droupadi to avoid confusion with Krishna. The sidelong glance signified
disapproval.]. The slayer of Keshi accepted
this as a sign of affection. She was his friend. Dhananjaya was also his friend and like Hrishikesha himself.

'O  lord!  Bhima  and  the  others,  the  Kurus  and  the  Yadavas,  were  delighted  on  hearing  about  Dhananjaya's
colourful exploits. They began to talk about Arjuna and conversed about the great-souled Vijaya's immortal deeds.
At that time, an intelligent man arrived before the best among the Kurus. He bowed down and reported that Arjuna, tiger among men, had arrived. On hearing this, the king's eyes became full of tears of joy. On hearing this
agreegable news, he gave him copious amounts of riches. On the second day, a large roar resulted and increased,
when the tiger among men, the bearer of the burden of the Pandavas, arrived. A dust was raised from the hooves of
the resplendent horse. It had fearlessly returned, as if it was Uchchaihshrava[Indra's horse.]. As he advanced, Arjuna heard
many happy words spoken by the men. "It is good fortune that Partha is well. King Yudhishthira is blessed. As the
best among horses wandered around, who other than Arjuna could have followed it? The great-souled one has surpassed all the kings, Sagara and the others. We have not heard of any such deed. Nor will any of the lords of the
earth be able to accomplish this in the future. The foremost among the Kuru lineage has performed an extremely
difficult deed." These were the words, agreeable to the ear, spoken by those men. Hearing this, Phalguna, with
dharma in his soul, entered the sacrificial arena. The king and his advisers and Krishna, the descendant of the Yadu
lineage, went out to receive him, placing Dhritarashtra at their head. He honoured his father's feet and the intelligent Dharmaraja. He honoured Bhima and the others and embraced Keshava. Having met them and being worshipped duly by them, he worshipped them back. The one with dharma in his soul rested, like a person who has
crossed over to the shore. At this time, King Babhruvahana, accompanied by his mothers[Both Chitrangada and Ulupi.], came to the intelligent
Kuru. He met all the Kurus and was welcomed by all of them. He then entered his grandmother Kunti's supreme
residence.'


