'Dhritarashtra asked, "O Sanjaya! When Arjuna reached Saindhava and the Panchalas were enveloped by Bharadvaja's son and clashed against the Kurus, what did they do?"

'Sanjaya said, "O great king! There was a battle in the afternoon and it made the body hair stand up. Drona was
like the stake in the clash between the Panchalas and the Kurus. O venerable one! The Panchalas were cheerful in
their minds and wished to kill Drona. They roared and showered down arrows. A tumultuous and terrible battle
commenced between the Panchalas and the Kurus and it was like that between the gods and the asuras. With the
Pandavas, all the Panchalas reached Drona's chariot. Wishing to penetrate his array, they displayed great weapons.
There were rathas stationed on their chariots and with medium speed[They probably didn't require greater speed, because they were already close.], they caused a tremor and reached up to
Drona's chariot. Brihatkshatra, the maharatha from the Kekayas, showered sharp arrows that were like the great
Indra's vajra and advanced. He was swiftly countered by the immensely illustrious Kshemadhurti, who showered
hundreds and thousands of sharp arrows. Dhrishtaketu, bull among the Chedis and possessing great strength,
quickly attacked Drona, like the great Indra against Shambara. On seeing him suddenly descend, like death with a
gaping mouth, Viradhanva, the great archer, quickly countered him. O great king! Yudhishthira was stationed
there, desiring victory, and he and his soldiers were repulsed by the valiant Drona. Nakula was skilled in battle and
was valiant. O lord! As he advanced, your valorous son, Vikarna, countered him. Durmukha, the afflicter of enemies, repulsed the advancing Sahadeva with many thousand swift arrows. Vyaghradatta used extremely sharp and
pointed arrows to repeatedly make Satyaki, tiger among men, tremble. Droupadi's sons, tigers among men, angrily
released supreme arrows. But those best of rathas were repulsed by Somadatta's son. Bhimasena advanced wrath-
fully. But he was countered by Rishyashringa's maharatha son, who was fierce and terrible of form[The rakshasa Alambusa.]. O king! In
the battle, the encounter that took place between the man and the rakshasa was like that between Rama and Ravana
in ancient times.

'"O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Yudhishthira, foremost among the Bharata lineage, struck Drona with
ninety arrows with drooping tufts and these penetrated all the inner organs. At this, Drona became angry and struck
the illustrious Kounteya, foremost among the Bharata lineage, between the breasts with twenty-five arrows. While
all the archers looked on, Drona again struck him, his horses, his charioteer and his standard with twenty arrows.
However, Pandava, with dharma in his soul, showed the dexterity of his hands and countered Drona's arrows with
a shower of arrows of his own. The archer Drona became extremely enraged in that battle. He suddenly severed
the bow of the great-souled Dharmaraja. Having severed the bow, the maharatha swiftly covered him everywhere
with many thousands of arrows. All those there saw that King Yudhishthira had been rendered invisible because of
the arrows of Bharadvaja's son and thought that he had been killed. Some others thought that he had run away. O
Indra among kings! They said, 'The king has been slain by the illustrious brahmana.' Dharmaraja Yudhishthira
thus confronted a great hardship. He cast aside the bow that had been severed by Bharadvaja's son in the battle and
grasped another divine bow that was capable of bearing a great burden and was more forceful. In that encounter,
the brave one sliced down all the thousands of arrows that had been released by Drona and it was extraordinary.
Having severed the arrows, the king's eyes became red with rage. In that battle, he grasped a lance that was capable of shattering the mountains. It was extremely terrible and fierce. It possessed a golden handle and was decorated with eight bells. The extremely powerful one roared cheerfully and hurled it. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the beings screamed in terror. On seeing the lance raised by Dharmaraja in that battle, all the beings suddenly exclaimed, 'May all be well with Drona.' Hurled from the king's arms, it was like a snake that had cast off
its skin. It blazed in the sky and in the directions and the sub-directions. It was like a she-serpent with a flaming
mouth and it was as if Drona confronted death. O lord of the earth! On seeing it suddenly descend, Drona, supreme
among those who knew about weapons, released the brahmastra. That weapon reduced the terrible-looking lance to
ashes and then quickly advanced towards the chariot of the illustrious Pandava. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When Drona's weapon advanced, the immensely wise King Yudhishthira used a brahmastra to pacify it. In
that battle, he then pierced Drona with five arrows with drooping tufts and used a sharp kshurapra arrow to severe
his great bow. O venerable one! Drona, the destroyer of kshatriyas, cast aside the severed bow and suddenly hurled
a club at Dharma's son. On seeing that the club was powerfully descending, Yudhishthira, the scorcher of enemies,
became angry and grasped a club. Those two clubs were powerfully hurled towards each other. They countered
each other and emitted sparks because of the collision. They then fell down on the ground. O venerable one! Drona
became extremely angry with Dharmaraja. He used four extremely sharp and supreme arrows to kill his horses.
With another arrow, he severed his bow, which was like Indra's standard. He severed Pandava's standard and
struck him with three arrows. With the horse slain, Yudhishthira quickly descended from the chariot. O bull among
the Bharata lineage! The king stood there, with his arms raised and without any weapons. O lord! On seeing that
he was without a chariot, and specifically without any weapons, Drona confounded the enemy and all the soldiers.
Displaying the dexterity of his hands, the one who was firm in his vows released large numbers of sharp arrows
and advanced against the king, like an angry lion towards a deer[Drona wished to capture Yudhishthira alive.]. On seeing that Drona, the destroyer of enemies, was advancing, sudden sounds of lamentation arose from the assembled Pandavas. O venerable one! 'The
king has been slain. The king has been slain by Bharadvaja's son.' These and other loud noises arose from all the
Pandu soldiers. But the king ascended Sahadeva's chariot. Those swift horses bore Yudhishthira, Kunti's son,
away."'


'Sanjaya said, "O great king! Kshemadhurti used his arrows to pierce Brihatkshatra of the Kekayas, firm in his valour, in the chest. King Brihatkshatra wished to penetrate Drona's array and swiftly struck him in that battle with
ninety arrows with drooping tufts. Kshemadhurti became angry. He used a yellow, sharp and broad-headed arrow
to sever the bow of the great-souled Kekaya. Having severed his bow, he then used an arrow with drooping tufts to
quickly pierce that supreme of archers in the chest. Brihatkshatra laughed and took up another bow. He deprived
maharatha Kshemadhurti of his horses, charioteer and standard. He then used another yellow, sharp and broad-
headed arrow to sever the king's head, with its blazing earrings, from the body[There is an inconsistency, because Kshemadhurti was later killed by Bhima.]. That head, with its curly hair
and crown, was suddenly lopped off and fell down on the ground, as resplendent as a stellar body dislodged from
the sky. On seeing that he had been slain in the battle, maharatha Brihatkshatra was delighted. For the sake of the
Parthas, he descended powerfully on your soldiers. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The great archer Viradhanva countered the powerful Dhrishtaketu, who was advancing against Drona. Those two spirited ones clashed
against each other and seemed to possess arrows as their teeth. Wishing to kill each other, they struck each other
with many thousand arrows. Those two tigers among men fought with each other, like two leaders of elephant
herds, fierce and crazy, fighting with each other in a great forest. They were like angry tigers in a mountainous cavern. Wishing to kill each other, those immensely valorous ones fought. O lord of the earth! The battle was tumultuous and worth watching. Masses of siddhas and charanas witnessed the extraordinary wonder. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! The angry Viradhanva laughed and used a broad-headed arrow to sever Dhrishtaketu's bow
into two. The maharatha king of Chedi discarded the severed bow. He grasped a large iron spear that possessed a
golden handle. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The immensely valorous one suddenly hurled this towards Viradhanva's chariot. That spear was one that could kill heroes. Struck by it, he was severely hurt and with his heart
shattered powerfully, fell down from the chariot onto the ground. O lord! When the brave maharatha from Trigarta
was killed, the Pandaveyas shattered your army from every direction.

'"Durmukha shot sixty arrows at Sahadeva. He roared loudly with that great roar, challenged Pandava to do battle. Madri's son became angry and laughingly, pierced Durmukha with ten arrows. Brother fought against brother.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing that the immensely strong Sahadeva was fighting violently in the
batte, Durmukha struck him with nine arrows. However, the immensely strong one[Sahadeva.] used a broad-headed arrow
to sever Durmukha's standard and then used four sharp arrows to slay his four horses. He then used another yellow, sharp and broad-headed arrow to sever his charioteer's head, with blazing earrings, from his body. He used a
sharp kshurapra arrow to slice down Kouravya's giant bow. Having severed it in the battle, Sahadeva then pierced
him with five arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O king! With his horses slain, Durmukha was distressed. He abandoned his chariot and climbed onto Niramitra's chariot. In that great battle, in the midst of those
soldiers, Sahadeva, the destroyer of enemy heroes, used a broad-headed arrow to angrily slay Niramitra. Niramitra,
the lord of men and the son of the king of Trigarta, fell down from the seat of his chariot and this caused sorrow to
your forces. Having killed him, mighty-armed Sahadeva roamed around, like Rama, Dasharatha's son, after having
killed the immensely strong Khara[This is a reference to the Ramayana. Rama killed Khara, Ravana's younger brother.]. O lord of men! On seeing that the immensely strong Prince Niramitra had
been slain, great sounds of lamentation arose among the Trigartas.

'"O king! In that battle, in an instant, Nakula vanquished Vikarna, your son with the large eyes. It was extraordinary. Vyaghradatta struck Satyaki with arrows that had drooping tufts. In the midst of the soldiers, he rendered him, his horses, his charioteer and his standard invisible. But Shini's brave descendant showed the dexterity
of his hands and countered those arrows. He used his arrows to bring down Vyaghradatta, his horses, his charioteer
and his standard. O lord! On seeing that the prince, the son of Magadha, had been killed, all the Magadhas made
efforts and attacked Yuyudhana from every direction. They released thousands of arrows and javelins, catapults,
spikes, clubs and maces. In the encounter, the brave ones fought with Satvata, who was invincible in battle. Satya-
ki, powerful and invincible in battle, laughed and without any difficulty, repulsed all of them. The bull among men
vanquished them. On seeing that the Magadhas had been routed, the few that were left ran away in every direction.
O lord! Your army was afflicted with Yuyudhana's arrows. The supreme of the Madhava lineage destroyed your
soldiers in that battle. The greatly illustrious one, supreme among archers, brandished his bow and was resplendent. O king! The army was shattered by the great-souled Satvata. Terrified of the long-armed one, no one advanced against him in that battle. Drona became extremely angry and rolled his eyes in anger. He himself advanced against Satyaki, whose deeds were based on truth."'


'Sanjaya said, "Somadatta's immensely illustrious son pierced each of Droupadi's sons, great archers, with five arrows each and then struck them again with seven arrows more. O lord! They were sorely afflicted by the force of
that terrible warrior. In that battle, they were stupefied and for some time, did not know what they should do.
Shatanika, Nakula's son and the scorcher of enemies, used two arrows to pierce Somadatta's son, bull among men,
and roared in delight. In that battle, the others[The other four brothers-Prativindhya through Yudhishthira, Sutasoma or Shrutasoma through Bhima, Shrutakarma or Shrutakirti through Arjuna and Shrutasena through Sahadeva.] also made efforts and struck Somadatta's intolerant son with
three arrows each. O great king! He shot five arrows at them and struck each of those immensely illustrious ones in
the heart with an arrow. Those five great-souled brothers were struck by the arrows. They surrounded the brave
ratha and pierced him severely with arrows. Arjuna's son used four sharp arrows to angrily slay his horses and dispatched them to Yama's abode. Bhimasena's son severed the bow of Somadatta's great-souled son. He roared powerfully and pierced him with sharp arrows. Yudhishthira's son sliced his standard and brought it down on the
ground. Nakula's son brought down his charioteer from the seat on the chariot. O king! On ascertaining that he had
been forced to retreat by his brothers, Sahadeva's son used a kshurapra arrow to sever the great-minded one's
head[So far, the adjective used has been Somadatta's son. This is usually a description used for Bhurishrava. However, Bhurishrava was killed later by Satyaki. So Shatanika killed Bhurishrava's brother Shala, who was also Somadatta's son.]. That head, adorned with gold, fell down on the ground. It was resplendent on the field of battle, with a
complexion like that of the rising sun. O king! On seeing that the head of Somadatta's great-souled son had been
brought down, all those on your side were terrified and fled in different directions.

'"In that battle, Alambusa angrily fought against the immensely strong Bhimasena, like Lakshmana against Ravana's son[Ravana's son means Indrajit.]. All the beings were astounded and delighted at the battle between the man and the rakshasa. O
king! Bhima laughed and pierced Rishyashringa's intolerant son, Indra among rakshasas, with nine sharp arrows.
Pierced in the battle, the rakshasa let out a mighty roar and he and his followers attacked Bhima. He pierced Bhima
with five arrows that had drooping tufts. In that battle, the scorcher of enemies quickly destroyed thirty rathas who
were following Bhima. He slew four hundred more and pierced Bhima with arrows. Having been thus pierced by
the immensely strong rakshasa, Bhima sat down on the floor of his chariot. He lost his senses. When he recovered
his senses, the son of the wind god was overcome by great rage. He stretched his terrible and supreme bow, which
was capable of bearing a great burden. He struck Alambusha all over the body with sharp arrows. O king! He was
like a large mass of collyrium and pierced by these many arrows all over his body, looked as beautiful as a kimshuka. He was struck in the battle by those arrows that had been released from Bhima's bow and remembered how his
brother had been killed by the great-souled Pandava. He assumed a terrible form and addressed Bhimasena. 'O
Partha! Wait for a while in this battle and witness my valour today. O extremely evil one! The powerful Baka,
supreme among rakshasas, was my brother. It is true that you killed him, but that happened when I did not see it.'

Having thus spoken to Bhima, he disappeared and enveloped him with a great and severe shower of arrows. O
king! When the rakshasa became invisible in that battle, Bhima covered the sky with his straight-tufted arrows.
Thus struck by Bhima, he instantly returned to his chariot. He entered deep inside the earth and suddenly rose up
into the sky. He adopted many different kinds of forms, some large and some small. From above, he showered
down many different kinds of words in every direction. Many Pandava soldiers died[The Critical edition excises some shlokas. In these, after the words, Alambusa showered down weapons. Because of the excision, the continuity is broken.]. O king! So did fighting
elephants, many horses and foot soldiers. Because of those arrows, rathas were brought down in their chariots. A
river of blood began to flow and the chariots were eddies. It was infested by crocodiles in the form of elephants.
The umbrellas were the swans. It was full of mud[From the blood, flesh and marrow.]. The arms[Severed arms.] were like serpents. That river began to flow
and was populated by large numbers of rakshasas. O king! It flowed and bore along many Chedis, Panchalas and
Srinjayas. O king! Thus did he fearlessly roam around in that battle. The Pandavas became extremely anxious at
witnessing his valour. The hearts of your soldiers became full of joy. Musical instruments were sounded in fierce
and extremely loud tones and this made the body hair stand up. On hearing the terrible sound emitted by your soldiers, the Pandavas could not tolerate it, just as a snake cannot bear the slapping of palms.

'"Bhimasena's eyes became coppery red in anger and they seemed to consume, like the fire. O venerable one! In
the battle, he released the weapon known as tvashtra, as if it had been released by Tvashtra himself. From that,
thousands of arrows were produced in every direction. Because of those arrows, your soldiers were severely routed. It destroyed the great maya created by the rakshasa and also afflicted the rakshasa. Thus, the rakshasa was
struck in many parts of his body by Bhimasena. He abandoned that encounter with Bhima and fled towards
Drona's array. O king! When that Indra among rakshasas was vanquished by the great-souled one, the Pandavas
roared like lions and made all the directions resound. They delightedly honoured the wind god's immensely strong
son, like the masses of Maruts worshipping Shakra after he had vanquished Prahlada in battle[However, Prahlada was a good asura and devoted to Vishnu. There was no reason for Indra to fight with him.]."'

