Janamejaya said, 'O sage! After having sent the brave Pandavas into exile, all these lamentations of King Dhritarashtra served no purpose. Why did the king agree with his son Duryodhana, whose intelligence is limited, and
anger Pandu's sons, the maharathas? What did Pandu's sons eat when they lived in the forest? Tell me whether it
was collected from the forest or cultivated.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'Those bulls among men ate what was obtained from the forest and animals brought
down with pure arrows, after having first offered it to the brahmanas. O king! When those great archers and warriors dwelt in the forest, brahmanas with fire[That is, brahmanas who maintained the sacrificial fire.], and those without fire, followed them there. There were ten thousand great-souled snataka brahmanas who knew about the means of salvation. Yudhishthira sustained them there.
After killing ruru deer, black antelopes and other sacrificial forest-dwelling animals with his bows, he offered them
to brahmanas in accordance with the rituals. Not a single ill-complexioned or diseased person could be seen there.
Nor was there anyone who was thin, weak, miserable or frightened. Dharmaraja Yudhishthira, supreme among the
Kouravas, maintained them like his beloved sons, relatives or brothers from the same womb. Like a mother, the
illustrious Droupadi first served her husbands, then all the brahmanas, and then ate whatever food remained. For
the sake of the meat of the deer, they wielded their bows and always made that race decay[That is, killed the deer.]-the king[Yudhishthira.] towards
the east, Bhimasena towards the south, the twins towards the west and also towards the north. Thus did they live in
Kamyaka and five years passed. They were without Arjuna and were anxious about him. They engaged themselves
in studying, meditating and sacrificing.'


Vaishampayana said, 'O bull among the Bharata lineage! Ambika's son Dhritarashtra let out a deep and hot sigh.
He summoned suta Sanjaya and told him, "The two Pandavas, Nakula and Sahadeva, are greatly illustrious sons of
the gods and are like the king of the gods in their resplendence. They are steadfast in battle, can fight from a distance and have resolution. Their hands are swift and they are steadfast in their anger. They are always firm and
speedy. When they advance in battle with Bhima and Arjuna at the forefront, they will be established with the valour of lions and will be as invincible as the Ashvins. O Sanjaya! I do not see any remnants of my soldiers left.
Those two sons of the gods are maharathas and cannot be repulsed in battle. Their anger at Droupadi's oppression
will not be assuaged. The Vrishnis are great archers. The Panchalas are greatly energetic. They are protected in
battle by Vasudeva, who never wavers from the truth. The Parthas will burn down the armies of my sons in battle.
O son of a suta! Led by Rama[Balarama.] and Krishna, when the Vrishnis advance in battle, even the mountains will not be
able to withstand the force. In their midst, is the mighty archer Bhima, whose valour is terrible. He will roam
around with an iron club that kills all warriors. The kings on my side will not be able to tolerate the roar of Gandi-
va, as loud as thunder, or the force of Bhima's club. It is then that I will remember the words of my well-wishers,
which should have been remembered, but which I did not heed earlier because I was obedient to Duryodhana."

'Sanjaya replied, "O king! That ignoring was your great transgression. Though capable, you were deluded and
did not restrain your son. Having heard that the Pandavas had been vanquished at dice, Achyuta Madhusudana
swiftly went to Kamyaka to show his respect to the Parthas. So did Drupada's sons, with Dhrishtadyumna at the
forefront. So did Virata, Dhrishtaketu and the maharatha Kekayas. O king! Through a spy, I have learnt everything
that they talked about when they met the defeated Parthas and I have told you that. When they met, they decided
that Madhusudana would be Phalguna's charioteer if there was a battle and Hari agreed[This is odd. Choosing a charioteer for Arjuna is premature and the question shouldn't arise at this stage. This
reinforces the general impression that this chapter was a later addition and doesn't quite belong.]. Krishna was also angered when he saw the Parthas in that state, attired in black deerskin for their upper garments. He told Yudhishthira, 'At the time of the rajasuya, I witnessed the prosperity of the Parthas in Indraprastha, so difficult to be obtained
by other kings. I saw all the lords of the earth there, terrified because of the energy of your weapons-Vangas, Angas, Poundras, Udras, Cholas, Dravidas, Andhrakas, those who live along the shores of the ocean, those who live
in cities, Simhalas, Barbaras, Mlecchas, those who live in forests, those from the western kingdoms, hundreds
from along the ocean, Pahlavas, Daradas, all the Kiratas, Yavanas, Shakas, Harahunas, Chinas, Tukharas, Saindhavas, Jagudas, Ramathas, Mundas, those from kingdoms ruled by women, Tanganas and many others who came
to serve you at the sacrifice. O bull among the Bharata lineage! That prosperity was transient and has been taken
away. I will take away the lives of those who have robbed you of it. O Kouravya! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! With Rama[Balarama.], Bhima, Arjuna, the twins, Akrura, Gada, Samba, Pradyumna, Ahuka, the brave Dhrishtadyumna and Shishupala's son[Shishupala's son is Dhrishtaketu.], I will today kill Duryodhana in battle, together with Karna, Duhshasana,
Soubala and whoever else stands against us in battle. You will live in Hastinapura with your brothers. You will
possess the prosperity that the sons of Dhritarashtra have. You will rule over this earth.' Then, in that assembly of
warriors, the king[Yudhishthira.] spoke to him and with the brave Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, they listened. 'O Janardana!
I accept these words of yours to be true. O mighty-armed one! You will kill my enemies and their followers, but
only after thirteen years have elapsed. O Keshava! Let me be true to my word. In the midst of the kings I gave my
promise that I would dwell in the forest.' On hearing these words of Dharmaraja, with Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, those present in the assembly gave their promise and pacified the wrathful Keshava with sweet words that
were appropriate for the occasion. Then, in Vasudeva's hearing, they told the unblemished Panchali[Droupadi.], 'O
queen[The word used is devi. This is a honorific form of address and doesn't mean goddess alone.]! It is certain that Duryodhana will part with his life because of your anger. O beautiful one! We promise
that this will be true. Do not sorrow. O Krishna! There are those who laughed at you then, on seeing you angered.
Their flesh will be devoured by laughing beasts and birds. Their blood will be drunk by vultures and jackals. There
were those who dragged you by the head[Specifically, the hair.] at the assembly hall. O Panchali! You will see their bodies strewn on
the ground, dragged and devoured relentlessly by carnivorous animals. There are those who oppressed you and
others who ignored you. They will be beheaded and the earth will drink their blood.' Such were the many words
that those bulls among men spoke. All of them were energetic warriors. All of them bore marks of battle. When
thirteen years have elapsed, those maharathas appointed by Dharmaraja will advance against us, with Vasudeva at
the forefront-Rama[Balarama.], Krishna, Dhananjaya, Pradyumna, Samba, Yuyudhana[Satyaki.], Bhima, Madri's sons, the
princes of Kekaya and the sons of Panchala, together with Dharmaraja. All these warriors of the world are great-
souled and invincible. They will be accompanied by their followers and soldiers. They will be like angry lions with
manes. Is there anyone who desires to live who can withstand them in battle?"

'Dhritarashtra replied, "At the time of the gambling, Vidura told me, 'O lord of men! If you defeat the Pandavas,
it is certain that this will bring about the end of the Kurus. A great fear will arise and there will be a torrent of
blood. O suta! I think that this will now happen, the way Kshatta had described it to me earlier. It is certain that
there will be a battle, after the time promised by the Pandavas has elapsed.'"'


Janamejaya asked, 'When the great-souled Partha went to Shakra's world for the sake of the weapons, what did
Yudhishthira and the other Pandavas do?'

Vaishampayana said, 'When the great-souled Partha went to Shakra's world for the sake of the weapons, those
bulls among men lived in Kamyaka, together with Krishna[Droupadi.]. One day, the best of the Bharatas, together with
Krishna, were unhappily seated in a deserted spot. They sorrowed over Dhananjaya. There were tears in their
throats and they were miserable. All of them were flooded with grief on account of the separation from Dhananjaya and were miserable because of the loss of the kingdom.

'Then the mighty-armed Bhima spoke to Yudhishthira, "O great king! It was on your instructions that the bull
among men went. The lives of the sons of Pandu are established in Arjuna. If he is destroyed, there is no doubt that
we ourselves, the Panchalas and their sons, Satyaki and Vasudeva will be destroyed. That energetic one departed,
without thinking about the many difficulties he would confront. Bibhatsu went on your instructions. What can
cause greater grief than that? All of us have depended on the arms of that great-souled one, thinking that we will
triumph over our enemies and win the earth. It was the influence of the one with the bow that prevented me from
killing all of Dhritarashtra's sons, together with Soubala, in the midst of that sabha. We have the strength of our
arms and we are controlling the anger for which, you are the reason. We are protected by Vasudeva. If Krishna and
we had killed the enemies led by Karna, we would have ruled the earth, conquered through the strength of our
arms. All of us are faced with this calamity because of your vice of gambling. O king! We do not lack in manliness. We are supremely strong among those who are strong. O great king! You must bear in mind the dharma of
kshatriyas. It is not the dharma of kshatriyas to reside in the forest. The learned have said that the supreme dharma
of kshatriyas is to rule over the kingdom. O king! You know the dharma of kshatriyas. Do not stray from that path
of dharma. O king! Let us kill the sons of Dhritarashtra before the twelve[This should really be thirteen years.] years have passed. Return from the
forest and summon back Partha and Janardana. O great king! O lord of the earth! Let us kill their armies and battle
formations in a great battle. I will send the sons of Dhritarashtra to another world. Together with Soubala, Duryodhana, Karna and whoever else wants to fight back, I will kill all the sons of Dhritarashtra. After I have pacified
them, you can return again to the forest. O lord of the earth! If we do this, no blame will be attached to you. O father[The word used is tata. This means father, but is also used for any elder or superior.]! O destroyer of enemies! If a sin is committed, we can perform various sacrifices. O great king! Wiping it
off in that way, we can attain supreme heaven. O king! This is the way it should be, if our king is not foolish or is
not given to procrastination[Alternatively, childish.]. Indeed, you are always devoted to dharma. But it is certainly the way of the wise to
kill those who are deceitful through deceitful means. There is no sin attached to killing deceitful ones through deceitful means. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O great king! Those who are learned in dharma say that in accordance with dharma, a day and a night are equal to an entire year. O illustrious one! O great king! We have heard
the words from the Vedas that in times of calamity, one entire year is equal to a day. O Achyuta[This is being addressed to Yudhishthira. So Achyuta is in the sense of one without decay.]! Therefore, if
the Vedas are the authority, regard the passage of thirteen years as equal to a single day. O destroyer of enemies!
This is the time to kill Duryodhana and his followers. O king! Otherwise, he will bring the entire earth under his
suzerainty." When Bhima said this, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira inhaled the fragrance of the Pandava's head and
spoke to him in tones of pacification, "O mighty-armed one! There is no doubt that you will kill Suyodhana, together with Gandivadhanva, but only after the thirteen years have passed. O Partha! O illustrious one! You have
said that the time has arrived. But I cannot utter a lie, because that finds no place in me. O Kounteya! O invincible
one! You will kill Suyodhana and his followers, but without resorting to deceit, because that will certainly be sin."

While Dharmaraja Yudhishthira was speaking to Bhima, the immensely fortunate and great rishi Brihadashva
arrived.

'He was a follower of dharma. And when Dharmaraja, with dharma in his soul, saw him arrive, he worshipped
him with madhuparka[A mixture based on honey that is offered to guests. It is made of five ingredients-curds, clarified butter, water, wax and candied sugar.], as is prescribed in the sacred texts. When he was rested and seated, the mighty-armed
Yudhishthira looked at him and addressed him in these piteous words, "O illustrious one! I have been robbed of
my riches and my kingdom in gambling with dice. I was challenged by those who were skilled in deceit and skilled
in playing with dice. I am not skilled in dice and the deceitful ones had decided on a course of evil. My wife is
more precious to me than my own life and she was dragged into the sabha. Is there any king on earth who is as
misfortunate as I am? Have you seen anyone else? Have you heard of anyone else? I think that there is no man
who is more miserable than I am." Brihadashva replied, "O great king! O Pandava! You have said you think that
there is no man more unfortunate than you are. O unblemished one! O lord of the earth! On this, I can narrate an
account, if you wish to hear it. This is the story of a king who was more miserable than you." At this, the king[Yudhishthira.]
told the illustrious one that he wished to hear the account. He wished to hear about the king who found himself in a
situation like his own.

'Brihadashva said, "O king! O lord of the earth! O Achyuta! Then listen with your brothers. There was a king of
the nishadhas by the name of Virasena. He had a son named Nala, learned in the ways of dharma and artha. We
have heard that this king was deceitfully defeated by Pushkara and though he did not deserve it, lived unhappily in
the forest with his wife. When that king lived in the forest, he never had any horses, any chariots, any brothers or
any kin. But you are surrounded by your brave brothers, who are the equals of the gods and by the foremost among
brahmanas, who are like Brahma himself. Therefore, do not sorrow."

'Yudhishthira said, "O best among eloquent ones! I wish to hear in detail the account of that great-souled Nala.
Please tell it to me."'


