Bhishma said, "If one is born as a brahmana, one is immensely fortunate. One is revered by all creatures and if
one is a guest, one gets to eat first. O son! Brahmanas are well-wishers towards everyone. They have excellent minds and mouths. When they are worshipped, they pronounce auspicious words of benediction. O son! There
may be those who hate brahmanas and disrespect their birth. When they are not properly worshipped, let them pronounce terrible curses on these. Those who know about the ancient accounts recount a hymn that was sung by
Brahma. In  ancient  times,  having  created  brahmanas,  the  creator  ordained  their  tasks.  'He[A brahmana.]  should  never  do
something that has not been properly laid down for him. When they are protected, brahmanas protect. They are the
best ornament of any habitation. When a brahmana undertakes his own tasks, there is prosperity. They set the standards for all beings and also restrain them along their paths. A learned brahmana must never undertake tasks recommended for a shudra. If he performs tasks recommended for a shudra, dharma is obstructed. Through studying,
he obtains prosperity, intelligence, energy, powers, influence and unadulterated greatness. By offering oblations,
they are established in great fortune. Prosperous brahmanas have been thought of as those who deserve to eat even
before expectant mothers. If such a person has great faith, is without violence and without greed and is devoted to
self-control and studying, he obtains all the objects of desire. Through their austerities, knowledge and humility,
they can be successful in obtaining everything that exists in the world of men and gods.' O unblemished one! I
have thus recounted to you what Brahma chanted. Out of compassion towards brahmanas, the intelligent one himself stated this. I think that the strength of those who are ascetics is equal to that of those who are kings. They are
impossible to assail, fierce, proud and swift in action. There are some virtuous ones who are as spirited as lions.
There are others who are as spirited as tigers. There are some who are as spirited as boars or deer. Others are as
spirited as elephants. There are some who are as mild as cotton. Others are like makaras to the touch. There are
some who can destroy those who speak against them. Others can slay with their sight. There are virtuous ones who
are like the poison of serpents. But there are also virtuous ones who are mild. O Yudhishthira! Many kinds of conduct  are  followed  by  brahmanas.  Because  there  are  no  brahmanas  among  them,  Mekalas,  Dramidas,  Kashas,
Poundras, Kollagiras, Shoundikas, Daradas, Darvas, Chouras, Shabaras, Barbaras, Kiratas, Yavanas and many other tribes of kshatriyas have been reduced to the status of vrishalas. Having been defeated by brahmanas, asuras had
to resort to the depths of the ocean. It is through the favours of brahmanas that gods got to reside in heaven. One is
incapable of touching the sky. The Himalaya mountains are incapable of moving. A bridge cannot be constructed
over the Ganga. On earth, brahmanas are incapable of being defeated. If one acts counter to brahmanas, one is incapable of ruling the earth. Great-souled brahmanas are like gods among the gods. If you desire to enjoy this entire
earth, right up to the girdle of the ocean, always worship them through gifts and servitude. O unblemished one!
When they receive gifts, the energy of brahmanas is pacified. O unblemished one! If you wish to protect yourself,
do not engage with those who do not receive."'


Bhishma said, "O Yudhishthira! In this connection, an ancient history is recounted, about a conversation between Shakra and Shambara. Listen. Shakra assumed the disguise of an ascetic with matted hair, smeared
with dust all over his body. In that distorted form, he presented himself before Shambara and asked, 'O Shambara!
What is the conduct through which you have come to be regarded as the foremost one among your relatives? I am
asking you. Tell me that.'

'"Shambara replied, 'I never censure brahmanas and Brahma, the grandfather. When brahmanas recite from the
sacred texts, I cheerfully honour them. I do not ignore what I have heard, nor do I ever find fault with it. Having
grasped the feet of those intelligent ones, I worship and then question them. Since they are always assured by me,
they speak to me trustfully. Even if they are distracted, I am attentive. When they are asleep, I am awake. Without
any malice, I follow the path indicated by the sacred texts. Like bees use honey in a hive, these brahmanas sprinkle
me with knowledge from the sacred texts. I satisfy them and use my intelligence to accept whatever they say. Meditating with my soul, I always think of myself as inferior. I am like one who is licking the juices at the tip of their
tongues. That is how I am established amidst my kin, like the moon among nakshatras. The sacred texts that emanate from the mouths of brahmanas are like amrita on earth. If one acts in accordance with this, one obtains
supreme benefit. Thus, in ancient times, my father was delighted and amazed to see that this was being used in a
battle between the gods and the asuras in ancient times[Since there was more than one Shambara, it is not obvious which one is meant. The idea clearly is that, in the
war, Brihaspati helped the gods and Shukracharya helped the demons.]. On witnessing the greatness of the great-souled brahmanas, my father asked the moon, "How do they become successful?"

'"'Soma  said,  "All  the  brahmanas  become  successful  through  their  austerities.  Their  strength  always  lies  in
speech, just as that of kings lies in the valour of their arms. For brahmanas, words are weapons. Wherever he
dwells, he should study. If he lives in a place that is extremely difficult to reside in, he must tend to the fire. He
must be without anger and without pride. He must be an ascetic who looks upon everything equally. If he is born in
a superior lineage, he must dwell in his father's house and study all the Vedas. He must not boast about this learning. Know that this is the sign of an ordinary person. Just as a snake is swallowed up by a hole in the ground, a
king who is unwilling to fight and a brahmana who does not dwell far away[Away from home, to study. With the exception of those born in noble lineages, all other brahmanas should go to
the houses of their preceptors to study.] are both swallowed. Great insolence destroys prosperity for men who are limited in intelligence. A maiden who conceives is tainted and this is
also true of a brahmana who resides at home."'

'"Shambara continued, 'My father heard these extraordinary instructions from Soma. He followed the great vow
of worshipping brahmanas and so do I.'"

'Bhishma  said,  "On  hearing  the  words  that  had  emanated  from  the  mouth  of  the  Indra  among  the  danavas,
Shakra worshipped brahmanas and became the great Indra."'


Yudhishthira asked, "O grandfather! Who is the best recipient for a gift-a stranger, a person with whom one
has lived for a long time, or a guest who has come from a long distance away?"

'Bhishma replied, "People follow diverse rites and excellent vows. Everything should be given to whoever asks.
However, we have heard that donations that make the various categories of servants suffer must not be undertaken.
If the various categories of servants suffer, one's own self suffers. The learned know that all these are proper recipients-a stranger, a person with whom one has lived for a long time, or a guest who has come from a long distance
away."

'Yudhishthira said, "One must not give by making the servants suffer or by causing violence to dharma. We
must also ascertain the nature of the recipient, so that we do not suffer from the act of giving."

'Bhishma said, "If the officiating priest, the priest, the preceptor, the disciple, matrimonial allies and relatives
possess learning and lack tendencies of causing injury, they must all be honoured and worshipped. All those who
do not possess these traits do not deserve to be treated virtuously. Therefore, one must always attentively examine
men. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Lack of anger, truthfulness in speech, lack of injury, self-control, uprightness, lack of hatred, lack of excessive pride, modesty, patience, austerities, tranquility and lack of improper
deeds-if these signs are seen in a person, he is a deserving recipient and must be honoured. Whether it is someone with whom one has dwelt for a long time, or whether it is someone one has just met, whether it is a stranger or
someone one knows, if these signs are present, he is a deserving recipient and must be honoured. A person who
questions the proof of the Vedas and transgresses the sacred texts, or a person who questions the ordinances in
every way, destroys his own self. O son! There may be a brahmana who thinks himself to be learned but censures
the Vedas, who is addicted to the futile knowledge of argumentation and scrutinizes everything in detail, who questions the reasons behind everything and seeks to be triumphant over those who cite reasons, who always speaks
against brahmanas and talks too much, who is suspicious of everyone, childish and harsh in speech-the learned
know such a man to be the equal of a dog. He barks like a dog, always seeking to bite. The purpose of such speech
is to destroy all the sacred texts. Such people are limited in learning and are inferior in arguments. When they are
asked, they are seen to be lacking in learning. They may exhibit the signs of knowledge, but they are engaged in
detecting weaknesses in those who are learned about shruti, smriti, itihasa, Puranas and the Aranyakas. However,
there are also acts that lead to the progress of the worlds and do not cause damage to dharma or one's own self-
men who engage in these, obtain prosperity for eternity. The rishis have said that debts to gods, rishis, ancestors,
brahmanas and guests, as the fifth, must be repaid[Debts to gods are paid through sacrifices, to rishis through studying, to ancestors through offspring, to brahmanas through gifts and to guests through hospitality.]. In due order, if a householder purifies himself and undertakes these tasks that have been laid down, then, his dharma does not suffer."'


