Vaishampayana said, 'O king! On seeing that Kounteya was about to leave, the brahmanas who still resided in the
forest went to him and spoke to him. "O king! You are going to the sacred tirthas with your brothers and with the
great-souled devarshi Lomasha. O great king! O Pandava! O Kourava! Please take us with you. Without you, we
will never be able to visit them. O lord of men! They are uneven and difficult of access and are frequented by
predatory beasts. Men in small groups cannot go to those tirthas. Your brothers are brave and are always skilled in
the use of bows. Under the protection of you valiant ones, we will be able to go there. O protector of the earth! O
lord of the earth! Through your favours, we will also obtain the auspicious fruits of tirthas and vows. O king! Protected by your prowess, we will become pure by bathing in those tirthas and cleansed of sin by visiting those
tirthas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! By bathing in those tirthas, you will also obtain the rare worlds obtained by King Kartavirya, rajarshi Ashtaka, Lomapada and the brave king and emperor, Bharata. O lord of the
earth! We wish to go with you and see Prabhasa and the other tirthas, mountains like Mahendra, rivers like Ganga
and giant trees like Plaksha. O lord of men! If you have any love for brahmanas, then swiftly do what we are asking you to. This will bring about your welfare. O mighty-armed one! The tirthas are infested by rakshasas, who always bring impediments in the way of austerities. Protect us from them. O lord of men! Visit the tirthas that have
been described by Dhoumya, the wise Narada and the great ascetic devarshi Lomasha. Visit them all in the prescribed way. Protected by Lomasha and accompanied by us, be cleansed of all sin." Having been thus worshipped
by them, his eyes filled with tears of joy.

'The bull among the Pandavas was surrounded by Bhimasena and his other brothers. He told all the rishis, "So
shall it be." With Lomasha's permission and that of the priest Dhoumya's, the best of the Pandavas, self-controlled,
made up his mind to leave, with his brothers and with Droupadi, unblemished of form. At that time, the immensely
fortunate Vyasa, Narada and Parvata, all of them extremely intelligent, appeared before the Pandava in Kamyaka,
desirious of seeing him. King Yudhishthira worshipped them in accordance with the proper rites. When they had
been worshipped, the immensely fortunate ones spoke to Yudhishthira. "O Yudhishthira! O twins! O Bhima! Banish all that is evil from your minds. Be clean and pure and go to the tirthas. The brahmanas have said that control
of the body is the vow for humans. The brahmanas say that purification of the mind and the intelligence is the vow
for gods. O lord of men! A mind that is clean is enough for brave ones. Therefore, bear friendship in your minds
and purified, go to the tirthas. Use your mental powers to purify and control your bodies through vows. Resort to
the vows of the gods and you will obtain the fruits that have been recounted." The Pandavas and Krishna promised
that it would be this way. Their journey was blessed by all the sages, divine and human. O Indra among kings!
They then touched Lomasha's feet and those of Dvaipayana, Narada and devarshi Parvata. Accompanied by
Dhoumya and other denizens of the forest, the brave ones departed when the full moon night of Margashirsha[The ninth month in the calendar, alternatively, Agrahayana. Roughly end November to end December. The
month is named after the constellation (nakshatra) Mrigashira.]
was over and Pushya[The eighth of the twenty-seven nakshatras.] was in the ascendant. They were attired in tough bark and deerskin. Their hair was matted. Clad in impenetrable armour, they set out to visit the tirthas. They were accompanied by Indrasena and the
other servants and had fourteen chariots. There were other attendants in charge of the food. O Janamejaya! With
weapons, with swords tied and with quivers and arrows, the brave Pandavas set out, their faces towards the east.'


'Yudhishthira said, "O supreme among devarshis! I do not think myself to be without qualities. But yet I am tormented by miseries, like no other king. O Lomasha! I think that my enemies do not possess any qualities. Nor do
they follow dharma. Why do they then prosper in this world?"

'Lomasha replied, "O king! O Partha! You should never grieve that those who do not follow dharma achieve
prosperity because they do not follow dharma. A man may be seen to prosper, attain fortune and triumph over his
enemies, though he does not follow dharma, but will be destroyed, down to his roots. O lord of the earth! I have
seen many daityas and danavas prosper, though they do not follow dharma. But decay finally overcomes them. O
lord! I have witnessed all this earlier, in the era of the gods. The gods found delight in dharma, but the asuras gave
up dharma. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The gods visited the tirthas, but the asuras did not. As a result of
not following dharma, they were first filled with insolence. Insolence gave birth to vanity and vanity gave birth to
anger. Anger resulted in a lack of shame and shamelessness destroyed their conduct. Because of their shamelessness, because of their lack of modesty, because of their evil conduct and because of their worthless vows, forgiveness, prosperity and dharma soon abandoned them. O king! Prosperity went to the gods and ill fortune went to the
asuras. When ill fortune overwhelmed them, they lost their senses because of insolence. Dissension possessed the
daityas and the danavas. O Kounteya! Overwhelmed by ill fortune and dissension and overtaken by insolence, the
danavas lost all their rites and intelligence. Overwhelmed by insolence, they soon confronted destruction. Overcome by infamy, the daityas were soon completely destroyed. But the gods went to oceans, rivers and lakes. They
followed dharma and visited other purifying places. O Pandava! They observed austerities and sacrifices and gave
gifts and benedictions. They discarded all sin and ensured their welfare. Thus, they were generous and always observed rites. They went to the tirthas. Therefore, they obtained supreme prosperity. O Indra among kings! Like
that, you will also bathe in the tirthas with your younger brothers. You will also regain prosperity. That is the eternal path. O lord of the earth! Just as King Nriga, Shibi and Oushinara, Bhagiratha, Vasumana, Gaya, Puru and Pururava were purified, through always observing austerities, touching water and visiting tirthas and seeing great-
souled ones, you will also obtain fame and pure riches. O Indra among kings! Like that, you will also obtain great
prosperity. Like Ikshvaku with his sons, subjects and relatives, like Muchukunda, Mandhata and King Marutta obtained pure fame, like the gods with their power of austerities, like the devarshis, you will also obtain it. But the
sons of Dhritarashtra are enslaved by insolence and delusion. There is no doubt that they will soon be destroyed
like the daityas."'


Vaishampayana said, 'O protector of the earth! Then those heroes, with the others[Their companions and servants.], lived here and there, and
eventually arrived at the Naimisha forest. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The Pandavas performed
their ablutions at the sacred tirtha of Gomati and donated cattle and riches. The Kouravas repeatedly satisfied the
gods, the ancestors and the brahmanas at Kanya tirtha, Ashva tirtha[Tirtha of horses.] and Gava tirtha[Tirtha of cows.]. O lord of the earth!
After staying in Valakoti on Mount Vrishaprastha, all the Pandavas bathed in Bahuda. O lord of the earth! They offered sacrifices to the gods in Prayaga, the sacrificial ground of the gods. Devoted to the truth, they cleaned their
bodies and performed supreme austerities at the confluence of the Ganga and the Yamuna. Having been cleansed
of sin, those great-souled ones gave a lot of riches to brahmanas. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Together with the brahmanas, those sons of Pandu then went to Prajapati's[Brahma's.] altar, frequented by ascetics. The brave
ones lived there, performing supreme austerities. They always satisfied the brahmanas with offerings obtained
from the forest. They then went to Mahidhara, worshipped by rajarshi Gaya, unrivalled in radiance, learned in
dharma and the performer of pure deeds. The lake Gayashira is there and the sacred Mahanadi. The extremely sacred and supreme Brahmasara[Brahma's lake.] is there, frequented by rishis. There the illustrious Agastya went to
Vaivasvata[Vaivasvata is the son of Vivasvata or the sun-god and is one of Yama's names. Dharma also means Yama.]. O king! That is where eternal Dharma himself lived. O lord of the earth! All the rivers originate
from there. That is where Mahadeva, the wielder of the pinaka, is always present[The wielder of the pinaka is Mahadeva. Pinaka means both a bow and a trident.]. The great Akshayavata is
there and the Pandavas performed chaturmasya[A sacrifice performed once every four (chatur) months (masa) and performed at the beginnings of the
months of Kartika, Phalguna and Ashadha.] and the great sacrifice of the rishis there. Hundreds of brahmanas, rich in austerities, came there and performed the chaturmasya sacrifice in accordance with the rites laid
down by the rishis. The learned brahmanas, learned in the Vedas and always devoted to austerities, talked about
sacred accounts, while they were seated in the sacrificial ground of those great-souled ones.

'O king! There was a brahmana named Shamatha. He was learned and immersed in vows and celibate. He spoke
about Gaya, the son of Amurtarayas. "O descendant of the Bharata lineage[Speaking to Yudhishthira.]! Gaya, the son of Amurtarayas, is
supreme among rajarshis. Listen to me as I recount his virtuous deeds. O king! His sacrifice had a lot of food and a
lot of stipends. There were mountains of food, in hundreds and thousands. There were several hundred rivers of
ghee and curd. There were thousands of flows of rich condiments. O king! Day after day, they were given to those
who asked for them. The brahmanas ate special food that was cooked well. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
When the time came for distributing gifts, the sound of the brahman rose up to heaven. Nothing could be heard but
for the sound of the brahman. O king! The sacred sound travelled through the earth, the sky and the firmament and
filled them and it was extraordinary. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Satisfied with the pure food and drink, men
sung a verse that radiated in every region. 'Who is there among beings who still wishes to eat at Gaya's sacrifice?
There are still twenty-five mountains of food left. No men earlier, nor men hereafter, will do what the immensely
radiant rajarshi Gaya did at this sacrifice. The gods have been extremely satisfied by the offerings tendered by
Gaya. They will never be able to accept anything offered by others.' O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Many such
verses were sung at the sacrifice of the great-souled one, near the banks of the lake."'


