Narada said, 'The large-eyed lady controlled her grief. She bent like a creeper, joined her hands in salutation
and said, "O supreme among those who grant boons! I have been created by you. How can you engage a
lady like me in such a terrible deed, one that is fearful to all living beings? I am terrified that I will act in accordance with adharma. Instruct me about a task of dharma. O lord of everything auspicious! You can see with your
eyes that I am terrified. There are living beings who are children, young and aged, who have done me no injury.
How will I take them away? O lord of living beings! I am bowing down before you. Show me your favours. There
will be beloved sons, friends, brothers, mothers and fathers. O god! If I make them die, I am terrified that I will
commit a crime. The tearful sorrow and compassion of the survivors will burn me for an eternal period. I  am
frightened of their power. That is the reason I seek refuge with you. O god! The performers of wicked deeds will
go to Yama's abode. O granter of boons! O lord! Be pacified and show me your favours. O grandfather of the
worlds! This is the desire that I wish you to satisfy. O lord of the gods! Through your favours, it is my wish that I
should perform austerities."'

'"The grandfather replied, 'O Death! I have thought of you for the sake of destroying subjects. Do not think
about this. Go and destroy all the subjects. This will certainly happen. It cannot be otherwise. O one with the unblemished limbs! O unblemished one! Act in accordance with my words.'

'"Narada said, 'O mighty-armed one! O vanquisher of enemy cities! Having been thus addressed, she did not
reply. She stood there, raising her eyes up at the illustrious one. Though he repeatedly spoke to her, the beautiful
one seemed to be bereft of her senses. The god of the gods, the lord of the lords[Brahma.], was himself silent. Brahma then
resorted within himself and became pacified. The lord of the worlds smiled and looked at all the worlds. The illustrious and unvanquished one controlled his rage. We have heard that the lady then departed. Having promised to
destroy subjects, she withdrew. O Indra among kings! Mrityu[Death.] swiftly went to the spot known as Dhenuka. The
goddess performed supreme austerities there, ones that are very difficult to accomplish. Standing on one foot, she
performed austerities for fifteen billion years[Padma. A padma is an unspecified large number, but is sometimes taken as equal to one billion.]. There, she performed austerities that are extremely difficult to accomplish. After this, the immensely energetic Brahma again spoke these words to her. "O Death! Swiftly act in accordance with my instructions." But she ignored this. O son[The word used is tata.]! O one who grants honours! She again performed
austerities for eighteen billion years. O son! She roamed with the deer and again performed austerities for ten thousand billion years. O king! She went again and observed an extraordinary vow of silence. O king! During this, she
immersed herself in water for eight thousand years. O bull among the Bharata lineage[Since Narada is speaking to Avikampaka, this is a clear inconsistency.]! The maiden then went to
the river Koushiki. Subsisting on water and air, she practised the vows again. The immensely fortunate one then
went to Ganga and Mount Meru. Desiring the welfare of living beings, she stood immobile there. She went to the
summit of the Himalayas, where the gods had assembled. O Indra among kings! She stood on her toes for a billion
years. She made careful efforts to pacify the grandfather. The creator of the worlds went and spoke to her there. "O
daughter! Why are you acting in this way? Act in accordance with my words." Death then again spoke to the illustrious grandfather. "O god! I cannot take away the subjects. I am again seeking your favours." She was terrified
because of the fear of adharma and again beseeched him. However, the god of the gods ignored her words and
spoke to her. "O Death! There will be no adharma for you. O fortunate one! It is desirable that you should control
the subjects. O fortunate one! The words that I have spoken can never be falsified. Eternal dharma will now penetrate you. I and all the gods will always be engaged in ensuring your welfare. I will also grant you the other wish
you desire. Subjects will be afflicted by disease and no sin will accrue to you. You will be a man among men, a
woman among women and the third sex among eunuchs." O great king! Having been thus addressed, she joined
her hands in salutation and again spoke to the great-souled and undecaying one, to the effect that she could not do
this. But the lord of the gods told the goddess, "O Death! Destroy men. O auspicious one! I am decreeing that no
adharma will attach to you. In front of me, I can see that tears are dropping from your eyes and that you are holding them in your hands. These will become diseases among men, terrible in form. O Death! At the appropriate
time, they will afflict them. When their end comes, all living beings will be united with desire and anger. Since you
will not discriminate in your conduct, you will follow dharma and no adharma will be attached to you. Protect the
dharma that I have spoken about. You will not immerse yourself in adharma. Therefore, you should find this desire
agreeable. Engage yourself in destroying living beings." At this, Mrityu was frightened of his curse and agreed to
follow the instructions. When the time of living beings was over, she started to dispatch desire and anger, so as to
confound and destroy them. The  tears  that  Mrityu  had  shed  became  diseases  that  afflicted  the  bodies  of  men.
Therefore, one should not sorrow when the lives of living beings are extinguished. Instead, one should use one's
intelligence to understand this. When their lives are over, all gods among beings depart and return again[Are born again.]. O lion
among kings! In that way, when their lives are over, all men go away, like the gods. The wind is terrible and immensely energetic. It emits a mighty roar and is the breath of life in all living beings, following different courses in
the bodies, until they are separated from their bodies. That is the reason the wind is special and is known as the
god of the gods. All the gods are characterized by traits of mortality. There are traits of divinity in all mortals. O
lion among kings! Therefore, do not sorrow over your son. Your son has obtained heaven and delight there. This is
the way Mrityu was created by the god, so that she could appropriately destroy beings when the time arrives. The
diseases are the tears that she shed. At the right time, they destroy living beings.'"'


Yudhishthira asked, "All these men have doubts about dharma. What is dharma? Where does dharma come
from? O grandfather! Tell me this. Is dharma for objectives in this world, or is it for objectives in the world
hereafter? Or is dharma for both objectives? O grandfather! Tell me this."

'Bhishma replied, "Good conduct, the sacred texts and the Vedas-these are the three signs of dharma. The wise
say that the objective is a fourth indication of dharma. On this, superior and inferior deeds have been spoken about.
The rules of dharma have been laid down for conduct in this world. They ensure happiness, both in this world and
in the next. A wicked person who engages in evil is incapable of obtaining the subtle aspects of dharma. Some say
that those who perform wicked deeds can never be freed from their sins. However, a person who speaks about sin
may act like one who follows dharma[Clearly, a distinction is being drawn between speaking of evil and acting wickedly.]. Devotion to dharma is evident in the conduct of those who resort to it, not
by speaking about it. A thief may steal riches and spend those on dharma. When there is no king, a thief may find
delight in stealing the property of others. However, when others steal what he has stolen, he then wishes for a king.
Even when his own property has been touched, he is not content with the riches that belong to him alone. Without
any fear and without any uncertainty, he knocks at the king's doors, as if he is a pure person[The reference is to a thief who goes and complains to the king about having become the victim of a theft
himself.]. A person who is
evil in conduct never thinks of himself in that way. Truthful words are virtuous and there is nothing that is superior
to the truth. Truth holds everything up. Everything is established in truth. The perpetrators of wicked and terrible
acts also separately have pledges of truth among themselves. They resort to the pledge of not acting violently towards each other. If they do not abide by these agreements, there is no doubt that they are destroyed. It is eternal
dharma that the riches of others should not be stolen. Powerful ones think that this system has been instituted by
the weak. However, when destiny makes them weak, they take pleasure in this system. Those who are extremely
powerful are not necessarily happy. Therefore, never use your intelligence to embark on a task that is not upright.
Then there is no reason for fear from wicked people, thieves, or kings. Since such a person has not done anything
against anyone else, he is free from fear and dwells in purity. A thief is frightened of everything, like a deer that
has come to a village. Having acted wickedly, he thinks that everyone's conduct is like that. A pure person is always delighted and is always fearless. Judging by his own self, he never sees any wicked conduct in others. Those
who are engaged in the welfare of beings have said that donations represent dharma. Those who have riches think
that this conduct has been laid down by those who are miserly. However, when destiny makes them poor, they find
pleasure in this principle. However, those who are extremely rich aren't necessarily happy. A man should not act
towards others in a way that he would not like to be acted against. Knowing what is not agreeable to himself, he
should not act towards others in that way. If a person becomes the lover of someone else's wife, whom will he
speak to? What does he deserve to say? Act towards others in ways that you are prepared to tolerate yourself. That
is my view. If a person wishes to remain alive himself, how can he murder another? One should think about others
on the basis of what one desires for one's own self. Extra objects of pleasure should be shared with others. That is
the reason the Creator ordained the practice of moneylending. One must remain established in the pledges that
have been made to the gods. When it is a time of gain, it is laudable to remain established in dharma. The learned
have said that dharma is what is agreeable to everyone. O Yudhishthira! Behold. I have instructed you about the
signs of dharma and adharma. This is what the Creator ordained in ancient times, for the sake of ensuring accumulation in the worlds. Virtuous people always pursue the subtle objectives of dharma and observe supreme conduct.
O supreme among the Kuru lineage! I have recounted to you the signs of dharma. Therefore, never use your intelligence to embark on a task that is not upright."'


