'Dhritarashtra said, "Shini's descendant proceeded towards Arjuna, crushing that large army. O Sanjaya! What did
my shameless sons do? When they confronted death in that battle, how did they hold up their spirits? The conduct
of Shini's descendant is like that of Savyasachi. In the midst of the soldiers, how could the kshatriyas bear to be
defeated? How did the immensely illustrious Satyaki pass through them in that battle? O Sanjaya! As long as my
sons were alive there, how could Shini's descendant progress in that battle? Tell me everything in detail. O
son[The word used is tata.]! What I have heard from you, about the clash between one and many, with maharathas on the side of the
enemy, is extremely wonderful. I think that destiny must be against my sons and they suffer from ill fortune, since
they are being slain in the battle by the great-souled Satvata. O Sanjaya! A single one is sufficient to counter my
entire army. When Yuyudhana is angry, let all the Pandavas remain standing[That is, there is no need for them to fight.]. He has vanquished Drona, who is
accomplished and unassailable in fighting, in the battle. Satyaki will kill my sons, like a lion against large numbers
of deer. There were many brave warriors, Kritavarma and the others. But in the battle, they were incapable of fighting with that bull among men and he will kill them. Phalguna himself was incapable of fighting in the way that
Shini's immensely illustrious grandson fought."

'Sanjaya replied, "O king! All this has happened because of Duryodhana's evil counsel and deeds. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! Listen attentively to what I am telling you. On your son's instructions, the samshaptakas
returned, having made up their minds to fight to their utmost. There were three thousand riders, with Duryodhana
at the forefront-Shakas, Kambojas, Bahlikas, Yavanas, Paradas, Kunindas, Tanganas, Ambashthas, Pishachas and
those from mountainous regions. They attacked Shini's descendant, like insects towards a flame. They were joined
by rathas from the mountainous regions, those who fought with stones. O king! Five hundred such brave ones attacked Shini's descendant. There were one thousand rathas and a hundred maharathas. There were one thousand
elephants and two thousand horses. Those maharathas showered many different kinds of arrows. In that battle, infantry attacked Shini's descendant. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O great king! Duhshasana urged all of
them to surround Satyaki and kill him. We witnessed the great and marvellous conduct of Shini's descendant.
Without any fear, he single-handedly fought against many. He slew that array of rathas, the army of elephants, all
the riders and all those dasyus. He mangled and routed them with his supreme weapons. Many wheels were shattered and beautiful chariot poles were destroyed. Bumpers were fragmented and standards brought down. The
earth was strewn with armour and whisks. O venerable one! There were garlands, ornaments, garments and yokes.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The earth was littered with these, like the sky with planets. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! The best of elephants, with the forms of mountains, were brought down. They were born in
the lineages of Anjana, Vamana, Supratika, Mahapadma, Airavata and many other lineages[The names of the eight elephants in charge of the eight directions are usually given as Airavata, Pundarika, Va-
mana, Kumuda, Anjana, Pushpadanta, Sarvabhouma and Supratika. Pundarika, Kumuda and Padma mean lotuses. So Mahapadma might mean either Pundarika or Kumuda.]. O king! The best
of tuskers were slain in large numbers and lay down there. O king! The best of horses, from Vanayu, mountainous
regions, Kamboja and Bahlika breeds, were slain there by Satyaki. There were foot soldiers who had been raised in
many different countries, born in many races. Hundreds and thousands of them were killed there by Shini's
descendant.

'"When the soldiers confronted death in this way, Duhshasana spoke to the dasyus. 'Return. You are not those
who are familiar with dharma[The reference to dharma is puzzling, other than the general statement that dasyus did not follow dharma. There
was adharma in many fighting with a single person, but that dharma was in any case not being followed.]. Why are you running away without fighting?' On seeing that they did not listen,
your son, Duhshasana, urged the brave ones from the mountainous regions, the ones who fought with stones. 'You
are skilled in fighting with stones and Satyaki is not familiar with this. You know about fighting with stones. Use
that mode to kill the one who desires to fight. None of the Kurus are skilled in fighting with stones. Do not be
frightened. Attack. Satyaki will not be able to approach you. Those mountain-dwellers raised boulders that were
like elephant cubs, and desiring death, advanced against Yuyudhana. Others hurled those at him, wishing to kill
Satvata. They were urged by your son and hemmed him in from all directions. On seeing them descend on him,
desiring to fight with boulders, Satyaki fought against them and released three hundred arrows. Those from the
mountainous regions rained down a tumultuous shower of boulders. However, the bull among the Shini lineage
countered these with iron arrows that were like serpents. These shattered the boulders and the fragments shone like
fireflies. O venerable one! Some of these slew the soldiers and sounds of lamentation arose. O king! There were
five hundred brave ones with giant boulders raised. Their arms were severed and fell down on the ground. Other
brave ones who fought with stones were stationed there. Many thousands of these were slain and it was extraordinary. The foremost among them again attacked, showering boulders from every direction. They held iron in
their hands. There were Daradas with spears in their hands and Khasas and Tanganas. There were Ambashthas and
Kunindas. They were enraged and Satyaki was also wrathful. The immensely strong one released iron arrows and
countered them. With his sharp arrows, he shattered those boulders in the sky. O king! This produced a noise that
made elephants, horses, rathas and infantry run away. Struck by shards from those boulders, powerful and armoured men were incapable of remaining there and roamed around. The remaining elephants[Those that had not been killed.] were covered
with blood. Their heads and frontal globes were shattered. They ran away from Yuyudhana's chariot. O venerable
one! A great noise arose among your soldiers when they were afflicted by Madhava, like that of the fierce ocean.

'"On hearing this tumultuous sound, Drona told his charioteer. 'O charioteer! In this battle, maharatha Satvata is
angry. As he roams around in the encounter, like Death, he is shattering the soldiers in many ways. O charioteer!
Take the chariot to the spot where the tumultuous sound has arisen. There is no doubt that Yuyudhana is fighting
with the mountain-dwellers. It is there that all the rathas are being destroyed and the horses are running away. The
foot soldiers are bereft of their armour. They are wounded and are falling down. In that melee, the charioteers can
no longer control their horses.' Having been thus addressed by Bharadvaja's intelligent son, the charioteer spoke to
Drona, supreme among those who wielded weapons. 'O one with a long life! The Kourava soldiers are running
away, in every direction. Behold. The warriors have been shattered and are fleeing here and there. The brave Panchalas and Pandavas have united. They are attacking us from every direction, wishing to kill you. O destroyer of
enemies! The time has come for you to decide what must be done. Should we remain here, or should we advance
further, towards where Satyaki is proceeding?' O venerable one! Thus did he speak to Bharadvaja's son. At that
time, Shini's descendant was seen, killing many different kinds of rathas. In the encounter, those on your side were
killed by Yuyudhana. They abandoned Yuyudhana's chariot and fled towards Drona's army. All of them were terrified and fled towards Drona's chariot. With other rathas, Duhshasana had already retreated there earlier."'


'Sanjaya said, "On seeing that Duhshasana's chariot was stationed near his, Bharadvaja's son spoke these words to
Duhshasana. 'O Duhshasana! Why are all these rathas running away? Is the king well and is Saindhava still alive?
You are a prince and your brother is a maharatha. Why are you running away from the battle? Accept the status of
heir apparent[Yuvaraja is heir apparent, and this need not necessarily be the king's son. The sense is that Duhshasana should
fight and make Duryodhana the king, with Duhshasana as heir apparent.]. You have yourself brought on this great enmity with the Panchalas and Pandavas. In the battle,
how can you be frightened of the single-handed Satyaki? In the gambling match in earlier times, when you grasped
the dice, did you not know that they would become terrible arrows in the future, like venomous serpents? Your
words towards the Pandavas were especially hateful. You were the cause of the hardships that Droupadi faced in
earlier times. Where is that insolence, pride and swagger about valour now? You enraged the Parthas, who are like
venomous serpents. Why are you running away now? The army of the Bharatas is sorrowing now, as is King Suyo-
dhana. He has a harsh brother, who is now intent on running away. O brave one! The army is shattered and is afflicted by terror. There is no doubt that you should resort to the strength of your arms and protect it now. But you
are abandoning the fight in fright now and are delighting the enemy. O destroyer of enemies! You are the leader of
your army and are fleeing. When the refuge is itself frightened, which other terrified person will remain stationed
in the battle? O unblemished one! You are fighting with the single-handed Satvata now. Even then, your mind turns
towards flying from the field of battle. O Kourava! What will you do when you behold the wielder of Gandiva,
Bhimasena and the twins in the battle? In a battle, Phalguna's arrows are like the sun and the fire in their energy.
Satyaki's arrows are equal to those and you are terrified and are running away from those. In that event, let there be
peace and hand over the earth to Dharmaraja. Have peace with the Pandavas before Phalguna's iron arrows, which
are like snakes that have cast off their skins, penetrate your body. Have peace with the Pandavas before the great-
souled Parthas kill one hundred of your brothers in battle and fling them down on the ground[In a pedantic sense, ninety-nine brothers. To be even more pedantic, fewer, since several of them have already
been killed.]. Have peace with
the Pandavas before King Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, and Krishna, who prides himself in battle, are enraged.
Have peace with the Pandavas before the mighty-armed Bhima penetrates the large army and grasps your brothers.
This is what Bhishma told your brother Suyodhana earlier. "O amiable one! The Pandavas cannot be vanquished in
battle. Have peace with the Pandavas." But your wicked brother, Suyodhana, did not act accordingly. Therefore,
resolve to fight and endeavour to battle with the Pandavas. Swiftly go on your chariot to the spot where Satyaki is
stationed. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Without your presence, the army will be driven away. Truth is
Satyaki's valour. For your own sake, fight with him in the battle.' Having been thus addressed, your son did not
say anything in reply. He pretended not to have heard what had been said and went to the spot where Satyaki was.

'"He was accompanied by a large army of mlecchas who did not retreat. Having approached Yuyudhana in the
battle, he sought to fight with him. Drona, foremost among rathas, angrily advanced against the Panchalas and the
Pandavas, using a medium speed. In that battle, Drona penetrated the Panchala array. He drove away those warriors, in hundreds and thousands. O great king! Drona proclaimed his name in the battle and caused great carnage
among the Pandus, Panchalas and Matsyas. The radiant Viraketu, the son of Panchala, attacked him. He pierced
Drona with five arrows that had drooping tufts. He pierced his standard with one and his charioteer with another
seven. O great king! What I witnessed in that encounter was extraordinary. Despite his violence, Drona could not
approach Panchala in that battle. O venerable one! O king! On seeing that Drona had been checked in that battle,
all the Panchalas[There should be no confusion. The plural Panchalas is being used for all the Panchalas and the singular Pan-
chala is being used for Viraketu.] desired the victory of Dharma's son and surrounded him from all sides. O king! They enveloped Drona with arrows that were like fire, extremely thick javelins and many kinds of weapons. O king! But in
every direction, Drona destroyed those masses of arrows, like a giant cloud in the sky, driven away by the wind.
The destroyer of enemy heroes then released an extremely terrible arrow, which was like the sun and the fire, towards Viraketu's chariot. O king! That arrow penetrated the descendant of the Panchala lineage and quickly entered the earth, like a flaming and red mountain[It was red because of the blood.]. The descendant of the Panchala lineage swiftly fell down from
the chariot, like a giant champaka tree that has been shattered by the wind and has fallen from a mountain top.
When that prince, immensely strong and a great archer, was killed, the Panchalas quickly surrounded Drona from
every direction. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Chitraketu, Sudhanva, Chitravarma and Chitraratha were
stricken with grief on account of their brother. They attacked and unitedly fought against Bharadvaja's son. They
released showers of arrows, like clouds at the end of the summer. He was struck in many ways by these maharatha
princes. Those princes were angry in the battle. But he deprived them of their horses, charioteers and chariots. The
immensely illustrious one then used other extremely sharp and broad-headed arrows to sever and bring down their
heads, as if he was plucking flowers. O extremely radiant king! Slain, they fell down on the ground from their
chariots. They were like daityas and danavas, in the ancient battle between the gods and the asuras.

'"Those maharatha Panchalas were like the gods. On seeing that they had been killed, Dhrishtadyumna became
extremely angry and tears flowed from his eyes. In that battle, he angrily advanced towards Drona's chariot. O
king! In that battle, Drona was enveloped by Panchala's[Dhrishtadyumna's.] arrows and on seeing this, great sounds of lamentation
suddenly arose. But though he was enveloped in many ways by the great-souled Parshata, Drona was not distressed and smilingly, continued to fight. O great king! Panchala became senseless with rage and wrathfully struck
Drona in the chest with ninety arrows with drooping tufts. Bharadvaja's powerful and immensely illustrious son
was severely wounded. He lost his senses and sat down on the floor of his chariot. On seeing him in that state, the
valiant Dhrishtadyumna cast aside his bow. The brave one quickly grasped a sword. O venerable one! The maharatha quickly descended from his chariot and swiftly ascended the chariot of Bharadvaja's son. His eyes were
red with rage and he wished to sever his[Drona's.] head from his body. Meanwhile, the immensely strong Drona regained
his senses and grasped a bow. O king! He pierced him with vaitastika arrows[Vaitastika arrows were nine inches long.] that were meant to be used for
fighting at close quarters. O king! In that battle, maharatha Dhrishtadyumna was struck by vaitastika arrows that
are meant for fighting at close quarters. These were known to Drona and they weakened Dhrishtadyumna. Having
been struck by many such arrows, the immensely strong one quickly descended from the chariot. The brave one's
speed had been baffled. The brave one ascended his own chariot and grasped a giant bow. In that encounter, maharatha Dhrishtadyumna pierced Drona. O great king! The clash between them was marvellous and large numbers
of beings applauded it, the kshatriyas, as well as other soldiers present there. O king! The Panchalas loudly exclaimed, 'There is no doubt that, having engaged in this encounter, Drona will be subjugated by Dhrishtadyumna.'

In that battle, Drona quickly brought down the head of Dhrishtadyumna's charioteer, like a ripe fruit from a tree. O
king! The great-souled one's horses ran away. When they had run away in the battle[They also carried Dhrishtadyumna away.], the powerful one drove
away the Panchalas and the Srinjayas. Bharadvaja's powerful son defeated the Pandus and the Panchalas. The
scorcher of enemies re-established his vyuha and stationed himself there. O lord! The Pandavas evinced no interest
in defeating him in the battle."'


'Sanjaya said, "O king! Meanwhile, Duhshasana attacked Shini's descendant. He showered thousands of arrows,
like a cloud pouring down rain. He pierced Satyaki with sixty arrows, and yet again with sixteen. But in that battle,
he could not make him tremble. He[Satyaki.] was like Mount Mainaka. The brave one covered Duhshasana with a severe
storm of arrows. It was as if a spider had got a mosquito[Alternatively, gnat.] within its strands. On seeing that Duhshasana was afflicted by hundreds of arrows, the king[Duryodhana.] urged the Trigartas to advance towards Yuyudhana's chariot. Those performers of evil deeds approached near Yuyudhana. There were three thousand Trigartas, skilled in fighting. They
surrounded him with a large army of chariots. They had resolved to fight and had sworn to be samshaptakas[That is, they had taken a pledge to die, rather than retreat.].
They advanced in that battle and released showers of arrows. Five hundred foremost warriors were stationed at the
forefront of that array. But the supreme one of the Shini lineage quickly uprooted, brought down and killed them
with his arrows. They were like giant trees that had been shattered by the force of a violent wind. O lord of the
earth! Many chariots and standards were shattered. Horses with golden harnesses fell down on the ground. O great
king! The arrows released by Shini's descendant made them flow with blood and they were as beautiful as flowering kimshukas. In that battle, those on your side were slaughtered by Yuyudhana. They could not find a protector,
like elephants that have sunk into a swamp. All of them fled towards Drona's chariot. They were like giant serpents, penetrating a hole, because of fear of the king of the birds[Garuda.]. The brave one killed five hundred warriors
with arrows that were like venomous serpents and then slowly advanced towards Dhananjaya's chariot.

'"As that best of men was advancing, your son, Duhshasana, quickly pierced him with nine arrows that had
drooping tufts. The great archer[Satyaki.] pierced him back with five sharp arrows that were gold-tufted and had the
feathers of vultures. O great king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Duhshasana laughed and pierced Satyaki
with three arrows, and yet again with five. Shini's descendant pierced your son with five arrows. In that battle, he
severed his bow and while smiling, proceeded towards Arjuna. Duhshasana became angry. As the brave one from
the Vrishni lineage was proceeding, he wished to kill him and hurled a javelin that was entirely made out of iron at
him. O king! Your son hurled that terrible javelin. But Satyaki used sharp arrows tufted with heron feathers to shatter it into a hundred fragments. O lord of men! Your son then grasped another bow. He pierced Satyaki with ten arrows and roared like a lion. In that encounter, Satyaki became enraged and confounded your son. He struck him
between the breasts with arrows that were like the flames of fires. He again pierced him with ten sharp and pointed
arrows that were completely made out of iron. Duhshasana pierced Satyaki back with twenty arrows. O great king!
Satvata pierced him between the breasts with three arrows that were extremely powerful and had drooping tufts.
The maharatha used some sharp arrows to kill his mounts and extremely angry, slew his charioteer with arrows
with drooping tufts. He severed his bow with a broad-headed arrow and his arm-guard with another five. The one
who was skilled in the use of supreme weapons then used a couple of broad-headed arrows to sever his standard
and the pole of his chariot. He then used sharp arrows to bring down the two parshnis. His[Duhshasana's.] bow was severed.
He was without a chariot. His horses were slain. His charioteer was killed. The general of the Trigartas then picked
him up on his own chariot. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Shini's descendant followed him for some time.
But remembering Bhimasena's words, the mighty-armed one did not kill him. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In the assembly hall and in everyone's presence, Bhimasena had sworn to kill your sons in battle. O lord! O
king! Thus did Satyaki vanquish Duhshasana in that encounter and quickly proceeded along Dhananjaya's route."'


