Janamejaya asked, 'O supreme among brahmanas! After having granted the boon to Utanka, what did the immensely illustrious and mighty-armed Govinda do next?'

Vaishampayana replied, 'Having granted the boon to Utanka, Govinda left for Dvaraka on extremely swift and
large horses, accompanied by Satyaki. Having passed over lakes, rivers and many kinds of forests, he arrived at the
beautiful city of Dvaravati. O great king! When Pundarikaksha reached, followed by Yuyudhana, it was time for
the festival of Raivataka. The mountain was ornamented in many colourful ways[Raivataka was the name of the mountain in Dvaraka and the festival took place near the mountain.]. O bull among men! All the
roads were paved with gold. The summit of the great mountain was decorated with extremely pleasant and golden
garlands and so were the houses. There were kalpavrikshas everywhere[A kalpavriksha is a tree that grants every object of desire. These are found in heaven. Here, it simply means that
the trees were beautifully decorated.]. There were golden lamps on the trees
and it was a beautiful sight. Even the caves and the waterfalls shone, as if it was day. There were colourful flags,
decorated with bells, in every direction. There were the melodious notes of men and women singing. It was beautiful to see, like Meru inhabited by large numbers of sages. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The women and
the men were cheerful and intoxicated. They sang on that Indra among mountains and the sound seemed to touch
heaven. The place was full of these excited people, mad with delight and intoxicated. Extremely beautiful and
cheerful sounds could be heard. There were excellent shops and stalls, filled with food that could be tasted and
swallowed. There were garments and garlands. There was the sound of veenas, flutes and drums. Food that could
be tasted and swallowed was mixed with sura and maireya[Since the text mentions these two different types of liquor, we have retained the names.]. Gifts were incessantly offered to the distressed, the
blind and the miserable. Because of these supremely beneficial acts, the giant mountain seemed to be greater still.
O brave one! Many auspicious abodes had been erected there and the virtuous ones resided there. Thus did the
brave ones from the Vrishni lineage enjoy the festival of Raivataka. Surrounded by all these residences, the mountain looked like the world of the gods. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On Krishna's arrival, that king of mountains looked like Shakra's residence. Honoured, Govinda entered an auspicious residence and Satyaki also went to
his own home. Cheerful, he[Krishna.] entered after a long period of residence away from home. Like Vasava among the
danavas, he had performed many extremely difficult deeds. The Bhojas, Vrishnis and Andhakas came forward to
meet the great-souled Varshneya, like the gods meeting Shatakratu. The intelligent one honoured them and asked
about their welfare. Delighted, he greeted his father and his mother. The mighty-armed one was embraced and
comforted by them. Surrounded by all the Vrishnis, he then sat down. When the greatly energetic one had washed
his feet and had rested, Krishna was asked by his father and told him about the great battle.'


Vasudeva said, "O Varshneya! I have heard about the supremely wonderful battle. O son! Men have always
spoken about it. O immensely wise one! But you were a direct witness and a participant. O unblemished one!
Therefore, speak about the battle accurately. How was the battle that involved the great-souled Pandavas, Bhishma,
Karna, Kripa, Drona, Shalya and the other excellent ones, all the other large numbers of kshatriyas who were accomplished in the use of weapons and those who wore diverse kinds of garments and were the residents of many
different countries?"'

Vaishampayana  continued,  'Thus  addressed,  in  the  presence  of  his  father  and  his  mother,  Pundarikaksha  recounted how the brave ones among the Kurus had been slain in the battle.

'Krishna[The text says Vasudeva. However, there is a danger of confusing the father, Vasudeva, with the son, Vaasudeva.
Therefore, in this section, we have replaced Vaasudeva with Krishna.] said, "The great-souled kshatriyas performed extremely wonderful deeds. There were such a large
number of these that one is incapable of recounting all of them in hundreds of years. Listen. I will tell you about
the most important elements of the encounter, about what those lords of the earth exactly did. Bhishma was the
overall commander for Kouravya, like Vasava for the gods, and there were eleven chiefs of the Kouravya army under him[The eleven akshouhinis of the Kouravas, the Pandavas possessing seven akshouhinis.]. Shikhandi was the leader of the seven chiefs of armies of the sons of Pandu[This should actually be Dhrishtadyumna, not Shikhandi.]. The intelligent one was
protected by the intelligent Savyasachi. The battle between the great-souled Kurus and Pandavas went on for ten
days[The period during which Bhishma fought.]. It was so great that it made the body hair stand up. After this, in the great battle, Shikhandi fought against
Gangeya and struck him with many arrows, aided by the wielder of Gandiva. After this, the sage lay down on a
bed of arrows. He waited for dakshinayana to be over and gave up his life in uttarayana. Then Drona, supreme
among those who know about weapons, became the commander. For the Indra among the Kouravas, the brave one
was like Kavya for the lord of the daityas[Kavya means Shukracharya, the preceptor of the demons. Drona was the preceptor of the Kouravas.]. The supreme of brahmanas was surrounded by the nine akshouhinis
that were left. He prided himself in battle and was protected by Kripa, Vrisha[Karna.] and the others. Dhrishtadyumna,
who knew about great weapons, became the leader of the Pandavas. He was protected by the energetic Bhima, like
Varuna by Mitra. The great-minded one was surrounded by five armies[The five akshouhinis remaining on the Pandava side.] and wished to get at Drona. He remembered the ill treatment of his father[Drupada's treatment at the hands of Drona.] and performed great deeds in the battle. In that clash between Drona and Parshata, many brave kings who had come from various directions were mostly destroyed. That supremely terrible
battle lasted for five days. After this, Drona was exhausted and was subjugated by Dhrishtadyumna. Next, Karna
became the commander of Duryodhana's forces. He was surrounded by the five akshouhinis that still remained in
the battle. Three armies were left for the sons of Pandu and they were protected by Bibhatsu. Many brave ones had
been killed. The remaining ones clashed. The suta's son fought a terrible battle against Partha and clashed against
him, like an insect headed towards a fire. He was slain on the second day. When Karna was killed, the Kouravas
lost their spirits and their energy was destroyed. The remaining three akshouhinis surrounded the lord of Madra.
With many mounts slain, the remaining one akshouhini of the Pandavas was also cheerless. However, they faithfully surrounded Yudhishthira. Yudhishthira, king of the Kurus, peformed an extremely difficult deed. Before half
of the day was over, he slew the king of Madra. When Shalya was killed, the great-minded and infinitely valorous
Sahadeva killed Shakuni, who was responsible for the dissension. When Shakuni was killed, the extremely evil-
minded king who was Dhritarashtra's son saw that most of the soldiers had been slain and fled, with a club in his
hand. The powerful Bhimasena angrily rushed after him. He found him inside the waters of Lake Dvaipayana.
From every direction, the remaining soldiers surrounded him. After he had hidden in the lake, the five Pandavas
were delighted at having discovered him. Though he was submerged in the water, the arrows of their words swiftly
and severely injured him. He rose up and prepared to fight, with a club in his hand. In that great encounter, the king
who was Dhritarashtra's son was slain. Many kings witnessed Bhimasena's valour. After this, the Pandava soldiers
were sleeping in their camp in the night. Intolerant because his father had been killed, they were slain by Drona's
son. Their sons were killed. Their soldiers were killed. Their friends were killed. I, Yuyudhana as the second, and
the five Pandavas are the only ones who remain. With Kripa and Bhoja[Kritavarma.], Drona's son is the only one who escaped
from the Kourava side. Having sought refuge with the Pandavas, Yuyutsu also escaped. Suyodhana, Indra among
the Kouravas, was killed, with his followers, and Vidura and Sanjaya presented themselves before Dharmaraja. O
lord! Thus did the great battle rage for eighteen days. Those lords of the earth were slain and began to reside in
heaven."'

Vaishampayana said, 'O great king! On hearing the account that made the body hair stand up, the Vrishnis were
overcome by grief, misery and sorrow.'


