Vaishampayana said, 'Having spoken these words, devarshi Narada
stopped. However, rajarshi Yudhisthira was overcome by sorrow and continued to think. The brave one was distressed in his mind and his head hung
down in sorrow. He sighed like a serpent and his eyes were full of tears.
Kunti's limbs were also overcome with sorrow and grief had robbed her of
her senses. However, she spoke these sweet and important words that were
suitable to the occasion. "O Yudhishthira! O mighty-armed one! You should
not grieve. O immensely wise one! Conquer your sorrow and listen to my
words. O supreme among those who uphold dharma! Earlier, I tried so that
he might let you know that he was your brother and so did the sun god, his
father. In front of me, the sun revealed himself in a dream to him and told
him words that a well-wisher who desired his benefit and prosperity would
say[This has also been described in Section 55 (Volume 4).]. But despite our entreaties and our affection, I or the sun god did not
succeed. We could not persuade him. Nor could we persuade him to unite
with you. He was under the subjugation of destiny and was engaged in fanning the enmity with you. He was engaged in causing you injury. So he was
ignored by me." When his mother said this, Dharmaraja's eyes filled with
tears. With his senses clouded by tears, the one with dharma in his soul
spoke these words. "I am extremely distressed because you kept this a secret." Tormented by extreme grief, the immensely energetic one cursed all
the women of the world, "Henceforth, they will not be able to keep a
secret." The king remembered his sons, grandsons, relatives and well-wishers and his heart became extremely anxious. He lost control over his senses.
Because he was overcome by sorrow, he was like a fire with smoke. Tormented and oppressed, the king yielded to despair.'


Vaishampayana said, 'Yudhishthira, with dharma in his soul, was anxious and unconscious because of his sorrow.
He remembered maharatha Karna and tormented by grief, sorrowed over him. Overcome by grief and sorrow, he
sighed repeatedly.

'He was oppressed by grief and on seeing Arjuna, spoke these words. "Had we survived by begging in the city
of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas, we would not have confronted this catastrophe and would not have deprived our
relatives of all their menfolk. Our enemies have been successful in their objectives and the Kurus have obtained
what they tried for. We have ourselves slain those who are our own. What fruits of dharma will we obtain? Shame
on the conduct of kshatriyas and shame on the strength that chests hold. Shame on the intolerance that has taken us
to this calamity. Forgiveness, self-control, purity, lack of enmity, lack of selfishness, non-violence and truthfulness
in words are to be praised. Those who dwell in the forest practise these. But because of our greed and our delusion,
we have resorted to arrogance and insolence. We have been brought to this state because of our hunger for a trifling kingdom. Even sovereignty over the three worlds will not delight us now, since we can see that those of our
relatives who desired the flesh of the earth[The word flesh is being used in a figurative sense.] have been slain. They did not deserve to be killed and were like the
earth. But they have been slain for the earth. Having given them up, deprived of prosperity and with our relatives
killed, we remain alive. We are not dogs. But like dogs, we fought over meat. That flesh has now been destroyed
and so have those who would have eaten the meat. We shouldn't have abandoned those who have been killed for
the sake of the entire earth, heaps of gold or for all the cattle and horses. They were full of desire and passion.
They were overcome by wrath and intolerance. They climbed onto the road to death and have gone to
Vaivasvata's[Yama's.] eternal abode. For the sake of their sons, fathers seek a lot of welfare on earth. They observe austerities and brahmacharya, chant and practise renunciation. In a similar way, mothers conceive after fasts, sacrifices,
vows and auspicious ceremonies and bear them for ten months. 'If they are born safely and remain alive after they
are born, if they are full of strength, they may give us happiness in this world and the next.' In pursuit of fruits, this
is what those pitiable ones hope for. Those young sons, decorated with earrings, have been killed. At a wrong time,
those hopes have become unsuccessful and have been abandoned. They have not enjoyed the pleasures of the
earth. They have not repaid their debts to the ancestors and the gods. They have gone to Vaivasvata's eternal
abode. When they were born, the parents had wishes for them. But those kings have been slain when they became
full of strength and beauty. They were full of desire and intolerance and experienced anger and delight. None of
them enjoyed any of the fruits of birth. Because of our deeds, the Panchalas and Kurus who have been killed, and
those of us who have not been slain, will obtain the worst of worlds. We will be known as the ones who caused the
destruction of the world, even though we were deceived by Dhritarashtra's son. He was skilled in deceit. He was
full of enmity and subsisted through the use of maya. Though we had never caused him injury, he always used
falsehood towards us. We have not succeeded in vanquishing them, nor have they defeated us. They have not enjoyed the earth, nor women, singing and music. They paid no attention to their advisers, nor did they listen to those
who knew about the sacred texts. They could not enjoy the jewels, the earth or the wealth they had obtained. When
he[Duryodhana.] saw our prosperity, he turned pale, ashen and lean. This was reported to King Dhritarashtra by Soubala[This has been described in Section 27 (Volume 2).]. Because of his affection, the father remained established in the ways of the son. He disregarded his father, Gangeya
and Vidura. There is no doubt that Dhritrashtra is in the same state as I am. He did not control his inauspicious and
greedy son who was overcome by desire. With his brothers, Suyodhana has fallen from his blazing fame. He has
hurled these two aged ones[Dhritarashtra and Gandhari.] into the flames of grief. The evil-minded one was always full of enmity towards us.
Which other relative, born into a noble lineage, would speak to well-wishers they way he did? In the presence of
the one from the Vrishni lineage, the inferior one, wishing to fight, used such words[The one from the Vrishni lineage is Krishna. This is a reference to the incidents in Section 54 (Volume 4).]. We have also been destroyed for an eternal period because of our own sins. Like the sun, we have scorched all the directions with our
energy. That man, full of enmity towards us, came under the clutches of an evil planet that gave bad advice[This is probably a reference to Shakuni.]. Because of Duryodhana's deeds, our lineage has been brought down. Having slain those who should not be slain, we
will earn censure in this world. King Dhritarashtra made that evil-minded one the lord of the kingdom. He was
wicked in his deeds and the exterminator of the lineage. Therefore, he[Dhritarashtra.] is grieving now. The brave ones have been
slain. The wicked deed has been done. The prosperity has been destroyed. Having slain them, our anger has been
overcome. This sorrow is restraining me now. O Dhananjaya! A wicked deed can be countered through a beneficial
one. The sacred texts say that someone who has renounced does not perform a wicked deed again. The sacred texts
say that someone who has renounced does not have to go through birth and death. Having attained perfection, that
person, firm in his resolution, unites with the brahman. O Dhananjaya! He attains the knowledge of the sages and
is without any sense of opposites[Sentiments like unhappiness and happiness, like and dislike, friend and
foe.]. O scorcher of enemies! I will take my leave from all of you and go to the forest. O destroyer of enemies! The sacred texts say that someone with possessions is not capable of attaining the best
forms of dharma. I can see that. Because I desired possessions, I committed wicked acts and the sacred texts say
that this can cause birth and death[That is, cause the cycle of death and rebirth.]. I will give up my possessions and the entire kingdom. I will depart, completely free, bereft of sorrow and devoid of fever. With the thorns having been removed, you rule over this pacified
earth. O best of the Kuru lineage! This kingdom and the pleasures are not for me." Having spoken these words,
Dharmaraja Yudhishthira stopped and the youngest Partha[Arjuna.] replied.'


Vaishampayana said 'Arjuna spoke, like a reviled person who is not ready to forgive. He was firm in his speech
and valour and spoke these proud words. Indra's son was terrible in his valour and revealed his fierce aspect. The
immensely energetic one laughed and repeatedly licked the corners of his mouth. "Alas! What misery! What a
great calamity! This is supreme frailty. Having performed a superhuman deed, you now wish to abandon this
supreme prosperity. The enemies have been slain and the earth has been obtained by practising one's own dharma.
Having killed one's foes, but for foolishness, why should one give everything up? When has a eunuch or one who
procrastinates ever obtained a kingdom? Overcome with rage, why did you kill all the lords of the earth? A person
desiring to live through begging can never use his deeds to enjoy anything. Even if he tries to be powerful, his fortune is destroyed and he is never renowned in the world as someone who possesses sons and animals. O king! If
you resort to this wicked means of subsistence through mendicancy and abandon this prosperous kingdom, what
will people say? O lord! Why do you wish to abandon all enterprise, giving up all your fortune? Like an ordinary
person, why do you wish to roam around as a beggar? You have been born in this lineage of kings and have conquered the entire earth. Yet, because of your confusion, you wish to give up dharma and artha and want to go to the
forest. When you have gone, if wicked people destroy the sacrificial offerings, the consequence of that sin will devolve on you. Nahusha[Yayati's father, an ancestor.] said, 'It is not desirable to possess nothing. Without riches, cruel deeds are perpetrated.
Shame on poverty.' You know that the practice of rishis is not to keep anything for tomorrow. But that which is
known as dharma is established on the basis of riches. When someone's riches are stolen, his dharma is also stolen.
O king! Who amongst us will pardon an act of our riches being robbed? If a poor person stands next to one's own
self, that poor person is abused. Poverty causes degradation in this world and you should not praise it. O king! One
who is degraded sorrows. One who is poor sorrows. I cannot see any difference between one who is degraded and
one who is poor. Here and there, all the rites are extended and accumulated through wealth, like streams flowing
down mountains. O lord of men! Dharma, kama and heaven result from artha. Without artha, the world will not be
able to sustain its life. Like an inferior river[One that dries up during the summer.] during the summer, all the rites of a person with limited intelligence
are destroyed in the absence of wealth. One who possesses riches possesses friends. One who possesses riches possesses relatives. One who possesses riches is a man in this world. One who possesses riches is learned. A person
who doesn't possess riches is incapable of obtaining riches only by desiring it. Riches follow riches, like elephants
follow mighty elephants[There is probably an implicit image of tame elephants being used to ensnare wild ones.]. O lord of men! Dharma, kama, heaven, delight, anger, learning, self-control-all of
these result from artha. The lineage is extended because of artha. Dharma is spread because of riches. O supreme
among men! A person without riches does not possess either this world, or the next. One without riches cannot
perform the acts of dharma. Dharma flows from riches, like mountainous streams from mountains. O king! A person is not called lean when his body is lean. He is lean when he is lean in horses, lean in cattle, lean in servants and
lean in guests. Consider this according to the right principles. Look at the gods and the asuras. O king! The gods
prosper after having slain their own relatives[The gods and the demons are descended from the same father, the sage
Kashyapa.]. If one does not take away the riches of others, how can one observe dharma? The wise ones have determined this in the Vedas. The learned ones have said that one must study
the three kinds of knowledge[The Rig Veda, the Sama Veda and the Yajur Veda.] and always make efforts to accumulate wealth and perform sacrifices. It is through
violence and enmity that all the gods have obtained their stations in heaven. This is what the gods resorted to, and
these are the eternal words of the Vedas. One must study, one must perform austerities, one must perform sacrifices
and one must officiate at the sacrifices of others. But all these become better when one takes objects away from
others. Nowhere do we see any wealth that has not been taken away from others. This is the way in which kings
conquered the earth. Having conquered, they say that the wealth is theirs, just as sons say that the wealth of their
fathers is their own. The rajarshis who have obtained heaven have proclaimed this to be dharma. In the overflowing ocean, water spreads out in the ten directions. In that way, wealth that emanates from a royal lineage spreads
throughout the earth. Earlier, the earth belonged to Dilipa, Nriga, Nahusha, Ambarisha and Mandhata[Dilipa was a famous king from the solar dynasty and was the father of
Raghu. Nriga was the son of Ikshvaku and also belonged to the solar dynasty. Nahusha was the father of Yayati and belonged to the lunar dynasty. Ambarisha was from the solar dynasty and so was Mandhata.]. It belongs
to you now. O king! A prosperous sacrifice, with all the donations given, now awaits you. If you do not perform
that sacrifice, you will cause offence to the gods. If a king performs a horse sacrifice and offers donations, everyone becomes purified because of that. Vishvarupa[Shiva's name.] Mahadeva performed a great sacrifice at which everything was
offered. He offered all the beings as oblations and then offered himself. That is the eternal path of prosperity and
we have heard that there is no other end that is possible. This is the great path known as dasharatha[Dasaratha means ten chariots. It is possible that this originally read
dasharatra, meaning a sacrifice that lasted for ten nights.]. O king! Do
not follow any other route."'


