'Yudhishthira asked, "O Vasudeva! O mighty-armed one! O immensely intelligent one! Tell me in detail about the
destruction of Soubha, because I am not satisfied with what you have said."

'Vasudeva replied, "O best of the Bharata lineage! When he heard that the mighty-armed King Shroutashrava[One of Shishupala's names.]
had been killed by me, Shalva marched on the city of Dvaravati. O Pandu's son[The word used is nandana.]! The evil-minded Shalva laid
siege to the city from every side, arranged his battle formations and stationed himself in the air[Soubha was airborne.]. That lord of the
earth fought with the city from there. He attacked from everywhere and the battle began. O best of the Bharata lineage! O king! The city was ready everywhere, with flags, gates, troops, fences, machines, miners, barricaded
streets, turrets, towers, hair-graspers[The word used is kachagrahani, meaning catchers or graspers (grahani) of hair (kacha) and it is difficult to
make sense of this, though it is possible to visualize war instruments that grasped enemy soldiers by the hair. The
word might very well be chakragrahani, in which case one means instruments that grasp enemy soldiers. That
would make better sense.], catapults that hurled flaming missiles, water vessels[The word used is ushtrika, which means she-camel, as well as a vessel for storing wine or water and made in
the shape of a she-camel. Given the context, water vessel seems more appropriate. Since elephants and horses are
not being mentioned here, why should she-camels be specifically mentioned?], kettledrums, musical instruments, army drums, kindling, straw, grass, shataghnis[It is impossible to precisely determine what this weapon was, except that it could kill a hundred people at one
time.], ploughs, bhushundis, rocks, clubs, weapons,
battleaxes, iron shields and machines that hurled fire and iron. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Everything was
in accordance with what is laid down in the sacred texts. There was a stock of many types of objects and it was
guarded by Gada, Samba, Uddhava and the like. O tiger among the Kuru lineage! They were men capable of repulsing attacks. There were warriors from famous lineages, their valour having been witnessed in battle. The middle and upper parts of the fortifications were protected well and the upper parts had cavalry and infantry. Ugrasena,
Uddhava and the others announced in the city that no one should drink, so that there should not be carelessness in
protection. Knowing that they would be killed by King Shalva if they were intoxicated, all the Vrishnis and the
Andhakas remained sober. The guards entrusted with the treasuries of Anarta swiftly drove out all the actors,
dancers and singers. O Kouravya! The bridges were destroyed. All the boats were forbidden to ply. The moats
were fortified with spikes. O best of the Kuru lineage! Because of the impending war, the reservoirs were destroyed. For a krosha[Measure of distance equal to one-fourth of a yojana.] on every side, the ground was made uneven[To make it difficult for the invading army.]. O unblemished one! Our fortress is naturally difficult to access. It is guarded well by nature. Nature has equipped it with special types of weapons. O best of
the Bharata lineage! It was protected well. That city was stocked with every kind of weapon, like Indra's abode. O
king! At the time when Soubha advanced, the city of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas was such that nothing could
come out or go in without a seal[That is, permission.]. O Kourava! O Indra among kings! Everywhere, along the roads and the open
spaces where the roads meet, there were forces and many elephants and horses. O mighty-armed one! The soldiers
had been paid wages and rations. They had been given weapons and armour. Nothing was pending. No one was
given too little pay. No one was paid in excess. No one was shown preference. There was no one whose valour had
not been tested. O king! Thus Dvaraka was prepared well. The soldiers had been paid a lot. O lotus-eyed one! It
was defended by King Ahuka[Ugrasena's name.]."'

'Vasudeva said, "O Indra among kings! But Shalva, the lord of Soubha, came to the city with many men, elephants
and forces. The army controlled by King Shalva had four kinds of forces[Chariots, elephants, cavalry and infantry.]. The army settled itself on plain
ground, where there were plenty of sources of water. But the army avoided cremation grounds, temples of the
gods, anthills and chaityas[Anthills have snakes in them. The word chaitya has several meanings-sacrificial shed, temple, altar, sanctuary and a tree that grows along the road.]. O king! The army formations were divided such that all the roads were covered and
Shalva's troops encompassed all the nine slopes[The number nine can't be explained, unless there were nine mountains around Dvaraka.]. There was every kind of weapon and the soldiers were skilled
in use of every kind of weapon. There were masses of chariots, elephants and horses, with infantry and flags. The
army was well paid and well fed and bore all the marks of courage. There were colourful pennants and colourful
chariots and bows. O Kouravya! O bull among men! He settled in Dvaraka, and like the king of the birds, attacked
with great strength.

'"On seeing King Shalva's strength, all the young descendants[The word used is nandana.] of the Vrishni lineage emerged, to do battle
with him. O Kourava! They were unable to bear the invasion of King Shalva-Charudeshna, Samba and maharatha Pradyumna. They emerged in their chariots, all adorned in colourful attire and flags. They fought with
King Shalva's warriors, who were like bulls. Samba took up his bow and in a happy frame of mind, fought with
Kshemavriddhi, Shalva's adviser and the general of his army. O best of the Bharata lineage! Just as the one with
one thousand eyes[Indra has one thousand eyes.] unleashes rain, Jambavati's son[Samba was Jambavati's son. Jambavati was one of Krishna's wives.] unleashed a great volley of arrows. O great king! Stationary like the Himalayas, the general Kshemavriddhi withstood that terrible shower of arrows. O Indra among kings!
Then, using his powers of maya, Kshemavriddhi unleashed a greater net of arrows on Samba. But Samba tore apart
that net of maya with his own maya and showered one thousand arrows on his[Kshemavriddhi's.] chariot. Samba pierced the general Kshemavriddhi and oppressed by Samba's arrows, he fled on his swift horses. When Shalva's cruel general fled,
a powerful daitya named Vegavan attacked my son. O Indra among kings! O king! But Samba is the extender of
the Vrishni lineage. Though Vegavan attacked him with force, the brave one withstood it. O Kounteya! The brave
Samba, whose valour is based on truth, swiftly hurled a fast club at Vegavan. O king! Struck by it, Vegavan fell
down on the ground, like a giant tree, rotten at the roots, collapses when struck by the wind. When that brave and
giant asura was killed by the club, my son entered the enemy's large army and began to fight. O great king! The
danava Vivindhya was a maharatha and a great archer. O king! He then began to fight with Charudeshna and a terrible duel ensued between Charudeshna and Vivindhya, like that between Vritra and Vasava[Indra.] in ancient times. O
great king! Enraged with each other, they shot arrows at each other and roared like mighty lions. Rukmini's son[Charudeshna.]
then fixed a great weapon to his bow and chanted mantras over it. Its radiance was like that of the sun and it was
capable of destroying the enemy. O king! In great rage, my son, the maharatha, challenged Vivindhya and let loose
his weapon. The asura fell down dead.

'"On seeing Vivindhya dead and his army agitated, Shalva returned again on Soubha, which could go anywhere
at will. Then the entire army of the residents of Dvaraka was alarmed, when they saw the mighty-armed Shalva arrive on earth in Soubha[Soubha flew in the sky.]. O Kounteya! O great king! Then Pradyumna came out and reassembled the army. He
told the inhabitants of Anarta, 'All of you stay where you are and all of you watch me fight. In this battle, I will repel with force Soubha and its king. O Yadavas! Today I will destroy the soldiers of the lord of Soubha, using my
hands to let loose iron weapons, that are like serpents, from my bow. Be reassured and do not be scared. Soubha's
king will be destroyed. Attacked by me, the evil-souled one will be destroyed, together with Soubha.' O descendant of the Pandu lineage[The word used is nandana.]! When Pradyumna thus spoke with a happy heart, the brave warriors stood where they
were and happily, began to fight again."'


'Vasudeva said, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! After having uttered these words to the Yadavas, Rukmini's
son[Pradyumna. Both Pradyumna and Charudeshna were Rukmini's sons. They were brothers.] ascended his golden chariot. It was yoked to tawny horses and the ornamented flag had a makara[Makara can be translated as crocodile, but that isn't quite accurate. A makara is a mythical sea animal, bearing some resemblance to both a crocodile and a shark.], with its
jaws gaping open. The mighty-armed one, best among archers, dashed at the enemy on swift horses that seemed to
fly through the sky. The great bow roared when he strung it and the warrior held quivers and a sword, with his
arms and fingers clad in armour. With lightning speed, he switched the bow from one hand to another and the
daityas and all the residents of Soubha were confused. As he shot an arrow and fixed another one to his bow repeatedly, it was impossible to see a gap and the enemies were continuously killed in battle. The colour of his face
did not change. There was no trembling of his body. All the worlds heard the sound of his wonderful valour, as he
roared like a lion. The aquatic animal[The makara.] that oppressed all fishes was on his golden flag-post, its jaws wide open,
adorning the chariot. It created terror among the chief soldiers in Shalva's army. O king! Pradyumna, the destroyer
of enemies, then rushed with great speed and attacked Shalva, who also wished to fight with him.

'"O extender of the Kuru lineage! Attacked by the brave Pradyumna in that great battle, Shalva was enraged and
could not bear it. He was mad with anger and began to do battle with Pradyumna. Shalva, the destroyer of enemy
cities, descended from the chariot that could go anywhere at will. A terrible battle then raged between Shalva and
the warrior from the Vrishnis. All the worlds watched it, like that between Bali and Vasava[Indra. This was the Bali who was humbled by Vishnu in his vamana incarnation.]. That brave one[Shalva.]
knew the use of maya and ascended a chariot that was ornamented with gold. It had a flag, a flagstaff and an undercarriage and was stocked with quivers. O Kouravya! O lord! Ascending that supreme chariot, that illustrious and
immensely strong one, unleashed arrows at Pradyumna. At that, Pradyumna also used the speed of his arms to bewilder Shalva with a shower of arrows. Thus attacked in battle, the king of Soubha could not bear it. He discharged
arrows at my son that were like blazing fire. O Indra among kings! Having been pierced by Shalva's arrows, Ruk-
mini's son swiftly unleashed an arrow that could seek out the heart in battle. This arrow shot by my son pierced his
armour. The feathered shaft pierced his heart and he fell down unconscious. When the brave King Shalva fell
down unconscious, all the lords among the danavas ran away, cleaving the earth[That is, beneath their running feet.]. O lord of the earth! O king!
Lamentations arose in Shalva's army, on seeing the lord of Soubha felled and deprived of his senses.

'"O Kouravya! But he regained his consciousness and arose. Then that immensely strong one suddenly unleashed an arrow at Pradyumna. Though the mighty-armed Pradyumna was pierced, he remained steady in battle.
But he was struck around his collarbone and the brave one sank down on his chariot. O great king! Thus piercing
Rukmini's son[The word used is nandana.], Shalva uttered a loud roar like a lion and it resounded through the earth. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Thereupon, when my son was senseless, he swiftly again shot many arrows at him, which were
difficult to repulse. O best of the Kouravas! Struck by these many arrows and deprived of his senses, Pradyumna
was helpless in the field of battle."'


