Sanjaya said, "Keshava, immeasurable in his soul, again spoke these words to Arjuna, who, in every way, had
firmed up his resolution to kill Karna. 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Today is the seventeenth day[Of the battle.] of
this extremely terrible destruction of men, elephants and horses. Those on your side possessed an extremely large
army and so did the enemy. O lord of the earth! Having clashed against each other in the battle, only remnants are
left on both sides. O Partha! The Kouravas possessed innumerable elephants and horses. Having encountered you
as an enemy, they have been destroyed in the field of battle. All these Panchalas, the Srinjayas and the others are
unassailable. They united and stationed themselves with the Pandavas. O slayer of enemies! Protected by you, the
Panchalas, the Pandavas, the Matsyas, the Karushas, the Chedis and the Kekayas caused a great destruction of the
enemy. O son[The word used is tata.]! In a battle, who is capable of vanquishing the assembled Kouravas, other than the maharatha
Pandavas, who are protected by you in the encounter? You are capable of defeating the gods, asuras and men in a
battle, even if the three worlds rise up against you, not to speak of the army of the Kouravas. O tiger among men!
Who other than you was capable of vanquishing King Bhagadatta, who was Vasava's equal? O Partha! O unblemished one! This large army has been protected by you and all the kings are incapable of even glancing at it. O
Partha! It is because they have always been protected by you that Dhrishtadyumna and Shikhandi could bring
down Bhishma and Drona in the battle. O Partha! Otherwise, in the battle, how could those two maharatha Pancha-
las have defeated Bhishma and Drona in an encounter? They were like Shakra in their valour. In a battle, who
could have withstood Shantanu's son[Bhishma.], Drona, Vaikartana, Kripa, Drona's son, Somadatta's son[Bhurishrava.], Kritavarma,
Saindhava[Jayadratha.], the king of Madra and King Suyodhana? They were brave and skilled in the use of weapons in a
battle. None of them retreated. They were the leaders of akshouhinis. They were fierce, angry and unassailable in a
battle. Many arrays have been destroyed. Horses, chariots and elephants have been exhausted. There were fierce
and intolerant kshatriyas from many kingdoms. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were Govasas,
Dasamiyas, Vasatis, Vratyas, Vatadhanas and the proud Bhojas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! That large
army was destroyed in Brahmakshetra[Being used as a synonym for Kurukshetra.]. Having clashed against you, they advanced towards death, with their
horses, chariots and elephants. There were Tukharas, Yavanas, Khashas, Darvabhisaras, Daradas, Shakas, Ra-
mathas, Tanganas, Andhrakas, Pulindas, Kiratas who are terrible in their valour, mlecchas, those from the mountainous regions and those who live on the boundaries of the ocean. They were fierce and the performers of terrible
deeds. They were insolent, delighted in battle and were strong, with firm fists. For Suyodhana's sake, they angrily
sided with the Kurus. O scorcher of enemies! Other than you, no one else was capable of defeating them in a battle. We saw the immensely strong formations of the sons of Dhritarashtra being destroyed. Without you as a protector, which man could have advanced against that? That army, covered with dust, looked like a swollen ocean. O
lord! Protected by you, the angry Pandavas shattered and destroyed it. Jayatsena, the lord of Magadha, was immensely strong. Since he was killed in the battle by Abhimanyu, seven days have passed[However, this incident has not been mentioned earlier, when that day's fighting was being described.]. There were ten thousand elephants, terrible in their deeds, which followed the king[Duryodhana.]. Bhima killed them with his club. Using his
great force, he destroyed hundreds of other elephants and chariots. O son[The word used is tata.]! Thus did the extremely fearful battle
continue. O Pandava! Having encountered Bhimasena and you, with their horses, chariots and elephants, the
Kouravas went to the world of the dead. O Partha! The vanguard of the army was destroyed by the Pandavas. O
venerable one! Bhishma showered down fierce arrows. He was skilled in the use of harsh weapons and enveloped
and killed the Chedis, the Kashis, the Panchalas, the Karushas, the Matsyas and the Kekayas with his arrows. Arrows issued from his bow and mangled the bodies of the enemy. Those gold-tufted arrows covered the entire sky.
Having followed the tenth direction, they slew horses, rathas and elephants[There are ten directions. The arrows followed the tenth direction and didn't deviate to the other nine. This is
an indirect way of saying that the arrows found their mark.]. Those arrows were released so that
they avoided those nine undesirable directions. Bhishma slaughtered your troops for ten days. He emptied the seats
of chariots and killed horses, elephants and steeds[The word horse figures twice in the text.]. He showed a form in battle that was like that of Rudra or
Upendra[Vishnu.]. He afflicted the Pandava soldiers and caused great destruction. He slaughtered kings from Panchala,
Chedi and Kekaya. He destroyed the Pandava army, which teemed with men, horses and elephants. It was as if he
was rescuing the wicked Suyodhana, who was submerged in an ocean without a raft. He roamed around in the battle, scorching like the sun. The Srinjayas and the other kings were incapable of glancing towards him. Desiring
victory, he roamed around in the battle. However, the Pandavas made every effort and attacked him violently. He
single-handedly drove the Pandavas and the Srinjayas away in the encounter and came to be regarded as the only
one who was brave. Shikhandi was protected by you and killed the maharatha, tiger among men, with his sharp
and straight-tufted arrows. The grandfather was brought down in that way and is lying down on a bed of arrows. O
tiger among men! Having encountered you, he was like a crow clashing against a vulture. Drona fought fiercely for
five days, destroying the army of the enemy. He constructed a vyuha in the great battle and brought down maharathas. The maharatha protected Jayadratha in the battle. When fighting took place during the night[On the fourteenth day, the fighting continued throughout the night. This has been described in Section 70 (Volume 6).], he was
as fierce as Yama and consumed beings. Bharadvaja's powerful and brave son clashed against Dhrishtadyumna and
attained the supreme objective. Today is the second day after that. On that day's battle, had you not checked the
enemy in the encounter, the son of a suta and the other rathas, Drona would not have been killed. You restrained
the entire army of the sons of Dhritarashtra. O Dhananjaya! That is how Parshata killed Drona in the battle. Which
other kshatriya would have been able to accomplish this in the battle? O Partha! That is also the way you accomplished the death of Jayadratha. You countered the large army and killed the brave kings. King Saindhava was
killed through the strength of your weapons and your energy. The kings know that the death of the king of Sindhu
was extraordinary. O Partha! But since you know that you are a maharatha, it wasn't that wonderful. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! If all these kshatriyas clash against you, I think they will be tormented by you and killed on
a single day. That is my view. O Partha! With the likes of Bhishma and Drona killed, this extremely fierce army of
the sons of Dhritarashtra can be regarded as having lost all its brave warriors in the battle. The best of warriors
have been destroyed. Horses, men and elephants have been killed. The army of the Bharatas is like the sky without
radiance, devoid of the sun, the moon and the stars. O Partha! Because of Bhima's valour, the army has been devastated in the battle, like the army of the asuras through Shakra's valour in ancient times.

' "'Other than those who have been slain, only five maharathas remain-Ashvatthama, Kritavarma, Karna, the
lord of Madra and Kripa. O tiger among men! If you kill those five maharathas today, you will destroy the enemies
and give the kingdom, with its islands and cities, to the king. Let Partha[Yudhishthira.], whose energy and prosperity are infinite, obtain the earth, with its sky, waters, the nether regions, mountains and large forests. Just as Vishnu killed
daityas and danavas in earlier times, you will give the earth to the king, like Hari[Vishnu.] to Shakra. With the enemies
slain by you today, the Panchalas will rejoice, like the gods when the danavas were slain by Vishnu. Do not honour
your preceptor Drona, foremost among men, and show compassion towards Ashvatthama, or show mercy towards
Kripa because of the honour due to a preceptor, or show excessive respect towards your relatives and honour your
brothers[The Kouravas.], or encounter Kritavarma and don't convey him to Yama's abode, or clash against your mother's
brother, Shalya, the lord of Madra[Madri was the mother of Nakula and Sahadeva and Arjuna's mother by extension.], and not strike him down and kill him because of compassion. Karna is evil-
minded and extremely injurious towards the Pandavas. O best of men! Kill him today with your sharp arrows. This
is your supreme task and there is nothing wrong in it. We applaud this and there is no sin attached to it. O unblemished one! O Arjuna! Whether it was the attempt to burn down your mother with her sons in the night[This is a reference to the episode of the house of lac, described in Section 8 (Volume 1).], or whatever Suyodhana attempted towards you in the course of the gambling match, the evil-souled Karna was the root of
all that. Suyodhana always thought that he would be saved by Karna and angrily tried to seize me too[When Krishna came as a messenger, described in Section 54 (Volume 4).]. O one
who grants honours! It is the firm belief of that Indra among men, Dhritarashtra's son, that Karna will certainly defeat all the Parthas in battle. O Kounteya! Though Dhritarashtra's son knew about your strength, he found pleasure
in a conflict with you because he depended on Karna. Karna has always said, "I will defeat the assembled Parthas,
Vasudeva and the kings in the great battle." The evil-minded one has encouraged Dhritarashtra's evil-souled son
and roared in the assembly hall. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Kill Karna today. In all the evil acts that
Dhritarashtra's son has done towards you, in all of these, the evil-souled and extremely wicked Karna has been
present. Subhadra's brave son had the eyes of a bull. We saw him killed by six cruel maharathas on the side of the
sons of Dhritarashtra[Abhimanyu was killed in Section 67 (Volume 6).]. The brave maharatha made Drona, Drona's son and Kripa tremble. The maharatha made
elephants and chariots bereft of men. His shoulders were like that of a bull and he brought fame to the Kuru and
Vrishni lineages. He deprived steeds of horse riders and foot soldiers of weapons and lives. He destroyed the soldiers and maharathas. He conveyed large numbers of men, horses and elephants to Yama's eternal abode. Subhadra's son advanced, scorching the army with his arrows. O friend! O lord! I tell you truthfully that my limbs
burn at the thought that even then, the evil-souled Karna attacked him. In that battle, he was unable to remain in
front of Abhimanyu. He was mangled by the arrows of Subhadra's son. He was unconscious and blood flowed
from his body. He blazed and sighed in rage. However, afflicted by the arrows, he retreated. He retreated and lost
all enterprise. He gave up all hope of remaining alive. He was supremely unconscious in that battle and exhausted
because of the blows. Hearing the appropriate, but cruel, words of Drona in the battle then, Karna severed his bow.
When he was devoid of weapons in that battle, five maharathas, skilled in deceit, killed him with their showers of
arrows. In front of the Pandaveyas and the Kurus, Karna spoke harsh and cruel words to Krishna[Krishnaa, Droupadi.] in the assembly hall. "O Krishna! The Pandavas have been destroyed and have gone to eternal hell. O wide-hipped one! O one
who is sweet in speech! Choose another one as a husband. Enter Dhritarashtra's abode as a servant-maid. O one
with long eyelashes! Your husbands are no longer there." He does not know about dharma and is extremely evil-
minded. Those were the words that he spoke then. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Karna spoke those wicked
and sinful words in your hearing. Those were the evil one's words. Arrows decorated with gold, sharpened on
stone and capable of taking away life, released by you, will pacify those words and other wicked deeds that the
evil-souled one has done towards you. Let your arrows rob him of his life and pacify those and other things today.
Let his limbs be touched by terrible arrows shot from Gandiva. Let the evil-souled Karna remember the words of
Bhishma and Drona. Let gold-tufted iron arrows, capable of killing the enemy and with the radiance of lightning,
be shot by you. Let them pierce his inner organs and drink his blood. O Arjuna! Let fierce, immensely forceful and
sharp arrows be shot by you and let them penetrate his inner organs. Strike Karna with great force and convey him
to Yama's eternal abode. Let all the lords of the earth see Karna brought down from his chariot, oppressed by your
arrows. Let them utter woes of lamentation and let them be miserable and distressed. Let all his well-wishers see
Karna prostrate, deprived of his weapons. Let them be cheerless on seeing him shattered, drenched in his own
blood and lying down on the ground. The standard of Adhiratha's son is large and is marked with the sign of an
elephant's harness. Let it shudder and fall down on the ground, uprooted by you with a broad-headed arrow. When
the gold-decorated chariot is shattered with hundreds of your arrows, with its warrior slain, let the terrified Shalya
abandon it and run away. O Dhananjaya! Let Suyodhana see that Adhiratha's son has been killed by you and give
up all hope of the kingdom, or of remaining alive. The Panchalas are being slaughtered and driven away by Karna's sharp arrows. O best of the Bharata lineage! But wishing to serve the Pandavas, the Panchalas, Droupadi's
sons, Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi, Dhrishtadyumna's sons, Nakula's son Shatanika, Nakula, Sahadeva, Durmukha,
Janamejaya, Sudharma and Satyaki are succumbing to Karna. Karna is attacking the Panchalas in the great battle.
O scorcher of enemies! Uttered by your relatives, a terrible roar can be heard. The Panchalas are not frightened.
Nor are they unwilling to fight. Those maharathas, great archers, are not concerned about death in this battle. Single-handedly, Bhishma surrounded the Pandava soldiers with his torrents of arrows. But even then, the Panchalas
clashed against him and did not retreat. The preceptor, Drona, was energetic and his blazing weapons were like the
fire. He scorched all the archers in battle and was unassailable. Those scorchers of enemies[The Panchalas.] always tried to
cheerfully defeat that foe in the encounter. The Panchalas will never be terrified and retreat before Adhiratha's son.
The brave Panchalas spiritedly advanced against him and Karna is destroying them with his arrows, like insects
before a fire. For the sake of their friends, those brave ones are advancing, ready to give up their lives. However, in
the battle, Radheya is bringing destruction to hundreds of Panchalas. Karna obtained a weapon from Bhargava
Rama, supreme among rishis in earlier times, and it has exhibited its extremely terrible and calamitous form. Its
form is fierce and extremely terrible and it is scorching all the soldiers. Blazing in its energy, it has surrounded the
large army[Of the Pandavas.]. The arrows released from Karna's bow are traversing in the field of battle. They are tormenting
those on your side, like a storm of bees. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having encountered Karna's irresistible weapon in the battle, the weak-spirited among the Panchalas are seen to run away in all the directions. O
Partha! Bhima is firm in his anger and, surrounded by the Srinjayas on all sides, is fighting with Karna. However,
he is oppressed by his sharp arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The Pandavas, Srinjayas and Panchalas,
will be slain by Karna, like a body destroyed by a disease that has been neglected. Amongst all the warriors in
Yudhishthira's army, with your exception, I do not see a single one who can clash against Radheya and return safely home. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Slay him with your sharp arrows today. O Partha! Act according to the
oath you had taken earlier and obtain fame. O foremost among warriors! You are the one who is capable of defeating Karna and the Kouravas in battle, and no other warrior. I am telling you this truthfully. Perform the great deed
of killing maharatha Karna. O Partha! O supreme among men! Be successful in your objective and be happy.'" '


Sanjaya said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing the words spoken by Keshava, Bibhatsu cast off
his sorrow and in a short instant, became cheerful. He quickly touched the bowstring and stretched Gandiva bow
for the sake of Karna's destruction. He spoke to Keshava. 'O Govinda! Protected by you, my victory is certain.
You are the lord of the past, the present and the future and you are pleased with me. O Krishna! With you as my
aide, I can kill the three worlds and attain the supreme world in a battle, not to speak of Karna. O Janardana! I can
see that the army of the Panchalas is being driven away. I can see Karna roaming around fearlessly in the encounter. I can see Bhargava's weapon coursing in every direction. O Varshneya! It has been released by Karna, like
the great vajra by Shakra. O Krishna! But as long as the earth exists, beings will talk about what will be done by
me in the battle. O Krishna! Today, my arrows without barbs will convey Karna to the land of the dead. They will
be released and shot from Gandiva and dispatched by my arms. Today, King Dhritarashtra will curse his intelligence, as a result of which, he instated Duryodhana in the kingdom, though he did not deserve the kingdom. O
mighty-armed one! Today, Dhritarashtra will be deprived of his kingdom, his happiness, his prosperity, his kingdom, his city and his sons. Today, King Duryodhana will lose all hope of remaining alive. O Krishna! Karna will
be slain. I am telling you this truthfully. On seeing Karna mangled by my arrows, the lord of men[Duryodhana.] will remember the words that you had spoken about peace. O Krishna! Today let Soubala know that my arrows are dice, Gan-
diva is the box used to throw them and my chariot the spread on which the game is played. In a battle, the son of a
suta thinks that there is no other man who is equal to him on earth. Let the earth drink his blood today. Released
from Gandiva, they[The arrows.] will grant Karna the supreme objective. Today, Radheya will repent the words that he
spoke to Panchali. In the midst of the assembly hall, he spoke cruel words and cast aspersions on the Pandavas.
They were described as sterile sesamum seeds then[In Section 27 (Volume 2), on the occasion of the gambling match.], but will turn out to be sesamum today, when Vaikartana
Karna, the evil-souled son of a suta, has been killed. He said, "I will save you[Duryodhana.] from fear about the sons of Pandu." My sharp arrows will render his words false. He said, "I will kill all the Pandavas and their sons." While all
the archers look on, I will kill that Karna today. Resorting to his valour, the great-minded[This great-minded is to be interpreted in the sense of insolent, that is,
this is what Duryodhana thought of himself.] son of Dhritarashtra,
evil-souled and evil in his intelligence, always disregarded us. O Madhusudana! I will kill that Radheya Karna today. O Krishna! When Karna has been killed today, the sons of Dhritarashtra and the kings will be terrified and run
away in different directions, like deer frightened of a lion. King Duryodhana will see the earth, with Karna killed
by me in the battle today, with his sons and his well-wishers. O Krishna! On seeing that Karna has been killed,
Dhritarashtra's intolerant son will know me to be the foremost among all archers in a battle. O Krishna! Today, I
will repay the debt I owe to all wielders of the bow, to my anger, to the Kurus, to my arrows and to Gandiva. Today, I will free myself of the sorrow I have borne for thirteen years. O Krishna! I will kill Karna in the battle, like
Maghavan against Shambara[Shambara was the name of a demon killed by Indra.]. Today, when Karna has been slain in the battle, the Somaka maharathas, who
wish to serve their friends in the battle, will think that their task has been accomplished. O Madhava! I do not
know whether Shini's descendant will be more delighted at Karna having been killed, or at the prospect of victory.
In the battle, I will kill Karna and his maharatha son and bring delight to Bhima, the twins and Satyaki. O Madhava! Having slain Karna in the great battle today, I will free myself of the debt I owe to Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi
and the Panchalas. The wrathful Dhananjaya will be seen in the battle today, fighting with the Kouravas in the encounter and bringing down the son of a suta. In your presence, let me again indulge in self-praise. In the world,
there is no one who is my equal in knowledge of dhanurveda. Where is the person who is my equal in valour? Is
there anyone else who is as forgiving as me? There is no one else who is my equal in anger. With the bow in my
hand and resorting to the strength of my arms, I can defeat the gods, the asuras and all the beings united together.
Know that my manliness is supreme among the best. With the arrows from Gandiva, which are like rays, I alone
will consume all the Kurus, Bahlikas and Kashis, with large numbers of their followers, like the fire burning dead
wood at the end of winter. The arrows have left marks on my palms. An arrow is affixed to the left of the bow. The
soles of my feet have the marks of a chariot and a standard. When someone like me advances into a battle, he cannot be vanquished.'" '


