'Sanjaya said, "O great king! Duryodhana advanced behind those bulls among men, Partha and Varshneya, who
had already penetrated. The Pandavas, together with the Somakas, emitted a mighty roar and swiftly rushed against
Drona. The battle commenced between the Panchalas and the Kurus at the mouth of the vyuha and it was extraordinary. It was extremely terrible and tumultuous and made the body hair stand up. O king! The likes of that
encounter had not been seen, nor heard of. O lord of the earth! The battle commenced when the sun was at the
midpoint. With Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, the Parthas, who were skilled in striking, arranged themselves
into a battle formation and enveloped all of Drona's soldiers with a shower of arrows. We had Drona, supreme
among the wielders of all weapons, at the forefront and showered down arrows on the Parthas, with Parshata at the
forefront. The heads of the two armies, adorned by chariots, were beautiful and dazzling. They looked like giant
clouds at the end of the winter season, driven towards each other by opposing winds. Those two large armies encountered and clashed against each other with the greatest of forces. It was like the rivers Ganga and Yamuna,
overflowing with water during the monsoon. Many different kinds of weapons were the winds. There were large
numbers of elephants, horses and chariots. In that battle, great and fierce clouds were like giant clouds tinged with
lightning. Thousands of currents of arrows were released from the wind that was Bharadvaja's son. They seemed
to pour down and pacify the immensely fierce fire that was created by the Pandu soldiers. The supreme of brahmanas agitated the Pandava soldiers, like the ocean at the end of the summer, when it is agitated by a fierce and gigantic storm. They made every endeavour to advance against Drona. They were like a strong wind that seeks to
shatter a large embankment. But they were restrained by Drona, like a mountain repulsing a torrent of water. In
that battle, the Pandavas, the Panchalas and the Kekayas were enraged. There were other kings too, who surrounded them from all sides. In that battle, those immensely strong and brave ones countered the Panchalas.

'"In that battle, Parshata, tiger among men, together with the Pandavas, repeatedly struck Drona, wishing to penetrate the enemy forces. Drona showered arrows on Parshata and he brought down a shower in return. Dhrishtadyumna brought down a shower of arrows. The swords were like winds at the forefront and there were lances,
spears and scimitars. The bowstrings were like lightning and Dhrishtadyumna was like the slayer of Bala[Indra.]. He
showered down a torrent of arrows in all the directions. He killed the best of rathas and horses and enveloped the
army. He prevented Drona from following the paths that the chariots of the Pandavas traversed. Parshata afflicted
Drona with his arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Drona made every endeavour in the battle. Having
encountered Dhrishtadyumna, his army was divided into three parts. One of these retreated towards Bhoja and another towards Jalasandha[There is some inconsistency about who this Jalasandha was. Duryodhana had a brother named Jalasandha. But
this must be a different Jalasandha, because he was later killed by Satyaki, and not by Bhima. In all probability,
this Jalasandha was from Magadha, and was Jarasandha's son. Jarasandha's eldest son, Sahadeva, sided with the
Pandavas. But the younger brother, Jalasandha, sided with the Kouravas.]. The last one was slaughtered by the Pandavas and went towards Drona. Drona,
supreme among rathas, tried to unite his forces. But maharatha Dhrishtadyumna routed and separated them. Divided into three parts, the army of the sons of Dhritarashtra was slaughtered by the Pandus and the Srinjayas. They
were like unprotected animals[Implying cattle.] in the forest, when attacked by many predators. Confounded by Dhrishtadyumna,
it was as if the warriors were devoured by Death. In that tumultuous battle, that is what people thought. The kingdom of a bad king is devastated by famine, disease and thieves. That is the way your army was shattered and routed by the Pandavas. Because of the rays of the sun on shattered weapons and armour and because of the dust raised
by the soldiers, the eyes were afflicted. Divided into three, the soldiers were slaughtered by the Pandavas.

'"Drona became intolerant and killed the Panchalas with his arrows. While he crushed those arrays and killed
them with arrows, Drona assumed the form of the blazing fire at the time of destruction. O lord of the earth! In that
battle, with only a single arrow, the maharatha pierced chariots, elephants, horses and foot soldiers. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! In the battle, there was not a single one among the soldiers of the Pandavas who could
withstand the sharp arrows that were released from Drona's bow. They were scorched by the sun and consumed by
Drona's arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Parshata's soldiers began to wander around there. In that
fashion, Parshata was like Death among your forces. He blazed everywhere, like a forest fire amidst dry wood. The
soldiers were killed by the arrows of Drona and Parshata. But those soldiers were ready to give up their lives and
fought to the best of their capacity. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O great king! Whether in your army, or that
of the enemy, there was not a single one who abandoned the fight out of fear.

'"The brothers Vivimshati, Chitrasena and maharatha Vikarna surrounded Kounteya Bhimasena from all sides.
Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti and the valiant Kshemadhurti-these three followed your three sons[Vivimshati, Chitrasena and Vikarna.]. The maharatha and energetic King Bahlika, born in a noble lineage, with his soldiers and his advisers, countered Droupadi's sons. Shaibya, the king of Govasana, with a thousand supreme warriors, countered the valiant son of Kashi.
Ajatashatru Kounteya was like a flaming fire and King Shalya, the lord of Madra, repulsed the king[Yudhishthira.]. The brave
and intolerant Duhshasana, together with his own soldiers, advanced and fought against Satyaki, supreme among
rathas. I armoured myself and with my soldiers and four hundred great archers, countered Chekitana[This is strange, because it suggests that Sanjaya himself took part in the battle and it doesn't sound right.]. Shakuni,
with seven hundred warriors from Gandhara who were armed with bows, lances, arrows and swords, countered
Madri's son[Meaning Sahadeva.]. The great archers, Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti, were prepared to give up their lives for the
sake of their friend and raised their weapons in battle, countering Virata, the lord of Matysa. The valiant Bahlika
made efforts to counter the unvanquished and powerful Shikhandi, the son of Yajnasena. Those from Avanti and
Souvira, together with the cruel Prabhadrakas countered the angry Dhrishtadyumna from Panchala. The brave rakshasa Ghatotkacha was cruel and was advancing to fight. Swiftly and angrily, Alayudha rushed against him in the
battle. Alambusa, the king of the rakshasas, adopted a fearsome form and was repulsed by maharatha Kuntibhoja,
with a large body of soldiers. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Saindhava remained stationed behind all the
soldiers. He was protected by the rathas who were supreme archers, Kripa and the others. O king! Saindhava's
chariot wheels were protected by two great ones-Drona's son to the left and the son of the suta to the right. His
rear was protected by Kripa, Vrishasena, Shala and the invincible Shalya, with Somadatta's son at the forefront.
They knew about policy and were great archers. All of them were skilled in fighting. Having made arrangements to
protect Saindhava, they[The Kouravas.] got ready to fight."'


'Sanjaya said, "O king! Listen. I will describe exactly the wonderful battle that commenced between the Kurus and
the Pandavas. Bharadvaja's son was stationed at the mouth of the vyuha. In that battle, the Parthas approached and
fought, seeking to penetrate Drona's force. Drona himself, and the soldiers, sought to protect the vyuha. They
fought against the Parthas in that battle, desiring great fame. Desiring the welfare of your son, Vinda and Anuvinda
from Avanti angrily struck Virata with ten arrows. O great king! While those two valiant ones and their followers
were stationed in battle, Virata bravely advanced against them and fought with them. The battle between them was
terrible and blood flowed like water. It was as if a lion and two foremost elephants with shattered temples had met
in the forest. Bahlika prided himself in the battle and Yajnasena's immensely powerful son[Shikhandi.] struck him with
sharp and terrible arrows that were capable of penetrating the inner organs. Bahlika became extremely angry and
used nine gold-tufted arrows with drooping tufts, which had been sharpened on stone, to strike Yajnasena's son.
The encounter between them was terrible and there was a profusion of arrows and lances. It generated fear among
cowards and increased the delight of the brave. The arrows released by those two covered the sky and the directions and enveloped everything, so that nothing could be seen. In the battle, together with his soldiers, Shaibya
from Govasana fought against the maharatha who was the son of Kashi. It was like one elephant against another
elephant. In the battle, the enraged King Bahlika fought against Droupadi's maharatha sons and this was as beautiful as the mind battling against the five senses. They[Droupadi's sons.], supreme among beings, fought fiercely and showered arrows in every direction, like the senses fighting for possession of the body. Your son, Duhshasana, struck Varshneya Satyaki with nine sharp arrows that had drooping tufts. Having been thus grievously struck by that great
archer, the archer Satyaki, for whom truth was his valour, quickly lost his senses somewhat. But having regained
his composure, Varshneya swiftly pierced your maharatha son with ten arrows that were shafted with the feathers
of herons. O king! They pierced each other firmly with arrows and the wounded in the battle, were dazzling, like
blossoming kimshukas. The angry Alambusa was afflicted by Kuntibhoja's arrows, which found their mark. He
was as beautiful as a flowering kimshuka. The rakshasa pierced Kuntibhoja with many iron arrows. At the forefront of your army, he then roared loudly. Those two brave ones fought against each other in that battle. To all the
beings, they seemed to be like Shakra and Jambha in ancient times[Jambha was a famous asura. He is sometimes described as having been killed by Indra, and sometimes described as having been killed by Vishnu.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The
sons of Madri were angry and violent against Shakuni in the battle, since he had caused the enmity earlier. In the
battle, they afflicted him with arrows.

'"O great king! That was the reason behind the destruction of men[This seems to be a reference to the injuries caused by Shakuni.]. It was created by you, extended by Karna
and maintained by your sons. O king! That fire of rage[On the part of the Pandavas.] has now arisen and is consuming the entire earth. Because of the arrows of the sons of Pandu[Nakula and Sahadeva.], Shakuni was forced to retreat. He was unable to exhibit his valour in
battle and did not know what to do. On seeing that he was retreating, Madri's maharatha sons again showered
down arrows on him, like clouds raining down on a large mountain. He was struck by many arrows with drooping
tufts. Using his swift horses, Soubala fled towards Drona's array. Ghatotkacha rushed against the brave rakshasa
Alayudha. But in that battle, he used only a medium violence and force[Suggesting that though Ghatotkacha was capable of more, he did not need it against Alayudha.]. O great king! The wonderful battle between the two was like the battle that had taken place in earlier times between Rama and Ravana. In the battle,
King Yudhishthira pierced the king of Madra with five hundred arrows and again pierced him with another seven.
O king! An extraordinary battle raged between them. It was like the great battle that had taken place in earlier
times between Shambara and the king of the immortals[There were several asuras named Shambara. One of these was killed by Indra.]. Your sons, Vivimshati, Chitrasena and Vikarna, were
surrounded by a large army and fought against Bhimasena."'


'Sanjaya said, "The battle commenced and it made the body hair stand up. The Kouravas were divided into three
and the Pandavas rushed against them. Bhimasena rushed against the mighty-armed Jalasandha and Yudhishthira
and his soldiers attacked Kritavarma in the battle. O great king! Dhrishtadyumna showered down arrows that were
as dazzling as the rays of the sun and attacked Drona in the battle. A battle commenced between all the spirited
archers, between the Kurus and the Somakas, who were angry with each other. There was the destruction of beings
and it gave rise to great terror. The soldiers were engaged in duels and fought without any fear. The powerful
Drona fought with the powerful son of Panchala. He[Drona.] showered down a torrent of arrows and it was extraordinary. In every direction, they caused destruction, like in a forest of lotuses[The lotuses are being compared to the heads of men.]. Drona and Panchala severed
the heads of many brave men from the arrays and they were strewn around everywhere. There were also garments,
ornaments, arms, standards, armour and weapons. They were golden and colourful and were smeared with blood.
Thus smeared, they looked like masses of clouds, tinged with lightning. The arrows brought down elephants, horses and men in that battle. The maharathas released these from bows that were as long as palm trees. In that clash
between the brave and great-souled ones, swords, shields, bows, heads and armour were strewn around. O great
king! In every direction, in that supreme carnage, many headless torsos were seen to arise. O venerable one! Vultures, herons, wild crows, hawks, crows, jackals and large numbers of many other carnivorous beasts were seen. O
king! They fed on the flesh and drank the blood. They dragged them[The dead bodies.] by the hair and got at the marrow in many
ways. They tugged at the bodies and the severed limbs. Large numbers of heads of men, horses and elephants were
there. The men were skilled in the use of weapons. They were trained in war and were accomplished. They wielded arrows and desired victory in that battle. They fought fiercely there. In that battle, many on your side displayed
many beautiful motions of fighting with swords, scimitars, javelins, spikes, spears, lances and battleaxes. There
were those who raised clubs, maces and other weapons in their arms. Men angrily fought and killed each other
with their bare arms. Rathas fought against rathas, horse-riders against horse-riders, elephants against supreme elephants and infantry against infantry. Some were excited and crazily attacked each other, as if they were roaming
around in an arena[This is clearly a reference to the elephants.]. They shrieked and killed each other in the battle.

'"O lord of the earth! Thus did the battle rage, without any fear. Dhrishtadyumna's horses got mixed up with
those of Drona's. Those horses were beautiful and well trained and possessed the speed of the wind. They possessed the complexion of pigeons and were red like blood[Dhrishtadyumna's horses were white, while Drona's were red.]. O king! Those horses got mixed up in the battle and
were as beautiful as clouds tinged with lightning. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The brave Dhrishtadyumna
saw that Drona was near. He discarded his bow and grasped a sword and a shield. Parshata, the destroyer of enemy
heroes, wished to perform an extremely difficult feat. With great strength, he approached Drona's chariot. He stationed himself on the middle of the yoke and sometimes on the joints of the yoke. He slew half of those horses and
was honoured by the soldiers. With the sword in his hand, he roamed around amidst those red horses. Drona could
not detect a weakness in him and it was extraordinary. He was like a hawk descending in the forest, in search of
some flesh. Thus did he venture forth, wishing to kill Drona. Drona released a hundred arrows to cut off the shield,
which was decorated with the mark of a hundred moons. He then severed the sword of Drupada's son with ten arrows. The powerful one used sixty-four arrows to kill his horses. With two broad-headed arrows, he severed his
standard and his umbrella and killed the charioteers who guarded his flanks[The parshnis.]. He stretched his bow back to his
ears, like the wielder of the vajra releasing the vajra and swiftly affixed a supreme arrow that would have caused
death. However, Satyaki severed that arrow with fourteen arrows. He rescued Dhrishtadyumna, as he was about to
be devoured by the preceptor's mouth. O venerable one! The lion among men had grasped him, like a deer grasped
by a lion. But the bull among the Shini lineage freed Panchala from Drona. On seeing that Satyaki had rescued
Panchala in that great battle, Drona swiftly shot twenty-six arrows at him. While Drona was devouring the Srinjayas, Shini's grandson pierced him back in the chest with twenty-six sharp arrows. All the Panchala rathas were
desirous of victory. They swiftly withdrew Dhristadyumna and resorted to Satvata, as he attacked Drona."'


