Vaishampayana said, 'When the mighty-armed Keshava heard these words of Bhima, which were without precedence in terms of their mildness, he laughed. The mountains seemed to have become light. The fire seemed to have
become cold. That is what Rama's younger brother, Shouri, the wielder of the Sharnga bow, thought[Rama is Balarama. Shouri is Krishna's name.]. Vrikodara
Bhimasena was seated, overcome with compassion. To incite him, like a wind fanning the fire, he said, "O Bhimasena! On other occasions, you have advocated war. You have desired to suppress the cruel sons of Dhritarashtra,
who find delight in murders. O scorcher of enemies! You do not sleep. You lie down and remain awake, with your
face downwards. You have always spoken terrible, violent and harsh words. When you sigh, your breath burns like
the fire. O Bhima! Your mind is not at peace, like a fire with smoke. You lie down alone and groan, like a weak
person unable to bear a load. People who do not know the reason think that you are mad. O Bhima! You are like a
roaming elephant, which uproots trees, groans and stamps down on the ground with its feet. You find no pleasure
in the company of people. O Pandava! You stay away from them. Whether it is night or day, you do not welcome
anyone. You suddenly smile, or weep because of a mysterious reason. You are sometimes seated, resting your head
on your thighs. Or you are seen, sometimes frowning, or licking your lips. O Bhima! All this is because you are
angry. 'As certainly as the sun rises in the east with its light, as certainly as it sets in the west, circling the pole star
with its rays, thus do I swear and there will be no deviation from my vow. I will attack the intolerant Duryodhana
and kill him with a club.' This is what you swore on your club earlier, in the midst of your brothers. O scorcher of
enemies! Is it the same mind that now turns towards pacification? Now that the time for war has arrived, those who
wished war are turning away. O Bhima! Are you frightened? O Partha! Or is it that you have seen portents, when
you are asleep or when you are awake, and those make you turn towards peace? You do not show any manliness in
you. You are like a eunuch. You have been overcome by cowardice. That is the reason your mind has swerved.
Your heart trembles and your mind is full of despair. Your thighs are paralysed. That is the reason you want peace.
O Partha! The minds of mortal men are inconstant and fickle, like the kernel of a shalmali tree that is swayed by
the wind. This distorted intelligence is as rare in you as human speech is in cows. The minds of the sons of Pandu
will be immersed, like a boat in water. That Bhimasena should speak words like these, is as extraordinary to me as
mountains moving around. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Look back at your own deeds and the lineage into
which you have been born. Arise! Do not yield to despair. O brave one! Be steady. O scorcher of enemies! This
lassitude is not like you. A kshatriya does not obtain that which he does not seize through his energy."'


Vaishampayana said, 'When Vasudeva spoke to him in this way, the one who was always angry and intolerant,
controlled himself like a well-trained horse and instantly replied, "O Achyuta! You have not completely understood what I wish to do. Truth is my valour and I am delighted at the prospect of war. O Dasharha! Because you
have lived with me for a long time, you know my spirit. Or is it that you do not know me at all, like one swimming
in a lake without a boat? Is that the reason you are censuring me with words that are off the mark? O Madhava!
How can someone who knows me, Bhimasena, speak in the perverse way that you have chosen to do? O descendant of the Vrishni lineage! Therefore, let me tell you a few words about my own manliness and my strength.
These are not equalled by anyone else. It is always the case that an arya should not praise himself. But because you
have excessively reviled me, I will tell you about my own strength. O Krishna! Behold. This is earth and that is
heaven, from which, all beings and all immobile objects have originated. It is the mother of everything. If these
two[Heaven and earth.] suddenly collide in anger, like mountains, I will hold them apart with my arms, with all their mobile and immobile objects. Behold the space between my two arms. They are like giant clubs. I do not see a man who can escape after having been grasped by them. The Himalaya mountains, the oceans and the wielder of the vajra and the
killer of Bala himself-even if all three try together, they cannot free one whom I have grasped with my strength. I
call kill all the kshatriyas who have assembled for the war, wishing to kill the Pandavas. I can fling them down on
the ground and trample them with my feet. O Achutya! You are not unfamiliar with my valour and the way in
which I defeated all the kings and brought them under my control. O Janardana! If it is the case that you do not
know me, with radiance like that of the rising sun, you will find out when you see me in the fierce turmoil of battle.
O unblemished one! Why have you pierced me with harsh words, like pricking a boil with a needle? I have told
you what I think I am. But know that I am greater than that. You will see me when the turmoil of battle begins.
You will see elephants, charioteers and riders destroyed by me. You and the worlds will see me angrily kill men
and bulls among the kshatriyas, destroying the supreme among the best. My marrow has not wasted away and my
mind is not trembling. Even if all the worlds are enraged, I have no fear. O Madhusudana! It is only because of
goodness of heart that I have shown compassion and have patiently endured all the hardships, so that the Bharatas
are not annihilated because of us."'


'Bhagavan said, "To determine your intentions, I spoke to you out of affection, not to belittle you, or to display my
learning, or out of anger, or because I doubted you. I know your greatness of spirit. I know the strength you possess. I know your deeds and I am not trying to find fault with you. O Pandava! The qualities I see in you are a
thousand times more than those you see yourself. You have been born in a lineage that is worshipped by all the
kings. You are surrounded by relatives and well-wishers. O Bhima! That is the kind of person you are. O Vrikodara! There are those who question dharma and seeking to draw a distinction between destiny and human endeavour, fail to arrive at a conclusion. The same reasons that lead a man to succeed also bring about his failure. The
consequences of human action are always uncertain. Even wise ones, competent to judge matters, may decide in
one way, though the consequences are the opposite. This is like the changing direction of the wind in the sky. The
deeds performed by a man may be well thought out, well advised and conducted well. But destiny may act in a
contrary way. Then again, human endeavour can counter what destiny has done, or not done. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! This is like cold and heat, hunger and thirst[The sense being that cold and heat, hunger and thirst, can be countered through human endeavour.]. And yet again, a man may undertake deeds that are
thought out well and these are not countered by destiny. These are the signs of destiny and human endeavour[There are three types-destiny countering human endeavour, human endeavour countering destiny and destiny
and human endeavour acting together.]. O
Pandava! The world cannot sustain itself through anything other than action. A man who knows this will act, regardless of the fruits, determined by both endeavour and destiny. He who possesses this intelligence will engage in
his own deeds. He will not suffer from failure, or exult at success. O Bhimasena! This is all that I meant to say. We
cannot be certain of complete success in a battle with the Kurus. Since destiny constantly changes, one should not
let go of the reins. Nor should one fall prey to despair and exhaustion. That is all that I meant to say.

'"O Pandava! I will go to Dhritarashtra tomorrow morning. I will try to bring about peace without sacrificing
your interests. If I succeed in obtaining peace, I will attain infinite fame. Your desires will be satisfied and their
supreme welfare will be ensured. But if the Kurus stick to their resolution and do not listen to my words, there will
be war and terrible deeds will ensue. O Bhimasena! In that war the burden will be on you. Arjuna will have the responsibility of guiding the chariot and the others will be dragged along. I will be Bibhatsu's charioteer in that war.
That is what Arjuna desires, because I do not myself wish to fight. O Vrikodara! It was because I had some doubt
about your intentions that I provoked you and addressed you as an eunuch. It was to ignite your energy."'


