Vaishampayana said, 'The extremely energetic and aged king, the extender of the Kuru lineage, could not see
anything unpleasant in Pandu's descendant. The great-souled Pandava always followed virtuous conduct and
King Dhritarashtra, Ambika's son, was pleased with him. Gandhari, Subala's daughter, forgot all sorrow on account of her sons. She was always pleased with them, as if they were her own sons. O extender of the Kuru lineage! Kouravya always acted in an agreeable way towards the king who was Vichitravirya's son and never did
anything disagreeable. O great king! Whatever King Dhritarashtra said that he wanted done and whatever the illustrious Gandhari desired, small or large, was done by the Pandava king, the bearer of burdens. The destroyer of enemy heroes honoured those words and acted in accordance with those wishes. Therefore, the king was pleased at
this conduct and was tormented by memories of his evil-minded son. The king always arose at dawn, meditated
and purified himself. He then blessed the sons of Pandu that they might be invincible in battle. As instructed by
brahmanas, he offered oblations into the fire. The king pronounced benedictions that the sons of Pandu might live
for a long time. The king had never obtained such great delight from his own sons, nothing like the joy the king
got from the sons of Pandu. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The state of brahmanas, the aged, kshatriyas and
large numbers of vaishyas and shudras was extremely agreeable. Following the king[Dhritarashtra.], the king acted so that his
heart no longer bore the evil acts that the sons of Dhritarashtra had done towards him earlier. If a man did anything
unpleasant towards Ambika's son, the intelligent Kounteya acted against him. Scared of Yudhishthira, no man said
anything  about  the  wicked  deeds  done  by  King  Dhritarashtra  or  Duryodhana.  O  slayer  of  enemies!  The Indra
among men[Dhritarashtra.], Gandhari and Vidura were pleased with Ajatashatru's fortitude and purity, but not with Bhima. Bhi-
ma did follow the instructions of the king, Dharma's son. However, he became cheerless whenever he saw Dhritarashtra. Kouravya[Bhima.] saw that Dharma's son followed the extremely intelligent king and also followed him, but his
heart was not in it.'


Vaishampayana said, 'O king! The people did not see anything missing in the affection that King Yudhishthira
and Duryodhana's father displayed towards each other. O king! However, whenever the Kourava king remembered his foolish son, the king couldn't help mentally censuring Bhima. O Indra among kings! In that way, Bhimasena could never tolerate King Dhritarashtra and caused the aged one displeasure. Vrikodara didn't reveal these
disagreeable acts. Instead, he used deceitful men to ignore his commands. One day, in the midst of his well-wishers, Bhima intolerantly slapped his palms, in Dhritarashtra and Gandhari's hearing. He remembered his enemy,
Duryodhana, and Karna and Duhshasana. Extremely enraged, Bhima spoke these harsh words. "This aged king's
sons were skilled in the use of all weapons. However, my arms are like clubs and I used these to kill them and convey them to the world hereafter. My arms are said to be like clubs and are impossible to withstand. The sons of
Dhritarashtra were embraced by these and were destroyed. That is the reason these arms should be smeared with
sandalwood paste and revered. It is because of these that Duryodhana and his sons and relatives have been destroyed." Vrikodara spoke many other similar words and they were like stakes. Hearing these, the king was distressed. The intelligent queen, Gandhari, knew about the progress of time and knew about all kinds of dharma. Despite hearing this, she paid no attention. However, after fifteen years had elapsed, the king was extremely affected
by similar words from Bhima and they were like arrows. The king became distressed. King Yudhishthira, Kunti's
son, didn't know this, nor did the one with the white horses[Arjuna.], Kunti, the illustrious Droupadi or Madri's sons.
They did not know Bhima's mind, or that he was happy at this. They sought to protect the king and never spoke
anything that was disagreeable. After this, Dhritarashtra summoned his well-wishers and in a voice choking with
tears, spoke these purposeful and grave words.'


