Yudhishthira said, "O foremost among the Kuru lineage! Tell us about the different kinds of sons who are born
in separate varnas. What kinds of sons are these? Who are they? Whose sons are they? We have heard that
there have been many disagreements about these sons. O king! We are confused about this. You should sever our
doubts."

'Bhishma replied, "Know that an anantaraja son is like one's own self[The term anantaraja son is used for a brahmana, kshatriya or vaishya father, when the mother is of the same
varna, or is only one varna below.]. Know that a son who has been obtained through niyukta is called prasritaja[Niyukta is when someone other than the husband, for specific reasons, is invited to have a son through the wife.]. When a husband unites with his wife, despite knowing that she has
gone astray, the son obtained in this fashion is known as vadhyuda. There are six kinds of sons known as apadhvamsaja and also the one known as kanina[Apadhvamsaja sons are of mixed parentage. An unmarried maiden has a kanina child.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Know that these are the
kinds that have been mentioned."

'Yudhishthira asked, "Who are the six kinds of sons known as apadhvamsaja? Who is the one known as an
apasada?. You should explain the truth about all this to me."

'Bhishma replied, "O Yudhishthira! O  descendant of  the Bharata lineage! The sons  that a brahmana obtains
through the three lower varnas, the sons that a king obtains through the two lower varnas and the sons that a
vaishya obtains through the lower varna are understood to be apadhvamsajas. Now hear about apasadas. Chandala,
vratya and vena-these are seen to be the three kinds of apasadas and are respectively born through a shudra father
and a brahmana, kshatriya or vaishya mother. A vaishya father is seen to have magadha or vamaka sons, depending
respectively on whether the mother is a brahmana or a kshatriya. When a kshatriya father is seen to have a son
through a brahmana mother, the offspring is known as suta. These are said to be apasadas. O lord of men! One is
incapable of falsely asserting that these kinds of sons aren't really sons."

'Yudhishthira asked, "Some say that the son is kshetraja. Others say that he is shukraja[We have deliberately retained the Sanskrit words. Kshetra means field, signifying the mother. Kshetraja means
someone born from the mother. Shukra means semen/seed, signifying the father. Shukraja means someone born
from the father.]. Are both of these the
same? Whom does the son belong to? O grandfather! Tell me this."

'Bhishma replied, "The son is said to be both shukraja[The text uses the word retaja, but retaja and shukraja mean the same thing.] and kshetraja. Listen to me. The sole exception to this
principle is adhyuda[This is a situation where the women become pregnant before marriage and the biological father does not marry
her. In such instances, the son belongs to the mother.]."
'Yudhishthira asked, "We know that the son is shukraja. How can the son become kshetraja? We know about the
one called adhyuda. However, in a violation of an agreement, why does the father abandon him?"

'Bhishma replied, "He may have obtained another son, or there may be some other reason. In any event, ownership does not come from the seed, but from the field. O lord of the earth! The field is the proof. When a person desires to marry for the sake of a son and has a son, that son is his own. O bull among the Bharata lineage! But in
other  cases[When the biological father does not marry the mother.],  the  son  is  said  to  be  kshetraja.  The  son  cannot  conceal  his  biological  traits.  They  can  be
discerned[Even when the mother has married someone else.]. The son is sometimes known as the son of the father who has given him birth, or the one who has
reared him. O Yudhishthira! Therefore, neither the seed, nor the field, is the complete proof."

'Yudhishthira asked, "When is a son regarded as that of the biological father and when is he regarded as the son
of the one who has reared him? O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When is the seed, or the field, taken to be the
proof?"

'Bhishma replied, "A son may be found abandoned on the road by the mother and the father. Unable to find the
mother and the father, someone may rear him. In this case, since he is no one's son, he becomes the son of the person who has reared him. Just as a son obtains the varna of the person who has given him birth, this son obtains the
varna of the person who has reared him."

'Yudhishthira asked, "How are the sacraments[Samskaras.] of such a person performed? Who undertakes them? What
kind of girl should he be married to? O grandfather! Tell me this."

'Bhishma replied, "The person who rears him should himself perform the sacraments. Having been abandoned
by the mother and the father, it is his varna that the son has adopted. O undecaying one! The sacraments should be
performed in accordance with the foster-father's gotra and varna. O Yudhishthira! The maiden bestowed on him
should thus be of the same varna. Such sacraments are performed without knowing the biological mother's gotra
and varna. Kanina and adhyuda are known to be tainted sons. Despite this, it has been determined that sacraments
should be performed for  them. Brahmanas and others should use  the same kinds of  sacraments for  kshetrajas,
apasadas and adhyudas as they would for themselves. The sacred texts of dharma have determined injunctions for
the different varnas. I have recounted all of this. What else do you wish to hear?"'


Yudhishthira asked, "O grandfather! What kind of affection results from seeing someone or dwelling together?
What is the great fortune that is associated with cattle? O grandfather! Tell me this."

'Bhishma replied, "O immensely radiant one! I will tell you an ancient account, about a conversation between
Nahusha and maharshi Chyavana. O bull among the Bharata lineage! In ancient times, maharshi Chyavana, from
the Bhargava lineage, decided to observe an extremely great vow, characterized by residing in water. He destroyed
his pride, anger, joy and sorrow. Firm in his vows, the sage dwelt in water for twelve years. He offered all the creatures there great and auspicious reassurances. To the creatures who lived in the water, the lord was like cool rays.
He purified himself and was like a pillar. He bowed down before the gods. He entered the water at the confluence
of the Ganga and the Yamuna. The currents of the Ganga and the Yamuna flowed with a loud and terrible roar. The
force was as swift as that of the wind, but he received all this on his head. The Ganga and the Yamuna, and the other rivers that followed and flowed into them, passed by the rishi and did not cause him any affliction. The great
sage was like a piece of wood and happily slept inside the water. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Sometimes,
the intelligent one stood upright. The creatures that lived in the water thought that he was agreeable to look at.
Cheerful in their minds, the fish sniffed at him. Thus, a long period of time elapsed. O immensely radiant one! On
one occasion, some fishermen arrived at the spot, with fishing nets in their hands. Those many nishadas had made
up their minds to catch fish. They were brave, strong and broad and were not scared of the water. They arrived at
that spot, determined to cast their nets. O lord of men! O supreme among the Bharata lineage! They tied all their
nets together and readied themselves to catch fish in the water. Desiring to catch fish, those kaivartas[Fishermen.] arrived at
the banks of the Ganga and the Yamuna and covered a part of the water with nets that were joined together. These
nets were made of new strands and covered a large space. They cast this large net at an appropriate place in the
water. With great force, all of them then began to draw the net in from every side. They were cheerful and without
fear and listened to each other. Many fish and other aquatic creatures got enmeshed. Chyavana, descendant of the
Bhrigu lineage, was surrounded by the fish. O great king! As they dragged in the net, as they wished, he too got
enmeshed. His limbs were covered with moss. His beard and matted hair were tawny. Large numbers of conch
shells and other kinds of shells had attached themselves to his body and made it multicoloured. As they dragged in
the net, they saw the one who was accomplished in the Vedas. All those lower classes joined their hands in salutation, bowed their heads and prostrated themselves on the ground. When the net had been dragged in, the fish were
distressed at having been brought in contact with the ground. They were terrified and lamented. The sage saw the
carnage that had been done to the fish. He was overcome by compassion and sighed repeatedly.

'"The nishadas said, 'In our ignorance, we have committed this sin[Of dragging Chyavana up.]. Show us your favours. O great king[Since this is not being addressed to Yudhishthira, this is an inconsistency.]!
What can we do to please you? Tell us.'"

'Bhishma continued, "Chyavana was thus addressed in the midst of the fish and spoke these words. 'Listen with
single-minded attention to my supreme desire now. Whether I have to give up my life, or whether I am sold, I wish
to remain with the fish now. I have dwelt with them for a long time and cannot abandon them now.'

Having been thus addressed, the nishadas trembled in great fear. All their faces were distressed and they went
and told Nahusha what had happened."'


