Sanjaya said, "O king! The Kurus[Meaning the Pandavas here. Kuru was a common ancestor, so the Pandavas could also be referred to as the Kurus.] were driven away by Karna, whose chariot possessed white horses. Using
great arrows, the son of a suta slew the sons of the Panchalas, like a storm dispelling large masses of clouds. With
an anjalika arrow, he brought down Janamejaya's charioteer from his chariot and killed his horses. He enveloped
Shatanika and Sutasoma with broad-headed arrows and severed their bows. In the battle, he pierced Dhrishtadyumna with six arrows and slew the horses that were on his right flank. The son of a suta next killed Satyaki's horses
and also slew Vishoka, the son of Kekaya. When that prince was killed, Ugradhanva, the general of the Kekayas,
attacked him. He used many arrows that were fierce and forceful and severely struck Karna's son, Sushena[However, we have earlier been told that Uttamouja killed Sushena.].
Karna laughed. Using three arrows that were in the shape of a half-moon, he severed his[Ugradhanva's.] arms and head. Having lost his life, he fell down from his chariot, like a decaying shala tree that is struck down with an axe. The horses of the foremost among the Shinis[Satyaki. We don't know how Satyaki's horses were killed.] had been slain. Sushena, the grandson of a suta, enveloped him with sharp
arrows and seemed to be dancing around. However, he was struck by the arrows of Shini's descendant and fell
down. When his son was killed, Karna became senseless with rage and wished to kill Shini's descendant, bull
among men. He said, 'O descendant of Shini's lineage! You have been killed.' He released an arrow that was capable of killing all enemies. Shikhandi severed it with three arrows and struck Karna with three more. Using large
arrows, he[Karna.] severed Shikhandi's bow and standard and then pierced Shikhandi with six fierce arrows. He next
severed the head of Dhrishtadyumna's son. Adhiratha's great-souled son then mangled Sutasoma with an extremely sharp arrow.

' "O lion among men! While that tumultuous battle was going on and Dhrishtadyumna's son had been killed,
Krishna said, 'O Partha! He is eliminating the Panchalas. Go and kill Karna.' Thus addressed, that foremost of
men laughed and advanced swiftly on his chariot towards the chariot of Adhiratha's son. The one with excellent
arms wished to save those who were frightened and were being killed[The Panchalas.] by that leader of rathas. He stretched
Gandiva with a twang that was loud and terrible. He rubbed the bowstring fiercely. He suddenly created darkness
with his arrows and destroyed elephants, horses, chariots and men. Bhimasena, the brave one among the Pandavas,
followed him on his chariot and protected his rear. Those two princes quickly advanced on their chariots towards
Karna, releasing arrows at the enemy.

' "During that time, the son of a suta fought mightily, crushing the Somakas in the battle. He destroyed large
numbers of chariots, horses and elephants and enveloped the directions with his arrows. Uttamouja, Janamejaya,
the enraged Yudhamanyu and Shikhandi united with Parshata[Dhrishtadyumna.]. They roared loudly and mangled Karna with
many arrows. Those five Panchala rathas attacked Vaikartana Karna extremely well, but were incapable of dislodging him from his chariot, just as the senses cannot overpower a patient and self-controlled person. Karna severed
their bows, standards, horses, charioteers, quivers and flags with his arrows and struck each of the five with arrows.
He then roared like a lion. As he struck them and there were the sounds of his bowstring, arrows, palms and the
bow, all beings were distressed. They thought that the earth, with its mountains and trees, was being shattered. His
bow was like Shakra's bow. Using that, Adhiratha's son shot fierce arrows. He was resplendent in the battle, like
the blazing solar disc, surrounded by a garland of rays. He pierced Shikhandi with twelve sharp arrows and the
ratha Uttamouja with six. He pierced Yudhamanyu with three sharp arrows and the sons of Somaka and Prishata
each with three arrows[Janamejaya is the son of Somaka and the son of Prishata (Drupada) is
Dhrishtadyumna.]. O venerable one! In the great battle, those five maharathas were defeated by the son of
a suta. They were rendered immobile by that scorcher of enemies, just as the senses are vanquished by one with a
controlled soul. They were submerged in the ocean that was Karna, like distressed merchants on an ocean. Droupadi's son rescued their maternal uncles[Because these warriors were from Panchala.] with well-prepared chariots, like providing boats on an ocean.

' "The bull among the Shini lineage used his sharp arrows to slice down the many arrows that Karna shot. He
struck Karna with sharp and iron arrows and pierced his eldest son[Vrishasena.] with eight arrows. Kripa, Bhoja[Kritavarma.], your
sons and Karna struck him back with sharp arrows. However, the supreme one amongst the Yadu lineage fought
with them, like the guardians of the directions fighting with the lords of the daityas. His bow roared continuously
and he showered down extremely fierce arrows. Satyaki became invincible, like the midday sun in the autumn sky.
Those rathas[The five warriors from Panchala.] armoured themselves well and again attacked, desiring to protect the foremost one from the Shini
lineage. The rathas from Panchala united in that great battle, like large numbers of Marut surrounding Shakra,
when he was afflicting the enemy. An extremely terrible encounter commenced between them and those on your
side who were engaged in your welfare. It was like an ancient one between gods and asuras and destroyed chariots,
horses and elephants. Afflicted by many types of weapons, chariots, elephants, horses and foot soldiers wandered
around. They struck each other and wavered. They uttered loud wails of lamentation and fell down, deprived of
their lives.

' "At that time, without any fear, your son, the younger brother of the king[Duhshasana.], showered arrows and advanced
against Bhima. Vrikodara spiritedly encountered him, like a lion leaping on a large ruru deer. The battle between
them was superhuman and was like a gambling match, with lives as stakes. They attacked each other fiercely and
angrily, like Shakra and Shambara in earlier times. They severely struck each other with extremely energetic arrows that were capable of ending lives. They mangled each other, like two mighty elephants that are overcome
with sexual desire and seek to indulge in intercourse[That is, they are fighting over the same she-elephant.]. With two kshurapra arrows, Vrikodara severed the bow
and the standard of your son. He struck him in the forehead with an arrow and severed his charioteer's head from
his body. The prince picked up another bow and struck Vrikodara with twelve arrows. He controlled the reins of
the horses himself and again rained down arrows on Bhima." '


Sanjaya said, "Prince Duhshasana accomplished an extremely difficult task in that tumultuous battle.
He severed Bhima's bow with a razor-sharp arrow and pierced his charioteer with six arrows. In an instant, the great-souled one then struck Bhimasena with many excellent arrows. Bhimasena hurled a
fierce club towards him. It struck Duhshasana and flung him a distance of ten bow-lengths away, rendering him like a wounded elephant with shattered temples. He was struck and fell down, trembling. O
Indra among kings! It[The club.] slew his horses and charioteer and having crushed the horses and the chariot,
fell down. His armour, ornaments and garments were destroyed and, completely immobile, he shrieked
in pain. The spirited Bhimasena remembered all the acts of enmity that had been performed by your
sons. He jumped down from the chariot onto the ground and eagerly looked at him. He grasped an extremely sharp sword and placed it against the throat of the trembling one. He tore apart the breast of the
one who had fallen down on the ground and drank the warm blood. He repeatedly savoured the taste.
Then, excessively angry, he glanced at him and spoke these words. 'This is superior to mother's milk,
honey, clarified butter, well-prepared liquor, celestial water and skimmed and churned milk. It is my
view today, that the blood of my enemies is tastier than all of these.' He again repeated these cheerful
and eloquent words. Whoever saw Bhimasena in that state then, fell down in distress and in fear. When
the men fell down there, the weapons also fell down from their hands. Others were terrified and
glanced at him with half-open eyes, uttering loud lamentations of woe. All those who saw Bhima drink
Duhshasana's blood were terrified and miserable and ran away in different directions. They said, 'This
one is not human.' In the hearing of the brave ones in the world, he[Bhima.] spoke these words. 'O worst of
men! I am drinking the blood from your throat. In great rage, you repeatedly called us cattle[At the time of the gambling match, described in Section 27 (Volume 2).]. When
I was asleep in Pramanakoti, you fed me poison and made me suffer the hardship of being bitten by
serpents[The Kouravas tried to poison Bhima in Pramanakoti. This has been described in Section 7 (Volume 1).]. You burnt us down in the house of lac. You robbed our kingdom through a gambling
match and made us dwell in the woods. We were robbed of the happiness in our homes and suffered
from weapons in battle. There were many other hardships and we have never known any joy. Dhritarashtra and his son have always acted maliciously towards us.' O king! O great king! Having spoken
these words, Vrikodara, who had obtained victory, again spoke these words to Keshava and Arjuna. 'O
brave ones! I had taken a vow about Duhshasana in the battle[At the time of the gambling match, Bhima took a pledge that he would
kill Duhshasana in the battle and drink his blood.]. I have accomplished that today. I
will accomplish the second vow now too, that of killing Duryodhana like a sacrificial animal. In the
presence of the Kouravas, I will press down the evil-souled one's head with my foot and obtain peace.'

Having spoken these words, he cheerfully roared, blood streaming from his body. The extremely powerful and great-souled one danced, like the one with one thousand eyes[Indra has one thousand eyes.] after Vritra's death." '


Sanjaya said, "O king! Ten of your sons were brave and maharathas. They did not run away from the field of battle. When Duhshasana was slain, those immensely valiant ones were overcome with great rage and showered Bhi-
ma with arrows. Kavachi, Nishangi, Pashi, Dandadhara, Dhanurdhara, Alolupa, Shala, Sangha, Vatavega and Suvarchasa united and attacked together, overcome with grief on account of their brother. They enveloped the
mighty-armed Bhimasena with arrows. He was restrained in every direction by the arrows of those maharathas.
Bhima's eyes became red with rage and he looked like the wrathful Destroyer himself. Using ten immensely forceful broad-headed and sharp arrows that were gold-tufted and decorated with gold, Partha conveyed those ten to
Yama's eternal abode. When those brave ones were killed, your soldiers ran away, afflicted by fear of the Pandavas, while the son of a suta looked on.

' "O great king! On witnessing Bhima's valour, like Yama amongst beings, Karna entered the great battle. O destroyer of enemies! On discerning what was going on in his mind, Shalya, the ornament of an assembly, realized
that the time was right and spoke these words to Karna. 'O Radheya! Do not be distressed. This is not deserving of
you. These kings are being driven away, afflicted by their fear of Bhimasena. Overcome with misery and grief on
account of his brother, Duryodhana is numb. The great-souled one has drunk Duhshasana's blood. His mind is full
of sorrow, and grief has robbed him of his senses. O Karna! Kripa and the others and the remaining brothers are
tending to Duryodhana and have surrounded him from all directions. The brave Pandavas are unwavering in their
aim. With Dhananjaya at the forefront, they are advancing towards you, stationing themselves in the battle. O tiger
among men! Base yourself on your great manliness. Devoting yourself to the dharma of kshatriyas, fight against
Dhananjaya. Dhritarashtra's son has placed the entire burden on you. O mighty-armed one! Shoulder it, to the best
of your capacity and the best of your strength. If you are victorious, you will obtain great fame. If you are defeated,
heaven is certain. O Radheya! The wrathful Vrishasena is your son. Since you are confused, he is advancing towards the Pandavas.' Hearing the words of the infinitely energetic Shalya, he came to the human conclusion that
there was nothing to do but to base oneself well in the battle.

' "The angry Vrishasena was stationed on his chariot and wishing to slay the enemy, advanced against Vrikodara, who was like Yama with a staff in his hand, and with a club in his hand, was uprooting those on your side.
Nakula, foremost among brave ones, was full of anger and attacked this enemy with arrows. He cheerfully attacked Karna's son in the battle, like Jishnu and Maghavan wishing to kill Jambha[Jambha was a demon killed by Vishnu and Indra.]. Using a razor-sharp arrow,
the brave Nakula severed his standard, which had the complexion of a conch shell and sparkled like crystal. Karna's son possessed a colourful bow that was adorned with golden cloth. He severed this with a broad-headed arrow. Extremely quickly, Karna's son picked up another bow and pierced Pandava. Wishing to show his respect to
Duhshasana, who had lost his life, the one who knew about great weapons, then struck Nakula with divine and
great weapons. The great-souled Nakula was enraged and pierced him back with arrows that were like giant meteors. Karna's son was skilled in the use of weapons and pierced Nakula back with celestial weapons. O king! Karna's son slew all of Nakula's horses with supreme weapons. They were swift, delicate and pure, ornamented with
gold, and were of the vanayu breed. When the horses were slain, he descended from his chariot and picked up a
beautiful shield that was marked with the signs of eight moons. He also picked up a sword that sparkled like the
sky. With these, he leapt up and roamed around, like a bird. He executed many wonderful motions in the air and
sliced down the best of men, horses and elephants. They were struck by that sword and fell down on the ground,
like animals at an ashvamedha sacrifice, struck by the executioner. There were two thousand warriors who found
delight in battle. They were well trained and came from many different countries. They never missed their objective. The upper parts of their bodies were smeared with sandalwood paste. Quickly and single-handedly, Nakula
brought them down. While they were falling down, he[Vrishasena.] attacked Nakula and pierced him from every direction
with arrows. Nakula was thus struck by those arrows and angrily pierced the brave one back in turn. Single-handedly, Karna's son struck men, horses, elephants and chariots. He pierced the brave one who seemed to be
sporting[Nakula.] with eighteen arrows and was angrily pierced back in return. Wishing to kill him, Pandu's son, foremost among men, attacked Karna's son in that battle. In the great battle, Karna's son sliced down the shield, which
was decorated with one thousand stars, with his arrows. The sword was extremely sharp, keen at the edges. It had
been unsheathed and was capable of bearing a great load. It was extremely terrible and was being whirled around,
used to sever the bodies of the enemy. It was as fierce in form as a serpent. With six sharp and extremely pointed
arrows, he[Vrishasena.] shattered his enemy's sword. He then struck him again between the breasts with sharp and yellow
arrows and pierced him grievously. Madri's son was tormented by Karna's son. His horses were slain. He jumped
onto Bhimasena's chariot, like a lion leaping onto the summit of a mountain, while Dhananjaya looked on.

' "Nakula's bow and arrows had been severed. He was without a chariot and afflicted by arrows. He had been
mangled by the weapons of Karna's son. On discerning this, the five foremost sons of Drupada, Shini's descendant
as the sixth, and the five sons of Drupada's daughter, all destroyers of enemies, swiftly advanced against those on
your side and devastated the elephants, chariots, men and horses. Those supreme men were cheerful and were on
swift chariots drawn by speedy steeds. Their flags fluttered in the wind. They used hundreds of arrows and other
weapons that resembled the lords of serpents. The foremost of rathas on your side, Hridika's son[Kritavarma.], Kripa,
Drona's son, Duryodhana, Shakuni, Shuka, Vrika, Kratha and Devavridha speedily countered them. They wielded
bows and were on chariots that roared like elephants and clouds. Those best of men countered the eleven brave
ones[Five of Drupada's sons, Satyaki and five of Droupadi's sons.] and used supreme and fierce arrows to strike and repel them.

' "Those on your side were in turn countered by Kunindas who were on elephants that were fierce in force and
were like the summits of mountains, with complexions like that of newly formed clouds. They[The elephants.] had been prepared well, were crazy and were from the Himalaya regions. Accomplished riders who desired to fight were astride
them. The elephants were beautifully covered with nets of gold and looked like clouds tinged with lightning. Using
ten arrows that were completely made out of iron, the son of Kuninda[That is, the son of the king of Kuninda.] severely struck Kripa and his charioteer.
However, slain by the arrows of Sharadvata's son, he fell down on the ground, together with his elephant. The
younger brother of the son of Kuninda then struck, using javelins that were completely made out of iron and were
as radiant as the sun's rays. He hurled these at his[Kripa's.] chariot and roared loudly. But the lord of Gandhara[Shakuni.] severed his head, while he was still roaring. When the Kunindas were slain, the maharathas on your side were delighted. They loudly blew on conch shells obtained from the ocean and with bows and arrows in their hands, attacked
the enemy. An extremely terrible battle commenced again between the Kurus and the Pandus and Srinjayas. Arrows, swords, javelins, scimitars, clubs and battleaxes were fiercely used and men, horses and elephants destroyed.
As they attacked and wounded each other, chariots, horses, elephants and foot soldiers fell down here and there. It
was as if clouds tinged with lightining were stationed in the sky and were dispelled with fierce winds. Bhoja struck
Shatanika, the mighty elephants, the chariots and the infantry on their side. Using his weapons, Kritavarma
brought down the horses and the elephants. At that time, three elephants belonging to the enemy were struck by the
arrows of Drona's son. All of them were ridden by warriors and sported flags. They lost their lives, shrieked and
fell down, like large mountains shattered by the thunder. The third son of the king of Kuninda struck your son[Duryodhana.]
between the breasts with excellent arrows. Your son pierced his body and that of his elephant with sharp arrows.
With the son of the king, that king of elephants fell down, with copious quantities of blood issuing forth. It was as
if, at the onset of the moon, water mixed with red chalk was exuding from a mountain, when it had been struck by
the vajra of Shachi's consort[Indra is Shachi's consort.]. However, though struck, the son of Kuninda ascended another elephant and
brought down Shuka, with his charioteer, horses and chariot. The lord Kratha[The text of the Critical edition confuses between Shuka and Kratha. In other editions, in this description,
Kratha figures consistently.] was afflicted by the arrows and
fell down, like a mountain shattered by thunder. Seated astride an elephant, the invincible ratha from the mountainous regions[The prince of Kuninda.] slew and brought down the lord of Kratha with arrows. He was brought down with his horses,
charioteer and bow, like a giant tree struck by a mighty storm. Vrika used twelve arrows to severely strike the one
who resided in the mountainous regions and was astride his elephant. However, using great speed in the battle, he
brought down Vrika, with his four horses and chariot. But that king of elephants was severely struck and brought
down by Babhru's son, together with its driver. Devavridha's son was also struck, slain and brought down by Sahadeva's son. The elephant of the son of Kuninda was capable of slaying the enemy with its tusks and body. It impetuously rushed towards Shakuni, wishing to kill him. The lord of Gandhara severed its head. Mighty elephants,
horses, rathas and large numbers of infantry on your side were slain by Shatanika. They fell down on the ground,
crushed and immobile, like trees devastated through a storm raised by Suparna[Suparna is Garuda and the storm is raised through his wings. The text uses the word naga, which can only be
translated as tree. This is probably a typo and should read naaga or serpent. Given Garuda, that fits better.]. The son of Kuninda smiled and
shot many sharp arrows at Nakula's son[This entire section is replete with typos and this must be another one of those. Why should the son of Kunin-
da attack Nakula's son? It can only be rationalized, other than a typo, by presuming that some of the Kunindas
also fought on the side of the Kouravas.]. At this, Nakula's son used a razor-sharp arrow to sever his head,
which was like a lotus, from his body.

' "Karna's son pierced Shatanika with three swift arrows and Arjuna with three more. He pierced Bhima with
three arrows, Nakula with seven and Janardana with twelve. On witnessing that superhuman deed, all the Kurus
were delighted and applauded him. But they also knew about Dhananjaya's valour and thought that he[Karna's son, Vrishasena.] was like
an oblation that had been poured into the fire. Kiriti, the slayer of enemy heroes, saw that the best of men[Nakula. The Critical edition excises a shloka where we are told that Vrishasena deprived Nakula of his
horses.] was
without his horses, which had been slain. In the battle, he attacked Vrishasena, who was stationed in front of the
son of a suta. In that great battle, he descended, with thousands of arrows. On seeing him advance, Karna's maharatha son, fierce and foremost among men, also attacked, like Namuchi against Indra in ancient times[Namuchi was a demon killed by Indra.]. The
son of the son of a suta then pierced Partha with many wonderful arrows. The illustrious one roared loudly, like
Namuchi in ancient times, after having pierced Shakra. Vrishasena used fierce arrows to again pierce Partha in his
armpits. He struck Krishna with nine arrows and again struck Partha with ten sharp and fierce arrows. Kiriti became enraged in that field of battle and his forehead furrowed into three lines. The great-souled one shot arrows in
the battle, designed to kill the son of a suta in the battle[Meaning Vrishasena. Son is being used in the extended sense of a grandson.]. Kiriti pierced him violently in the inner organs with
ten arrows. With four razor-sharp arrows, he severed his bow, his arms and his head. He was struck by Partha's arrows and fell down from the chariot onto the ground, deprived of his arms and head. He was like an extremely
large and flowering shala tree, with a lot of leaves, which had been struck by a storm and brought down from the
summit of a mountain. The son of a suta saw that his son had been struck by arrows and had fallen down from his
chariot. He was tormented because his son had been slain. Powerfully and violently, he advanced on his chariot towards the ratha Kiriti." '


