'The gandharva said, "O Partha! In the world, there was a king named Kalmashapada. He was born in the lineage
of Ikshvaku and he was unrivalled on earth in his prowess. One day, the king left his capital to go on a hunt in the
forest. That chastiser of enemies shot many deer and boars. Hungry and thirsty, the king followed a narrow path
and met Vashishtha's great-souled son on the way. The son was an illustrious sage and his name was Shakti. He
was the illustrious extender of Vashishtha's lineage and was the eldest of the great-souled Vashishtha's 100 sons.
As they came face to face in opposite directions on the narrow path, the king said, 'Move off from our path.' The
rishi then spoke to him in a soothing and kind voice, but did not yield the path, because he was following the path
of dharma[In the sense that the king should have yielded the way to a Brahmana.]. Out of pride and anger at the sage, the king did not yield the path either. When the sage refused to
give way, the best of kings, deluded like a rakshasa, struck the sage with his whip. Thus struck by the whip,
Vashishtha's son, the best of sages, was angered and cursed the best of kings. 'O worst of kings! Since you have
struck an ascetic like a rakshasa, from today you will become a maneater. O corrupt king! Go from here and wander around the earth, eating human flesh.' Thus, Shakti cursed him through the strength of his powers.

'"Vashishtha and Vishvamitra had had a quarrel over who should be the officiating priest[Officiating priest to King Kalmashapada.]. At that time, Vishvamitra, came to that place. O Partha! The immensely powerful Vishvamitra, the rishi with great austerities, neared
the place where the two were quarrelling. After the curse on the great king, the rishi[Vishvamitra.] recognized that the rishi[Shakti.]
was none other than Vashishtha's son, as powerful as Vashishtha himself. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Desiring to bring some benefit to himself, Vishamitra remained there, but concealed himself by making himself
invisible from them. Having been cursed by Shakti, that best of kings[Kalmashapada.] sought Shakti's mercy and worshipped
him, so as to pacify him. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Knowing the king's nature, Vishvamitra ordered a rakshasa to enter the king's body. Because of the Brahmana rishi's curse and because of Vishvamitra's instruction, a
rakshasa named Kimkara then entered the king's body. O chastiser of enemies! Knowing that the rakshasa had entered the king's body, Vishvamitra, the best of sages, went away.

'"Thereafter, the wise king was possessed and tormented by the rakshasa within him and found it difficult to
save himself. A certain Brahmana saw the king roaming in the forest. Being hungry, he begged for some food with
meat. Rajarshi Kalmashapada Mitrasaha[Mitrasaha can also be translated as 'with his friends'. However, no friends have been mentioned. So Mitrasaha is more likely to be one of Kalmashapada's names.] said, 'O Brahmana! Stay here for a while. When I return, I will give
you the food you desire to have.' Having said this, the king went away and that best of Brahmanas remained there.
But when he entered the inner quarters of his palace, the king forgot about his promise to the Brahmana and remembered it only at midnight. He told his cook, 'Go to the forest. A Brahmana is waiting for me there, hoping to
get some food. Take some meat to him.' Having been thus addressed, the cook could not find any meat anywhere
and came and sorrowfully informed the king about this. Possessed by the rakshasa, the king unhesitatingly told the
cook, 'Feed him human flesh,' and repeated his instructions. Agreeing, the cook quickly went to where executioners lived and took some human flesh from them. Washing it and cooking it properly, he mixed it with rice and
quickly took it to the hungry and ascetic Brahmana.

'"Through his ascetic sight, the best of Brahmanas immediately recognized the food to be forbidden. His eyes
red with anger, he said, 'That worst of kings has offered me food that is forbidden. Therefore, that deluded one will
himself become fond of such food. Becoming fond of human flesh, as Shakti had cursed him earlier, he will roam
the earth and persecute all beings.' Repeated for the second time, the curse on the king became very strong. Being
possessed by the rakshasa, the king soon lost all his senses. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing Shakti,
that best of kings, having been deprived of his senses by the rakshasa within him, said, 'Because you have imposed
this unparalleled curse on me, I shall begin my man-eating predicament by eating you first.' Having said this, the
king immediately separated Shakti from his life and ate him up, the way a tiger devours its favoured prey. Having
seen Shakti killed thus, Vishvamitra urged the rakshasa to kill Vashishtha's other sons. Like an angry lion devours
small animals, he ate up all the younger sons of the great-souled Vashishtha.

'"When Vashishtha learnt that Vishvamitra had conspired to get his sons killed, he bore his grief patiently, like a
great mountain bears the earth. That best of sages, chief among those who are intelligent, resolved to sacrifice himself rather than set his mind on extinguishing the Kushika lineage. The illustrious rishi threw himself down from
the peak of Mount Meru and his head struck the stones like a bale of cotton. O Pandava! When the illustrious one
found that the fall did not kill him, he lit a fire in that great forest and entered it. But though the flames blazed up
high, they did not kill him. O chastiser of enemies! Instead, the blazing flames cooled him. Seeing the ocean, the
grief-stricken and great sage tied a heavy stone around his neck and flung himself into the water. But the strong
waves brought the great sage back to the shore. With a sorrowful heart, he then returned to his hermitage."'


'The gandharva said, "On seeing that his hermitage was bereft of his sons, the grief-stricken sage left it again. O
Partha! He saw a river swollen with the new water of the rainy season. It was sweeping away many trees that grew
along the banks. O descendant of Puru! On seeing this, the miserable one again began to think that he would certainly be killed in this water. Thereupon, the great sage bound himself with strong ropes and, struck with great
grief, flung himself into the waters of that great river. O chastiser of enemy armies! But the river tore those ropes
away and, unfettered, washed the rishi up onto the bank. Freed from the bindings, the great rishi arose and gave the
river the name of Vipasha[Pasha means noose or bond and Vipasha is something that frees one from a bond. Vipasha is identified with
the river Beas.].

'"However, his mind was obsessed with grief and he did not stay in any one place. He went to mountains, rivers
and lakes. Seeing once more the terrible river Himavati[Himavati can be the specific name for a river. Alternatively, it can also be a general term for any river descending from the Himalayas.], terrible of appearance and full of fierce animals, he
once more flung himself into its waters. That best of rivers, thinking that the Brahmana was fire, immediately fled
in a hundred directions and thereafter came to be known as Shatadru[Shatadru is a river with a hundred streams and is identified as the river Sutlej.]. Finding that he was once again on dry
land, he exclaimed that he was unable to die at his own hands and returned to his hermitage.

'"When he was returning to his hermitage, his daughter-in-law Adrishyanti followed him. As she came near, he
heard the sound of Vedic incantations, embellished with the fullness of meaning of the six branches[This is a reference to the six Vedangas.]. 'Who is
following me?' he asked. 'I am Adrishyanti, Shakti's wife,' his daughter-in-law answered. 'O illustrious one! I am
austere, engaged in austerities.' Vashishtha said, 'O daughter! Who is reciting the Vedas and their angas that I
hear? It is just as I have heard it from Shakti earlier.' Adrishyanti said, 'In my womb, there is a son begotten by
Shakti. He has been there for twelve years. O sage! You have heard his recitations.' Having been thus addressed by
her, Vashishtha, the best of rishis, was greatly delighted. O Partha! Exclaiming that there was a son, he refrained
from death.

'"The unblemished one returned[To his hermitage. The unblemished one is Vashishtha.], accompanied by his daughter-in-law. He found Kalmashapada seated in the
deserted forest. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing him[Vashishtha.], possessed by the rakshasa, the king arose
in anger and sought to devour him. But seeing the king of evil deeds, Adrishyanti spoke to Vashishtha in fear and
alarm, 'O illustrious one! This terrible rakshasa looks like death himself, as he advances towards us with a fearful
wooden club in his hand. O best among those who are learned in all the Vedas! Except you, no one on earth has the
power to ward him off. O illustrious one! Save me from this evil one, whose form is terrible. Without a doubt, the
rakshasa is advancing towards us to devour us.'"'


'"Vashishtha said, 'O daughter! Do not be frightened. There is nothing to be frightened of from a rakshasa. There
is no danger from the one you see advancing. He is not a rakshasa. He is King Kalmashapada, powerful and famous on earth. That terrible one lives in this part of the forest.'"

'The gandharva said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As he[Kalmashapada.] advanced towards them, the illustrious
and energetic rishi Vashishtha stopped him with a roar. He sprinkled water sanctified with mantras over him and
freed the good king from the terrible rakshasa. For twelve years, the king had been swallowed through the energy
of Vashishtha's son, like the sun is swallowed by the one who swallows[Rahu.] at the time of an eclipse. Thus freed
from the rakshasa, the king reddened the great forest with his energy, like the sun illuminates the evening[The word used is sandhya, which can mean dawn, as well as dusk.]
clouds. Regaining his senses, the king worshipped Vashishtha, the best of rishis, with joined palms and said, 'O illustrious one! O best of Brahmanas! I am the son of Sudasa. You are my preceptor. Tell me what your wish is now
and what I should do.' Vashishtha said, 'O lord of men! My desire was fulfilled when the right time arrived. Return
to your kingdom and rule and never again disregard Brahmanas.' The king said, 'O illustrious one! I shall never
again disregard the bulls among Brahmanas. In accordance with your instructions, I shall always worship the
twice-born. O best among the twice-born! O best among those who are learned in the Vedas! I wish to obtain a
boon from you, so that I can be freed from the debt I owe to the Ikshvaku lineage. I wish to have a son. Please go
to my beloved queen[This story is taken up later, and we learn why Kalmashapada requested Vashishtha to impregnate the queen.], who is virtuous, beautiful and has all the qualities, so that the Ikshvaku lineage can be
extended.'

'"Vashishtha, the best of Brahmanas and always devoted to the truth, agreed to the desires of the great archer,
the king. O king of men! After some time, Vashishtha, accompanied by the one without blame[The king.], went to his capital, famous in this world as Ayodhya. In great joy, all the people came out to welcome the great-souled and sinless
one[Meaning the king, who had now been freed from the curse of the rakshasa.], like gods welcome their chief. Accompanied by the great-souled Vashishtha, the king of men soon entered
his auspicious city. O king! The citizens of Ayodhya saw him, like the sun rising in Pushya[One of the twenty-seven nakshatras.]. The king, the most
fortunate among those who are blessed with fortune, filled Ayodhya, like the cool moon which fills the skies when
it rises in the autumn. His mind was gladdened when he saw that supreme of cities, with its streets clean and
washed, adorned with flags and pennants. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! That city was full of people who were
happy and well fed. It looked as radiant as Amaravati[Indra's capital.] in Indra's presence.

'"After the rajarshi had entered the best of cities, the queen came to Vashishtha at the king's command. When
the season was right, maharshi Vashishtha, the rishi who always obtained the best share, united with her, in accordance with the divine rites laid down by the gods. Thereafter, when the queen conceived through him, the best of
sages received salutations from the king and returned to his hermitage. When she had carried the embryo for a long
time, the famous lady split her womb open with a stone. O bull among men! After twelve years, rajarshi Ashmaka
was born, the one who founded the city of Potana."'


