Vaishampayana said, 'Having been thus addressed, the illustrious fire, with the smoke as his banner, remembered
Varuna, the lord of the worlds, Aditi's son and the god who lives in the water and is the lord of the waters. Knowing that he had been remembered, he too appeared before the fire. The smoke-crested one paid homage to the lord
of the waters, the fourth lokapala[A lokapala is a protector (pala) of a loka or a world. The number of lokas is sometimes three, sometimes seven and sometimes fourteen. Here, the reference is to the three worlds of heaven, earth and the nether regions and
the waters have been added as a fourth world.], the protector and the great god and said, "Quickly give me the bow, the two
quivers and the chariot bearing the flag of a monkey that were obtained from King Soma. Partha will accomplish a
great task with Gandiva[The name of the bow.] and Vasudeva with the chakra[Vishnu's weapon, usually translated in English as a discus, though disc is more appropriate. It is a circular
weapon, hurled like a missile.]. For that reason, let those be given to them." Varuna
told the fire, "I will give them." Then he gave him that extraordinary gem of a bow, endowed with great valour and
capable of extending fame and deeds. It was incapable of being hurt by any weapon, but could destroy all
weapons. It was the chief of all weapons and was the destroyer of enemy armies. It alone was equal to one hundred
thousand and was the extender of kingdoms. It was radiant, smooth and unblemished everywhere and adorned with
many colours. For an eternity, it had been worshipped by the gods, the danavas and the gandharvas. He also gave
him two inexhaustible quivers and a chariot with divine horses, with a monkey on the banner. The horses were silvery and were from the land of the gandharvas. They were in golden harnesses, as swift as the wind or the mind,
and resembled white clouds. Every weapon was laden onto the chariot and it was incapable of being vanquished by
the gods or the danavas. It was radiant, with a thunderous roar and was enchanting to all beings. Through his ascetic powers, it was created by Prajapati Bhoumana[Bhoumana is Vishvakarma's name. Vishvakarma is the architect of the gods. The Sanskrit text of the critical
edition actually says Bhouvana, though many regional versions say Bhoumana. Bhoumana and Bhouvana are
synonymous.], the lord of the worlds. Its form was like that of the sun and
could not be gazed at. It was on this that Lord Soma had ascended when he vanquished the danavas. It was radiant
in its beauty and was gigantic, like an elephant or a cloud. On this supreme of chariots was mounted an excellent
flagpole, golden and resplendent like Shakra's weapon. On the flagpole was a divine monkey marked with the
signs of the lion and the tiger. It seemed to roar out from that adorned perch. There were many other great beings
on that flag and their roars made enemy soldiers lose their senses.

'Then Partha circumambulated that supreme chariot, adorned with many pennants. He worshipped all the gods
and attired in armour, with guards for his fingers and wrists, and with a sword slung against his chest, ascended it,
like a virtuous man on a vimana[A vimana is a celestial chariot and those who are virtuous get to ride on vimanas.]. Arjuna was extremely delighted when be grasped the Gandiva, the divine and
supreme of bows, created by Brahma in ancient times. Paying his homage to the fire, the valorous one grasped the
bow with great force and strung it. When the powerful Pandava strung the bow, the hearts of those who heard the
sound trembled. Having obtained the chariot, the bow and the two inexhaustible quivers, Kounteya thought himself to be powerful and accomplished for the task. Then the fire gave Krishna the chakra, with a vajra at its centre.
On receiving this fiery and desirable weapon, he too became accomplished. The fire said, "O Madhusudana! There
is no doubt that with this weapon you will be victorious in battle, even over those who are not human. It is certain
that in the destruction of great enemies-humans, gods, rakshasas, pishachas, daityas, nagas-you will be the superior in battle. O Madhava! Whenever you hurl it at an enemy in the course of battle, it will irresistibly kill and
return again to your hand." The illustrious Varuna also gave Hari a terrible club named Koumadaki[Vishnu's club.], the destroyer of daityas, with the roar of the thunder.

'The delighted Krishna and Arjuna told the fire, "O illustrious one! We are now armed with weapons and know
their use. We are mounted on chariots with flags. We are eager to fight all the gods and demons together, not to
speak of a single wielder of the vajra who wishes to fight for the sake of a naga." Arjuna said, "O fire! When the
powerful Varshneya releases the chakra in battle, there is nothing in the three worlds that Janardana cannot vanquish. Having obtained the bow Gandiva and these two inexhaustible quivers, I am also capable of vanquishing the
worlds in battle. O lord! Blaze as you wish and encircle this great forest. We are capable of helping you in your
task." Having been thus addressed by Dasharha and Arjuna, the illustrious one assumed his energetic form and began to consume the forest. He surrounded it from all sides with his seven flames. As terrible as the fire at the end of
a yuga, he began to angrily consume Khandava. O bull among the Bharata lineage! When he surrounded the forest
from all sides, he roared like the clouds and burnt all the beings. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The blazing
forest looked like Meru, king of the mountains, golden in its great radiance.'


