'"The lord said, 'They say the ashvattha tree, 524 with a root above and branches below, is indestructible. He who
knows that its leaves are the metres 525 knows the truth. Specially nurtured by the gunas, with objects 526 as its
shoots, its branches extend upwards and downwards. In the world of men, its rootlings 527 stretch downwards, the
cause of action. In this, 528 this form 529 is not felt, nor the end, nor the beginning. Nor even its establishment.
Slicing the thick root of this ashvattha with the weapon of firm detachment, thereafter, one must seek that goal, the
attainment of which means no return, 530 stating, "I seek refuge in that original being, from whom this eternal
process is created," without pride and delusion, having conquered the fault of attachment, constant in the knowledge of the atman, having restrained desire, freed from the opposites of happiness and unhappiness, the wise go to
that indestructible goal. Attaining that, there is no return. The sun cannot light that, 531 nor the moon, nor fire.
That is my supreme abode. Indeed, part of my eternal form is established as beings in nature and attracts the mind
and six 532 senses to the world of beings. Like the wind carries away fragrance from receptacles, 533 the lord, 534
when it discards one body and attains another one, takes these 535 with it and leaves. This 536 is established in the
ears, the eyes, touch, the tongue, the nose and also the mind and enjoys objects. The deluded do not see the establishment and also the enjoyment and progress, with the qualities as attributes. 537 Those with eyes of wisdom, see
this. Careful 538 yogis, established in the atman, see this. Despite care, those who are not established in the atman,
and are without consciousness, don't see this. The energy in the sun that lights up the entire world, that in the
moon and that too in the fire, know that energy to be mine. I enter the earth and hold up the beings with my energy.
As the watery moon, I nourish all the herbs. 539 I am established in the bodies of beings as the fire of digestion. I
mingle with the prana and apana breath 540 and digest the four types of food. 541 I am established in the hearts of
all beings. I result in memory and knowledge and their lack. Indeed, it is I who am the knowledge of the Vedas and
the origin of Vedanta. And I am the knower of the Vedas. 542 The destructible and the indestructible, these two purushas exist in the world. All these beings are destructible. 543 The fixed is known as the indestructible. 544 That
apart, there is a supreme purusha known as the paramatman, who enters the three worlds and sustains them-the
indestructible Lord. Because I am beyond destruction and superior even to the indestructible, therefore, I am
known as the supreme being 545 in this world 546 and in the Vedas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Without
delusion, he who knows me as the supreme being, he is omniscient and worships me in every way. O pure one! O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thus, this extremely secret knowledge has been related by me. This understanding leads to knowledge and accomplishment.'"' 547

'"The lord said, 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Absence of fear, pureness of heart, 549 steadiness in jnana
yoga, 550 donation, and control, 551 yajnas, self-study, 552 practice of austerities and simplicity, 553 absence of
injury to others, truthfulness, lack of anger, renunciation, tranquility, lack of criticism of others, compassion towards beings, lack of avarice, gentleness, sense of shame, 554 steadfastness, energy, forgiveness, perseverance,
cleanliness, absence of hatred, absence of ego-these belong to the person born towards divine wealth. 555 O
Partha! Arrogance, insolence, egoism, anger, cruelty and ignorance-these belong to birth towards demonic
wealth. Divine wealth is for liberation. Demonic wealth is for bondage. O Pandava! Do not sorrow. You have been
born towards divine wealth. O Partha! In this world, two types of beings are created, divine and demonic. The divine has been stated in detail. Hear from me about the demonic. Demonic people do not know about inclination
and disinclination. 556 In them, there is no purity nor righteousness, nor even truthfulness. They say the world is
full of falsehood, 557 without basis, 558 without a lord, created without continuity 559 and with no reason other
than to satisfy desire. Resorting to such views, with distorted minds, little intelligence and cruel action, they perform evil deeds. They are born to destroy the world. Seeking refuge in insatiable desires, deluded with a sense of
insolence, pride and arrogance, accepting search of the untrue 560 and performing impure rites, they act. Resorting
to immeasurable thoughts till the time of destruction, 561 convinced certainly that the enjoyment of desire is
supreme, tied down with the noose of a hundred hopes, prone to lust and anger and accepting evil means for the
sake of desire gratification, they wish to accumulate wealth. Today I have gained this. I will get that desired object
later. I have this and again that wealth will also be mine. This enemy has been killed by me. I will also kill the others. I am the lord, I am the enjoyer. I am the successful, strong and happy. I am wealthy and of noble descent. Who
is there equal to me? I will perform yajnas, I will donate. 562 I will pleasure myself. Deluded by ignorance in this
way, minds distracted by many thoughts, caught in the net of delusion, addicted to gratification of desires, they are
hurled into impure hell. Self-glorifying, haughty, proud because of wealth, they insolently perform unsanctioned
rites that are yajnas only in name. Resorting to vanity, strength, insolence, desire and anger, they hate me in their
own bodies and in the bodies of others and are disfavoured. In this world, I hurl those hateful, cruel, evil and worst
among men into demonic births, 563 several times. O Kounteya! From birth to birth, the deluded don't attain me
and obtaining demonic births, go down even further. 564 Desire, anger and avarice-these are the three types of
doors to hell and destroyers of the atman. Give up these three. O Kounteya! The man who is freed from these three
dark doors and follows that which is good for the atman, thereafter attains the supreme goal. He who deviates from
the prescription of the shastras 565 and acts as he desires like doing, that person doesn't attain liberation or happiness or the supreme goal. Therefore, in deciding what should be done and what should not be done, the shastras are
your test. In this, 566 get ready to perform action knowing what the shastras prescribe.'"'


'"Arjuna said, 'Those who discard 567 the prescriptions of the shastras, but worship 568 with recourse to faith,
what is their devotion like? Is it sattva, rajas or tamas?'

'"The lord said, 'According to their nature, people show three kinds of faith-sattva-type, rajas-type and tamas-
type. Listen to this. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Everyone's faith follows his inner nature. This being 569
is full of faith. The kind of faith one has makes the person. Those of the sattva-type worship the gods, those of the
rajas-type, yakshas and rakshas. 570 The others, of the tamas-type, worship ghosts 571 and devils. 572 Those who
perform terrible austerities, not sanctioned by the shastras, full of insolence and ego and deriving strength from desire and attachment, 573 devoid of consciousness, torture the elements in the body and also me, inside the body.
574 Know them to be driven by demonic resolution. The favoured food of all is of three types and so too, sacrifices, meditation and donations. Listen to the distinction between these. The sattva-type favour food that increases
life expectancy, vitality, 575 strength, freedom from disease, happiness and joy-tasty, oily, nourishing and pleasant. The rajas-type favour food that is extremely spicy, acidic, salty, hot, pungent, dry and burning-increasing unhappiness, sorrow and disease. The tamas-type favour food cooked a long time ago, 576 no longer succulent 577
and with a bad smell, stale 578 and tasted by others 579 -impure. The sacrifices performed according to prescribed rites, pacifying the mind, without attachment to fruits and only because such sacrifices ought to be performed, are of the sattva-type. O best of the Bharata lineage! But know sacrifices performed in search of fruits or
indeed because of insolence, 580 to be of the rajas-type. Sacrifices without following prescribed rites, without donating food, without mantras, without donations and without faith, are said to be of the tamas-type. Worship of
gods, brahmanas, 581 teachers and the wise, purity, simplicity, brahmacharya and non-violence 582 -these are
known as physical austerities. Not uttering words that lead to anxiety, speaking the truth and that which is pleasant
and leads to welfare, 583 and self-study 584 -these are known as verbal austerities. Tranquility of mind, lack of
cruelty, reserve in speech, control of one's self, purity in attitude 585 -all these are known as mental austerities.
These three types of austerities performed single-mindedly by men, without attachment to fruits and with supreme
faith, are said to be of the sattva-type. Austerities performed with the objective of obtaining praise, respect or worship, and based on insolence, are said to be of the rajas-type and in this, 586 are temporary and uncertain. Austerities performed on the basis of delusion, resulting in the oppression of one's self or undertaken to destroy others, are
said to be of the tamas-type. Alms donated for the sake of donation, 587 to those who have not benefited the donor,
588 and based on place, time and subject 589 -are said to be of the sattva-type. But donations for the sake of return favours or for the fruits or given unwillingly, are said to be of the rajas-type. Donations in the wrong place, at
the wrong time and to the wrong subject, given without respect and disdainfully-are said to be of the tamas-type.

"Om tat sat"-in these three ways, the brahman has been described in the sacred texts. From this, in the past, brahmanas and the Vedas and yajnas have been created. Therefore, according to prescribed rites, sacrifices, donations
and austerities by those who are learned in the brahman, are always undertaken after uttering "Om". Those who
desire liberation, give up desire for fruits and undertake sacrifices, donations and austerities after uttering "Tat". O
Partha! "Sat" is used to signify existence and superiority. And the word "Sat" is also used for auspicious acts.
Steadfastness in sacrifices, donations and austerities is known as "Sat" and action performed towards those ends is
also indeed known as "Sat". O Partha! Sacrifices, donations and austerities and any other action, undertaken without faith, are known as the opposite of "Sat", with nothing 590 in this world or in the afterworld.'"'


