Vaishampayana said, 'After this, the great yogi, the sage Krishna Dvaipayana, spoke. "O son[Vedavyasa was speaking to Yudhishthira.]! Read this[Shiva's names.].
May you be fortunate and let Maheshvara be pleased with you. O son! In ancient times, I tormented myself
through supreme austerities on the slopes of Meru. O great king! That was for the sake of a son and I praised him
through this chant. O descendant of the Pandu lineage! Thus did I obtain my desires. In that way, you will also obtain all your wishes from Sharva." Then, Shakra's beloved friend, Chatushirsha, also known as Alambayana[The name of a sage.],
spoke, driven by a feeling of compassion. "I went to Gokarna and performed austerities for one hundred years,
thus obtaining one hundred sons who were not born from any woman's womb. They were self-restrained, learned
about dharma and extremely radiant. Without  facing  old  age  and  misery,  they  lived  for  one  hundred  thousand
years. O son of King Pandu! In ancient times, I obtained them through Sharva." Next, the illustrious Valmiki spoke
to Yudhishthira. "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Once, in the course of a dispute, sages who were learned in
the Sama Veda accused me of having killed a brahmana[This was a metaphorical and not literal killing of a brahmana and concerned a dispute over Sama rituals.]. As soon as they said this, in an instant, that adharma
overcame me. To cleanse myself, I sought to satisfy the unblemished Ishana. I was incapacitated. But that dispeller
of grief freed me. The destroyer of Tripura told me that I would obtain great fame." O son! Jamadagni's son[Parashurama.],
supreme among the upholders of dharma, spoke to Kounteya. Stationed amidst the rishis, he was like the sun radiating heat. "O  eldest  among  the  Pandavas!  I  was  afflicted  because  I  had  killed  brahmanas  who  were  like  my
father[On his father's instructions, Parashurama had killed his mother. There are no stories about his having killed
brahmanas. His elder brothers (brahmanas) were actually killed by his father, Jamadagni, and Parashurama revived them.]. O king! To purify myself, I sought Mahadeva's refuge. I chanted the god's names and praised him. Bhava was satisfied and gave me a battleaxe. The god also gave me divine weapons. He said, 'From now on, no sin
will attach to you and you will be invincible. Death will have no power over you and you will be famous.' The illustrious Shikhandi, auspicious in form, spoke to me in this way and I obtained everything through the favours of
that intelligent one." Next, Asita-Devala spoke to the king who was Pandu's son. "Earlier, because of Shakra's
curse, all my dharma was destroyed. I obtained my dharma, great fame and a long life because of Bhava." There
was a rishi named Gritsamada and he was Shakra's beloved friend. This illustrious one was like Brihaspati in his
radiance. He told Ajamidha[Yudhishthira's name.], "The illustrious Vasishtha was Chakshusha Manu's son. Shatakratu performed the
inconceivable task of a sacrifice that lasted for one thousand years. While that was going on, I was given the task
of reciting Sama hymns and he[Vasishtha.] told me, 'O foremost among brahmanas! The rathantara is not being chanted
properly. O supreme among brahmanas! Cast aside your delight and use your intelligence to consider what you are
doing again. O extremely evilminded one! Why are you acting so that the sacrificial offerings will not be conveyed?' Having said this, he was overcome by great rage. Wrathfully, he again spoke these words. 'You will become a forest dweller. You will be miserable and bereft of wisdom. You will always be terrified and you will remain in that state for ten thousand, eight hundred and ten years. You will have neither food nor water and you will
be abandoned by other animals[Gritsamada was cursed that he would become an animal.]. That spot will not have any trees that can be used for sacrifices and will be populated by ruru deer and lions. You will become a cruel animal and will face great hardships.' O Partha! Because of
his words, when I died, I was born as an animal. I sought refuge with Maheshvara and the yogi told me, 'You will
be without old age. You will be immortal. You will be free from misery. Your friendship[With Indra.] will be ensured and
both your sacrifices will prosper.' The illustrious lord exhibits his favours in this way. In matters of happiness and
unhappiness, he is always superior to the creator and the ordainer. In deeds, thoughts and words, the illustrious one
is  incomprehensible.  O  son!  I  know  of  no  warrior  who  is  superior  to  him,  nor  anyone  who  is  his  equal  in
learning."'

'Jaigishavya added, "O Yudhishthira! In ancient times, in Varanasi, the illustrious and powerful one carefully
protected me and gave me the eight kinds of powers[The eight powers associated with yoga.]."
'Gargya continued, "O Pandava! On the banks of the Sarasvati, I satisfied him through a mental sacrifice and he
conferred on me the sixty-four different branches associated with the knowledge of time[There was more than one Gargya. This is clearly the one who contributed to astronomy (jyotisha). There is no
obvious way to pin down the number sixty-four.]. He also gave me one
thousand sons who were my equal in knowledge of the brahman. I and my sons obtained life-spans of one million
years each."

'Parashara said, "O king! In earlier times, I thought of Sharva in my mind and gratified him. I desired a son from
Maheshvara,  one  who  would  be  great  in  asceticism,  great  in  energy,  immensely  famous  and  a  great  yogi.  He
should be one who would classify the Vedas, be the abode of prosperity and be driven by compassion towards the
brahmanas. Knowing that this was the desire in my heart, the supreme among gods spoke to me. 'The fruit that you
desire from me will be obtained and you will have a son named Krishna[Parashara was the father of Krishna Dvaipayana Vedavyasa.]. This will happen in the creation associated with Savarni Manu[The manvantara that will follow the current one.] and he will be one of the saptarshis. He will classify the Vedas and extend the Kuru
lineage. That son will compose itihasa[Itihasa is history and is used to mean the Ramayana and the Mahabharata, Vedavyasa being the composer of the
Mahabharata.] and be engaged in the welfare of the universe. That great sage will be
loved by the great Indra. O Parashara! Your son will be without old age and will be immortal.' Having said this,
the illustrious one vanished from the spot. O Yudhishthira! The great yogi is full of energy. He is without decay
and without transformation.

'"Mandavya added, 'I was no thief. But suspected of being one, I was impaled on a stake[Animandavya's story has been recounted in Section 6 (Volume 1).]. While I was in that
state, I praised the god. Maheshvara told me, "You will be freed from the stake and will live for one billion years.
O brahmana! But you will not suffer any pain from being impaled on the stake. You will be free from all kinds of
affliction and disease. O sage! Your atman has been generated from the fourth foot[Dharma has four feet. The sage was born from dharma's fourth foot, regarded as truth.]. Your birth is unrivalled.
Make it successful. Without any obstructions, you will be able to bathe in all the tirthas. O brahmana! When you
die, I ordain that you will obtain eternal heaven." The illustrious one, with the bull as his mount, spoke in this way.
O great king! Maheshvara deserves worship. The immensely radiant one is clad in hides. With his companions, the
best among gods then disappeared.'

'"Galava continued, 'Having obtained Vishvamitra's permission, I went to my father[Galava had studied under Vishvamitra. After completing his studies, he obtained Vishvamitra's permission and
returned home. By that time, Galava's father was dead.]. My mother was miserable and wept piteously. She said, "O son! Through Koushika's[Vishvamitra's.] favours, you have been adorned with knowledge of the Vedas. O unblemished one! O son! You are young and self-controlled. But your father is unable to see
you." On hearing my mother's words, I despaired, because I wouldn't be able to see my senior. I controlled my atman and devoted myself to Mahadeva. He showed himself and spoke to me. "O son! Your father and mother will
not suffer from death. Swiftly enter your house and you will be able to see your father there." O Yudhishthira!
Having obtained the illustrious one's permission, I went home. O son! I saw my father there, emerging after having
completed a sacrifice. He held some offerings, kusha and other grass. With tears in his eyes, my father flung these
away. O Pandava! I had bowed down before him. He raised me, embraced me and inhaled the fragrance of my
head.  He  said,  "I  have  seen  you  through  good  fortune.  O  son!  You  have  returned  after  completing  your
learning."'"'

Vaishampayana continued, 'The sages spoke about these and other extraordinary deeds of the great-souled one.
On hearing this, Pandava was astounded. Then Krishna[This is Krishna Vasudeva and not Krishna Dvaipayana Vedavyasa.], supreme among extremely intelligent ones, again spoke
to Yudhishthira, who was always devoted to dharma, like Ishvara speaking to Puruhuta[Puruhuta is Indra. It is not clear who is meant by Ishvara.]. "O Ajamidha! Aditya,
Chandra, wind, fire, heaven, the earth, the water, the Vasus, the Vishvadevas, Dhatri, Aryama, Shukra, Brihaspati,
the Rudras, the Sadhyas, Varuna, the protector of riches[Kubera.], Brahma, Shakra, the Maruts, the truth about the brahman, the Vedas, sacrifices, dakshina, those who chant the Vedas, soma, the one who sacrifices, all the offerings and
oblations,  protection,  consecration,  rituals,  svaha,  vashatkara,  the  brahmanas,  the  descendants  of  Surabhi,  the
wheel of dharma, the wheel of time, movement, fame, self-control, the steadfastness of intelligent and wise people,
good and bad, the seven sages, the best of intelligence, thoughts, sight and touch, success in deeds, success itself,
the large number of gods who drink heat and soma, the horizon, suyamas[A class of gods.], tushitas[A class of gods.], everything with a form of
the brahman, the shining bodies, those who survive on scent, those who survive on sight, those who restrain their
speech, those who restrain their thoughts, the pure, those who are devoted to emancipation, the gods who survive
on touch, the gods who survive on sight, the gods who survive on clarified butter, the foremost among gods that
one can think of, all the other gods, birds, gandharvas, pishachas, danavas, yakshas, serpents, charanas, the subtle,
the gross, the mild, the extremely subtle, happiness, unhappiness, all that is intermediate between joy and misery,
sankhya, yoga, everything that is superior to the most supreme and everything that I have recounted-know that all
these originate with Sharva. All creatures have originated from him. He is the one who deserves to be revered. In
ancient times, all the gods who are the protectors of the universe and all the rakshasas who have penetrated into the
earth were created by him. I think of him in my mind and please him. He is the reason behind this breath of life
and I bow down before him. When he is praised and pleased, that god, the lord without decay, grants boons. If a
man purifies himself and reads this praise after having controlled his senses, restrained and not deviating from
yoga for one year, then he obtains the fruits of a horse sacrifice. A brahmana obtains all the Vedas, a king conquers
the entire earth, a vaishya obtains gains and dexterity and a shudra obtains a good destination and happiness after
death. This is the king of chants. If one fixes one's mind on Rudra and chants it, one is freed from all sins and becomes pure, sacred and famous. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Such a man dwells in heaven for thousands
of years, for as many years as there are hairs on his body."'


Yudhishthira said, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! Why is it that at the time of accepting a woman's hand
in marriage, it is stated in the learned texts that one must follow dharma together? This sahadharma[We have deliberately used the Sanskrit. Sahadharma means that husband and wife follow dharma together.] has
been spoken about by the great rishis earlier. Does this dharma result from arsha, prajapatya or asura[There were eight kinds of marriage. Three of these were arsha, prajapatya and asura. In arsha, the father gives
away his daughter after receiving a bride price. In prajapatya, husband and wife are instructed to follow dharma
together. In asura, the bridegroom pays whatever he can afford to the bride's family. Yudhishthira evidently is
asking which of these forms of marriage develop the concept of sahadharma.]? I have a
grave doubt on this account and my mind refuses to accept this. Why has sahadharma been recommended, if there
is death? O grandfather! When one dies, one goes to heaven. What does sahadharma mean then? If one of the couple dies first, what happens to the other one then? Tell me this. There are diverse fruits that result from deeds.
There are diverse means of subsistence. Depending on what they do, there are diverse and many kinds of hells that
men go to. Those who have laid down the sutras have said that women are false in their behaviour. O father[The word used is tata.]! If
women are prone to falsehood, why have the sacred texts spoken about sahadharma? Even in the Vedas, one can
read that women are prone to falsehood. The signs of dharma are said to be the observance of rituals and rites on
auspicious occasions. I have thought about this incessantly, but it seems to be a great mystery to me[If women are wicked, how can there be dharma with them? If dharma is interpreted as rituals, what happens
when one of the couple dies? If dharma is not interpreted as rituals, it is individual. In that case, what is the concept of practising dharma together? Since the couple may not be married to each other in their next lives, how
can the fruits of dharma be carried over?]. O grandfather! As has been instructed in the sacred texts, as it is practised and as it has come down, dispel all my doubts
about this. O immensely wise one? You should explain this to me in its entirety."

'Bhishma replied, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In this connection, there is an ancient history about a
conversation between Ashtavakra and Disha. In ancient times, the great ascetic, Ashtavakra, desired the daughter
of the great-souled rishi Vadanya, and asked for her. The lady was known by the name of Suprabha and her beauty
was  unmatched on  earth. She  was  supremely  worthy  in  her  qualities,  conduct,  virtue,  character  and  beauty.  A
glance of that beautiful-eyed one had robbed him of his heart, just like a beautiful grove adorned with blossoming
flowers does so in the spring. The rishi said, 'I will give you my daughter. But listen to me. First, go to the auspicious northern directions, to see what you might find there.'

'"Ashtavakra answered, 'You should tell me what I will see there. I will undertake whatever task you ask me to.'

'"Vadanya said, 'When you pass beyond the dominion of the lord of riches, you will approach the Himalayas
and see Rudra's plains, frequented by the siddhas and the charanas. A large number of his cheerful companions
will be there. They will possess many kinds of faces and will be engaged in dancing. Their limbs will be smeared
with divine paste. There will also be many kinds of pishachas. They will clap their hands and sound musicial instruments. The rhythms of their cheerful dancing will be both uneven and smooth. They serve Sharva there. We
have heard it said that in that celestial region in the mountains, the god is always present, with his auspicious companions. To obtain Shankara, it was there that the goddess[Uma.] tormented herself with extremely difficult austerities.
It has therefore been said, that region is desired by the god and Uma. There is a cave that is on the great slopes that
are to the north of where the god resides. The seasons, the night of destruction[At the time of universal dissolution.] and celestial humans, all assume
their own forms to worship the god there. You should cross that region and proceed further. You will see a blue
forest that has the complexion of the clouds. You will see a beautiful lady there, charming to the mind. The immensely fortunate one is aged and has consecrated herself to asceticism. When you see her there, worship her carefully. When you return after having seen her, you can accept the hand[Of the daughter.]. If you want to make a true pledge, then
undertake a successful journey there.'"'


Ashtavakra replied, 'There is no doubt that I will undertake a successful journey there, just as you have said.
O virtuous one! May you also be truthful in your words.'"

'Bhishma continued, "The illustrious one headed further and further towards the north, to the slopes of the Himalaya  mountains,  populated  by  the  siddhas  and  the  charanas.  The  tiger  among  brahmanas  reached  the  great
mountains, the Himalayas. He went to the sacred river of Bahuda, the granter of dharma. He bathed in the clear
waters of the tirthas and rendered offerings to the gods. He then spread out a bed of kusha grass and lay down happily. Having spent the night in this way, the brahmana arose in the morning. Having bathed, he followed the rites,
kindling a sacrificial fire and offering oblations. He reached the cave known as Rudrani and rested near the lake
there. After resting, he awoke and headed towards Kailasa. He saw a golden gate that blazed in its beauty. He saw
Mandakini and Nalini, both belonging to the great-souled lord of riches[Mandakini is that part of the Ganga which flows through Kailasa. Nalini is a lake, full of lotuses, owned by
Kubera.]. There were rakshasas entrusted with
the task of protecting that lake full of lotuses and they were led by Manibhadra. On seeing the illustrious one, all of
them arose and greeted him. He also honoured those rakshasas, who were terrible in their valour, and told them to
quickly inform the lord of riches that he had arrived. O king! At this, the rakshasas told the illustrious one, 'King
Vaishravana is himself approaching you. The illustrious one knows the reason for your coming here. Behold. The
immensely fortunate one has arrived, blazing in his energy.' Vaishravana approached the unblemished Ashtavakra.
He duly asked him about his welfare and told the brahmana rishi, 'May you obtain happiness here. Tell me what
you desire from me. O brahmana! Tell me everything. I will do whatever you ask me to. O supreme among brahmanas! If it pleases you, do enter my residence. I will honour you properly. When your task has been accomplished, depart without any obstructions.' Having said this, he took that supreme among brahmanas and led him
into his residence. He gave him his own seat, water to wash his feet and a gift.

'"When both of them were seated, Kubera's companions, the yakshas, gandharvas and rakshasas, with Manibhadra leading them, also sat down. When they were seated, the lord of riches spoke these words. 'If they have your
permission, the large numbers of apsaras will commence dancing. It is my supreme duty to serve a guest like you.'

In  a sweet voice, the sage replied that it could commence. Urvara, Mishrakeshi, Rambha, Urvashi,  Alambusa,
Ghritachi, Chitra, Chitrangada, Ruchi, Manohara, Sukeshi, Sumukhi, Hasini, Prabha, Vidyuta, Prashama, Danta,
Vidyota, Rati-these and many other beautiful apsaras started to dance. The gandharvas played on many kinds of
musical instruments. The celestial music and dancing started. Without realizing it, the rishi, the extremely great ascetic, found pleasure and spent an entire divine year there. King Vaishravana spoke to the illustrious one. 'O brahmana! Behold. Since you arrived here, more than a year has elapsed. O brahmana! O noble one! This kind of performance is known by the name of gandharva. O brahmana! It shall be as you wish. Shall it continue? You are a
guest  in  my  household  and  a  guest  must  be  honoured.  All  of  us  will  quickly  follow  your  commands.  We are
supremely devoted to you.' Pleased with Vaishravana, the illustrious one replied, 'O lord of riches! You have honoured me, as is proper. I shall now depart. O lord of riches! I am pleased with you. Everything that you possess is
exactly like you. O illustrious one! Through your favours, I must now undertake the task the great-souled rishi[Vadanya.]
has entrusted me with. May your prosperity become even more prosperous.' The illustrious one emerged and headed in a northward direction. He passed Kailasa, Mandara and all the golden mountains.

'"Beyond this, there is the supreme region, the great mountain known as Kairata. He controlled himself, bowed
his head down and circumambulated it. Having descended again on the ground, he thought that he had been purified. Circumambulating the mountain thrice, he proceeded northwards. With joy in his heart, he advanced along
the plain ground that extended in front of him. He then saw another beautiful forest. There were roots and fruits
that grew in every season and it was full of birds. It was as if the beautiful forest was, here and there, adorned with
them. The illustrious one saw a divine hermitage there. There were hills with many kinds of forms, decorated with
gold and jewels. Gems were stuck to the ground and there were lakes. He saw many other extremely beautiful
things. At this, the maharshi with the cleansed soul was delighted in his mind. There, he saw a celestial and golden
house, covered everywhere with jewels. It was extraordinary in form and was superior to the residence of the lord
of riches. There were many giant palaces that were like mountains. There were beautiful vimanas and many kinds
of gems. The river Mandakini flowed there, covered with mandara flowers. There were gems that blazed with their
own radiance and the ground was strewn with diamonds. There were many kinds of houses, with colourful jewels
on their gates. Nets of pearls were flung around and there were decorations of gems and jewels. It was beautiful
everywhere, captivating the mind and the eye, and everything was auspicious. In every direction in that beautiful
place, he saw rishis. He began to think about where he might be able to find a residence. He advanced towards a
gate. Stationing himself there, he said, 'Let those who dwell here know me to be a guest who has arrived.' At this,
several maidens emerged from that house. They had many different forms and all of them were beautiful. O lord!
Actually, there were seven maidens. They were so beautiful that, whichever one he looked at, happened to steal his
mind. Despite making the best of efforts, he could not control his mind. Finally, the intelligent brahmana resorted
to his fortitude and controlled himself. The women said, 'O illustrious one! Enter.' The brahmana was filled with
curiosity about the extremely beautiful women in that house and entered the house. There, he saw an aged lady.
She was overcome with old age and was dressed in a white garment. Though she was lying down on a bed, she
was adorned with every kind of ornament. He spoke words of greeting and the lady reciprocated. She arose and
asked the brahmana to be seated.

'"Ashtavakra said, 'Let all these women go to their houses and let only a single one remain. Let the one who remains be extremely wise and extremely tranquil. As they wish, let the others depart.'

'"Thus addressed, the maidens circumambulated the rishi and left the house. The aged lady was the only one
who remained. She lay down on a radiant bed and he told her, 'O fortunate one! You should go to sleep. Night is
passing.' They were engaged in conversation, but the brahmana put an end to it, himself lying down on a second,
extremely radiant bed. After some time, she pretended that her limbs were trembling with the cold and she climbed
onto the maharshi's bed. The illustrious one respectfully welcomed her. O bull among men! She was delighted.
Stretching out her arms, she embraced the rishi. The rishi was indifferent and was as rigid as a piece of wood. On
seeing this, she was miserable and began to converse with the rishi again. 'O brahmana! A man may possess patience, but women are overcome by desire. I am overcome by kama and desire you. You should desire me. O brahmana rishi! Be happy and have intercourse with me. O brahmana! Embrace me. I am severely afflicted with desire
for you. This is the revered fruit obtained by your following dharma and observing austerities. As soon as I saw
you, I began to desire you. Desire me. All the riches that you see here, all the forests and everything else that you
see, are mine. There is no doubt that you will become their lord and also of me. If you find pleasure with me, I will
give you every object that you desire. O brahmana! Sport with me in these forests, which grant every fruit that one
desires. If you sport with me, I will become obedient to you. We will enjoy all the objects of desire, divine and human. For a woman, there is no task that is superior to that of having intercourse with a man. For us women, that is
the supreme fruit. When they are goaded by the god of love, women do whatever they wish. Even if they have to
walk over sand that is extremely hot, they do not get burnt.'

'"Ashtavakra replied, 'O fortunate one! I never have intercourse with another man's wife. The sacred texts of
dharma have decreed that intercourse with another person's wife is a sin. O fortunate one! I tell you truthfully that
I am indeed interested in kama. However, know that I am inexperienced in material objects and am only interested
in offspring for the sake of pursuing dharma and artha. There is no doubt that after having obtained a son, I will
proceed to those worlds. O fortunate one! Know that this is dharma and that there is nothing superior to this.'

'"The woman said, 'O brahmana! Anila, Agni, Varuna and the other residents of heaven are not loved by women
as much as Kama[Kama meaning the god of love. Anila is the god of the wind and Agni is the god of the fire.]. Women are addicted to sexual desire. Among thousands of women, even among hundreds of
thousands, there will perhaps be only one who is devoted to her husband. They do not care for the father, the lineage, the mother, the brother, the husband, the son or the husband's younger brother[Under the influence of desire.]. In the pursuit of pleasure,
they destroy the family, just as a great river destroys its banks[There is a pun which the translation misses. Kula means both family/lineage and bank.]. Prajapati himself has spoken about the wicked
vices of those evil ones.'"

'Bhishma continued, "The rishi was single-minded and replied to the woman, 'I find no pleasure or desire in
you. Tell me what I should do.' The woman said, 'O illustrious one! O immensely wise one! One sees according to
the time and the place[There is an implied suggestion that if Ashtavakra remains there, he may-find the lady attractive.]. Dwell here and my task will have been accomplished. After that, depart.' O Yudhishthira! The brahmana rishi agreed to this and remained there. He said, 'As long as I am interested in doing so, there is
no doubt that I will reside with you.' The rishi glanced at the woman and saw that she was overcome with old age.
He thought a lot about this and was tormented. Whenever the brahmana rishi looked at her limbs, he derived no
pleasure, because her beauty had been destroyed. 'She is the owner of this house. There is no doubt that her beauty
has been destroyed through some curse. I must deduce the reason and not arrive at any hasty conclusion.' He was
occupied with these thoughts and desired to know the reason. His mind was anxious and he thought about this, until the day was over. After this, the woman spoke to him. 'O illustrious one! Look at the sun. Its form is now tinged
by the evening clouds. What can I possibly do for you?' He told the woman, 'Bring me water for my bath. I will
restrain my speech and my senses. Having bathed, I will perform the evening rites.'"'


