Janamejaya said, 'O, great Brahmana! Please tell me about Kripa. How was he born from a clump of reeds? How
did he get his weapons[There is a break of continuity in the critical edition and Kripa appears out of the blue. In other editions, we
are told that Dhritarashtra wanted to find a teacher for the princes, since they were getting out of control. Kripa,
descended from Goutama, was chosen to teach the art of fighting.]?'
Vaishampayana said, "Maharshi Goutama had a son named Sharadvat. O king! This son was so named because
he was born armed with arrows[The word shara means arrow and Sharadvat is one with arrows.]. O destroyer of enemies! His intelligence was not attracted to the study of the
Vedas. Instead, his intelligence was more attracted to the study of Dhanur Veda[The science or knowledge of weapons.]. Just as those who know the
brahman acquire all their knowledge of the Vedas through austerities, he acquired all his weapons through austerities. Goutama's son worried the king of the gods because of his austerities and because of his expertise in Dhanur
Veda. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! The lord of the gods summoned a daughter of the gods named Janapadi
and told her, "Create impediments in his austerities." She went to Sharadvat's beautiful hermitage. The young
woman began to tempt Goutama's son, who had a bow and arrows in his hand. The apsara was only clad in a single piece of cloth. On seeing her wandering around in the forest alone, with a form that was unparalleled in the
worlds, Goutama's son's eyes became wide open. The bow and arrows slipped down from his hands onto the
ground. On seeing her, his body went numb. But he still possessed his knowledge and the power of his austerities.
The immensely wise one used his patience to resist temptation. O king! However, a sudden fever overcame him
and though he did not notice it, his semen issued forth. The sage left the hermitage and the apsara. His semen fell
on a clump of reeds and having fallen there, divided itself into two. From this, a pair of twins was born to Goutama's son Sharadvat.

'King Shantanu had gone on a hunt and one of his soldiers happened to notice the twins. He saw a bow and arrows around them and also a black deerskin. He therefore deduced that they were the sons of a Brahmana who was
learned in DhanurVeda. He showed the twins and the arrows to the king. Out of compassion, the king adopted the
twins. He took them home, saying that they were like his children. He performed the usual rites and began to rear
them. Goutama's son, who had left, became an expert in Dhanur Veda. Because the children had been reared out of
compassion, the lord of the earth decided to name them accordingly[The word kripa means compassion. One of the twins was a boy and he was named Kripa. The other one was
a girl and she was named Kripi.]. Through the power of his austerities,
Goutama's son got to know where they were, though no one knew the secret. He went there and told everything,
including his lineage. He taught him[Kripa.] the four parts of Dhanur Veda[There are four upavedas or minor vedas, of which, dhanurveda is one. Each upaveda is attached to one of
the main vedas. The other three upavedas are ayurveda (medicine), gandharvaveda (music) and sthapatyaveda
(architecture).] and the usage of many different kinds
of weapons, including all the secrets associated with them. He soon became a great teacher. All the maharathas
learnt Dhanur Veda from him. This included Dhritarashtra's sons, the immensely powerful Pandavas, the Vrishnis
and other kings who assembled from many countries.'


Vaishampayana said, 'Bhishma wanted his grandsons to do especially well and wished to instil discipline. He
therefore asked around for a preceptor who would be learned in archery and would be valorous. A man of little intelligence, who wasn't illustrious, wasn't an expert in all weapons and didn't have divine prowess, would never
have been able to discipline the immensely powerful Kurus.

'In ancient times, maharshi Bharadvaja was once getting ready to pour oblations into the fire. The rishi saw the
apsara Ghritachi herself, bathing[There is a break in continuity in the critical edition. Bharadvaja had gone to the Ganga for a bath before
making the offerings into the fire.]. The wind blew her garment away. At that, his semen issued out and the wise
one placed it in a vessel[Drona. This is usually a wooden vessel.]. The wise Drona was then born from that pot. He studied all the Vedas and the Vedangas. The powerful Bharadvaja, supreme among those who know dharma, taught the knowledge of the agneya
weapon to the illustrious Agniveshya. O supreme among those of the Bharata lineage! The sage who was born
from the fire[Agniveshya.] gave knowledge of the great weapon agneya to Bharadvaja's son.

'Bharadvaja had a friend and he was a king named Prishata. A son named Drupada was born to him. Prishata's
son, that bull among Kshatriyas, always used to go to Drona's hermitage to play and study with him. When Prishata died, Drupada became the king, a mighty-armed lord of men over northern Panchala. The illustrious Bharadvaja
also ascended to heaven. Obeying the instructions of his father and driven by the desire to obtain a son, the immensely famous Drona took Sharadvat's daughter Kripi for a wife. This descendant of Goutama was always engaged in agnihotra, the pursuit of dharma and self-control. She obtained a son named Ashvatthama. As soon as he
was born, he neighed like the horse Ucchaihshrava. On hearing this, an invisible voice said from the sky, "Since
this boy neighed like a horse and his voice carried over a long distance, he will be known as Ashvatthama[Ashva means horse and sthaman means strength or stamina.]."
Bharadvaja's son was extremely pleased with his son. He continued to live there and became extremely skilled in
Dhanur Veda.

'The great-souled son[Parashurama.] of Jamadagni was a conqueror of enemies. O king! He[Drona.] heard that he was giving
away all his wealth to Brahmanas. Bharadvaja's son spoke to him when Rama[Parashurama.] was already leaving for the forest. He said, "I have come in search of riches. Know that I am Drona, a bull among Brahmanas." Rama replied, "O
one blessed with the power of austerities! Nothing is left of the gold or other riches that I possessed. I have given it
all away to Brahmanas. I have given to Kashyapa, the goddess earth, right up to the boundaries of the ocean, with
all her settlements and garlands of cities. Now I only have this body with me, weapons and many precious
weapons. O Drona! Tell me quickly what you want. I will give it to you." Drona said, "O descendant of the Bhrigu
lineage! Give me all your arms and weapons of destruction, especially the knowledge of releasing them and withdrawing them." Agreeing to this, the descendant of the Bhrigu lineage gave him all his weapons, especially all the
mysteries of Dhanur Veda. Having received this, that supreme among Brahmanas became accomplished in the use
of weapons and happily went to see his beloved friend Drupada.'


Vaishampayana said, 'O king! Bharadvaja's powerful son went to Prishata's son and said, "Recognize me." Drupada replied, "O Brahmana! Your wisdom is lacking and inferior, if you suddenly begin to address me as your friend.
O one with a dull mind! No great king can ever be a friend with men like you. You have no prosperity, nor do you
have riches. Time decays everything, including friendship. It is true that we were friends once, but that was based
on a relationship of equality. No friendship can be found in the world that does not age; desire and anger both destroy it. Do not therefore talk about a friendship that has died out. O best of Brahmanas! Find a fresh friendship. I
was friends with you because it served my purpose. The poor cannot be a friend to the rich. The fool cannot be a
friend to the learned. The weak cannot a friend of the strong. Who wants an old friendship? Those of similar
wealth and similar lineage can have marriages and friendship together, not one who is rich with one who is poor.
One who is learned in the Vedas[The word used is shrotriya, which can also be translated as a learned Brahmana.] cannot be a friend to one who is not learned. One with chariots cannot be a
friend to one who has no chariots. A king cannot be a friend to one who is not a king. Who wants this old friendship?" Thus addressed by Drupada, Bharadvaja's powerful son was full of wrath and reflected for a while. The
wise one thought about a course of action for Panchala[Drupada, the king of Panchala.] and made his way to Gajasahrya[Hastinapura.], the chief city of
the Kurus.

'One day, all the Kuru princes came out of Gajasahrya together. The brave ones wandered around, playing with
a wooden ball[The word used is vita. I have translated this as ball. But there is no evidence to suggest that this was spherical. In all probability, this was a short piece of wood struck with another long piece of wood, something like a bat.
Guli-danda may be the closest approximation.]. While they were playing, the ball fell into a well. With all their efforts, they couldn't find a way
to recover the ball. The valorous Drona saw that the princes were unsuccessful in their attempts. He laughed at
them a little and then softly told them, "Shame on your Kshatriya prowess! Shame on your knowledge of weapons!
You have been born in the Bharata lineage and yet you cannot recover a ball. Here is a handful of reeds[The word used is ishika and means reed. In recounting this particular anecdote, renderings invariably interpret this as reed or grass. However, ishika also means arrow and Drona could have used arrows instead of reeds.
There is nothing in the text to counter the arrow interpretation.] that I
have invested with the mantra of my weapons. Look at their power, unmatched by that of anything else. I will
pierce the ball with one of these reeds and that reed with another one and that one with another. With the chain of
reeds, I will bring the ball up into my hands." On seeing this, the eyes of the princes widened with wonder. They
saw him pull up the ball and spoke to the one who had pulled the ball up. "O Brahmana! We pay homage to you.
No one else has the knowledge to do that. Who are you? We wish to know your lineage. What can we do for you?"

Drona replied, "Go to Bhishma and tell him of my appearance and qualities. He has great intelligence and will
know what should be done." The princes agreed. They went to Bhishma, the grandfather, and told him exactly
what the Brahmana had said and done. On hearing this from the princes, Bhishma immediately recognized Drona.
He thought that this would be the right preceptor. He went to him in person and paid him the highest of respects.
Bhishma, the greatest of those who wielded arms, then skilfully asked Drona about the reason why he had come
there and he told him the entire reason.

'Drona said, "Desiring to learn the science of Dhanur Veda, I earlier went to maharshi Agniveshya. I lived there
for a long time, as a humble brahmachari with matted hair, desiring to learn Dhanur Veda. The powerful Yajnasena, son of the king of Panchala, hardworking and dedicated, also studied with me under that teacher. There he became my friend and was always willing to do what brought me happiness. I also loved his company. O descendant
of the Kuru lineage! We studied together from the time we were boys. He would come to me and do things that
were pleasurable for me. O Bhishma! He used to say things that brought me pleasure: 'I am the favourite son of
my great-souled father. O friend! When I am instated by the king of Panchala in the kingdom, it will be yours to
enjoy. I swear truthfully on this. My pleasures, riches and happiness will all be yours.' This is the way he spoke to
me then. Having become skilled in use of weapons, I set out in search of riches. When I heard that he had been instated, I remembered those words. Happily, I went to see my old friend in his kingdom. O lord! Remembering
those words, I went to my old friend Drupada and told him, 'O tiger among men! Recognize me as your friend.'

But he laughed at me, as if I was a person who was unimportant. He said, 'O Brahmana! Your wisdom is lacking
and inferior. O Brahmana! Why have you suddenly come to me, claiming to be my friend? O one with a dull mind!
No great king can ever be a friend with men like you. You have no prosperity, nor do you have riches. The poor
cannot be a friend to the rich. The fool cannot be a friend to the learned. The weak cannot a friend of the strong.
The king cannot be a friend to one who is not a king. Who wants an old friendship?' O Bhishma! I was flooded
with anger at Drupada's words and I made my way to the land of the Kurus, in search of disciples who might have
the right qualities."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Bhishma and Pandu's sons accepted him as a preceptor. O king! With all kinds of riches,
he handed over his grandsons as disciples to Drona, in accordance with the prescribed manner. Delighted, that
great archer accepted the Kouravas as his disciples. Having accepted them, Drona called all of them together and
told them privately, when they were seated at his feet, "O unblemished ones! There is a special task in my heart.
You must promise me that you will give it to me when you have become skilled in the use of arms." O lord! When
they heard him, the Kouravas remained silent. But Arjuna, the scorcher of enemies, gave him a complete promise
and he then inhaled the scent of Arjuna's forehead repeatedly, embracing him delightedly and shedding tears of
joy.

'Then the valorous Drona taught Pandu's sons the use of many weapons, human and divine. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! Other princes also came to Drona, supreme among Brahmanas, to learn the use of arms-the Vrishnis, the Andhakas, kings from many countries and Radheya[Radha's son, Karna.], the son of the suta. They made Drona their preceptor. The suta's son was envious of Partha and always competed with him. With Duryodhana's support, he
showed his contempt for the Pandavas.'


