Janamejaya asked, 'Why is it called Sapta-Sarasvata? Who was the sage Mankanaka? How did that illustrious
one observe rituals and become successful? O supreme among brahmanas! What lineage was he born in and
what did he study? O supreme among brahmanas! In accordance with the proper way, I wish to hear all this.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'O king! The seven Sarasvatis cover this entire universe. Wherever she was powerfully
summoned, Sarasvati manifested herself there-Suprabha, Kanchanakshi, Vishala, Manashrada, Sarasvati, Oghavati, Suvenu and Vimalodaka[It is not clear whether Vimalodaka is a proper name or not. If it is a
proper name, the seven names of Sarasvati are in addition to the name of
Sarasvati. If Sarasvati is also one of the seven names, Vimalodaka is an
adjective, meaning the one with clear waters. However, since the seven
names occur separately later, Sarasvati is not one of the seven names.]. The grandfather[Brahma.] performed a great sacrifice on the surface of the earth and all
the brahmanas assembled there. Sacred incantations from the unblemished Vedas resounded there. At that great
sacrifice, performed in accordance with the indicated rites, the gods were also agitated[Because the sacrifice was so spectacular.]. O great king! The great
grandfather consecrated himself at that sacrifice. That sacrifice yielded every object of desire, everything that one
could mentally think of. It yielded the objectives of dharma and artha. O Indra among kings! All of these manifested themselves before the brahmanas who were there. The gandharvas went there and large numbers of apsaras
danced. Divine musical instruments were played upon. At the richness of the sacrifice, even the gods were satisfied, not to speak of the supreme wonder that arose among those who were human. In the grandfather's presence,
the sacrifice was held in Pushkara. O king! However, the rishis said, "This sacrifice will not lead to great fruits.
The best of rivers, Sarasvati, cannot be seen here." On hearing this, the illustrious one cheerfully summoned Sarasvati. O Indra among kings! Summoned by the grandfather to the sacrifice in Pushkara, Sarasvati came there as
Suprabha. On seeing the swift flows of the Sarasvati, the sages were satisfied and showed a great deal of respect to
the grandfather's sacrifice. Thus, for the sake of the grandfather and to satisfy the learned ones, Sarasvati, supreme
among rivers, manifested herself in Pushkara.

'O king! The sages assembled in Naimisha. O lord of men! They conversed colourfully amongst themselves. In
diverse ways, the sages there talked about the study of the Vedas. The sages who were assembled there remembered Sarasvati. O great king! The rishis, who wanted to perform a sacrifice, thought of her. O Indra among kings!
To aid the assembled great-souled ones, the immensely fortunate and sacred Sarasvati arrived there in Naimisha, as
Kanchanakshi, for the sake of the sages who wished to perform a sacrifice. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
The best of rivers arrived there and was worshipped.

'Gaya performed a great sacrifice in Gaya. Sarasvati, the best of rivers, was summoned to Gaya's sacrifice. In
Gaya, the rishis, rigid in their vows, named her Vishala.

'The river originates from the flanks of the Himalayas and is swift in flow. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Ouddalaka performed a sacrifice there. From every direction, a large number of sages assembled there. O king!
This was a sacred spot towards the north of the region of Kosala. Before the great-souled Ouddalaka had performed his sacrifice there, he had thought of Sarasvati. For the sake of that rishi, the best of rivers had arrived at
that spot. She was honoured by the large number of sages, clad in bark and deerskin. Because she had been summoned mentally, she came to be known as Manashrada[Here, the text actually says Manohrada, but the two words mean the
same thing. Literally, both mean something that has been summoned by
the mind.].

'There is a sacred region known as Suvenurishabha, frequented by rajarshis. There, the great-souled Kuru performed a sacrifice in Kurukshetra. The immensely fortunate Sarasvati, best among rivers, arrived there. O Indra
among kings! Sarasvati, with divine waters, was summoned to Kurukshetra as Oghavati by the great-souled
Vasishtha.

'Daksha performed a sacrifice in Gangadvara[The Critical edition abruptly excises a shloka here. The missing shloka
tells us that Sarasvati appeared there as Suvenu. Gangadvara is the gate
of the Ganga, meaning the opening in the Himalayas, through which,
Ganga descends into the plains. This is in Haridvara.].
'Brahma again performed a sacrifice on the sacred slopes of the Himalaya mountains. The illustrious one was
summoned there as Vimaloda[The same as Vimalodaka.].

'All of these come together as one flow at the tirtha of Sapta-Sarasvata. That tirtha is famous on earth. These are
the seven names of Sarasvati that are recounted. The tirtha of Sapta-Sarasvata is sacred and famous. Now hear
about the young Mankanaka, who observed brahmacharya. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! While he was
bathing, he saw a woman sporting a lot in the waters, as she pleased. She was also bathing and was beautiful in her
limbs. She was unblemished and was naked. O great king! At this, his semen fell into the waters of the Sarasvati.
The great ascetic picked it up and placed it in a pot. Collected in the pot, it became divided into seven parts. Seven
rishis were born from these and gave birth to the large number of Maruts[The Maruts are gods of the storm and the wind, sometimes identified
with Indra and sometimes with Shiva. While the number of Maruts
varies, it is often given as forty-nine, which fits the notion of seven times
seven.]. Vayuvega, Vayubala, Vayuha, Vayu-
mandala, Vayujvala, Vayureta and the valiant Vayuchakra-these were the ones who gave birth to the Maruts.

'O Indra among kings! Other than this, listen to another wonderful account on earth. This is about the conduct of
the maharshi, famous in the three worlds. O king! It has been heard that, in earlier times, after Mankanaka obtained
success, his hand was wounded by a blade of kusha grass. The juice of vegetables began to flow from this. On seeing the flow of vegetable juice, he was delighted and began to dance around. O brave one! He was overwhelmed
by his own energy and began to dance. On seeing him dance, all mobile and immobile objects also began to dance.
O king! Brahma and the other gods and the rishis, rich in their austerities, went to Mahadeva and told him about
the rishi. O lord of men! They said, "O god! You should do something to prevent him from dancing." On seeing
that the sage was extremely delighted, for the sake of the welfare of the gods, the god Mahadeva spoke to him. "O
brahmana! You know about dharma. Why are you dancing around in this way? O supreme among sages! What is
the reason for your delight? Tell me. O supreme among brahmanas! You are an ascetic and should be stationed on
the path of dharma." The rishi replied, "O brahmana[Shiva was in the disguise of a brahmana.]! Can you not see that vegetable juice is flowing from this
wound in my hand? O lord! On seeing this, I am overcome with great delight and am dancing." The god laughed at
the sage who was overcome by such emotion and said, "O brahmana! I am not astounded at all. Look at me." O
Indra among kings! Having spoken thus to the best of sages, the intelligent Mahadeva pierced his thumb with one
of his fingernails. O king! Ashes, white as snow, began to flow from that wound. O king! On seeing this, the sage
was ashamed and fell down at his feet. The rishi said, "I think that you are no other than the god Rudra, great and
supreme. O wielder of the trident! You are the refuge of the universe, the gods and the asuras. The learned ones say
that the universe has been created by you. At the time of the destruction of a yuga, everything enters into you
again. Even the gods are incapable of comprehending you. How can I? O unblemished one! Everything, Brahma
and the other gods, are seen in you. You are all the gods. You are the actor and the one who causes action. It is
through your favours that the gods enjoy happiness, free from fear." Thus did the rishi prostrate himself and worship Mahadeva. He said, "O illustrious one! Through your favours, let there be no decline in my store of austerities." The god was pleased and spoke again to the rishi. "O brahmana! Through my favours, your austerities will
multiply a thousandfold. I will always dwell with you in this hermitage. If a man worships me in Sapta-Sarasvata,
there is nothing that cannot be attained by him, in this world or in the next. There is no doubt that he will go to the
world known as Sarasvata[After death.]." Such was the infinitely energetic conduct of Mankanaka. He was the son of Sajanya, born from the wind god.'


Vaishampayana said, 'Rama spent a night there and was worshipped by the residents of the hermitage. The pious one, with the plough as his weapon, showed his affection for Manakanka. He gave gifts to the brahmanas
and spent a night there. The one with the plough was worshipped by a large number of sages and arose in the
morning. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He touched the waters and took his leave of all the sages. For the
sake of tirthas, the immensely strong Rama departed quickly. The one with the plough as his weapon went to the
tirtha known as Oushanasa. O king! This is also known as Kapalamochana, where the great sage, Mahodara, was
freed from the large head that stuck to his thigh. O great king! In earlier times, Rama hurled a rakshasa's head a
great distance. Before this, the extremely great-souled Kavya[Shukra, the preceptor of the demons. The wise Shukra laid down many
kinds of policy (niti).] had tormented himself through austerities there. It
was there that the great-souled one thought about all kinds of policies. It was there that he thought about the conflict of the daityas and the danavas[Not a conflict between the daityas and the danavas, but their conflict
with the gods.]. O king! Bala reached that supreme of tirthas. In due form, he donated riches
to the great-souled brahmanas.'

Janamejaya asked, 'O brahmana! Why is it known as Kapalamochana? How was the great sage freed from the
head? Why did it stick to him?'

Vaishampayana replied, 'O tiger among kings! Earlier, the great-souled Raghava dwelt in Dandakaranya, to
bring an end to the rakshasas who lived there. In Janasthana, with a razor-sharp arrow that was sharp at the edges,
he severed the head of an evil-souled rakshasa. This fell down in a great forest. O king! Mahodara was roaming
around in the forest at will. It fell down, pierced his bones and stuck to his thigh. Because it was stuck to his thigh,
the immensely wise brahmana could not go to any of the other tirthas. The great sage was in pain and pus exuded
from the wound. It has been heard that he went to all the tirthas on earth. The immensely ascetic one went to all the
rivers and the oceans. He spoke to all the rishis who had cleansed their souls. He bathed in all the tirthas, but was
not freed. The Indra among brahmanas then heard the great words of the sages about the famous and supreme
tirtha on the Sarasvati. It could free from all sins and was the supreme spot for obtaining success. The brahmana
went to that tirtha of Oushanasa. He touched the waters of Oushanasa tirtha. The head was freed from his leg and
fell down into the water there. O king! The one with the pure soul was freed from the taint. Having been successful, Mahodara delightedly went to his hermitage. The great ascetic brahmana became pure and was freed from his
exhaustion. He told all the rishis, who had cleansed their souls, about this. O one who grants honours! On hearing
his words, all the assembled ones named that tirtha Kapalamochana[Kapala means a skull and mochana means release. Thus, release from a
skull.]. Madhava honoured the brahmanas there
and gave them many gifts.

'The foremost among the Vrishni lineage then went to the hermitage of Rishangu. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! Arshtishena had tormented himself through terrible austerities there. The great sage Vishvamitra was able
to become a brahmana there[Vishvamitra was born as a kshatriya and wanted to become a brahmana.]. O Indra among kings! The handsome wielder of the plough was surrounded by
brahmanas there and departed from the spot known as Rishangu. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Rishangu
was an aged brahmana who was always engaged in austerities. Having made up his mind to cast aside his body, he
thought a lot. Rishangu summoned all his immensely ascetic sons and told them to take him to a spot where there
was a lot of water. Knowing about Rishangu's age, those great ascetics took that store of austerities to a tirtha on
the Sarasvati. Those intelligent sons took him to the Sarasvati, where there were hundreds of tirthas, frequented by
large numbers of brahmanas. O king! The immensely ascetic one bathed there, in accordance with the prescribed
rites. O tiger among men! The supreme among rishis knew about the qualities of tirthas and delightedly told all his
sons, who were worshipping him, "The northern bank of the Sarasvati has a lot of water. He who makes up his
mind to cast aside his body there and engages in meditation and austerities, will never suffer from death." The one
with the plough as his weapon, with dharma in his soul, touched the water there and bathed. He was devoted to
brahmanas and gave a lot of gifts to brahmanas.

'O Kouravya! He then went to Lokaloka, created by the illustrious grandfather. Arshtishena, rigid in his vows
and supreme among rishis, had performed great austerities there and become a brahmana. O king! Rajarshi Sindhudvipa, the great ascetic Devapi and the great sage Vishvamitra had also become brahmanas there. They were illustrious and great ascetics. They were fierce in their energy and great in their austerities. The strong and powerful
Balabhadra[Another name for Balarama.] went there.'


Janamejaya asked, 'Why did the illustrious Arshtishena torment himself through great austerities? How did Sindhudvipa become a brahmana? How did Devapi and the supreme Vishvamitra become brahmanas? O illustrious
one! Tell me all this. I am supremely curious.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'O king! Earlier, in krita yuga, there was a supreme among brahmanas, known as Arshtishena. He always resided in the house of his preceptor and was always engaged in studying. O king! He always
lived in the house of his preceptor. O lord of the earth! But his learning of the Vedas never became complete. O
king! Depressed, the great ascetic tormented himself through austerities. Because of his austerities, he obtained the
supreme Vedas[That is, knowledge of the Vedas.]. The supreme among rishis obtained learning of the Vedas and attained success. The immensely
great ascetic granted three boons to that tirtha. "From today, a man who bathes in the tirtha on this great river[Sarasvati.],
will obtain all the fruits of a horse sacrifice. From today, there will be no fear here from predatory beasts[Alternatively, snakes.]. From a
little bit of effort, all the fruits will be obtained." Having spoken thus, the immensely energetic sage went to heaven. Thus did the illustrious and powerful Arshtishena attain success. O great king! In that tirtha, the powerful Sindhudvipa and Devapi obtained the exalted status of being a brahmana.

'O son[The word used is tata. This means son, but is affectionately used towards
anyone younger or junior.]! In that way, Koushika controlled his senses and always engaged in austerities. Severely tormenting
himself through austerities, he attained the status of a brahmana. There was a great kshatriya, famous everywhere
on earth by the name of Gadhi. O king! His son was the powerful Vishvamitra. O son! King Koushika performed a
great sacrifice[The use of the word Koushika causes a problem, since it is being used
for both Vishvamitra and his father. The entire family was descended
from Kusha. Vishvamitra's father was Gadhi. Hence, both Gadhi and
Vishvamitra are Koushika.] and obtained the immensely ascetic Vishvamitra as his son. Having decided to cast aside his body,
he decided to instate his son. The subjects bowed down and said, "O immensely wise one! Do not go. Save us
from a great fear." Having been thus addressed, Gadhi replied to the subjects, "My son will be the protector of the
entire universe." O king! Saying this and instating Vishvamitra, Gadhi went to heaven. Vishvamitra became the
king. However, despite making efforts, he could not protect the earth. The king heard that there was a great fear
from the rakshasas. With four kinds of forces, he went out of the city. Having gone a long distance, he reached Vasishtha's hermitage. O king! His soldiers created a lot of nuisance there. When the illustrious brahmana Vasishtha
returned to his hermitage, he saw that the entire large forest was being destroyed. O great king! Vasishtha, supreme
among sages, became angry at this. He instructed his cow to create a large number of terrible mountainous hunters.
Thus instructed, the cow created men who were terrible in form. From every direction, they clashed against those
soldiers and caused carnage. On seeing that the soldiers were driven away, Gadhi's son, Vishvamitra, made up his
mind that austerities were supreme. O king! He meditated in that supreme tirtha along the Sarasvati. He observed
vows and fasted. He emaciated his own body. He lived on water. He lived on air. He lived on leaves. He slept on
the bare ground and observed many other separate rules. The gods made many attempts to dislodge him from his
vows. But the great-souled one's mind never deviated from those rules. He made supreme efforts and tormented
himself through many kinds of austerities. In his energy, Gadhi's son became as radiant as the sun. When Vishvamitra was thus engaged in austerities, the grandfather, the granter of boons, thought that he would grant the immensely ascetic one a boon. O king! He asked for the boon that he might become a brahmana. Brahma, the grandfather of all the worlds, agreed. The immensely illustrious one thus became a brahmana through his fierce austerities. Successful in his objective, he roamed around the entire earth, like a god. O king! In that supreme tirtha,
Rama cheerfully gave away many riches, milk-yielding cows, carts, beds, garments, ornaments and the best of
food and drink to the best of brahmanas, after having worshipped them. O king! Rama then went to the hermitage
of Baka, which was not that far away. It has been heard that Dalbhya Baka tormented himself through fierce austerities there.'


