'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! There were many resplendent standards of diverse forms, belonging to the Parthas
and those on our side. Describe those to me."

'Sanjaya replied, "Those great-souled ones possessed many different standards, of diverse forms. They had different forms, colours and names. Listen to me. The chariots of those foremost among rathas had many different
kinds of standards. O Indra among kings! They were seen to blaze like fire. They were golden, decorated with
gold, or garlanded with gold. They were like golden summits and like giant mountains made out of gold. Those
standards were surrounded by pennants in every direction. These were of many different colours and hues and surrounded them everywhere. Those pennants were stirred by the wind. They were seen to be dancing around, like
female dancers in an arena. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Those pennants had the complexion of Indra's
weapon[That is, Indra's bow, the rainbow.]. They stirred above the chariots and adorned the maharathas. There was a standard with the sign of an
ape, as fierce as the face and tail of a lion[The sense is not very clear. Presumably, the fierce ape had the face and tail of a lion.]. This belonged to Dhananjaya and was seen to cause terror in battle.
O king! The flag was adorned with the supreme of apes. Your soldiers were terrified by the standard of the wielder
of Gandiva. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that way, the top of the standard of Drona's son had the mark
of a lion's tail and was seen to be as radiant as the rising sun. It was golden and fluttered in the wind. It was as resplendent as Shakra's standard. The standard of Drona's son arose high and delighted the Indras among the
Kouravas. The standard of Adhiratha's son[Karna.] had the mark of an elephant's housing that was fashioned in gold. O
great king! It dazzled and in the battle, seemed to fill up the sky. In the battle, golden pennants and garlands were
attached to Karna's standard. Stirred by the wind, they seemed to dance around on top of the chariot. The preceptor
of the Pandus was the illustrious brahmana. Kripa, the son of Goutama, had a well-crafted bull on his[Before Drona, Kripa was the preceptor of the Kouravas and the Pandavas.]. O king!
With the mark of the bull, the maharatha was resplendent, like the destroyer of Tripura is dazzling with the mark of
the bull[Shiva destroyed a city of the demons named Tripura and Shiva has the bull on his standard.]. Vrishasena had a golden peacock, adorned with gems and jewels. Stationed there, it seemed to crow
and adorn the front of the army. The great-souled one's chariot was dazzling with the peacock. O Indra among
kings! It was like the resplendent Skanda aloft his peacock. Shalya, the king of Madra, possessed a beautiful golden image of a plough on the top of his standard and it was like the flame of a fire. O venerable one! The plough
was luminescent on the top of his chariot. The plough was surrounded by prosperity, with every kind of seed
sprouting from it. A silver boar adorned the top of the king of Sindhu's standard. It was decorated with golden nets
and had the complexion of a bloodless crystal[Bloodless probably means white.]. With that silver standard, Jayadratha looked beautiful, like
Pusha was radiant in ancient times in the battle between the gods and the asuras[Pusha means the sun god.]. Somadatta's intelligent son
was devoted to sacrifices and his standard had the mark of a sacrificial stake and was seen to be as radiant as the
sun or the moon. O king! Somadatta's son was dazzling with that golden sacrificial stake. It was like a sacrificial
stake raised in rajasuya, the best of all sacrifices. O great king! Shala had a large silver elephant. The pennant was
golden and colourful and was adorned with the sign of peacocks. O bull among the Bharata lineage! That pennant
adorned your troops, like the giant white elephant adorns the army of the king of the gods[This is a reference to Indra's elephant, Airavata.]. There was a bejewelled elephant on the king's standard, which was decorated with gold[The king means Duryodhana.]. It tinkled with the sound of one hundred
bells and colourfully blazed on the supreme of chariots. O king! O lord of the earth! Your son, a bull among the
Kurus, looked extremely resplendent with that large standard in the battle. These nine supreme standards arose in
your army. They blazed amidst the forces, like the sun at the time of the destruction of a yuga.

'"The tenth standard was Arjuna's, marked with a giant ape. Arjuna blazed, like a fire on the Himalayas. The
maharathas, scorchers of enemies, grasped colourful, bright and extremely large bows and swiftly advanced
against Arjuna. Partha, the destroyer of enemies, also grasped the bow Gandiva, the performer of divine deeds. O
king! All this happened because of your evil counsel. Because of your crimes, many men and many warriors were
killed. They had been summoned from many directions, with horses, chariots and elephants. With Duryodhana at
the forefront, there were these on one side and that bull among Pandus on the other. They roared at each other and
the encounter began. Kounteya had Krishna as his charioteer and performed supreme and extraordinary deeds.
Fearlessly, the single one advanced against the many. The mighty-armed one was resplendent when he stretched
the bow Gandiva. The tiger among men wished to kill Jayadratha. O great king! Arjuna released thousands of arrows. That scorcher of enemies made the warriors on your side invisible. In that battle, all those maharathas, tigers
among men, also showered down a cloud of arrows and made Partha invisible. On seeing that Arjuna, bull among
the Kuru lineage, was thus covered through the hands of those lions among men, a great sound arose among the
soldiers."'


'Dhritarashtra asked, "O Sanjaya! When Arjuna reached Saindhava and the Panchalas were enveloped by Bharadvaja's son and clashed against the Kurus, what did they do?"

'Sanjaya said, "O great king! There was a battle in the afternoon and it made the body hair stand up. Drona was
like the stake in the clash between the Panchalas and the Kurus. O venerable one! The Panchalas were cheerful in
their minds and wished to kill Drona. They roared and showered down arrows. A tumultuous and terrible battle
commenced between the Panchalas and the Kurus and it was like that between the gods and the asuras. With the
Pandavas, all the Panchalas reached Drona's chariot. Wishing to penetrate his array, they displayed great weapons.
There were rathas stationed on their chariots and with medium speed[They probably didn't require greater speed, because they were already close.], they caused a tremor and reached up to
Drona's chariot. Brihatkshatra, the maharatha from the Kekayas, showered sharp arrows that were like the great
Indra's vajra and advanced. He was swiftly countered by the immensely illustrious Kshemadhurti, who showered
hundreds and thousands of sharp arrows. Dhrishtaketu, bull among the Chedis and possessing great strength,
quickly attacked Drona, like the great Indra against Shambara. On seeing him suddenly descend, like death with a
gaping mouth, Viradhanva, the great archer, quickly countered him. O great king! Yudhishthira was stationed
there, desiring victory, and he and his soldiers were repulsed by the valiant Drona. Nakula was skilled in battle and
was valiant. O lord! As he advanced, your valorous son, Vikarna, countered him. Durmukha, the afflicter of enemies, repulsed the advancing Sahadeva with many thousand swift arrows. Vyaghradatta used extremely sharp and
pointed arrows to repeatedly make Satyaki, tiger among men, tremble. Droupadi's sons, tigers among men, angrily
released supreme arrows. But those best of rathas were repulsed by Somadatta's son. Bhimasena advanced wrath-
fully. But he was countered by Rishyashringa's maharatha son, who was fierce and terrible of form[The rakshasa Alambusa.]. O king! In
the battle, the encounter that took place between the man and the rakshasa was like that between Rama and Ravana
in ancient times.

'"O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Yudhishthira, foremost among the Bharata lineage, struck Drona with
ninety arrows with drooping tufts and these penetrated all the inner organs. At this, Drona became angry and struck
the illustrious Kounteya, foremost among the Bharata lineage, between the breasts with twenty-five arrows. While
all the archers looked on, Drona again struck him, his horses, his charioteer and his standard with twenty arrows.
However, Pandava, with dharma in his soul, showed the dexterity of his hands and countered Drona's arrows with
a shower of arrows of his own. The archer Drona became extremely enraged in that battle. He suddenly severed
the bow of the great-souled Dharmaraja. Having severed the bow, the maharatha swiftly covered him everywhere
with many thousands of arrows. All those there saw that King Yudhishthira had been rendered invisible because of
the arrows of Bharadvaja's son and thought that he had been killed. Some others thought that he had run away. O
Indra among kings! They said, 'The king has been slain by the illustrious brahmana.' Dharmaraja Yudhishthira
thus confronted a great hardship. He cast aside the bow that had been severed by Bharadvaja's son in the battle and
grasped another divine bow that was capable of bearing a great burden and was more forceful. In that encounter,
the brave one sliced down all the thousands of arrows that had been released by Drona and it was extraordinary.
Having severed the arrows, the king's eyes became red with rage. In that battle, he grasped a lance that was capable of shattering the mountains. It was extremely terrible and fierce. It possessed a golden handle and was decorated with eight bells. The extremely powerful one roared cheerfully and hurled it. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the beings screamed in terror. On seeing the lance raised by Dharmaraja in that battle, all the beings suddenly exclaimed, 'May all be well with Drona.' Hurled from the king's arms, it was like a snake that had cast off
its skin. It blazed in the sky and in the directions and the sub-directions. It was like a she-serpent with a flaming
mouth and it was as if Drona confronted death. O lord of the earth! On seeing it suddenly descend, Drona, supreme
among those who knew about weapons, released the brahmastra. That weapon reduced the terrible-looking lance to
ashes and then quickly advanced towards the chariot of the illustrious Pandava. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When Drona's weapon advanced, the immensely wise King Yudhishthira used a brahmastra to pacify it. In
that battle, he then pierced Drona with five arrows with drooping tufts and used a sharp kshurapra arrow to severe
his great bow. O venerable one! Drona, the destroyer of kshatriyas, cast aside the severed bow and suddenly hurled
a club at Dharma's son. On seeing that the club was powerfully descending, Yudhishthira, the scorcher of enemies,
became angry and grasped a club. Those two clubs were powerfully hurled towards each other. They countered
each other and emitted sparks because of the collision. They then fell down on the ground. O venerable one! Drona
became extremely angry with Dharmaraja. He used four extremely sharp and supreme arrows to kill his horses.
With another arrow, he severed his bow, which was like Indra's standard. He severed Pandava's standard and
struck him with three arrows. With the horse slain, Yudhishthira quickly descended from the chariot. O bull among
the Bharata lineage! The king stood there, with his arms raised and without any weapons. O lord! On seeing that
he was without a chariot, and specifically without any weapons, Drona confounded the enemy and all the soldiers.
Displaying the dexterity of his hands, the one who was firm in his vows released large numbers of sharp arrows
and advanced against the king, like an angry lion towards a deer[Drona wished to capture Yudhishthira alive.]. On seeing that Drona, the destroyer of enemies, was advancing, sudden sounds of lamentation arose from the assembled Pandavas. O venerable one! 'The
king has been slain. The king has been slain by Bharadvaja's son.' These and other loud noises arose from all the
Pandu soldiers. But the king ascended Sahadeva's chariot. Those swift horses bore Yudhishthira, Kunti's son,
away."'


