Vaishampayana said, 'In that battle, King Duryodhana then spoke to Bhishma, Drona, the tiger among charioteers,
and the great maharatha Kripa. "Both Karna and I have told the preceptor this several times. I will say it again, because I am not satisfied with having spoken it earlier. When they were defeated, our pledge was that they would
dwell for twelve years in the forest and undetected for one year in any country. The thirteenth year is not yet over.
Bibhatsu, who was supposed to live in disguise, has appeared before us. If Bibhatsu arrives before the period of
concealment is over, the Pandavas will have to dwell again in the forest for twelve years. Their avarice may have
made them forget, or we may have been confused. Bhishma should know whether they have exceeded, or fallen
short of, the stipulated period. If things are not clear, there is always scope for doubt. Something that is thought of
in one way, may turn out to be another. We followed the northern direction in order to fight with the army of the
Matsyas. However, if Bibhatsu arrives, we cannot turn away. We came here to fight with the Matsyas, on behalf of
the Trigartas. The many depredations of the Matsyas have been recounted to us. They[The Trigartas.] sought refuge with us out
of fear and we have given them our promise. The arrangement was that they would first, on the afternoon of the
seventh lunar day, seize the great wealth of cattle of the Matsyas and we would again do the same at sunrise on the
eighth lunar day. They may not have been able to find the cattle, or they may have been defeated. They may have
deceived us and concluded an alliance with the Matsyas. Or the Matsya, together with his countrymen, may have
defeated them. With his entire army, he is now advancing towards us to fight. It is possible that an extremely valorous one among them is leading the way, so as to defeat us. Or it may be Matsya himself. Whether it is the king of
Matsya, or whether it is Bibhatsu, who has arrived, it is our agreement that all of us must fight. Why are our
supreme charioteers, Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Vikarna and Drona's son[Ashvatthama.] standing idly on their chariots? All of
these maharathas seem to be confused at this time. There is no other option but to fight. Therefore, resolve yourselves accordingly. If, to save our cattle, we have to confront in battle the god who wields the vajra[Indra wields the vajra.] or Yama himself, who would flee to Hastinapura? There may be doubt about the horses. But who among the foot soldiers will
remain alive, even if they have been pierced by arrows and dispersed in the deserted forest[The sense is that soldiers wouldn't flee alive from the field of battle.]? Setting the preceptor
aside, let us decide on the course of action. He[Drona.] knows their[The Pandavas.] minds and tries to terrify us. I can perceive his special affection towards Arjuna. As soon as he sees Bibhatsu arrive, that is the reason he praises him. Decide on a
course of action so that our army is not destroyed in a foreign land, in the great forest and in the summer. Decide
on a course of action so that this army is not confused and routed by the enemy. Having heard the neighing of horses, why should one praise the enemy? Horses always neigh, whether they are walking or standing. The wind always blows. Vasava[Indra.] always showers down. The roar of the thunder can be heard many times. What does this
have to do with Partha and why should he be praised? That can only be out of love towards him and hatred and
anger towards us. Preceptors are indeed compassionate and wise. They can see what is wrong. But they should
never be consulted when a great danger arrives. Learned ones are adornments when they recount their beautiful
tales in fine palaces, assemblies and dwelling houses. Learned ones are adornments when they perform wonderful
acts in assemblies of people and when sacrificial offerings have to be prepared. They know the weaknesses of others and human character. Learned ones are adornments when they point out defects in the preparation of food. But
ignore learned ones when they praise the qualities of enemies. Instead, decide on a course of action so that the enemy can be killed. Let the cattle be protected. Let the soldiers immediately be arranged in battle formations.
Arrange for guards in the appropriate places, so that we can fight with the enemy."'


'Karna said, "I see that all you honourable ones[The text uses the word ayushmat, which means someone with a long life. But it is also used for someone who
has been born in a noble lineage.] are frightened and terrified. All of you do not wish to fight and
are standing idly. Whether it is the king of Matsya or Bibhatsu who has come, I will restrain him, the way the
shoreline holds back the abode of makaras[A makara is a mythical aquatic animal, which can loosely be translated as crocodile or shark. The abode of
makaras is the ocean.]. Arrows with straight feathers will be shot from my bow and they will
not be repulsed, like gliding snakes. They have golden tufts and are extremely sharp at the tip. Released from my
hand, these arrows will cover Partha, like locusts covering a tree. These winged shafts will firmly strike against the
string of the bow, and the sound of the slapping of palms will be like that of a kettledrum. Bibhatsu has concentrated for eight and five years[Adding up to thirteen. Arjuna has been thinking of the impending battle for thirteen years.] and is fondly looking forward to a battle in which he will strike me. Kounteya, with
the qualities of a brahmana, is the right receptacle to receive thousands of arrows shot by me. This great archer is
famous in the worlds. O best of the Kurus! But in no way am I inferior to Arjuna. I will release these golden arrows, shafted with the feathers of vultures, and the sky will seem to be covered with fireflies. I gave my word to
Dhritarashtra's son[Duryodhana.] earlier and I will repay that debt today. I will kill Arjuna today. My feathered arrows will split
the sky and envelope the directions. They will appear like locusts in the firmament. Partha's touch is like that of
Indra's vajra and he is as energetic as the great Indra. But I will oppress him, the way an elephant is oppressed with
flaming torches. He is as unassailable as the fire. But I will assail him with swords, spears and arrows. The flaming
Pandava burns down enemies. But the force of my horses will be like a storm and the roar of my mass of chariots
will be like thunder. The shower of my arrows will be like a great cloud and I will pacify Pandava. The arrows released from my bow will be like the virulent poison of snakes to Partha. Those arrows will pierce him, like serpents gliding into a termite hill. I have obtained weapons from Jamadagni's son, supreme among rishis[Karna was taught by Parashurama, Jamadagni's son.]. Using
their power, I can fight with Vasava himself. With an arrow[The word used is bhalla, which can mean some other kind of missile too.], I will kill the monkey that is stationed on the top of
his standard. It will fall down on the ground today, uttering a terrible roar. The other beings who are stationed on
the enemy's flag will be tormented. Oppressed by me, they will fly in all the directions and their wails will rise up
into the sky. Today I will uproot with its roots the stake that has been impaled in Duryodhana's heart for a long
time. I will bring down Bibhatsu from his chariot. Today, the Kouravas will see Partha bereft of his chariot, with
his horses dead and his manliness destroyed, sighing like a serpent. Let the Kurus go as they wish, taking only the
riches[The cattle.] with them. Or let them be stationed on their chariots and witness my battle."'


