Vaishampayana said,  'The  supreme  among  the  Bharata  lineage  instructed  the  soldiers.  Those men were like
guardians of the worlds and protected everyone, with Arjuna at the front. In delight, a loud roar arose, "Yoke
the vehicles. Get ready." The riders shouted, "Yoke the mounts." Some men advanced on vehicles, others on horses as swift as thought. There were chariots that were like cities, blazing like the fire. O lord of men! Others were on
Indras  among  elephants  or  camels.  Some  advanced  on  foot.  There  were  warriors  who  fought  with  nails  and
spikes[This is a bad translation. What it really means is that there were warriors who fought with weapons made out of
iron, shaped like the talons of tigers. These were worn on the hands.]. The residents of the city and the countryside were there, in many kinds of vehicles. Wishing to see Dhritarashtra, they followed the king of the Kurus. On the king's instructions, the preceptor, Goutama Kripa, assembled
all the soldiers and the commanders and advanced towards the hermitage. Yudhishthira, the prosperous king of the
Kurus, was surrounded by brahmanas. He was praised by many bards, raconteurs and minstrels. A white umbrella
was held aloft his head. The descendant of the Kuru lineage advanced with a large number of chariots. Vrikodara,
the performer of terrible deeds, was on an elephant that was as large as a mountain. The son of the wind god advanced, equipped with machines and implements of war. Madri's sons were astride well-prepared horses. They
were cheerful at the prospect of seeing their mother. They were clad in armour and had standards. The immensely
energetic Arjuna was on a chariot that was as radiant as the sun. This was yoked to divine and white horses and he
followed the king on this. For the large number of women who were on palanquins, Droupadi led the way. The superintendents of the women advanced, showering around large quantities of riches. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The Pandava soldiers were beautiful, with many men and elephants, accompanied by the sounds of flutes and
veenas. O lord of the earth! As they advanced, the bulls among the Kurus progressively dwelt along the banks of
rivers and beautiful lakes. On  Yudhishthira's  instructions, the immensely energetic Yuyutsu and Dhoumya, the
priest, were left with the task of protecting the city. Progressively, King Yudhishthira reached Kurukshetra. He
crossed the extremely sacred river, Yamuna. From a distance, the intelligent rajarshi saw the hermitage of Shatayupa and Kouravya Dhritarashtra. All the people were delighted and entered the forest. O bull among the Bharata lineage! They filled everything with a loud uproar.'


Vaishampayana said, 'When they were some distance away, the Pandavas descended and proceeded on foot.
They bowed down in humility and advanced towards the king's hermitage. All the citizens, the residents of the
kingdom, the women and the foremost among the Kurus followed them on foot. The Pandavas reached Dhritarashtra's lonely hermitage, only frequented by a large number of deer and beautiful with groves of plantain trees. There
were ascetics there, engaged in different kinds of vows. When the Pandavas arrived, they were curious and came
forward to see them. His voice choking with tears, the king asked them, "Where is the upholder of the Kourava lineage? Where has our elder father gone?" They replied, "The lord has gone to bathe in the Yamuna and to collect
flowers and water." On foot, all of them swiftly proceeded along the path that was indicated to them and saw him
from  a  distance.  Wishing  to  see  their  father,  they  advanced  swiftly.  Sahadeva  quickly  dashed  towards  Pritha.
Weeping aloud, the intelligent one touched his mother's feet. On seeing her beloved son, tears also flowed down
her cheeks. She raised her son and embraced him with her arms, informing Gandhari that Sahadeva had come.
Then Pritha saw the king, Bhimasena, Arjuna and Nakula and swiftly came towards them. She was ahead of the
couple whose sons had been killed and was dragging them along. Seeing her, they[The Pandavas.] fell down at her feet. The
great-minded and intelligent lord, the king[Dhritarashtra.], recognized them through their voices and touch. Showering  down
tears and following the prescribed rites, the great-souled ones greeted the king, Gandhari and their mother. They
took away the water pots and carried those themselves. The Pandavas were again comforted by their mother and
regained their senses. The women, whose husbands were lions among men, the warriors and the inhabitants of the
city and the countryside saw the king. King Yudhishthira presented each of them, announcing their names and their
families and they were honoured back in return. Surrounded by them, the king's[Dhritarashtra's.] eyes were filled with tears of joy
and he thought himself to be back in his house in the city of Gajasahvya. With Gandhari and the intelligent Kunti,
the king greeted his daughters-in-law, Krishna and the others and was delighted. He went to the hermitage, populated by siddhas and charanas. He wished to see it, since it was populated by the visitors, like the firmament by
large numbers of stars.'


