Sanjaya said, "While that tumultuous engagement was going on, Bhima was fighting alone and countering the
army of the sons of Dhritarashtra. He was surrounded by large numbers of the enemy. In that situation of great
fear, he told his charioteer, 'O charioteer! Bear me swiftly on these horses. I will send all the sons of Dhritarashtra
to Yama.' Having been thus addressed by Bhimasena, the charioteer advanced with a fierce speed against the army
of your son, that is, towards the army that Bhima wished to advance against. A large number of Kurus advanced
against him from every direction and the enemy possessed elephants, chariots, horses and foot soldiers. With innumerable arrows, they powerfully struck the best of horses from every side. The great-souled one severed those descending arrows with his gold-tufted arrows. Those gold-tufted arrows were severed into two and three fragments
by the arrows released by Bhima and fell down[The enemy also had gold-tufted arrows.]. O king! In the midst of the kings on your side, elephants,
rathas, horses and foot soldiers were slain by Bhima and roared loudly. O Indra among men! They were like mountains shattered by the thunder. The foremost among kings were shattered by Bhimasena, who was single-handed.
In that encounter, they rushed against Bhima from every side, like birds in search of flowers heading towards a
tree. When they attacked him, in the midst of your soldiers, he[Bhima.] exhibited a force that was greater than the greatest. He was like the Destroyer at the time of destruction. He was the like the one who exterminates all beings, with
a staff in his hand[That is, Yama.]. In that battle, his speed was greater than that of the greatest. Those on your side could not
withstand it. It was as if the one who destroys all beings, when the time of destruction has arrived, had descended
with a gaping mouth. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that battle, the great-souled one scorched the army of
the Bharatas. They were frightened of Bhima and fled in different directions, like large masses of clouds driven
away by a great wind.

' "The intelligent and powerful Bhimasena then spoke cheerfully to his charioteer again. 'O suta! Chariots and
standards have assembled and are advancing towards us. Find out whether they belong to the enemy or to us. Since
I am engaged in fighting, I cannot make out. I should not envelop our own soldiers with arrows. O Vishoka[Vishoka was Bhima's charioteer.]! I
see the enemy on all sides and I am extremely anxious that the king[Yudhishthira.] should not be suffering. Kiriti has not yet
returned. O suta! That is the reason I am overcome by great sorrow. O charioteer! I am grieving that Dharmaraja
has abandoned me in the midst of the enemy and has departed. I do not know whether he and Bibhatsu are alive or
dead. That is the reason I am overcome with grief. However, I will assume a terrible form and drive away these
soldiers. Once they have been destroyed, I shall rejoice. Stationed in the midst of the enemy, I will slay the assembled ones. Then, I will rejoice with you. Count all the quivers and arrows and tell me. How many arrows are still
left on my chariot? What kinds are there and what is their length? O suta! Determine this and tell me.' Vishoka
replied, 'O brave one! There are sixty thousand arrows, ten thousand kshurapra arrows and the same number of
broad-headed arrows. O brave one! There are two thousand iron arrows. O Partha! There are three thousand
pradaras[A pradara is a special kind of arrow.]. O Pandaveya! The weapons that still remain cannot be carried on six carts pulled by bullocks. Release these and others in thousands. You possess clubs, swords, your arms and other stores.' Bhima said, 'O suta!
Behold. In this awful engagement today, I will shatter all the kings with my speed and force. In the encounter, my
fierce arrows will be terrible in form. The sun will disappear and it will be like the world of the dead. O suta! The
kings will know this today, and so will their sons, that Bhima has been submerged in this battle and has singlehandedly vanquished the Kurus in the encounter. All the Kurus will be destroyed in the battle, or let the worlds
know about my deeds since childhood[In the event that Bhima dies.]. Single-handedly, I will bring all of them down or let all of them crush
Bhimasena. There are those who pronounce benedictions on virtuous deeds. Let those gods bless me. Let Arjuna,
the slayer of enemies, come here, like Shakra swiftly summoned to a sacrifice. Behold. The army of the Bharatas
has been shattered. Why are those Indras among men running away? It is evident that the intelligent Savyasachi,
foremost among men, has shrouded the soldiers with his swift arrows. O Vishoka! Behold. The standards are being
routed in the battle, and so are the large numbers of elephants, horses and infantry. The chariots are being shattered, afflicted by arrows and javelins, and so are the rathas. O suta! Behold. The Kourava soldiers are being severely slaughtered and destroyed. Dhananjaya's force is like that of the vajra, and his golden arrows, tufted with
the feathers of peacocks and hawks, are devouring them. The chariots, horses and elephants are being driven away.
Large numbers of foot soldiers are being crushed. All the Kouravas are confounded. The terrified elephants are
running away, as if from a conflagration. O Vishoka! Sounds of lamentation are arising in the battle. Kings among
elephants are emitting loud shrieks.' Vishoka replied, 'O Pandava! All your desires have come true. In the midst of
the elephant arrays, the standard with the ape can be seen. Behold. Like lightning flashing amidst blue clouds, the
bow is being extended there. Astride the top of Dhananjaya's standard, the ape can be seen from every direction.
The celestial gem on the diadem is as radiant as the rays of the sun[Arjuna was known as Kiriti because he wore a diadem.]. Alongside, behold the terrible and extremely loud blare of Devadatta, pale in complexion[Devadatta was the name of Arjuna's conch shell.]. Janardana has the reins in his hand. He is driving through the
army of the enemy. Behold. Next to Janardana is his chakra, increasing Keshava's fame. It is sharp at the edges
and is like the sun in complexion. Its handle is like the vajra. It is always worshipped by the Yadus. O brave one!
Behold.' Bhima said, 'O charioteer! Because you have pleased me greatly and given me good news, I will give
you fourteen supreme villages, one hundred maidservants and twenty chariots. O Vishoka! You have given me
news about Arjuna.'" '


Sanjaya said, "In the battle, hearing the clatter of chariots and roars of lions, Arjuna asked Govinda to drive the
horses quickly. On hearing Arjuna's words, Govinda told Arjuna, 'I am proceeding extremely swiftly to the spot
where Bhima is stationed.' The horses that were as white as snow, or conch shells, advanced. The harnesses were
decorated with golds, pearls and jewels. It was as if the lord of the gods was advancing in great anger, grasping the
vajra, desiring victory and wishing to kill Jambha[Jambha was a demon killed by Indra.]. There was a large number of chariots, horses, elephants and
foot soldiers, accompanied by the whizzing sound of arrows and the clatter of hooves. The earth and the directions
echoed with the sound. Angrily, they advanced against Jaya, lion among men. There was a great clash between
them and Partha. That great encounter brought destruction to bodies and lives. It was like that between the asuras
and the god Vishnu, supreme among victorious ones, fighting over the lordship of the three worlds. The diademed
and garlanded one was alone. But he severed all their superior and inferior weapons. With sharp arrows that were
like the razor and in the shape of a half-moon, he severed many of their heads and arms and also their umbrellas,
whisks, fans and standards. Large numbers of horses, rathas, foot soldiers and elephants shrieked and fell down in
diverse ways, assuming mutilated forms. They were like a forest shattered by a storm. There were giant elephants
decorated with golden nets. They had been prepared for war, with standards signifying victory. They were mangled
by gold-tufted arrows and looked like blazing mountains. With supreme arrows that were like Vasava's vajra, he
shattered elephants, chariots and horses. He then advanced swiftly, wishing to kill Karna, just as in ancient times,
the lord of the Maruts had advanced to shatter Bala[Bala was a demon killed by Indra (lord of the Maruts).]. O scorcher of enemies! That mighty-armed tiger among
men penetrated the army of the son of a suta, like a makara entering the ocean. O king! On seeing this, those on
your side attacked Pandava, with chariots and foot soldiers and a large number of elephant riders and horse riders.
As they advanced against Partha, they created an extremely loud noise, like the sound made by the waters of a turbulent ocean. In the battle, those maharathas were like tigers. Ready to give up their lives and abandoning fear,
they attacked that tiger among men. They descended there, showering down arrows. However, Arjuna scattered
those soldiers, like clouds dispelled by a strong storm. Those large numbers of rathas were great archers and strikers. They advanced against Arjuna and pierced him with sharp arrows. However, using his arrows, Arjuna dispatched thousands of rathas, elephants and horses towards Yama's abode. In that battle, they were slaughtered by
arrows released from Partha's bow. As fear was generated in the maharathas, they started to melt away. Using his
sharp arrows, Arjuna conveyed four hundred brave maharathas, who were endeavouring, to Yama's abode. In the
battle, they were slain by arrows of many different forms. In their fear, they abandoned Arjuna and fled in different
directions. As they fled, a great uproar arose in the vanguard of the army. O fortunate one! It was like that made by
the giant ocean when it dashes against a mountain. That army was severely routed and driven away by Arjuna's
arrows. O venerable one! Partha then advanced in the direction of the army of the son of a suta. There was a great
noise when he advanced against the enemy. It was like that made in ancient times, when Garuda descended in
search of serpents.

' "On hearing that sound, the immensely strong Bhimasena was extremely delighted, because he desired to catch
sight of Partha. O great king! On hearing that Partha was advancing, the powerful Bhimasena became ready to
give up his life and crushed your soldiers. He was like the force of the wind. He was like the force of the wind in
speed. Bhima, the powerful son of the wind god, roamed around like the wind. O Indra among kings! O lord of the
earth! Your soldiers were afflicted. O great king! They were whirled around, like a shattered boat on the ocean.
Bhima showed those soldiers the dexterity of his hands. He released sharp arrows and conveyed them to Yama's
eternal abode. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In the battle there, the warriors witnessed Bhima's superhuman strength. He was like the Destroyer at the time of the destruction of a yuga. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They were afflicted by Bhimasena's terrible strength. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On seeing this,
King Duryodhana spoke these words, addressing the soldiers, the great archers and the warriors. 'All of you unite
in this battle and kill Bhima. Once he has been slain, I think that all the remaining soldiers will have been killed.'

Accepting the instructions of your son, the kings enveloped Bhima with a shower of arrows from every direction.
O king! There were many elephants and men, desiring victory. O Indra among kings! There were also chariots and
horses that surrounded Vrikodara. O king! O foremost among Bharatas! Having been thus surrounded by valiant
ones from every direction, the brave one was as beautiful as the moon surrounded by stars. O great king! That
supreme of men looked radiant and handsome in the battle, in particular, as beautiful as Vijaya was. All those
kings released showers of arrows at him. They were cruel and their eyes were red in anger. They wished to kill
Vrikodara. In that battle, Bhima drove away that large army with straight-tufted arrows and emerged, like a fish in
the water coming out of a net. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He killed ten thousand elephants that refused
to retreat, two hundred thousand and two hundred men, five thousand horses and one hundred rathas. Having killed
them, Bhima created a river made out of blood and mire. Blood constituted the water and chariots were the eddies.
It was full of crocodiles in the form of elephants. The men were the fish and horses were the sharks. Hair constituted the moss and the weeds. The trunks of the best of elephants were severed and many jewels were borne along.
Thighs were alligators. The fat was the mud. It was full of many heads that were the rocks. The bows and arrows
were like rafts. Clubs and maces were the flags. In the battle, a current of warriors were borne along to Yama's
abode. In an instant, the tiger among men created a river that flowed downwards[To the nether regions. The river Vaitarani flows in the nether regions
and one has to cross it to reach Yama's world.]. It was like the fierce
Vaitarani, difficult for those who have not perfected their souls to cross. Wherever the spot where Pandaveya,
supreme among rathas, advanced, in that spot he brought down hundreds and thousands of warriors.

' "O great king! Having seen the deeds performed by Bhimasena in the battle, Duryodhana spoke these words to
Shakuni. 'O maternal uncle! Defeat the immensely strong Bhimasena in the encounter. If the immensely strong
Pandaveya is vanquished, I think that our victory is ensured.' O great king! At this, the powerful Soubala advanced, surrounded by his brothers, to engage in that great battle. In the battle, he rushed against Bhimasena,
whose valour was terrible. He countered the brave one, like the shoreline against the abode of makaras. Though he
was restrained by sharp arrows, Bhima did not retreat. O Indra among kings! Shakuni struck him on the left flank
and between the breasts with iron arrows that were gold-tufted and had been sharpened on stone. O great king!
Those golden arrows, tufted with the feathers of herons and peacocks, penetrated the great-souled one's armour
and sank in. In the battle, Bhima was severely pierced by those gold-decorated arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He violently shot an arrow towards Soubala. O king! As the terrible arrow arrived, the immensely
strong Shakuni, the scorcher of enemies, displayed the dexterity of his hands and shattered it into one hundred
fragments. O lord of the earth! When it fell down on the ground, Bhima was enraged. He laughed and severed
Soubala's bow with a broad-headed arrow. The powerful Soubala cast aside that severed bow and picked up another bow and sixteen broad-headed arrows. O great king! With four of those broad-headed and straight-tufted arrows,
he struck Bhima's horses and his charioteer with a fifth. O lord of the earth! He severed his standard with one and
his umbrella with two. With four more, Subala's son struck his four horses[This doesn't add up to a count of sixteen. That's because the Critical
edition excises some shlokas. In these, the missing arrows are used to
strike Bhima.]. O great king! At this, the powerful
Bhimasena became wrathful. In that battle, he hurled a javelin that was completely made out of iron, but had a
golden handle. Released from Bhima's arm, it was like the flickering tongue of a serpent. It swiftly descended on
the great-souled Soubala's chariot. O lord of the earth! The javelin had been hurled by the enraged Bhimasena and
was decorated with gold. But he[Shakuni.] seized it and hurled it back and it penetrated the great-souled Pandava's left
arm. It then fell down on the ground, like lightning descending from the sky. O great king! In every direction, the
sons of Dhritarashtra let out a loud cry. However, Bhima was not prepared to tolerate those spirited roars, like
those of lions. In haste, the maharatha grasped a bow and strung it. O Indra among kings! In a short while, in that
battle, the immensely strong one enveloped Soubala's soldiers, who were prepared to give up their lives, with arrows. O lord of the earth! He killed his[Shakuni's.] four horses and his charioteer. The valiant one swiftly severed his standard with a broad-headed arrow. With the horses slain, the supreme among men abandoned his chariot. His eyes
were red with rage and he stretched his bow, sighing deeply. O king! He covered Bhima from every direction with
many arrows. However, the powerful Bhimasena countered him with force. He angrily severed his bow and
pierced him with sharp arrows. O lord of men! Powerfully and extremely severely pierced by the enemy, the afflicter of enemies fell down on the ground, with only a little bit of life left in him. O lord of the earth! On discerning that he had lost his senses, your son bore him away on his own chariot, while Bhimasena looked on. On seeing
that the tiger among men was taken away on the chariot, the sons of Dhritarashtra retreated. They suffered from
great fear on account of Bhima and, terrified, fled in different directions. O king! When the archer Bhimasena had
defeated Soubala, your son, Duryodhana, was shattered by great fear. Thinking about his maternal uncle, he fled on
swift horses. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing that the king had retreated, the troops withdrew,
abandoning the duels that were going on in different directions. On seeing this, all the atirathas among the sons of
Dhritarashtra also retreated. Bhima quickly rushed at them, showering down many hundreds of arrows. Slaughtered by Bhima, the sons of Dhritarashtra withdrew.

' "O king! From every direction, they sought refuge with Karna, who was stationed in the battle. That greatly
valiant and immensely strong one became like an island to them. O king! O tiger among men! It was as if mariners
who suffered from a calamity and had a shattered boat found comfort on reaching an island. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! In that way, those on your side sought refuge with Karna. O king! Having stationed themselves
there, they cheered each other. They advanced to fight again, preferring to die rather than retreat." '


Dhritarashtra asked, "O Sanjaya! When the soldiers were shattered by Bhimasena in the battle, what did Duryodhana and Soubala say? What about Karna, foremost among victorious warriors, Kripa, Kritavarma, Drona's son,
Duhshasana and other warriors on my side? I think that Pandaveya's valour was extremely wonderful. Did Rad-
heya Karna, the destroyer of enemies, act towards all the Kuru warriors in accordance with his vow? O Sanjaya!
On seeing that the army had been routed by the infinitely energetic Kounteya, Radheya, Adhiratha's son, remained
the prosperity, the armour, the base and the hope of remaining alive. What did the warrior Karna do? What about
my sons and the invincible maharatha kings? O Sanjaya! You are skilled in narrating. Tell me everything about all
this."

'Sanjaya replied, "O great king! In the afternoon, while Bhimasena looked on, the powerful son of a suta began
to strike all the Somakas. The extremely strong Bhima also began to uproot all the soldiers of the sons of Dhritarashtra. On seeing that the intelligent Bhimasena was driving away the army, Karna asked his charioteer to drive
him towards the Panchalas. The immensely strong king of Madra, Shalya, drove the white horses, which were extremely swift, towards the Chedis, the Panchalas and the Karushas. Shalya, the destroyer of enemy troops, penetrated those soldiers. He cheerfully drove the horses to the spot where that foremost one[Karna.] wanted him to go. The
chariot was like a cloud and was covered in tiger skins. O lord of the earth! On seeing it, the Pandus and the Panchalas were terrified. The loud roar of the chariot could be heard in the great battle. Its roar was like that of a
cloud, or of a mountain being shattered.

' "Karna drew his bow all the way back to his ear and slew hundreds and thousands of Pandava soldiers with
hundreds of sharp arrows. While he was performing that superhuman deed in the encounter, the great archers, the
Pandava maharathas, surrounded him. Shikhandi, Bhima, Parshata Dhrishtadyumna, Nakula, Sahadeva, Droupadi's sons and Satyaki surrounded him and showered down arrows, wishing to kill Radheya. In the battle, the brave
Satyaki, supreme among men, pierced Karna with twenty sharp arrows in his shoulder joints. Shikhandi pierced
Karna with twenty-five arrows, Dhrishtadyumna with five, Droupadi's sons with sixty-four, Sahadeva with seven
and Nakula with one hundred. In that encounter, the immensely strong and angry Bhimasena pierced him in the
shoulder joints with ninety arrows with drooping tufts. Adhiratha's immensely strong son laughed. He drew back
his supreme bow and released sharp arrows, afflicting them. Radheya pierced each of them back with five arrows
each. The bull among men severed Satyaki's bow and standard and struck him between the breasts with nine arrows. The scorcher of enemies wrathfully pierced Bhimasena with thirty arrows and struck his charioteer with
three arrows. In the twinkling of an eye, the bull among men deprived Droupadi's sons of their chariots and it was
extraordinary. With straight-tufted arrows, he made all of them retreat. He killed the brave maharathas from Pan-
chala and Chedi. O lord of the earth! In that battle, the Chedis and the Matysas were slaughtered. They rushed
against Karna, who was single-handed, and struck him with torrents of arrows. The maharatha son of a suta struck
those down with his sharp arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I witnessed this extraordinary deed performed by Karna. In the battle, the brave and powerful son of a suta was single-handed. O great king! However,
despite those enemy warriors striving to their utmost in the encounter, he restrained the Pandaveyas with his arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the gods, siddhas and supreme rishis were satisfied at the dexterity
shown by the great-souled Karna. The great archers, the sons of Dhritarashtra, applauded that best of men. Karna
was best among supreme rathas. He was foremost among all archers. O great king! Karna consumed the army of
the enemy, just as a large and flaming fire burns down dead wood during the summer. Thus slaughtered by Karna
and witnessing Karna's great strength, the Pandaveyas were terrified in the battle and fled here and there. In the
great encounter, loud lamentations arose among the Panchalas, since they were slaughtered by the sharp arrows
that were released from Karna's bow. The large army of the Pandavas was frightened at the sound. In the battle
there, the enemies thought that Karna was the only warrior. Thus Radheya, the afflicter of enemies, accomplished
that supremely wonderful deed. He single-handedly countered all the Pandavas and no one was capable of glancing towards him. They were like a large mass of water that dashes against a supreme mountain and is driven back.
In that way, the Pandava soldiers clashed against Karna and were shattered. O king! In the battle, Karna blazed like
a fire without smoke. The mighty-armed one burnt down the large army of the Pandavas. O great king! With great
agility and his light arrows, the brave Karna severed the heads, with earrings, and the arms of the valiant ones.
There were swords with handles of ivory. There were standards, javelins, horses and elephants. There were the
parts of chariots and many kinds of flags and whisks. There were axles, yokes, harnesses and many kinds of
wheels. Karna observed his vow of a warrior and shattered these into hundreds of fragments. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Elephants and horses were slain by Karna. Because of the flesh, blood and mire, the earth assumed an impassable form. With destroyed horses, foot soldiers, chariots and elephants, one could no longer distinguish uneven terrain from plain ground. Nor could the warriors distinguish those on their own side from that of
the enemy. The arrows generated from Karna's weapon created a terrible darkness. The arrows released from Rad-
heya's bow were decorated in gold. O great king! In the battle, the Pandaveya maharathas repeatedly endeavoured,
but were shrouded by Karna. O great king! The maharathas endeavoured and were submerged. They were like a
herd of deer, driven away by an angry lion in the forest. The warriors who fought against Karna in the battle were
greatly illustrious. But those soldiers were slaughtered, like a large number of smaller animals by a wolf.

' "Seeing that the Pandava soldiers were retreating, the great archers, the sons of Dhritarashtra, pursued them,
emitting fierce roars. O Indra among kings! Duryodhana was filled with great delight. He joyfully instructed that
many musical instruments should be sounded in every direction. The great archers among the Panchalas, supreme
among men, were shattered. But though shattered, those brave ones returned, preferring death over retreat. O great
king! The brave Radheya, scorcher of enemies and bull among men, countered and repelled them in many different
kinds of ways. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Twenty rathas among the Panchalas were slain there by Karna
and so were one hundred angry enemy riders from among the Chedis. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He
emptied the seats of chariots and the backs of horses. He brought down men from the necks of elephants. He drove
away the infantry. The scorcher of enemies was like the sun at midday and was impossible to look at. The son of a
suta assumed as cruel a form as Yama and roamed around. O great king! In this fashion, the great archer Karna, the
destroyer of large numbers of the enemy, killed men, horses, rathas and elephants and was stationed there. The immensely strong one was stationed there like the Destroyer after slaying large numbers of beings. The single-handed
maharatha was stationed there, after having slain the Somakas. However, we beheld the wonderful valour of the
Panchalas. Though they were slaughtered by Karna, they did not forsake the field of battle. The king[Duryodhana.],
Duhshasana, Sharadvata Kripa, Ashvatthama, Kritavarma and Shakuni Soubala slew the Pandava soldiers in hundreds and thousands. O Indra among kings! The brothers who were Karna's sons were also true in their valour.
Those powerful ones easily fought with the Panchalas, here and there. They created a cruel and great destruction
among the horses there. Despite this, the brave Pandavas, Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi and Droupadi's sons were
enraged and attacked those on your side. In this fashion, there was destruction among the Pandavas there and also
amongst those on your side, when they clashed against the immensely strong Bhima in the battle." '


