Vaishampayana said, 'One evening, the Pandavas who had gone to the forest were seated with Krishna and were
talking to each other, afflicted with grief and sorrow.

'The beloved, beautiful, learned and devoted Krishna spoke these words to Dharmaraja, "There is no sorrow
over us in the mind of that evil, cruel and evil-minded son of Dhritarashtra[Duryodhana.]. O king! When you were banished
to the forest with me and your brothers, attired in deerskins, the evil-hearted and evil-minded one felt no torment.
The heart of that performer of evil deeds is made of iron. Thus it was that he could address harsh words to his superior, who is supreme among those who follow dharma[Meaning Yudhishthira.]. Having reduced you, always used to comforts and undeserving of hardship, to this misfortune, that evil-souled one, that performer of evil deeds, rejoices with his well-
wishers. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing you leave for the forest in your deerskins, there were four
among all the Kurus who did not shed any tears-Duryodhana, Karna, the evil-souled Shakuni and the cruel and
evil brother Duhshasana. O supreme among those of the Kuru lineage! All the others were overcome with grief
and tears rolled down from their eyes. O great king! On seeing your bed now and remembering your earlier one, I
sorrow for you. You are used to comforts and do not deserve this misery. Thinking of that jewelled seat, inlaid with
ivory, in the middle of that sabha and seeing this one made of kusha grass, I am consumed with grief. I have seen
you in the sabha, surrounded by kings. O king! On no longer seeing that, how can there be peace in my heart? O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! I have seen you anointed with sandalwood paste, as radiant as the sun. On seeing you now anointed with mud, I am losing my senses. O Indra among kings! Earlier, I have seen you attired in
white and expensive silk garments. I now see you dressed in tattered rags[The word used is chira, which also means bark.]. Earlier, food that catered to every
kind of taste used to be taken from your house for thousands of brahmanas, on plates made out of gold. O king! O
lord with all the qualities! From your house you provided food to the ascetics and the homeless. O king! Now that
I can no longer see that, how can there be peace in my heart? O great king! Young cooks who wore polished earrings used to prepare and serve the best of tasty food for your brothers. I now see them in the forest, surviving on
the fare of the forest. O Indra among men! They do not deserve this discomfort. My mind can find no peace. I see
Bhimasena, unhappily living in the forest, immersed in thought. As time passes, are you not suffused with anger?
Are you not angered to see that Bhimasena has to perform all these tasks himself? How can your anger not increase on seeing that one who is used to happiness is now in misery? He was served in many ways, the high and
the low, with vehicles and garments. How can your anger not increase on seeing him in the forest thus? That powerful lord could have killed all the Kurus, but honouring your promise, Vrikodara tolerated everything. This two-
armed Arjuna is the equal of the many-armed Arjuna[The many-armed Arjuna is Kartaviryarjuna, king of the Haihayas. He had a thousand arms because of a
boon obtained from Dattatreya. He was Ravana's contemporary and was eventually killed by Parashurama.]. In the speed with which he discharges arrows, he is like
Yama, the destroyer. O great king! Through the power of his weapons, all the lords of the earth were forced to bow
down at your sacrifice, tended to by brahmanas. This tiger among men has been worshipped by the gods and the
demons. Look at Arjuna, immersed in thought. O king! How can your anger not increase? Partha is used to comforts and does not deserve this unhappiness. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing him in the forest thus,
I am confounded that your anger does not increase. On a single chariot, he defeated gods, men and serpents. On
seeing him in the forest thus, how can your anger not increase? Through force, this scorcher of enemies obtained
tribute from all the lords of the earth-extraordinarily constructed vehicles, horses and elephants. Shooting one
swift arrow, he created five hundred arrows. On seeing him in the forest thus, how can your anger not increase?
Nakula is tall, dark and young and wields the best of shields in battle. On seeing him in the forest thus, how can
your anger not increase? O Yudhishthira! You have seen Madri's handsome and brave son, Sahadeva, in the forest.
How can your anger not increase? I have been born in the lineage of Drupada. I am the daughter-in-law of the
great-souled Pandu. On seeing me in the forest thus, how can your anger not increase? O supreme among those of
the Bharata lineage! It is certain that there is no anger left in you. Despite seeing your brothers and me, your mind
is not miserable. But the sacred texts say that there is no kshatriya in the world without anger. But in you, today, I
see that which is contrary to kshatriyas. O Partha! A kshatriya who does not display his energy when the time is
right is always despised by all beings. Therefore, under no circumstances should you show and forgiveness towards your enemies. There is no doubt that you are capable of destroying all of them through your energy. But it is
also true that a kshatriya who is not pacified when the time of forgiving arrives, is not loved by all beings and is
destroyed here, and in the hereafter."'


'Droupadi said, "On this, an ancient story is recounted, the conversation between Prahlada and Bali, the son of Virochana. Prahlada was Bali's father's father and was the Indra of the daityas. That immensely wise Indra of the
asuras was one to whom all knowledge of dharma had been imparted. 'O father[Bali is asking this. The word used is tata, which means father, but not only in the narrow sense. It can be
used for any superior, including a grandfather.]! Does forgiveness lead to welfare, or is it better to seek revenge? I have a doubt about this. So please tell me exactly by answering my question.
You are knowledgeable about dharma. So please tell me, without a doubt, which of the two is better. I will then do
exactly as you have instructed me.' On being thus asked, the grandfather answered everything exactly. He was
wise and answered everything exactly, so that the doubt in the question could be removed.

'"Prahlada said, 'O son[The word used is tata again. This means not only son in the narrow sense, but anyone younger in a broad
sense.]! Revenge is not always superior. Nor is forgiveness always superior. Learn the nature of both, so that there is no scope for doubt. O son! A man who always forgives suffers from many faults. His
servants treat him with contempt and others are also disrespectful. All the beings never bow down before him.
Therefore, the learned say that perpetual forgiveness should be avoided. Disregarding him, the servants fall prey to
many sins. Those with limited intelligence try to take his riches away from him. The servants also appropriate his
vehicles, garments, ornaments, beds, seats, food, drink and all his other articles. They do not give to those to whom
presents should be given, as instructed by the master to give, but fall prey to their own desires. The master is never
shown the respect he deserves. To be ignored in this world is worse than death. O son! Slaves, sons, servants and
even those who are not servants speak harsh words to such a forgiving person. They abuse the forgiving person
and even desire his wife. The wife too follows her own desire and intelligence. Even if a slight bit of punishment is
deserved and it is not meted out, those lovers of pleasure will injure him and resort to evil acts. These and other
faults are always associated with those who are forgiving. O Virochana's son! Now listen to the faults associated
with those who never forgive. If in the wrong place, or even in a right one, a person is afflicted with passion and
anger and metes out various punishments on the strength of his energy, he will be clouded because of his energy
and will face conflicts with his allies. He will receive hatred from the worlds and from his relatives. Because of the
contempt displayed, such a man suffers loss of riches and receives abuse, disrespect and disregard. He confronts
remorse, hatred and confusion and creates enemies. If in anger, a man inflicts different kinds of punishments on
men, he is swiftly deprived of his riches, life and relatives. If he equally uses his force on benefactors and those
who wish him ill, such a man is shunned in the world, like a snake inside a house. How can the world confer good
fortune on someone who is shunned? People are sure to hurt him, as soon as they find a weakness. Therefore, one
should not always be overpowering. Nor should one always be gentle. He who is gentle at the right time and harsh
at the right time always finds happiness in this world and the next. Listen, I will now tell you in detail about the
time when one should be forgiving. This has been recounted by the learned ones earlier and should always be followed. If a former benefactor commits a crime that is not too great, in view of the earlier favour, this transgression
should be pardoned. Those who commit an offence out of stupidity and seek pardon should be forgiven, because
learning is not easily available everywhere to men. Even if the offence is slight, an offender who commits a crime
with full knowledge, but claims he did not know, should be punished, because this is crookedness. The first offence
should be forgiven for all beings. But when they commit the second one, however slight, it should be punished. If
a crime is committed unknowingly, it is said that this should be pardoned, but only after proper examination. Gentleness can vanquish gentleness and gentleness can also vanquish harshness. There is nothing that gentleness cannot vanquish. Therefore, gentleness is the stronger of the two. But one should act after considering the time and the
place, the strengths and the weaknesses. The wrong time and place can lead to failure. Therefore, one should wait
for the right time and place. Sometimes, an offender can be pardoned out of regard for the people. These have been
described as the right times to forgive. At times other than these, it has been said that one should use one's
energy[That is, punish.].'"
'Droupadi said, "O lord of men! Therefore, I think that the time for displaying your energy has come. The avaricious sons of Dhritarashtra are always engaged in doing harm. This is not the time to exhibit forgiveness towards
the Kurus. The time has come to show energy, and punishment must be displayed. The mild are always disregarded. But people are careful of those who are harsh. He who knows the right time to employ both of these is a true
lord of the earth."'


