'Brihadashva said, "Having heard all this, Damayanti was overcome with grief. She suspected that he was Nala
and told Keshini, 'O Keshini! Go and examine Bahuka in many ways. Do not say anything. But stay near him and
observe his conduct. O beautiful one! Whenever he does something, find out the reason. In particular, notice if he
does anything attentively. O beautiful one! If fire is to be given to him, place an obstruction. If he asks for water,
be in no hurry to give it to him. Observe everything about his conduct and come and tell me. Report to me everything about whatever else you happen to see.' Thus addressed by Damayanti, Keshini left quickly. She determined
that he had the marks of someone who was skilled in horses and returned. She told Damayanti everything that she
had observed, everything about Bahuka, human and divine.

'"Keshini said, 'O Damayanti! Never before have I seen, or heard of, a man with conduct like this. He is firm
and pure in his conduct. When he comes to a short passage, he never lowers his head. But on seeing him, the passage is elevated, and he comfortably passes through. Thus a narrow opening becomes a wide opening for him. The
king sent a lot of many kinds of food for Rituparna and there was the flesh of many animals. A vessel had been
provided for cleaning the meat. When Bahuka looked at the vessel, it filled up with water for cleaning. He then
wished to cook and grasped a handful of straw. He made it into kindling and held it up and suddenly, it blazed up
in flames. On witnessing that extraordinary sight, I was astounded and came back here. I also saw another great
marvel there. O beautiful one! Though he touched fire, it did not burn him down. The water flowed rapidly on his
instructions. I witnessed yet another great wonder. He took some flowers in his hand and pressed them gently.
When these flowers were pressed in his hands, they became even more fresh and fragrant. Having witnessed these
extraordinary wonders, I have swiftly come back here.' Having heard about the deeds performed by Punyashloka,
Damayanti decided that Nala was known through his acts and signs and had been regained.

'"She guessed that her husband Nala had assumed the form of Bahuka. She wept and again told Keshini in a soft
voice, 'O beautiful one! Go yet again. When Bahuka is inattentive, take from the kitchen some meat that he has
cooked and come back here.' The one who performed desired actions went swiftly. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! When Bahuka's attention was elsewhere, Keshini took some warm meat and instantly brought it to
Damayanti. In earlier times, she had often tasted meat prepared by Nala. On tasting it, she knew Nala to be the
cook. She wept in great sorrow, overcome by grief. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! She then washed her face
and sent Keshini with the twins. Bahuka recognized Indrasena[This is the daughter Indrasenaa. The son is Indrasena. But given the way names have been written in this
translation, Indrasenaa is also written as Indrasena.] and her brother. The king rushed to them, embraced them and placed them on his lap. Having regained his children, who were like divine children, Bahuka was
overcome by great grief and cried loudly. Thus, Nishadha repeatedly displayed his mental anguish. Suddenly, he
let his children go and told Keshini, 'O beautiful one! These twins are just like my own children and on suddenly
seeing them, I began to shed tears. You have been coming here quite often and people may interpret these signs
wrongly. We are guests in your country. O beautiful one! Therefore, I bow down before you. Go away.'"'


'Brihadashva said, "Having seen all the agitations of the wise Punyashloka, Keshini quickly returned and reported
it to Damayanti. Damayanti was sad and anxious because of the suspicion that this was Nala. She sent Keshini
again to her mother[With a message.], 'Suspecting him to be Nala, I have examined Bahuka in many ways. But I have doubts on
account of his appearance. I wish to know this for myself. O mother! Let him come to me, or let me go to him,
with or without my father's knowledge.' Thus addressed by the daughter of Vidarbha, the queen related this to
Bhima and the king got to know about his daughter's plan. O bull among the Bharata lineage! With the sanction of
her father and mother, she had Nala brought to where she was staying.

'"On suddenly seeing King Nala, the beautiful one was overcome with a terrible sorrow. O great king! She was
dressed in a red garment. Her hair was matted, dirty and caked with mud. Damayanti spoke these words to Bahuka,
'O Bahuka! Have you ever seen any man, who is said to know about dharma, abandon his sleeping wife in a deserted forest? Who will forsake his beloved and innocent wife, when she is overcome by fatigue? Who but Punyashloka Nala will leave? What offence have I committed towards that lord of the earth? When I was overcome
with sleep, why did he desert me in the wilderness and go away? In earlier times, I had chosen him myself, in the
presence of the gods. She loved him and was devoted to him. She was the mother of his children. How could he
forsake her? He had accepted my hand in front of the fire, following the words of the swans. He had promised to
sustain me. Where has that pledge gone now?' O destroyer of enemies! When Damayanti was saying all this, tears
of sorrow welled up in her eyes and flowed copiously. When Nala saw those tears of sorrow flow copiously from
the black-pupiled and red-tinged eyes, he replied in words of sorrow, 'O timid one! The loss of my kingdom was
not brought about by me. It was brought about by Kali and he made me abandon you. O you who are best in the
observance of dharma! In earlier times, when you were living in the forest and were miserable and sorrowful at my
having lost my garment, you had cursed him. Ever since then, tormented by the curse, Kali has resided in my body.
Burnt with that curse, he has been like kindling with fire in it. Now he has been conquered with my perseverance
and austerities. O beautiful one! There will be an end to our miseries. Freeing me, that evil one has gone away. O
one with the wide hips! It is because of this that I came here, for your sake and for no other reason. O timid one!
But how could a woman like you abandon a husband who loved her and was devoted to her? How could you marry
another? On the king's instructions, messengers have travelled all over the earth, proclaiming that Bhima's daughter will choose a second husband. Like a wanton one, and acting on her own desires, she will choose one who is
her equal. On hearing this, Bhangasvari came here swiftly.' When she heard Nala's lament, Damayanti trembled
and was frightened. She joined her hands in salutation and spoke these words."'


