'Shakuni said, "O Yudhisthira! You have lost great riches of the Pandavas. O Kounteya! Do you have any other
riches that you have not lost yet?"

'Yudhishthira replied, "O Shakuni! O Soubala! I know of unlimited riches that I possess. Why do you ask me
about my wealth? I can stake ayuta[Ten thousand. These large numbers are not stated in ascending (or descending) order.], prayuta[A million.], kharva[Ten billion.], padma[One thousand billion.], arbuda[One hundred million.], shamkha[One hundred billion.], nikharva[A billion.]
and an entire ocean[Of riches.]. O king! These are my riches that I will play with you for."'

Vaishampayana said, 'At these words, Shakuni resorted to deceit and told Yudhishthira, "I have won."

'Yudhishthira replied, "O Soubala! I have many cattle, horses, milch cows, sheep and goats, of many species, to
the east of the Sindhu[The Indus River.]. O king! These are my riches that I will play with you for."'

Vaishampayana said, 'At these words, Shakuni resorted to deceit and told Yudhishthira, "I have won."

'Yudhishthira replied, "O king! The riches that I have left are my city, the country, the land of all the non-brahmanas and the nonbrahmana subjects. O king! These are my riches that I will play with you for."'

Vaishampayana said, 'At these words, Shakuni resorted to deceit and told Yudhishthira, "I have won."

'Yudhisthira replied, "O king! These princes[The other four Pandava brothers.] are resplendent in their ornaments, their earrings, the golden
decorations on their breasts and the other bodily decorations. O king! These are my riches that I will play with you
for."'

Vaishampayana said, 'At these words, Shakuni resorted to deceit and told Yudhishthira, "I have won."

'Yudhishthira replied, "This dark youth with the red eyes is Nakula, with long arms and the shoulders of a lion.
He and everything that he possesses will be one stake."

'Shakuni said, "O King Yudhisthira! But Prince Nakula is dear to you. If he becomes part of our riches, what
will you have left to gamble with?"'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having said this, Shakuni then flung the dice and told Yudhishthira, "I have won."

'Yudhishthira replied, "This Sahadeva is the one who administers dharma. He is known in the worlds as a
learned one. Though this beloved prince does not deserve it, I will play with him with one who is not loved[Shakuni is the one who is not loved by Yudhishthira.]."'
Vaishampayana said, 'At these words, Shakuni resorted to deceit and told Yudhishthira, "I have won."

'Shakuni said, "O king! I have now won Madri's two sons, dear to you. But I think you regard Bhimasena and
Dhananjaya as dearer."

'Yudhishthira replied, "O foolish one! Without regard to what is proper, you are following that which is not
dharma. You are trying to create dissension among those who are one of heart."

'Shakuni said, "O king! O bull among the Bharata lineage! One who is intoxicated falls into a hole and remains
there, like the trunk of a tree. You are our elder and our superior. I bow down before you. O Yudhishthira! When
gamblers play, they utter mad ravings about what they have not seen, whether asleep or awake."

'Yudhishthira replied, "Like a boat, he carries us over to the other bank of battle. He is a powerful prince who
defeats his enemies. The world knows that this warrior does not deserve it. O Shakuni! I will play with you for
Phalguna[Arjuna.]."'
Vaishampayana said, 'At these words, Shakuni resorted to deceit and told Yudhishthira, "I have won."

'Shakuni said, "Pandava Savyasachi, the foremost archer among the Pandavas, has been won and has become
mine. O king! Now play with your beloved Bhima. That is all you now have left to throw."

'Yudhishthira replied, "He is our leader and guide in battle. He is like the wielder of the vajra[Indra.], the enemy of
the demons. He is great of soul, with slanted eyes and knitted brows. His shoulders are like those of a lion and his
anger is long-lasting. There is no other man with strength like his. He is the slayer of enemies and foremost among
those who wield the club. O king! Though this prince does not deserve it, I will play with you for Bhimasena."'

Vaishampayana said, 'At these words, Shakuni resorted to deceit and told Yudhishthira, "I have won."

'Shakuni said, "O Kounteya! You have lost a great deal of riches. You have lost your brothers, your horses and
your elephants. Tell us if there are any riches that you have not yet lost."

'Yudhishthira replied, "I myself am left, especially loved by all my brothers. If won over, until the time of destruction, I will do whatever deed I am asked to do."'

Vaishampayana said, 'At these words, Shakuni resorted to deceit and told Yudhishthira, "I have won."

'Shakuni said, "O king! You have allowed yourself to be won and you have committed the worst evil act. When
there are riches left, it is evil to allow oneself to be won."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Thus spoke the one who was skilled in gambling with the dice. He had won in the game,
one by one, the brave warriors of the world.'

'Shakuni said, "But you have your beloved queen, who has still not been won in the game. Use Krishna Pan-
chali[Krishna and Panchali are both Droupadi's names.] as a stake and using her, win back yourself."

'Yudhishthira replied, "She is neither too short, nor too tall. She is neither too dark, nor too red. Her eyes are red
with love and I will play with you for her. Her eyes are like the petals of lotuses in the autumn. Her fragrance is
like that of lotuses in the autumn. Her beauty serves that of lotuses in the autumn. Her beauty is like that of Shri
herself. Such is her lack of cruelty, her wealth of beauty and the goodness of her conduct, that every man desires
her for a wife. She retires to bed last and she is the first one to wake up. She looks after the cowherds and the shepherds. She knows everything about what should be done and what should not be done. When covered with sweat,
her face looks like a lotus or a jasmine. Her waist is shaped like an altar. Her hair is long. Her eyes are copper-red.
She does not have too much of body hair. O king! O Soubala! I will make the beautiful Droupadi of Panchala,
slender of waist, my stake. Let us play."'

Vaishampayana said, 'When the intelligent Dharmaraja uttered these words, all the elders assembled in the sabha raised words of "shame". O king! The sabha seemed to shake and the kings talked among themselves. Bhishma,
Drona, Kripa and the others broke out in sweat. Vidura buried his head in his hands and sat with a downcast face,
thinking and sighing like a serpent, like one who has lost his senses. But Dhritarashtra was delighted and failing to
control his emotions, repeatedly kept asking, "Has he won? Has the stake been won?" Karna, Duhshasana and
their allies were happy. But tears began to flow down the eyes of others who were in the assembly hall. However,
Soubala was insolent with success and proud of victory. He instantly flung the dice and said, "I have won."'


'Duryodhana said, "O Kshatta! Bring Droupadi here, the beloved and honoured wife of the Pandavas. Let her
sweep and perform our tasks. It will be good to see her with the serving girls."

'Vidura replied, "Through people like you, the impossible happens. O evil one! You do not know that you are
tying yourself in a noose. You do not realize that you are extended over a precipice. You are only a deer, but you
are angering tigers. O one who is greatly evil at heart! Angry serpents, full of great venom, have raised themselves
above your head. Do not anger them and go to Yama's abode. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Krishna[Droupadi.]
has not yet become a slave. The king[Yudhishthira.] offered her as stake when he was no longer his master. A bamboo bears
fruit only to kill itself[A bamboo has fruit only when it is old.]. This king, Dhritarashtra's son, also bears fruit. He does not see that gambling leads to
fearful enmity and that he is ripe, like one about to meet his destiny. No one should cause hurt, or act cruelly. Nor
should one extract from one who is miserable. Words that cause pain and hurt others should not be uttered, because
they lead to hell. From his lips, a man utters words that hurt. The one stung by them burns night and day. Therefore, learned ones do not utter words that unleashed on another, pierce the depths of the heart. When a weapon
could not be found, by pawing the ground, it is said that a goat dug up a weapon that was used to cut its own
throat[This is an allusion to an old story that is not recounted completely in the text, perhaps because it was a familiar one. Thieves stole a goat. But when they were ready to kill the goat, they couldn't find the knife, because it
had got buried in the ground. So they set the goat free. Prancing around, the goat unearthed the knife and got
slaughtered in the process.]. Therefore, do not dig up an enmity with the sons of Pandu. No one speaks ill of the forest-dweller or
householder. But like dogs, the same men bark at the ascetic who is full of learning[The sense is that one who should know better, like the ascetic, is censured if he performs an evil act, but not
one who cannot differentiate between good and evil.]. Dhritarashtra's son does
not know the crooked and terrible door that leads to hell. Duhshasana and many others among the Kurus will follow him there, through the route of gambling. Gourds may sink[Gourds are light and float. Gourds sinking conveys a sense of impossibility.] and stones may float. Boats may eternally be
lost on the seas. But King Dhritarashtra's deluded son will not listen to my words, which are appropriate[The word used is pathya, which not only means advice, but also medicine and right diet.] for
him. It is certain that this will be the end of the Kurus, a terrible end that will lead to everyone's destruction. The
words of Kavya and his well-wishers were apt[The word pathya is used again.]. But because greed has expanded, they are no longer listened
to."'


Vaishampayana said, 'Dhritarashtra's son was insolent with pride. He said, "Kshatta be damned." In the midst of
all the revered ones in the assembly hall, he looked at the attendant and said, "O Pratikamin[The attendant, usher.]! Go and bring
Droupadi here. You have no reason to fear the Pandavas. It is only Kshatta who is scared and speaks to the contrary. But he never wishes that our prosperity should increase." Having heard the words of the king, the suta attendant[The attendant was of the suta class, that is, a charioteer and bard.] swiftly departed and went to the queen of the Pandavas, like a dog entering a lion's lair.

'The attendant said, "O Droupadi! Yudhishthira was intoxicated by gambling and has lost you to Duryodhana. O
Yajnaseni! Now come to Dhritarashtra's house. I must take you for the tasks you have to perform." Droupadi
replied, "O Pratikamin! How can you speak like this? Can any prince stake his wife in a gamble? The king must
have been deluded in his intoxication for the game. Could he not find anything else for the stake?" The attendant
said, "Pandava Ajatashatru offered you as stake when there was nothing left as stake. The king had earlier staked
his brothers and then himself. O Princess! He next staked you." Droupadi replied, "O son of a suta! Go back to the
assembly hall and ask that gambler from the Bharata lineage whether he first lost himself or me. O son of a suta!
After having found this out, come back to me." He went to the assembly hall and repeated Droupadi's words.

"Droupadi wants to know, 'Whose lord were you when you lost me? Did you lose yourself first or me?'" Yudhishthira sat there unmoved, like one who has lost his senses. He did not reply to the suta, in words that were either
good or bad. Duryodhana said, "Let Panchali Krishna come here and ask the question herself. Let everyone in the
sabha hear what they have to say to each other." The attendant was in Duryodhana's service and went to the king's
house[Yudhishthira's house. Since he was in Duryodhana's service, the attendant had no choice.]. Though miserable, the suta told Droupadi, "O Princess! Those in the assembly hall are summoning you.
It seems to me that the destruction of the Kurus is near. O Princess! Since that weak-minded one[A reference to Duryodhana.] wants you in
the sabha, he will no longer be able to protect our prosperity." Droupadi replied, "The one who determines everything has destined thus. Both the young and the old are touched thus. It has been said that dharma is supreme in the
worlds. If it is sustained, peace will be brought." O bull among the Bharata lineage! On hearing of Duryodhana's
intentions, Yudhishthira sent a trusted messenger to Droupadi[There seems to be a break in continuity in the text. The Pratikamin was Duryodhana's servant and Yudhishthira sent one of his own instead. As a result of this summons, Droupadi came to the assembly hall.]. Panchali was going through her menses then.
She was weeping and clad in a single garment tied below the navel, she went to the sabha and stood before her father-in-law[Meaning Dhritarashtra.]. Looking at the faces of the assembly, King Duryodhana delightedly told the suta[The Pratikamin.], "O
Pratikamin! Bring her here. Let her be in front of us, so that the Kouravas can speak to her." The suta was in
his[Duryodhana's.] servitude, but was scared of the wrath of Drupada's daughter. Giving up his pride, he told the assembly,
"How can I speak to Krishna?" Duryodhana said, "O Duhshasana! This son of a suta has limited intelligence. He is
frightened of Vrikodara. Go and bring Yajnaseni here yourself. Our rivals are now under our control. They can do
nothing." Having heard his brother, the prince[Duhshasana. There is a logical incoherence in the text. In what follows, Duhshasana brings Droupadi to the
assembly hall. In that case, she couldn't already have been in the assembly hall, as a result of the summons sent by
Yudhishthira through his trusted messenger. Different versions and different interpolations no doubt lead to this
inconsistency.] arose. His eyes were red with anger. He entered the house of
those maharathas and told Princess Droupadi, "O Panchali! O Krishna! You have been won by us. Look upon
Duryodhana without any shame. O one with eyes like long lotus petals! You will now love the Kurus. You have
been won in accordance with dharma. Come to the sabha." She arose in great distress and wiped her pale face with
her hands. In distress, she ran to where the aged king's[Dhritarashtra.], who was a bull among the Kurus, women were. Swiftly
the angry Duhshasana rushed at her, letting out a great roar. The long, blue and flowing hair belonged to the wife
of a lord of men and was now grabbed by him. At the time of the great rajasuya sacrifice, the hair had been sprinkled with auspicious waters. The valour of the Pandavas was vanquished and Dhritarashtra's son[Duhshasana.] grabbed it
with force. She had protectors, but was without a protector. Grabbing her by her long hair, Duhshasana pulled and
dragged her to the sabha, like a plantain tree buffeted by the wind. When she was thus dragged, she bent down her
body and softly whispered, "It is the period of my menses now. O evil-minded one! I am only clad in a single garment. O you who are not an arya! Do not take me to the sabha thus." But he forcibly grabbed her by her black hair
and told Krishna, "Pray to Krishna and Jishnu and Hari and Nara[Jishnu means the victorious one and is a name for Indra, Vishnu and also Arjuna. Hari is Vishnu's name.
Nara is an ancient sage, and also means a man. The words Nara and Narayana are often used for Arjuna and
Krishna respectively.]. Cry out for help, but I will take you. O Yajnaseni! This may be the time of your menses. But whether you are clad in a single garment or in no garments at all,
you have been won at the game and are now a slave. One can sport with a slave as one desires." Her hair was dishevelled. As she was pulled around by Duhshasana, her half-garment had come loose. She burnt with shame and
mortification. In a soft voice, Krishna whispered again, "There are those in the assembly hall who are learned in
the sacred texts. They follow all the righteous rites and are all like Indra. All of them are my preceptors or like
them. I cannot stand before them in this fashion. O performer of evil deeds! O you who act as if you are not an
arya! Do not strip me and do not debase me in this fashion. Even if all the gods with Indra become your allies,
these princes[The Pandavas.] will not pardon you. The great-souled son of Dharma[Yudhishthira.] always bases himself in dharma. The
ways of dharma are subtle and only the skilled can discern this. But despite the words of my lord[Yudhishthira.], I will not
commit even a tiny offence or deviate from my own qualities. You are performing a most unworthy act by dragging me among the Kuru warriors when I am in my menses. There is no one here who will praise you for that,
though there is no doubt that they have the same inclinations as you. Shame! The descendants of the Bharata lineage have lost their dharma and their knowledge of the ways of kshatriyas. All the Kurus in this sabha have witnessed the transgression of the dharma of the Kurus. There is certainly no longer substance in Drona, Bhishma and
in this great-souled one[This probably means Dhritarashtra, though Vidura could also have been intended.]. The foremost among the elders of the Kuru lineage have chosen to ignore this terrible
transgression of dharma by the king." The slender-waisted one thus piteously cried out and cast a scornful and
sidelong glance at her angry husbands. The Pandavas were inflamed by that sidelong glance and their bodies were
filled with wrath. They didn't suffer that much from the loss of the kingdom, or the riches, or the chief jewels, as
they did from Krishna's sidelong, angry and miserable glance. On seeing Krishna look at her miserable husbands,
Duhshasana dragged her with even greater force, so that she almost lost her senses. He repeatedly called her
"slave" and laughed uproariously. Karna was delighted at these words and approved of them by laughing out loudly. In similar fashion, Soubala, the king of Gandhara, applauded Duhshasana's deed. Among all those who were
present in the assembly hall, with the exception of these and Dhritarashtra's son[Duryodhana.], everyone was extremely miserable on seeing Krishna thus dragged into the sabha. Bhishma said, "O fortunate one! Since the ways of dharma
are subtle, I cannot properly resolve the question you have posed. One without property cannot stake the property
of others. But women are always the property of their husbands. Yudhishthira will abandon the entire earth with its
riches before he gives up truth. The Pandava has himself said he has been won. Therefore, I cannot resolve this issue. Shakuni has no equal in dice. Kunti's son has voluntarily played with him. The great-souled one does not
think he[Shakuni.] has resorted to deceit. Therefore, I cannot answer the question." Droupadi replied, "Though he is himself unskilled, the king was challenged in this sabha by those who are skilled, evil-minded and deceitful, those who
love the game of dice. How can it be said he chose voluntarily? The pure-hearted and foremost one among the Kurus and the Pandavas was robbed of his senses by inclinations towards deceit. He has understood everything only
after he has been won and after the gambling is over. In this assembly hall are Kurus who are the lords of their
sons and daughters-in-law. Let all of them examine my words and answer my question in the appropriate way."

Thus spoke the one who was miserable and weeping, while glancing at her miserable husbands. Duhshasana spoke
many harsh, unpleasant and rude words to her. Vrikodara watched her being dragged, while she was in her menses
and with her upper garments dishevelled. She did not deserve this. In extreme distress, he uttered words of anger to
Yudhishthira.'


