Janamejaya asked, 'Why did the illustrious Arshtishena torment himself through great austerities? How did Sindhudvipa become a brahmana? How did Devapi and the supreme Vishvamitra become brahmanas? O illustrious
one! Tell me all this. I am supremely curious.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'O king! Earlier, in krita yuga, there was a supreme among brahmanas, known as Arshtishena. He always resided in the house of his preceptor and was always engaged in studying. O king! He always
lived in the house of his preceptor. O lord of the earth! But his learning of the Vedas never became complete. O
king! Depressed, the great ascetic tormented himself through austerities. Because of his austerities, he obtained the
supreme Vedas[That is, knowledge of the Vedas.]. The supreme among rishis obtained learning of the Vedas and attained success. The immensely
great ascetic granted three boons to that tirtha. "From today, a man who bathes in the tirtha on this great river[Sarasvati.],
will obtain all the fruits of a horse sacrifice. From today, there will be no fear here from predatory beasts[Alternatively, snakes.]. From a
little bit of effort, all the fruits will be obtained." Having spoken thus, the immensely energetic sage went to heaven. Thus did the illustrious and powerful Arshtishena attain success. O great king! In that tirtha, the powerful Sindhudvipa and Devapi obtained the exalted status of being a brahmana.

'O son[The word used is tata. This means son, but is affectionately used towards
anyone younger or junior.]! In that way, Koushika controlled his senses and always engaged in austerities. Severely tormenting
himself through austerities, he attained the status of a brahmana. There was a great kshatriya, famous everywhere
on earth by the name of Gadhi. O king! His son was the powerful Vishvamitra. O son! King Koushika performed a
great sacrifice[The use of the word Koushika causes a problem, since it is being used
for both Vishvamitra and his father. The entire family was descended
from Kusha. Vishvamitra's father was Gadhi. Hence, both Gadhi and
Vishvamitra are Koushika.] and obtained the immensely ascetic Vishvamitra as his son. Having decided to cast aside his body,
he decided to instate his son. The subjects bowed down and said, "O immensely wise one! Do not go. Save us
from a great fear." Having been thus addressed, Gadhi replied to the subjects, "My son will be the protector of the
entire universe." O king! Saying this and instating Vishvamitra, Gadhi went to heaven. Vishvamitra became the
king. However, despite making efforts, he could not protect the earth. The king heard that there was a great fear
from the rakshasas. With four kinds of forces, he went out of the city. Having gone a long distance, he reached Vasishtha's hermitage. O king! His soldiers created a lot of nuisance there. When the illustrious brahmana Vasishtha
returned to his hermitage, he saw that the entire large forest was being destroyed. O great king! Vasishtha, supreme
among sages, became angry at this. He instructed his cow to create a large number of terrible mountainous hunters.
Thus instructed, the cow created men who were terrible in form. From every direction, they clashed against those
soldiers and caused carnage. On seeing that the soldiers were driven away, Gadhi's son, Vishvamitra, made up his
mind that austerities were supreme. O king! He meditated in that supreme tirtha along the Sarasvati. He observed
vows and fasted. He emaciated his own body. He lived on water. He lived on air. He lived on leaves. He slept on
the bare ground and observed many other separate rules. The gods made many attempts to dislodge him from his
vows. But the great-souled one's mind never deviated from those rules. He made supreme efforts and tormented
himself through many kinds of austerities. In his energy, Gadhi's son became as radiant as the sun. When Vishvamitra was thus engaged in austerities, the grandfather, the granter of boons, thought that he would grant the immensely ascetic one a boon. O king! He asked for the boon that he might become a brahmana. Brahma, the grandfather of all the worlds, agreed. The immensely illustrious one thus became a brahmana through his fierce austerities. Successful in his objective, he roamed around the entire earth, like a god. O king! In that supreme tirtha,
Rama cheerfully gave away many riches, milk-yielding cows, carts, beds, garments, ornaments and the best of
food and drink to the best of brahmanas, after having worshipped them. O king! Rama then went to the hermitage
of Baka, which was not that far away. It has been heard that Dalbhya Baka tormented himself through fierce austerities there.'


Vaishampayana said, 'O king! The descendant of the Yadu lineage then went to see the spot where Dalbhya
Baka, the extremely great ascetic, offered the kingdom of Dhritarashtra, Vichitravirya's son, as an oblation.
The place was full of brahmanas. Deciding to torment his body, he performed austerities that were extremely terrible in form. The powerful one, with dharma in his soul, was overcome by great rage. In earlier times, those who
lived in Naimisha performed a sacrifice for twelve years. When the sacrifice named Vishvajita was completed, the
rishis set out for Panchala. The learned ones asked for a dakshina[Donation given to priests for performing a sacrifice.] from the lord there[That is, the king of Panchala.]. They wanted twenty-
one strong and healthy calves. The aged Baka told them, "Divide these animals among you[Baka offered them his animals.]. I am giving up these
animals and will ask for some more from the best of kings." O king! Having told all the rishis this, the powerful
one, supreme among brahmanas, went to Dhritarashtra's abode. Having approached King Dhritarashtra, Dalbhya
begged him for some animals. The best of kings saw that some of his cattle had died and angrily told him, "O one
who is united with the brahman! If you want, take these animals." The rishi knew about dharma and hearing these
words, he thought, "The words that have been spoken to me in this assembly are cruel. Having thought for an instant, the best of brahmanas was overcome with rage. He made up his mind to ensure King Dhritarashtra's destruction. The best of brahmanas sliced off flesh from the dead animals. He went to the tirtha on the banks of the Sarasvati and lit a fire there. Into that, in those ancient times, he offered King Dhritarashtra's kingdom as an oblation[The flesh was offered as an oblation, intending the destruction of the
kingdom.].
O great king! Dalbhya Baka was supremely devoted to rituals. The immensely ascetic one used the flesh to offer
the kingdom as an oblation. In accordance with the rituals, that extremely terrible sacrifice started. At this, King
Dhritarashtra's kingdom began to decay. O lord! It was as if a large forest was being sliced down with an axe. On
seeing that the kingdom was thus afflicted, losing its vitality and afflicted by a hardship, the lord of men was distressed. O king! The lord began to think. In those earlier times, to free himself, the king made endeavours with
brahmanas. O king! The king asked those brahmanas. O king! However, he was incapable of freeing his kingdom.
O Janamejaya! He asked his advisers and those advisers said, "A wicked deed has been committed by you concerning those animals. In the form of flesh, the sage Baka is offering your kingdom as an oblation. It is because of
those oblations that the kingdom is facing this great decay. It is because of his austere deeds that this great calamity
has come about. O king! There is a grove with water along the Sarasvati. Go and seek his favours there." The king
went to the Sarasvati and spoke to Baka. O bull among the Bharata lineage! He lowered his head down on the
ground and joined his hands in salutation. "O illustrious one. Grant me your favours. Pardon my offence. I am distressed and greedy. I am stupid and devoid of intelligence. You are my refuge. You are my protector. You should
show me your favours." He lamented in this way, senseless with grief. On seeing this, the rishi felt compassion and
freed his kingdom. He was pleased and abandoned his wrath. To free the kingdom, he again offered oblations into
the fire. Having freed the kingdom, he received many animals in return. Delighted, he again went to Naimisharanya. The great-minded Dhritarashtra, with dharma in his soul, was also relieved. The king returned to his greatly
prosperous city.

'O great king! In that tirtha, the immensely intelligent Brihaspati offered oblations of flesh for the decay of the
asuras and the prosperity of the denizens of heaven. At this, the asuras began to decay. The gods desired victory
and shattered them in a battle. In accordance with the prescribed rites, the immensely illustrious one[Balarama.] gave brahmanas horses, elephants, vehicles with horses and mules yoked to them, extremely expensive jewels, riches and
grain. O lord of the earth! The mighty-armed one then went to the tirtha known as Yayata. O great king! The great-
souled Yayati, Nahusha's son, performed a sacrifice there and Sarasvati produced milk and clarified butter[Instead of water.]. Having performed the sacrifice, King Yayati, tiger among men, cheerfully ascended upwards and obtained all the
worlds. O king! Because Yayati performed the sacrifice there, Sarasvati flowed and gave all the objects of desire to
the great-souled brahmanas. In whatever spot the brahmanas desired whichever object of desire, in those spots, the
best of rivers flowed and gave those in abundance. The gods and the gandharvas were pleased at this prosperous
sacrifice. On beholding the prosperity at the sacrifice, men were astounded. The great-souled one, cleansed in his
soul[Balarama.], always gave away a lot of gifts. He possessed a palm tree on his banner and was the source of great dharma. He had fortitude and had conquered his soul. He then went to Vasishthapavaha, which had a great and terrible
current.'


