'"Rishyashringa replied, 'A brahmachari came. He had matted hair and he was intelligent. He wasn't too short and
he wasn't too tall. His complexion was golden. His eyes were long, like lotuses. He was radiant, like a son of the
gods. His prosperous form was as radiant as the sun. His eyes were beautiful and black and white, like those of
chakora birds. His matted hair was blue, clear, fragrant and extremely long, and braided with golden thread. Like
lightning blazing in the sky, there were two receptacles under his throat. There were two balls under his throat[The breasts.].
They had no hair on them and were extremely beautiful. His waist was thin around the navel. But his hips were expansive. Like mine, a girdle blazed from under his garment. But his was made of gold. That apart, there was an extraordinary sight-a tinkling sound emerged from his feet[There were anklets.]. Ornaments with a similar sound were also tied to
his wrists. They were like this string of rosaries, but made a musical sound. They made a sound whenever he
moved, like intoxicated swans in a pond. His garments were extraordinary to see. They were not like mine, but
were beautiful. His face was also an extraordinary sight. His words brought gladness to the heart. His speech was
like that of male cuckoos. When I heard it, it saddened the innermost parts of my heart. During the spring months,
the forest is fragrant when fanned by the wind. O father! Like that, there was a supreme and sacred fragrance when
the wind fanned him. His matted hair was tied neatly and arranged so that it divided his forehead into two equal
halves. His ears seemed to be surrounded by circles[Earrings.]. They were coloured and beautiful of form. He held something that looked like a beautiful circular fruit[The ball.] in his right hand. It bounced repeatedly on the ground and rose
up again, in an extraordinary way. He hit it and whirled around. His body was like a tree stirred by the wind. O father! On seeing that son of the immortals, my joy became supreme and desire was born in me. He embraced my
body repeatedly. He grasped me by my matted hair and lowered my mouth. He placed his mouth on my mouth and
uttered a sound that brought great pleasure to me. He did not desire water for washing the feet, or the fruits that I
had brought. He told me that those were the vows followed by him. He gave me other novel types of fruit. I tasted
all the fruits he gave me. These are not as succulent as those. They did not have skins like these have. Nor did they
have seeds like ours. The generous one gave me liquids to drink. They were extremely fine in flavour. As soon as I
drank them, great pleasure engulfed me and the ground seemed to move. These are the beautiful and fragrant garlands that he tied up with silken threads. Having scattered them here, he left for his own hermitage, blazing in austerities. I have lost my senses at his departure. My body seems to be burning. I wish to go to him immediately. I
wish that he should always roam around here. O father! I shall go to him this very instant. Please tell me the name
of the vow observed by him. I wish to observe it, together with him. I wish to observe the severe and austere rites
practised by him.'"'


'"Vibhandaka said, 'O son! These are rakshasas. They roam around in their extraordinary forms. They are unsurpassed in beauty and are extremely terrible. They always endeavour to create obstacles in the way of austerities. O
son! They assume beautiful forms. They assume different forms to tempt. Those terrible deeds are used to dislodge
the sages of the forest from the happiness of their worlds. Sages who are in control of their souls never serve them,
particularly if they desire the worlds of the virtuous. O one who doesn't perform evil acts! Those ones of evil
deeds find delight in obstructing ascetics and destroying their austerities. O son! Those liquids are for those who
aren't virtuous. They are wine and desired by evil ones. These garlands, coloured, bright and fragrant, are not regarded by the learned as fit for sages.'"

'Lomasha said, "Having restrained his son and told him that these were rakshasas, Vibhandaka went out to
search for her. After searching for three days, he failed to find her, and returned to his hermitage. When Kashyapa
again went out to gather fruit, as was the practice for hermits, the courtesan again returned to tempt the sage
Rishyashringa. As soon as he saw her, Rishyashringa was delighted. His mind was deluded and he told her, 'Let us
go to your hermitage before my father returns.' O king! Then she tempted Kashyapa's only son into the boat and
unmoored it. She tempted him through various means and brought him to the king of Anga. That extremely beautiful boat was moored within sight of a hermitage. A beautiful wood was created near the bank and named Rajashrama[Literally, the king's hermitage.]. The king brought Vibhandaka's only son and lodged him in the inner quarters. And he suddenly saw the
god[Indra.] showering rain, until the world was full and flooded with water. His wishes fulfilled, Lomapada bestowed
his daughter Shanta on Rishyashringa. To counter the wrath[Vibhandaka's wrath.], he instructed cattle to be placed on the roads and
the land tilled. Along the road that Vibhandaka would follow, the king placed many animals and warriors to look
after the animals. 'When maharshi Vibhandaka arrives in search of his son and asks you, you must join your hands
in salutation and tell him, "O maharshi! These animals and this tilled land belong to your son. What can we do to
please you? All of us are your servants and await your command[These are Lomapada's instructions to his warriors.]."' Meanwhile, after gathering roots and fruit,
the sage who was exceedingly wrathful returned to his hermitage. He searched for his son and on not finding him
there, became extremely angry. Rent asunder by rage, he suspected that this was the work of the king.

'"Deciding that he would burn up the king of Anga and all his possessions, he left for Champa[Champa was the capital of Anga. Anga is the eastern part of Bihar, and east of Munger, there are two villages by the name of Champa.]. Exhausted
and hungry, Kashyapa arrived at settlements that were prosperous with cattle. He was honoured by the herdsmen in
accordance with the prescribed rites, as if he was a king, and spent the night there. Having received great homage
from them, he asked them, 'O pleasant ones! Whose servants are you?' All of them respectfully told him, 'All
these riches belong to your son.' He was thus worshipped in region after region and heard similar pleasant words.
Thus, his anger was greatly appeased and in a happy frame of mind, he approached the city of the king of Anga.
He was worshipped by that bull among men. He saw his son, like Indra in heaven. He also saw his daughter-in-law
Shanta there, looking like a flash of lightning. Having seen the villages, the settlements of cattle, his son and Shanta, his extreme anger was pacified. O Indra among men! Vibhandaka showed his supreme favours to that lord of
the earth. The maharshi, as resplendent as the sun and the fire, left his son there and told him, 'Having done everything that pleases the king, you will return to the forest once a son has been born.' Rishyashringa acted according
to his words. He returned to where his father was. Shanta tended to him[Shanta went to the hermitage with Rishyashringa.], like the devoted Rohini attends on the
moon in the sky, like the fortunate Arundhati waits on Vasishtha, like Damayanti on Nala and like Shachi on the
wielder of the vajra[Indra.]. O Ajamidha[Yudhishthira's name is Ajamidha.]! Like Nadayani Indrasena was always obedient to Mudgala[There are different stories about Mudgala. He was both a king and a sage. In some accounts, Mudgala's
wife was Indrasena. In other accounts, Indrasena was his daughter-in-law. Indrasena was Narayana's daughter.
Thus, Nadayani could also read Narayani, as in some non-Critical texts.], thus was
Shanta towards Rishyashringa in the forest. O Indra among men! Driven by love, she tended to him. That sacred
hermitage is radiant here. The great lake, site of sacred deeds, is radiant here. O king! Having bathed here and purifying yourself, you will accomplish all your deeds and then go on to other tirthas."'


Vaishampayana said, 'O Janamejaya! Then the Pandava left Koushiki and one after another, went to all the other
sacred places. O king! He went to the ocean, to the confluence of the Ganga. He performed his ablutions in the
middle of the five hundred rivers. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Then, together with his brothers, the brave
lord of the earth travelled along the shores of the ocean towards Kalinga.

'Lomasha said, "O Kounteya! This is Kalinga, where the river Vaitarani flows. Here, under the refuge of the
gods, Dharma performed sacrifices. This is the northern bank, always frequented by brahmanas and inhabited by
rishis. It is a sacrificial ground that has been made beautiful by a mountain. In ancient times, other rishis have also
performed sacrifices here and gone to heaven along the route followed by the gods. O Indra among kings! This is
the place where Rudra grasped the sacrificial animal[There are stories about Rudra (Shiva) not being offered a share in the sacrifices and about how this was altered later.]. O Indra among men! Rudra grasped the animal and said,
'This is my share.' O bull among the Bharata lineage! When the animal was stolen, the gods told him, 'Do not
covet the property of others. Do not destroy all dharma.' Later, they praised Rudra with sweet words. They satisfied him with a sacrifice and showed him honour. Then, discarding the animal, he followed the path traversed by
the gods. O Yudhishthira! Listen to what is said about Rudra. 'As a result of their fear of Rudra, the gods resolved
that the supreme share of everything that was not stale would always be set apart for him. A man who touches the
water here, while reciting this verse, has the route of the gods as his path and sees it with his eyes.'"'

Vaishampayana said, 'Then all the immensely fortunate Pandavas, together with Droupadi, descended into
Vaitarani and offered oblations to the ancestors. Yudhishthira said, "O Lomasha! O illustrious one! O one rich in
austerities! Behold. As soon as I have bathed in this river, I have gone beyond what is human. O follower of good
vows! Through your grace, I can see all the worlds. This is the sound of the great-souled hermits, as they recite
their prayers."

'Lomasha replied, "O Yudhishthira! O lord of the earth! Keep quiet. The sound that you hear is at a distance of
three hundred thousand yojanas. O king! The beautiful forest that manifests itself here belongs to the one who created himself[Brahma.]. O Kounteya! The powerful Vishvakarma performed a sacrifice here. At that sacrifice, the one
who created himself gave the earth, with all its mountains, forests and regions, as a stipend to the great-souled
Kashyapa. O Kounteya! As soon as she had been given away, the earth became dejected. In anger, she spoke to the
illustrious lord of the worlds. 'O illustrious one! You should not have given me away to a mere mortal. Your giving
me away will be unsuccessful. I will go to rasatala[As has been mentioned earlier, rasatala is one of the seven nether regions.].' O lord of the earth! On seeing that the earth was dejected,
the illustrious rishi Kashyapa pacified her. O Pandava! She was satisfied by his austerities and once again emerged
from the water, establishing herself as an altar. O king! You can see it there, with all the signs of an altar. O great
king! Ascend it, and you will be extremely valorous. As you ascend it today, I will myself pronounce the benediction. O Ajamidha! As soon as it is touched by a mortal, this altar immerses itself in the ocean again. 'Agni, Mitra,
the womb, the water, the goddess, Vishnu's seed, the navel of amrita[The celestial drink, ambrosia.].' O Pandava! Having recited these truthful
words, swiftly climb up onto the altar."'

Vaishampayana said, 'When the benediction had been pronounced on him, the great-souled Yudhishthira went
into the ocean. When he had done all that he had been asked, he went to Mahendra and spent the night there.'


