Vaishampayana said, 'Having heard these words of Yajnaseni, the intolerant Bhimasena went to the king[Yudhishthira.]. He
sighed angrily and told him, "For the sake of kingship, tread along the road of dharma, one used by righteous ones.
Deprived of dharma, artha and kama, what do you gain by living in this hermitage of ascetics? Duryodhana did not
rob the kingdom through dharma, honesty or energy, but through deceitful gambling with dice. Our kingdom was
stolen the way a weak scavenging jackal steals a piece of meat from stronger lions. O king! Why have you abandoned artha, which is the source of dharma and kama, tormenting yourself in this wilderness in some trifling pursuit of dharma? Protected by the wielder of the Gandiva[Arjuna.], our kingdom could not even have been robbed by
Shakra. But because of our obedience to you, it was stolen in front of our eyes. While we were still alive, our riches were taken away from us because of you, like bilva fruit or cattle from those who are crippled. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! You are always firm in desiring dharma. But it is because we sought to do what is pleasing to
you, that we now face this great calamity. O bull among the Bharata lineage! It was because our selves were under
your control that we are now ploughing our friends and providing delight to our enemies. It was our stupidity that
we did not kill the sons of Dhritarashtra. But because we followed your commands, that evil deed is now tormenting us. O king! Look at you, living in a home meant for animals. This is the act of a coward, not one served by the
strong. This is not approved by Krishna[Droupadi.], or Bibhatsu, or Abhimanyu, or Srinjaya[This is probably a reference to Dhrishtadyumna.], or I myself, or the two
sons of Madri. Because you are dharma, you always oppress yourself by your vow towards dharma. O king! But
isn't it possible that despair has condemned you to the life of an impotent? It is only cowards who are incapable of
winning back their prosperity. They love despair, which bears no fruits and destroys everything. You have strength
and sight. You can see your manliness. O king! But because you have resorted to gentleness, you do not feel our
distress.

'"While we have always been forgiving, the sons of Dhritarashtra regard us as incapable. This causes more grief
than death in battle. If all of us were to die in battle, in a straight fight and without turning back, that would have
been better, because we would have obtained worlds after death. O bull among the Bharata lineage! And if we
killed them all and obtained back the entire earth, that would also be superior. If we are always devoted to our
tasks and established in our own dharma, if we wish to obtain great fame, if we wish to repulse enmity, then the
signs are that for our own sake, we should embark on war. Our kingdom has been stolen by others. We will be
praised and not censured. O king! Dharma that causes affliction to our friends and our own selves is vice. It is not
dharma. It is bad dharma. A man who always resorts to dharma follows weak dharma. Dharma and artha desert
him, like happiness and unhappiness leave a man who is dead. One who suffers dharma's afflictions for the sake of
dharma alone is not learned. He does not know the true purpose of dharma, like a blind one does not know the rays
of the sun. He who thinks that artha exists only for the sake of artha, does not know about artha. He is like a servant tending to cattle in the forest. He who excessively pursues artha and doesn't pay attention to the other two
goals[Dharma and kama.] deserves to be censured, like the killer of a brahmana, and should be killed by all beings. In that way, he
who always pursues kama and ignores the other two goals of dharma and artha, is certain to be robbed of his
friends and will be weak in dharma and artha. He is certain to be killed at the end of the kama, like a fish that
roams with pleasure until the pond dries up. It is for this reason that the learned are never confused about dharma
and artha. They are required for kama, like kindling for a fire. Dharma is the root of all artha and dharma is united
with artha. Know that the two are rooted in each other, like the ocean and the clouds. One feels a sensation of pleasure when one touches objects that have artha. This kama is a state of the mind and has no physical existence. O
king! A man who pursues artha should also strive for great dharma. He who strives for kama also seeks artha, because from kama one obtains nothing else. Kama yields no fruit other than desire, once that fruit is used up. The
learned regard it as ashes from wood. O king! Just as a seller of meat kills small birds, in that way, it is the nature
of that which is not dharma to kill beings. One who does not perceive the nature of dharma because of desire and
avarice deserves to be killed by all beings. He remains evil-minded, here and in the hereafter. O king! It is known
to you that artha is derived from the possession of objects. You also know about its nature and its various transformations. Its loss, or destruction at the time of old age and death, is regarded as a calamity. That affliction has now
overtaken us. The five senses, the mind and the heart find pleasure when there is attachment to objects. In my view,
that is the supreme fruit of one's deeds. Thus, dharma, artha and kama should be considered separately. A man
should not be excessively addicted to dharma, or to artha, or to kama. All of them must always be served. The sacred texts decree that dharma must be followed in the first, artha in the middle and kama in the last[This means the time of the day, dharma in the morning, artha during the day and kama in the evening.]. The sacred
texts decree that, in due order and according to age, kama must be observed in the first, artha in the second and
dharma in the last[Kama in the first part of one's life, artha in the subsequent stage and dharma at the end.]. O supreme among eloquent ones! Learned ones who know the nature of time apportion their
time in due order, serving all of dharma, artha and kama. O king! O descendant of the Kuru lineage[The word used is nandana. So it can also be translated as beloved of the Kuru lineage.]! Whether
freedom from these or obtaining them is the superior goal for those who seek to obtain happiness is a question that
you should reflect on, with every means at your disposal. O king! You should then swiftly act on obtaining either
the former or the latter. He who lives a life of vacillation between the two is immersed in a miserable state.

'"You know dharma and you have always practised it. On knowing this, your well-wishers are urging you to act.
O king! Donations, sacrifices, honesty, worship, retention of the Vedas and uprightness-these represent powerful
and supreme dharma, here and in the hereafter. O king! But one who is distressed and destitute cannot serve these.
O tiger among men! This holds even if one has all the qualities. O king! The universe is based on dharma and there
is nothing that is above dharma. O king! But dharma can only be served through great wealth. O king! Such wealth
can never be obtained through begging or through impotence, but can always be obtained by one whose intelligence is based on dharma. O bull among men! Begging brings success to brahmanas. But that has been forbidden
to you. Therefore, seek to obtain the artha that you desire by exercising your energy. Begging is not recommended,
nor the life of a vaishya or a shudra. In the heart of kshatriyas, the special dharma is that of strength. The wise and
the learned say that nobility is dharma. Therefore, strive for nobility and do not stop short of it. O Indra among
kings! You know the eternal dharma. Awake! You have been born to perform cruel deeds[Born as a kshatriya.], those that other men
suffer from. The fruits that you obtain by nurturing your subjects can never be condemned. O king! This is the
eternal dharma that the preserver[Dhata.] has determined for you. O Partha! If you deviate from this, you will provide
cause for laughter to the world. Men do not praise deviation from one's own dharma. O Kounteya! Make your
mind that of a kshatriya. Forsake this lassitude of mind. Rely on valour. Bear the weight like a beast of burden. O
king! No one has won the world with only dharma in his soul. No king has won prosperity and fortune in this way.
One can obtain a kingdom by deceiving inferior ones, who have avarice in their hearts, with a sweet tongue, like
one with a spear[Shalyaka, one with a spear. A hunter with a spear offers bait and obtains his food.] obtains food. O bull among the Pandavas! The asuras were the elder brothers and were prosperous in every way[The asuras, specifically the daityas, are the offspring of Diti. The gods, specifically the adityas, are the offspring of Aditi. Both Diti and Aditi were married to Kashyapa.]. But the gods conquered them through deceit. O lord of the earth! O mighty-armed one!
Knowing that everything belongs to those with strength, win over the enemies by resorting to deceit. There is no
archer who is equal to Arjuna in battle. There is no man who is my equal in wielding the club. O king! A strong
one engages in battle on the basis of strength, not on the basis of greater numbers or greater enterprise. O Pandava!
Therefore, resort to your prowess. Prowess is the source of artha. Nothing else is the source. It is not useless, like
the shade of a tree during the winter. O Kounteya! If one desires greater artha, one should give up some artha, like
seeds sown on the ground. There is no doubt about this. But when the gain of artha is equal to the expenditure
made of artha, or smaller than it, expenditure is not the indicated task. That would be like scratching an ass. O Indra among men! In that way, a man who gives up a little bit of dharma for the sake of obtaining greater dharma is
certainly considered to be wise. If an enemy possesses friends, learned ones make them their friends. Then, when
the enemy is weakened because his friends have left him, they overcome him. O king! Those who are strong embark on a battle on the basis of prowess, not only enterprise or sweet words. That is how all the subjects are made
one's own. By uniting together, weak ones can kill a stronger enemy, like bees kill someone trying to steal the
honey.

'"O king! The sun sustains and destroys all beings with its rays. Be like the sun. O king! Just as it was observed
by our grandfathers, we have heard the ancient accounts about the observance of austerities, so as to protect the
earth in accordance with ordinances. On witnessing your affliction, the world has decided that the sun may lose its
light and the moon its beauty. O king! Separately and collectively, when assemblies gather together in conversation, they praise you and censure the other[Duryodhana.]. O king! Over and above this, when brahmanas and the Kurus assemble, they happily talk about your adherence to the truth. They say you have never uttered a falsehood because
of delusion, meanness, greed, fear, desire or wish for prosperity. If a king acquires demerits in an attempt to win
the earth, all of that can later be countered through sacrifices and offering of large quantities of dakshina. O king!
Just as the moon emerges from darkness, he is freed from all his sins by giving villages and thousands of cows to
brahmanas. O descendant of the Kuru lineage[The word used is nandana. So it can also be translated as beloved of the Kuru lineage.]! O Yudhishthira! All the citizens and residents of the countryside, both young and old, often praise you. The kingdom vested in Duryodhana is like a dog's skin touched by
milk, the brahman in a shudra, truth in a robber and strength in a woman. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
These are the words that have been uttered in the world since ancient times. Even women and children say it, as if
it was part of studying.

'"Therefore, mount the chariot that is stocked with all the implements. Let the best of brahmanas pronounce
benedictions over you, so that your supreme objective is successful. Set out instantly, and today itself, for Gajasahrya[Hastinapura.]. Surrounded by your brothers, who are skilled in the use of weapons and wield firm bows, and whose
valour is like that of venomous serpents, you will be like the killer of Vritra[Indra killed Vritra.] surrounded by the Maruts. Use
your energy to destroy the weak enemies, like the destroyer of the asuras. O Kounteya! O immensely strong one!
Rob the sons of Dhritarashtra of their prosperity. No man on earth can withstand the touch of arrows when they are
unleashed from Gandiva. Shafted in feathers of vultures, they are like virulent serpents. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! When I am enraged in battle, no warrior, no elephant and no noble steed can withstand the force
of my club. O Kounteya! With the help of the Srinjayas[The Panchalas.], the Kekayas and the bulls among the Vrishnis, how
can we not win back our kingdom in battle?"'


'Yudhishthira said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There is no doubt that all this is true. Your sharp words
pierce me like barbs and weaken me. But I cannot blame you. My wrong course of action has brought this adversity and misery on us. I took up the dice with a desire to take away the sovereignty and kingdom of Dhritarashtra's
son. It was thus that Subala's son, the skilful and deceitful gambler, played with me for Suyodhana's sake. O Bhimasena! Shakuni, the dweller of the mountains[Shakuni was from Gandhara, a mountainous region.], is knowledgeable in great maya. He hurled out the dice in the
middle of the sabha. He used maya against me, who did not know any maya. It is then that I saw the deceit. I saw
that the dice would always follow the wishes of Shakuni and favour him in odds and evens[Ayuja is odd and yuja is even. These are numbers thrown up by the dice.]. I was capable of
restraining my mind then, but anger robs a man of his patience. O son[The word tata means son, but can be used for anyone who is a junior.]! The self cannot be controlled when it is
overcome by manliness, pride and valour. O Bhimasena! I do not take umbrage at what you have said. I think that
this was destined to be. O Bhimasena! The king who is Dhritarashtra's son wished to rob us of our kingdom and
inflict misery on us. Slavery was inflicted on us and it was Droupadi who became our only refuge.

'"Both you and Dhananjaya know what Dhritarashtra's son told us when we were summoned to the sabha yet
again to gamble with dice. In front of all the Bharatas, he told us what one throw of the dice would entail. He said,
'O prince! O Ajatashatru! Without being concealed, you will have to live in the forest of your choice for twelve
years. After that, you and your brothers will have to live for another year in concealment and without being detected. O father[The word tata means father, but can also be used for anyone who is a senior. Duryodhana was younger to
Yudhishthira.]! O Partha! But when you are roaming thus, if the spies of the Bharatas hear of you or detect you,
you will again have to spend a similar period in that fashion. Knowing this, you must give your certain promise. O
king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If you are not found out during that period and manage to confound my
spies, I promise in this assembly of Kurus that you will have the five rivers back[The land of the five rivers, the region of the Punjab.]. If we are defeated by you, 'all
my brothers and I' will give up our comforts for a similar period and live accordingly.' This is what the king said
earlier in the midst of the Kurus and I gave my promise. That abominable game of dice then began there. All of us
were defeated and exiled. We are thus roaming around in these regions, in these difficult forests that are in the form
of a calamity. Even then, Suyodhana did not wish for peace. He fell prey to even greater rage. He encouraged all
the Kurus and all those who were under his control[To express delight at the discomfiture of the Pandavas.]. Having entered into an agreement before righteous ones,
who would wish to break it for the sake of a kingdom? As an arya, I think that transgression of dharma is worse
than death, even for the sake of ruling the earth.

'"You could have performed a brave deed then. You grasped your club at the time of the gamble. Had Phalguna
not restrained you, you would have burnt my arms. O Bhima! That would not have been a misdeed then. Since you
are aware of your manliness, why did you not speak up then and perform the deed at its appointed time. You have
found the time now, when it is too late. When the time has passed, what is the point of censuring me? O Bhimasena! But I suffered from misery even more, when I saw Yajnaseni oppressed and though we saw it, we restrained
ourselves. O Bhima! That was like drinking a poisonous juice. O brave one among the Bharata lineage! We cannot
do anything now. We made an agreement in the midst of the Kuru warriors. We must wait for the time, until our
happiness dawns again, like those who sow seeds wait for the fruit. If someone has been vanquished through deceit
earlier and knows that the enmity will bear flowers and fruit, such a brave one truly lives in the world of the living
and obtains many qualities through his manliness. He obtains all the prosperity in this world. I think that his enemies bow down before him. His friends gather around and worship him, and live off him, like the gods off Indra.
Know that the promise I made will be true. I think dharma is superior to immortality and life. The kingdom, sons,
fame, wealth-all of these are worth only a small fragment[The word used is kala. This means small fragment or fraction. But specifically, it also means a sixteenth
part.] of truth."'


'Bhimasena said, "O great king! You have made an agreement with time, the arrow[The word used is patatrina, which etymologically, means the one with wings. Specifically, patatrina means
a bird or an arrow, but the latter fits the text better.] that brings an end to everything. It has no end, it is without measure and it is like a current that carries everything away. I think that it follows
the dharma of foam and the dharma of fruit. You are a mortal and you are tied down by time. How can you think
that time is directly before you? O Kounteya! Like collyrium becomes less every time it is picked with a blade of
grass[Collyrium is a black pigment applied to the eye with a stick or pencil. The word sucha is used. This means
needle, but it also means a pointed shoot or blade of kusa grass. Since collyrium is applied to the eye, blade of
grass seems to be a better translation than needle.], one's life becomes less in an instant. Why should it[Time.] wait? Only one whose life has no end or one who
knows the measure of one's life can wait for time, since one can then see everything clearly. O king! If we wait for
time and for thirteen years, our lives will be shortened and we will be nearer death. The bodies of those who have
bodies are always overtaken by death. Therefore, we should work towards obtaining the kingdom before death.
One who should extend the earth[A king.], but does not avenge enmity, fails to achieve fame and remains incomplete,
like a useless cow. If a man does not avenge enmity because he has little strength and enterprise, I think that his
birth has been useless and that he has been born in an inferior lineage. O lord of the earth! Your arms will be laden
with gold, you will attain fame. Use the strength of your arms to kill those who hate you in battle and enjoy the
riches. O king! O destroyer of enemies! If a man goes to hell after killing a deceitful person, that instantly becomes
like heaven to him.

'"The torment born from anger burns more than fire. I am tormented by it and cannot sleep during the day or at
night. Partha Bibhatsu is foremost among those who draw the string of the bow. He is now supremely tormented
like a lion in its den. Like a giant elephant, he is suppressing the great heat that arises inside him, though unaided,
he can take on all the archers in the world. So as to please you, Nakula, Sahadeva and the aged mother[Kunti.] who has
given birth to warriors are seated, benumbed and dumb. All our relatives, together with the Srinjayas, wish you
well. But I and Prativindhya's mother[Droupadi. Prativindhya is Droupadi's son.] are greatly tormented and speak to you, though what I am saying will be
agreeable to them too. All of them have attained great grief and all of them will welcome war. O king! No calamity
can be greater than this. Mean and weaker ones have stolen our kingdom and are now enjoying it. O scorcher of
enemies! You are bearing this misery so that your conduct is not tainted out of tenderness and gentleness. But no
one will praise you for this. Your gentleness is like that of a brahmana. How have you been born as a kshatriya?
Those who are born in that womb are usually cruel-minded. You have heard about the dharma of kings, as recounted by Manu. They are cruel, characterized by deceit and are against pacification. O tiger among men! There is
work to be done. Why are you behaving like a crippled one? You have intelligence, valour, knowledge and birth.

'"O Kounteya! You wish to conceal us, like hiding the Himalaya Mountains in a handful of grass. You are famous throughout the earth. You will not be able to live secretly, undetected. O Partha! The sun cannot pass undetected in the sky. How can Jishnu remain unrecognized? He is like a giant shala tree, like a palasha tree with
branches and flowers. He is like a white elephant. O Partha! How will these two young brothers who are like lions,
Nakula and Sahadeva, remain hidden? The princess Droupadi is the mother of brave ones and the performer of sacred deeds. O Partha! Krishna is famous. How will she remain unrecognized? O king! All the subjects know me,
even the children. I see myself as unrecognized as Mount Meru. Besides, we have exiled many kings and the sons
of kings from their kingdoms and they will now follow Dhritarashtra. Deprived and exiled by us, they will not
have pacific feelings towards us. They will certainly try to injure us, so as to cause him pleasure. They will employ
many spies against us. There will be a great danger that they will detect us and inform against us. We have already
lived in this forest for thirteen months. Regard that as equal to that number of years. The learned ones have said
that a month can substitute for a year, like putika[A kind of herb.] is a substitute for soma. Act accordingly. O king! You can
also free yourself from this single sin[From violating the agreement.] by satisfying with sacred food a bull that pulls a sacred burden. O king!
Therefore, make up your mind to kill your enemies. For kshatriyas, there is no dharma other than that of fighting."'


