Vaishampayana said, 'While these two intelligent ones were conversing in this way, the night, auspicious with the
nakshatras, passed. The great-souled Vidura was listening to many words about dharma, artha and kama, diverse in
their purport, sentences and syllables, spoken by the infinitely energetic Krishna and he did not desire that the
night should pass. Neither did Krishna. Then, many bards and minstrels with good voices awoke Keshava, to the
sound of conch shells and drums. Dasharha Janardana, bull among all those of the Satvata lineage, arose and performed all the necessary morning ablutions. Having bathed in water, meditating and offering oblations into the fire,
Madhava adorned himself in ornaments and worshipped the rising sun.

'Duryodhana and Shakuni Soubala came to the unvanquished Krishna Dasharha, while he was performing the
morning rites. They told Krishna, "O Govinda! Dhritarashtra has arrived in the assembly hall with all the Kurus,
with Bhishma at the forefront, and all the other kings and lords of the earth. They are waiting for you, like the immortals await Shakra in heaven." Govinda welcomed them with extremely conciliatory words. Then, when the
clear sun had risen, Janardana, the scorcher of enemies, gave the brahmanas gold, garments, cows and horses.
When the unvanquished Dasharha had given many gems and was waiting, his charioteer arrived and greeted him.
On the instructions of the immensely intelligent one, the divine chariot was brought. It roared like a monsoon
cloud and was decorated with every kind of jewel. Janardana circumambulated the fire and the brahmanas. He
donned the Koustubha jewel and was radiant in his supreme prosperity. Surrounded by the Kurus and protected by
the Vrishnis, Shouri Krishna, the joy of all the Yadavas, ascended the chariot. After Dasharha had ascended, Vidu-
ra, knowledgeable in dharma, foremost among all beings and supreme among all those who uphold dharma, also
ascended. Duryodhana and Shakuni Soubala followed Krishna, the scorcher of enemies, on a second chariot.
Satyaki, Kritavarma and maharatha Vrishnis followed Krishna on chariots, horses and elephants. As they travelled,
the beautiful and colourful chariots roared. They were decorated in gold and were yoked to excellent horses. In a
short while, Krishna, resplendent in his wisdom and prosperity, came upon a large road that was frequented by rajarshis. The dust had been swept and it had been sprinkled[With water.]. As Dasharha proceeded, there was continuous music
from drums, conch shells and other musical instruments. Brave and young warriors from all the worlds, scorchers
of enemies and with the valour of lions, surrounded Shouri's chariot as he travelled. Many thousand of others preceded Krishna in colourful and wonderful attire, with swords, spears and other weapons. There were more than
one hundred elephants and thousands of supreme horses that followed the brave and unvanquished Dasharha as he
progressed. The entire city of the Kurus was full of children, women and the aged, who wished to see Janardana,
the scorcher of enemies, arrive on his chariot. There were many women who crowded on the balconies, so that the
foundations seemed to sway under the burden. He proceeded slowly, honoured by the Kurus, listening to the many
words, glancing in all directions and returning the homage to those who should be honoured.

'Keshava and his followers then reached the assembly hall. The sounds of conch shells and flutes filled all the
directions, resounding in the sky. The entire assembly of infinitely energetic kings trembled in delight, desiring
Krishna's arrival. As Krishna neared, the lords of men trembled when they heard the roar of the chariot, with a
noise like that of a monsoon cloud. Shouri, bull among all the Satvatas, reached the gate of the assembly hall and
dismounted from the chariot, which was like Mount Kailasa. Similar to clouds and mountains, it was radiant in its
energy. He entered the assembly hall, which was like the abode of the great Indra. The immensely famous one held
Vidura and Satyaki with his two hands. O king! He overshadowed the Kurus with his radiance, like the sun over
the nakshatras. Karna and Duryodhana were in front of Vasudeva. Kritavarma and the Vrishnis were behind
Krishna. With Dhritarashtra at the forefront, Bhishma, Drona and all the others arose from their seats and honoured
Janardana. When Dasharha arrived, the immensely famous lord of men who possessed wisdom as his sight[Dhritarashtra.] arose,
together with Bhishma, Drona and the others. When the great king Dhritarashtra, lord of men, arose, all the thousands of kings stood up in every direction. On Dhritarashtra's instructions, a golden seat that was excellent in
every way had been prepared for Krishna. Madhava greeted the king, Bhishma and Drona with a smile. The one
with dharma in his soul greeted the other kings in accordance with age. The kings, the lords of the earth and all the
Kurus worshipped Keshava Janardana when he entered the assembly hall. Dasharha, the scorcher of enemies and
the conqueror of enemy cities, stood in the midst of the kings and saw that the rishis had assembled in the sky. On
seeing the rishis, with Narada at the forefront, Dasharha softly told Bhishma, Shantanu's son, "O king! The rishis
have arrived to witness this assembly on earth. They should be invited, offered seats and shown a great deal of honours. No one is capable of being seated as long as they don't have seats. Let the sages, who have controlled their
souls, be immediately worshipped." On seeing the rishis arrive at the gate of the assembly hall, Shantanu's son ordered the servants to quickly bring seats for them. They brought many large and beautiful seats, smooth and decorated with jewels and gold. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When they had accepted the argha[Gift given to a guest, also arghya.], they seated
themselves. Krishna seated himself, and so did the kings in their respective seats. Duhshasana showed Satyaki his
excellent seat. Vivimshati brought a golden seat for Kritavarma. The great-souled and intolerant Karna and Duryodhana shared the same seat, not far away from Krishna. O lord of the earth! Shakuni, the king of Gandhara, was
protected by all those from Gandhara and sat on a seat, together with his son. Vidura sat on a seat that was crested
with jewels and was covered with white deerskin. His seat touched the seat where the immensely wise Shouri was
seated.

'For a long time, all the kings glanced towards Dasharha. They looked at Janardana, as if they were drinking
amrita, and were not satisfied. Janardana was attired in a yellow garment and had the complexion of an atasi
flower[A small yellow flower of the common flax.]. He sat in the midst of that assembly hall, like a jewel that has been set in gold. With their minds on
Govinda, all of them were seated and silent. Not a man who was there said anything.'


Vaishampayana said, 'When all the kings had seated themselves and were silent, Krishna, whose teeth were excellent, began to speak in a voice that rumbled like a drum or like a cloud at the end of the summer. Madhava addressed Dhritarashtra so that everyone in the assembly hall could hear him.

'"O descendant of the Bharata lineage! May there be peace between the Kurus and the Pandavas, without any
endeavours at war on the part of the warriors. That is the reason why I have come. O king! I have nothing else to
say, no other words that can be beneficial. O destroyer of enemies! You know everything that deserves to be
known. O lord of the earth! This lineage of yours is supreme among all the kings. It is known for its learning and
conduct and possesses all the qualities. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Compassion, sympathy, kindness,
non-violence, uprightness, forgiveness and truthfulness-all these distinguish the Kurus. O king! Belonging to a
lineage that is great in these ways, an improper act on your part is especially to be deplored. O supreme among the
Kurus! O father[The word used is tata.]! You are foremost among those who restrain the Kurus when they act in accordance with falsehood, whether with outsiders or insiders. O Kouravya! With Duryodhana leading the way, these sons of yours have
turned their backs on dharma and artha and have strayed into violence. They are wicked. They have transgressed
honour. They have lost their senses because of their avarice, even towards their chief relatives. O bull among men!
You know this. An extremely terrible calamity has arisen before the Kurus. O Kouravya! If it is ignored, it will destroy the earth. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If you wish to do so, you are capable of pacifying this. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! It is my view that it will not be difficult to obtain peace. O king! Peace depends on
you. O lord of the earth! It depends on me. O Kouravya! Establish[On the right path.] your sons and I will establish the others[The Pandavas.]. O
Indra among kings! Your sons and their followers must obey your instructions, because if they act in accordance
with your instructions, that will ensure their great welfare. O king! What is beneficial for you will also be beneficial for the Pandavas. They wish to be instructed by you, while I endeavour for peace. O lord of the earth! Reflect
on the consequences and then act accordingly. O lord of men! You are capable of uniting the Bharatas. O king!
Protected by the Pandavas, you will be established in dharma and artha. O lord of men! However much you try,
you will not obtain people like them. When the great-souled Pandavas protect you, not even Indra with the gods
can withstand you. How can kings? O bull among the Bharata lineage! Who will wish to fight against a side that
has Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Karna, Vivimshati, Ashvatthama, Vikarna, Somadatta, Bahlika, Saindhava, Kalinga,
Kamboja, Sudakshina, Yudhishthira, Bhimasena, Savyasachi, the twins and the immensely energetic maharatha
Satyaki? O destroyer of enemies! With the Kurus and the Pandavas, you will become invincible before your enemies and will become the unrivalled lord of the world. O lord of the earth! O scorcher of enemies! Lords of the
earth who are your equal and kings who are your superior will seek alliances with you. Protected in every direction
by your sons, grandsons, brothers, fathers and well-wishers, you will live happily. O lord of the earth! Give primacy to their interests and treat them well, as you have in the past, and you will enjoy the entire earth. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! Together with the Pandavas and your own[Your own sons.], you will triumph over enemies and this will be
in your own interests. O scorcher of enemies! O lord of men! If you are united with your sons and advisers, you
will enjoy land that will be conquered by them.

'"O great king! But if there is war, a great destruction can be seen. O king! There will be destruction on both
sides. What dharma do you see in that? The Pandavas may be killed in battle, or your immensely strong sons. O
king! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Tell me the happiness that you will feel then. They are brave ones, skilled
in the usage of weapons, and all of them, the Pandavas and your own, wish to fight. Save them from a great danger.
If there is a battle, we will not see all the Kurus, or the Pandavas. Brave ones will be destroyed on both sides.
Charioteers will kill charioteers. O supreme among kings! All the kings of earth have gathered together. They are
under the influence of anger and will destroy your subjects. O king! Save the world and do not destroy your subjects. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! If you return to your natural state, some remnants may be left. They are
pure. They are generous. They are modest. They are aryas. They are born of pure lineages. They are related to one
another. O king! Save them from this great danger. Let the lords of the earth meet each other in auspicious circumstances. Let them eat and drink together and let them return to their respective homes, with excellent garments and
beautiful garlands, and duly honoured. O scorcher of enemies! Let the intolerance and enmity be restrained. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! When so much of your age has elapsed, let the affection that you once felt for the Pandavas return again, now and for always. They lost their father when they were children and were reared by you. O
bull among the Bharata lineage! Protect them in a proper way, as you would your own sons. You should especially
protect them when they face hardships. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Otherwise, your dharma and your artha
will be destroyed. O king! The Pandavas have conveyed their homage and seek your favours, saying, 'On your instructions, we and our followers have faced unhappiness. We have dwelt for twelve years in the forest. We lived
for a thirteenth year in concealment, unknown to others. We spent that time, certain that our father would not deviate from the agreement. O father! We have adhered to the agreement. The brahmanas know this. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! Therefore, adhere to the agreement with us, as we have. O king! We have suffered many hardships. We should now obtain our share of the kingdom. Since you know about dharma and artha, it is for you to
save us. Seeing that you are our senior, we have borne many hardships. Therefore, act towards us as a mother or a
father. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The conduct of a disciple towards his preceptor is supreme. If we deviate from the path, it is for the father to establish us there. O king! Establish us on the right path and follow that
yourself.' O bull among the Bharata lineage! Your sons have said this to the assembly. 'To those who know about
dharma and are in the assembly hall, anything inappropriate is improper, such as when dharma is destroyed by adharma and truth by a falsehood. If this happens in the sight of those who are in the assembly hall, they are themselves killed. Dharma has been pierced by adharma and has come to this assembly hall. If the stake is not taken
out, those who are in the assembly hall are themselves pierced. Dharma destroys them, like a river uproots the
trees along its banks.' O bull among the Bharata lineage! Those who can see dharma, and are silently waiting for it
to manifest itself have spoken what is true, righteous and just. O lord of men! What can you tell them, except returning their share?

'"Let the lords of the earth who are in this assembly hall speak. O bull among the kshatriyas! If I have spoken in
accordance with dharma and artha, if I have spoken the truth, free those kshatriyas from the noose of death. O best
of the Bharata lineage! Make peace. Do not come under the control of anger. As is proper, return to the Pandavas
their share of the ancestral kingdom. O scorcher of enemies! Be successful with your sons and enjoy the prosperity. O lord of men! You know that Ajatashatru is always established in the dharma of the righteous and you know
his conduct towards you and your sons. There was an attempt to burn him. There was an attempt to exile him. But
he has returned again to you as a refuge. You and your sons banished him to Indraprastha. Dwelling there, he
brought all the lords of the earth under his suzerainty. O king! But he has always placed you above him and has
never crossed you. When he conducted himself in this way, Soubala conquered him through ultimate deceit, because he coveted the kingdom, the riches and the grain. When he was reduced to such a state, Krishna[Krishnaa, Droupadi.] was
brought to the assembly hall. But Yudhishthira, whose soul is unfathomable, did not swerve from the dharma of
kshatriyas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I wish their welfare and yours, dharma, artha and happiness. O
king! Do not destroy your subjects. O lord of the earth! Control your sons, who have overstepped the limits of
greed and think that which is not artha to be artha, and that which is artha to be not artha. The Parthas, the destroyers of enemies, are stationed, ready to serve you and ready to fight. O king! O scorcher of enemies! Station yourself in what you perceive to be healthy."'

Vaishampayana said, 'In their hearts, all the lords of the earth welcomed these words. But no one present ventured to speak first.'


