'Sanjaya said, "The terrible and fierce battle continued. O lord of the earth! The world was covered in darkness and
dust. As they were stationed in that encounter, the warriors could not see each other. The great battle continued on
the basis of guessing and signs. Men, elephants and horses encountered supreme destruction and it made the body
hair stand up. O supreme among kings! The brave Drona, Karna and Kripa and Bhima, Parshata and Satyaki, agitated each other's soldiers. In every direction, the maharathas slaughtered the soldiers. Because of the darkness and
the dust, the elephants fled in different directions. The warriors were terrified and bereft of their senses. They also
fled in different directions. O great king! They were killed and fled in that encounter. Thousands of maharathas
killed each other in that battle. They were blind and confounded by the darkness and this was due to your stupid
son's policy. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the soldiers, and the protectors of the soldiers, were confused in that battle. Everything was covered in darkness."

'Dhritarashtra asked, "They were agitated by the Pandavas and their energy was sapped. Those on my side were
blinded and shattered by the darkness. What was the state of your minds then? O Sanjaya! When the world was
covered in darkness, how did their soldiers and those on my side again become visible?"

'Sanjaya replied, "There were soldiers who had not been killed[On the Kourava side.]. Instructed by their leaders, they again
arranged themselves in the form of a vyuha. Drona was in the front and Shalya at the rear. O king! Drona and
Soubala were along the flanks. During that night, the king himself[Duryodhana.] protected all the soldiers. O king! Duryodhana spoke to the large numbers of infantry and comforted them. 'Abandon your supreme weapons. Take up flaming lamps in your hands.' Thus instructed by the supreme of kings, they were cheered and took up lamps. Divided
through different standards, during that night, the army was beautiful because of the radiance of the fire. They were
adorned in extremely expensive ornaments. They possessed divine weapons. These blazed as they were hurled. In
a short while, properly arranged, those lamps lit up the entire army. The foot soldiers held lamps with oil in their
hands and this made all the soldiers look radiant. They looked like clouds in the night sky, illuminated by lightning. When the soldiers were illuminated in this way, Drona, who was like the fire, scorched all the directions. O
Indra among kings! In his golden armour, he was like the midday sun with its rays. As the light was reflected from
golden ornaments, sparkling swords and bows and yellow weapons, it was beautiful. There were bright clubs and
dazzling bludgeons. There were lances and spears. O Ajamidha! As they were repeatedly lit, the rays of the lamps
reflected from these. O king! There were umbrellas, new whisks and other accompaniments and they flamed like
giant meteors. There were golden garlands that were whirled around. They looked brilliant. Because of the reflection from the weapons and the illumination from the lamps, your army then looked dazzling. O king! There was
the radiance from the reflection on ornaments and it was extremely beautiful. There were yellow weapons that
were well crafted, used for mangling bodies. They were whirled by the brave ones and created a flaming radiance
there, like the lightning in the sky at the end of summer. These were brought down with great force to kill the enemy and the faces of the men trembled as they did this, like large clouds driven by the wind. It was as if a raging
conflagaration blazes like the sun and destroys a large forest. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The army
blazed in that light and looked fierce in form, generating great fear.

'"On seeing that our army was thus illuminated, the Parthas quickly instructed all their soldiers and the large
numbers of foot soldiers to also light lamps. Seven lamps were placed on each elephant. Ten lamps were placed on
each chariot. There were two lamps on the back of each horse. There were other lamps on the flanks, the standards
and the rear. There were others along the flanks of all the soldiers, at the rear and in the front, in every direction.
Other men roamed around in the midst of the two armies, with flaming torches in their hands. All the soldiers and
the masses of infantry got mixed up with the elephants, the chariots and the large numbers of horses. The army of
the sons of Pandu was illuminated with others who were in the midst and held flaming torches in their hands. It
was as if a fire was rendered more powerful because of an additional blaze and those two armies assumed greater
strength. It was like the sun making the planets more radiant, or the sun fiercely illuminating the flames of a fire.
That radiance spread on the earth and into the sky and spreading over all the directions, seemed to increase. The
splendour was extremely fierce and made your soldiers, and theirs, visible. O king! As that radiance spread up towards the sky, the masses of gods, the gandharvas, the yakshas, the asuras and large numbers of siddhas were
awakened and assembled, with all the apsaras. The place was full of gods, gandharvas, yakshas, leaders among the
asuras, masses of apsaras and brave warriors who had been killed and had ascended to heaven. The field of battle
looked like heaven itself. There were chariots, horses, elephants, all illuminated with lamps. Angry warriors
roamed around and so did wounded horses. Those large armies of chariots, horses and elephants were arrayed in
battle formation and were as resplendent as the gods and the asuras, arranged in vyuhas. The force of spears was
like a turbulent wind. The large chariots were like clouds. There was the roar of chariots and horses. Weapons
showered down, like clouds raining blood. As night commenced, there was a battle between the men who were
like gods. The great-souled one[Drona or Ashvatthama. It is not clear who is being referred to.] was like a giant fire. He tormented the foremost among the Pandavas. O Indra
among men! He was like the sun that has reached the midpoint of the sky at the end of the monsoon."'


'Sanjaya said, "The world, covered in dust and darkness, was thus illuminated. Wishing to kill each other, the
brave ones attacked. O king! They clashed in that battle, with weapons, lances and swords in their hands. Overcome with rage, they glanced at each other. There were thousands of blazing lamps in every direction. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The ground was beautiful, like the firmament decorated with planets. The field of battle was dazzling, as if with hundreds of flaming torches. The earth looked as if the worlds were about to be consumed[With an image of the time of destruction.]. All the directions were illuminated with lamps in every direction. They were as beautiful as trees with
fireflies during a monsoon evening. Brave ones separately clashed against brave ones, elephants clashed with elephants, horses with horses and chariots clashed against chariots. At the commencement of the night, on the instructions of your son, they were all cheerful. O great king! Arjuna started to swiftly destroy the Kourava soldiers and
weaken all the kings."

'Dhritarashtra asked, "When the invincible and intolerant one angrily penetrated into the army of my son, what
was the state of your minds then? When that scorcher of enemies penetrated, what did the soldiers think? Given
the occasion, what did Duryodhana think should be done? In that battle, who were the scorchers of enemies who
advanced against that brave one? Who protected Drona's right wheel and who was on the left? As the brave one
fought, which valiant ones protected his rear? Who advanced in front, killing the enemies in the battle? That unvanquished one, great archer, penetrated the Panchalas[This is a reference to Drona.]. The valiant tiger among men seemed to be dancing
around in the path of his chariot. Advancing on his chariot, Drona consumed the Panchalas with his arrows. He
was as angry as a fire[The word used in the text is dhumaketu. While this means comet, it can also be translated as something that
has smoke as its banner, that is, a fire.]. How did he come about his death? You always speak of the enemy as undisturbed and
unvanquished. But in the battle, you have always said that those on my side were killed, distressed and routed and
that the rathas were deprived of their chariots."

'Sanjaya replied, "O great king! During that night, Drona desired to fight. Discerning his mind, Duryodhana
spoke to his obedient brothers-Vikarna, Chitrasena, the Kourava Mahabahu, Durdharsha, Dirghabahu and their
followers[As mentioned earlier, there is inconsistency in naming Duryodhana's brothers. For example, Vikarna and Chitrasena have already been killed by Bhima in Section 69.]. 'O brave ones! Go and endeavour to protect Drona's rear. Hardikya will be near the right wheel and
Shalya on the left.' Saying this, your son addressed the remaining brave maharathas from Trigarta. 'The preceptor
is extremely controlled. The Pandavas are making great efforts. As he kills the enemy in the battle, protect the one
who is so controlled. Drona is powerful in battle. He is dexterous in the use of hands and valiant. He can defeat the
thirty gods in an encounter, not to speak of the Parthas and Somakas. O maharathas! All of you unite and make the
best of efforts. Protect Drona from the Panchala maharatha Dhrishtadyumna. O kings! With the exception of
Dhrishtadyumna, I do not see any warrior among the Pandaveya soldiers who can defeat Drona in a battle. Therefore, I think that all our efforts should be to protect Bharadvaja's son. Thus protected, he will slay the Somakas and
the Srinjayas and the kings. With the Srinjayas slain at the forefront of the array, there is no doubt that Drona's son
will kill Dhrishtadyumna in the battle. In that fashion, maharatha Karna will defeat Arjuna in the battle. Armouring
myself, I will defeat Bhimasena in the battle. It is evident that we will be victorious for a very long time. O maharathas! Therefore, protect Drona in this battle.' O foremost among the Bharata lineage! Having thus spoken,
your son, Duryodhana, instructed the soldiers in that terrible darkness.

'"O bull among the Bharata lineage! A battle commenced in the night. Both the armies were fierce and desired
victory. Arjuna attacked the Kourava soldiers and the Kouravas attacked Arjuna. They used many different kinds
of weapons and afflicted each other. Drona's son attacked the king of Panchala[Drupada.] and Bharadvaja's son attacked
the Srinjayas. In that battle, they enveloped them with straight-tufted arrows. O venerable one! As the Pandu, Pan-
chala and Kourava soldiers slaughtered each other, a terrible uproar arose. We, or our forefathers, had not seen or
heard of anything like this earlier. The battle that commenced in the night engendered great fear."'


'Sanjaya said, "O lord of the earth! That terrible battle that took place during the night led to the destruction of all
beings. At that time, Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, spoke to the Pandavas, Panchalas and Somakas. 'Advance only
against Drona, desiring to kill him.' O king! On hearing the king's words, the Panchalas and the Somakas advanced against Drona, roaring fiercely. Those on our side roared back in return and counter-attacked with intolerance. In that encounter, they used the best of their capacity, the best of their enterprise and the best of their spirit.

'"Yudhishthira was advancing towards Drona, desiring to kill him, like a crazy elephant against another crazy
one, and Hardikya Kritavarma attacked him. O king! In the forefront of that battle, the Kourava Bhuri[Bhurishrava's brother.] released
a shower of arrows, from every direction, on Shini's descendant. O king! Maharatha Sahadeva wished to advance
against Drona and Vaikartana Karna countered the Pandava. Bhimasena advanced, like Death with a gaping
mouth. In that encounter, Duryodhana himself countered the obstinate one, who was advancing like Death. O king!
Nakula was foremost among warriors and was skilled in all forms of fighting. Shakuni Soubala quickly countered
him. O king! Shikhandi, supreme among rathas, advanced on his chariot and Sharadvata Kripa countered him in
that battle. O great king! Prativindhya[Droupadi's son through Yudhishthira.] advanced on horses that had the complexion of peacocks and
Duhshasana made endeavours to counter him. Bhimasena's son[Ghatotkacha.], skilled in a hundred different kinds of maya,
advanced, and wishing to protect his father's honour, Ashvatthama checked him. In that battle, maharatha Drupada
wished to advance against Drona and Vrishasena checked him, together with his soldiers and his followers. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Virata quickly advanced, wishing to kill Drona, and the king of Madra angrily
checked him. Wishing to kill Drona, Nakula's son, Shatanika, proudly advanced in that battle. Chitrasena quickly
countered him with his arrows. Maharatha Arjuna, foremost among warriors, advanced, driving everyone away. O
great king! Alambusa, Indra among rakshasas, checked him[However, Alambusa has already been killed by Ghatotkacha in Section 69.]. The great archer, Drona, slaughtered enemies in
the battle. However, Panchala Dhrishtadyumna cheerfully countered him. O king! There were other maharatha
sons of Pandu who also advanced and the rathas on your side countered them, with all their energy. In that great
battle, elephant riders swiftly clashed with other elephant riders. Hundreds and thousands were seen to fight with
each other. O king! During that night, horses advanced against each other with great force and seemed to be like
mountains with wings. O great king! Horse riders clashed against horse riders with spears, lances and swords in
their hands and roared separately. There were many men there, clashing against each other. They used large numbers of clubs, bludgeons and many other kinds of weapons.

'"Hardikya Kritavarma angrily countered Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, like the shoreline holds back the ocean.
Yudhishthira pierced Hardikya with five swift arrows. Asking him to wait, he again pierced him with twenty arrows. O venerable one! Kritavarma became extremely angry with Dharma's son. He severed his bow with a broad-
headed arrow and pierced him with seven arrows. Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, then picked up another bow. He
pierced Hardikya in the arms and the chest with ten arrows. O venerable one! Having been thus pierced in the battle by Dharma's son, Madhava[Madhu was an ancestor of the Yadavas and anyone from the Yadava lineage can be referred to as Madhava.
Kritavarma belonged to the Yadava lineage.] trembled with rage and afflicted him with seven arrows. However, Partha severed his bow and his arm-guard. The king released five sharp arrows that had been sharpened on stone. They
pierced his armour, which was decorated with gold and was extremely expensive. They then penetrated the earth,
like angry snakes entering a termite hill. In the twinkling of an eye, he[Kritavarma.] picked up another bow and pierced Pan-
dava with sixty arrows and his charioteer with nine. Pandava's soul was immeasurable. O foremost among the
Bharata lineage! He laid down his giant bow on his chariot and hurled a lance that was like a serpent. It was large
and decorated with gold. Having been thus released by Pandava, it penetrated his right arm and entered the ground.
At that time, Partha again picked up his bow. He enveloped Hardikya with straight-tufted arrows. In that battle, in
an instant, the foremost of brave rathas among the Vrishni lineage[Kritavarma.] made Yudhishthira devoid of his horses,
charioteer and chariot. The eldest of the Pandavas then grasped a sword and a shield. But in that battle, Madhava
sliced these down with his sharp arrows. Yudhishthira then picked up a spear with a golden handle. It was difficult
to resist and in that battle, he quickly hurled it towards Hardikya. It was released from Dharmaraja's hands and descended suddenly. However, dexterous in the use of his hands, Hardikya severed it into two fragments and
laughed. He then shrouded Dharma's son with hundreds of arrows. He angrily cut down his armour with sharp arrows. The great-souled one's armour was severed by Hardikya. O king! It fell down in that battle, like a stellar
cluster dislodged from the firmament. His bow was severed. He was without a chariot. He was without armour. He
was afflicted by arrows. Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, quickly withdrew himself from that battle. Kritavarma defeated Yudhishthira, Dharma's son. The immensely strong one again began to protect Drona's wheel."'


