Yudhishthira said, "You possess wisdom, learning, good conduct and behaviour. You possess all the qualities and are
also  aged.  O  supreme  among  those  who  uphold  dharma!  Therefore,  I  am  asking  you  about  dharma.  O
supreme among kings! If a person is a kshatriya, vaishya or a shudra, you should tell me how he can become
a brahmana. O grandfather! Does one become a brahmana through austerities, great deeds or learning? Tell me
that."

'Bhishma replied, "O son! O Yudhishthira! For a kshatriya and the others, the three varnas, becoming a brahmana is extremely difficult. For all beings, that is the best state. O son! If one is repeatedly and progressively
cooked in the cycle of life, one can then be born as a brahmana. O Yudhishthira! In this connection, there is an ancient history about a conversation between Matanga and a she-ass. O son! There was a brahmana and this lord obtained a son through a varna that was not his equal[This will be explained soon.]. His name was Matanga and he possessed all the qualities. O
Kounteya! O scorcher of enemies! Wishing to perform a sacrifice, his father sent him to bring the required objects.
He departed on a wagon that travelled fast and it was drawn by an ass. O king! The ass was young and it dragged
the wagon to its mother. At this, he[Matanga.] repeatedly struck it on the nose. The she-ass loved its son. On seeing those
terrible wounds, it said, 'O son! Do not grieve. A chandala is driving you. A brahmana is never terrible. A brahmana is said to be friendly. He is the preceptor of all creatures and their instructor. How can such a person strike?
This one is wicked in nature and does not show any compassion, even to someone who is young. By exhibiting his
character, he is only exhibiting the nature of his birth.' Matanga heard these terrible words of the she-ass. He descended from the wagon and addressed the she-ass.'O she-ass! O fortunate one! How was my mother tainted?
How do you know that I am a chandala? O she-ass! Instruct me quickly. How was I born as a chandala and how
has my status as a brahmana been destroyed? O immensely wise one! Without leaving out anything, tell me everything about this.'

'"The she-ass said, 'There was a brahmana lady who was overcome with desire and you were born through a
vrishala who was a barber. That is the reason you have been born as a chandala and the reason why your status as a
brahmana has been destroyed.'" 'Bhishma continued, "Having been thus addressed, Matanga returned home. On
seeing that he had returned, his father spoke these words. 'I asked you to do some things connected with the sacrifice. How can you return without performing the tasks instructed by your superior? Is everything well with you?'

'"Matanga replied, 'How can someone of uncertain birth, or with the worst possible birth, be well? O father!
How can someone with a mother like that be well? O father! I have got to know that though my mother is a brahmana, my father is a vrishala. A superhuman she-ass told me this. Therefore, I must torment myself through great
austerities.'"

'Bhishma continued, "Having spoken to his father and having made up his mind, he left for the great forest, to
torment himself through great austerities. The gods themselves were tormented by the force of these austerities.
Through his good conduct, Matanga desired the region that would provide great bliss. While he was thus engaged
in austerities, Harivahana[Indra.] appeared before him and asked, 'O Matanga! Why are you tormenting yourself? Why
have you given up the pleasures that men like? I wish to grant you a boon. Tell me about the boon that you desire.
Without any delay, tell me about everything that is in your mind.'

'"Matanga replied, 'I have started these austerities with the desire of becoming a brahmana. Having attained
this, I will depart from this place. This is the boon sought by me.'"

'Bhishma continued, "On hearing his words, Purandara said, 'You desire the status of a brahmana, but that cannot be obtained by someone whose soul has not been cleansed. This is the best state among all creatures. Therefore, refrain from these austerities. This desire and these fierce austerities will quickly destroy you. Among gods,
asuras and mortals, this state is said to be sacred and supreme. Having been born as a chandala, you can never obtain it.'"'


Bhishma said, "O one without decay! Matanga was careful about his vows and in control of his soul. Though
he was addressed in this way, he stood on one foot for one hundred years. The immensely illustrious Shakra
again appeared before him and said, 'O Matanga! The supreme state that you desire is extremely difficult to obtain.
O son! Do not exhibit this futile rashness. This isn't the path of dharma. You cannot obtain what you wish for and
will soon be destroyed. O Matanga! I have sought to restrain you from aspiring to obtain that supreme state. If you
still desire to perform these austerities, you will be destroyed in every possible way. Among all the men who are
born as inferior[Subhuman.] species, only a few are reborn as pulkasa or chandala. O Matanga! Anyone on earth who is seen
to have been born as wicked species, will have to whirl around in that state for a long period of time. After having
spent one thousand births in this way, one obtains the status of a shudra[We have followed non-Critical versions in translating the duration. Non-Critical versions say, ten times one
hundred, that is, one thousand. The Critical edition states, ten times. This makes deduction of the duration
difficult.]. One is whirled around in the state of a
shudra for a long period of time. After three thousand births in this way, one obtains the status of a vaishya. One is
whirled around in the state of a vaishya for a long period of time. After six thousand births in this way, one obtains
the status of a king[Meaning a kshatriya.]. One is whirled around in the state of a king for a long period of time. After six thousand
births in this way, one obtains the status of being a friend of a brahmana[That is, a brahmana.]. One is whirled around in the state of
being a friend of a brahmana for a long period of time. After two thousand births in this way, one obtains the status
of a brahmana who earns a living by selling weapons. One is whirled around in the status of a brahmana who earns
a living by selling weapons for a long period of time. After three thousand births in this way, one obtains the status
of an ordinary brahmana. Having obtained this status, one is whirled around for a long period of time. After four
thousand births in this way, one is born as a learned brahmana. One is whirled around in the state of a learned
brahmana for a long period of time. O son! In that state, anger, delight, desire, hatred, insolence and argumentation
penetrate him and try to make him the worst among brahmanas. When he abandons these enemies, he obtains a
virtuous end. However, if they defeat him, he falls down, as if from the top of a palm tree. O Matanga! That is the
reason I have spoken to you, restraining you and asking you to ask for some other boon. The status of a brahmana
is something that is extremely difficult to obtain.'"'


Bhishma said, "Thus addressed, Matanga was overwhelmed by great grief. He went to Gaya and stood on one
toe for one hundred years. He performed many kinds of extremely difficult yoga. He became thin and was reduced to veins. The one with dharma in his soul was reduced to nothing but bones and we have heard that he fell
down. When he was falling down, Vasava came and seized him. After all, the lord and the granter of boons is engaged in the welfare of all beings.

'"Shakra said, 'O Matanga! You are engaged in trying to obtain the status of a brahmana, but this is a perverse
pursuit. Worship what will bring you happiness. Do not worship what will bring you unhappiness. Among all creatures, it is controlled brahmanas who display yoga and kshema. The ancestors and the gods are satisfied through
brahmanas. O Matanga! Among all creatures, brahmanas are said to be supreme. It is brahmanas who grant what
you are asking for[The implication has to be deduced. Had Matanga been a brahmana, thanks to his powers, he need not have
asked for a boon from anyone else. If Matanga needed to ask someone else for a boon, he couldn't be a
brahmana.]. O son! One is repeatedly and progressively cooked in the fire of the cycle of life. It is only in
rare cases that one can obtain the status of a brahmana.'

'"Matanga replied, 'I am already afflicted by grief. Why are you oppressing me? You are striking me, but I am
already like one who is dead. I am not grieving that I have not obtained the radiance that comes about from being a
brahmana. O Shatakratu! Among the three varnas, if the status of a brahmana is so difficult to obtain, why do men
who have obtained it deviate? An evil person who acts in this way should be regarded as the worst among wicked
ones, since he disregards the status of being a brahmana, something that is like getting riches which are extremely
difficult to obtain. It is indeed hard to become a brahmana and having become one, it is very difficult to maintain
it. Having obtained something that is difficult to get, men do not maintain it. O Shakra! I find pleasure in only one
thing[His soul.]. I do not suffer from opposite sentiments. I am devoid of possessions. I am non-violent. I  am self-restrained and generous. Why should I not obtain the status of a brahmana? Let me roam around in my own pleasures, just as birds roam around as they will. Without any constraints, let me be revered by both brahmanas and
kshatriyas. O Purandara! Let me obtain fame without decay.'

'"Indra said, 'You will become famous as the god of metre and will be worshipped by women[A sage named Matanga was the author of a work (Brihaddeshi) on music.].'"
'Bhishma continued, "Vasava granted this boon to him and disappeared. Having given up his life, Matanga obtained a supreme station. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thus, the status of a brahmana is supreme. As indicated in the words of the great Indra, it is extremely difficult to obtain."'


