'"Vidula said, 'If you wish to give up your manliness in your present state, you will soon follow the path travelled
by the inferior. A kshatriya who does not display energy to the best of his capacity and who does not exhibit his
valour, desiring to remain alive, is said to be a thief. My meaningful, appropriate and beneficial words do not reach
you, like medicine to someone who is about to die. It is true that the king of Sindhu has many satisfied subjects.
But they are weak and foolish and are waiting for a calamity to strike them. When they see you collect aides one
by one and behold your manliness, they will lose heart and his enemies will join you. Conduct alliances with them
and roam around in mountainous forts, waiting for the time when he will be destroyed. He is not beyond old age.
Nor is he immortal. You are Sanjaya only in name. I do not see it in you[Sanjaya is someone who brings about victory (jaya).]. O son! Live up to your name. Do not
make your name false. When you were only a child, an immensely wise brahmana who had foresight said, "After
confronting great hardships, he will prosper again." Remembering those words, I hope that you will be victorious.
O son! Therefore, I am repeatedly telling you about this. If others thrive on the perseverance with which a person
pursues his goals, and if he pursues these goals with reflection, that person will certainly be successful. Your ancestors also confronted prosperity and adversity. O Sanjaya! Knowing this-fight. Do not turn back. Shambara[One cannot identify which Shambara this is.]
has said that there is nothing more miserable than not seeing where today's and tomorrow's meal will come from.
He said that this is a greater misery than the death of one's husband and sons. Poverty is nothing but progressive
death. I have been born in a great lineage. I have gone from one pond to another[Figuratively, from the father's household to the husband's household.]. I have been the mistress of
everything fortunate. I have been extremely honoured by my husband. Earlier, masses of well-wishers saw me bedecked in expensive garlands and ornaments, adorned in excellent garments. I am in penury now. O Sanjaya!
When you see me and your wife extremely weak, what purpose can life have for you? The slaves and servants who
used to work for us, the preceptors and the foremost priests have left us, because they no longer have sustenance.
On seeing this, what purpose can life have for you? If I do not see you today, performing the illustrious and praiseworthy deeds that you used to earlier, how can there be peace in my heart? My heart is shattered when I have to
say no to brahmanas. Neither my husband nor I, have ever said no to a brahmana. Others seek refuge with us. But
we do not seek refuge with others. If I now have to depend on others for a living, I will give up my life.

'"'When there are no shores, provide us a shore. When there are no boats, be our boat. When there is no status,
find us status. Revive those of us who are dead. If you do not cling to life, you are capable of withstanding all your
enemies. But if you follow this conduct of an eunuch, depressed in mind and troubled in soul, then free yourself of
this wretched life. A brave one becomes famous by killing a single enemy. Indra became the great Indra by slaying
Vritra alone. He obtained the great Indra's cup for drinking soma and the lordship of the worlds. He proclaimed his
name in battle and challenged the armoured enemies. When he drives away the best of armies and kills the best of
warriors in an excellent battle, a brave one obtains great fame. His enemies tremble and bow down before him.
Men who are cowards are helpless. If a skilled warrior is prepared to give up his life in battle, they satisfy every
desire that he has for riches. Even if there is terrible danger to the kingdom, even if there is doubt about remaining
alive, virtuous ones do not leave any remnants of an enemy who is near. The kingdom is a road to heaven, it is like
amrita itself. It allows for only one[The gate only allows one person to pass.] and it is closed to you. Knowing this, descend like a firebrand on the enemy.
O king! Defeat your enemies in battle. Follow your own dharma. O fortunate one! Let the enemies not see you in
this extremely dejected state, surrounded by our miserable people and delighted foes. Let me not be miserable at
seeing you in this miserable state. Pleasure with the maidens of Souvira[Vidula's son was the king of Souvira, while Sindhu was the enemy.]. Boast about your prosperity, as you
used to do earlier. Do not be so exhausted and come under the control of the maidens of Sindhu. You are young
and handsome, possess learning and have been born in a good lineage. You are renowned and famous in the world.
One like you should not act in this way, like a bull that cannot bear the burden. I think that this is worse than death.
If I see you speaking pleasant words to the enemy, or following behind him, how can there be peace in my heart?
No one born in this lineage has ever followed others. O son! You should not live in this way, sustaining yourself on
another. I know the eternal heart of kshatriyas, as described by our ancestors and those who came after them, and
also by the ancestors of the enemy and those who came after them. A kshatriya who has been born in this world
and knows about the dharma of kshatriyas, will never bow down before another, either out of fear or to earn a living. Stand upright in manliness. Do not make efforts to bend. It is better to break at the joints than to bend down. O
Sanjaya! You should be strong in your mind and roam around like a rutting elephant, bowing down before brahmanas and dharma. Control the other varnas and chastise all those who perform evil acts. Whether you possess allies or do not possess allies, you should always live in this way.'"'


'"The son said, 'O mother! You have converted your heart into steel. There is no compassion in you. Incited by the
wisdom of bravery, you have become intolerant. Shame on the conduct of kshatriyas, about which you are censuring me, as if I am a stranger. You are speaking such words to your only son. If you can no longer see me, what purpose will the entire earth have for you? What use will there be of ornaments, or of the pleasures that life brings?'

'"The mother replied, 'O son! Everything done by the learned is for the purpose of dharma and artha. O Sanjaya! I have incited you with a view to those ends. The great moment has arrived for you to decide on your course
of action. With the time having arrived, if you do not act accordingly, you will be dishonoured and commit a deed
of extreme cruelty. O Sanjaya! You have already been touched by ill fame. If I do not speak to you in this way, my
affection towards you will be like that of a she-ass, without strength and without purpose. Abandon the path censured by the righteous and frequented by the stupid. This is the great ignorance to which all beings cling. If your
conduct is that of the virtuous, you will be my beloved, that is, if you have the qualities of dharma and artha and
never follow anything else. This recognizes destiny and human endeavour and is the conduct of the virtuous. If one
finds delight in a son or a grandson who does not have humility and does not exert himself, one loses the fruits of
obtaining offspring. Those who perform deeds that should not be performed are censured. Such inferior men obtain no happiness, in this world and the next. O Sanjaya! A kshatriya has been created to fight and be victorious,
for always performing cruel deeds and protecting the subjects. Whether he triumps, or whether he is slain, he attains Indra's world. But in Shakra's sacred and celestial world, the happiness that a kshatriya obtains from subjugating his enemy, is missing. Let the spirited man who has been defeated many times be tormented by rage and
wait to exact vengeance on the enemy. In what other way can he find peace, other than giving up his own life or
bringing down the enemy? In this world, a wise man is not delighted with a trifle. It is certain that a person who is
delighted with a trifle, will not remain happy with that trifle. In the absence of what he desires, a man will not be
radiant. It is certain that he will feel empty, like the Ganga after flowing into the ocean.'

'"The son said, 'O mother! You should not speak in this way, certainly not to your son. You should look for
compassion, like one who is deaf and mute.'

'"The mother replied, 'It is a great pleasure to me that you look on it in this way. You are inciting me in this
way, so that I can incite you some more. I will honour you when you have killed all the Saindhavas and I see you
victorious, free of all your worries.'

'"The son said, 'I have no treasury. I have no allies. How can I obtain the success of victory? This is my extremely terrible state and I know about my own self. I have withdrawn from the kingdom, like a performer of evil
deeds withdraws from heaven. This being the situation, I cannot see any means. You are mature in your wisdom
and I am asking you. Tell me exactly and I will act entirely in accordance with your instructions.'

'"The mother replied, 'O son! You should not demean yourself because of your earlier failures. Objects that
were not obtained earlier can be obtained. In the same way, those that were obtained can be destroyed. Stupid ones
cannot obtain objects through anger at their absence. O son! The fruits of all deeds are never permanent. Knowing
that they are not permanent, one may be successful or one may fail. But those who do not act, never obtain success. Lack of trying has only one consequence-failure. However, for those who try, there are two consequences-
success or failure. O son of a king! He who knows in advance that all success is impermanent, repels growth and
prosperity and acts against his own interests. One should arise. One should awake. One should yoke oneself to the
task that must be done. Without any hesitation, one must always make up one's mind that something needs to be
done. One should consider auspicious signs and honour brahmanas and the gods. O son! There is swift prosperity
for such a wise king. Like the sun rising in the east, Lakshmi returns to him. I have instructed you with many instances and words and you have appreciated them. Now display your form. Exhibit your manliness. It is appropriate that you should obtain the objects that you desire. Examine those who are angry, greedy, weak, dishonoured
and disrespected and those who hate him[The enemy.]. In this way, you can bring them together and create great dissension
in his ranks, like an extremely swift wind that disperses the clouds. Be the first to give them gifts. Make efforts.
Speak pleasantly to them. As soon as the enemy knows that you are ready to give up your life, he will shrink away
from you, like from a snake that has penetrated his house. If one knows that the enemy is too powerful to be conquered, one should use conciliation, friendliness and similar methods. Through such methods, one can obtain riches and extend them. Friends gather around those who are prosperous and serve them. O son! Then again, relatives
desert one whose prosperity has been dissipated. They do not gather around such a man, but shun him. If one can
convert an enemy into an ally and obtain his trust, one can then think about regaining the kingdom.'"'


