Vaishampayana said,  'Meanwhile,  accompanied  by  the  Vrishnis,  the  valiant  Vasudeva  arrived  at  the  city  of
Varanasahvya. When he had left for his own city, Dharma's son had told him that the bull among men should
return when he knew that it was time for the horse sacrifice. He was accompanied by Rukmini's son[Pradyumna.], Yuyudhana, Charudeshna, Samba, Gada, Kritavarma, the brave Sarana, Nishatha and Ulmuka, with Baladeva leading the
way. Subhadra was also with him. They came to see and comfort Droupadi, Uttara, Pritha and all the other kshatriya women whose husbands had been slain. On seeing that they had come, King Dhritarashtra and the great-
minded Vidura received and welcomed them in the proper way. Worshipped by the greatly energetic Vidura and
Yuyutsu, Krishna, bull among men, resided there. O Janamejaya! The brave ones among the Vrishni lineage dwelt
there.

'O king! Your father, Parikshit, the slayer of enemy heroes, was born. O great king! That king had been afflicted
by the brahmastra[Released by Ashvatthama and invoked on a blade of grass. Parikshit was born dead, but Krishna had promised
that he would revive Parikshit. The incident has been described in Section 79 (Volume 8).]. He was born as a lifeless corpse and this increased both joy and grief. On hearing that he was
born,  loud  roars  of  joy,  like  those  of  lions,  were  let  out.  That  sound  penetrated  all  the  directions,  but  soon
stopped[On learning that the child had been born dead.]. At this, Krishna swiftly entered the inner quarters. His senses and mind were distressed and Yuyudhana
was with him. He saw that his father's sister[Kunti.] was quickly advancing. As she rushed forward, she wept and repeatedly called out to Vasudeva. Droupadi and the illustrious Subhadra were behind her. O king! They, and all the
female relatives, wept piteously. O tiger among kings! Kunti, the daughter of a king, met Krishna. She spoke in a
voice that was choking with tears. "O Vasudeva! O mighty-armed one! Having given birth to you, Devaki has
come to be known as an excellent mother. You are our destination and our refuge. This lineage depends on you. O
brave one of the Yadu lineage! O lord! This is the son of your sister's son. Because of Ashvatthama, he has been
born dead. O Keshava! Revive him. O descendant of the Yadu lineage! This is what you had promised when the
blade of grass was released. 'O lord! The child will be born dead, but I will revive him.' O son[The word used is tata.]! O bull among
men! Behold. The child has been born dead. O Madhava! Look at Uttara, Subhadra, Droupadi and me and also at
Dharma's son, Bhima, Phalguna, Nakula and Sahadeva. O invincible one! You should save all of us. The breath of
life of the Pandavas and of me is in the child. O Dasharha! He will offer the funeral cakes for Pandu and for my
father-in-law. O fortunate one! Abhimanyu was your beloved and like you. O Janardana! You should now do what
brings pleasure here and in the hereafter. O slayer of enemies! Uttara recounts the beloved words spoken to her by
Abhimanyu. O Krishna! There is no doubt that she loves those words. O Dasharha! In earlier times, this is what
Arjuna's son told Virata's daughter. 'O fortunate one! Your son will be reared in the family of my maternal uncle.
He will go to the lineage of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas and learn dhanurveda. He will learn about wonderful
weapons and also about the sacred texts of good policy.' O son! This is what Subhadra's son, the slayer of enemy
heroes, said in love. The invincible one spoke these words and there is no doubt about this. O Madhusudana! For
his sake, we are bowing down our heads and beseeching you. For the welfare of the lineage, act so as to ensure this
supreme benefit." Thus did the large-eyed Pritha speak to Varshneya. Having said this, she raised her arms up and,
with the other women, fell down on the ground. O great king! All the women had tears in their eyes. O lord! They
lamented, "The son of Vasudeva's sister's son has been born dead." When Kunti spoke in this way, Janardana
seized her. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He raised her from the ground and comforted her.'


Vaishampayana said, 'Pritha was raised. On seeing her brother, Subhadra was stricken by grief. She lamented
loudly and said, "O Pundarikaksha! Behold the intelligent Partha's grandson. His life has been destroyed and
the lineage of the Kurus has decayed. Drona's son raised a blade of grass for the sake of Bhimasena. But it descended on Uttara, Vijaya and me. O Keshava! It blazed and is still impaled in my heart. O invincible one! O lord!
Behold my son's son. What will Dharmaraja Yudhishthira, with dharma in his soul, say? What about Bhimasena,
Arjuna and Madravati's sons? O Varshneya! On hearing that Abhimanyu's son has been born dead, the Pandavas
will think that they have been deceived by Drona's son. O Krishna! There is no doubt that Abhimanyu was loved
by his fathers. On hearing that they have been vanquished by the weapon of Drona's son, what will they say? They
will be overcome by supreme grief. O Janardana! What do you think? O Krishna! O scorcher of enemies! Abhimanyu's son has been born dead. O Krishna! I seek your favours. I am bowing down my head before you now. O
Purushottama! Look towards Pritha and Droupadi. O Madhava! O slayer of enemies! When Drona's son slew the
foetuses of the Pandava women, you wrathfully said, 'O worst of men! O one who does not deserve to be a brahmana! I will render your desire unsuccessful. I will bring back the son of Kiriti's son to life.' O invincible one!
Hearing these words and knowing your strength, I am seeking your favours. Let Abhimanyu's son be brought back
to life. O tiger of the Vrishni lineage! Having pledged, if you do not act in accordance with your auspicious words
and make them successful and listen to my entreaties, I will kill myself. O brave one! O invincible one! If Abhimanyu's son is not brought back to life while you are still alive and present, what have you done for us? O invincible one! Bring Abhimanyu's son back to life, like rain from the clouds revives crops. O brave one! His eyes are
like his[Parikshit's eyes are like Abhimanyu's.]. O Keshava! You have dharma in your soul. You are truthful. Truth is your valour. O scorcher of enemies! You should make your words true. If you so wish, you can make all the dead ones in the three worlds come
back to life, not to speak of the son of your beloved sister's son, who has been born dead. O Krishna! I know your
powers. That is the reason I am speaking to you. Perform this great favour for the sons of Pandu. O mighty-armed
one! I am your sister and my son has been killed. I have sought refuge with you. Knowing this, you should show
me this compassion."'


Vaishampayana said, 'O Indra among kings! Thus addressed and senseless with grief, the slayer of Keshi signified his assent. When he said this, all the people were delighted. The bull among men spoke these words to the
people and they rejoiced, like those who are suffering from sweat recovering through a sprinkling of water. O tiger
among men! He quickly entered the quarters where your father had been born. In the proper way, it was sanctified
with white garlands. In every direction, pots completely full of water were arrayed. O mighty-armed one! There
was tinduka[Medicinal tree, Diospyros peregrina. It is easily inflammable and the fruit yields a resin.] wood sprinkled with clarified butter. There were mustard seeds. Sparkling weapons and fires were
arranged on every side. There were pleasant and aged women as attendants. O brave one! All around, there were
skilled and accomplished physicians. The energetic one also saw many objects designed to destroy rakshasas laid
around, placed there by people who were accomplished in such matters. On seeing that the room where your father
was born had been readied in this way, Hrishikesha was delighted and spoke words of appreciation. With a cheerful face, Varshneya said this. Droupadi quickly went to Virata's daughter and spoke these words. "O fortunate one!
Your father-in-law, Madhusudana, has come here. He is the ancient rishi whose soul cannot be comprehended. The
unvanquished one has approached." The queen[Uttara.] controlled her tears. She covered herself and glanced towards
Krishna, the way one looks towards a god. The ascetic lady's heart was shattered. On seeing that Govinda was approaching, she lamented piteously, in a voice that choked with tears. "O Pundarikaksha! Behold. We have been deprived of this child. O Janardana! It is as if both Abhimanyu and I have been killed. O Varshneya! O slayer of
Madhu! O brave one! I am bowing down my head and seeking your favours. My son has been burnt by the weapon
of Drona's son. Revive him. O lord! O Pundarikaksha! At that time, had Dharmaraja, Bhimasena or you said, 'Let
the blade of grass destroy the unconscious mother,' I would have been destroyed and this disaster would not have
occurred. The child in the womb has been destroyed by the brahmastra. Drona's evil-minded son has perpetrated a
cruel deed. What purpose has been served by that? O slayer of enemies! She is now bowing down her head and
seeking your favours. O Govinda! If you do not revive him, I will cast aside my life. O virtuous one! Many of my
wishes are based on him. O Keshava! If he is slain by Drona's son, why should I remain alive? O Krishna! O Janardana! It was my hope that I would honour you with him on my lap, but that has been destroyed. O bull among
men! This son of the one with the restless eyes[Meaning Abhimanyu.] has been killed. O Krishna! All the wishes in my heart have become futile. O Madhusudana! You loved the one with the restless eyes. Look at his son, brought down by the brahmastra. He is ungrateful and cruel, just like his father. Having cast aside the prosperity of the Pandavas, he has now
gone to Yama's abode. O Keshava! O brave one! When Abhimanyu was slain in the forefront of the battle, I had
pledged that I would soon follow him. O Krishna! But I didn't do that. I am cruel and love life. If I go there and
meet him now, what will Phalguna's son say?"'


