Uma asked, "O illustrious one! O lord of all the bhutas! O one who is worshipped by the gods and the asuras! O god! O lord! I have a doubt about dharma and adharma for men. Tell me about this. Men are always
bound down in three ways-deeds, thoughts and words. They are also freed from nooses through these means. O
god! Through what kinds of good deeds, what kinds of qualities in conduct and what kinds of speech do men go to
heaven?"

'"'Maheshvara replied, "O goddess! You know the truth about the purport of dharma. You are always devoted to
truth and self-control. However, engaged in the welfare of all beings, you have asked a question that enhances intelligence. Listen. A virtuous person is devoted to the dharma of truth. He discards every kind of desire. He dispels
all his doubts and is not bound down by dharma or adharma. He is omniscient and looks on everything equally. He
knows  the  truth  about  destruction  and  falling  down.  Such  men  are  beyond  attachment  and  are  freed  from  all
bondage. Such a man does not cause any injury in deeds, thoughts and words. They are never attached and are not
bound down by any kinds of deeds. They are not addicted to taking the lives of others. They are virtuous in conduct and are full of compassion. They are impartial towards what is hated and what is agreeable. They are controlled and are freed from all the bondage of deeds. They are compassionate towards all creatures. They grant assurance to all beings. Such men discard all injurious tendencies in their conduct and go to heaven. They never have
a sense of ownership about what belongs to others. They avoid the wives of other people. Men who enjoy the riches obtained through dharma go to heaven. Men who always act towards other people's wives as if they are mothers, sisters or daughters, go to heaven. They always refrain from theft and are satisfied with their own riches. Men
who are content with what fortune has given them go to heaven. They are devoted to their own wives and have intercourse when it is the season. Men who do not hanker after sexual intercourse like vulgar people go to heaven.
Their conduct is such that they always withdraw their glances from looking towards the wives of other people.
They control their senses. Such men exhibit supreme good conduct and go to heaven. These men always tread
along the path that has been created by the gods. Learned men always tread along this path, even if they are not attired in ochre. They follow the dharma of donating. They observe good conduct and purity. They are compassionate. For the sake of earning a living, such men always follow dharma. Virtuous men who wish to reside in heaven
should follow this and nothing else."

'"'Uma said, "There are words that bind down and there are also those that lead to liberation. O god! O lord of
creatures! O unblemished one! Tell me about those."

'"'Maheshvara replied, "For one's own self, for the sake of someone else, for sport or for laughter, if a man never utters a falsehood, he goes to heaven. For the sake of subsistence, for the sake of dharma, or for the sake of satisfying desire, if a man never utters a falsehood, he goes to heaven. Men who speak gentle, harmless and sweet
words that are devoid of sin, and those who utter words of welcome go to heaven. Virtuous men do not utter bitter,
harsh and cruel words, and are not addicted to slander. They go to heaven. There are men who avoid calumny and
do not use words that cause dissension. They only utter words that ensure friendship. They go to heaven. There are
men who never seek to hate others and do not seek to search out their weaknesses. They are self-controlled and
equal in treatment towards all creatures. They go to heaven. There are those who avoid deceitful and vain talk and
words that are against others. They always indulge in amiable speech. They go to heaven. Because of anger or fear,
they do not utter words that shatter the hearts of others. Even when angered, they speak comforting words. Such
men go to heaven. O goddess! In speech, a man must always follow this kind of dharma. This is auspicious and
has the quality of truth. A learned person must always avoid falsehood."

'"'Uma said, "A man is always bound down by his thoughts and deeds. O immensely fortunate one! O god of
the gods! O wielder of Pinaka! Tell me about those."

'"'Maheshvara replied, "A man must always exhibit dharma in his thoughts. O fortunate one! He will then go to
heaven. I will tell you about it. Listen. If there are wicked thoughts, the acts these lead to are more evil. They bind
men down. O one with the beautiful face! Listen. Even if a man seeks something that belongs to someone else,
abandoned in a deserted forest, and does not entertain thoughts about appropriating it, he goes to heaven. If a man
never desires an object that belongs to someone else, in a village, house or a deserted place, he goes to heaven. In
that fashion, if a man never desires to have intercourse with someone else's wife, not even in his mind, he goes to
heaven. A man whose thoughts are such that he always regards a friend and an enemy as equal, and treats both as
friends when he meets them, goes to heaven. A man who is learned, compassionate, pure, devoted to the truth and
satisfied with what belongs to him, goes to heaven. A man whose nature avoids enmity, one whose intelligence is
always turned towards friendship and one who is compassionate towards all beings, goes to heaven. If a man is
faithful, compassionate, virtuous, loves association with virtuous people and always knows the difference between
dharma and adharma, he goes to heaven. O goddess! If a man knows the fruits and consequences of good and bad
deeds, he goes to heaven. A man who follows the law, possesses the qualities, is always devoted to gods and brahmanas and reveres those who should be shown respect, goes to heaven. I have recounted to you the fruits of auspicious deeds about the path that leads to heaven. What do you wish to hear next?"

'"'Uma said, "O Maheshvara! I have a great doubt about mortal creatures. Therefore, you should explain this to
me in a skilful way. O lord! Through what deeds does a man obtain a long life? O lord of the gods! Through what
great austerities does one obtain a long life? On earth, because of what deeds does a man obtain a short life? O
god! O unblemished one! You should tell me about these perverse deeds. Some obtain great fortune. Others obtain
ill fortune. Some are born in ignoble families. Others are born in noble families. Some men are hideous and look
like pieces of wood. Other men are handsome and beautiful to behold. Some are limited in intelligence, others are
wise. Some are extremely wise and have insight about jnana and vijnana. Some face few obstructions, others confront great impediments. O god! Men are seen to be like this. You should instruct me about this."

'"'Maheshvara replied, "O goddess! I will tell you about the fruits of deeds. In the world of mortals, all men enjoy these fruits. There may be a fierce man who is engaged in taking the lives of others, with a staff raised in his
hand. With staffs raised in their hands, large numbers of demons always attack him[In hell.]. There may be a man who is
cruel towards all beings. He always causes anxiety to everyone. He is so wicked that he doesn't even spare insects
and ants. O goddess! Such a man goes to hell. If a hideous person has dharma in his soul, he is reborn handsome.
A person with injurious tendencies in his soul goes to hell. A person who doesn't cause injury goes to heaven. In
hell, a man confronts terrible hardships. Having passed through hell, some are reborn as humans, but have short
lifespans. O goddess! A man who is addicted to violence is bound down by his wicked deeds. A person who causes injury to all creatures is reborn as one with a short lifespan. A person who does not kill beings, has cast aside his
staff and does not use his staff against anyone, one who does not strike or kill even when he is struck and one who
is affectionate towards all creatures, treating others like his own self, is reborn as a pure person. O goddess! These
kinds of men are the best and obtain divinity. They obtain happiness and all the objects of pleasure. They will obtain bliss. When such a person is reborn in the world of men, he obtains happiness and a long life. Through good
conduct and good deeds, this is the path to obtain a long life. Brahma has spoken about liberation through lack of
injury towards creatures."'"'


Uma asked, "Through what kind of conduct, behaviour, deeds and donations does a man obtain heaven?"

'"'Maheshvara replied, "O goddess! If a man is generous, honours brahmanas, is compassionate towards the distressed and the blind, donates food, grain, drink and garments, constructs dwelling houses, assemblies, wells, lakes and ponds and cheerfully gives all those who desire, and not just one single person, seats, beds,
vehicles, riches, jewels, houses, all kinds of grain, cattle, fields and women-when such a person dies, he obtains
the world of the gods. He dwells there for a long period of time, enjoying all the objects of pleasure. With apsaras
for company, he sports and obtains bliss in Nandana and other pleasure gardens. Thereafter, when he is dislodged
from heaven, he is reborn in the world of men. O goddess! However, he is born in a family that possesses all the
objects of pleasure, with riches and grain. With all the qualities of desire, he finds delight there. Such a man is
prosperous. He has large stores of treasure and many objects of pleasure. O goddess! In this way, a person who is
generous in his conduct towards all creatures obtains all the objects of pleasure and is handsome in every way.
Brahma himself spoke about this in ancient times. O goddess! There are others who are niggardly in giving to
brahmanas. They are limited in intelligence and do not give, even when they have possessions. Even when they see
distressed, blind and afflicted people and mendicants and guests who are seeking, they turn them away. They are
addicted to their own tongues and greed. They do not give riches, garments, objects of pleasure, food, gold, cattle,
not even food that is not good. They follow evil conduct. They are greedy and non-believers. They are devoid of
generosity. O goddess! Such foolish men always go to hell. After some time has passed, they are reborn as men.
But these ones, limited in intelligence, are born in families that lack riches. They are overwhelmed by hunger and
thirst. They do not enjoy the objects of pleasure. They lose hope about obtaining all the objects of pleasure. They
subsist by following inferior methods of living. Such men are born in families that have few objects of pleasure.
They suffer from ill fortune. O goddess! It is through their own deeds that these men are born poor. There are others who are insolent and proud, always addicted to wicked deeds. Lacking sense, they do not offer seats, even to
those who deserve them. Limited in intelligence, they do not yield right of way to those who should be granted
right of way. Limited in intelligence, they do not offer padya to those who should be offered padya. They do not
follow the ordinances and worship and honour those who should be revered by giving them arghya. Limited in intelligence, they do not offer arghya and water for ablutions to those who deserve them. When a preceptor arrives,
they do not treat the preceptor with the affection that he deserves. Their conduct is driven by insolence and they
are full of greed. They disrespect those who should be revered. They seek to subjugate their seniors. O goddess!
Such kinds of men always go to hell. After many years have passed, these men overcome hell and are born again,
but in inferior families. Those insensible people, those who disrespect their preceptors and seniors, are born in inferior lineages, like those of svapakas and pulkasas[Pulkasas are same as pukkasas.]. A person who is not insolent and proud, one who worships
gods and brahmanas, one who bows down before everyone and uses sweets words, one who does what is agreeable
to all varnas and is always engaged in the welfare of all beings, is honoured in the worlds. Such a person does not
hate. He is pleasant and gentle in his words. His speech is always agreeable. He does not cause injury to any being
and has words of welcome for everyone. He always observes the virtuous ordinances and worships those who deserve to be shown respect. He yields the right of way to those who should be given right of way. He worships preceptors as a preceptor should be worshipped. He receives guests who arrive and honours the others who come. O
goddess! Such men obtain the destination of heaven. When such a person is reborn as a man, this occurs in a superior family. There are all the objects of pleasure there and the family possesses all the jewels. He follows supreme
dharma and donates to those who should be given. He is revered by all creatures. All the worlds bow down before
him. Such a man always obtains these fruits because of his own deeds. He obtains a superior lineage and associates
with those who are superior. I have spoken about the dharma that the creator himself spoke about. There may be a
person who is fierce in conduct. All creatures are terrified of him. He strikes them with his hands and feet and
sticks, or binds them up in ropes. O beautiful one! He stupefies creatures with bricks and other methods and ties
them up. He is deceitful in his intelligence, causing violence and agitation. He always attacks creatures and makes
them anxious. A person who shows this kind of conduct goes to hell. After some time has passed, he is born as a
man. However, he is reborn in an inferior family and has to face many kinds of impediments and hardships. This
wicked man hated creatures and these are the fruits of his own deeds. O goddess! Know that this man's relatives
and friends also have similar natures. There may be another person who is seen to be compassionate towards all
creatures. He looks on everyone with a friendly eye, and treats them the way a father treats his son. He is in control
of his senses and is without any enmity. He does not agitate creatures or cause any violence to them. He controls
his hands and feet and offers assurance to all beings. He does not use ropes, rods, sticks and weapons to agitate
creatures. He is gentle in his deeds and is full of compassion. A person with good conduct of this nature obtains
heaven. He obtains delight in that divine residence, dwelling like a god. After those deeds have been exhausted, he
is reborn in the mortal world as a human. However, when he is born, he faces no hardships or impediments and obtains happiness. Without any effort, he obtains happiness. Such a man is always without any anxiety. O goddess!
These are the paths of the virtuous, where there are no obstructions."

'"'Uma said, "Some men are seen to be accomplished in commentaries and debating. They are full of jnana and
vijnana. They are wise and learned about meanings. O god! There are others who find wisdom difficult to obtain.
They are devoid of jnana and vijnana. Through what specific deeds does a man become wise? O Virupaksha! How
does a man become limited in wisdom? O supreme among those who know about all kinds of dharma! Dispel my
doubt about this. O god! Some are born blind. Others are afflicted by disease. Some men are seen to be eunuchs.
Tell me the reason for this."

'"'Maheshvara replied, "There are brahmanas who are learned about the Vedas. They are successful and know
about dharma. They incessantly ask about what is good and what is bad. They avoid inauspicious deeds and practise the auspicious ones. They always obtain heaven and happiness in this world. When they are reborn as men,
they become intelligent. They are learned and wise and obtain what is beneficial. If a foolish person looks at another person's wife with a wicked eye, because of that evil sentiment, he is reborn as a blind person. With wicked intent, if a man looks at naked women, because of that evil deed, he is reborn as a person who is afflicted with disease. If a foolish man is evil in conduct and engages in an act of sexual intercourse with someone from another
varna, because of that lack of wisdom, he is reborn as an eunuch. A man who binds animals, violates his preceptor's bed and indulges in indiscriminate sexual intercourse, is reborn as one who is impotent."

'"'Uma asked, "What are virtuous deeds? What leads to hell? O supreme among gods! How can a man obtain
what is beneficial?"

'"'Maheshvara replied, "A person who wishes to stay on the virtuous path must always ask brahmanas. A person who searches for dharma and desires the qualities obtains heaven. O goddess! Thereafter, when he is reborn as
a human, he is intelligent and wise and retains his memory. O goddess! This is the revered dharma of the virtuous
and it leads to prosperity. For the welfare of men, I have told you about this."

'"'Uma said, "There are men who are limited in knowledge. They hate dharma. They do not desire to approach
brahmanas who are learned in the Vedas. There are other men who follow vows and are full of devotion and selfcontrol. There are others who deviate from vows and rituals and are like rakshasas. Some perform sacrifices. Others do not offer oblations. What kind of deeds lead to these outcomes? Tell me."

'"'Maheshvara replied, "For the worlds, the ordinances of dharma have been laid down earlier in the sacred
texts. However, even those who are firm in vows are subsequently seen to become ordinary in conduct. Because
they are overcome by delusion, those who speak about dharma practise adharma. Those who deviate from their
vows and ordinances are said to become Brahma-rakshasas[A brahmana who is reborn as a rakshasa.]. After some time has passed, they regain their enterprise and are reborn as humans. However, they do not offer oblations. They do not utter vashatkara and are the
worst among men. O goddess! I have thus dispelled all your doubts. I have told you about what is good and bad for
men and about the ocean of dharma."'"'


Maheshvara said, "O one who knows about the supreme! O one who knows about dharma! O one who resides in hermitages! O virtuous one! O one with the excellent brows! O one with beautiful tips of the
hair! O daughter of the Himalaya mountain! O accomplished one! O one who possesses tranquility and self-control! O one who has no sense of ownership! O one who follows dharma! O beautiful one! I am asking you. I wish
to ask you about something. Tell me. Savitri is Brahma's virtuous wife, Shachi is Koushika's[Koushika is one of Indra's names.]  virtuous wife,
Dhumorni is the wife of Martanda's son[Meaning Yama.], Riddhi is Vaishravana's[Kubera's.] wife, Gouri is Varuna's wife, Suvarchala is
Surya's wife, Rohini is the virtuous wife of the moon, Svaha is the wife of Vibhavasu[Agni.] and Aditi is the wife of
Kashyapa. All of them regard their husbands as gods. O goddess! You have always spoken to all of them and have
asked them. O one who knows about dharma! O one who speaks about dharma! That is the reason I am asking
you. I wish to hear about the dharma of women, which you also follow vis-à-vis me. You observe dharma with me.
Your conduct is similar to mine. Your vows are similar to mine. Your attributes and energy are similar to mine.
You have performed terrible austerities. Whatever you speak to me will become a yardstick. This will be specific
to women and will always be the objective of women. O Gouri! O one with the beautiful hips! This will always be
observed on earth and be established in all the worlds. Your body is half of my body. It has emerged from half of
my body. You are the one who performs the tasks of the gods. You are the one who caused the worlds to have offspring. O beautiful one! You know everything about the eternal dharma of women. Therefore, in detail, tell me
about the specific dharma of women."

'"'Uma replied, "O illustrious one! O lord of all beings! O creator of the past, the present and the future! O god!
It is because of your powers that these words are manifesting themselves before me. O lord of the gods! These
rivers, with the waters of all the tirthas, have approached near you, so that you can touch their waters. After consulting them, I will progressively tell you everything[Most, though not all, rivers are feminine.]. Purusha is said to be someone who possesses the powers,
but has no sense of ego[The allusion seems to be that Shiva knew the answer, but asked Uma, because of lack of ego.]. O lord of creatures! Women always tend to follow other women. These rivers will therefore be honoured by me. This sacred river, Sarasvati, is supreme among all rivers. This is the foremost among all
rivers and heads towards the ocean. There are Vipasha, Vitasta, Chandrabhaga, Iravati, Shatadru, Devika, Sindhu,
Koushiki, Gomati and the river of the gods, which has all the tirthas and is the supreme rivers which has come
down to earth from heaven, the goddess Ganga." This is what the wife of the god among the gods, supreme among
the upholders of dharma, said. She first smiled and then addressed all those rivers. Devoted to dharma, the goddess
and queen asked them about the dharma of women. All of them, with Ganga, supreme among rivers, as the foremost, were accomplished about the dharma of women. Uma said, "The illustrious one has asked a question about
the dharma of women. I wish to speak to Shankara after I have consulted you. I do not see any knowledge on earth
that is possessed by one single individual. Whether you are in heaven, or whether you head towards the ocean, I
am therefore showing you respect."'"

'Bhishma continued, "Those best among rivers were auspicious and extremely sacred and were thus asked. They
appointed Ganga, the river of the gods, who worshipped her[Uma.]. She[Ganga.] was prosperous with a great deal of intelligence. She was sweet in her smiles and knew about the dharma of women. She spoke to the goddess who was the
auspicious and sacred daughter of the king of the mountains, the one who destroys all sins. She[Ganga.] was intelligent
and full of humility. She was accomplished in all kinds of knowledge. Possessing great intelligence, Ganga smiled
and spoke these words. 'O goddess! O one who is devoted to dharma! We are blessed that you have shown us your
favours. O unblemished one! You are revered by the entire universe, but you have shown honour to a river. If a
powerful person asks another person, there is no doubt that the questioner should be respected. There is no doubt
that a person who is evil-souled will not go to a learned person. A person who knows about jnana and vijnana and
is accomplished in commentaries and arguments, but who does not ask others before replying, is not worthy of respect, even if he speaks extremely learned words in an assembly. If he is driven by a sense of ego, he ends up uttering words that are weak in import. You are foremost in heaven in your divine knowledge. The divine and the sacred are always present in you. O  goddess!  In  instructions about the dharma of  women, you  are the one who
should be worshipped by us.' The goddess was thus praised by Ganga because of her many qualities. The extremely beautiful one among the gods[Uma.] then began to speak everything about the dharma of women. 'In accordance
with the ordinances, the dharma of women manifests itself to me. I will thus speak about what is praiseworthy. In a
marriage, the relatives speak about the dharma that women should follow. In the presence of a fire, she agrees to
follow the dharma of her husband. She must be pleasant in nature and sweet in speech. She must be good in conduct and must be pleasant in her appearance. With an attentive mind and a pleasant face, she must follow the dharma of her husband. This is the supreme dharma for a woman who wishes to have a share in dharma. A virtuous
wife always regards her husband as a divinity. In her conduct, she attends to him and follows his words, as if a god
has spoken it. She does not exhibit any sentiments of disregarding this and is excellent in her vows. She derives as
much happiness from looking at her husband as from looking at her son's face. She is virtuous and controlled in
her conduct. Such a wife follows dharma. It has been heard that the dharma of a couple is to follow the sacred
dharma together. A wife whose intelligence is devoted to her husband and who bears a pleasant visage is one who
follows that dharma. She does not speak harsh words, or does not glance at him with cruelty in her eyes. A woman
who exhibits an extremely pleasant face towards her husband is one who is devoted to her husband. Such a beautiful woman does not look at the moon or the sun, or at a tree that has an appellation of being male. If she looks at
none other than her husband, she is one who follows dharma. A woman who attends to her husband like a son,
even if he is poor, diseased, distressed, or weak from travels, is one who obtains a share in dharma. If a woman is
accomplished and self-controlled, if she has sons, if she is devoted to her husband and if she loves her husband,
then that woman has a share in dharma. If a woman always serves and tends, without any distraction, if she is extremely happy and humble, then she obtains a share in the dharma. If a woman does not desire any objects of pleasure, prosperity or happiness other than her husband, then she has a share in that dharma. She always awakes at the
right time and attends to the seniors. She keeps the house clean and rubs it down with cow dung. She always tends
to the fire and makes offerings of flowers. With her husband, she satisfies gods, guests and servants. Following the
law and the ordinances, she subsists on leftover food. A woman who always satisfies and nourishes people is united with dharma. Possessing the qualities, she satisfies the father-in-law and the mother-in-law, attentive at their
feet. She is always devoted to her mother and her father and possesses a store of austerities. A woman who nourishes brahmanas, the weak, those without protectors, the distressed, the blind and the destitute with food is one
who takes part in the vows of her husband. With a light spirit, she always practises vows that are extremely difficult to observe. Her mind is on her husband. She is engaged in the welfare of her husband. She is one who has a
share in the vows of her husband. A woman who regards her husband as supreme, practises auspicious austerities,
which convey her to eternal heaven. She is sacred and follows her husband's vows. For women, the husband is the
god. The husband is the friend. The husband is the destination. There is no objective equal to the husband. There is
no divinity equal to the husband. There is no heaven that can match a woman as much as a husband's favours. O
Maheshvara! If you are pleased with me, that is beneficial heaven for me. Even if a poor or diseased husband asks
the wife to undertake a task that is adharma or leads to a loss in life, even if that task is a vice or leads to a curse
imposed by brahmanas, regarding this as the dharma to be followed in a time of catastrophe, that task must be undertaken, without any reflection. In accordance with your words, I have thus recounted the dharma of women. A
beautiful woman who conducts herself in this way obtains a share in dharma.' Thus addressed, the lord of the gods
worshipped the daughter of the mountain. He then gave all the people permission to leave, including his supreme
companions. The large numbers of bhutas and the rivers went away, to wherever they had come from. The gandharvas and the apsaras also bowed their heads down before Bhava."'


