Vaishampayana said, 'Placing King Dhritarashtra at the forefront, the mighty-armed Yudhishthira offered water[To Bhishma.].
His senses were bewildered. His eyes overflowing with tears, the lord of the earth arose from the waters of the
Ganga and fell down on the bank, like an elephant struck by a hunter. Instructed by Krishna, Bhima picked up the
one who was sinking down. Krishna, the afflicter of enemy armies, said, "Do not act in this way." O king! The
Pandavas saw that Yudhishthira, with dharma in his soul, was afflicted and had fallen down on the ground, sighing
repeatedly. They saw that the lord of men was distressed in his mind and was almost lifeless. At this, the Pandavas
were overwhelmed by grief again and sat down. The mighty-armed Dhritarashtra saw that the king was seated, afflicted by great grief. The immensely wise one spoke these words. "O tiger among Kurus! Arise. Do what must be
done next. O Kouravya! You have conquered the earth through the dharma of kshatriyas. O lord of men! Enjoy the
earth with your brothers and your well-wishers. O supreme among the upholders of dharma! I do not see any reason why you should grieve. O lord of the earth! It is I and Gandhari who should grieve. We have lost our sons and
our kingdom, like wealth that is obtained in a dream. I did not listen to the words, full of grave import, of the great-
souled Vidura, who desired our welfare. That is the reason I, an evil-minded person, am repenting. The one with
divine sight and dharma in his soul had told me earlier, "Your lineage will be destroyed because of Duryodhana's
crimes. O king! If you desire welfare for yourself and for your lineage, kill the evil-souled one, the wicked King
Suyodhana. Never  let  Karna  and  Shakuni  meet  him.  Restrain  them  from  their  intoxication  with  this  gambling
match. Instate King Yudhishthira, with dharma in his soul. He will follow dharma and control and rule the earth. O
king! Or, if King Yudhishthira, Kunti's son, does not desire the kingdom, be the focal point for the entire kingdom
and accept it yourself. O lord of men! Look upon all creatures impartially. O extender of your kin! Let all your relatives earn a living." O Kounteya! The far-sighted Vidura spoke to me in this way. But my intelligence was foolish
and I followed the wicked Duryodhana. I did not listen to the brave one's sweet words. Hence, I have obtained the
fruits of this great grief and am immersed in this ocean of sorrow. O king! Behold. Your aged fathers[This probably means father and mother, that is, Dhritarashtra and Gandhari.] are miserable. O lord of men! However, I do not see any reason why you should be grieving.'


Vaishampayana said, 'Thus addressed by the intelligent Dhritarashtra, the intelligent king was silent and Kesha-
va spoke to him. "O lord of men! If a man has excessive grief in his mind about the death of his forefathers, he
has nothing but torment. You should now perform many kinds of sacrifices, with large quantities of dakshina, satisfying the gods with soma and the ancestors with svadha. O immensely wise one! You should not act in this way.
You know what is to be known. Act in accordance with that. You have heard about the dharma of kings from
Bhishma, Bhagirathi's son, Krishna Dvaipayana, Narada and Vidura. You should not follow the conduct of the
foolish. O one who bears the burden of the lineage! You should follow the conduct that was resorted to by your
forefathers. There is no doubt that a kshatriya should obtain heaven through his fame. A brave person is never slain
when he has turned his back on a battle. O great king! Therefore, abandon your grief. This is nothing but destiny.
You will not be able to see those who have been slain in this battle again." Govinda spoke in this way to Dharmaraja Yudhishthira. When the immensely energetic one paused, Yudhishthira replied. "O Govinda! I know the
affection you bear towards me. You have loved me, wished me well and always shown me your compassion. O
one with the chakra and the club! Do what will bring me great pleasure now. O handsome one! O descendant of
the Yadava lineage! In every way, my mind will then be happy. O illustrious one! Grant me permission to go to a
hermitage. After having killed the grandfather, I cannot find any peace. There is also Karna, tiger among men, who
never retreated from an encounter. O scorcher of enemies! I will then be able to free myself from the cruel deed.
Through such an act, I will be able to purify my mind." While he was speaking, Vyasa, who knew about dharma,
spoke to him. The immensely energetic one comforted him through these auspicious words. "O son! Your intelligence is still not refined. You are again confused, like a child. Why are all of us repeatedly casting our words towards the sky[As a metaphor for futile speech.]? You know about the dharma of kshatriyas. Fighting is their livelihood. A king must follow that
conduct, without being tied down by bonds of affection. You have heard the entire truth about moksha dharma. I
have severed your unaccomplished doubts that resulted from desire. However, intelligence is extremely difficult
for those who have no faith. It is certain that you have forgotten everything. You should not act in this way. You
should not be so ignorant. O unblemished one! You know about all the rites of atonement. You have heard everything about the dharma of fighting and the dharma of giving. You know about all kinds of dharma and are accomplished in all the sacred texts. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Yet, you are confused again, as if you are ignorant."'


