'"Narada said, 'This supreme and excellent city is known as Hiranyapura of the daityas and the danavas, who roam
around with a hundred different kinds of maya. Maya fashioned it in his mind and Vishvakarma created it with a
great deal of effort[Maya is the architect of the demons, while Vishvakarma is the architect of the gods.]. It was placed in the nether regions of Patala. Having been granted a boon in ancient times,
the brave and greatly energetic danavas lived here, practising a thousand different kinds of maya. Shakra, or
Varuna, or Yama, or the lord of riches[Kubera.], or any of the others, could not control them. The asuras known as the
Kalakhanjas were created from Vishnu's feet. The Nairritas and Yatudhanas were created from Brahma's altar[There is probably a typo in the critical edition's text here. It says vedi (altar), instead of pada (feet), as in the
preceding shloka. As with Vishnu's feet, it should probably read Brahma's feet.].
They had teeth and terrible forms and were valorous, with the speed of the wind. They were endowed with the
prowess of maya. They lived here and protected themselves. The danavas named Nivatakavachas were invincible
in battle. You know that even Shakra was incapable of restraining them. O Matali! You yourself, together with
your son Gomukha, have repeatedly been shattered by them and also the king of the gods, Shachi's consort, together with his son. O Matali! Behold those mansions, constructed out of gold and silver. They have been designed and
constructed with diverse kinds of wonderful artisanship. They have green lapis lazuli, red coral, white coral that is
like the sun and radiant diamonds. They shine like the earth, mountains or rocks, and seem to be like the stars.
They are as radiant as the sun and like a blazing fire. They have colourful nets of jewels and are tall, standing close
to one another. It is impossible to describe their forms, constituents and qualities. They are large and possess all the
qualities. Look at the sporting grounds of the daityas and their beds. The vessels and the seats are bejewelled and
extremely expensive. Look at the mountains which are like clouds, with currents of water flowing down them and
trees that can move around at will and provide blossoms and fruit one desires. O Matali! Is there anyone here who
appeals to you as a groom? Or if you so wish, let us go towards some other direction on earth.'"

'Kanva said, "Matali then spoke to the one who had addressed him in this way. 'O devarshi! I do not wish to do
anything that causes displeasure to the denizens of heaven. Though the gods and the danavas are brothers, they are
always engaged in enmity. I cannot find pleasure in an alliance with the enemy's party. It is better that we should
go somewhere else. I should not look at the danavas. I know this of myself. I wish to give that lotus away.'"'


'"Narada said, 'This is the world of the Suparnas. They are birds which kill serpents. They are not exhausted in
their valour, in travelling, or in bearing loads. O charioteer! This is the lineage that has descended from the six
sons of Vinata's son[Vinata's son is Garuda.]-Sumukha, Sunamna, Sunetra, Suvarchasa, Surupa, the king of the birds, and Subala.
There were hundreds and thousands who were born and reared in Vinata's lineage, born in the lineage of the king
of the birds. They were born in Kashyapa's lineage and extended it[The sage Kashyapa was married to Vinata.]. All of them are endowed with prosperity.
All of them are marked by the srivatsa sign[Vishnu bears the srivatsa mark (or curl) on his chest. This is the place where Lakshmi resides. Garuda is Vishnu's mount.]. All of them aspire for good fortune and bear strength. They are
kshatriyas in their deeds and are ruthless in feeding on serpents. Because they destroy their relatives[Serpents are descended from another one of Kashyapa's wives, Kadru. Therefore, serpents are related.], they never
attain the status of brahmanas. O Matali! Listen. I will recount the names of the foremost ones to you. This lineage
is extremely revered because it is favoured by Vishnu. Vishnu is their god and Vishnu is their refuge. Vishnu is always in their hearts. Vishnu is always their objective. There are Suvarnachuda, Nagashi, Daruna, Chandatundaka,
Anala, Anila, Vishalaksha, Kundali, Kashyapi, Dhvajavishkamba, Vainateya, Vamana, Vatavega, Dishachakshu,
Nimesha, Nimisha, Trivara, Saptavara, Valmiki, Dvipaka, Daityadvipa, Sariddvipa, Sarasa, Padmakesara,
Sumukha, Sukhaketu, Chitrabahu, Anagha, Meghakrita, Kumuda, Daksha, Sarpanta, Somabhojana, Gurubhara,
Kapota, Suryanetra, Chirantaka, Vishnudhanva, Kumara, Paribarha, Harita, Susvara, Madhuparka, Hemavarna,
Malaya, Matarishva, Nishakara and Divakara. I have recounted Garuda's descendants only as examples. They are
the foremost ones in fame, deeds and spirit. O Matali! If none of these appeals to you, let us proceed. I will take
you to a region where you may find what you are looking for.'"'


