The brahmana said, 'I have entered this great forest, having crossed the terrain that is extremely difficult to
traverse[The brahman is being compared to a great forest and the material world to the terrain.]. It has grief, joy, cold and heat, and these are like gnats and mosquitoes. It is enveloped in the
blind darkness of confusion and greed is like predators and reptiles. Possessions are hardships and desire and anger
are like bandits along the road.'

'"The brahmani asked, 'O immensely wise one! Where is that forest? What are its trees and rivers? What are its
hills and mountains? How far away is the forest?'

'"The brahmana replied, 'There is nothing that is separate from it. There is nothing that is equal to it. Since there
is nothing that is separate from it, it is only a short distance away. There is nothing smaller than it. There is nothing
larger than it. There is nothing that is more miserable than it. There is nothing that is its equal in happiness. Once
brahmanas enter there, they no longer have any reason to grieve or rejoice. They are not frightened of anyone. Nor
does anyone have reason to be frightened of them. There are seven large trees in that forest, seven fruits, seven
guests, seven hermitages, seven kinds of meditation and seven different types of initiation[The seven trees are the five senses, mind and intelligence. The seven fruits are what are experienced by these,
the seven guests being the qualities that lead to this experience. These seven guests seek recourse with the seven
trees, which are thus also like seven hermitages. The seven kinds of meditation and initiation are meant to progressively extinguish the seven trees. Some of the imagery is not easy to understand.]. The trees that pervade that forest yield divine flowers and fruits of five colours. The trees that pervade that forest yield divine flowers and fruits that have excellent colours. The trees that pervade that forest yield divine flowers and fruits that have
four colours. The trees that pervade that forest yield flowers and fruits that have mixed and three colours. The trees
that pervade that forest yield flowers and fruits that are fragrant and have a single colour. The giant trees that pervade that forest yield flowers and fruits that have many colours that are not manifest. For a brahmana with an excellent mind, there is a single fire there. The five senses are the kindling. For the sake of emancipation, there are
seven kinds of initiation. The qualities are the fruits and the guests survive on those fruits. The seven maharshis
become the guests there. When they have been honoured and disappear, another beautiful forest manifests itself.
Resolution is that tree, full of shade. Tranquility is its fruit. Knowledge is the resort and contentment is the water.
Beyond  all  this,  the  kshetrajna  is  the  sun.  Virtuous  ones  who  go  there,  never  have  to  suffer  from  fear  again.
Whether upwards, diagonally or downwards, the extremeties of that tree cannot be discerned. Seven women always dwell there. Their visages face downwards and they are radiant mothers. From above, they provide juices to
the subjects. In every other way, they are all transient. The seven successful saptarshis, with Vasishtha as the foremost, are established there and repeatedly emerge from there. Fame, radiance, power, victory, success and energy
-these  always  follow  those  seven,  who  are  like  radiant  stellar  bodies.  Collected  together,  there  are  hills  and
mountains there. There are rivers and streams that bear water, all originating with Brahma. There is a sacred sacrificial ground at the confluence of the rivers. There, those who are content in their own atmans advance towards the
grandfather himself. Their desires have been extinguished. They are excellent in their vows. They have burnt their
sins through austerities. They enter the atman in their own selves and worship the brahman. People who know
about that forest of knowledge praise it with hymns from the Rig Veda. For those who intend that forest, patience
is generated. Learned brahmanas instruct us about that divine forest in this way. Having obtained the knowledge,
they follow the instructions of the kshetrajna.'"'


The brahmana said, 'I do not smell scents. I do not know taste. I do not see form. I do not touch. I do not hear
different kinds of sound. I do not entertain the slightest bit of resolution. It is nature that desires agreeable
objects. It is nature that dislikes disagreeable objects. Like prana and apana when they enter the bodies of living
creatures, it is nature that experiences desire and hatred. There are other sentiments that are permanent. The atman
in creatures does not discern them in the body. When I am based there[In the body.], I am capable of being distracted by desire, anger, old age and death. I do not desire all the objects of desire. I do not hate all the sins. There is no taint in
my nature, like a drop of water is not left on a lotus. When one glances at many kinds of nature, the eternal is everlasting. The net of enjoyment is no longer attached to deeds, just as the blazing rays of the sun are not attached to
the firmament. In this connection, there is an ancient history about a conversation between an officiating priest[A special kind of officiating priest, adhvaryu, associated with the Yajur Veda.]
and a mendicant. O illustrious one! Listen to it. On seeing an animal prepared for a sacrificial rite, a mendicant
censured the violence and spoke to an officiating priest who was seated there. The officiating priest replied, "This
goat will not be destroyed. If the sacred texts are right, this animal will obtain great benefit. This part, constituted
of earth, will enter the earth. This part, constituted of water, will enter the water. The eyes will enter the sun. The
ears will enter the directions. The breath of life will enter the firmament. I follow the sacred texts and there is no
sin in this." '"'The mendicant said, "If you perceive a benefit from the sacrifice of the goat, then the sacrifice is for
the sake of the goat. Why does the sacrifice need you? Take the permission of the goat's mother, father, brother and
friends and let them pronounce the mantras. In particular, the goat depends on them. You should ask them and obtain their consent. It is only after their permission has been obtained that one can think about what should be done.
The life-breath of the goat has left[The goat has already been sacrificed.] and returned to its own origin. It is my view that only the immobile body is
left. This body, bereft of senses, is like kindling. Those whose desire is addicted to violence have thought of this as
an animal and have reduced it to kindling. Non-violence is the ancient instruction of all dharmas. I know that a rite
is indeed a rite if it does not involve any violence. I have a pledge of non-violence. If I wish to say anything beyond this, I am capable of saying many things. Your deed is reprehensible. All of us always find delight in non-violence towards all beings. We see this directly manifest. We do not worship what is indirect."

'"'The officiating priest replied, "You enjoy the qualities of smell that belong to the earth. You drink and taste
the quality of the water. You see form, the quality of fire. You touch the quality of the wind. You hear sound, which
originates in space. You use your mind to think of different things. You think that all these elements have life. You
are always engaged in taking away life. You are engaged in violence. There is no endeavour without violence. O
brahmana! What do you think?"

'"'The mendicant said, "The indestructible and the destructible are the two opposite aspects of the soul. The indestructible is existence. The destructible is said to be non-existent nature. Life, the tongue, the mind, the spirit,
sattva and rajas are part of nature. When one has been freed from the opposite pairs of sentiments, one is without
hope. Such a person looks upon all creatures impartially. He has no sense of ownership and has conquered his atman. When one has been freed in every possible way, there no longer is any fear."

'"'The officiating priest replied, "O supreme among intelligent ones! One should always reside with those who
are virtuous. Hearing your views, my intelligence has been illuminated. O illustrious one! Realizing that you were
an enlightened one, I spoke to you in this way. O brahmana! I showed honour to the customs in performing this
sacrifice. No crime attaches to me because of this sacrifice."'

'"The brahmana continued, 'When this was said, the mendicant remained silent. The officiating priest was freed
from his confusion. He engaged in the supreme rite of the great sacrifice. In this way, learned brahmanas know
about the extremely subtle nature of moksha. They know and follow the instructions of kshetrajna.'"'


The brahmana said, 'O beautiful one! In this connection, there is an ancient history about a conversation between Kartavirya and the ocean. There was a king named Kartavirya Arjuna and he possessed one thousand
arms. Using his bow, he conquered the earth, up to the frontiers of the ocean. We have heard that on one occasion,
intoxicated with his strength, on the shores of the ocean, he enveloped the ocean with hundreds of arrows. The
ocean joined its hands in salutation and bowed down before him. "O brave one! Do not shoot iron arrows at me.
What can I do for you? O tiger among kings! The creatures that have sought refuge with me are being slaughtered
by the great arrows you have released. O lord! Grant them freedom from fear."

'"'Arjuna replied, "If there is any archer who is equal to me in battle, tell me about him, so that I can face him in
an encounter."

'"'The ocean said, "O king! You may have heard of maharshi Jamadagni. As you have said, he is capable of receiving you as a guest[Jamadagni's son was Parashurama. Guest is an indirect way of saying that Parashurama would accept Kartavirya
Arjuna's challenge in a battle. Jamadagni was Richika's son. Jamadagni was killed by Kartavirya Arjuna.].""'
'"The brahmana continued, 'At this, the king was overcome by great rage. He left for the hermitage and confronted Rama. With his relatives, he engaged in hostilities against Rama and this caused stress to the great-souled
Rama. O lotus-eyed one! The infinitely energetic Rama's energy blazed forth and he burnt down the enemy soldiers. Rama violently grasped a battleaxe and sliced down the thousand arms, like lopping off the branches from a
tree. When they saw that he had been slain, all the relatives assembled together. They surrounded Bhargava and
attacked him with their spears. Rama seized his bow and swiftly ascended a chariot. He released a shower of arrows and killed the king's soldiers. Some of the kshatriyas were slain by Jamadagni's son. Others entered fortifications in the mountains, like deer afflicted by a lion. Because of their fear, some of them could not find brahmanas
and could not engage in their own rites. Their offspring became vrishalas[Kshatriyas require brahmanas for the performance of rites. Vrishala means someone who is wicked or inferior,
but is often taken to be the same as shudra.]. In this way, Dramidas, Kashas, Pun-
dras and Shabaras were uprooted from the dharma of kshatriyas and became vrishalas. When the brave ones were
slain, the brahmanas obtained sons through the kshatriya women[Since the male kshatriyas were killed.]. However, Jamadagni's son repeatedly killed
these kshatriyas. When this had happened twenty-one times, an invisible and divine voice spoke gentle words and
these were heard by all the worlds. "O Rama! Desist. O son[The word used is tata. Parashurama's ancestors spoke.]! O Rama! What gain do you see in this? Why are
you repeatedly depriving the relatives of the kshatriyas of their lives?" His great-souled and immensely fortunate
ancestors, with Richika at the forefront, asked him to desist. However, unable to tolerate his father's death, Rama
told those rishis, "You should not restrain me in this way." The ancestors replied, "O supreme among victorious
ones! You should not kill the relatives of the kshatriyas in this way. You are a brahmana. You should not kill these
kings."'"'


