Vaishampayana said, 'O, descendant of the Bharata lineage! The son of the wielder of the vajra[The vajra is Indra's weapon and Arjuna was Indra's son.] told the brahmanas everything and left for the slopes of the Himalayas. He first went to Agastya's banyan tree and then to Vasishtha's mountain. Kounteya performed his ablutions on Bhrigu's peak. He donated a thousand cows at sacred
places of pilgrimage. That supreme among Kurus gave houses to brahmanas. That supreme among men then
bathed at the place of pilgrimage known as Hiranyabindu and saw the best of mountains and sacred places. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! That best of men then descended, accompanied by brahmanas. That bull of the
Bharata lineage then left for the eastern direction. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! One after another, the best
of the Kurus saw many places of pilgrimage and the beautiful river Utpalini in the Naimisha forest-and the famous rivers Nanda, Upananda and Koushiki, the great rivers Gaya and Ganga. Having seen all these places of pilgrimage and having purified himself, he donated riches to the brahmanas. He went to every sacred place of pilgrimage in Anga, Vanga and Kalinga. Having seen them in the proper fashion, he gave away riches. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! When he approached the gates of the kingdom of Kalinga, the brahmanas who had followed the Pandava took their leave and departed. But with their permission, Kunti's son, the valorous Dhananjaya,
went on as far as the ocean, with only a few companions with him.

'Passing beyond Kalinga, the lord saw many beautiful countries, and followers of dharma. He went and saw
Mahendra Mountain, adorned with ascetics. Travelling slowly along the shores of the ocean, he arrived in Manalura. Having seen all the sacred places of pilgrimage there, the mighty-armed one went to visit the king who was the
lord of Manalura-King Chitravahana, who was devoted to dharma. He had a beautiful daughter named Chitrangada. When he saw Chitravahana's daughter of the beautiful hips, roaming around in the city at will, he was struck
by desire. He went to the king and told him what he wished. The king then spoke to him in a placatory voice, "A
king named Prabhamkara was once born in our lineage. He had no sons and performed supreme austerities for the
sake of offspring. On witnessing his terrible austerities and homage, the god Mahadeva Umapati[Mahadeva is Uma's consort.] Shankara was
satisfied. The great lord granted him the boon that only a single offspring would be born in every generation of this
lineage. Since then, in succession, only a single offspring has been born in our lineage. All my ancestors before me
had sons. But a daughter was born to me and it is certain that she will have to carry forward my lineage. O
supreme among men! I have always thought of her as my son. O bull among the Bharata lineage! In accordance
with what is prescribed, I have therefore made her my putrika[A putrika is a daughter who is regarded as a son. After marriage, she lives in her father's household. Her son
is regarded as her father's son and becomes the heir.]. The son, the perpetuator of this lineage, will be
the bride price. O Pandava! You can take her, as long as you agree to this condition." Agreeing to this condition, he
accepted the daughter and Kounteya lived in that city for three winters.'


Vaishampayana said, 'The bull of the Bharata lineage then went to the sacred places of pilgrimage to the south,
near the ocean. These sacred places were adorned with ascetics. However, these ascetics stayed away from five
places of pilgrimage that had been frequented by ascetics in earlier times-Agastyatirtha, Soubhadra, the immensely purifying Poulama, the calm Karandhama that provided the fruits of a horse-sacrifice and the great
tirtha[Place of pilgrimage.] Bharadvaja, which washes away all sins. On seeing these places of pilgrimage abandoned and shunned by
intelligent sages who were devoted to dharma, the Pandava who was Kuru's descendant joined his hands in salutation and asked the ascetics, "Why have those who are learned in the brahman abandoned these tirthas?" The ascetics replied, "O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Five crocodiles live in them and drag away those who are
blessed with the power of austerities. That is the reason these tirthas are abandoned." On hearing this, the mighty-
armed and valorous one, supreme among men, went to see these tirthas, though the ascetics tried to restrain him.

'He went to Soubhadra, named after a maharshi, and supreme among tirthas. The brave one, scorcher of enemies, swiftly immersed himself to have a bath. At that, a giant crocodile that lived in the water came and grasped
Kunti's son Dhananjaya, tiger among men. But the mighty-armed Kounteya, supreme among those who are strong,
seized the aquatic creature which began to struggle and got out of the water. O king! As soon as the famous Arjuna
dragged the crocodile out, it turned into a beautiful woman, adorned in every ornament, radiant, charming, divine
of form and alluring. On witnessing this great and extraordinary event, Kunti's son Dhananjaya was extremely
pleased and asked the lady, "O, fortunate one! Who are you and how did you come to live in the water? Why have
you been committing such great sins earlier?"

'The lady replied, "O mighty-armed one! I am an apsara who used to roam in the forests of the gods. I am the
extremely powerful Varga, always the favourite of the lord of riches[Kubera.]. I had four beautiful friends, all capable of
going anywhere at will. With them, I was once going to the abode of the protector of the worlds[The word used is lokapala, which translates as protector or preserver of the worlds. In this context, it might
mean either Brahma or Vishnu. There are also eight lokapalas who are regarded as guardians of the eight directions. But that is clearly not meant.]. On our way, all
of us saw a brahmana who was rigid in his vows. He was extremely handsome and was studying alone, in his solitude. O king! That entire forest was radiant with the energy of his austerities. Like the sun, he seemed to have illuminated that entire region. On witnessing the extraordinary sight of his terrible austerities, we descended in that
region, so as to bring impediments to his pursuit of austerities. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I, Sourabheyi,
Samichi, Budbuda and Lata went to the brahmana at the same time. We sang and laughed and sought to tempt the
brahmana. O brave one! But he did not pay any attention to us, even for an instant. The immensely energetic and
pure one did not waver and was fixed in his austerities. O bull among kshatriyas! But the brahmana was angered
and cursed us that we would become crocodiles and live in the water for a hundred years."'


