'Sanjaya said, "O king! On seeing that Satvata, invincible in battle, was descending, Bhurishrava became angry
and suddenly attacked him. The mighty-armed Kouravya spoke to the bull among the Shini lineage. 'It is good fortune that you have arrived within my range of vision today. In this battle today, I will obtain what I have always
desired. Unless you abandon the battle, you will not escape with your life. You have always been proud of your
bravery and I will kill you in today's encounter. O Dasharha! I will delight Suyodhana, the king of the Kurus. You
will be scorched by my arrows and fall down on the face of the earth today. All the brave ones in the battle will
witness this, together with Keshava and Arjuna. Today, the king who is Dharma's son will hear that you have been
killed by me. Having sent you, he will today be overcome with shame. Today, Partha Dhananjaya will get to know
about my valour. He will see you slain, lying down on the ground and covered with blood. Today, you will clash
with me and I have always desired this for a long time. In the ancient battle between the gods and the asuras, this
will be like the one between Shakra and Bali. O Satvata! I will grant you an extremely terrible encounter today.
You will get to know the true nature of my valour, strength and manliness. Having been killed by me in the battle,
you will go to Yama's residence, just as Ravana's son[Indrajit.] was slain by Lakshmana, Rama's younger brother. O
Madhava! Today, Krishna, Partha and Dharmaraja will witness your death and there is no doubt that they will lose
all enthusiasm and give up the battle. O Madhava! Today, I will cause your death with sharp arrows and delight the
wives of those who have been killed by you in the battle. O Madhava! Now that you have come within the range of
my vision, you will not escape, like a small deer that has approached a lion.' O king! Yuyudhana laughed and
replied, 'O Kouraveya! I am never frightened in a battle. A person who disarms me is the only one who is capable
of killing me in an encounter. He who kills me in battle today, will continue to kill for a long time to come[The sense is that such a person will continue to be victorious for a long time.].
What is the point of talking a lot? Do what you have spoken about. You are as fruitless as the roar of clouds during
the autumn. O brave one! On hearing your roars, laughter is generated in me. O Kourava! In this world, you have
desired this encounter for a long time. Let it commence. O father[The word used is tata, in the sense of senior. Bhurishrava's father, Somadatta, and Satyaki's grandfather, Shini,
were contemporaries and rivals. Therefore, Bhurishrava was considerably older than Satyaki.]! In my heart, I also wish to fight with you and
let us act swiftly. O wretch among men! I will not retreat without killing you today.' Those bulls among men castigated each other with those words. Each of them wished to kill the other and in that battle, struck each other in
great anger. Those two tigers among men challenged each other and clashed against each other in the encounter,
striking strongly. They were like crazy and angry elephants, fighting for the sake of a she-elephant.

'"Bhurishrava and Satyaki, scorchers of enemies, were like clouds and showered down terrible torrents of arrows on each other. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! Having shrouded Shini's descendant with arrows, Somadatta's son wished to kill him and pierced him with sharp arrows. Somadatta's son pierced Satyaki with ten arrows and wishing to kill the bull of the Shini lineage, released many other sharp arrows at him. O lord of the earth!
O lord! But before those sharp arrows could reach him, Satyaki used the maya of his weapons to slice them down
in the air. Those two supreme and brave ones, born in noble lineages and the extenders of the fame of the Kurus
and the Vrishnis, brought down separate showers of arrows on each other. They were like tigers fighting with their
claws, or giant elephants with their tusks. They used spears[Rathashakti.] and arrows released from bows to mangle each other. They mangled each other's bodies and made blood flow from the wounds. They confounded each other in a
gambling match in which their lives were the stake. Those two, the extenders of the fame of the Kuru and Vrishni
lineages, fought against each other in this way and performed supreme deeds. They were like the leaders of elephant herds. Placing the world of Brahma in front of them[That is, desiring Brahma's world after death.], they fought for a long time there, seeking to defeat
each other and kill each other. Satyaki and Somadatta's son showered down arrows on each other. And these showers delighted the sons of Dhritarashtra, who were looking on. The people who were there also witnessed the fight
between these two supreme warriors. They fought like elephants seeking a she-elephant in the herd.

'"They slew each other's horses and severed each other's bows. Devoid of their chariots in the great battle, they
clashed and fought with swords. They took up large, beautiful and colourful shields made out of the hides of bulls.
They unsheathed their swords and roamed around in that encounter. They traversed various paths and executed circular motions. Those two scorchers of enemies were angry and repeatedly struck each other. They possessed
swords and were clad in colourful armour. They had golden armlets and ornaments. O king! In the battle, they
were intoxicated with the encounter and made thrusts at each other. O Indra among kings! In a short instant, they
tired each other out. While all the soldiers looked on, those brave ones again regained their composure. They severed those large and beautiful shields with the swords. When those were severed, the tigers among men engaged in
a bout of wrestling. They had broad chests and long arms. They were skilled in fighting at close quarters[The text uses the word niyuddha, which means boxing, wrestling or hand-to-hand combat.]. They
attacked each other with arms that were like iron clubs. They struck each other with those arms, grabbed each other and seized each other. They had obtained strength through learning and delighted all the other warriors. O king!
As those supreme men fought on in that battle, a terrible and loud sound arose, as if thunder was striking against a
mountain. They were like elephants goring each other with the tips of their tusks, or giant bulls with their horns.
Those great-souled ones, bulls among the Kuru and Satvata lineages, fought on.

'"While Satvata was fighting and his weapons were exhausted, Vasudeva spoke to Arjuna. 'Behold. The foremost among all those who wield the bow is fighting in this encounter, though he is without a chariot. O Pandava!
Following you, he penetrated the army of the Bharatas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage[Arjuna was also descended from the Bharata lineage.]! The immensely
brave one fought with all the Bharatas. The best of warriors is exhausted and has now confronted
Bhuridakshina[We have used Bhuridakshina as a proper name and as another name for Bhurishrava. Given the shloka, this
seems natural. However, bhuridakshina can also be an adjective, in which case, Bhurishrava is being described
as someone who has given away a lot of donations.], who is advancing with a desire to fight. O Arjuna! This is not fair. Bhurishrava is invincible in
battle and is angry with Satyaki.' O king! Like maddened elephants, those two got ready to kill each other. O king!
Those two foremost among warriors were enraged and rushed against each other in their chariots, while Keshava
and Arjuna were spectators to the encounter. Krishna spoke to the mighty-armed Arjuna. 'Behold. The tiger of the
Vrishni and Andhaka lineages has succumbed to Somadatta's son. Having performed an extremely difficult task,
he is now lying down on the ground. O Arjuna! The brave one is tired and you should protect Satyaki. O supreme
among those who slay enemies! Let him not succumb to the performer of sacrifices[Referring to Bhurishrava.]. O tiger among men! O
lord! Quickly do what must be done.' Having been thus addressed by Vasudeva, Dhananjaya cheerfully replied,
'Look. The brave one among the Vrishnis and the bull of the Kuru lineage are sporting. They are like giant and
crazy elephants in the forest, playing with herds of lions.'

'"O bull among the Bharata lineage! At that time, a giant lamentation arose among the soldiers. The mighty-
armed one[Bhurishrava.] struck and brought Satyaki down on the ground. Bhuridakshina, the best of the Kurus, dragged the
foremost of the Satvata lineage, like a lion dragging an elephant and looked beautiful in the battle. In that encounter, Bhurishrava unsheathed his sword and grasping him by the hair, struck him in the chest with his foot. O
king! On seeing that Satvata was thus being dragged in the battle, Vasudeva again spoke to Arjuna. 'Behold. The
tiger among the Vrishnis and the Andhakas has succumbed to Somadatta's son. O mighty-armed one! He is your
student and he is not inferior to you in archery. O Partha! Truth is Satyaki's valour. But in this battle, Varshneya's
valour has been rendered false by Bhurishrava.' Having been thus addressed by Vasudeva in the battle, the mighty-
armed Pandava mentally worshipped Bhurishrava and said, 'I am glad that the extender of the deeds of the Kuru
lineage is only dragging the best of the Satvata lineage in this battle and sporting with him. He has not killed
Satyaki, the foremost among the brave ones of the Vrishni lineage. He is dragging him, like the king of deer dragging a giant elephant in the forest.' O king! Having thus worshipped Kourava in his mind, the mighty-armed
Partha Arjuna replied to Vasudeva, 'O Madhava! Since my sight was fixed on Saindhava, I did not see anything
else. For the sake of the Yadava, I will perform an extremely difficult task.' Having spoken these words to Vasudeva, Pandava used an arrow to sever the arm, which held the sword, of the one who was devoted to sacrifices[Bhurishrava.]."'

'Sanjaya said, "The arm, with the sword and with a beautiful armlet, fell down on the ground and this caused
supreme grief in the world of living beings. Kiriti severed the arm while he was still unseen and it fell down on the
ground with great force, like a five-headed serpent. Having seen that he had been rendered unsuccessful by Partha,
Kourava let go of Satyaki and angrily censured Pandava. 'O Kounteya! You have performed an extremely cruel
deed. While unseen by me and without engaging with me, you have severed my arm. What will you tell King Yudhishthira, the son of dharma? "I killed Bhurishrava in the battle, though he was not fighting with me." Is this what
the great-minded Indra instructed you himself? O Partha! Are these the weapons you learnt from Rudra, Drona and
Kripa? It is said that you know more about dharma than anyone else in this world. How did you strike someone
who was not engaged with you in battle? Learned ones do not strike someone who is distracted, frightened and
without a chariot, or someone who seeks mercy or confronts a hardship. This is inferior conduct and is practised by
men who are wicked. O Partha! How did you then perpetrate this extremely difficult deed? O Dhananjaya! Noble
ones can easily perform deeds that are noble. But on this earth, noble ones find it extremely difficult to perform an
ignoble act. O Partha! Men quickly pick up the deeds and conduct of those they consort with. This can be seen in
you. You have been born in a lineage of kings and in particular, you are a Kouraveya. You were good in conduct
and observed good vows. How could you have transgressed the dharma of kshatriyas? You have performed this
wicked deed for the sake of Varshneya[Meaning Satyaki.]. This is no doubt because of Vasudeva's counsel, though this is not worthy of you. Other than someone who is Krishna's friend, which person can inflict such a hardship on someone who
is distracted and is fighting with another person? The Vrishnis and the Andhakas are vile[Vratya, also meaning outcaste.]. They are naturally
addicted to deeds that should be censured. O Partha! Why have you accepted them as a model?' Having thus spoken, the mighty-armed and immensely illustrious one, who had a sacrificial altar on his banner, abandoned Satyaki
in the battle. He decided to fast to death[The translation doesn't capture the nuance. The practice in question is prayopavesa. While this does mean voluntary fasting to death, it is adopted by someone who has no worldly desires left.]. The one with auspicious signs spread a bed of arrows with his left
hand. He wished to go to Brahma's world and offered his breath of life to the lord of the senses as an oblation. He
fixed his eye on the sun and his mind on pure water. He meditated on the great Upanishad and united with yoga,
became silent.

'"All the soldiers and all the men censured Krishna and Dhananjaya and applauded that bull among men.
Though censured, the two Krishnas did not say anything unpleasant in reply. Though praised, the one with the sacrificial altar on his standard, was not pleased either. O king! Dhananjaya could not mentally tolerate that your sons
should have uttered such words and spoke to them. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! His words were not angry, but he wished to remind them. Phalguna, Pandu's son, spoke these words. 'All the kings know about my great
vow. No one who is within the range of my arrows will be able to kill anyone on our side. O one with the sacrificial altar on your banner! Knowing this, you should not censure me. Without knowing about the nature of dharma,
one should not censure someone else. You possessed weapons and you were about to kill the brave one from the
Vrishni lineage in the battle. If I have severed your arm then, that is not against dharma. O father[The word used is tata.]! Which virtuous one will not condemn the slaughter of Abhimanyu, when he was without a weapon, without a chariot and without armour? He was only a child.' Thus addressed by Partha, he[Bhurishrava.] touched the ground with his head. With his left
arm, he offered his severed right arm. O great king! Having heard Partha's words, the immensely radiant one, with
the sacrificial altar on his standard, remained silent and hung his head down. Arjuna said, 'O Shala's elder
brother[Somadatta had three sons-Bhuri, Bhurishrava and Shala.]! The affection that I bear towards you is the same as the one I bear towards Dharmaraja, Bhima, Naku-
la, supreme among eloquent ones, and Sahadeva. Having taken my leave and also that of the great-souled Krishna,
go to the sacred worlds, where Shibi, the son of Ushinara, is[Shibi's story of generosity has been recounted in Section 31 (Volume 2).].' Having been freed by Somadatta's son, Shini's
descendant arose.

'"Desiring to sever the head of the great-souled one, he grasped his sword. Bhuridakshina, Shala's elder brother,
had already been slain by Pandu's son and was distracted. Satyaki wished to kill such an unblemished one. He was
seated with his arm lopped off, like an elephant with a severed trunk. All the soldiers censured the extremely evil-
minded one loudly. He was restrained by Krishna, the great-souled Partha, Bhima, the two protectors of the chariot
wheels[Yudhamanyu and Uttamouja.], Ashvatthama, Kripa, Karna, Vrishasena and Saindhava. The soldiers loudly asked him not to kill the
one who was devoted to his vows. However, Satyaki severed the head of the Indra among the Kouravas with his
sword, though his arm had been severed in the battle by Partha and he was fasting to death. The soldiers did not
applaud Satyaki's deed. The extender of the Kuru lineage had already been slain by Arjuna. The siddhas, the cha-
ranas and men saw Bhurishrava, who was an equal of the thousand-eyed one, being killed in the battle, though he
was fasting to death. Amazed at his deeds, the gods honoured him. The soldiers also took sides and debated in
many ways. 'This is not Varshneya's crime. This is destiny. Therefore, we should not fall prey to anger. Anger
causes misery for men. It was destined that the brave one would be killed and it is not for us to debate this. The
creator has ordained that in this battle, he will meet his death through Satyaki.'

'"Satyaki said, 'You tell me that one should not kill someone who should not be killed. You speak about dharma
and seem to be established in dharma. You wear the garments of dharma. Subhadra's son was a child. He was
bereft of weapons. When you slew him in the battle, where was your dharma then? At some time, I had insolently
taken a pledge. While I was still alive, if someone flung me down in battle and kicked me with his feet in anger, I
would slay that enemy, even if he were to adopt the vow of a sage. O ones with limited intelligence! I was struggling to counter him, with my arms and eyes intact. But you thought that I was already dead. O bulls among the
Kurus! It is very proper that I should have countered him in this way. Out of affection towards me, Partha protected his pledge[Of protecting those on his own side.]. But having severed his arm with the sword, he has deprived me. That which is ordained will
happen. Destiny works in this way. He has been killed while he was fighting. What adharma has been committed
by me? In ancient times, Valmiki sung this shloka on earth. "Men must always act so as to cause pain to their enemies."'"

'Sanjaya said, "O great king! When he had spoken in this way, no one among the Kouravas and the Pandavas
said anything. They worshipped him[Bhurishrava.] in their minds. He was sanctified with mantras. He was great in granting
boons. He was illustrious. He had given away thousands of donations. He was like a sage who had gone to the forest. No one was happy at his death. He had dark blue eyes. He was a benefactor. He was brave. His eyes were red,
like those of a pigeon. His head was severed, like that of a horse at a sacrifice and was then placed at the spot for
oblations. In the great battle, his energy sanctified the weapon that had severed his head. He was the granter of
boons. He was the recipient of boons. Because of his supreme dharma, he filled heaven and earth[Rodasi.] and ascended
above."'


'Dhritarashtra asked, "He was undefeated by Drona, Radheya, Vikarna and Kritavarma. Fulfilling his promise to
Yudhishthira, the brave one passed through that ocean of soldiers. How was he checked and humiliated in the battle by Kouraveya Bhurishrava and forcibly thrown down by him on the ground?"

'Sanjaya replied, "O king! Listen to the ancient account about the origin of Shini's descendant and also that of
Bhurishrava. O king! You are uncertain on that account. Atri had a son named Soma and Soma's son was known as
Budha. Budha had a single son named Pururava and his splendour was like that of the great Indra. Pururava's son
was Ayu and Ayu's son was known as Nahusha. Nahusha's son was Yayati, revered by the gods as a rajarshi.
Through Devayani, Yayati had an eldest son named Yadu. A son named Devamidha was born in Yadu's lineage.
His son Shura was born in the Yadava lineage and was honoured in the three worlds. Shura's descendant was the
immensely illustrious Shouri[Anyone descended from Shura is Shouri, not necessarily the son alone. Shura's son was Shini and Shini's son
was Vasudeva.] Vasudeva, foremost among men. Shura was a supreme archer and was equal to
Kartavirya[Kartavirya Arjuna.] in battle. In his lineage, and equal to him in valour, was born a king named Shini. O king! At this
time, a svayamvara was organized for the great-minded Devaka's daughter[The daughter was named Devaki.]. All the kshatriyas assembled there.
Wishing to obtain her for Vasudeva, he[It has to be inferred that this is Shini. As mentioned earlier, there is a distinction between svayamvara and
viryashulka, though that distinction is not always maintained. This is more of viryashulka.] defeated all the kings there and placed the princess Devaki on his chariot. O king! On seeing Devaki on Shouri Shini's chariot, the immensely energetic Somadatta, bull among men,
could not tolerate this. O king! There was a wonderful and extraordinary battle between them and it lasted for half
a day. Those two extremely strong ones engaged in a wrestling match, like that between Shakra and Prahlada. Somadatta was forcibly thrown down on the ground by Shini. He[Shini.] raised his sword, grasped him by the hair and
kicked him with the foot, in the midst of thousands of kings who looked on in every direction. Then, overcome by
compassion, he let him go and said, 'Live.' O venerable one! Having been reduced to that state, Somadatta was
overcome by intolerance and sought the favours of Mahadeva. The lord Mahadeva, supreme among the granters of
boons, was satisfied. He wished to gratify him with a boon and the king asked for the following boon. 'O lord! I
ask for a son who will strike down Shini's descendant in the midst of thousands of kings and kick him with the
foot in a battle.' Having heard the words of King Somadatta, the god agreed that it would be this way and disappeared. It was because of the boon that he obtained Bhuridakshina, and Somadatta's son brought down Shini's descendant in the battle. O king! I have told you what you asked me. Satvata, bull among men, cannot be vanquished
in an encounter.

'"The Vrishnis are successful in attaining their objective in battle. They fight in diverse colourful ways. They
can even defeat the gods, the danavas and the gandharvas. They obtain victory through their own valour and do not
have to depend on the help of others. O lord! O bull among the Bharata lineage! No one equal to them in strength
can be seen. There is no one like that. There has been no one like that. Nor will there be anyone like that. They do
not disrespect their kin and are devoted to the commands of the elders. In a battle, the gods, the asuras, the gandharvas, the yakshas, the serpents and the rakshasas cannot vanquish the brave ones of the Vrishni lineage, not to
speak of men. They do not covet the possessions of brahmanas, the possessions of their elders or the possessions of
their kin. They never covet the possessions of those who have protected them in times of distress. Though prosperous, they are not excessively attached[To wealth.]. They are devoted to brahmanas and are truthful in speech. They regard
even the strong as weak and save them. They are always devoted to the gods. They are self-controlled, generous
and free from insolence. It is because of this that the foremost ones among the Vrishnis can never be thwarted. O
king! One can bear Mount Meru or swim across the abode of makaras, but one cannot stand up in an encounter
with the foremost among the Vrishnis. O lord! I have told you everything that you had doubts about. O king of the
Kurus! O best of men! All this is because of your grave errors."'


