'Sanjaya said, "While they were thus conversing, Dhananjaya arrived. He wished to meet the king who was the
foremost among the Bharata lineage, together with his well-wishers. He entered the auspicious chamber and having saluted him[Yudhishthira.], stood in front. The bull among the Pandavas[Yudhishthira.] arose from his seat and affectionately embraced
Arjuna with his arms, inhaling the fragrance of his head. Having pronounced his blessings, he smilingly said, 'O
Arjuna! It is evident that you will certainly accomplish a great victory in the battle. Your countenance shows that
Janardana is extremely pleased with you.' Jishnu recounted to him the great and supremely wonderful incident. 'O
fortunate one! I witnessed it through Keshava's favours.' Dhananjaya told him everything that he had witnessed
and about his encounter with Tryambaka, and thus assured his well-wishers. All of them were astounded and lowered their heads on the ground. Having shown obeisance to the one with the bull on his banner, they spoke words
of praise. All the well-wishers then took their leave of Dharma's son. They swiftly armoured themselves and happily emerged to do battle.

'"Having shown their honours to King Yudhishthira, Yuyudhana, Achyuta and Arjuna also happily emerged
from his abode. The invincible Yuyudhana and Janardana were on a single chariot and together, went to brave Arjuna's abode. Having gone there, Hrishikesha prepared the chariot, like a charioteer. It was a supreme chariot and
bore the signs of the bull among monkeys. It possessed a roar like that of the clouds. It possessed the complexion
of molten gold. That supreme of chariots was prepared and was as resplendent as the morning sun. The tiger
among men[Krishna.] prepared himself. Having prepared himself, he told Partha, who had finished his morning ablutions,
that the chariot was ready. Kiriti, the supreme among men in this world, donned golden armour. With the bow and
arrows in his hand, he circumabulated[The chariot.]. The learned and the aged, who were in control of their senses and had
performed rites, pronounced benedictions for the maharatha's victory. The supreme chariot had earlier been invoked with mantras that would bring about triumph in battle. Having been invoked with mantras, it dazzled like
the rays of the morning sun. The foremost among rathas, clad in gold, ascended the golden chariot. He was as resplendent as the unblemished rays of the sun on Meru. After Partha had ascended, Yuyudhana and Janardana also
climbed up[Onto the same chariot.], like the Ashvins coming with Indra to Sharyati's sacrifice[Sharyati was a famous king and was the father of Sukanya. The story of Sharyati's sacrifice has been recounted
in Section 33 (Volume 3).]. Govinda, supreme among those who
hold reins, grasped the reins, like Matali for Vasava[Vasava is Indra and Matali is the name of Indra's charioteer.], when he departed to slay Vritra. Partha was with both of
them, on that supreme chariot. He was like the moon, the dispeller of darkness, together with Budha and Shukra[Mercury and Venus respectively.].
The destroyer of large numbers of the enemy departed, wishing to kill Saindhava. He was like Indra in Tarakamaya[Famous battle fought between the gods and the demons.], accompanied by the lord of the oceans[Varuna.] and Mitra. There was the sound of musical instruments and auspicious and sacred chants. Arjuna proceeded, praised by bards and minstrels. The auspicious chants of bards and
minstrels wished for his victory. These mingled with the sound of musical instruments and became extremely
pleasant. Auspicious winds began to blow from the rear, with fragrant scents. They delighted Partha and dried up
his enemies. O venerable one! Many omens of victory manifested themselves in favour of the Pandavas and it was
the reverse for those on your side.

'"On beholding these signs of victory, Arjuna spoke to the great archer, Yuyudhana, who was on his right. 'O
Yuyudhana! I can see that victory is certain in the battle. O bull among the Shini lineage! These good portents can
be seen. Let me go to the spot where King Saindhava is. He is waiting to witness my valour and to proceed to
Yama's world. The slaying of Saindhava is the supreme task for me. It is also a great task to protect Dharmaraja. O
mighty-armed one! You protect him today. You will protect him the way I would have protected him myself. I do
not see anyone else I can depend on, with the exception of maharatha Pradyumna. O bull among men! Ignoring
this[The task of protecting Yudhishthira.], I can then kill Saindhava. O Satvata! You should not entertain any anxiety on my account. Devote all your
attention to the supreme task of protecting the king. Where the mighty-armed Vasudeva is stationed, and where I
am, it is certain that there is no scope for danger there.' Thus addressed by Partha, Satyaki, the destroyer of enemy
heroes, signified his assent to the words and went to the spot where King Yudhishthira was."'


'Dhritarashtra said, "After Abhimanyu had been killed, the next day arrived. They[The Pandavas.] were oppressed with sorrow
and grief. What did they do? Who, from my side, fought with them? The Kurus knew about Savyasachi's deeds.
Knowing this, how could they, and those on my side, fearlessly perform this wicked deed? Tell me. The tiger
among men[Arjuna.] was tormented by sorrow on account of his son. He was enraged. He was like Death, the destroyer.
When he advanced in that battle, how could they glance at him? In the battle, the one with the ape on his banner
shook his giant bow, grieving on account of his son. On beholding him, what did those on my side do? O Sanjaya!
What did Duryodhana confront in the course of the battle? A great sorrow has overtaken us today. I do not hear
sounds of joy[From the Kourava camp.]. Those are sounds pleasant to the mind. They bring happiness to the ear. Today, all of those can no
longer be heard in Saindhava's abode. The praises I heard earlier in the camps of my sons, can no longer be heard
today. There were masses of bards and minstrels and dancers everywhere. Earlier, those sounds used to strike my
ears. But I no longer hear them today. They must be miserable today and I can no longer hear those sounds. O Sanjaya! O son[The word used is tata.]! Earlier, seated in the abodes of Satyadhriti and Somadatta, I used to hear those supreme sounds,
charming to the ears[Is this at the time of the war? At the time of the war, there was no reason for Dhritarashtra to be seated in any of
the abodes, either of Satyadhriti or of Somadatta. Satyadhriti was from the Matsyas and fought on the Pandava
side. At the time of the war, there was no reason for Dhritarashtra to be in Satyadhriti's abode. In that case,
Satyadhriti should not be taken as a proper noun, but as an adjective for Somadatta, meaning someone who upholds the truth. However, at the time of the war, why should Dhritarashtra be in Somadatta's abode either? We
have therefore taken this to mean an earlier occasion, and accepted Satyadhriti as a proper noun.]. My merits have diminished today and I hear woes and lamentations from the abodes of my
sons. I perceive that they have lost their enterprise. That is the reason I do not hear such sounds from Vivimshati,
Durmukha, Chitrasena, Vikarna and my other sons. Drona's son, the great archer, is devoted to my sons. Brahmanas, kshatriyas, vaishyas and disciples used to wait upon him. He found delight in debate, talk and conversation
and in the playing of musical instruments. Day and night, he found pleasure in many kinds of songs. He was worshipped by many from the Kurus, the Pandavas and the Satvatas. O suta! In the house of Drona's son, sounds cannot be heard today, as they used to be earlier. Drona's son, the great archer, used to be worshipped by multitudes of
dancers and singers. Those sounds cannot be heard there now. Every evening, a great sound arose from the camps
of Vinda and Anuvinda. It cannot be heard today. Every day, from the houses of the Kekayas, great sounds of
rhythmic singing and dancing could be heard, as they and their soldiers amused themselves. O son! Those sounds
are non-existent today. Somadatta's son[Bhurishrava.] is a store of learning. Officiating priests, learned in saptatantu[Saptatantu is a special kind of sacrifice in seven (sapta) parts.] sacrifices,
used to wait upon him. Those sounds cannot be heard. The twang of bowstrings, the praise of the brahman and the
sounds of lances, swords and chariots could be incessantly heard from Drona's house. But they cannot be heard
now. There were the sounds of singing from those from many different countries and the playing of musical instruments. Those great sounds cannot be heard today. Janardana Achyuta arrived in Upaplavya, compassionate towards all beings and desiring peace[This is a reference to Krishna's mission for peace, described in Section 54 (Volume 4).]. O suta! At that time, I told my wicked son, 'O son! Use Vasudeva as a place
of pilgrimage and have peace with the Pandavas. O Duryodhana! I think that the time has come and do not cross
me. Do not refuse Keshava, who has come to solicit peace. He has your welfare in mind. Otherwise, you will truly
be defeated.' But he refused Dasharha, who is a bull among all archers, and who was entreating him. He brought
calamity on himself. The evil-minded one was attracted by destiny and ignored my beneficial words. He accepted
the views of Duhshasana and Karna. I did not desire the game with the dice. Nor did Vidura approve of it. Saindhava did not desire the gambling. Bhishma did not desire the gambling. O Sanjaya! Shalya, Bhurishrava, Purumitra, Jaya, Ashvatthama, Kripa and Drona did not desire the gambling either. If my son had acted in accordance
with the views of these people, with his kin and his well-wishers, he would have had a long and peaceful life. 'The
sons of Pandu are pleasant and sweet in speech[From the text, it is not obvious where Dhritarashtra's quote to Duryodhana begins again. But this is as good a
place as any.]. In the midst of their kin, they speak pleasantly. They are born in
noble lineages. They are revered and wise. They will obtain happiness. A man who is always on the side of dharma, obtains happiness everywhere. After death, he obtains welfare and favours. Based on their capacity, they deserve to enjoy half of the earth. Right up to the frontiers of the ocean, the earth is also theirs, from their fathers and
grandfathers. Obtaining their stations, the Pandavas will remain devoted to dharma. O son! I have kin and the Pandavas will always listen to them-Shalya, Somadatta, the great-souled Bhishma, Drona, Vikarna, Bahlika, Kripa
and other aged and great-souled ones among the Bharata lineage. O son! If they speak on your behalf, they will act
in accordance with those words. Do you think that there is any among them[That is, among the Pandavas.] who will speak in a contrary way?
Krishna will never give up dharma and all of them will follow him. Those brave ones will not act contrary to the
words of dharma that I speak to them. The Pandavas have dharma in their soul.' O suta! Thus did I lament and
speak many words to my son. But the stupid one did not listen. It seems to me that all this is because of destiny.
Vrikodara and Arjuna are there and brave Satyaki from the Vrishni lineage. There are Uttamouja from Panchala,
the invincible Yudhamanyu, the unassailable Dhrishtadyumna, the unvanquished Shikhandi, the Ashmakas, the
Kekayas, Kshatradharma from the Somakas, Chekitana from Chedi, Abhibhu, the son of Kashi, the sons of
Droupadi, Virata, maharatha Drupada and the twins, tigers among men. Madhusudana is the counsellor. Who in
this world wishes to fight the likes of these and desires to live? Who will withstand my enemies when they exhibit
their divine weapons? There are Duryodhana, Karna, Shakuni Soubala and Duhshasana as the fourth. I do not see a
fifth. They have Vishvaksena[Krishna's name.] stationed on the chariot, reins in his hand. The armoured Arjuna is the warrior.
There cannot be defeat. Does Duryodhana not remember those lamentations of mine? You have told me that
Bhishma and Drona, tigers among men, have been brought down. Those were the words spoken by Vidura, the farsighted one. Beholding the fruits of those deeds, I think that my sons must be sorrowing. At the end of the winter,
aided by a great wind, the fire consumes dry wood. Thus will Dhananjaya consume my soldiers. O Sanjaya! You
are skilled in narrating. Tell me everything. O son! When Abhimanyu was slain and that wicked deed was done to
Partha in the evening, what was the state of your minds? O son! Having performed that wicked deed, in battle,
those on my side must have found it impossible to withstand the deeds of the wielder of Gandiva. What did Duryodhana do? What did Karna do and say? When they confronted this end, what about Duhshasana and Soubala? O
Sanjaya! O son! Everything that befell my assembled sons in battle was because of wicked and intolerant deeds.
The evil-minded one[Duryodhana.] was addicted to avarice. His mind was distorted because of anger. The stupid one coveted
the kingdom. Hatred made him lose his senses. O Sanjaya! Tell me whether their actions were good or evil."'


'Sanjaya said, "I will tell you everything, as I have seen it with my own eyes. Listen with patience. Your faults
have been great. When waters have receded after a flood, the construction of an embankment is useless. O king! O
bull among the Bharata lineage! Lamentation is pointless. Do not sorrow. Know that the decrees of destiny are
wonderful and cannot be transgressed. O best among the Bharata lineage! Do not grieve. This destiny is ancient. If,
in earlier times, you had restrained Yudhishthira, Kunti's son, or your own sons from gambling with the dice, you
would not have confronted this calamity. Yet again, when the time for battle arrived, had you restrained both the
angry parties, you would not have confronted this calamity. If, in earlier times, you had instructed the Kurus to kill
the disobedient Duryodhana, you would not have confronted this calamity. Then the Pandavas, the Panchalas, the
Vrishnis and all the other great ones would never have blamed you for your lack of intelligence. Had you performed the duties of a father and directed your son to a righteous path, making him follow dharma, you would not
have confronted this calamity. You are the wisest person in this world, but you abandoned eternal dharma, following the counsel of Duryodhana, Karna and Shakuni. O king! You are addicted to artha. And all these lamentations
of yours that I hear seem to be like honey laced with poison. O king! In earlier times, Krishna did not revere the
Pandava king[Yudhishthira.], Bhishma or Drona as much as he revered you. But when he knew that you had been dislodged
from the dharma of kings, from that time, Krishna no longer regards you with high honour. When your sons addressed harsh words towards the Parthas, despite they being under your control, you remained indifferent, coveting
the kingdom for them. O unblemished one! You obtained the kingdom from your fathers and grandfathers and it
will be lost. And so will the entire earth that has been conquered by the Parthas[In addition to the ancestral kingdom, the Pandavas conquered many countries and extended the kingdom.]. The fame and the kingdom of
the Kouravas are because of what the sons of Pandus won. The Pandavas followed dharma and added a lot to
those. But having encountered you, those deeds of theirs became extremely fruitless. They were dislodged from
their kingdom because of your avarice. O king! Now that the time for battle has arrived, you are censuring your
sons. You have indicated the many faults that they possess. But this is not deserved. When kings fight in battle,
they do not seek to protect their lives. The bulls among kshatriyas are fighting, penetrating the army of the Parthas.
Who other than the Kouravas will seek to fight with an army of soldiers protected by Krishna, Arjuna, Satyaki and
Vrikodara? Their warrior is Gudakesha[Arjuna.] and their counsellor is Janardana. They are protected by Satyaki and
they are protected by Vrikodara. Other than the Kouravas and those who are following them, which mortal archer
would dare to fight against these? With the devoted kings, the brave Kouravas are doing whatever they are capable
of, devoted to the dharma of kshatriyas. Now listen to the supremely grievous battle between those tigers among
men, the Kurus and the Pandavas. Listen exactly to everything that occurred."'


