'Karna said, "Among all women in humankind, renowned for their beauty, we have not seen, nor heard, of the accomplishment of such a deed. When the sons of Pritha and the sons of Dhritarashtra were raging in anger, Krishna
Droupadi brought solace. The sons of Pandu were immersed and drowning in an ocean without a boat. Panchali
became their boat and brought them safely ashore."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having heard the words that a woman had become the salvation for the sons of Pandu,
Bhimasena was extremely hurt. In the midst of the Kurus, he said unhappily, "Devala[An ancient sage.] has said that there are
three stars[In the sense of objectives or directions.] for a man-offspring, deeds and learning, since these are the source of creation. When the body has
lost life and is hollow and impure, discarded by relatives, these are the three that survive. But our light has become
dark, because our wife has been humiliated. O Dhananjaya! How can offspring from a defiled one serve any purpose?" Arjuna replied, "The Bharatas do not talk about words from inferior men, uttered or not uttered. They only
converse about those from superior men. They remember good deeds and not enmity that has been shown. They
know only the good because they have confidence in their own selves." Bhima said, "Right now, I will kill all the
enemies who have assembled here. O Indra among kings[Bhima is now speaking to Yudhishthira.]! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Shall I tear
them up by their roots? O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Where is the need to debate this or suffer? Here and
now, I am going to kill all of them and you can rule the earth without a rival." Having said this, Bhimasena, surrounded by his younger brothers, glanced at his club, like a lion in the midst of deer. Partha[Arjuna.], whose deeds are
unblemished, pacified him and cooled him. But the mighty-armed and valorous one streamed with anger. O lord of
men! He was so angry that smoke, sparks and flaming fire issued from his ears and other openings in his body. His
brows were furrowed and his face was terrible to behold, like Yama's form when destruction at the end of a yuga is
near. 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Yudhishthira restrained the mighty-armed one with his arms. He told
him not to act in this way and to be quiet. Having restrained the mighty-armed one, whose eyes were red with
anger, Yudhishthira approached his father Dhritarashtra, his hands joined in salutation.'


'Yudhishthira said, "O king! You are our lord. Command us as to what we should do. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! We have always desired to be established under your rule."

'Dhritarashtra replied, "O Ajatashatru! Be fortunate. Go in peace and safety. On my instructions, rule your kingdom with your riches. But bear in mind the instructions that I, an old man, am giving. I have reflected on this and it
is the supreme medication[Or diet or regimen, the word used being pathya.] for welfare. O Yudhishthira! O son! You know the subtle path of dharma. You are
humble, immensely wise and serve your superiors. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Where there is intelligence, there is peace. Therefore, tread the path of serenity. A weapon does not cut what is not wood. But it does
cut wood. Supreme men do not indulge in hostilities. They do not know enmity and see good qualities, leaving out
bad qualities. O Yudhishthira! It is only the worst among men who use harsh words in a quarrel. Those who are average reply to such words, but the supreme among men never respond. Supreme men never converse about ill
words, whether they are uttered or not uttered by inferior men[This is a repetition of what Arjuna has said.]. They only remember good deeds and not deeds
resulting from enmity. They only know the good because they have confidence in their own selves. In this assembly of good people, you have shown the character of an arya. O son! Do not take to your heart Duryodhana's
harshness. Look at your mother Gandhari and me. We crave for your good qualities. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! Look at your old and blind father present before you. I wished to see my friends and judge the strengths
and weaknesses of my sons. It was from this desire that I had earlier allowed the gambling match to take place. O
king! There is no reason to feel sorry for the Kurus whom you rule. The intelligent Vidura, knowledgeable in all
the sacred texts, is your adviser. There is dharma in you, valour in Arjuna, strength in Bhimasena and respect and
service towards superior in the twins, foremost among men. O Ajatashatru! Be fortunate. Return to Khandavaprastha. Let there be fraternal love with your brothers[Meaning the Kouravas.]. May your mind always be established in dharma."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Hearing these words, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira, supreme among those of the Bharata lineage, performed all the deeds that were appropriate for the occasion and left with his brothers. With Krishna[Droupadi.],
they left in chariots that were like the clouds. In a happy frame of mind, they left for Indraprastha, supreme among
cities.'


Janamejaya asked, 'When they learnt that the Pandavas had been granted permission to leave with their gems, riches and treasures, what was the state of mind of Dhritarashtra's sons?'

Vaishampayana said, 'O king! When he found out that the intelligent Dhritarashtra had given the permission,
Duhshasana swiftly went to his brother[Duryodhana.]. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On arriving before Duryodhana and
his advisers, the foremost of the Bharatas[Duhshasana.] spoke these miserable words, "O maharathas! That old man has made
us lose everything that we had obtained with great difficulty. He has given those objects to our enemies." Then the
proud Duryodhana, Karna and Soubala Shakuni got together and plotted against the Pandavas. They went to the
intelligent King Dhritarashtra, Vichitravirya's son, and spoke to him these conciliatory words.

'Duryodhana said, "O king! Have you not heard what Brihaspati, the learned priest of the gods, told Shakra
about policy? 'O destroyer of enemies! Enemies must be killed through every means possible, before they cause
harm through war or force[This is what Brihaspati said.].' We should offer homage to all the kings through riches obtained from the Pandavas.
If we fight with them[The Pandavas.] thereafter, what reversal can befall us? If one places angry and venomous snakes that bring
destruction on one's back and neck, how can one get rid of them? O father! The angry Pandavas will ride on chariots and hold their weapons. In their rage, they will destroy us like venomous serpents. Arjuna is attired in armour
and has grasped his two supreme quivers. He is frequently picking up the Gandiva, breathing heavily and glancing
around. We have heard that Vrikodara has swiftly raised his giant club and is riding on a chariot that has been
yoked. Nakula has his sword and the shield marked with the signs of eight moons. Sahadeva and the king[Yudhishthira.] have
made their intentions clear through their gestures. They have ascended chariots that are stocked with many different kinds of arms. They have whipped up the teams of chariots and are ready to employ armies. We have caused
them offence and they will not pardon us. Who among them will forgive Droupadi's oppression? O bull among the
Bharata lineage! Be fortunate. We must again gamble with the Pandavas so as to send them to the forest. In this
way, we will be able to bring them under our sway. Either they or we will be defeated in the gambling with dice
and attired in deerskin, will enter the great forest for twelve years. The thirteenth year will have to be spent in an
inhabited place, in disguise. If one is recognized, one will again have to go to the forest for twelve years. Either
they or we will live here. Therefore, let the gamble begin. Let the dice be thrown again and let the Pandavas play.
O king! O bull among the Bharata lineage! This is the most important task for us. This Shakuni is skilled and possesses all the knowledge about the secrets of dice. We will be firmly established in the kingdom and will have alliances. We will gather a vast, brave and invincible army and keep it content. O king! O scorcher of enemies! If
they survive the vow after thirteen years, we will be able to defeat them. Let this find pleasure with you."

'Dhritarashtra replied, "Then immediately bring them back, even if they have gone a long distance away. Let the
Pandavas return and gamble with the dice again."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Then Drona, Somadatta, the maharatha Bahlika, Vidura, Drona's son[Ashvatthama.], the valorous son
of the vaishya[Though Vidura has already been mentioned by name, this means Vidura, who was the son of a vaishya
woman.], Bhurishrava, Shantanu's son[Bhishma.] and maharatha Vikarna collectively said, "Don't have the gamble.
Let there be peace." But Dhritarashtra loved his son and ignored the desires of these well-wishers, all of whom
could foresee the consequences. He summoned the Pandavas. O great king! Gandhari was always united with
dharma. She was miserable because of affection towards her sons and spoke to Dhritarashtra, lord of the people.

"When Duryodhana was born, the immensely intelligent Kshatta[Vidura.] told us that it would be better to send this destroyer of the lineage to the other world. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As soon as he was born, he howled
like a jackal. O Kurus! Listen to this. He will be the destroyer of the lineage. O lord! Do not listen to the views of
these wicked ones who are nothing but children. Do not become the cause for the terrible destruction of the lineage. Who will breach a dam[Alternatively, bridge.] that has been constructed? Who will rekindle a dying fire? O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! The sons of Pritha are now established in peace. Who would want to anger them? O Ajamidha[Dhritarashtra's name.]!
You remember, but I am reminding you again. Either in good or in evil deeds, the sacred texts cannot instruct those
who are evil in intelligence. O king! Nor will one with the intelligence of a child ever attain the wisdom of age.
You should yourself be the leader to your sons. Let them not be torn apart from you. Let peace, dharma, the counsel of others and natural intelligence be your principles in framing policy. Prosperity built through cruelty is destroyed. If it is gently nurtured, it grows old and passes to sons and grandsons." Having been thus addressed by
Gandhari, who had seen the way of dharma, the great king replied, "It is certain that if the destruction of our lineage has come, I will not be able to prevent it. Let it be as they wish. Let the Pandavas return. Let those who are
mine gamble again with the Pandavas."'


