Vaishampayana said, 'There, he saw the king, who had assumed a terrible form. His beard was long and it was
smeared with the blood of humans. However, the brahmana wasn't frightened. The immensely energetic king,
the cause of terror, looked like Yama's equal. He arose and said, "O supreme among brahmanas! It is good fortune
and beneficial that you  have come before me at the sixth hour,  when  I  am about to hunt for  food[Sixth hour is not to be interpreted in the sense of 'hour'. This is a division of the day and night into six segments, each of three hours' duration. Hence, sixth hour means evening, the end of the day and the beginning of
the night, when rakshasas set out to feed.]."  Utanka
replied, "O king! Know that I have wandered around and have come here for the sake of my preceptor. The learned
ones  have  said  that  a  person  who  is  engaged  in  his  preceptor's  task  must  not  be  injured."  The  king  said,  "O
supreme among brahmanas! The sixth hour has been ordained as a time for me to seek food. I am hungry now and
am incapable of letting you go." Utanka replied, "O great king! Fine, let you and me have an agreement. Having
accomplished my preceptor's task, I will again return and place myself under your control. O  supreme among
kings! O lord of men! I have heard that what I seek for my preceptor is owned by you. O Indra among kings! I beg
that from you. You give all kinds of jewels to the best of brahmanas. You are a giver. O tiger among men! On
earth, I am a fit person to receive. O supreme among kings! Know me to be a worthy recipient. O scorcher of enemies! I will take it from you and satisfy my preceptor by giving it to him. O Indra among kings! After that, following the agreement, I will return and place myself under your control. I only know the truth and have never resorted
to falsehood. Since I have never uttered a lie, why shall I violate that rule now, even in jest?" Soudasa said, "If the
object that you seek for your preceptor is something that I am fit to give and you are fit to receive, then tell me
what that object is." Utanka replied, "O bull among men! It is my view that you have always been a worthy person
from whom one can receive. That is the reason I am begging the earrings from you." Soudasa said, "O brahmana
rishi! Those earrings are loved by my wife. O one with excellent vows! Think of some other boon and I shall grant
that to you." Utanka replied, "O king! Enough of this attempt to instruct me. If you want to demonstrate that you
speak the truth, then give me those earrings." Thus addressed, the king again spoke these words to Utanka. "O excellent one! Listen to my words. Go to the queen and ask her to give them to you. O best among brahmanas! There
is no doubt that when you speak to the sweet-smiling one and tell her about my instructions, she will follow them
and give you those earrings." Utanka asked, "O lord of men! Where is your wife and how am I capable of meeting
her? Why don't you go to your wife and ask her yourself?" Soudasa said, "You will now find her near a waterfall
in the mountains. It is now the sixth hour and I am incapable of seeing her." O bull among the Bharata lineage!
Utanka agreed to this and departed.

'He saw Madayanti[Soudasa's wife.] and told her about his need. O Janamejaya! On hearing Soudasa's words, the large-eyed
one spoke to the immensely intelligent Utanka. "O brahmana! O unblemished one! It shall be that way. But I need
to ensure that you are not lying. You should bring me some sign[From Soudasa.]. These earrings are divine and the gods, the
yakshas and the giant serpents always desire to look for means to steal them. They watch out for opportunities. If
they are placed on the ground, the serpents will steal the jewels and so will the supreme rishis. If the wearer eats
leftovers, they will be taken away by the yakshas. If the wearer succumbs to sleep, they will be stolen by the gods.
O bull among brahmanas! Whenever there are weaknesses, they are always capable of being stolen. The gods, rakshasas and the serpents look for a moment of carelessness. O supreme among brahmanas! During day and night,
they produce gold. At night, they attract the radiance of the nakshatras and the stars. O illustrious one! The wearer
is freed from hunger, thirst and fear. There is also no fear from poison, fire and predatory beasts. If the wearer is
short, the earrings become short. If the wearer is tall, they also assume a similar kind of form. These are the characteristics of the earrings and they are worshipped. They are famous in the three worlds. Therefore, bring me some
sign."'


Vaishampayana said, 'Utanka returned to his friend[Meaning Soudasa.] and asked for a sign. The supreme one of the Ikshvaku lineage gave him a sign.

'"Soudasa said, My present status cannot be tolerated. But there is no other escape. That being the case, it is my
instruction that you should give the earrings away[These words of Soudasa, conveyed to Madayanti through Utanka, are meant to be the sign, since the secret of
the curse wouldn't be known to everyone, but would certainly be known to his wife. In addition, since no other
escape was possible, one might hope for some good merit to come from the act of giving the earrings to a
brahmana.]."'
Vaishampayana continued, 'Thus addressed, Utanka went and told her what her husband had said. Hearing this,
she gave him those earrings. Having obtained the earrings, he went to the king and said, "O king! I wish to hear the
secret that was implicit in your words."

'Soudasa replied, "Since the time subjects were created, kshatriyas have worshipped brahmanas. But we have
committed many sins towards brahmanas. I have always bowed down before brahmanas, but my present state is
also because of a sin committed towards a brahmana. Without Madayanti's aid, I do not perceive any other escape,
whether it is in terms of advancing towards the gate of heaven or in this world. O supreme among brahmanas! In
particular, a king who is against brahmanas is incapable of obtaining status in the world of men, or obtaining happiness after death. That is the reason I asked that the earrings you desired should be given to you. You should now
successfully complete the agreement that you made with me."

'Utanka said, "O king! I will truly act that way and again place myself under your control. O scorcher of enemies! But there is a question I wish to ask you. Please answer the question."

'Soudasa replied, "O brahmana! Tell me what you wish. I will reply to your words. I will instantly dispel whatever doubt you have. There is no need to think about this."

'Utanka said, "Those who are learned and accomplished in their insight about the dharma to be followed vis-à-
vis friends say that one who behaves unfairly towards friends is like a thief. O king! You have become my friend
today. O supreme among intelligent ones! Therefore, use your intelligence to give me proper advice. I have now
obtained what I wanted and you are a maneater. Should I now come back before you or not[Following the agreement and after delivering the earrings to Ahalya.]?"
'Soudasa answered, "O supreme among the best of brahmanas! You should not ask me to answer this. O foremost among brahmanas! You should never return before me. O extender of the Bhrigu lineage! I can see that this is
best for you. O brahmana! If you return, there is no doubt that you will die."'

Vaishampayana continued, 'He was thus addressed by the intelligent king about what was beneficial for him.
Having obtained the king's permission, he went to meet Ahalya. He grasped the divine earrings that were so desired by his preceptor's wife. With great speed, he left for Goutama's hermitage. He protected them in the way Madayanti had instructed. He carried the earrings after having bound them in black antelope skin. On one occasion, he
was overcome by hunger. Afflicted by hunger, he saw a bilva tree that was heavy with the burden of fruit. O
scorcher of enemies! The best among brahmanas hung the black antelope skin, with the earrings bound in them, to
a branch and climbed the tree, so as to gather fruit. But the bond was loosened and the black antelope skin fell
down on the ground. A certain serpent, born in the lineage of Airavata, saw the earrings and swiftly seized them in
its mouth. With the earrings, it then entered a termite hill. On seeing that the earrings had been stolen by the serpernt, he was overcome by sorrow and great rage and quickly descended from the tree. Grasping a wooden stick,
he began to dig up the termite hill. The bull among brahmanas was so overcome with rage that his limbs became
hot. The earth was incapable of tolerating this force. Its limbs were severely afflicted by the wooden stick and it
began to tremble. The brahmana rishi was still digging away on the surface of the ground. He had made up his
mind that he would find a way to the world of the serpents. The immensely energetic wielder of the vajra came to
the spot on a chariot that was yoked to tawny horses and saw the supreme among brahmanas. He assumed the form
of a brahmana who was also grieving at Utanka's sorrow and told him, "O son! This task of yours cannot be accomplished. The world of the serpents is thousands of yojanas away. I do not think your task can be undertaken
with a wooden stick."

'Utanka replied, "O brahmana! O supreme among brahmanas! If I cannot get back the earrings from the world
of the serpents, then, while you look on, I will cast aside my breath of life."'

Vaishampayana continued, 'The one with the vajra in his hand failed to dissuade him from the task he had set
his mind on. Thereafter, he infused the wooden stick with the vajra weapon. O Janamejaya! The earth was shattered at being struck by the vajra and a path was created to the world of the serpents. Through that path he entered
the world of the serpents and saw the world of the serpents, extending for thousands of yojanas. There were many
celestial walls, adorned with pearls and jewels. O immensely fortunate one! These were made out of molten gold.
There were tanks with crystal staircases leading down to them. There were rivers with sparkling water. He saw
many trees, populated by large numbers of birds. The extender of the Bhrigu lineage saw the gate to that world. It
was five yojanas high and one hundred yojanas wide. On seeing the world of the serpents, Utanka was distressed.
O son! He lost all hope of getting the earrings back again. But a horse arrived. It was dark, with a white tail. O
Kouravya! Its eyes were coppery in complexion and it blazed with energy. It said, "O brahmana! Blow into my
apana duct[Meaning, blow into my anus.]. You will then get back the earrings that were seized by Airavata's son. O son! Do not hesitate. For
your sake, this attempt will not be fruitless. When you were in Goutama's hermitage, this is what you used to do."

Utanka asked, "How did I know you in my preceptor's hermitage? I wish to hear how I earlier did what you have
asked me to do now."

'The horse replied, "O son! Know that I am the blazing Jataveda[The fire god. Chitrabhanu is also a name for the fire god.], your preceptor's preceptor. For the sake of
your preceptor, you always worshipped me. O brahmana! O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! You always purified
yourself and worshipped me. That is the reason I will ensure your welfare. Do it without any delay."'

Vaishampayana continued, 'Thus addressed by Chitrabhanu, Utanka did what he had been asked to. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The fire god was pleased with him. From the horse's pores, flames issued and blazed
in the directions. Thick smoke billowed and caused terror in the world of the serpents. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! O great king! That smoke suddenly increased and nothing could be seen in the world of the serpents. O
Janamejaya! There were cries of lamentation everywhere in Airavata's abode, among the serpents, with Vasuki as
the foremost. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Obstructed by the smoke, the residences could no longer be
seen. They looked like forests and mountains that were enveloped in mist. They[The serpents.] were tormented by the energy of
the fire. Because of the smoke, their eyes were red. They arrived before the infinitely energetic Bhargava to ascertain what had happened. They heard what had occurred from the greatly energetic maharshi and all of them honoured him in their minds, worshipping him with the appropriate rites. All the serpents, with the aged and the young
at the forefront, joined their hands in salutation. They bowed their heads down and asked the illustrious one to be
pacified. When the brahmana was pacified, they offered him water to wash his feet and a gift[Respectively padya and arghya.]. The serpents returned the greatly revered and divine earrings. The powerful Utanka was thus worshipped by the serpents. He circumambulated the fire and left for his preceptor's house. O king! He swiftly proceeded towards Goutama's residence. O unblemished one! He gave his preceptor's wife the divine earrings. O Janamejaya! In this way, the great-
souled one roamed around the three worlds, for the divine earrings that had been stolen. O bull among the Bharata
lineage! This was the power of the sage Utanka, about which you had asked me. He was supreme in austerities.'


Janamejaya asked, 'O supreme among brahmanas! After having granted the boon to Utanka, what did the immensely illustrious and mighty-armed Govinda do next?'

Vaishampayana replied, 'Having granted the boon to Utanka, Govinda left for Dvaraka on extremely swift and
large horses, accompanied by Satyaki. Having passed over lakes, rivers and many kinds of forests, he arrived at the
beautiful city of Dvaravati. O great king! When Pundarikaksha reached, followed by Yuyudhana, it was time for
the festival of Raivataka. The mountain was ornamented in many colourful ways[Raivataka was the name of the mountain in Dvaraka and the festival took place near the mountain.]. O bull among men! All the
roads were paved with gold. The summit of the great mountain was decorated with extremely pleasant and golden
garlands and so were the houses. There were kalpavrikshas everywhere[A kalpavriksha is a tree that grants every object of desire. These are found in heaven. Here, it simply means that
the trees were beautifully decorated.]. There were golden lamps on the trees
and it was a beautiful sight. Even the caves and the waterfalls shone, as if it was day. There were colourful flags,
decorated with bells, in every direction. There were the melodious notes of men and women singing. It was beautiful to see, like Meru inhabited by large numbers of sages. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The women and
the men were cheerful and intoxicated. They sang on that Indra among mountains and the sound seemed to touch
heaven. The place was full of these excited people, mad with delight and intoxicated. Extremely beautiful and
cheerful sounds could be heard. There were excellent shops and stalls, filled with food that could be tasted and
swallowed. There were garments and garlands. There was the sound of veenas, flutes and drums. Food that could
be tasted and swallowed was mixed with sura and maireya[Since the text mentions these two different types of liquor, we have retained the names.]. Gifts were incessantly offered to the distressed, the
blind and the miserable. Because of these supremely beneficial acts, the giant mountain seemed to be greater still.
O brave one! Many auspicious abodes had been erected there and the virtuous ones resided there. Thus did the
brave ones from the Vrishni lineage enjoy the festival of Raivataka. Surrounded by all these residences, the mountain looked like the world of the gods. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On Krishna's arrival, that king of mountains looked like Shakra's residence. Honoured, Govinda entered an auspicious residence and Satyaki also went to
his own home. Cheerful, he[Krishna.] entered after a long period of residence away from home. Like Vasava among the
danavas, he had performed many extremely difficult deeds. The Bhojas, Vrishnis and Andhakas came forward to
meet the great-souled Varshneya, like the gods meeting Shatakratu. The intelligent one honoured them and asked
about their welfare. Delighted, he greeted his father and his mother. The mighty-armed one was embraced and
comforted by them. Surrounded by all the Vrishnis, he then sat down. When the greatly energetic one had washed
his feet and had rested, Krishna was asked by his father and told him about the great battle.'


