Janamejaya said, 'O, lord! Recount to me the names of Dhritarashtra's sons, beginning with the eldest, in the order
of their birth.'

Vaishampayana said, 'Duryodhana, Yuyutsu, Duhshasana, Duhsaha, Duhshala, Jalasandha, Sama, Saha, Vinda,
Anuvinda, Durdharsha, Subahu, Dushpradharshana, Durmarshana, Durmukha, Dushkarma, Karna, Vivimshati,
Vikarna, Sulochana, Chitra, Upachitra, Chitraksha, Charuchitra, Sharasana, Durmada, Dushpragaha, Vivitsu, Vika-
ta, Urnanabha, Sunabha, Nanda, Upanandaka, Senapati, Sushena, Kundodara, Mahodara, Chitrabana, Chitravarma,
Suvarma, Durvimochana, Ayobahu, Mahabahu, Chitranga, Chitrakundala, Bhimavega, Bhimabala, Balaki, Balavardhana, Ugrayudha, Bhimakarma, Kanakayu, Dridhayudha, Dridhavarma, Dridhakshatra, Somakirti, Anudara,
Dridhasandha, Jarasandha, Satyasandha, Sadahsuvak, Ugrashrava, Ashvasena, Senani, Dushparajaya, Aparajita,
Panditaka, Vishalaksha, Duravara, Dridhahasta, Suhasta, Vatavega, Suvarcha, Adityaketu, Bahvashi, Nagadanta,
Ugrayayi, Kavachi, Nishangi, Pashi, Dandadhara, Dhanurgraha, Ugra, Bhimaratha, Vira, Virabahu, Alolupa, Abhaya, Roudrakarma, Dridharatha, Anadhrishya, Kundabhedi, Viravi, Dirghalochana, Dirghabahu, Mahabahu,
Vyudhoru, Kanakadhvaja, Kundashi and Viraja. O king! Over and above the hundred, Duhshala was the daughter. I
have recounted the names of the one hundred, in accordance with the order of their birth.

'O king! Know that they were all brave and unrivalled charioteers. They were all skilled in battle, all knowledgeable in the Vedas and wise in the ways of ruling. They were skilled in the science of relationships and were
radiant in knowledge. O lord of the earth! When the time was right, Dhritarashtra considered the matter carefully
and married them to wives who were their equals. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! With the permission of
Subala's daughter, the king married Duhshala to Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu.'


Janamejaya said, 'O you who are knowledgeable about the nature of the brahman! You have recounted to me the
excellent and superhuman story of the human origins of the sons of Dhritarashtra. O Brahmana! In accordance
with birth, you have also told me their names. Now I wish to hear about the Pandavas. They were great-souled and
the equal of the king of the gods in valour. You have earlier told me that they were the partial incarnations of the
gods themselves[This is a reference to Section 6, Adi-vamshavatarana Parva.].O Vaishampayana! I now wish to hear about their origins and their superhuman deeds. Please
tell me all.'

Vaishampayana said, 'One day, in the great forest frequented by deer and predatory beasts, King Pandu saw a
stag that was the leader of its herd mating with a doe. With five swift and sharp arrows that were decorated with
golden feathers in their shafts, Pandu shot both the stag and the doe. O king! The stag was actually the immensely
energetic son of a rishi, blessed with the power of austerities. The energetic one was uniting with his wife in the
form of a deer. While still united with the doe, he fell down on the ground instantly and as he began to lose his
senses, lamented in a human voice.

'The deer said, "Even evil men who are enslaved by lust and anger, are therefore deprived of reason and are always sinful, stay away from such cruel deeds. A man's judgement does not swallow destiny. Destiny swallows
judgement. The wise never sanction anything that is forbidden by destiny. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
You were born in a dynasty that was always devoted to dharma. Overcome by lust and avarice, how have you lost
all your reason?" Pandu replied, "O deer! In dealing with deer, kings behave no differently from enemies; they kill
them. Therefore, you should not blame me in your delusion. Deer can be killed openly and through trickery. That
is the dharma of kings. Since you know that, why are you blaming me? When seated at a sacrifice, the rishi
Agastya went on a hunt. He offered each deer in that great forest to all the gods. This is the sanction of dharma.
Then why are you reproving me? According to Agastya's actions, the likes of you are offerings at sacrifices." The
deer said, "Earlier, they never unleashed arrows without considering preparedness[Meaning that the enemy was unprepared.]. There is a time for this and
killing at such times is praised." Pandu replied, "It is known that killing occurs, whether prepared or unprepared,
through different means-strength and sharp arrows. O deer! Why are you blaming me?"

'The deer said, "O king! I do not blame you because you have killed a deer or because you have caused me injury. But instead of performing such a cruel act, you should have waited until my act of intercourse was complete.
This is a time that is for the welfare of all beings and desired by all beings. Which learned one will kill a deer engaged in intercourse in the forest? You have rendered futile my attempt to obtain offspring. O Kourava! O Pourava! This lineage has had rishis and is famous for its righteous acts. This act was unworthy of you. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! This greatly cruel act is condemned in all the worlds. It destroys attainment of heaven and
fame and is against dharma. You are acquainted about pleasures from uniting with women. You also know the sacred texts and norms of dharma. You are the equal of a god. You should not have committed such an act, which is
unworthy of reaching heaven. O best of kings! Your duty is to punish men who act cruelly, are engaged in evil acts
and have abandoned the three[Dharma, artha and kama.] goals. O best of men! O king! What have I done that you killed me? I am a sage
in the form of a deer and live on roots and fruit. I always live peacefully in the forest. Since you have caused injury
to me, you will certainly be injured. Since you have been cruel to a helpless couple, when you are overcome
through the pangs of desire, death will overtake you. I am a sage named Kimdama, unparalleled in austerities.
Ashamed of men, I was engaged in intercourse with this deer. Assuming the form of a deer, I roamed with other
deer in this dense forest. The sin of killing a Brahmana will not vest on you, since you did that unknowingly. O
foolish one! But since you killed me in the form of a deer when I was overcome by desire, you will meet with the
same fate that has befallen me. Overcome by desire, when you unite with your loved one, at that very instant, you
will depart for the land of the dead. The woman with whom you unite in your last moments will also go to the land
of the king of the dead, inescapable for all beings. Out of devotion towards you, that best of intelligent ones will
follow you. You have now brought me into grief when I was in the midst of pleasure. Like that, you will be afflicted with misery when you have just found happiness." Having said this, in great pain, the deer gave up its life. In an
instant, Pandu was also immersed in grief.'


Vaishampayana said, 'After the deer's death, the king and his wives lamented grievously, as if they had lost a
relative.

'Pandu said, "Even if born in righteous families, deluded by the net of desire, men confront calamity because of
their deeds and when their intelligence is destroyed. I have heard that my own father was born from a man always
devoted to dharma. But he died when he was still young, because he lived a life addicted to desire. Through the
illustrious rishi Krishna Dvaipayana, self-controlled in speech, I was born in the field of that lustful king. Despite
that, I have become evil-hearted and my lowly mind is spent on the evil chase of deer, deserted by the gods. I am
tied down by a great vice and I will now seek salvation. Following the undecaying example set by my father, I will
now follow a meritorious way of life. I will certainly tie myself to a life of extreme austerities. I will live alone,
spending each day under a single tree[That is, a different tree for every night.]. I will shave off my head and become a hermit who begs for his food as
he roams the earth. I will cover myself with dust and be without a home and without refuge. The foot of a tree will
be my home. I will renounce everything that is loved or hated. I will neither grieve nor rejoice, and praise and
blame will be the same to me. I will not seek homage or greetings. I will be at peace and without possessions. I
will not mock anyone, nor will I furrow my brow at anyone. With a smiling face, I will always devote myself to
the welfare of all creatures. I will never transgress the four orders, movable and immovable, and will treat them all
equally, like my own children. Once every day, I will beg my food from two or five families and sustain myself. If
it is impossible to obtain food in this way, I will fast. I will eat only a little and will never be greedy. I will never
beg for more and never include more than seven[Not beg from more than seven families.]. I will think of the cutting off of one arm with an axe and the
covering of the other with sandalwood the same way. I will not think of one as good and the other as evil, since
both are equal. I will not act so as to live, nor act so as to die. Life and death are the same and I will not welcome
one and hate the other. I will give up all the rituals for prosperity that those who are alive indulge in and times for
their observance. I will always give up everything that makes the senses work. I will cleanse myself of all sin and
even give up that done in the name of dharma. I will be free from all sin and all traps. I will not be under anyone's
powers, but will follow the dharma of being as free as the wind. I will always sustain myself in this way and no
other. I will make my body walk the path of fearlessness and not deviate. I will not follow the miserable path of
dogs, followed by those without virility. I will follow my own righteous dharma and tread the lovely path of not
using one's virility. He who is honoured and dishonoured and lusts for another life with hungry eyes, becomes full
of desire and treads the path of dogs." When he had uttered these words, the king sorrowfully sighed.

'He looked at Kunti and Madri and said, "Tell Kousalya, kshatta[A name for Vidura, a man born from a Kshatriya woman and a Shudra man.] Vidura, the king and all his relatives, the
lady Satyavati, Bhishma, the royal priests, great-souled soma-drinking and rigid-vowed Brahmanas and old citizens who live here under my protection that Pandu will leave for the forest." Hearing these words of their husband,
who had made up his mind on leaving for the forest, both Kunti and Madri addressed him in these words. "O bull
of the Bharata lineage! We are your wives under dharma. There are other stages of life[The four ashramas-brahmacharya, garhasthya, vanaprastha and sannyasa.] that you can observe
with us and still perform great austerities. There is no doubt that even then, you will attain heaven. We will also
control our senses, devote ourselves to our husband's world, give up all happiness and desire and perform great
austerities. O lord of the earth! O immensely wise one! If you forsake us, there is no doubt that we will give up our
lives today." Pandu replied, "If this decision of yours is in conformity with dharma, I will follow the undecaying
path shown by my father with both of you. I will give up the pleasant life of villages and perform great austerities.
I will eat roots and fruit, wear the bark of trees and roam in the great forest. I will bathe in the morning and
evening and make offerings to the fire. I will make my body thin by eating less. I will wear skins and my hair will
be matted. I will expose myself to hot and cold winds, hunger, thirst and exhaustion. Through difficult austerities, I
will reduce my body. I will seek solitude and live on fruits, be they ripe or unripe. I will worship the ancestors and
the gods with food found in the forest, water and words. The sight of a man living for vanaprastha has never affected superior residents. How can it affect those who are inferior[There is a problem of translation here. What has been translated as superior residents should literally be
translated as residents of families. And inferior residents should literally be translated as residents of villages. This
doesn't quite seem right. Hence village is probably being used in an inferior and normative sense.]? Until my body perishes, I will perform the
severest penances laid down in the sacred texts for those who live in forests." Having said this to his wives, the
king, a descendant of the Kuru lineage, gave the jewel from his crown, necklace, earrings, bracelets and valuable
garments and ornaments belonging to his wives to the Brahmanas.

'Pandu then again said, "Go to Nagapura[Hastinapura.] and say that Pandu has left for the forest. He has given up riches,
desire, happiness and the supreme joy of sex. The descendant of the Kuru lineage has left with his wives." Hearing
these words of the lion of the Bharata lineage, the servants and attendants sorrowed and lamented. They bewailed
in loud and pitiable voices. They shed hot tears and took their leave of the lord of the earth. Then they left for
Hastinapura with his message. On hearing the details of all that had happened in the great forest, Dhritarashtra,
best among kings, mourned for Pandu.

'Living on roots and fruit, the Kourava prince Pandu went with his wives to the mountain named Nagasabha. He
went to Chaitraratha and crossed the Varishena. Then he crossed the Himalayas and went to Gandhamadana. Protected by the great beings[Alternatively, the primary elements.], the siddhas and the supreme rishis, the king lived for some time on the mountains
and for some time on the plains. He then went to the lake Indradyumna and crossed Hansakuta. Then the ascetic
king arrived at Shatashringa[Mountain with a hundred peaks.].'

