Yudhishthira said, "O grandfather! Tell me the truth about the different names of the lord Isha Shambhu, the
tawny one who represents great fortune, the one who withdraws the universe."

'Bhishma replied, "O Yudhishthira! You have asked me about Shiva, whose form is the universe. The god Vishnu, the preceptor of the gods and the asuras, can tell you about him. In ancient times, Tandi[A rishi.] was born from Brahma. In Brahma's world, in front of Brahma, he recited one thousand names of that god. Dvaipayana and other
rishis, controlled, rich in austerities and extremely good in their vows, heard these devotedly. He is Dhruva[The fixed and immovable one.], Nandi[Shiva's name, meaning the cheerful one.], Hotri[The one who sacrifices.], Goptri[The guardian or protector.], the creator of the universe, Agni, the immensely fortunate one, the lord, Mundin[The one with the shaved head.] and Kapardin[The one with the matted hair.].

'"Vasudeva said, 'The gods, Indra and the maharshis, with Hiranyagarbha at the forefront, are incapable of understanding the truth about the progress of his deeds. Even those who possess the subtle sight of knowledge do not
know the one who is the beginning and the end. How can an ordinary man comprehend the virtuous one? I will
properly recount to you some of the qualities of the illustrious one who is the slayer of asuras and is the lord of
vows.'"'

Vaishampayana continued, 'Saying this, the illustrious, great-souled and intelligent one[Vasudeva.]  purified himself by
touching water and recounted the qualities.

'Vasudeva said, "O Indras among brahmanas! O Yudhishthira! O father[The word used is tata, which means father, but is used for anyone who is older or senior. Yudhishthira was older
to Krishna.]! O son of the river[Meaning Bhishma.]! Listen to the
names of the lord of the universe. For the sake of Samba, I meditated earlier and could see the illustrious one,
something that is very difficult to accomplish[Samba was the son of Krishna and Jambavati. Krishna obtained Samba as a son, after praying to Shiva in the hermitage of the sage Upamanyu.]. Twelve years passed after Rukmini's intelligent son killed Sham-
bara[Pradyumna was the son of Krishna and Rukmini. Pradyumna killed the demon Shambara.]. Jambavati spoke to me. She saw Pradyumna, Charudeshna and the other sons who had been born from
Rukmini. O Yudhishthira! Desiring a son, she spoke these words to me. 'O one without decay! Quickly grant me a
brave son who is the best among strong ones and is beautiful and without sin, one who is like you. There is nothing
in  the  three  worlds  that  you  cannot  obtain.  O  extender  of  the  Yadu  lineage!  If  you  so  desire,  you  can  create
supreme worlds. For twelve years, you dried yourself by subsisting only on air. You worshipped the lord of creatures[Shiva.]  and  obtained  sons  through  Rukmini-Charudeshna,  Sucharu,  Charuvesha,  Yasodhara,  Charushrava,
Charuyasha, Pradyumna and Shambhu. Through Rukmini, you obtained sons who are excellent in their valour. In
that way, also grant me a son who is powerful.' Thus addressed by that goddess, I spoke to the one with the excellent waist. 'O queen! Grant me leave. I will act in accordance with your words.' She told me, 'Go. May you be victorious and obtain what is auspicious. May Brahma, Shiva, Kashyapa, the rivers, the gods who follow the mind,
the fields, the herbs, the hymns that convey sacrificial offerings, the large numbers of rishis, the earth, the oceans,
the dakshinas, the chants, the bears, the ancestors, the planets, the wives of the gods, the daughters of the gods, the
mothers of the gods, the manvantaras, the cattle, the moon, the son, Hari, Savitri, the knowledge of the brahman,
the seasons, the years, the kshapas[Kshapa means night and also means a day of twenty-four hours. Kshana is a measurement of time, with differing
interpretations. A second or an instant is accurate enough. Lava is a small fraction of a second. Muhurta is forty-
eight minutes. Nimesha is the twinkling of an eye, a minute.], the kshanas, the lavas, the muhurtas, the nimeshas and the progress of the yu-
gas always protect you. O Yadava! Wherever you go, may they bring you cheer. O unblemished one! May you be
safe and undistracted along your path.' When she had pronounced her benedictions in this way, I took my leave of
that daughter of the Indra of the apes[Jambavati was the daughter of Jambavan or Jambavat. Jambavat is sometimes described as a king of the bears
and sometimes as a king of the apes.]. I then went to my father, supreme among men, my mother, the king and
Ahuka[The king means Ugrasena and Ahuka was Ugrasena's father.]. I told them the purport of what the daughter of the Indra among the vidyadharas had told me, in great affliction[A vidyadhara is a supernatural being. Here, the expression is being used for Jambavati.]. Miserably, I took their leave and then went to Gada and the immensely strong Rama[Rama means Balarama. Gada was Krishna's brother.]. Having taken the
permission of the seniors, I thought of Tarkshya[Garuda.]. He bore me to the Himalayas and I let him go. It was on that
supreme of mountains that I saw the one who is the creator of beings. I saw an excellent hermitage, the best place
for performing austerities. This divine spot belonged to the great-souled Upamanyu, the descendant of Vyaghrapada.  It  was  revered  by  the  gods  and  the  gandharvas  and  possessed  all  the  signs  of  the  brahman.  There  were
dhavas[The axlewood tree.],  kakubhas[The Arjuna tree.],  kadambas[Kind of tree, Nauclea cadamba.],  coconut  trees,  kurabakas[Red amaranth.],  ketakas[The crew pine.],  jambus[Rose apple.],  patalas[Bignonia suaveolens.],  vatas[Banyan, Indian fig tree.],
varunakas[Garlic pear tree.],  vatsanabhas[Kind of tree.],  bilvas[Wood-apple tree.],  saralas[Kind of pine.],  kapitthas[Wood-apple tree.],  priyalas[The Chironji tree.],  salas[Kind of tree.],  talas[Palm tree.],  badaris,  kundas[Jasmine.],
punnagas[This can mean either nutmeg or a white lotus. Here, white lotus fits better.], ashokas[Kind of tree, Saraca indica.], mango trees, atimuktakas[The Harimantha tree.], bhallatakas[Cashew nut tree.], madhukas[The honey tree, Madhuca longifolia.],  champakas[Magnolia champaca.],  panasas[Jackfruit.]  and
many other kinds of wild trees that were full of fruits and flowers. The place was covered with flowers, creepers
and lantanas and was adorned with the roots of plantain trees. The trees were full of fruit and many kinds of birds
fed on them. These[The fruits.] were flung around here and there, decorating the forest and making it beautiful. The place
was inhabited by ruru antelopes, elephants, tigers, lions and leopards. There were deer and peacocks, wild cats and
snakes. There were herds of animals and buffaloes and bears. Pleasant winds blew, bearing pollen from many flowers and the scent of gajapushpa flowers. Many songs were sung be celestial women. O brave one! There were
sounds from streams, the singing of birds, the auspicious trumpeting of elephants, the songs sung by kinnaras and
the sacred chants of Sama hymns. The mind cannot think of those ornamented lakes. There were large altars for
the sacrificial fire, covered in kusha grass. O king! That place was always decorated and swept by the pure and
auspicious waters of Jahnu's daughter[That is, Ganga.]. The best among maharshis, great-souled ones who were the upholders of
dharma, were always there and they were like the fire. Some of them only subsisted on air and others only subsisted  on  water.  Those  ascetics  were  always  engaged  in  meditating  and  cleansing  themselves.  Some  subsisted  on
smoke, others on fire and still others on milk. In every direction, it was full of Indras among the brahmanas. There
were some who followed the conduct of cattle[They ate what they found and did not store food.]. Some used stones to grind grain[Known as ashmakuttas.]. Some used their teeth to
grind[Known as dantolukhalinas.]. Some fed on rays[Of the sun and the moon.]. Some fed on foam. There were others who conducted themselves like deer[Like the cattle.]. They
followed great hardships and rituals and observed excellent austerities. My eyes grew wide and I wished to enter
that place. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O king! That circle of hermitages was as radiant as the solar disc
in the firmament. It was revered by the large number of gods and all great-souled ones, even the likes of Shiva.
Snakes and mongooses played there. Deer and tiger were like friends. This was because of the power of those ascetics, who possessed all the qualities. That best of hermitages was pleasant to all creatures. It was inhabited by
tigers among brahmanas, accomplished in the Vedas and the Vedangas. There were great-souled rishis, renowned
because they practised many rituals. Entering there, I saw the lord[Upamanyu.], who was attired in tattered rags and bark.
Because of the energy of his austerities, he blazed like a fire. That bull among brahmanas was tranquil and young
and was in the midst of his disciples.

'"When I bowed my head down and greeted him, Upamanyu said, 'O Pundarikaksha! Welcome. Our austerities
have now become successful. You should be honoured, but you are honouring me. You should be seen, but you
wish to see me.' I joined my hands in salutation and asked him about his welfare and dharma, that of his disciples
and that of the animals, the birds and the sacrificial fire. The illustrious one addressed me in amiable and extremely
sweet words. 'O Krishna! There is no doubt that you will obtain a son who is just like your own self. Perform extremely great austerities and satisfy the lord Ishana. O Adhokshaja! With his wife, he sports here. O Janardana! In
ancient times, it was here that the gods and the large numbers of rishis satisfied that best of gods with thier austerities, brahmacharya, truth and self-control and obtained their sacred wishes. The illustrious one is the store of energy and austerities here. He creates everything that is good and bad and withdraws them back again. O destroyer of
enemies! He is the unthinkable god you wish to meet. He is here, with the goddess. A great danava named Hiranyakashipu was born. He could make Mount Meru tremble. From Sharva[Shiva.], he obtained a boon that he would
obtain the prosperity of the immortals for one billion years. His eldest son was the famous Mandara. Because of a
boon from Mahadeva, he could fight with Shakra for one billion years. O son[The word used is tata.]! O Keshava! In  those ancient
times, Vishnu's terrible chakra and Akhandala's[Indra's.] vajra were shattered on the evil one's body. Like an evil planet,
that extremely powerful one afflicted the gods. O king! Because of the boon obtained from Shiva, that asura was a
severe burden on Indra of the gods. Vidyutprabha[Another demon.] satisfied him and intoxicated at this, roamed around the three
worlds. He was the lord of all the worlds for one hundred thousand years. He[Shiva.] said, "Always be my companion."

The lord gave him the boon that he would have one million sons. The illustrious one, who has no birth, gave him
the kingdom known as Kushadvipa. Dhatri[Brahma.] created another great asura named Shatamukha. For one hundred
years, he offered flesh from his own body as oblations into the fire. Satisfied with this, the illustrious Shankara
asked him, "What can I do for you?" Shatamukha replied, "O best among the gods! Please grant me extraordinary
yoga, so that I can possess eternal strength." He[Shiva.] agreed. In ancient times, for the sake of sons, Svayambhu[Brahma.]
performed a sacrifice. He entered his atman for three hundred years and resorted to yoga. Honoured by this sacrifice, the god[Shiva.] gave him one thousand sons. O Krishna! Know that there is no doubt about him being the lord of
yoga, referred to in the songs of the gods. In ancient times, the Valakhilyas were disrespected by Maghavan[Indra.].
They were enraged and satisfied the illustrious Rudra through their austerities. The best of the gods and the lord of
the universe was pleased and told them, "Through your austerities, you will create Suparna and he will steal the
soma[As an act of revenge, the Valakhilyas created Garuda/Suparna, who stole the soma from Indra.]." In ancient times, the waters were destroyed because of Mahadeva's wrath. The other gods satisfied him
with the sacrifice known as saptakapala[Sacrifice performed in seven vessels.] and made them flow again. Atri's wife was knowledgable about the
brahman and abandoned her husband[Atri's wife was Anasuya. She left Atri because he was too dominating.]. She said, "I will never again subjugate myself to this sage." Having said
this, she sought refuge with Mahadeva. Terrified of Atri, she fasted for three hundred years, lying down on a bed of
clubs and trying to please Bhava[Shiva.]. The god appeared before her, smiled and said, "You will obtain a son, as you
desire. He will be famous in a lineage that is named after him[This son was Dattatreya.]." O Keshava! Shakalya[Famous sage. The major recension of the Rig Veda that still survives is the Shakalya version.] restrained his soul for
nine hundred years and worshipped Bhava through mental sacrifices. The illustrious one was satisfied and told
him, "You will be the composer of books. O son! Your deeds will be famous in the three worlds and will never decay. Your lineage will not decay and will be adorned by many maharshis." In krita yuga, there was a famous rishi
by the name of Savarni[This is probably a reference to the Manu of the eighth manvantara.]. For six thousand years, he tormented himself through austerities here. The illustrious
Rudra was pleased. He showed himself to him and said, "O unblemished one! I am satisfied with you. You will be
without old age and without death. You will be a composer of books and will be famous in the worlds." O son[The word used is tata.]!
O Madhava! In ancient times, I have also seen the lord, the god of the gods. I saw Pashupati himself. Listen to this.
O immensely energetic one! In ancient times, I made endeavours to worship Mahadeva. Listen to the details. Earlier, I learnt this from Mahadeva, the god of the gods, himself. O unblemished one! I will tell you everything about
that  now.  O  son!  In  ancient  times,  in  krita  yuga,  there  was  an  immensely  illustrious  rishi.  He  was  known  as
Vyaghrapada and he was accomplished in the Vedas and the Vedangas. I was his son and Dhoumya was born as my
younger brother. O Madhava! On one occasion, while playing with Dhoumya, I went to a hermitage where there
were sages who had cleansed their souls. I saw a cow being milked there. I saw the milk and it seemed to me to be
as tasty as amrita. O Madhava! There were also cakes being boiled in water. We were given milk to drink. O son! I
had never tasted the milk of cows earlier. O son! I was no longer happy with cakes boiled in water. In my childishness, I told my mother, "Please give me some food cooked in milk." My mother was overcome with grief. O Madhava! Out of affection for her son, she embraced me and inhaled the fragrance of my head. She said, "O son! How
can sages who have cleansed their souls have food with milk? We always reside in forests and eat bulbs, roots and
fruits. O son! Without the favours of the undecaying Sthanu Virupaksha, how can one obtain food cooked with
milk, objects of pleasure or garments? O son! In every possible way, always seek refuge with Shankara. O son! It
is through his favours that you will obtain all the fruits that you desire." O slayer of enemies! Since that day, on
hearing my mother's words, my faith and devotion in Mahadeva were aroused. I resorted to austerities to satisfy
Shankara. I stood on the tips of my toes for one thousand celestial years. For one hundred years, I subsisted only
on fruit. For a second one hundred, I subsisted on dried leaves. For a third one hundred, I subsisted on water. Then,
for seven hundred years, I only lived on air. The lord Mahadeva, the lord of all the worlds, was pleased. He assumed Shakra's form and was surrounded by large numbers of all the gods. The immensely illustrious one was in
the form of the thousand-eyed one and held the vajra in his hand. He was astride a gigantic elephant that was extremely white and red-eyed. Its ears were folded back and it was crazy with musth. The trunk was rolled back. It
was terrible and had four tusks. The illustrious one was seated astride this, radiant in his own energy. He advanced,
with a diadem on his head and adorned with necklaces and bracelets. A white umbrella was held aloft his head. He
was served by apsaras and celestial gandharvas sung his praises. He said, "O supreme among brahmanas! I am Indra of the gods and I am pleased with you. Ask a boon from me, whatever it is that your mind cherishes." I wasn't
pleased on hearing Shakra's words. O Krishna! Hearing the words of the king of the gods, I replied, "O amiable
one! I desire no boon from you nor from any of the other gods, with the exception of Mahadeva. I am telling you
this truthfully. On Pashupati's words, I am ready to become a worm, or a tree with many branches. Without Pashupati's favours, the prosperous kingdom of the three worlds will not bring me any benefit. On Shankara's instructions, I will become a worm or an insect. O Shakra! However, if they are granted by you, I do not desire the three
worlds. He wears the sparkling crescent of the moon on his crest. As long as the illustrious lord, Pashupati, is not
pleased with me, I will bear these hundreds of hardships of old age, death and birth. I will bear these miseries in
bodies. He blazes like the sun, the moon and the fire. He is the single one who conveys across the impermanence
of the three worlds. It is through Rudra's favours that one overcomes old age and becomes immortal. In this universe, where is the man who can obtain tranquility without him?" Shakra asked, "What is the reason why you regard him as the cause behind all causes? Why don't you desire the favours of any god other than him?"'

'"Upamanyu answered, 'Why does one have to think of reasons as to why Isha is the cause behind all causes?
We have not heard of the gods worshipping anyone else's signs. If we leave aside Maheshvara, who is the other
one whom the gods worship in all his signs? Has any such person been worshipped earlier? If you have heard this,
tell me. You, Brahma, Vishnu and the other gods always worship his signs. Therefore, he is the supreme one. O
Koushika[Koushika is one of Indra's names.]! Therefore, I desire a boon from him and am ready to be destroyed otherwise. O Shakra! O slayer of
Bala! Stay or go, as you wish. I desire to have a boon, or a curse, from none other than Maheshvara. I do not desire
it from any other god, even if it brings all the fruits of desire.'

'"Upamanyu continued[Upamanyu has just finished speaking to Indra. Now he continues speaking to Krishna.], 'Once I had said this to Indra of the gods, my senses were overcome with grief. Why
has Rudra not been pleased with me? That is what I thought. In a short instant, I again saw Airavata[Indra's elephant.]. It transformed itself into a bull that was as white as a swan or jasmine, as radiant as the stalk of a white lily and like the
ocean of milk itself. It was huge in size and its tail was black. Its eyes were reddish brown, like honey. Throughout, the horns were ornamented with molten gold. Its eyes were red and it had large nostrils. Its ears and waist
were excellent. Its flanks were excellent and it possessed a huge neck. It was handsome and beautiful to behold.
The dazzling hump covered the entire shoulder. It was like the snowclad summit of a mountain, or the crest of a
white cloud. With Uma, the illustrious god of the gods was seated on it. Mahadeva was as resplendent as the lord
of the stars[The moon.] on a full-moon night. The flames of his energy were like lightning tinging the clouds. It was as if one
thousand suns had enveloped everything. The immensely energetic Ishvara was like the fire of destruction that
arises at the end of a yuga and consumes all creatures. Since that energy pervaded everything, it was difficult to see
anything. My heart again became anxious. I thought "what is this?" In a short while, that energy pervaded the ten
directions. However, through the maya of the god of the gods, it also became pacified in an instant. I then saw the
illustrious Sthanu Maheshvara stationed there. He was astride Surabhi's descendant[Surabhi is the mother of all cattle and is also the divine cow.] and was as peaceful as a fire
without smoke. Parvati, beautiful in every limb, was with Parameshvara. The great-souled Nilakantha is the store
of the energy of detachment. Sthanu possessed eighteen arms, adorned with all the ornaments. The god was attired
in white garments. He had white garlands and unguents. The unassailable standard was white. His sacred thread
was also white. His divine companions were like him in valour. They surrounded him, singing, dancing and playing on musical instruments. A white crescent moon was his diadem, arising like the moon in the autumn. The three
eyes blazed and looked like three suns that had arisen. The god dazzled, wearing a garland that was white in complexion. It was made out of molten gold and strung with lotuses and decorated with gems. O Govinda! On the infinitely energetic Bhava's person, I also saw the embodied forms of weapons, all of them radiating energy. The
great-souled one's bow possessed a thousand colours, like that of the rainbow. This is famous as Pinaka, but is actually a giant serpent. It is giant in form and has seven heads. Its fangs are sharp and its poison is virulent. With a
giant neck, it was stationed in a man's embodied form, with the bowstring wound around it. The arrow was like the
sun and was as resplendent as the fire of destruction. This was the great and extremely terrible divine weapon, the
Pashupata. It  was  unmatched,  impossible  to  describe  and  fearful  to  all  creatures.  It  was  gigantic  in  size,  with
sparks, and seemed to spout out fire. It possessed a single foot and giant teeth[The embodied form of the weapon.]. It had one thousand heads and
one thousand stomachs. There were one thousand arms and one thousand eyes, and these seemed to spout out fire.
O mighty-armed one! It is superior to Brahma, Narayana, Aindra, Agneya and Varuna weapons and is capable of
countering all weapons. O Govinda! In ancient times, Mahadeva sported around and with this single arrow, in an
instant, consumed and reduced Tripura to ashes. There is no doubt that if it is released from Maheshvara's arms, in
an instant, it can consume the entire universe and the three worlds, with their mobile and immobile objects. There
is nothing in the worlds that cannot be slain with it, even Brahma, Vishnu and the gods. O son! I saw that extraordinary, wonderful and supreme weapon there. There was another mysterious and supreme weapon, equal or
superior[To Pashupata.]. This is famous in all the worlds as the spear of the one who wields the trident. It is capable of shattering the entire earth and drying up the giant ocean. When it is released from the hand of the one who wields the trident, it can destroy the entire universe. Yuvanashva's son, Mandhata, was an immensely energetic king who became an emperor by conquering the three worlds. In ancient times, Mandhata and all his soldiers were struck down
by this[Mandhata and his soldiers were defeated by a demon named Lavanasura. Lavanasura had inherited Shiva's trident from his father, Madhu, and he used this against Mandhata.]. O Govinda! He was immensely strong and immensely valorous and was like Shakra in his prowess.
However, the rakshasa Lavana released it from his hand and struck him down. That trident is sharp at the points. It
is extremely terrible and makes the body hair stand up. It seems to be stationed, ready to strike, as if its forehead is
creased into three furrows. It is dark and is like a fire without smoke, like sun when it arises at the time of destruction. That trident is impossible to describe. Its handle is a snake. It is like the Destroyer with his noose. O Govinda!
Near Rudra, I saw that weapon. In ancient times, Mahadeva was gratified and gave Rama[Parashurama.] a battleaxe that was
sharp at the edges. This was used to destroy the kshatriyas. It was also used to slay Emperor Kartavirya in a great
battle. Using this, there were twenty-one occasions when kshatriyas were exterminated from the earth. O Govinda!
Jamadagni's son, Rama of the unblemished deeds, accomplished this. It flamed at the edges and was extremely terrible. This was also near the wielder of the trident, who had a snake strung around his neck. It looked like the blazing flames of a fire. The intelligent one also possessed numerous other divine weapons. O unblemished one! I have
only recounted the main ones. Brahma, the grandfather of the worlds, was stationed on the god's left flank. He was
astride a celestial vimana, yoked to swans that possessed the speed of thought. Narayana was also stationed on the
left flank. He held a conch shell, chakra and club and was astride Vinata's descendant[That is, Garuda.]. Astride a peacock, Skanda was near the goddess. Grasping a spear and a bell, he looked like a second fire[Among other things, Skanda holds a spear and a bell (ghanta). The Critical edition's text says kantha (throat),
which makes no sense and we have therefore corrected what seems to be a clear typo.]. Nandi could be seen, stationed in front of the god. Stationed with a spear in his hand, he looked like a second Shankara. The rishis, with
Bhrigu at the forefront, born from Svayambhu's mental powers, were there and so were all the gods, with Shakra
at the forefront. In every direction, they surrounded the great-souled one and worshipped him. The gods praised
Mahadeva with many kinds of hymns. Brahma praised Bhava by uttering the rathantara. Narayana praised the lord
of the gods with the jyeshtha Sama hymn. Shakra praised him with the excellent shatarudriya, which is about the
supreme brahman[Rathantara and jyeshtha are Sama hymns. Literally, shatarudriya means one hundred Rudras and is a mantra to
Rudra, from the Yajur Veda.]. Those three, Brahma, Narayana and Koushika, the king of the gods, were radiant around the
great-souled one, like three fires. In their midst, the resplendent god Shiva was resplendent. He was like the rays of
the autumn sun, freed from the clouds.

'"'I followed excellent vows and worshipped the god through chants. "I bow down before the one who is the
god of everything. I bow down before Mahadeva. You are Shakra. You are in Shakra's form. You are in Shakra's
attire. I bow down before the one with the vajra in his hand. You are tawny. You are red. You always hold the Pinaka in your hand. You hold the sword and the trident. I bow down before the one with the dark garments, the one
who has dark and curly hair. A black antelope skin forms your upper garment. You are the one who is worshipped
on  krishnashtami[This means the eighth (ashtami) day of krishnapaksha. There is no obvious connection between this day and
Shiva. However, Krishna was born on krishnashtami. This probably means that Shiva is worshipped in the form
of Krishna.].  You  are  white  in  complexion.  You  are white. You  are  attired  in  white  garments.  You  are
smeared in white ashes. You are engaged in white deeds. Among all the gods, you are Brahma. Among all the
Rudras, you are Nilalohita. You are the soul of all creatures. In sankhya, you have been spoken of as Purusha. You
are  the  bull[In the sense of the best.]  among  all  things  that  are  sacred.  Among  yogis,  you  are  the  Shiva  who  is  indivisible.  You  are
garhasthya among the ashramas. You are the lord Maheshvara. Among all the yakshas, you are Kubera. You are
Vishnu among sacrifices[The word Vishnu is also used to mean the foremost sacrifice.]. Among mountains, you are the great Meru. Among nakshatras, you are the moon. You
are Vasishtha among the rishis. You are said to be the sun among planets. Among forest animals, you are the lion.
You are Parameshvara. Among domesticated animals, you are the bull. You are the illustrious one who is worshipped in the worlds. You are Vishnu among the Adityas. You are Agni among the Vasus. You are Vinata's descendant among the birds. You are Ananta among the serpents. Among  the Vedas, you  are Sama Veda. In  the
hymns  of  Yajur  Veda,  you  are  shatarudriya.  You  are  Sanatkumara  among  the  yogis.  Among  the  exponents  of
sankhya, you are Kapila. O god! You are Shakra among the Maruts. Among the ancestors, you are the king of
dharma[Yama.].  Among  the  worlds,  you  are  Brahma's  world.  Among  all  destinations,  you  are  said  to  be  moksha.
Among oceans, you are the ocean of milk. Among mountains, you are the Himalaya mountains. You are brahmanas among varnas. Among brahmanas, you are brahmanas who have been initiated. You are the origin of the
worlds. You are the destroyer who destroys everything. You are everything that is said to constitute superior energy
in the worlds. You are the illustrious one who is everything. That is my firm view. O illustrious one! O god! I bow
down before you. O one who is affectionate towards devotees! I bow down before you. O lord of yoga! I bow
down before you. O origin of the universe! I bow down before you. Show your favours towards one who is devoted towards you. I am miserable. I am distressed. I am without prosperity. O Bhava! You are the eternal destination.
O Parameshvara! O lord of the gods! I may have committed crimes in my ignorance. Since I am your devotee, you
should pardon all these. O lord of the gods! I was confused because of the form you assumed. O lord of the gods! I
did not offer you  arghya and padya[Respectively, a gift and water to wash the feet, offered to a guest.]."  Thus,  with  devotion,  I  worshipped  Ishana  and  offered  him  padya  and
arghya. I joined my hands in salutation and offered everything to him. O son! A shower of auspicious flowers descended on my head. They were sprinkled with cool water and possessed divine fragrances. The servants of the
gods sounded celestial drums. An auspicious breeze started to blow. It was pleasant and bore sacred scents.

'"'With his wife, Mahadeva, the one with the bull on his banner, was pleased with me. Delighted with me, he
spoke to the gods who were present. "O all the gods! Look at the great-souled Upamanyu. His single-minded devotion towards me is divine and supreme and he has no other sentiment." O Krishna! The one with the trident in
his hand spoke in this way to the gods. All of them joined their hands in salutation. They bowed down before the
one with the bull on his banner and said, "O illustrious one! O god! O lord of the gods! O protector of the worlds!
O lord of the universe! Thanks to you, this excellent brahmana will obtain all the fruits that he desires." All the
gods, with Brahma at the forefront, spoke in this way to Sharva. The illustrious lord Shankara seemed to smile at
me. He said, "O Upamanyu! O child! I am pleased with you. O bull among the sages! Look at me. Your devotion
towards me is firm. O brahmana rishi! I wished to test you[By appearing before Upamanyu in the form of Indra.]. I am extremely delighted at your great devotion.
Therefore, I will now give you everything that you wish for." This is what the lord Mahadeva told me there. My
eyes filled with tears of joy and my body hair stood up. In a voice that was full of joy and devotion, I spoke these
words to the god. I sank down on my knees and repeatedly prostrated myself before him. "O god! It seems to me
as if I have been born today. My austerities have become successful today. O Mahadeva! I have seen you in person. You are stationed in front of me, pleased with me. I have seen the one who is worshipped, the infinitely valorous one whom even the gods cannot see. Having seen that god, who is more fortunate than me? Learned ones meditate  on  him  as  the  supreme  and  eternal  truth.  He  is  famous  as  the  lord  of  attachment.  He  is  supreme  of  the
supreme. He is the one without decay. He is the illustrious god who represents all that is true. He is without beginning and without destruction. He is the one who knows about all truth and ordinances. He is the lord who is the
foremost Purusha. He is the one who created Brahma, the creator of the worlds, from his right flank. He is the lord
who created Vishnu, for the protection of the worlds, from his left flank. When the end of a yuga arrives, he is the
lord who creates Rudra from his limbs. Rudra destroys everything in the universe, mobile and immobile. He is the
immensely energetic Destroyer, the fire of destruction. This god, Mahadeva, is the creator of everything in the universe, mobile and immobile. At the end of a kalpa, it has been said that everything is withdrawn into him. You go
everywhere. You are the soul of all creatures. You are Bhava, the creator who creates the creator of beings. You always go everywhere, but are incapable of being seen by all the gods. O lord! O Shankara! If you are gratified with
me and wish to grant me a boon, let me have eternal devotion towards you. O lord! O supreme among the gods!
Through your favours, let me possess the intelligence so that I know everything about the past, the present and the
future. Let me and my relatives be able to enjoy an inexhaustible supply of food cooked with milk. May  your
supreme self always reside near me, in my hermitage." The illustrious one, revered by the worlds, agreed to this.

'"'The lord Maheshvara, the immensely energetic preceptor of everything mobile and immobile, said, "Be without old age and without death. Be free from misery. Be full of good qualities. Know everything and be handsome.
May you possess eternal youth. May you possess an energy that is like that of the fire. O sage! Wherever you desire, there will be an ocean of milk. As you desire, that store of milk will always be near you. Enjoy that ocean of
milk, with amrita mixed in it. With your relatives, always think of worshipping me. O supreme among brahmanas!
I will always be with you, in your hermitage. O child! Reside wherever you wish. You should have no anxiety. O
brahmana! Whenever you remember me, I will always show myself to you." The illustrious one was as resplendent
as one crore suns. Having granted me the boon, Ishana disappeared from that spot. O Krishna! Thus, through my
meditations, I saw the god of the gods. I obtained everything that the intelligent one had mentioned. O Krishna!
Behold. You can directly see the siddhas who reside here. There are the rishis, the vidyadharas, the yakshas, the
gandharvas and the apsaras. Look at the trees that are always beautiful and full of flowers and fruit. There are flowers everywhere. There are pleasant leaves and excellent branches. O mighty-armed one! Everything has a celestial
ring to it.'"'


Upamanyu said, 'The great Hara has favoured many thousand others. O Madhava! Why will the illustrious
one not show you his favours? Such an assembly of the gods is to be praised, especially by someone like
you, who is faithful, devoted to brahmanas and non-violent. I will grant you the japa[The mantra for silent meditation.], through which, you will be
able to see Shankara'"

Krishna said[This is Krishna speaking to Yudhishthira.], "I told him, 'O brahmana! O great sage! Through your favours, I will see the lord of the gods,
the one who crushed the large numbers of Diti's sons[The daityas.].' On the eighth day, following the rites, I was initiated by
the brahmana. I received the staff and shaved my head. I held the kusha grass and dressed myself in rags. I sprinkled myself with clarified butter and wore a girdle made out of grass. For one month, I lived on fruits. For a second
month, I subsisted on water. For the third, fourth and fifth months, I only subsisted on air. I single-mindedly stood
on one foot, raising my arms upwards. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I saw the energy of one thousand suns
in the firmament. O descendant of the Pandu lineage! In the midst of that energy, I saw a cloud that was decorated
by an array of cranes. It looked like a blue mountain and there were rainbows all over it. Garlands of lightning
seemed to form a window inside it. The illustrious and extremely radiant one was seated there, together with the
goddess. With his wife, he blazed because of his austerities, energy and beauty. There, with the goddess, the illustrious Maheshvara looked resplendent. It was as if the sun was located inside that cloud, together with the moon. O
Kounteya! My body hair stood up in delight. My eyes dilated in wonder. He is the refuge of the large numbers of
gods. He is the dispeller of all affliction. I saw Hara. He wore a crown. He held a club and a trident in his hands.
He was attired in tiger skin. His hair was matted and he held a staff in his hand. He held the Pinaka and the vajra.
His teeth were sharp. He wore sparkling bracelets and his sacred thread was a snake. A celestial garland, with
many colours, adorned his chest. It was so large that it hung down, right up to his ankles. I saw him and he looked
like the moon in the evening, when the rains are over. Large numbers of demons[Pramathas, spirits and ghosts.] surrounded him on every side.
He was difficult to see, as dazzling as the autumn sun. He was seated on a bull and there were eleven Rudras
around him. They sought to praise the deeds of the one who is the performer of auspicious deeds. The Adityas, the
Vasus, the Sadhyas, the Vishvadevas, the Ashvins praised the god who is the lord of the universe. Everything in the
universe chanted his praise. Shatakratu and the illustrious Vishnu, both sons of Aditi, and Brahma were near Bhava, praising him with the rathantara Sama hymn. O Yudhishthira! There were many lords of yoga, ancestors and
preceptors who knew about yoga, brahmana rishis and their sons, devarshis, the earth, the firmament, the nakshatras, the planets, the fortnights, the months, the seasons, the nights, the years, the kshanas, the muhurtas, the nimeshas, the yugas in due order, the divine branches of knowledge, all the directions, Sanatkumara, the Vedas, itihasa,
Marichi, Angiras, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, the seven Manus, soma, the Atharvans, Brihaspati, Bhrigu, Dak-
sha,  Kashyapa,  Vasishtha,  kashya[This is probably the liquor known as kashya.],  the  metres,  diksha,  sacrifices,  dakshina,  the  fire,  oblations,  the  embodied
forms of all the articles required at sacrifices, all the guardians of the worlds, the rivers, the serpents, the mountains, all the mothers of the gods, the wives and the daughters of the gods and thousands, tens of thousands and billons of sages. They, and the mountains, the oceans and the directions, bowed down before the lord of tranquility.
There were gandharvas and apsaras, accomplished in singing and the playing of musical instruments. They sung
divine and wonderful praises to Bhava. O great king! The vidyadharas, the danavas, the guhyakas, the rakshasas
and all the beings, mobile and immobile, bowed down before the lord, in speech, thoughts and deeds. Sharva, the
lord of the gods, manifested himself before me. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing that Ishana was in
front of me, the universe, with Prajapati and Shakra, glanced towards me. However, I did not possess the strength
to look towards Mahadeva.

'"At this, the god spoke to me. 'O Krishna! Look at me and speak to me.' Delighted, I bowed my head down before the god and the goddess, Uma. I praised Sthanu in words that are used by Brahma and the other gods to praise
him. 'I bow down before the eternal one who is the womb of everything. The rishis speak of you as Brahma's lord.
Virtuous ones speak of you as austerities, sattva, rajas, tamas and truth. You are Brahma. You are Rudra. You are
Varuna. You are Agni. You are Manu. You are Bhava. You are Dhatri. You are Tvashtri. You are Vidhatri. You are
the lord who faces all the directions. All creatures, mobile and immobile, originate in you. You are the origin of all
beings and you are the one who destroys them. The rishis speak of you as being superior to all the objects of the
sense, the mind, the wind, the seven kinds of fire and all the male gods who are in heaven. O illustrious one! There
is no doubt that you are the Vedas, the sacrifices, soma, dakshina, the fire, the oblations and everything else required for a sacrifice. Sacrifices, gifts, studies, vows, rituals, modesty, fame, prosperity, radiance, contentment and
success are offered to you. O illustrious one! Desire, anger, fear, avarice, insolence, confusion, malice, pain and
disease are your offspring. You are deeds. You are the outcome of those deeds. You are destruction. You are the
foremost one. You are power. You are immutable. You are the supreme origin of the mind. Your nature is eternal.
You are the unmanifest. You are the purifying lord. You are golden and possess a thousand rays. You are the origin
of  all  the  qualities.  All  life  is  dependent  on  you.  The  great  atman,  Mati[Understanding.],  Brahma,  the  universe,  Shambhu,
Svayambhu, Buddhi[Intelligence.], Prajna[Wisdom.], realization, consciousness, fame and fortitude are all words that the great-souled
ones have progressively used in the sacred texts to express your greatness. It is through comprehending you that
learned  brahmanas  overcome  the  confusion  that  is  in  the  hearts  of  all  beings.  The  rishis  have  praised  you  as
kshetrajna. Your arms and feet are in all the directions. Your eyes, heads and faces are in all the directions. You
hear everything in the worlds. You are established, pervading everything. You are the fruits of everything that the
one with the sharp rays[The sun.] performs in a nimesha. As Purusha, the rays of your power are in all hearts. You are the
obtaining of anima and laghima. You are Ishana, the resplendent and undecaying one. The worlds resort to your
understanding and intelligence and seek you out as a refuge. Those who have conquered their senses and are devoted to the truth always use yoga to meditate on you. There are those who know you as the eternal one, the lord
who is the deep refuge, the Purusha who is everywhere in the universe, the one who is golden in complexion, the
one who is supremely intelligent and is the greatest destination. These intelligent ones based themselves on what
transcends intelligence. Those intelligent ones know the seven subtle forms[Mahat, consciousness and the five primal elements.], the six of your attributes[Omniscience, completeness, contentment, independence, power and lack of finiteness.] and the
main techniques of yoga and penetrate into you.' O Partha! I spoke in this way to Bhava, the destroyer of all afflictions. At this, the entire universe and all mobile and immobile objects roared like lions. The large numbers of brahmanas, the gods, the asuras, the serpents, the pishachas, the ancestors, the birds, the large numbers of rakshasas,
the large numbers of spirits[Bhutas.] and all the maharshis bowed down before him. Fragrant and celestial flowers showered down on my head in large numbers. A pleasant breeze began to blow. For the welfare of the universe, the illustrious Shankara glanced towards the goddess Uma, Shatakratu and me and said, 'O Krishna! O slayer of enemies! We know of your great devotion towards us. I am extremely pleased with you and I will do what brings you
benefit. O Krishna! O supreme one! Ask for eight boons and I will give them to you. O tiger among Yadavas! Tell
me what you desire, even if it is something that is extremely difficult to get.'"'


