'Markandeya said, "Now hear about Skanda's companions. They were terrible and extraordinary. They were born
when Skanda was struck by the vajra and are the minor Kumaras. These terrible ones steal children, whether they
have been born or whether they are in the womb. From the force of the vajra, immensely strong daughters were
also born from him. The Kumaras thought of Vishakha as their father. The illustrious one protects in battle, with
the face of a goat. He is surrounded by the masses of daughters and all his own sons. While the mothers look on,
Bhadrashakha[Kumara's epithet.] provides succour. So people on earth call Skanda the father of sons. In different regions, those
who wish sons or have sons, always worship Rudra, Agni and the extremely strong Uma as Svaha.

'"The maidens who the fire named Tapas had begotten, went to Skanda and he asked, 'What will I do?' The
mothers replied, 'Grant us this favour. May we be the supreme mothers of all the worlds. May we be worshipped.
Do this for our pleasure.' He replied that it would be this way. Then that great-souled one again said, 'You will be
of different kinds, auspicious and inauspicious.' Thus, having fulfilled the resolution of making Skanda their son,
the group of mothers went away. Kaki, Halima, Rudra, Brihali, Arya, Palala and Mitra became the seven mothers
of children who have just been born. Through Skanda's favours, each of them had a terrible son, named
Shishu[Meaning infant or child.], full of valour and red in the eye. Those who were born from Skanda's group of mothers are known as
the eight brave ones[There is an anomaly in the numbers. The number of mothers (matrikas) is sometimes given as seven, sometimes as eight. Seven is also associated with the six stars of the Pleiades (krittika). One sentence in the text mentions seven mothers, but the next sentence suggests eight. Krittika (krittikas in the plural) is the third of the twenty-
seven nakshatras. Reared by the Krittikas, Skanda was named Kartikeya. The six wives of the rishis became the
Krittikas.]. Together with the one who has the face of a goat[Skanda.], they are referred to as the nine. O
king! Know that the sixth of Skanda's six heads has the face of a goat and is always worshipped by the group of
mothers. The chief among his six heads is known as Bhadrashakha. It is through this that he created divine energy.
All these incidents occurred on the fifth day of shuklapaksha. O lord of men! The extremely terrible war transpired
on the sixth."'


'Markandeya said, "Skanda was seated, with golden armour. He wore a golden crest and crown. His eyes were
golden and he was immensely radiant. His garments were tinged with red. His teeth were sharp and he was beautiful. He possessed all the auspicious marks. He was the beloved of the three worlds. He was the granter of boons.
He was brave. He was young. He was adorned with earrings. In the form of an embodied lotus, Shri herself worshipped him. When the greatly famous Kumara was thus united with Shri, all the beings saw him, like the moon on
the night of the full moon. The great-souled brahmanas worshipped the extremely powerful one.

'"The maharshis spoke to Skanda in these words. 'O fortunate one! O one with the golden complexion! May
you be the saviour of the worlds. Though you have been born in six nights[This is a reference to Svaha having adopted the forms of the wives of the rishis on six separate nights.], the worlds have been subdued by
you. O supreme among gods! You have granted them freedom from fear again. You should therefore become Indra
and free the three worlds from their fear.' Skanda asked, 'O ones rich in austerities! What does the Indra of all the
worlds do? How does the lord of the gods always protect the masses of gods?' The rishis replied, 'Indra grants beings strength, energy, offspring and happiness. When he is satisfied, the lord of the gods grants everyone their
shares. He withdraws it from those who perform evil deeds and grants it to those who perform good ones. The destroyer of Bala assigns beings to their tasks. He acts as the sun when there is no sun, and as the moon when there is
no moon. He becomes the fire, the wind, the earth and the water and their origins. These are Indra's tasks and Indra's strength is immense. You are brave and you are supreme in strength. Therefore, you should be our Indra.'

Shakra said, 'O mighty-armed one! O excellent one! You become Indra and bring happiness to everyone. You are a
worthy one and we will instate you today.' Skanda replied, 'You alone will rule over the three worlds, fixed on victory. O Shakra! I will remain as your servant. I do not desire to become Indra.'

'"Shakra said, 'O brave one! Your strength is extraordinary. Kill the enemies of the gods. Amazed at your prowess, the worlds will ignore me. O brave one! Though I am established as Indra, I am inferior in strength and have
been vanquished. Incessantly, they will attempt to bring about false dissension among us. O lord! When you have
been separated, the world will be divided into two factions. The beings of the worlds will then decide to split into
these two sides. O immensely strong one! Because of this division of beings, there will be strife then. O son[The word used is tata.]!
Let me assure you that you will then vanquish me in battle. Therefore, you should become Indra. Do not think
about this.' Skanda answered, 'O fortunate one! You are my king, as well as of the three worlds. O Shakra! What
can I do for you? Tell me what your instructions are.' Shakra said, 'O Skanda! If you have spoken true words according to your decision, and if you wish to follow my instructions, then listen to me. O immensely strong one! Be
instated as the general of the gods. O immensely strong one! Following your words, I will remain as Indra.' Skanda answered, 'For the destruction of the danavas, for accomplishing the objectives of the gods, for the protection of
cows and brahmanas, then instate me as the general.' So Maghavan[Indra.], together with all the masses of gods, instated him. He looked extremely handsome and was worshipped by the maharshis. The golden umbrella[Held over Skanda's head.]
sparkled like the circle of a fire that has been kindled well. Vishvakarma had created a golden and celestial garland.
The slayer of Tripura[Shiva.] fastened this on him. O tiger among men! O scorcher of enemies! He himself arrived,
with the famous goddess[Shiva's consort, Uma.]. Extremely happily, the illustrious Vrishadhvaja[Shiva. Literally, the one with a bull on his banner. Rudra is also Shiva's name.] showed him homage. The brahmanas also refer to Agni as Rudra and he is thus Rudra's son. The semen secreted by Rudra became Mount Shveta.
It was on Mount Shveta that the Krittikas placed Agni's semen[More correctly, placed there by Svaha in the form of the six wives.]. All the residents of heaven saw Rudra offer
homage to Guha, foremost among those who possess all the qualities. So he came to be known as Rudra's son. The
child was born after Rudra entered Agni. Because he was born in this way, he became Rudra's son. It was thus that
Skanda, foremost among the gods, was born as Rudra's son, through the energy of Rudra, Agni, Svaha and the six
ladies.

'"Agni's son was attired in a pair of red garments that had no dust. His blazing body shone, like the sun attired
in a pair of red clouds. Agni gave him a cock and that became his ornamental sign[The rooster or the cock is Skanda's emblem. The peacock became his mount later.]. Perched on his chariot, it
blazed like the red fire of destruction. His body was cased in armour that he had naturally been born with. It is always visible when the god goes into battle. O lord of the people! With Skanda, power, dharma, energy, beauty,
truthfulness, devotion to brahmanas, lack of delusion, protection of devotees, destruction of enemies and protection of the worlds were also born. Having been thus instated by the masses of all the gods, in his ornaments, he
looked happy and satisfied. His visage was as radiant as the full moon. Pavaki[Skanda's name.] was thus instated by the gods.
The sounds of hymns from the Vedas, celestial music, the songs of the gods and the gandharvas and all the masses
of apsaras arose. He sported, surrounded by many who were happy, satisfied and ornamented. Thus instated by the
residents of heaven, Mahasena could be seen, like the rising sun when darkness has been destroyed. At that, thousands of armies of the gods came to him from all the directions and said that he was their lord. The illustrious one
was surrounded by masses of all the beings. He was worshipped and praised and comforted them.

'"Having instated Skanda as the general, Shatakratu remembered Devasena, whom he had once freed. 'Brahma
himself must have destined that he will be her husband.' Thinking this, the slayer of Bala fetched Devasena,
adorned in her ornaments and told Skanda, 'O supreme among gods! Even before you were born, the self-creating
one[Brahma.] destined this maiden to be your wife. Therefore, in accordance with the prescribed rites and to the chanting
of mantras, accept her hand. The right hand of this goddess is like a lotus. Accept it.' Having been thus addressed,
he accepted her hand, in accordance with the prescribed rites. Brihasapati recited the prescribed mantras and offered oblations. Thus, wise ones know Devasena to be Skanda's queen. The brahmanas know her as Shashthi, Lakshmi, Asha, Sukhaprada, Sinivali, Kuhu, Sadvritti and Aparajita. When Devasena obtained Skanda as her eternal
husband, the goddess Lakshmi herself sought refuge with him, in embodied form[Lakshmi was personified in the form of Devasena. Lakshmi is also known as Shri.]. Since Skanda was united
with Shri on the fifth lunar day, this is known as Shripanchami[Panchami is the fifth lunar day.]. He accomplished his objective on the sixth and
this is known as the great tithi of shashthi[Tithi is a lunar day and shashthi means the sixth. Shashthi is also one of Devasena's names.]."'

'Markandeya said, "When Mahasena was united with Shri and became the general of the gods[The text says devasenapati. This can mean either general of the gods, or Devasena's husband. Both are
equally correct.], the six goddesses who were the wives of the saptarshis came to him. They had been abandoned by the rishis, though they were devoted to dharma and were great in their vows. They swiftly went to the lord who was the general of the gods and
said, 'O son! Without any reason and driven by anger, our divine husbands have abandoned us. O son! We have
been dislodged from our pure positions. It is said that someone reported we gave birth to you and they heard this
falsehood. You should save us. O lord! Through your favours, we should attain eternal heaven. We wish that you
should be our son. When you do this, you will be freed from your debt.' Skanda replied, 'O unblemished ones!
You are truly my mothers and I am your son. You will obtain everything that you have asked for.' When this had
been said, he[Skanda.] asked Shakra, 'What should be done?' Asked thus by Skanda, Vasava replied, 'Abhijit is Rohini's
younger sister, but is proud[The twenty-seven nakshatras were Daksha's daughters and were married to Chandra, the moon. Krittika is
the third, Rohini is the fourth, Dhanishtha is the twenty-third. Abhijit is not one of the twenty-seven, but has been
added as a twenty-eighth, between the twenty-first and the twenty-second. The story in the text is clearly about the
order of these nakshatras. Rohini was the first because Chandra loved her the most.]. The goddess wishes to be the eldest and has gone to the forest to perform austerities. O fortunate one! I am bewildered, because a nakshatra has been dislodged from the sky. O Skanda! Consult
with Brahma about that excellent time[The time that the dislodged nakshatra was supposed to measure.]. Brahma determined the time for Dhanishtha and the others. Rohini was
the first and their number used to be complete.' Having been thus addressed by Shakra, the Krittikas went to heaven. This nakshatra is presided over by the god of fire and shines in the form of a cart[One can visualize the major stars of Pleiades arranged in the form of a cart.].

'"Vinata[Vinata is Garuda's mother. However, Svaha assumed the form of a Garudi. So this Vinata means Svaha,
rather than the Vinata who is Garuda's mother.] told Skanda, 'You are my son and you are entitled to offer me funeral oblations. O son! I wish to
live with you always.' Skanda replied, 'I bow before you. Let it be that way. Instruct me with a mother's affection.
O goddess! Worshipped by your daughter-in-law, you will always live here.' Then the entire group of mothers
spoke to Skanda in these words. 'The wise ones have praised us as the mothers of all the worlds. But we wish to be
your mother. Therefore, show us honour.' Skanda replied, 'You will be my mothers and I will be your son. Tell me
what I should do to satisfy your wishes.' The mothers said, 'In earlier times, others had been thought of as mothers
of the world. Let us have that position and let them no longer have that position. O bull among gods! Let us be
worshipped by the world, not them. Because of you, we have been deprived of our offspring[Probably because their husbands had abandoned them.]. Give them back
to us.' Skanda replied, 'You cannot wish for offspring that have already been given away. But if you so wish, I can
give you other offspring.' The mothers said, 'While we are with you, we wish to devour the offspring of those
mothers[It now becomes clear that these other mothers are the natural mothers of children.]. Give them to us. They and their gods are different from you.' Skanda replied, 'I can give you offspring. But what you have asked for will be extremely painful. O fortunate ones! Protect the offspring as long as
they are good and show you homage.' The mothers said, 'O fortunate one! O Skanda! As you desire, we will protect the offspring. O Skanda! O lord! If it pleases you, we wish to live with you always.' Skanda replied, 'In different forms, afflict the offspring of young humans until they have attained sixteen years of age. I will give you undecaying and terrible souls. With these, you will live in supreme happiness and also be worshipped a lot.' At that, an
extremely strong being, golden in complexion, sprung up from Skanda's body to devour the offspring of humans.
Oppressed by hunger, it suddenly fell down on the ground, unconscious.

'"With Skanda's permission, it became a graha[A graha is something that seizes or grasps, that is, it is an evil spirit. It is also possible, in this context, to interpret a graha as a disease.], terrible in form. Supreme brahmanas know it by the name
of Skandapasmara[Literally, Skanda's falling sick, or Skanda's epilepsy.]. The extremely terrible Vinata is known as the graha Shakuni. The rakshasa woman Putana
is known by the learned as the graha Putana. She is terrible in form. She is fearful in form. She causes great pain
and roams around in the night. The pishacha woman who is terrible in form is known as Shitaputana. Her form is
fearful and she steals embryos from women. Aditi is known as Revati and her graha is known as Raivata. This extremely terrible and gigantic graha afflicts children. Diti, the mother of the daityas, is known as Mukhamandika.
This inaccessible demoness happily feeds on the flesh of children. The Kumaras and the Kumaris are said to have
been created from Skanda. O Kouravya! They are extremely large grahas and all of them devour embryos.
They[The Kumaras.] are known as the husbands of the Kumaris. They are terrible in deeds, and without it being known, they
snatch small children. O king! The wise know Surabhi to be the mother of cattle. Shakuni rides on her, and with
her, devours children on earth. O lord of men! The goddess Sarama is the mother of dogs. She always robs the embryos of women. The mother of trees resides in a karanja[The name of a tree used for medicinal purposes.]. Men who wish to have sons worship her in the
karanja. These eighteen grahas, and others, are fond of meat and liquor[The number eighteen is not clearly explained. It could be Skandapasmara, Shakuni, Putana, Shitaputana,
Revati, Mukhamandika, Surabhi, Sarama and Karanji (adding up to nine) and devagraha, pitrigraha, siddhagraha,
rakshasagraha, yakshagraha, pishachagraha, gandharvagraha (adding up to seven) mentioned a little later, with
perhaps Vinata and Kadru added. Alternatively, children are believed to suffer from nine different kinds of diseases
or afflictions. Eighteen might mean these nine diseases and the nine mothers who preside over these diseases.]. They always live for ten nights in
places where delivery takes place. Assuming a subtle form, Kadru enters a woman who is pregnant. She devours
the embryo there and she[The mother.] gives birth to a serpent instead[Kadru is the mother of serpents. Arishta is the mother of gandharvas and Muni is the mother of apsaras, and
Arishta and Muni are Kadru's sisters. But here, Kadru seems to be the mother of gandharvas and apsaras.]. The mother of gandharvas grasps the embryo and
departs. On earth, that woman is seen as one whose foetus has vanished. The mother of apsaras grasps the embryo
and sits and the learned refer to this as a foetus that is seated[Perhaps implying that the foetus does not move and is dead.]. The daughter of the ocean of blood is known as
Skanda's nurse. In a kadamba tree, she is worshipped by the name of Lohitayani[Literally, someone whose path is red.]. Arya dwells among women,
the way Rudra resides in men. Kumara's mother Arya is separately worshipped for the fulfilment of desires.

'"I have thus recounted for you the great grahas of the Kumaras. They are inauspicious up to sixteen years of
age. After that, they turn auspicious. The listed group of mothers and the male grahas are always known by everyone as Skanda grahas, residing in the body. They are pacified through oblations, bathing, incense, collyrium, sacrifices and gifts, especially rites for Skanda. When thus worshipped and offered homage properly, all of them bestow
welfare, long lives and energy on men. O Indra among kings! After worshipping Maheshvara, I will now recount
the grahas that afflict men beyond the sixteenth year. The man who sees gods, whether asleep or awake, swiftly
turns mad and the learned know this as devagraha. The man who sees his ancestors, whether seated or asleep,
swiftly turns mad and this is known as pitrigraha. He who disrespects the siddhas angers them and is cursed by
them, swiftly turning mad, and this is known as siddhagraha. He who inhales fragrances and tastes different
flavours, swiftly turns mad and this is known as rakshasagraha. A man on earth who is touched by celestial gandharvas, swiftly turns mad and this is known as gandharvagraha. Over a period of time, a man who is entered by
yakshas, swiftly turns mad and this is known as yakshagraha. A man who is always ascended by pishachas, swiftly
turns mad and this is known as pishachagraha. A man whose mind is deluded and turbulent because of these evils,
swiftly turns mad, and must be cured in accordance with the sacred texts. Men swiftly turn mad because of perplexity, fear and terrible sights, and must be cured through rites. There are three types of grahas-some are frolicsome, others are gluttons, and others are lustful. They afflict men until the attainment of seventy years of age. After
that, fever is the equivalent of a graha for men. Grahas always avoid those who have not dispersed their senses and
those who are controlled, pure and always attentive, and also those who believe in god and are devoted. This is the
description of grahas that afflict men. Grahas do not touch men who are devoted to the god Maheshvara."'


