Janamejaya asked, 'When they learnt that the Pandavas had been granted permission to leave with their gems, riches and treasures, what was the state of mind of Dhritarashtra's sons?'

Vaishampayana said, 'O king! When he found out that the intelligent Dhritarashtra had given the permission,
Duhshasana swiftly went to his brother[Duryodhana.]. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On arriving before Duryodhana and
his advisers, the foremost of the Bharatas[Duhshasana.] spoke these miserable words, "O maharathas! That old man has made
us lose everything that we had obtained with great difficulty. He has given those objects to our enemies." Then the
proud Duryodhana, Karna and Soubala Shakuni got together and plotted against the Pandavas. They went to the
intelligent King Dhritarashtra, Vichitravirya's son, and spoke to him these conciliatory words.

'Duryodhana said, "O king! Have you not heard what Brihaspati, the learned priest of the gods, told Shakra
about policy? 'O destroyer of enemies! Enemies must be killed through every means possible, before they cause
harm through war or force[This is what Brihaspati said.].' We should offer homage to all the kings through riches obtained from the Pandavas.
If we fight with them[The Pandavas.] thereafter, what reversal can befall us? If one places angry and venomous snakes that bring
destruction on one's back and neck, how can one get rid of them? O father! The angry Pandavas will ride on chariots and hold their weapons. In their rage, they will destroy us like venomous serpents. Arjuna is attired in armour
and has grasped his two supreme quivers. He is frequently picking up the Gandiva, breathing heavily and glancing
around. We have heard that Vrikodara has swiftly raised his giant club and is riding on a chariot that has been
yoked. Nakula has his sword and the shield marked with the signs of eight moons. Sahadeva and the king[Yudhishthira.] have
made their intentions clear through their gestures. They have ascended chariots that are stocked with many different kinds of arms. They have whipped up the teams of chariots and are ready to employ armies. We have caused
them offence and they will not pardon us. Who among them will forgive Droupadi's oppression? O bull among the
Bharata lineage! Be fortunate. We must again gamble with the Pandavas so as to send them to the forest. In this
way, we will be able to bring them under our sway. Either they or we will be defeated in the gambling with dice
and attired in deerskin, will enter the great forest for twelve years. The thirteenth year will have to be spent in an
inhabited place, in disguise. If one is recognized, one will again have to go to the forest for twelve years. Either
they or we will live here. Therefore, let the gamble begin. Let the dice be thrown again and let the Pandavas play.
O king! O bull among the Bharata lineage! This is the most important task for us. This Shakuni is skilled and possesses all the knowledge about the secrets of dice. We will be firmly established in the kingdom and will have alliances. We will gather a vast, brave and invincible army and keep it content. O king! O scorcher of enemies! If
they survive the vow after thirteen years, we will be able to defeat them. Let this find pleasure with you."

'Dhritarashtra replied, "Then immediately bring them back, even if they have gone a long distance away. Let the
Pandavas return and gamble with the dice again."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Then Drona, Somadatta, the maharatha Bahlika, Vidura, Drona's son[Ashvatthama.], the valorous son
of the vaishya[Though Vidura has already been mentioned by name, this means Vidura, who was the son of a vaishya
woman.], Bhurishrava, Shantanu's son[Bhishma.] and maharatha Vikarna collectively said, "Don't have the gamble.
Let there be peace." But Dhritarashtra loved his son and ignored the desires of these well-wishers, all of whom
could foresee the consequences. He summoned the Pandavas. O great king! Gandhari was always united with
dharma. She was miserable because of affection towards her sons and spoke to Dhritarashtra, lord of the people.

"When Duryodhana was born, the immensely intelligent Kshatta[Vidura.] told us that it would be better to send this destroyer of the lineage to the other world. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As soon as he was born, he howled
like a jackal. O Kurus! Listen to this. He will be the destroyer of the lineage. O lord! Do not listen to the views of
these wicked ones who are nothing but children. Do not become the cause for the terrible destruction of the lineage. Who will breach a dam[Alternatively, bridge.] that has been constructed? Who will rekindle a dying fire? O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! The sons of Pritha are now established in peace. Who would want to anger them? O Ajamidha[Dhritarashtra's name.]!
You remember, but I am reminding you again. Either in good or in evil deeds, the sacred texts cannot instruct those
who are evil in intelligence. O king! Nor will one with the intelligence of a child ever attain the wisdom of age.
You should yourself be the leader to your sons. Let them not be torn apart from you. Let peace, dharma, the counsel of others and natural intelligence be your principles in framing policy. Prosperity built through cruelty is destroyed. If it is gently nurtured, it grows old and passes to sons and grandsons." Having been thus addressed by
Gandhari, who had seen the way of dharma, the great king replied, "It is certain that if the destruction of our lineage has come, I will not be able to prevent it. Let it be as they wish. Let the Pandavas return. Let those who are
mine gamble again with the Pandavas."'


Vaishampayana said, 'On the intelligent King Dhritarashtra's command, a Pratikamin spoke to Partha Yudhishthira, who had already gone a long distance away. "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Your father has said that the
sabha has been covered with carpets. O king! O Pandava! The dice are ready. Come and play." Yudhishthira
replied, "Following the decisions of the creator, all beings attain good and evil. Even if I do not play again, neither
can be prevented. This summon to gamble with the dice is the old one's[Dhritarashtra.] command. Though I know that it will
lead to ruin, I cannot disobey the command." Having uttered these words, the Pandava returned with his brothers.
Though he knew Shakuni's resort to maya, Partha returned to gamble. Paining the hearts of their well-wishers,
those maharathas, bulls among the Bharata lineage, again entered the sabha. They once again seated themselves,
ready to gamble, ordained by destiny in the destruction of all the worlds.

'Shakuni said, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! The old one returned all your riches and I worship him for
that. But listen to me, because there is one more stake with great riches. If we are defeated by you in gambling, we
will enter the great forest for twelve years. We will wear the skins of ruru deer and spend a thirteenth year in disguise, but in inhabited places. If recognized, we will return to the forest for another twelve years. But if you are defeated by us, together with Krishna, you will live in the forest for twelve years, clad in deerskin. When the thirteenth year is over, as is proper, each will obtain his own kingdom back. O Yudhishthira! O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! With this stake, let us ready the dice and play another gamble with us."

'Those who were in the sabha said, "Alas! Why can't his[Yudhishthira's.] relatives make him understand the great danger?
The intelligent can understand this. But the bulls among the Bharatas do not understand it."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Partha, lord of men, heard the remarks of the people. But from shame and from his sense
of dharma, again began to play with dice. The immensely intelligent one knew, but returned to the game, thinking
about whether this would lead to the destruction of the Kurus. Yudhishthira said, "I am a king who always follows
his own dharma. How can I not return when challenged? O Shakuni! I will play with you." Shakuni replied, "O
Pandavas! Ignore cattle, horses, many milch cows, innumerable sheep and goats, elephants, treasuries, gold and all
the female and male slaves. There is a single stake of exile in the forest. Whether you or we lose, we will live in
the forest. O bull among the Bharata lineage! This is the stake with which we will play. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There is one throw of the dice for a life in the forest." Partha accepted the challenge and Soubala gathered the dice. Shakuni told Yudhishthira, "I have won."'


Vaishampayana said, 'Having been defeated, the sons of Pritha began to prepare for exile in the forest. One after
another, they dressed themselves in deerskins and upper garments. Those destroyers of enemies had lost their kingdom and were attired in deerskin. On seeing them ready to leave for the forest, Duhshasana said, "The wheel has
now begun to turn for the great-souled king, Dhritarashtra's son. The Pandavas have been vanquished and have attained supreme misery. Today, the gods have come to us along their smooth celestial routes. We have become elders to our enemies in qualities, their elders and more numerous than they are. The Pandavas have descended into
hell for a long time, for eternity. They have fallen from happiness and have lost their kingdom, destroyed for an
eternity. The Pandavas were intoxicated with their strength and laughed at the sons of Dhritarashtra. They have
been defeated and have lost their riches. They must go to the forest. They have to give up their multicoloured armour and their divine and radiant garments. All of them must now put on the skins of ruru deer. They have accepted the stake that Soubala offered. Their minds were always nourished by the thought that there were no men like
them in the world. But today, the Pandavas will know themselves in adversity, like sesame seeds that are barren. O
Kourava[Addressing Yudhishthira.]! Your stay will not be like that of great-minded ones[Ascetics who live in the forest.]. The deerskins of the powerful Pandavas have
not been consecrated[Unlike proper ascetics.]. Yajnasena was the immensely intelligent descendant of Somaka. He gave his daughter
Panchali to the Pandavas. That was not a deed well done, because the Parthas, husbands of Yajnaseni, are impotent. O Yajnaseni! What pleasure will you derive, since those dressed in fine garments are now reduced to deer-
skins in the forest, without riches and without homes? Choose a husband who will bring you pleasure. All the Kurus who are assembled here are forbearing and self-controlled and have no dearth of riches. Choose one of them as
your husband, so that you do not suffer from this change in fortune. All the Pandavas are now like sesame seeds
without kernels, or deer that only have skin on them. They are like barren corn. Why do you show homage to the
Pandavas who have fallen? Serving sterile sesame seeds is a waste of labour." Dhritarashtra's son uttered these
cruel and harsh words in the hearing of the Parthas.

'Having heard these words, the impetuous Bhimasena suppressed his anger. Like a Himalayan lion dashing at a
jackal, he suddenly approached him[Duhshasana.] and loudly rebuked him. "O cruel and evil one! You utter words that lead to
failure. You are boasting among these kings because of the skills of Gandhara[Shakuni.]. Just as your words pierce our
hearts like arrows, I will make you remember all this when I pierce your heart in battle. I will send to Yama's
abode all those who are your followers and protectors because of desire and avarice, together with all their relatives." Clad in his deerskin, Bhima uttered these angry words. But though immersed in grief, he stuck to the path
of dharma. The other one[Duhshasana.] had no shame. He danced around in the middle of the Kurus and challenged him[Bhima.],
calling him a cow. Bhimasena said, "O Duhshasana! Cruel, harsh and rough words are possible for you. Who else
will boast of riches obtained through deceit? If he does not rip apart your breast and drink your blood in battle,
Partha Vrikodara will not go to the worlds attained by those with good deeds. In front of all the archers, I will kill
the sons of Dhritarashtra in battle. I tell you truthfully that it is only after this that I will go to the abode of peace."

When the Pandavas were leaving the sabha, the evil king Duryodhana, in play and delight, sought to mimic
through his own steps Bhimasena's leonine gait. At that, Vrikodara half-turned his body towards him and said, "O
stupid one! This will not make you successful. I will soon kill you, with your relatives, and give you my response
by reminding you of this." The powerful and proud Bhima witnessed this insult to himself, but controlled his
anger. Following the king[Yudhishthira.] in the assembly of Kurus, he spoke these words and went out, "I will be the slayer of
Duryodhana. Dhananjaya will be the slayer of Karna. Sahadeva will kill Shakuni, the deceitful one with the dice.
In the midst of this sabha, I will once again utter the words of grave and solemn import. The gods will surely make
this true when there is a war between us. I will kill Suyodhana[Duryodhana.] with a club in battle. I will press down his head
on the ground with my foot. As for this evil-hearted and cruel Duhshasana, whose valour is in his words, I will
drink his blood like the king of deer[A lion is the king of deer.]."
'Arjuna said, "The truthful Bhima's resolutions are not known only in words. In the fourteenth year, what is going to occur will be witnessed. The earth will drink the blood of Duryodhana, Karna, the evil-hearted Shakuni and
Duhshasana, as the fourth. O Bhimasena! On your instructions, I will kill in battle this jealous Karna, who uses his
eloquence to praise the wicked." For giving pleasure to Bhima, this is what Arjuna swears. "In battle, I will kill
Karna and Karna's followers with my arrows. With my sharp arrows, I will send to Yama's abode all those other
kings who will fight with me out of their folly. Let the Himalayas move from where they are established, let the
sun be dimmed, let coolness be destroyed from the moon, if I deviate from this vow. In the fourteenth year, if
Duryodhana does not restore the kingdom to us with proper honour, all this will certainly happen."'

Vaishampayana said, 'When Partha said this, Sahadeva, Madri's handsome and powerful son, grasped his own
large arms. His eyes were red with anger and he sighed like a serpent. Desiring to kill Soubala, he uttered these
words. "O foolish one! O destroyer of the fame of Gandhara! What you thought were dice are not dice, but sharp
arrows that you have invited in battle. For you and your relatives, I will certainly accomplish what Bhima has said.
I will do what I have to do and you can do everything that you wish to do. O Soubala! I will overpower you and
swiftly kill you in battle with your relatives, if you stay and fight in accordance with the dharma of the kshatriyas."

O lord of the world! On hearing Sahadeva's words, Nakula, the most handsome among men, uttered his words, "At
this gambling match, Dhritarashtra's sons have used harsh and insulting words towards Yajnaseni, so as to bring
pleasure to Duryodhana. These sons of Dhritarashtra are evil and summoned by destiny, are soon to die. In their
great numbers, I will show them the abode of Vaivasvata[Yama's name.]. On Dharmaraja's instructions and following Droupadi's footsteps, I will soon relieve the earth of the sons of Dhritarashtra." Having extended their arms to take these
many oaths, all these tigers among men went to Dhritarashtra.'


