Vaishampayana said, 'Summoning his splendid weapons, Pandava Bibhatsu, repulsed the shower of rain with a
shower of arrows. Pandava covered every side of Khandava with his arrows and drove away that rain from that
forest. When the sky was covered with Savyasachi's arrows, not a single being could escape from there.

'Takshaka, the immensely powerful king of the serpents, wasn't in the flaming forest then. He had gone to Kurukshetra. But Takshaka's powerful son Ashvasena was there. He made great efforts to escape from the fire. However, oppressed by Kounteya's arrows, he didn't succeed in getting out. But his mother, daughter of the serpents,
tried to save him. She first swallowed his head. Then she began to swallow his tail and in her haste to save her son,
the serpent lady rose up. When Pandava saw this, he sliced off her head with a sharp arrow[The word used is bhalla. The word is used for an arrow, as well as for a missile that is like a small spear.]. The lord of the gods
saw this. Acting as saviour, the wielder of the vajra unleashed a shower of rain on Pandava and when this dazed
him, Ashvasena instantly escaped. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing this terrible power of maya and
having been deprived by the serpent, he cut down all the serpents into two and three pieces. Angrily, Bibhatsu
cursed the serpent that had escaped and so did the fire and Vasudeva, to the effect that he would never attain fame.

'Then Jishnu remembered the deception that had been played on him. He was angered and seeking to fight with
the thousand-eyed one, covered the sky with his sharp arrows. On seeing Phalguna's[Phalguna or Phalguni is Arjuna's name. He was thus named because he was born when the nakshatra Phalguni was in the ascendant.] wrath, the king of the gods
unleashed his own blazing missile and it flashed across the entire sky. Then winds with terrible roars churned all
the oceans. Masses of clouds, mingled with torrents of rain, were created. To counter them, Arjuna unleashed his
own supreme weapon. The one who had the knowledge used a mantra to invoke the vayavya weapon. In an instant,
it destroyed the energy and might of Indra's clouds, rain and thunder. The clouds dried, the lightning died and the
dark sky was pacified. Cool and pleasant winds began to blow and the sun's orbit returned to normal. Delighted
that there was no opposition any more and with the many offerings being made, the fire blazed up again and filled
the world with its roar.

'On seeing that the fire was protected by the two Krishnas, many feathered beings of the Suparna[Suparna is Garuda's mother.] lineage, including Garuda, rose up into the sky, eager to attack the warriors Krishna and Pandava with their wings, beaks and
claws, as tough as the vajra. Many serpents also descended near Pandava, spewing terrible and flaming venom
from their mouths. As soon as he saw these sky-dwelling creatures, Partha angrily cut them down with his arrows.
Benumbed, their bodies fell into the flaming fire. At that, the gods, the gandharvas, the yakshas, the rakshasas and
the serpents rose up, uttering loud roars and desiring to fight. They were armed with iron clubs, chakras and
bhushundis[It isn't clear from the Mahabharata what kind of a weapon a bhushundi was. It was a weapon that was hurled
and could have been a simple rock. However, in descriptions of the Kurukshetra War, it seems to have been more
sophisticated than a simple rock.], with lightning in them. They were intent on killing Krishna and Partha, their great energy be-
numbed by their anger. Though they unleashed a fearful shower of weapons, Bibhatsu churned their upper limbs
with his sharp arrows. The immensely energetic Krishna, destroyer of enemies, then wrought a great slaughter of
daityas and danavas with his chakra. Pierced by arrows and struck with the force of the chakra, many powerful
ones were pacified, like waves that reach a shore.

'Then Shakra, the great lord of the thirty gods[The gods number thirty or thirty-three.], was angered. Riding a white elephant, he charged at them.
Grasping lightning, he hurled his vajra weapon with great force and the slayer of demons announced to the gods
that the two had been killed. On seeing that the king of the gods was about to hurl the great lightning, the gods
grasped all their respective weapons-King Yama his kaladanda[The staff of death.], the god of wealth his shibika[A shibika is a palanquin, the god of wealth or Kubera's weapon.], Varuna his
pasha[Noose.], Shiva his vichakra[This seems to be a special kind of chakra, though Shiva's weapon is actually a trident. However, the word
Shiva is also used generically for any god.], the two Ashvins luminiscent oshadhi[Herbs.], Dhata his dhanu[Bow.], Jaya his musala[Club.],
the immensely strong Tvashta a mountain, Amsha his shakti[Spear.] and the god of death[Yama.] his parashva[Battleaxe.]. Aryaman
grasped a fearful parigha[Mace.] and walked around. Mitra stood there, grasping a chakra that was as sharp as a razor.
O lord of the earth! Pusha, Bhaga and Savita grabbed bows and swords and rushed at Krishna and Partha. O
supreme among men! The Rudras, the powerful Maruts, the Vishvadevas, the Sadhyas resplendent in their energy,
and many other gods armed with diverse weapons advanced towards Krishna and Partha, in a desire to kill them. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that great battle, wonderful omens were witnessed, equal to those seen when
all beings were exterminated at the end of a yuga.'

'The two Achyutas[Krishna and Arjuna. Achyuta means one who does not decay and is usually used for Krishna.] saw the angry Shakra and the assemblage of the other gods. Those fearless and invincible
warriors stood there, their bows ready. When they saw the gods advancing from every direction, they angrily repulsed them with arrows that were like the vajra. Repeatedly, the resolutions of the gods were shattered. In fear,
they gave up the battle and sought refuge with Shakra. On seeing the gods repulsed by Madhava and Arjuna, the
sages who dwell in heaven were astonished. Shakra was also extremely pleased at witnessing their constant prowess in battle and engaged in fighting them once again. In an attempt to question Savyasachi's valour, the chastiser
of Paka[Paka was a demon killed by Indra.] then cast down a gigantic shower of rocks. But intolerantly, Arjuna countered that shower. On seeing
that his act was unsuccessful, Shatakratu, the king of the gods, increased the strength of his shower. But the son of
the chastiser of Paka brought great pleasure to his father by destroying that shower of rocks with his swift arrows.
Wishing to kill Pandu's son, Shakra then uprooted with his bare hands a giant peak of Mandara, with all its trees,
and flung it. But Arjuna immediately splintered that peak of the mountain into a thousand pieces with his swift and
straight, fire-tipped arrows. The sight of that mountain splintering was like that of the sky breaking, with the sun,
the moon and the planets. Pieces of that giant mountain fell on the forest and killed many beings who lived in
Khandava.'


Vaishampayana said, 'The inhabitants of Khandava were frightened at the fall of the mountain-danavas, rakshasas, serpents, hyenas, bears, elephants in rut, tigers, lions with manes, deer, buffaloes, hundreds of birds and
other forest-dwellers. In great alarm, they and many other beings slithered away. They saw the raging fire and the
two Krishnas, their weapons ready and the terrible roar scared them. Janardana let fly his chakra, radiant with its
own energy, and small creatures, danavas and nishacharas[Literally, those who move about (chara) in the night (nisha), but the term is also specifically used for goblins, jackals, owls and snakes.] were instantly cut down in hundreds and hurled into
the fire. Mangled by Krishna's chakra and covered with fat and blood, the rakshasas then seemed to be like twilight
clouds. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Varshneya was like destiny, killing pishachas, birds, serpents and animals in their thousands. Released from the hand of Krishna, the slayer of enemies, the chakra repeatedly killed
many beings and returned to his hand. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As he went about killing all the beings, the form of he, who is the soul of all beings, became dreadful.

'All the assembled gods and danavas could not vanquish Krishna and Pandava in battle. Nor could the gods save
the forest with their strength or quench the fire, so they retreated. On seeing how the masses of gods had been
turned away, Shatakratu was extremely pleased and praised Krishna and Pandava. When the gods were repulsed, a
disembodied voice spoke to Shatakratu in a loud and deep tone. "Your friend Takshaka, supreme among serpents,
is not here. At the time of Khandava's burning, he had gone to Kurukshetra. O Shakra! Listen to my words. You
cannot defeat Vasudeva and Arjuna when they are steadfast in battle. They are the gods Nara and Narayana, famous in heaven. You yourself know their bravery and their valour. These two supreme and ancient sages are invincible in battle and cannot be conquered in any of the worlds. They deserve the worship of all the gods, asuras, yak-
shas, rakshas, gandharvas, humans, kinnaras[Kinnaras are mythical and semi-divine species, with human bodies and heads of horses. They are the companions of Kubera.] and serpents. O, Vasava[Indra.]! Therefore, depart from here with the
gods. The destruction of Khandava is destined." Having heard these words and knowing them to be true, the lord
of the immortals gave up his anger and jealousy and returned to heaven. O king! On seeing the great-souled
Shatakratu leave, all the other dwellers of heaven also departed. When the two warriors, Vasudeva and Arjuna, saw
the king of the gods leave with the other gods, they roared like lions.

'O king! Krishna and Pandava were delighted that the king of the gods had left. Fearlessly, they continued with
burning the forest. Having vanquished the gods the way the wind scatters the clouds, Arjuna used showers of arrows to kill the beings who lived in Khandava. Not a single being could escape from there, they were cut down by
Savyasachi's arrows. Even the greatest of beings could not look upon the invincible Arjuna in battle, not to speak
of engaging him in a fight. Like the god of death himself, he pierced one with a hundred arrows and a hundred
with one, and dead, they descended into the flames. They found no refuge along the banks, or in the uneven plains,
or in the abodes of the ancestors and the gods. The heat increased and thousands of herds of beings cried out loudly in pain. Elephants, deer and birds cried out and the sound scared those who lived in the Ganga and the ocean.
No one dared gaze at the mighty-armed Arjuna and the immensely strong Krishna, let alone fighting with them.
With his chakra, Hari slew rakshasas, danavas and nagas and those who ventured along solitary paths. The heads
and trunks sliced with the force of the chakra, the giant bodies fell into the mouth of the blazing fire. Aided by the
flesh, torrents of blood and fat, the flames rose up into the sky, without a trace of smoke. Agni's eyes blazed, his
tongue blazed and his wide-open mouth also blazed. The hair stood up, drinking up the fat of life, the eyes were
tawny. The fire fed on the nectar that Krishna and Arjuna had provided and was extremely happy, satiated and
contented.

'Then Madhusudana saw an asura named Maya suddenly attempting to escape from Takshaka's abode. The
fire's charioteer was the wind and assuming the form of a hermit with matted hair and roaring like clouds, he pursued him with the intention of consuming him. Vasudeva stood with his chakra raised, ready to kill. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! On seeing the raised chakra and the fire ready to consume him, Maya cried out, "O Arjuna!
Save me." Hearing these scared words, Arjuna replied, "Do not be frightened." O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Partha's words seemed to instil new life into Maya. Maya was Namuchi's[A demon killed by Indra.] brother. When Partha told Maya
he need not fear, Dasharha no longer desired to kill him and the fire did not burn him either. In that flaming forest,
Agni did not burn six beings-Ashvasena, Maya and the four Sharngakas[The chataka birds, but also peacocks.].'

Janamejaya asked, 'O brahmana! Why did Agni, the fire, not burn the Sharngakas when that forest was blazing?
Tell me at once. O, brahmana! You have recounted the reason why Ashvasena and the danava Maya were not
burnt. But you have not told us the reason for the Sharngakas. O, brahmana! It is extraordinary that the Sharngakas
escaped from destruction. Recount to us why they were not destroyed in the conflagaration.'

Vaishampayana said, 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I will tell you everything exactly about why Agni
did not consume the Sharngakas. O king! There was a great rishi renowned by the name of Mandapala. He was
learned in dharma, rigid in his vows and chief among ascetics. He followed the path of the rishis who held up their
seed[The term for this is urdhvareta, meaning those who hold up their semen.], was devoted to studying the sacred texts and dharma, was an ascetic and had achieved control over his
senses. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having attained the final goal of ascetism, he gave up his human
body and went to the world of the ancestors. But he did not find the fruits of his acts there. The dwellers of heaven
were seated around Dharmaraja[Yama, the god of death.] and he asked them, "Why have I not attained the worlds that should have been
the fruit of my asceticism? What have I not done that this should be the fruit of my actions? O dwellers of heaven!
I will do that which will get me the fruits of my asceticism and open that which is now closed. Tell me." The gods
replied, "O brahmana! Hear about the debts men are undoubtedly born with-to rituals, brahmacharya[In this context, this should be interpreted as a period earmarked for studying, rather than lifelong celibacy.] and offspring, and these are respectively discharged through sacrifices, austerities and progeny. You are an ascetic and you
have performed sacrifices. But you did not have any offspring. Because you did not have offspring, these worlds
are closed to you. Therefore, have progeny and you will enjoy these worlds for an eternity. O sage! A son saves a
father from the hell known as put[There are several hells (naraka). A son is named putra because he saves (trana) the father from the hell
named put. This hell is also called punnam, which means, by the name of put.]. O supreme among brahmanas! Therefore, try to obtain offspring." On hearing
these words of the dwellers of heaven, Mandapala began to wonder how he might obtain a large number of offspring swiftly. After thinking about this, he concluded that birds give birth to many offspring.

'So he became a Sharngaka bird and united with a female Sharngaka bird named Jarita. Through her, he had
four sons who were knowledgable about the brahman. While these young sons were still inside their eggs, the sage
deserted them there in that forest with their mother and went off after Lapita[The former human wife.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When the immensely illustrious one went off after Lapita, out of affection for her children, Jarita became
very thoughtful and anxious. O king! Those sons, the infant rishis still in their eggs, had undeservedly been abandoned by their father in Khandava forest. But out of love for her sons, Jarita could not discard them and after they
were born, brought them up in her own way[The way of the birds.].

'After some time, the rishi Mandapala was wandering in the forest with Lapita and he saw Agni advance towards Khandava to consume it. Knowing his resolution and knowing his sons were still young, the brahmana sage
prayed to the greatly energetic fire, lord of the world, scared about the protection of his sons. Mandapala said, "O
Agni! You are the mouth of all the gods, you are the one who carries sacrificial offerings. You are the purifier who
dwells invisibly in all living beings. The learned have said that you are one and have again said that you are
three[The sacrificial fire is of three types-garhapatya (in the household), ahavaniya (used in sacrifices) and dakshina (the one placed facing the south).]. They think of you in eight forms[The number eight has two possible interpretations. The first is the ordinary fire and the other seven consisting
of the sacrificial fire in seven different places-the wife's position at the sacrifice, the soma altar, the general altar,
the seat of the priest who maintains the sacrificial fire, the area reserved for the assisting priests, the place where
the rituals are performed and the place where the worship is performed. The second and perhaps more convincing
explanation is the ordinary aggregated fire and the seven flames or tongues a fire is supposed to have-karali
(frightful), dhumini (full of smoke), shveta (white), lohita (red), neelalohita (bluish red), suvarna (golden) and
padmaraga (red like a ruby).] and imagine you as the one who carries sacrificial offerings. The
supreme rishis say that you have created the entire universe. O fire! The universe is based on you and without you,
it will be destroyed instantly. It is after paying homage to you that the brahmanas go to the eternal worlds they
have earned through their actions, together with their wives and sons. O Agni! It is said that you are the fire in the
clouds in the sky, in their lightning. The flames that emerge from you burn down all beings. O immensely radiant
one! O Jataveda[Jataveda is one of Agni's names and means that the Vedas are born from (jata) the fire.]! You have created everything in this universe. Everything, mobile and immobile, every action
and everything that exists is based on you. You have determined the ancient waters, everything in the universe is
based on you. The offerings to the gods and the offerings to the ancestors, as prescribed, are based on you. O Agni!
You are the one who burns down, you are Dhata[Dhata means creator and is also a term used for Brahma and Vishnu.], you are Brihaspati[The preceptor of the gods. In earlier times, Brihaspati was also a term used for Indra.]. You are the two Ashvins, the two
Yamas[The word yama itself means two or a couple and can therefore also be an adjective used for the two Ashvins.
However, if it is not an adjective, the two Yamas can only mean Yama and his sister Yami.], Mitra, Soma and Anila[The god of wind or Vayu.]." O king! Having been thus prayed to by Mandapala, Agni was satisfied with
the immeasurably energetic sage. With happiness in his heart, he asked him, "What good can I do for you?" With
hands joined in salutation, Mandapala told the fire, "When you burn Khandava forest, please spare my sons." The
illustrious bearer of sacrificial offerings gave him his word and at that time, he blazed into Khandava, wishing to
consume it.'


