Vaishampayana said, 'Then the monkey contracted his huge body, which he had extended through his own wishes.
He once again embraced Bhimasena with his arms. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having been thus embraced by his brother, Bhima's exhaustion was destroyed and everything was at ease. With tears in his eyes, the
ape once again told Bhima, in a voice that was choked and affectionate. "O brave one! Return to your own abode.
But remember me in your thoughts. O best of the Kurus! Do not tell anyone that I am here. O immensely powerful
one! When they have obtained leave from the abode of the lord of the riches, the wives of the gods and the gandharvas come to this region and to this time. My eyes have been satisfied and I have remembered Raghava. O Bhi-
ma! Through you, I have touched another human body. O brave one! O Kounteya! Now let your sight of me be
successful too. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Because of our brotherhood, ask for a boon. If you wish that I
should go to Hastinapura and kill the low sons of Dhritarashtra, I will do that. Or I will grind that city down with
rocks. O immensely strong one! I will perform whatever deed you desire." On hearing these words of the great-
souled one, Bhima was delighted and replied to Hanuman with happiness in his heart, "O bull among apes! You
have already done everything for me. O mighty-armed one! May you be fortunate. Forgive me. I desire your
favours. With a protector as valorous as you, all of us Pandavas have found a protector. With your energy, all of us
will triumph over our enemies." Having heard these words, Hanuman told Bhimasena, "From brotherhood and out
of my well wishes towards you, I will do that which will bring you pleasure. O brave one! O mighty-armed one!
When you rush into the enemy's battle formations, armed with arrows and spears, and utter a roar like that of a
lion, I will add my own roars to that of yours. Seated on Vijaya's flagstaff[Vijaya is Arjuna's name. Hanuman was perched on Arjuna's flagstaff at the time of battle.], I will let loose terrible roars that will
rob the enemies of their lives." Having said this, he disappeared.

'When that supreme of apes had left, Bhima, foremost among strong ones, travelled along that road to the extensive Gandhamadana. He thought about his[Hanuman's.] resplendent body, unmatched on earth. He thought about
Dasharathi's greatness and power. Travelling eagerly towards Sougandhika forest, he made lovely forests and
groves tremble. He saw forests with blossoms and many colourful flowers and lotuses. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He saw mad elephants that were streaked with mud, like masses of monsoon clouds. Proceeding fast,
the handsome one saw bucks with does in the forest. They had grass in their mouths and their darting eyes looked
at him. With great valour, Bhimasena entered the mountain that was infested with buffaloes, boars and tigers, as if
forest trees that were in blossom, stirred by the breeze and with branches lowered by the burden of delicate and
copper-red shoots, had invited him in. He passed ponds teeming with lotuses, with beautiful tirthas and groves,
swarming with intoxicated bees. The lotuses seemed to join their hands in salutation. But Bhima's mind was set on
the peak of the mountain, full of flowers. With Droupadi's words providing sustenance, he travelled faster. When
the day had turned[That is, when it was afternoon.], in the forest that was infested with deer, he saw a wide river. It was full of unblemished and
golden lotuses. It was aswarm with intoxicated karandavas[Type of duck.] and adorned with chakravakas[The ruddy goose.]. It was as if a
garland of spotless lotuses had been designed for the mountain. Near that river, the greatly powerful one saw the
large Sougandhika forest. It was as radiant as the rising sun and brought him joy. On seeing this, Pandu's son
thought that his desires had been satisfied. His mind went out to his beloved, who was suffering as a result of
dwelling in the forest.'


Vaishampayana said, 'On the peak of Kailasa and in that beautiful grove, he saw that beautiful pond, guarded by
rakshasas. Its source was the mountainous waterfalls that were near Kubera's abode. It was extremely beautiful,
with a lot of shade and full of many trees and creepers. It was covered with yellow lotuses and divine golden lotuses. It made the world pure. It was auspicious and extraordinary to behold. Pandava, Kunti's son, saw the clear,
cool, light and pure water there, like amrita. He drank a lot of that auspicious water. The beautiful pond was covered with sougandhika lotuses. There were golden lotuses, with supreme fragrance. The stalks were made out of
lapis lazuli[Vaidurya.]. They were beautiful and had many colours. Disturbed by the swans and the karandakas[The ruddy goose.], they
scattered white pollen. This was the pleasure ground of the great-souled Kubera, king of the yakshas. It was shown
great homage by the gandharvas, the apsaras and the gods. It was frequented by the rishis, yakshas, kimpurushas,
rakshasas and kinnaras and was protected well by Vaishravana[Vaishravana is Vishrava's son and is Kubera's name.].

'On seeing that celestial pond, the immensely strong Kounteya Bhimasena was filled with great delight. On the
instructions of their king[Kubera.], hundreds and thousands of rakshasas, named krodhavashas, stood guard, armed with
many different kinds of weapons. They saw Kounteya, the destroyer of enemies. Bhima, terrible in valour, was
clad in deerskin and golden armour for his upper arms. He was armed and his sword was girded. When they saw
him fearlessly advance to gather the lotuses, they shouted at one another, "Why has this maharatha, tiger among
men, come here? He is clad in deerskin and bears arms. Inquire." Then all of them approached the mighty-armed
Vrikodara and asked the resplendent one, "Who are you? Tell us. You wear the garments of a hermit and we see
that you are attired in bark. O immensely intelligent one. Tell us why you have come."'


