Vaishampayana said, 'When the great-souled Pandavas were seated, Satyavati's son, Vyasa, invited the king to
speak. "O Dhritarashtra! O mighty-armed one! Are your austerities progressing? O lord of men! Is your mind
pleased with residing in the forest? O king! Has the sorrow on account of the destruction of your sons diminished?
O unblemished one! Are all your senses of knowledge clear? Is your intelligence firmly fixed on observing the
rites of the forest? I hope my daughter-in-law, Gandhari, is not overcome by grief. The queen is immensely wise
and intelligent and has knowledge of dharma and artha. She knows the truth about prosperity and adversity. I hope
she is not sorrowing. O king! I hope Kunti is serving you without any sense of ego. She has given up the kingdom
and devoted herself to serving her seniors. Did the king who is Dharma's son, Bhima, Arjuna and the twins greet
you happily? Have they been comforted? Were you happy at seeing them? Has your mind been cleansed of sin? O
lord of men! Do you possess pure sentiments and has knowledge been generated in you? O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! O great king! In all creatures, there are three things that are superior-lack of enmity, truth and
lack of violence. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I hope you are not suffering from residing in the forest. O
lord! What about eating forest fare and wearing the garments of sages? O king! I know about the departure, following the proper rites, of the great-souled Vidura. He was born from Dharma and was extremely great-souled. It
was because of Mandavya's curse that Dharma was born as Vidura[Described in Section 7 (Volume 1). Dharma imposed too heavy a punishment on the sage Mandavya and was
cursed.]. He was immensely intelligent. He was a
great yogi. He was great-souled and extremely great-minded. Brihaspati among the gods and Sukra among the
asuras did not possess as much of intelligence as that bull among men did. Over a long period of time, the rishi
Mandavya accumulated the strength of his austerities and used this to overwhelm eternal Dharma. Through his
strength,  Brahma's  command  and  my  employment,  that  extremely  intelligent  one  was  born  in  Vichitravirya's
field[Vidura was Vedavyasa's son.]. O great king! He was your brother. But he was also the eternal god of the gods. Through the techniques of
dharana and dhyana, the wise and the learned known him now as Dharma. The eternal one prospers through truth,
self-control, rituals, non-violence, generosity and austerities. Yudhishthira, king of the Kurus, was born through the
strength of his yoga. O king! That is the reason that wise and extremely intelligent one is also known as Dharma.
Both here and in the hereafter, Dharma exists, like the fire, like the wind, like the water, like the earth and like the
sky. O Kouravya! He can go everywhere. He pervades everything, mobile and immobile. That god of the gods can
be seen by the siddhas, those who have cleansed their sins. Dharma is Vidura. Vidura is the Pandava[Yudhishthira.
 
 
 ]. O king!
You can see Pandava, who is standing before you and is obedient to you. Your brother, the supremely intelligent
one, has entered him with his soul. It is good fortune that the great-souled one, immensely strong in yoga, now pervades Kounteya. O bull among the Bharata lineage! You will also be united with the greatest benefit. O son! Know
that I have come here to dispel your doubts. There is a deed that none of the maharshis in this world have ever accomplished earlier. It is marvelous. Through the fruits of my austerities, I will show it to you. O lord of the earth!
What do you desire? What do you seek to obtain from me? Tell me clearly what you wish to see or hear. I will act
in accordance with that."'

This ends Ashrama-Vasa Parva.

Janamejaya asked, 'O brahmana! King Dhritarashtra, tiger among men, went to the forest with his wife and his
daughter-in-law, Kunti. Vidura obtained success and merged himself into Dharmaraja. All the sons of Pandu
were then residing in the circle of the hermitage. What wonderful deed did the supremely energetic maharshi,
Vyasa, accomplish? What did he speak of doing? O brahmana! For how long did the undecaying Kouravya king,
Yudhishthira, reside in the forest with his people? O lord! While he dwelt there, what did he and his soldiers eat?
What about the great-souled ones and the women of the inner quarters? O unblemished one! Tell me that.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'O king! With the permission of the king of the Kurus, the Pandavas prepared many
kinds of food and drink and felt refreshed. With the soldiers and the women of the inner quarters, they resided
there for one month. O unblemished one! After this, as I have told you, Vyasa arrived there. In the presence of the
king, all of them began to converse. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When Vyasa had come, other
sages also arrived there-Narada, Parvata, Devala, great in austerities, Vishvavasu, Tumbaru and Chitrasena[Vishvavasu, Tumbaru and Chitrasena are actually the names of gandharvas. But here, they are mentioned as
sages.]. With
Dhritarashtra's permission, Yudhishthira, the great-minded king of the Kurus, followed the proper rites and worshipped them. Having been worshipped by Yudhishthira, all of them sat down on sacred and excellent seats covered with grass. When they were seated, the immensely intelligent king who was the extender of the Kuru lineage[Dhritarashtra.]
also sat down, surrounded by the sons of Pandu. Gandhari, Kunti, Droupadi, Satvati[Subhadra.] and the other women also
seated themselves. O king! The conversation that ensued was divine, full of dharma and concerned accounts of the
ancient rishis, the gods and the asuras.

'When this conversation was over, Vyasa, foremost among eloquent ones and supreme among those who knew
about all Vedas, was pleased. The immensely energetic one again spoke these words to the lord whose sight was
his wisdom. "O Indra among kings! I know the desire that is there in your heart. You are burning with grief on account of your sons. O king! That grief is also there in Gandhari's heart. O great king! It is also there in the hearts of
Kunti and Droupadi. Subhadra, Krishna's sister, is also holding up a fierce sorrow on account of her son being
killed. That is also known to me. O king! I heard that all of them had come here and were residing here. O descendant of the Kourava lineage! I have accordingly come here to dispel doubts. Over a long period of time, I have accumulated the valour of austerities. All of these gods, gandharvas and maharshis will witness that today. Therefore,
tell me. O mighty-armed one! I will grant you whatever you wish. I am lofty and can grant you a boon. Behold the
strength  of  my  austerities."  The  Indra  among  kings  was  thus  addressed  by  the  infinitely  intelligent  Vyasa.  He
thought for a short while and then spoke. "I am blessed that you are showing me your favours. Since you have
come here today, with all these virtuous ones, my life has become successful. Today, I understand the destinations
obtained by great-souled ones. All of you are Brahma's equal. You are stores of austerities and have come here to
meet me. There is no doubt that I have become purified through the act of seeing you. O unblemished ones! I no
longer entertain any fears about the world hereafter. However, I loved my son and always remember him. My mind
is distressed. He was evil-minded and extremely wicked. What has happened to him? He was evil in his intelligence and oppressed the innocent Pandavas. He violently destroyed the earth, with its men and elephants. There
were great-souled kings, the lords of many countries. They assembled for my son's sake and all of them came under the subjugation of death. Those brave ones gave up their sons and wives, dearer to them than their own lives.
They went to the abode of the lord of the dead. What has happened to them? O brahmana! What has happened to
those who were slain in the battle for the sake of their friends? What about my sons and grandsons who were killed
in the encounter? My heart is pained at the immensely strong and aged Bhishma, Shantanu's son, being brought
down, as it is for Drona, supreme among brahmanas. My son was foolish and wicked. He hated his well-wishers.
Desiring the kingdom of the earth, he conveyed his blazing lineage to its destruction. I remember all this and am
burnt night and day. Overwhelmed by sorrow and grief, I cannot obtain any peace. O father! This is what I think
about. There is no tranquility for me."'


