Yudhishthira asked, "O supreme among the Bharata lineage! In this world, when a king wishes to give away
gifts to brahmanas, which are the ones with superior qualities? What satisfies them instantly? What follows
when they are satisfied? O mighty-armed one! Instruct me about the great fruits of auspicious deeds. O king! In
this world and in the world hereafter, what are the fruits of donations? I wish to hear about this from you. Tell me
in detail."

'Bhishma replied, "Earlier, I asked Narada, who has the form of a celestial being, these questions. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! I will tell you what he told me. Listen.

'"Narada said, 'In ancient times, the gods and the rishis praised food. The sustenance of beings and all the sacrifices are based on food. There is no donation that is equal to food. There has not been and there will not be. Therefore, men especially wish to donate food. In this world, food provides energy and life is based on food. O lord! It is
food that holds up everything in the world and in the universe. In this world, householders and mendicants sustain
themselves on food. There is no doubt, and it is evident, that life depends on food. If one desires for one's own
prosperity, even if this means causing suffering to the family, one should donate food to great-souled brahmanas
who are begging for alms. If a person donates food to an accomplished brahmana who asks for it, then, in the
world hereafter, the donor ensures the best riches for himself. There may be an aged guest who arrives at a house,
exhausted and far from home. If the householder desires his own prosperity, he should worship him. O king! If a
person casts aside anger, is without anger and is extremely good in conduct, donating food in this way, then he obtains happiness in this world and in heaven. A guest who has arrived must not be disrespected or refused. Gifts to
even shvapakas[Shvapaka means dog-eater or someone who cooks food for dogs. This is usually equated with chandala or
outcaste.] and bitches aren't destroyed. There may be a person who is exhausted and has never been seen
before[That is, he is a stranger.]. If clean food is given to such a person, then great dharma is obtained. O lord of men! A man who affectionately offers food to ancestors, gods, rishis, brahmanas and guests obtains great and auspicious fruits. If a person has committed wicked deeds and donates food to someone who asks for it, then his sins are destroyed, especially if the recipient happens to be a brahmana. A gift of food to a brahmana becomes inexhaustible and that to a
shudra yields great fruits. This is the difference between donating food to brahmanas and to shudras. When a brahmana solicits food, he should not be asked about his gotra, conduct, learning, country of residence or birth. Food
must be given to this alms-seeker, even if he doesn't ask for it. O king! There is no doubt that if a man gives food,
he plants a tree of food that provides all the objects of desire, in this world and in the next. Like farmers who wait
for excellent rains, the ancestors hope that their sons and grandsons will donate food. The brahmana is a great creature. If he himself comes and asks to be given, whether one gives voluntarily or involuntarily[Whether one gives for the merits, or regardless of the merits.], one obtains auspicious merits. For all creatures, the brahmana is a guest. He is the one who eats first. When a brahmana seeks alms
at a house and returns after being treated well, the householder's prosperity increases. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! After death, he is born in a family that enjoys great objects of desire. If a man gives food in this world, he
obtains the supreme objective. A person who gives sweetmeats and sweet food resides in heaven and is honoured
there. Food is the life of men. Everything is established on food. A person who donates food gets animals, daughters, riches and objects of pleasure. In this world, a person who donates food is described as a giver of life and he
is said to be someone who has given everything. If a person follows the proper rites and gives food to guests and
brahmanas, then the donor obtains happiness and even the gods worship him. The brahmana is a great being. He
roams around on foot, but is like a field. Any seed that is sown there leads to great and auspicious fruits. A gift of
food directly leads to delight in the giver and the recipient. The fruits of all other kinds of gifts are felt indirectly. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! Know that birth results from food. Desire results from food. Know that dharma
and artha result from food. It is food that cures disease. In an earlier kalpa, Prajapati said that food is amrita. Food
is the earth, heaven and the sky. Everything is established in food. When food is destroyed, the five elements in the
body are adversely affected. When food is destroyed, even the strongest of the strong is destroyed. In the absence
of food, invitations, marriages and sacrifices vanish. O foremost among men! Even the brahman[Meaning the following of the brahman.] is destroyed.
Everything, mobile and immobile, is based on food. For dharma and artha in the three worlds, the learned give
away food. O king! If a man donates food, in the three worlds, his strength, energy, fame, happiness, deeds and
breath of life increase. The auspicious wind, the lord of the breath of life, accumulates water in the clouds. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Shakra showers down rain from the clouds. Using his rays, the sun in the sky
sucks up those juices from the earth. For the juices, the god, Prajapati, uses the sun and the wind in this way. From
the clouds, rain pours down on the earth. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! That makes the goddess Vasumati
gentle[Vasumati is another name for the earth and means the one who is full of riches.]. Crops are sown then and these sustain the universe. Flesh, fat, bones and semen result again. O lord of the
earth! The creatures are generated from the semen. Agni and Soma create the semen and nurture it. In this way, the
sun, the wind and semen are dependent on food. These are said to be parts of the same accumulation and creatures
are generated from this. O bull among the Bharata lineage! If a person swiftly gives food to someone who comes
to his house and asks for it, then he gives life and energy to creatures.'"

'Bhishma said, "O king! Having been thus addressed by Narada, I have always given food. Therefore, do not be
malicious. Give food without any anxiety. O king! O lord! If you follow the rites and give food to brahmanas in the
proper way, then you will obtain heaven. O lord of men! Hear about the worlds that are obtained through donations
of food. In heaven, the abodes of those great-souled ones are resplendent. They are in many places, have many
kinds of forms and possess many pillars. They are as white as the lunar disc and have nets of bells. Those abodes
are both stationary and mobile and possess the complexion of the rising sun. They are populated by many hundred
creatures that dwell on land and in the water. They dazzle like lapis lazuli and are decorated with silver and gold.
Trees that yield all the objects of desire are placed in those abodes. There are tanks, roads, plains, wells and lakes
everywhere. The roar of thousands of yoked vehicles can be heard. There are mountains of food to be tasted and
swallowed  and  garments  and  ornaments.  There  are  rivers  overflowing  with  milk  and  mountains  of  food.  The
palaces have the hue of white clouds and the beds shine in gold. Those who donate food obtain these. Therefore,
give food. For great-souled ones who give food, these are the worlds obtained, meant for the performers of auspicious deeds. Therefore, on earth, men must specially donate food."'


