Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing Yudhishthira's words, the intelligent and accomplished rishi, Dvaipayana,
thought for some time and then spoke to Pandava. "O king! Remember the dharma of kshatriyas and do not sorrow
pointlessly. O bull among the kshatriya lineage! While following their own dharma, those kshatriyas were slain.
They desired complete prosperity and great fame on earth. They followed the rules of death and, following time,
were killed. They were not killed by you, Bhima, Arjuna, or the twins. Following the dharma of time, those living
beings gave up their lives. Time has no mother or father, nor is it partial towards anyone. It is a witness to the
deeds committed by people. O bull among men! This[The destruction in the war.] is an instrument of time. In its form as lord, it uses beings
to slay other beings. Know that time is the essence of deeds and is witness to the good and the bad. Time leads to
happiness and unhappiness. Time is the one that yields the fruits. O mighty-armed one! Think of the deeds they[The ones who have been killed.]
performed. Those led to their destruction and they have come under the subjugation of time. Know your own self
and the rules and vows that you observe, and also that these deeds have been ordained by fate. An implement constructed by an artisan is under the control of the one who handles it. In that way, the universe is driven by deeds
that are controlled by time. On seeing that the birth and destruction of men have no evident cause, sorrow and delight are both pointless. O king! However, your heart has been ensnared by that which is unreal. Because of that,
perform deeds of atonement. O Partha! It has been heard that, in ancient times, the gods and the asuras fought with
each other. The asuras were elder brothers and the gods were younger[The gods and the demons were descended from the sage Kashyapa, but
had different mothers.]. Because of rivalry over prosperity, they
fought a great battle that lasted for thirty-two thousand years. The earth became a large ocean of blood. At that
time, the gods killed the daityas and obtained possession of heaven. The brahmanas, knowledgeable about the
Vedas, obtained the earth. However, because they were confounded by insolence, they began to help the danavas.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They were known in the three worlds as shalavrikas[The brahmanas who helped the demons. Literally, shala means jackal
and vrika means wolf.]. There were eighty-
eight thousand of them and they were killed by the gods. Those who destroy dharma, and those who seek the
spread of adharma, should be killed, just as the evil-souled daityas were killed by the gods. If by killing a single
person the rest of the lineage becomes virtuous and healthy, or if by killing a family the kingdom is saved, then
that must be done. O lord of men! Sometimes, dharma has the appearance of adharma. Learned people should
know that dharma may assume the form of adharma. O Pandava! Therefore, control yourself. You are learned. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! You have followed a path that has been travelled by the gods. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! People like these do not go to hell. O scorcher of enemies! Assure your brothers and well-wishers. A person who begins wicked acts and does not think about it, and, despite continuing to act in this way, does
not feel any shame, then it has been said that all the sins accrue to him. There is no atonement for him. Nor are his
wicked deeds ever diminished. You have been born in a pure lineage. Your deeds have been caused by someone
else's crimes. You performed those tasks unwillingly. Having performed them, you are repenting. As atonement, a
great horse sacrifice is indicated. O great king! Perform that and you will be cleansed of your sin. Having defeated
his enemies with the help of the Maruts, Maghavan, the chastiser of Paka, performed one hundred sacrifices one by
one and came to be known as Shatakratu[Indra's name is Shatakratu, shata meaning one hundred and kratu meaning sacrifice.]. He purified himself and won heaven. He obtained worlds that yield
happiness. Surrounded by large numbers of the Maruts, Shakra was radiant and illuminated the directions. Shachi's
consort is glorified in heaven by the apsaras. The lord of the gods is worshipped by the rishis and the gods. You
have conquered this earth through your valour. O unblemished one! The kings have been defeated through your
valour. O king! Surrounded by your well-wishers, go to their cities and kingdoms[The kingdoms of the kings who have been slain.] and instate their brothers, sons
and grandsons in their respective kingdoms. Assure the children who are still in the wombs. Delight all the citizens
and rule the earth. Where there is no male child, instate a maiden. As a class, women are addicted to desire and
will laugh away their sorrow. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In this way, assure all the kingdoms. Perform a
horse sacrifice, just as the victorious Indra did in ancient times. O bull among the kshatriyas! You should not sorrow about those great-souled kshatriyas. Their destruction has been brought on by their own deeds and they have
been confounded by the power of death. You have practised the dharma of kshatriyas and have obtained a kingdom
that is free from taint. O Kounteya! Follow dharma and after death, you will obtain the best."'


'Yudhishthira asked, "After what action does a man need to perform rites of atonement? O grandfather! What must
be done to free oneself? Tell me that."

'Vyasa replied, "Having not done deeds that must be performed, having done what is forbidden and having acted
in a false way, a man must perform rites of atonement. O Kounteya! A brahmachari who is asleep when the sun
rises, one who goes to sleep before the sun sets, one with malformed nails, one with discoloured teeth, one whose
younger brother gets married first, one who marries before his elder brother, one who maligns the brahman, one
who is guilty of slander, one who is the husband of a didhishu, one whose first wife is a didhishu[The word didhishu has different meanings-a widow who has remarried, a woman
who has married twice, or an elder sister who marries before the younger sister.], one who has
violated his vow of chastity, one who kills a brahmana, one who teaches the brahman to an undeserving person,
one who does not teach the brahman to a deserving person, one who performs a sacrifice for ordinary people, one
who sells the king[Probably meaning a traitor.], one who slays a shudra or a woman, one whose ancestors were contemptible, one who slays
an animal without a good reason[A good reason being a sacrifice.], one who sets fire to a forest, one who subsists through deceit, one who goes
against his preceptor, one who abandons the sacred fire, one who sells the brahman[That is, one who sells knowledge.] and one who violates an
agreement-all of these are sinners[These are sins that require atonement.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Listen attentively as I tell you about
deeds that must not be done. Abandoning one's own dharma, following the dharma of another, officiating at the
sacrifice of someone who is not entitled to sacrifice, eating something that should not be eaten, abandoning those
who have sought refuge, not supporting servants, selling liquor[The text uses the word rasa. This has multiple meanings, such as salt, juice and
spices. Other than liquor, it is not obvious why the selling of any of these other
items should be regarded as a sin.], the killing of inferior species[Birds and animals, that is, killing them unnecessarily.], not performing
tasks that one is capable of undertaking, not giving the gifts that must be given every day, not giving dakshina to
brahmanas and humiliating them-those who know about dharma say that these are deeds that must not be done. A
son who quarrels with his father, one who has intercourse with his preceptor's wife and one who does not procreate according to dharma-these are people who follow adharma. These are deeds that should not be done and men
must perform atonement for them. However, even when men perform these deeds, there are some situations when
they are not tainted. If a brahmana who knows about the Vedas picks up a weapon and attacks you in a battle,
wishing to kill you, then you are allowed to kill him. O Kounteya! On this, there is a mantra in the Vedas. This is
dharma, as proved by the Vedas, and I am telling you this. 'If a brahmana has deviated from his conduct and attacks like an assassin, killing him does not amount to the sin of killing a brahmana. This is said to be rage countering rage.' If a person drinks liquor in ignorance, or because he has been instructed that this will save his life[Presumably by a physician.], he
should thereafter be brought back to dharma through purification. O Kounteya! I have also told you everything
about what should be eaten and what should not be eaten. For all this, purification through rites of atonement is
prescribed.

'"A man incurs no sin if intercourse with the preceptor's wife is for the sake of the preceptor. Through a disciple, Uddalaka had Shvetaketu as a son[Shvetaketu was Uddalaka's son and their stories figure in the Upanishads, particularly Chandogya Upanishad. However, this bit about Shvetaketu being born to Uddalaka through a disciple is not mentioned elsewhere.]. If one steals for the sake of imparting prosperity to one's preceptor, one
is not bound down. That happens if one steals a lot because of desire, or if it is for one's own sake. If one takes
from those who are not brahmanas, there is no sin and one is not touched by the crime, as long as it is not for one's
own self. Lying is allowed provided it is for the sake of saving one's own life or that of someone else, for the sake
of one's preceptor, when it is among women and in connection with a marriage. A vow is not broken if semen is
released through a wet dream. Offering oblations into a blazing fire are prescribed as atonement. If the elder brother has become an outcast or has renounced the world, there is no sin from marrying before him. When someone
else's wife solicits you, there is no taint or adharma from indulging her. One should never kill an animal without
good reason or cause such an act to be done. Animals deserve kindness and a violation requires due purification. If
one gives to an undeserving brahmana in ignorance, there is no sin, nor if one gives to an undeserving person or
does not give to a deserving person, provided there is a reason for this. There is no crime in casting off a wife who
is of bad conduct[Implicitly, a wife who is adulterous.]. If such a woman is purified, the husband is not to be blamed. There is no crime in selling
soma if one knows the truth about it[That is, it should really be used in sacrifices to the gods.]. If an incompetent servant is discarded, there is no crime. There is no crime
if a forest is burnt for the sake of cattle[To create pastureland.]. I have told you about deeds that do not lead to sin when they are done.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I will now tell you in detail about rites of atonement."'


'Vyasa said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Through austerities, deeds and donations, a man is purified, as
long as he does not commit wicked deeds again. A person who has killed a brahmana can free himself of the crime
of killing a brahmana by eating once a day, roaming around for alms, performing all his tasks himself, holding a
skull in one hand and a bedpost in the other[A skull and khattanga (bedpost) being held as rod or staff are the signs of mendicancy. The broken bed
is symbolic of the giving up of the bed and the comforts of a household.], following brahmacharya, by always being enterprising, showing no
malice, sleeping on the bare ground and disclosing his deed to the worlds. He has to do this for a full twelve years.
If he lives on a diet of hardship, a man who kills a brahmana can be purified in six years[The translation doesn't capture the nature of the hardship (krichchha) diet. In this kind of practice, one
only eats in the morning for three days, only in the evening for the next three days, nothing that is not
obtained through begging in the next three days and fasts for three more days. This cycle of twelve days
continues and one is purified in six years. If this cycle is modified by replacing a seven-day span in
odd-numbered months and an eight-day span in even-numbered months, one is purified in three years.]. If he eats from one
month to another, he is freed in three years. If he eats only once a month, there is no doubt that he is freed in one
year. O king! If one does not eat at all, one is freed very soon. There is no doubt that one is purified through a
horse sacrifice. In this way, there are men who have bathed after a horse sacrifice. There are supreme learned texts
which say that all their souls have been cleansed. If one is killed in a battle for the sake of a brahmana, one is freed
from the sin of killing a brahmana. If the slayer of a brahmana gives one hundred thousand cows to deserving recipients, he is freed from all sin. If one gives away twenty-five thousand milk-yielding brown cows, one is freed
from all sin. At the time of death, if one gives one thousand milk-yielding cows with calves to virtuous and poor
people, one is freed from sin. O protector of the earth! If one gives away one hundred horses from Kamboja to
self-restrained brahmanas, one is freed from sin. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If someone gives something
that another person wishes for and does not brag about his generosity, he is freed from sin.

'"When a brahmana has drunk liquor, if he drinks that liquor when it is as hot as fire, he purifies himself in this
world and the next. Or he can fling himself down from Mount Meru, or enter a fire, or embark on the great
journey[The great journey (mahaprasthana) is death. The suggestion is of killing oneself.]. He will then be freed from all sin. However, a brahmana who has drunk liquor can again be admitted
into an assembly of brahmanas, provided he follows the injunctions of Brihaspati laid down in texts concerning
brahmanas. O king! If a man who has drunk liquor casts off envy and gives away land, without indulging in that
act again, he is cleansed and purified.

'"If one has had intercourse with a preceptor's wife, one should lie down on a heated slab of stone. Alternatively, one should cast one's eyes upwards and roam around, holding one's penis in one's hand.

'"By giving up the body, one is freed from all wicked deeds. If women endeavour to be restrained for a year,
they are freed from such deeds. If one observes a great vow, gives away everything that he owns, or is slain in a
battle for the sake of a preceptor, one is freed from all wicked deeds. If one acts falsely towards a preceptor or opposes him, one is freed from that crime by giving him something agreeable[By giving the preceptor an agreeable gift.]. If one has deviated from a vow of
chastity, one should follow the atonement vows prescribed for a killer of a brahmana. Alternatively, one can wear
the hide of a donkey for six months. One will then be freed from that crime. A person who has abducted another
person's wife or stolen another person's possessions must observe a vow for one year to be freed from that sin. If a
person has stolen the property of another, he must use every means possible to return riches that are of an equal
measure. He will then be freed from that sin. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A younger brother who has
married before the elder brother, or an elder brother whose younger brother has married before him, are both naturally freed by eating the hardship diet for twelve nights, or at least for ten. But, to save the ancestors, he[The elder brother.] must
get married. The wife[Of the younger brother.] is not tainted by this and no blemish attaches to her. Those who know about dharma say
that, after giving birth and after a period, women are cleansed and purified through a chaturmasya vow. When
there is suspicion about a woman's wicked conduct, it is known that there should be no sexual intercourse with her.
However, she is purified through her menstrual flow, like a vessel with ashes.

'"The four parts of dharma are decreed for brahmanas. For kings, it has been ordained that dharma will be reduced by one quarter. The vaishya's will be a quarter less than that and the shudra's a quarter less than that too. In
this way, one determines the seriousness or lightness of the crime and the atonement.

'"If a person kills a bird or an animal, or cuts down a large number of trees, that man should only subsist on air
for three nights and proclaim his crime. O king! If a person has intercourse with someone he should not have intercourse with, the atonement has been laid down. For six months, he should sleep in wet clothes and lie down on
ashes. These are the decrees laid down in the brahmana texts[The brahmana texts associated with the Vedas.], explaining all the deeds, the forms of atonement
and the detailed reasons. If one recites the savitri mantra[Another name for the gayatri mantra.] in a secluded place, while eating little, abjuring violence and hate and speaking little, one is freed from all sin. During the day, one must be under the open sky and
during the night, one must also sleep there. Thrice during the day and thrice during the night, one must immerse
oneself in the water, wearing one's garments. A brahmana who is observing this vow must not speak to women,
shudras and those who have become outcasts because of deviation in their conduct. He will then be freed from any
sins that he may have committed in ignorance.

'"The witness to a being[The atman.] obtains good and bad fruits after death. Depending on which of the two[Good and bad deeds.] is more,
the doer reaps the consequences. Donations, austerities and deeds lead to auspicious fruits. In that way, they increase and become greater than wicked deeds. If wicked deeds have been performed, that is a reason to perform
auspicious ones. By constantly giving away riches, one is freed from sin. The rites of atonement are in proportion
to the wicked deed. However, no atonement is recommended for a mahapataka[A great sin is pataka or mahapataka, while a minor sin is upapataka. While it is agreed that there are
five great or major sins, the listing of those sins varies. But something like killing a brahmana or having
intercourse with a preceptor's wife would figure in all such lists.]. O king! Eating what should not
be eaten and speaking what should not be spoken-for these, atonement depends on whether these are done knowingly or unknowingly. Crimes that are knowingly committed are said to be grievous. Those that are unknowingly
committed are light and there is atonement for both. The methods and rites described are capable of cleansing the
sin. But those recommendations are for the believers and the faithful. Those rites are never seen to be for men who
are non-believers, and unfaithful and those who are prone to insolence and wickedness. O supreme among those
who uphold dharma! Good conduct is the dharma of the virtuous. O tiger among men! For the sake of happiness
after death, they must serve this. O king! Because of the motives behind your earlier crimes, you will be freed. You
wished to save by killing them. Alternatively, you were following the duty of kings. However, if you abhor what
you did, follow the path of atonement. Like those who are not aryas, you will then not confront destruction because of your deeds."'


