Vaishampayana said, 'When the invincible one had departed, Pundarikaksha, bull among the Yadu lineage, spoke
these words to Yudhishthira, Kunti's son. "O Pandava! Your brother is overcome with sorrow on account of his
sons. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The descendant of the Bharata lineage has left alone, wishing to kill
Drona's son. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Among all your brothers, Bhima is the one you love most. He is
headed towards a calamity. Why are you not doing something about it? Drona, the destroyer of enemy cities, instructed his son about a weapon named brahmashira. It is capable of burning down the earth. That great-souled and
immensely fortunate one possessed a standard that was foremost among that of all archers. The preceptor gave it[The weapon.]
to his beloved Dhananjaya. His son was unable to tolerate this[That it had been given to Arjuna.]. The great-souled one knew that his son was reckless. The preceptor knew about all forms of dharma and gave it to his son with reluctance. He spoke to his son and
imposed this restriction on his son. 'O son! Even if you confront the greatest of catastrophes in a battle, this
weapon should never be used, especially against humans.' The preceptor, Drona, spoke these words to his son.
Later, he again added, 'O bull among men! You will not stay along the path of the righteous.' On hearing the unpleasant words of his father, the evil-souled one gave up hope of obtaining all kinds of fortune. Tormented by sorrow, he began to roam around the earth. O best among Kurus! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! At that time,
you were in the forest. He came to Dvaraka and was supremely honoured by the Vrishnis. While he dwelt in Dvaravati[Dvaravati is another name for Dvaraka.], he once came to me, while I was alone along the shores of the ocean. He smiled and told me, 'O Krishna!
My father, the preceptor of the Bharatas, has given the weapon named brahmashira to me. It was obtained by
Agastya, for whom truth was his valour, after performing the fiercest of austerities. It is worshipped by the gods
and the gandharvas. O Dasharha! It is with me now, as it used to be with my father. O supreme among the Yadu
lineage! I will give that divine weapon to you, if you give me the chakra weapon in return, one that is capable of
destroying enemies in battle.' O king! He affectionately joined his hands in salutation and addressed these words
to me. O bull among the Bharata lineage! He carefully sought that weapon from me. 'Gods, danavas, gandharvas,
men, birds and serpents together are not equal to one-hundredth part of my valour[Krishna spoke these words to Ashvatthama.]. I possess this bow, this spear,
this chakra and this club. I will give you whichever of these weapons you cherish. Whichever one you wish,
whichever you can raise and use in battle, take that from me, without giving me any weapon in return.' The
mighty-armed one wished to rival me and told me that he wanted the chakra. It possessed an excellent nave and
one thousand spokes. It possessed the essence of the vajra and was made out of iron. At this, I asked him to take
the chakra. He violently seized the chakra with his left hand. O one without decay! However, he was incapable of
moving it from its spot. He then attempted to seize it with his right hand. He made every kind of effort and tried
every means to grasp it. But though he used all his strength, he was incapable of raising it or moving it. Drona's
evil-minded son made the supreme of efforts. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Exhausted, he then desisted.
When he gave up all such intentions, I spoke these gentle words to the insensible Ashvatthama. 'He is regarded as
the supreme one among gods and humans. He is the wielder of Gandiva, the one with the white horses. The
supreme of apes sits astride his standard. He is Jishnu. He defeated and satisfied Shankara, the one with the blue
throat and Uma's consort, the god who is the lord of the gods, himself in a duel[Described in Section 31 (Volume 2).]. There is no other man on earth
whom I love as much. There is nothing that I cannot give him, even my wives and sons. O brahmana! He is unblemished in his deeds. Even such a well-wisher like Partha has never spoken such words to me earlier, the likes of
which you have spoken[That is, Arjuna never asked for those weapons.]. I observed extremely terrible brahmacharya for twelve years, on the slopes of the Himalayas. I worshipped through austerities. Rukmini[One of Krishna's wives.] observed similar vows and gave birth to my son named
Pradyumna, who is as energetic as Sanatkumara[One of the four mental sons born to Brahma. Sanatkumara is believed to
have been born as Pradyumna.]. He is like me. But even he has never asked for this great and
divine chakra. You have sought it like a foolish person. The extremely strong Rama[Balarama.] has never spoken such words
to me. Nor have Gada and Samba asked for what you have asked[Gada was Krishna's brother. Samba was Krishna's son, through Jambavati.]. Nor have the other Vrishni and Andhaka maharathas who dwell in Dvaraka earlier asked for what you have asked. The son of the preceptor of the Bharatas is
revered by all the Yadavas. O best among rathas! O son[The word used is tata. It means son, but is affectionately used for anyone
who is younger or junior.]! Who, will you fight with this chakra?' Having been thus
addressed by me, Drona's son spoke these words in reply. 'O Krishna! O great one! After worshipping you, it was
my intention to fight with you. That is the reason I desired the chakra, worshipped by gods and danavas. O lord!
Had I obtained it, I would have become invincible. I tell you this truthfully. O Keshava! That is the truth. I have
not obtained that extremely rare object of desire. O Govinda! I am about to depart. Speak auspicious words to me
now. You are a bull among the Vrishnis and you wield this chakra, with the excellent nave. There is no one on
earth who can receive this chakra.' Having spoken these words, Drona's son received a couple of horses and riches
from me. The child also took many kinds of jewels. He is angry and evil in his soul. He is fickle and cruel too. He
knows about the weapon brahmashira. Therefore, Vrikodara needs to be protected from him."'
