Vaishampayana said, 'O great king! The maiden, good in her vows, tended to the brahmana, rigid in his vows. She
satisfied him, with a pure mind. O Indra among kings! The foremost among brahmanas sometimes said that he
would return in the morning, but would return in the evening or at night. But at all hours, and always, the maiden
worshipped him with food and shelter and gave him more and more. Day by day, her hospitality about food, other
objects, beds and seats, increased and never decreased. O king! Even if the brahmana censured her, found fault
with her or spoke unpleasant words, Pritha never did anything that displeased him. On several occasions, the brahmana returned when the time had passed, or did not return at all. He asked her to serve food when it was difficult
to obtain. But she always said that everything was ready and served him. She was self-restrained, like a disciple, a
son or a sister. O Indra among kings! That unblemished gem of a maiden created affection in that foremost among
brahmanas, tending to his wishes. The supreme among brahmanas was satisfied with her character and conduct and
with her many supreme efforts, she continued to serve him. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Her father used
to ask her in the morning and the evening. "O daughter! Is the brahmana satisfied with your service?" The famous
one would reply that he was supremely satisfied. The great-souled Kuntibhoja felt great joy.

'When one year had passed, the foremost among those who meditate had detected no misdeeds on Pritha's part
and had become her well-wisher. Delighted, the brahmana told her, "O fortunate one! O beautiful one! I am completely satisfied with your service. O fortunate one! Ask for a boon that is difficult for humans to obtain, so that
you are able to surpass all women in your fame." Kunti replied, "O foremost among those who are learned in the
Vedas! All my desires have already been satisfied, since you and my father are pleased with me. O brahmana!
What purpose will boons serve me?" The brahmana said, "O fortunate one! O one with the sweet smiles! If you do
not wish for a boon from me, accept this mantra. Through it, you can summon the gods. O fortunate one! Whichever god you invoke through this mantra will be under your control. Whether willing or unwilling, the god will be
under your control, pacified by the mantra, and will be like your servant." O king! The unblemished one wasn't
capable of refusing a second time. She was scared that the foremost among brahmanas might curse her. O king!
The brahmana instructed the one with the flawless limbs about the sequence of mantras, located towards the beginning of the sacred Atharva texts[The Atharva Veda.]. O Indra among kings! Having thus bestowed it, he told Kuntibhoja, "O king! I
have lived happily in your house, satisfied by your daughter. She has always pleased me and honoured me. It is
over." Having said this, he disappeared. The king was overcome with wonder at seeing the brahmana vanish on the
spot. He honoured Pritha.'
