'Yudhishthira asked, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! Why do the brahmanas speak of the king as a divinity? O
grandfather! He is only the lord of men. Tell me that."

'Bhishma replied, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In connection with this, an ancient account of what Vasumana asked Brihaspati is spoken of. A supreme among intelligent ones was named Vasumana and he was the
king of Kosala. He was accomplished in his wisdom and he questioned maharshi Brihaspati. He knew about the
requirements of humility and he observed all the humble modes towards Brihaspati. As is decreed, he kept him on
the right and bowed down before him[Vasumana circuambulated Brihaspati in a clockwise direction and then
bowed down before him.]. He was engaged in ensuring the welfare of all beings in the kingdom and
asked in the proper way. O lord of the earth! Basing himself on dharma, he wished to know about the welfare of
subjects. 'What makes beings prosper and when do they advance towards destruction? O immensely wise one!
Whom should they worship, so as to obtain extreme happiness?' Having been asked by the infinitely energetic one,
the great king of Kosala, Brihaspati attentively praised the reverence that should be shown to kings.

'"'O great king[This is Brihaspati speaking.]! In this world, the king is seen to be the root of all dharma. It is because they are frightened of
the king that subjects do not devour each other. The king pacifies this entire agitated and anxious world. Having
pacified it through dharma, he rules it. O king! If the sun and the moon did not rise, all the beings would be blind
and submerged in darkness and be unable to see each other. Like fish in the absence of water and birds in the absence of perches, they would repeatedly roam around according to their desires and attack each other. They would
crush and intolerantly cross each other. There is no doubt that they would soon confront destruction. In that way,
without a king, these subjects will be destroyed. They will be blind and submerged in darkness, like animals without a herdsman. If a king does not protect, the strong will abduct the possessions of the weak and kill them when
they resist. If a king does not protect, the wicked will violently seize many kinds of vehicles, garments, ornaments
and jewels. If a king does not protect in this world, everyone will say, "This is mine," and there will be no property. There will be destruction of the universe. If the king does not protect, wicked ones will oppress and kill their
own mothers, fathers, elders, teachers, guests and preceptors. If the king does not protect, many kinds of weapons
will descend on those who follow dharma, while those who follow adharma will be accepted. If the king does not
protect, those with riches will always be killed, bound and oppressed, and there will be no sense of ownership. If
the king does not protect, the sky will be the end[The sense probably is that there will be no worlds in the hereafter for those
with good deeds.]. This world will be full of bandits and everyone will descend
into a terrible hell. If the king does not protect, seed and grain will not grow. There will be no agriculture and no
paths for traders. Dharma and the three types of learning will be submerged. If the king does not protect, there will
be no sacrifices and no decreed dakshina. There will be no marriage and no society. If the king does not protect,
bulls will not work and there will be no churning of milk in pots. The pens of cattle will be destroyed. If the king
does not protect, hearts will be anxious and frightened and the senses will be overcome with lamentations. Everything will be destroyed in an instant. If the king does not protect, one will not be able to stand without fear. There
won't be sacrifices throughout the year, with the decreed dakshina being given. If the king does not protect, brahmanas will not engage in asceticism and study the four Vedas. They will not bathe after studying and they will not
bathe after austerities. If the king does not protect, all barriers will be demolished and one hand will steal from the
other hand. Everyone will run away in fright. If the king does not protect, no one will be touched by dharma. People who are struck will strike back and their own senses will govern them. If the king does not protect, there will
be wrong policies and a mixing of varnas. The kingdom will be ravaged by famine. It is because they are protected
by the king that men are without fear. They sleep anywhere, as they wish, and leave the doors of their houses open.
If men have a king who is devoted to dharma as their protector, no one has to suffer verbal abuse or blows from the
hands. If the lord of the earth protects, women, even when unaccompanied by men, can wander fearlessly on the
roads, wearing all their ornaments. If the lord of the earth protects, dharma is followed and there is no violence towards each other. Instead, favours are done to each other. When the lord of the earth protects, the three varnas separately perform great sacrifices and attentively study the sacred texts. When the lord of the earth protects, everything is well and the world is productively supported by the three[Probably the three varnas.]. When the king bears that excellent burden
and bears the subjects with a great deal of strength, the world is pleased. In every direction, all the beings always
exist because he exists. Had he not existed, they would not have existed. Who will not honour such a person? A
king who bears a burden for the happiness of all the people and is engaged in their pleasure and benefit conquers
both worlds[This world and the next.]. If a man harbours evil thoughts towards such a person in his mind, there is no doubt that he will
suffer hardships in this life and will be cast into hell after death. No one should disregard a lord of the earth as a
mere man. He is a great divinity established in the form of a man. Depending on the occasion, he always adopts
five different forms-Agni, Aditya, Mrityu, Vaishravana and Yama[Mrityu is Death and Vaishravana is Kubera.]. When the king has been deceived through
falsehood and burns wicked ones down with his fierce energy, he is then Pavaka[That is, Agni.]. When the lord of the earth
uses spies to look at everyone and then travels after providing safety, he is then Bhaskara[That is, Aditya, the sun god.]. When he is angry and
destroys hundreds of impure men, with their sons, grandsons and relatives, he is then Antaka[That is, Mrityu or Death.]. When he strikes
all those who follow adharma with the fierce rod of chastisement and shows favours to those who follow dharma,
he is Yama. He gives streams of wealth to those who are his benefactors and takes away jewels and many other objects from those who injure him. O king! In this world, when he gives prosperity to some and takes it away from
others, the lord of the earth is Vaishravana. Someone who is skilful and is capable of working incessantly, or desires dharma and is not envious of what has been obtained by his lord, should never speak ill of him[The king.]. One who
acts contrary to the king will never obtain happiness, even if it happens to be a son, a brother, a friend, or someone
who is like his own self. A fire trailing black smoke, and with the wind as its charioteer, leaves a residue. But when
one is seized by a king, there is nothing that is left. One must keep everything protected by him at a long distance,
as if it is death. A man must not steal a king's possessions. One will be destroyed if one touches those, like a deer
touching a trap. An intelligent person must protect a king's possessions like his own. Those stupid ones who steal
the king's possessions descend for a long time into a great, terrible and fathomless hell. He is praised with words
like "Raja, Bhoja, Virat, Samrat, Kshatriya, Bhupati and Nripa[All of these are terms for a king and respectively mean delighter of the people, granter of happiness, possessor of prosperity, emperor (supreme one),
healer of wounds, lord of the earth and protector of men.]". Who will not worship such a person? Therefore, an intelligent and accomplished person who is controlled, who has conquered his soul and restrained his senses, who possesses a good memory and wishes to be prosperous, should seek refuge with a lord of the earth. As a
minister, the king must honour someone who is grateful, wise, not inferior, firm in his devotion, restrained in his
senses, always devoted to dharma and unwavering from his status. Even a forbidden person may be given refuge if
he is firm in his devotion, accomplished in wisdom, knowledgeable about dharma, controlled over his senses,
brave and superior in his deeds. A king makes a person confident. A king makes a small man great. Where is happiness for someone the king has seized? The king makes someone who approaches him happy. The king becomes
great in the hearts of the subjects. He is their objective, their base and their supreme happiness. When men resort to
this Indra among men, they conquer this world and the next properly. The lord of men who has ruled the earth with
control, truth and affection and, who has worshipped through great sacrifices, obtains great fame and, because of
his good deeds, obtains a place in heaven.'

'"The supreme king of Kosala was thus addressed by his preceptor[This is Bhishma speaking again.]. The brave one made efforts to carefully
protect his subjects."'
