'Dhritarashtra asked, "O Sanjaya! On seeing that Iravat had been killed in the battle, what did the maharatha
Parthas do?"

'Sanjaya said, "On seeing that Iravat had been killed in the battle, Bhimasena's son, the rakshasa Ghatotkacha,
let out a loud roar. O king! At the sound of this roar, the earth, up to the frontiers of the ocean, with its mountains
and forests, seemed to tremble violently. So did the sky, the directions and all the sub-directions. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! On hearing this extremely loud roar, the thighs and other limbs of all your soldiers began to
tremble. They quaked and began to sweat. O Indra among kings! All those on your side became dispirited. They
seemed to be in the coils of a snake and were like elephants frightened of a lion. The rakshasa let out that extremely loud roar. He raised a flaming spear and assumed a terrible form. He was surrounded by terrible bulls among
rakshasas, wielding many weapons. They advanced in great anger, like Yama at the destruction of an yuga. On witnessing him advance, in anger and with a terrible form and beholding that his own soldiers were frightened and
were running away, King Duryodhana attacked Ghatotkacha. He grasped a large bow and repeatedly roared like a
lion. The lord of Vanga himself followed him at the back, with ten thousand elephants that were like mountains
and were exuding musth. O great king! On seeing that your son was advancing, surrounded by an army of elephants, the traveller of the night[Ghatotkacha.] became angry. O Indra among kings! A tumultuous battle commenced between the rakshasa and Duryodhana's soldiers and it made the body hair stand up. That army of elephants was like
a mass of clouds, charged with lightning. On beholding it advance, the angry rakshasas grasped weapons in their
hands. They roared in many different ways, like thundering clouds full of lightning. They began to strike down the
elephant-riders with arrows, javelins, swords, iron arrows, catapults, spears and battleaxes. They killed the mighty
elephants with the peaks of mountains and trees. Their temples were shattered. Blood began to flow from the mangled bodies of the elephants. O great king! We saw that they were killed by those travellers of the night. The warriors on elephants were scattered. O great king! On seeing this, Duryodhana attacked the rakshasas. He was overcome by intolerance and gave up all desire to protect his own life. The immensely strong one released arrows towards the rakshasas. The great archer slew the foremost among the rakshasas. O best of the Bharata lineage! Your
son, Duryodhana, was angry. The maharatha used four arrows to kill four of them-Vegavat, Maharoudra,
Vidyutjihva and Pramathi. O best of the Bharata lineage! The one whose soul is immeasurable showered down arrows that were irresistible, towards that army of travellers in the night. O venerable one! On seeing that great deed
of your son, Bhimasena's extremely strong son blazed forth in anger. He twanged his great bow, with a sound like
that of Indra's vajra. The scorcher of enemies forcefully attacked Duryodhana. O great king! On seeing him advance, like Death urged on by the Destroyer, your son, Duryodhana, was not distressed. The cruel one[Ghatotkacha.] angrily
spoke to him, his eyes red with rage. 'It is because of your great cruelty that they were exiled for a long time. O
king! You defeated the Pandavas in a deceitful game of dice. O one with evil intelligence! It was because of this
that Droupadi Krishna was brought to the assembly hall, though she was in her menses and was clad in a single
garment. You caused her hardship in many ways. While they dwelt in the hermitage, it was to bring you pleasure
that the evil-souled Saindhava tormented her, disrespecting my fathers. O worst of your lineage! Because of this
and many other insults, I will bring about your end today, if you do not flee from the field of battle.' Having said
this, Hidimba's son drew his gigantic bow. He bit his lip[The lower lip.] and licked the corners of his mouth. He covered Duryodhana with a great shower of arrows, like the slayer of Bala[Indra killed a demon named Bala.] bringing down a shower of rain on a mountain
during the monsoon."'
