Yudhishthira said, "O father[The word used is tata.]! It is evident that the infinitely energetic Vritra was devoted to dharma. His knowledge was unequalled and so was his devotion to Vishnu. O father! Vishnu's infinite energy is difficult to comprehend. O tiger among kings! How was Vritra capable of understanding that state? O one without decay!
You  have  spoken  about  him  and  I  have  heard  faithfully.  But there is something that I  still do  not understand.
Hence, I am asking you again. O bull among the Bharata lineage! How could Vritra be slain by Shakra? He was
devoted to dharma and faithful to Vishnu. He knew about the true state. O bull among the Bharata lineage! I have a
doubt on this account and am asking you. O tiger among kings! How was Vritra vanquished by Shakra? O grandfather! Tell me how this extraordinary thing happened. O mighty-armed one! I have supreme curiosity. Tell me in
detail."

'Bhishma replied, "In ancient times, Indra had left on a chariot, with large numbers of gods with him. He saw
Vritra stationed before him, like a mountain. O scorcher of enemies! He was five hundred yojanas tall and three
hundred yojanas in circumference. On seeing that form of Vritra's, which was difficult for the three worlds to vanquish, the gods were terrified and could not obtain any peace. O king! At that time, on suddenly seeing Vritra's
supreme form, Shakra was frightened and his thighs were paralysed. Having presented themselves at that battle,
the gods and the asuras roared and sounded musical instruments. O Kouravya! However, on seeing Shakra present
himself, Vritra was not scared or terrified and made no efforts. An encounter, frightful for the three worlds, ensued
between Shakra, Indra of the gods, and the great-souled Vritra. There was the great sound of swords, battleaxes,
tridents, javelins, spikes, clubs, many kinds of stones, bows, diverse kinds of divine weapons, fire and flaming
torches. All the soldiers of the gods and the asuras clashed against each other. With the grandfather at the forefront,
all the numerous gods, and the immensely fortunate rishis came on their celestial vehicles to witness the battle. O
great king! O bull among the Bharata lineage! There were the siddhas too. Gandharvas came on their celestial vehicles and so did the apsaras. Vritra, supreme among those who upheld dharma, covered the sky and showered
down boulders, which were as large as mountains, on the Indra among the gods. The large numbers of gods were
enraged at this. In that battle, in every direction, they used their weapons to counter the boulders that had been
showered down by Vritra. O tiger among the Kurus! Vritra was gigantic in form and extremely strong. He resorted
to fighting with maya[Illusion.], and in every way, confounded the Indra among the gods. Shatakratu was overcome with
confusion and afflicted by Vritra."

'"However, Vasishtha addressed him in a rathantara[A kind of Sama hymn.]. Vasishtha said, 'O Indra among the gods! You are chief
among the gods. O destroyer of the enemies of the gods! O Shakra! You possess the strength of the three worlds.
Why are you distressed? O Shakra! Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva, the lord of the universe, the illustrious god, Soma, and
all the supreme rishis are looking towards you. O Shakra! Do not fall prey to lassitude, like an inferior god. O noble one! Make up your mind to fight. O lord of the gods! Slay the enemy. The three-eyed one[Shiva.], the preceptor of
the worlds and worshipped by all the worlds, is looking at you. O illustrious one! O lord of the gods! Discard this
confusion. O Shakra! These brahmarshis, with Brihaspati at the forefront, are using divine chants to praise you, so
that you may be victorious.' The great-souled Vasishtha addressed Vasava in this way and ignited and extended his
strength and energy. The illustrious chastiser of Paka used his intelligence to resort to great yoga and dispelled the
maya.

'"The illustrious son of Angiras[Brihaspati.] and the other supreme rishis witnessed Vritra's valour and went to Mahesh-
vara. They worshipped him for the welfare of the worlds and for Vritra's destruction. The illustrious lord of the
universe  then  assumed  the  form  of  a  fever  and  in  this  extremely  terrible  form,  penetrated  the  body  of  Vritra,
supreme among the daityas. The illustrious god Vishnu, revered by all the worlds, was engaged in the protection of
the worlds and entered Indra's vajra. The intelligent Brihaspati, the immensely energetic Vasishtha and the other
supreme  rishis  approached  Shatakratu.  They  worshipped  Vasava,  the  granter  of  boons  and  worshipped  by  the
worlds, and said, 'O lord! Slay Vritra with single-minded attention.' Maheshavara said, 'O Shakra! This gigantic
Vritra is surrounded by a great army. He is the soul of the universe. He can go everywhere. He possesses great
powers of maya and is learned. Therefore, this best of asuras is incapable of being vanquished by the three worlds.
O lord of the gods! Resort to a state of yoga and then slay him. O lord of the immortals! To obtain strength, he has
tormented himself with austerities for sixty thousand years. Thus, Brahma gave him boons-the greatness that yogis possess, great powers of maya, immense strength and fierce energy. O lord of the gods! O Vasava! My energy
has permeated into this danava[In the form of fever.]. You are capable of slaying Vritra with your vajra.' Shakra replied, 'O illustrious
one! This son of Diti is extremely difficult to assail, but I will do it with your favours. O bull among the gods!
While you look on, I will slay him with the vajra.' The daitya, the great asura, was permeated by that fever and the
gods and the rishis uttered loud roars of delight. Thousands of drums, conch shells, kettledrums and tambourines
were loudly sounded. All the asuras lost their memories and their great wisdom and strength disappeared in an instant. On realizing that tamas had penetrated them, the rishis and the gods praised Shakra and Ishana and urged
them. At the time of the battle, the great-souled Shakra was stationed on his chariot and his form was extremely
difficult to look at. He was praised by the rishis."'
