'"'The Brahmana woman said, "O sons! I have not robbed you of your eyesight. Nor am I angry with you. It is the
Bhargava who has been born from my thigh who is angry with you. O sons! There is no doubt that your eyesight
has been taken away by this great-souled one, whose anger has been aroused on remembering that you had killed
his relatives. O sons! When you destroyed even the Bhrigu sons in the wombs, I carried this child in my thigh for
100 years so that he might do that which is good for the Bhrigu lineage. All the Vedas, including their six angas,
came to him when he was in the womb. Angry at the killing of his fathers, he certainly wishes to kill you. It is
through his divine radiance that your eyesight has been destroyed. O sons! Pray to Ourva, this supreme son of
mine. If he is placated through your homage, he may restore your eyesight."'

'"Vashishtha said, 'Having been thus addressed, all the kings addressed the son who had been born from her
thigh and begged him for mercy. He was merciful. Since that supreme Brahmana rishi was born after splitting open
the thigh, he came to be known in the worlds by the name of Ourva. Regaining their eyesight, the kings returned.
But the Bhargava sage decided to bring about the destruction of the entire world. O son! That great-souled one decided to bring about the destruction of all the worlds. In order to bring honour to the Bhrigus, that descendant of
the Bhrigu lineage engaged in great austerities, so as to bring about the destruction of all the worlds. Through his
great and severe austerities, he burnt the worlds with the gods, the asuras and men, and gratified his ancestors. On
learning what the descendant of the lineage was planning to do, the ancestors descended from their world and told
him, "O Ourva! O son! We have witnessed the power of your severe austerities. Have mercy for the worlds and
control your anger. O son! The self-controlled Bhrigus weren't powerless. Nor were they indifferent to slaughter at
the hands of the violent Kshatriyas. O son! When we got tired of our long lives, we ourselves wished for our
deaths at the hands of the Kshatriyas. The riches that were buried in the ground in the dwelling place of the Bhrigus were placed there with the intention of angering the Kshatriyas and creating enmity with them. O bull among
the twice-born! What use are riches to us when we wish to attain heaven? O son! When we found that death was
completely unable to overcome all of us, we thought this would be the most pleasant way. O son! Those who kill
themselves never attain the best worlds. Remembering that, we did not kill ourselves with our own hands. O son!
That which you desire does not please us at all. Therefore, control your mind and refrain from this evil destruction
of all the worlds. O son! None of the Kshatriyas in the seven worlds[There are fourteen lokas (worlds). Seven are above the ground and seven are below. This is a reference to
the seven that are above the ground-bhurloka, bhuvarloka, svarloka, maharloka, janarloka, taparloka and brahmaloka (satyaloka).] has offended or harmed our austerities.
Win over the anger that has arisen in you."'"'
