'Yudhishthira asked, "What should be the kind of city within which the king should himself dwell? Is it one that
already exists, or should he get one constructed? O grandfather! Tell me this."

'Bhishma replied, "O Kounteya! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The place where he will reside with his
sons, brothers and relatives must be properly checked, to ensure that it is protected and there is a means of sustenance. In particular, I will tell you about what must be done about fortifications. Having heard about this, you must
make efforts to follow the injunctions. The cities must be constructed with the six kinds of forts in mind, so that
there is sufficient prosperity and an abundance of every required object. The six forts are-those in the desert,
those on the ground, those in mountains, those with men, those in the water and those in forests[This is a reference to the kind of protection a fort will have. For example, one in the water will be protected by natural water or trenches and
moats on all sides. Those in the ground will be protected with high walls.
Those with men will be protected by warriors and so on.]. The city must
have forts and must be stocked with grain and weapons. There must be firm walls and moats and it must be full of
elephants, horses and chariots. There must be learned artisans there and there must be stores of every kind of requirement. It must be populated by excellent and accomplished people who follow dharma. There must be energetic men, elephants and horses and it must be adorned with crossroads and shops. There must be established rules
of conduct, so that people are peaceful and without fear. It must be radiant, with the sound of activity[Actually, only sound is mentioned. So this could also be the sound of
musical instruments.]. There
must be extremely spacious houses. It must be full of brave and wealthy people and must resound with chants of
the brahman. There must be congregations and festivals at which the gods are always worshipped. With his faithful
advisers and soldiers, the king must himself reside within that city, conducting himself so that his treasury, forces
and friends increase. He must restrain all the sins in the city and the countryside. He must make efforts to increase
his stores of goods and his stores of weapons. He must increase all the collections of stores, machines, clubs, medicines, firewood, iron, grain chaff[For use as fuel.], charcoal, timber, horn, bones, bamboo, marrow, oil, fat, honey, medicines,
flax, resins from the shala tree, grain, weapons, arrows, leather, sinews, cane, munja grass, balbaja grass[Goosegrass, Eleusine indica.] and
bows. The king must always control access to tanks and wells that contain a great deal of excellent water and also
to giant trees that are full of juice[These offer shade.]. He must make efforts to treat preceptors, officiating priests and priests with a
great deal of honour. There must be similar treatment for great archers, architects and astrologers. Those who are
wise, intelligent, self-controlled, accomplished, brave, extremely learned, born in good lineages and full of enterprise must be appointed for all the tasks. The king must revere those who follow dharma and restrain those who
follow adharma. He must make efforts to engage all the varnas in their own tasks. Spies must be engaged within
and outside. Having thus got to know, he must employ the people of the city and the countryside in different tasks.
In particular, the king must himself attend to spies, the treasury and policy, because everything is established on
this. Using spies as his eyes, he must know everything that the people in the city and the countryside wish to do,
whether they are neutrals, enemies or friends. He must thus arrange everything, without being careless about anything. He must always honour those who are devoted and punish those who seek to cause injury. He must always
perform rites and sacrifices and donate without any hesitation. It is his task to protect the subjects and not undertaking this task is to be censured. He must always think of a means of sustenance and arrange yoga and kshema for
those who are miserable, those who have no protectors, those who are aged and those women who are widows. At
the right time, the king must honour those who are in hermitages and treat them well with garments, vessels and
food. He must always make efforts to stand before an ascetic and tell him about himself, all his tasks and his kingdom. When he sees a person who has given up everything, has been born in a noble lineage and is extremely
learned, he must honour him with beds, seats and food. The king can trust him, even in an emergency. Even bandits trust an ascetic. The king will offer his possessions to him and obtain wisdom in return. However, he must not
serve them all the time, or honour them excessively[The sense seems to be that if the king is excessive in doing this, enemies
may harm these ascetics.]. He must seek out one[A reference to ascetics the king should befriend.] from within his own kingdom, another from the kingdom of the enemy, another who resides in the forests and another who lives in the cities of the
vassals. These must be honoured well and a means of sustenance arranged for them, irrespective of whether they
reside in the kingdom of the enemy, in the forest, or within one's own dominion. The ascetics are rigid in their
vows. And if the king should ever desire to seek refuge with them in a time of hardship, they will offer this refuge.
I have now briefly recounted to you the characteristics of the region and the city the king must himself reside in."'
