'Brihadashva said, "After the night had passed, King Nala adorned himself in ornaments. With Vidarbha's daughter by his side, he went and met the king at the right time. Then Nala paid his respects to his father-in-law. Then
the beautiful Damayanti also offered her respects to her father. Extremely delighted, Bhima welcomed him like a
son. The lord also showed him due homage and comforted Nala, together with his devoted wife Damayanti. Thus
honoured, King Nala also returned the honour in the proper way and offered his services to him[To Bhima.]. A great roar of
joy arose in the city. The people were delighted to see Nala return in this way. The city was decorated with flags,
flagstaffs and garlands. The streets were watered and the royal roads cleaned and adorned with flowers. At every
door, the citizens placed flowers that had been cut. The gods were worshipped in all the temples.

'"When King Rituparna heard that Bahuka was Nala and that he had been reunited with Damayanti, he was delighted. King Nala had him brought and begged forgiveness of the king. He who was intelligent begged forgiveness because of several reasons. Thus honoured, the surprised king spoke to Nishadha, 'I congratulate you that you
have been happily reunited with your wife. O Nishadha! O lord of Nishadha! If I committed any crime when you
lived in disguise in my house, if I committed an offence, knowingly or unknowingly, please pardon me.' Nala
replied, 'O king! You have not committed the slightest crime. Even if you had, I would not have been angered and
would have forgiven you. O lord of men! You have always been my friend and my relative. I have lived happily in
your house and you have always provided me with every object of desire, more in your house than in my own. O
king! Please exhibit your friendship in future too. Your knowledge about horses vests with me[Nala had held it in trust.]. O king! If you
so wish, I will happily impart it to you now.' Having said this, Nishadha gave that knowledge to Rituparna. Having
performed the prescribed deeds, he accepted it. When King Bhangasvari had obtained the knowledge about horses,
he appointed another charioteer and left for his own city[Bahuka (Nala) could no longer be his charioteer. Varshneya was Nala's charioteer and would therefore stay
on with Nala.]. O lord of the earth! After Rituparna had left, King
Nala did not reside in the city of Kundina for a long time."'
