Souti said, 'Having crossed the ocean, Kadru of swift speed, accompanied by Vinata, quickly arrived before the
horse. Seeing many black hairs stuck to the tail, Kadru made the dejected Vinata her slave. Then, having lost the
wager, Vinata became a slave who was stricken by grief.

'Meanwhile, when the time came, Garuda of great energy broke open the egg without his mother's help and
emerged. He looked like a mass of blazing fire and was fearful in appearance. As soon as he was born, the bird increased to a gigantic size and rose into the sky. On seeing him, all the beings[As will be evident, this really means the gods.] sought the refuge of Vibhavasu[Agni.].
They bowed down before the god who has a universal form and who was seated on his seat, and addressed him
thus. "O Agni! Do not extend your body. Have you decided to burn us? Look, the huge mass of flames is spreading." Agni replied, "O persecutors of the demons! It is not what you think. It is the mighty Garuda, equal to me in
energy." Thus addressed, the gods and all the sages approached Garuda and from a distance praised him in these
words. "O lord of the birds! You are a rishi. You obtain the greatest share in a sacrifice. You are a god. You are our
supreme protector. You are the ocean of strength, you are purity. You are beyond qualities and darkness. You are
the possessor of all anger. You cannot be conquered. We have heard that you are the performer of all great acts.
You are all that has not been and all that has been. You are the supreme knowledge. Surpassing the rays of the sun,
you produce all that is permanent and all that is transient. Darkening the splendour of the sun, you are the destroyer of everything. You are all that perishes and all that does not perish. O god! With the splendour of fire, you consume everything, just as the sun burns all beings in his anger. You are like the terrible fire which destroys everything at the end of a yuga, when all is consumed in the cycle of destruction. O king of the birds! Having come to
you, we seek refuge in you. You move in the sky, you have unbounded energy, you are as powerful as the fire. You
are the mighty bird Garuda, you reach the clouds. We have approached you. You are the granter of boons and unparalleled in strength." Having been thus praised by the gods and all the sages, Suparna[Another name for Garuda, meaning the one with beautiful feathers.] then decreased his energy and his splendour.'
