'Virata asked, "O best of the Pandavas! Why do you refuse to accept my daughter as your wife? Accept her. I am
offering her to you."

'Arjuna replied, 'Dwelling in your inner quarters, I always observed your daughter. Whether in private or in
public, she always trusted me as her father. I was loved by her and respected because of my skills in dancing and
singing. Your daughter has always thought of me as her teacher. O king! I lived for a year with a woman who is
nubile. O lord! Suspicion on your part, or that of your subjects, is not misplaced. O lord of the earth! Therefore, I
am asking for your daughter. I have been pure and have been in control of my senses. Because of my self-control,
she has been kept pure. There is no difference between a daughter and a daughter-in-law, nor that between a son
and one's own self. I do not see any misdemeanour in this and purity will be preserved. O scorcher of enemies! I
am terrified of curses and false accusations. O king! That is the reason I will accept your daughter Uttara as my
daughter-in-law. O lord of the earth! My mighty-armed son Abhimanyu is Vasudeva's nephew[Abhimanyu's mother Subhadra was Krishna's sister.]. He is just like a
child of the gods. He is learned in all weapons and is loved by the one who wields the chakra[Krishna is the wielder of the chakra.]. He is the right
son-in-law for you and a husband for your daughter."

'Virata said, "This is indeed appropriate for Kunti's son, Dhananjaya, the best of the Kurus. Pandava is learned
and wise and always follows dharma. O Partha[Virata is addressing Yudhishthira now.]! What do you think should be done after this? If one has an alliance with Arjuna, all one's desires are completely satisfied."'

Vaishampayana said, 'When the Indra among kings said this, Kunti's son, Yudhishthira, gave his consent to the
alliance between Matsya and Partha. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Virata, lord of the earth, and Kounteya[Arjuna.]
sent messengers to all their friends and Vasudeva. Thus, after the thirteen years were over, all the five Pandavas began to live in Virata's Upaplavya[Upaplavya was the name of a city in Virata's kingdom.]. Bibhatsu Pandava went to bring Janardana, Abhimanyu and the other
Dasharhas from the Anarta region[The Dasharhas are the Yadavas and they lived in the Anarta region, roughly corresponding to today's Sourashtra. When the Pandavas were banished, Abhimanyu and Subhadra went to live with the Yadavas.]. O lord of the earth! The kings of Kashi and Shaibya, who were affectionate
towards Yudhishthira, arrived with two akshouhinis[An akshouhini is a large army and consists of 21,870 chariots, 21,870 elephants, 65,610 horses and 109,350 soldiers on foot.]. The immensely strong and powerful Yajnasena[Drupada.] arrived
with one akshouhini, and Droupadi's brave sons and the unvanquished Shikhandi. There was the invincible
Dhrishtadyumna, supreme among those who wield all weapons. There were others with many akshouhinis, those
who sacrificed with a lot of donations. All of them were learned in the use of weapons and all of them were brave
and were ready to give up their lives[For the cause of the Pandavas.]. Matsya, supreme among those who uphold dharma, was happy at seeing
that they had come. He was happy that he had bestowed his daughter on Abhimanyu. After the lords of the earth
had arrived from different directions, Vasudeva Vanamali arrived, and so did the wielder of the plough[Balarama is the wielder of the plough. Vanamali is one of Krishna's names.]. Hardikya
Kritavarma, Yuyudhana Satyaki, Anadhrishti, Akrura, Samba and Nishatha arrived[The names of various Yadavas. Yuyudhana is one of Satyaki's names. Hardikya is one of Kritavarma's names.]. Those scorchers of enemies
brought Abhimanyu and his mother with them. Indrasena[Yudhishthira's charioteer.] and the others arrived there, taking good care of the
chariots, having remained away for one entire year. Ten thousand elephants arrived and one million horses. There
were a full one hundred million chariots and one billion foot soldiers. There were many supremely energetic Vrishnis, Andhakas and Bhojas. They followed that tiger among the Vrishnis, the greatly resplendent Vasudeva. Krishna
separately gave each of the great-souled Pandavas a collection of women, gems and garments.

'In accordance with the rites, the marriage between the Matsyas and the Parthas took place. Conch shells, kettle
drums, trumpets and drums were assembled and played in Matysa's palace, honoured by the Parthas. Many hundreds of diverse deer and other animals were slain. Liquor and other celestial drinks were brought in large quantities. There were many skilled singers and raconteurs, dancers and minstrels. The assembled bards, together with
the minstrels, began to chant praises. With Sudeshna leading the way, the supreme women from the Matsyas arrived. All of them were beautiful in their limbs and wore earrings that were studded with excellent gems. They
were well complexioned, noble, beautiful and ornamented. But Krishna surpassed them in beauty, fame and prosperity. They surrounded the ornamented Princess Uttara and honoured her, as if she was a daughter of the great Indra. Dhananjaya Kounteya accepted Virata's unblemished daughter for his and Subhadra's son. Kunti's son, the
great king Yudhishthira, stood there, equal in beauty to Indra, and accepted her as his daughter-in-law. When
Partha had accepted her and honoured Janardana, the wedding ceremony of Subhadra's great-souled son was performed. He gave him[Virata gave Abhimanyu.] seven thousand horses that possessed the speed of the wind, two hundred supreme elephants and a great deal of riches. Once the marriage was over, Dharma's son, Yudhishthira, gave the brahmanas the
riches that Achyuta[The one without decay, Krishna's name.] had brought-thousands of cows, gems, diverse kinds of garments, excellent ornaments, vehicles and beds. There were great festivities. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The city of the king of Matsyas
was resplendent and crowded with people who were happy and well fed.'

This ends Virata Parva.