Sanjaya said, "O lord! Your soldiers placed the king of Madra at their head. In that great battle, they again powerfully attacked the Parthas. Though they were afflicted, all those on your side were intoxicated at the prospect of
war. In a short while, they agitated the Parthas in many ways. While Krishna and Partha looked on, the Pandavas
were slaughtered by the Kurus and were incapable of remaining stationed there, though they were restrained by
Bhima. Dhananjaya became angry at this. He covered Kripa and his followers and Kritavarma with a storm of arrows. Sahadeva countered Shakuni and his soldiers. Stationed on a flank, Nakula glanced at the king of Madra.
Droupadi's sons repeatedly repulsed many kings. Panchala Shikhandi countered Drona's son. With the club in his
hand, Bhimasena held back the kings. Kunti's son, Yudhishthira, countered Shalya and his soldiers. As those on
your side and the enemy engaged, refusing to retreat from the battle, duels commenced here and there.

' "In the great battle, we witnessed Shalya's supreme deed. He single-handedly fought against all the soldiers on
the Pandava side. We saw Shalya stationed near Yudhishthira in the battle, like the planet Saturn near the moon. He
afflicted the king with arrows that were like venomous serpents. He again attacked Bhima and covered him with
showers of arrows. On witnessing the lightness of his hands and his skill in the use of weapons, the soldiers on
your side and those on the side of the enemy, applauded him. The Pandavas were severely oppressed and wounded
by Shalya. Ignoring Yudhishthira's cries, they abandoned the field of battle. The Pandava soldiers were slaughtered
by the king of Madra. Dharmaraja Yudhishthira was overcome with intolerance. He resorted to his manliness and
oppressed the king of Madra. The maharatha made up his mind to win or be killed. He summoned all his brothers
and Krishna Madhava and said, 'Bhishma, Drona, Karna and all the other brave kings fought in the battle for the
sake of the Kouravas and went to their death. All of you have resorted to your manliness and used your enterprise
to take care of your shares[The Pandavas had apportioned out the Kouravas amongst themselves.
Shalya was Yudhishthira's share.]. There is a single share that is left. Maharatha Shalya is mine. I wish to fight against
the lord of Madra and defeat him today. I will tell all of you what is in my mind now. Madravati's[Madri's.] brave sons
will guard my chariot wheels. They are revered as brave ones in battle and cannot be vanquished by Vasava. They
will place the dharma of kshatriyas at the forefront and virtuously fight against their maternal uncle. They deserve
honour and are devoted to the truth. They will fight back, for my sake. O fortunate ones! Either Shalya will be
killed by me in the battle, or I will be killed by him. O brave ones in the world! Listen to my words. I am telling
you truthfully. O kings! I will resort to the dharma of kshatriyas and fight against my maternal uncle today. I have
determined that I will be victorious, or be defeated. Therefore, equip me with a larger store of weapons and all the
implements. Let the chariot be quickly equipped for the battle, in accordance with the decrees of the sacred texts.
Let Shini's descendant guard my right wheel and Dhrishtadyumna the left. Let Partha Dhananjaya protect my rear
today. Let Bhima, supreme among wielders of weapons, advance in front of me today. In the great battle, I will
then be superior to Shalaya and will drive him away.' Having been thus addressed by the king, all the well-wishers
did as they had been asked to. O king! The soldiers were again filled with delight. This was especially true of the
Panchalas, the Somakas and the Matsyas. Having taken the pledge, Dharmaraja set out to accomplish it in the
battle.

' "Hundreds of conch shells, trumpets and drums were sounded by the Panchalas and they roared like lions.
Spiritedly and angrily, they rushed towards the king of Madra. The bulls among the Kurus were also filled with
great delight and roared. There was the noise of bells on elephants and the blare of conch shells. The earth resounded with the great sounds of trumpets. Your son and the valiant king of Madra received them. They were like
large mountains, receiving rain pouring down from giant clouds. Shalya prided himself in battle and showered
down arrows on Dharmaraja, the scorcher of enemies, like Maghavan pouring down rain. The great-minded king
of the Kurus also grasped a beautiful bow and displayed the diverse kinds of learning that he had been taught by
Drona. He showered down arrows, colourful, dexterous and skilled. As he roamed around in the battle, no weakness could be discerned in him. They wounded each other with many kinds of arrows. In the battle, those valorous
ones were like tigers fighting over a piece of meat. Bhima clashed against your son, who found delight in a battle.
In every direction, Shakuni and the other brave ones received Panchala[Dhrishtadyumna.], Satyaki and the Pandavas who were the
sons of Madri. They desired victory and fought tumultuously again. O king! The enemy and those on your side
fought because of your evil policy.

' "In the battle, Duryodhana used an arrow with a drooping tuft to sever Bhima's gold-decorated standard. It was
large and beautiful to see, adorned with nets of bells. Having brought Bhimasena's standard down, he roared like a
lion. With a razor-sharp arrow, pointed at the tip, the lord of men then severed his[Bhima's.] colourful bow, which was like
the trunk of a king of elephants. When his bow was severed, the spirited one resorted to his prowess and hurled a
javelin[Rathashakti.] towards your son. It pierced his chest and made him sink down on his chariot. When he was bereft of his
senses, Vrikodara again used a kshurapra arrow to sever his charioteer's head from his body. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! O king! When the charioteer was slain, the horses dragged the chariot away in different directions
and loud sounds of lamentation arose. For the sake of rescuing your son, Drona's maharatha son, Kripa and Kritavarma followed. The soldiers were agitated and the followers were terrified. The wielder of Gandiva used his
bow and arrows to slaughter them.

' "Yudhishthira intolerantly attacked the lord of Madra. He himself controlled his horses, which were as swift as
thought and as white as ivory. When we saw Kunti's son, Yudhishthira, it was extraordinary. He was mild and controlled earlier, but assumed a fearful form. Kounteya dilated his eyes in rage and trembled in anger. He mangled
hundreds and thousands of warriors with his arrows. Wherever the soldiers fought back, the eldest Pandava was
there. O king! He brought them down with his arrows, like the best of mountains shattered by thunder. Many horses, charioteers, standards, chariots and rathas were brought down. He sported with them, like a violent wind toying
with clouds. In the battle, he angrily brought down thousands of horse riders, horses and foot soldiers, like an enraged Rudra among animals. With showers of arrows shot in every direction, he emptied the field of battle of warriors. He attacked Shalya, the lord of Madra, and asked him to wait. On witnessing him roam around in the battle,
terrible in his deeds, all those on your side were terrified. However, Shalya countered him. Extremely enraged,
those two blew on their conch shells. They challenged each other and censured each other. Shalya countered Yudhishthira with a shower of arrows. Kounteya also countered the king of Madra with a shower of arrows. O king! In
that battle, those two brave ones, the king of Madra and Yudhishthira, were seen to be covered with blood, because
of the arrows shafted with the feathers of herons. They were as beautiful as flowering shalmali or kimshuka trees
in the forest. Those great-souled ones blazed. They were ready to give up their lives and were unassailable in battle. On seeing them, none of the soldiers knew which one would be victorious, whether Partha would kill the lord
of Madra and enjoy the earth today, or whether Shalya would kill Pandava and give the earth to Duryodhana. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! The warriors there could not make up their minds on this. As he fought, Dharmaraja kept all of them to his right[He placed the enemy on the right.]. Shalya swiftly shot one hundred arrows towards Yudhishthira. He severed
his bow with an arrow that was sharp at the tip. He picked up another bow and piercing Shalya with three hundred
arrows, severed his bow with a razor-sharp arrow. He then slew his four horses with arrows with drooping tufts.
With two arrows that were sharp at the tips, he killed the two parshni charioteers. Stationed in front of him, he used
a blazing, yellow, sharp and broad-headed arrow to sever his standard. O scorcher of enemies! At this, that army of
Duryodhana's scattered. Drona's son rushed towards the king of Madra and picking him up on his chariot, swiftly
fled. After they had travelled a short distance, they heard Yudhishthira roar. The lord of Madra stopped and ascended another chariot. It sparkled and had been duly prepared. It roared like the clouds. It had been equipped with all
the implements and made the body hair of enemies stand up." '
