Vaishampayana said, 'When there was a break in the conversation, the immensely ascetic and eloquent
Devasthana spoke appropriate words in reply to Yudhishthira. "Phalguna spoke words to the effect that
there is nothing superior to wealth. Listen attentively as I explain this to you. O Ajatashatru! You have conquered the entire earth through dharma. O king! Having won it, you should not give it up without reason.
There are four steps on the ladder, established on action[The four ashramas or stages of life.]. O mighty-armed one! O king! You should ascend it by stages. O Partha! Therefore, perform great sacrifices, with many donations. Rishis perform the
sacrifice of austerities and others observe the sacrifice of knowledge. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
You must understand that those who are devoted to austerities also base themselves on action. O Indra
among kings! We have heard the words of the vaikhanasas[Hermits or anchorites.]. 'One who does not strive for riches is superior to one who does. There are many sins associated with the pursuit of wealth and they only increase. For
the sake of riches, people collect objects with a great deal of difficulty. One who thirsts after wealth is stupid and does not understand that a foetus is being killed[Sacrifices for the sake of wealth are being condemned. Objects are collected for such sacrifices and it is better not to perform such sacrifices. If
sacrifices cannot be performed without wealth, it is best to avoid such
sacrifices. Such a pursuit of wealth kills one's own self, the foetus probably referring to one's own self in the cycle of rebirth. This is the belief of
the vaikhanasas, being contradicted by Devasthana.].' One may give to the undeserving and not give
to the deserving. The dharma of distinguishing the undeserving from the deserving is extremely difficult.
The creator created riches for sacrifices and man for protecting them[The riches.] and performing sacrifices. Therefore, all riches should be used for performing sacrifices. Kama follows from that[The desire for the fruits of sacrifices.]. The immensely energetic Indra surpassed all the gods by performing many sacrifices that were full of food. He became the radiant Indra because of that. Therefore, all riches should be used for performing sacrifices. The great-souled
Mahadeva offered himself in a sarvamedha sacrifice and became the exalted god of the gods. He surpassed
all the beings in the universe with his deeds. He is the radiant Krittivasa and illuminates them[Krittivasa is Shiva's name and means the one who is attired in skins.
The word for deeds is kirti and there is a pun that a translation misses.]. Avikshit's
son, King Marutta, was mortal. But because of his sacrifice, he surpassed the king of the gods. All the vessels used were made out of gold and Shri[The goddess Lakshmi.] herself came to the sacrifice. You have heard about Harishchandra, Indra among kings. He performed sacrifices, earned merits and overcame his sorrow. Though
he was human, he surpassed Shakra[Indra.] with his prosperity. Therefore, everything must be used to perform
sacrifices."'
