Sanjaya said, "In the battle, the great archer, Karna, killed the Pandava soldiers with his straight-tufted arrows. O
king! In that fashion, in Karna's presence, the maharatha Pandavas angrily killed your son's soldiers. O king! The
mighty-armed Karna killed the Pandava soldiers with iron arrows that had been polished by artisans and were like
the rays of the sun. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The elephants were afflicted by Karna's iron arrows.
They roared loudly and were weakened. They lost their senses and fled in the ten directions. O venerable one!
While the army was thus being slaughtered by the son of the suta, Nakula swiftly attacked the son of the suta in
that great battle. Bhimasena advanced against Drona's son, who was performing extremely difficult deeds. Satyaki
countered Vinda and Anuvinda from Kekaya[Not to be confused with Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti. Those two
were killed by Arjuna in Section 69 (Volume 6).]. Chitrasena, lord of the earth, advanced against Shrutakarma[Prativindhya was Droupadi's son through Yudhishthira, Sutasoma
through Bhima, Shrutakarma (or Shrutakirti) through Arjuna, Shatanika
through Nakula and Shrutasena through Sahadeva.].
With a colourful standard and a colourful bow, Chitra advanced against Prativindhya. Duryodhana attacked King
Yudhishthira, Dharma's son. Dhananjaya angrily attacked the large numbers of samshaptakas. When the brave
ones were being killed, Dhrishtadyumna rushed against Kripa. Shikhandi attacked the undecaying Kritavarma.
Shrutakirti 136 attacked Shalya. O great king! Madri's son, the powerful Sahadeva, attacked your son,
Duhshasana.

' "In the encounter with Satyaki, the Kekayas showered down radiant arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Satyaki also enveloped the two from Kekaya. In the great battle, those two brothers severely struck the brave
one in the chest and it was like two elephants striking another elephant with their tusks. With their armour pierced
by arrows, the brothers were resplendent in the battle. O king! But they pierced Satyaki, who was truthful in his
deeds, with arrows. O great king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! However, Satyaki countered them and
laughed. He shrouded them in every direction with a shower of arrows. Having been repulsed by the shower of
arrows released by Shini's descendant, they quickly enveloped the chariot of Shini's descendant with arrows. In
that great battle, Shouri severed their colourful bows[While Shouri is usually used for Krishna, Shouri means Shura's descendant and Shura was a common ancestor. The Yadavas are also referred to as Satvatas.]. In that encounter, he repulsed them with sharp arrows
that were difficult to withstand. They then grasped other bows and giant arrows in their fists and roaming around
with skill and dexterity, covered Satyaki. They shot giant arrows that were tufted with the feathers of herons and
peacocks and were decorated. They were embellished with gold and illuminated all the directions. O king! Because of the arrows released, there was darkness in the great battle there. Those maharathas severed each other's
bows. O great king! Satvata, indomitable in battle, became enraged. In that encounter, he picked up and strung another bow. With an extremely sharp kshurapra arrow, he severed Anuvinda's head. O king! That large head, with
earrings, fell down on the ground, like Shambara's head when he was killed in the great battle[There were several demons named Shambara. Since they were killed in
different battles, we don't know which of the various Shambaras is
meant.]. On seeing that
he swiftly fell down on the ground, all the Kekayas grieved. On seeing that his brave brother had been killed, the
maharatha[Vinda.] strung another bow and countered Shini's descendant. He pierced Satyaki with gold-tufted spears
that had been sharpened on stone[The text uses the word shakti, which means spear. Since these were
tufted and sharpened on stone, arrows are indicated instead.]. The maharatha from Kekaya roared loudly and powerfully and asking Satya-
ki to wait, struck him in the arms and in the chest with arrows that were like the flames of fires. The wise and spirited Satvata was wounded in all his limbs by these arrows. O king! He was resplendent in that battle, like a kimshuka[Tree with red blossoms.] with leaves. Having been pierced by the great-souled Kekaya in the battle, Satyaki laughed and pierced
Kekaya with twenty-five arrows. In their excellent arms, they grasped shields that were marked with the signs of
one hundred moons. Wielding the best of swords, they roamed around in that great arena. It was like the immensely strong Jambha and Shakra in the battle between the gods and the asuras[Jambha was a demon killed by Indra. But there was also another demon
named Jambha who was killed by Krishna or Vishnu.]. In the great battle, they roamed
around in circles and swiftly attacked each other, wishing to kill each other in the encounter. Satvata severed
Kekaya's shield into two fragments and in that way, the king also shattered Satyaki's shield. Having severed the
shield that was marked with the signs of hundreds of stars, Kekaya whirled around in circles, advancing and retreating. Wielding the best of swords, Shini's descendant also roamed around in that great arena and striking sideways, severed Kekaya's head. O king! Still wearing his armour, in that great battle, the great archer from Kekaya
was severed into two parts and fell down, like a mountain shattered by thunder. Having killed him in the battle,
Shini's brave descendant, supreme among rathas and scorcher of enemies, quickly climbed onto Yudhamanyu's
chariot. He then again ascended a different chariot that had been prepared properly. Using his arrows, Satyaki began to slaughter the large army of the Kekayas. The large army of the Kekayas was slaughtered in that battle. It
abandoned the enemy in the encounter and fled in the ten directions." '
