Bhishma said, "There was a time when King Soudasa, born of the Ikshvaku lineage and supreme among generous ones, went to Vasishtha, supreme among sages, who was successful and could roam around in all the
worlds. He was the eternal store of the brahman. Having honoured him, he asked his priest the following question.

'"Soudasa asked, 'O illustrious one! O unblemished one! What is sacred in the three worlds? Tell me. Recount
to me the means whereby a mortal can always obtain the supreme benefits."'

'Bhishma continued, "He bowed down and spoke these beneficial words. The learned one instructed him about
cattle, after having first purified himself by bowing down to cows. 'Cows possess an excellent fragrance. They
possess the fragrance of guggula[Resin of the guggul tree.]. Creatures owe their existence to cattle. Cows provide great blessings. Cows
are the past and the future. Cows are eternal nourishment. Cows are the foundation of prosperity. Anything given
to cows is not destroyed. Food always exists in cows. They provide supreme oblations for the gods. Svaha and
vashatkara are always established in cows. Cows are the fruits of sacrifices. Sacrifices are established in cows. O
immensely intelligent one! O bull among men! Morning and evening, and always at the time of oblations, cows
provide oblations to rishis. O lord! If a person gifts a cow, he tides over all the sins and evil deeds he has committed and all the hardships he faces. If a person possesses ten cows and gifts one, if he possesses a hundred cows and
gifts ten, if he possesses a thousand cows and gifts one hundred-all of them obtain equal fruits. However, if the
owner of one hundred cattle doesn't ignite the sacrificial fire, if the owner of one thousand cattle doesn't perform
sacrifices and if a prosperous person acts like a miser-all three of them warrant no respect. If a person observes
excellent vows and gifts a kapila and a calf, with a brass vessel for milking and a garment covering the cow, he
conquers both this world and the next. O scorcher of enemies! There may be a young bull, an Indra among cows,
among the hundreds that are in the herd, with all its senses intact. If a person ornaments its horns and gives it to a
learned brahmana, he obtains prosperity when he is repeatedly born. One should not go to sleep without reciting
the names for cows, or awake without remembering them. If one bows down to cattle morning and evening, one
obtains prosperity. One must not hate cow dung and the urine of cows. One must not eat the flesh of cows. Thus,
one will obtain prosperity. One must always recite the names of cows. One must never disrespect cows. If a man
has bad dreams, he must recite the names of cows. One must always bathe in cow dung. One must sit on dried cow
dung. One must not release spit, urine and excrement on cow dung. One must avoid obstructing cows. When one
eats, one must sit on moistened cow hide, looking towards the west. Restrained in speech, one must eat ghee off
the ground. One will then obtain the prosperity that cattle confer. Ghee is offered as an oblation into the fire. Benedictions must be pronounced with ghee. If one gives ghee and eats ghee, one will obtain the prosperity that cattle
confer. One may also pronounce mantras on a cow moulded out of sesamum, taking it to assume the form of a
cow. If a person gifts this, with tasty food and jewels, one does not sorrow from sins committed and not committed[Interpreted as voluntary and involuntary.]. Let cows that yield plentiful supplies of milk and have gold-encrusted horns approach me, like rivers approach the ocean. These are surabhis and the descendants of Surabhi. Let cows always look at me. Let me always
look at cows. The cows belong to us and we belong to them. We exist where cows are. If a man chants this, day
and night, in joy and misery, and even in times of great fear, he is freed from all fear.'"'
