'Yudhishthira asked, "What are the specific duties a king must undertake? How should the countryside be protected? How should he protect against enemies? How should he employ spies? O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
How does he obtain the confidence of the varnas, the servants, the wives and the sons?"

'Bhishma replied, "O great king! Listen attentively to the complete account of the conduct of kings-the tasks
that a king who is naturally a king must first do. The king must always conquer his soul and then he must conquer
his enemies. If a lord of men has not conquered his own soul, how can he defeat the enemy? Victory over one's
own self means restraint of the aggregate of the five[The five senses.]. Having conquered the senses, a lord of men is then capable
of countering the enemy.

'"O descendant of the Kuru lineage! O tiger among men! He must place platoons in forts, boundaries, the groves
of cities, all the parks of the towns and the cities, in the midst and in the abode of the king. As spies, he must employ men who have been tested and found to be wise, those who can withstand hunger, thirst and heat. They
should seem to be dumb, blind and deaf. O great king! Having reflected about it, he must employ spies against all
his advisers, the three types of friends[One's direct allies, allies of allies and enemies of enemies.], his sons, in cities and in the countryside, and amongst kings who are vassals. The spies should be such that they do not know about each other. O bull among the Bharata lineage! He must
know about the spies the enemy has employed in shops, pleasure grounds, assemblies, among beggars, in groves
and gardens, amidst assemblies of learned men, brothels, crossroads, assembly halls and dwelling houses. O Pan-
dava! A wise one must counter the spies of the enemy in this way. If one knows everything about the spies, they
are as good as destroyed.

'"When the king examines himself and knows himself to be weak, he must seek the counsel of his advisers and
have a treaty with the one who is stronger. Even if he knows that he is not weak, an intelligent king swiftly concludes a treaty with the enemy, if he desires to obtain some advantage out of this. A king who protects the kingdom
in accordance with dharma appoints those who possess qualities, are great in their enthusiasm, knowledgeable
about dharma and virtuous. If an immensely wise king realizes that he is being resisted, he must kill all the people
who have injured him in the past and, in every way, counter those who are injurious. A lord of the earth should
have nothing to do with someone who can neither help nor hurt him, nor with those who are incapable of saving
him from hardships. An intelligent person will march out undetected against someone who has no allies and
friends, someone who is preoccupied[Because that other king is busy fighting with someone else.], someone who is negligent and someone who is weak. A brave one will
give the instruction for advancing when the army is strong, nourished and happy. However, before the advance, he
must make arrangements for the city. Even if the other one is valiant, a king must never accept subjugation. Even if
he is weak in strength and valour, he must try to afflict the enemy. He must oppress the kingdom with weapons,
fire and poison and overwhelm it. He must try to cause strife amidst his[The enemy's.] advisers and servants. Even if he desires
a kingdom, an intelligent person will always seek to avoid war. Brihaspati has said that there are three means of
obtaining prosperity-conciliation, gifts and dissension. A learned lord of men will be satisfied with whatever
prosperity can be obtained through these.

'"O descendant of the Kuru lineage! For protecting the subjects, an infinitely wise king will take one-sixth of
their income as tax. However, even for the sake of protecting the citizens, he must not violently take whatever
those in the tenth decade possess, be it a lot or little. There is no doubt that he should look upon the citizens as his
sons. In adjudicating disputes, it is his duty not to be partial because of affection. For the task of adjudication, a
king must appoint a wise son who can consider all the aspects. A kingdom is always based on proper dispute resolution. The king must appoint his advisers and skilful men who do not cause injury as supervisors over mines, salt,
taxes, ferries and elephant corps. A king who always wields the rod of chastisement well will obtain dharma. In the
dharma of kings, the rod is always praised. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The king must always be learned
in the Vedas and the Vedangas, wise, a great ascetic and always devoted to donations and the performance of sacrifices. All these qualities must always be collectively established in a king. If a king does not observe the rites, how
will he obtain heaven and how will he obtain fame?

'"If a king is oppressed by a stronger king, he must resort to the three kinds of allies and friends[Direct allies, allies of allies and enemies of enemies.] and determine what must be done. Those in pens must be set on the roads[Presumably, so that they can go somewhere else.] and villages must be removed. All of them
must be made to enter the outskirts of the city. The wealthy and the leaders of the army must repeatedly be assured.
The lord of men must himself ensure that the grain is brought in[To guard against a siege and to prevent it from falling into the hands of the enemy.]. If it cannot be brought in, it must be completely burnt by fire. The grain that is still in the fields can be used to wean away the enemy's men, or one's own forces
can be used to completely destroy it. The bridges over rivers and the roads must always be demolished. All the
stored water must be released. If it cannot be released, it must be poisoned. When such a situation of present and
future conflict is at hand, one can ignore policy and decide that it is time to have friendships with anyone who is
capable of countering the enemy[This is a difficult shloka to translate and some liberties have been taken.]. The king must cut down the roots of all the small trees that are near forts.
However, chaitya trees must be spared[Sacred trees that grow on mounds and are worshipped.]. The branches of all the old trees must be pruned. However, one must
always avoid cutting down the leaves of chaityas. He must erect high walls and casements[Around the forts.]. The moats must be
filled with stakes, crocodiles and fish. There must be doors of straw so that people inside the city can breathe
freely. One must act so that these doors are also protected in every way. Machines must be placed atop the heavier
gates. He must act so that shataghnis are placed there and are under his control. Timber must be collected and
wells must be dug. For the sake of water, wells that have been dug earlier must be purified. Houses thatched with
grass must be plastered with mud. Because of the fear of fire, in the month of Chaitra[March-April, the beginnings of the hot season and the last month of the preceding year.], all straw must be removed from the city. The lord of men must allow food to be cooked only during the night. With the exception of
agnihotras, the burning of fires in houses during the day will be avoided. Special care must be taken of fires ignited
by artisans and in places where women give birth. It is recommended that fires lit in houses must be covered well.
For the sake of the protection of the city, it must be announced that those who light fires during the day will be severely punished. O best of men! Beggars, wagoners, drunkards, lunatics and actors should be driven out. Otherwise, evil may result. The king must act so as to appoint spies from appropriate varnas at crossroads, tirthas, assembly halls and dwelling houses. The lord of men must construct broad royal roads. He must instruct that stores
of drinking water and shops are constructed at appropriate places. There must also be stores for riches, stores for
weapons and stores for grain everywhere and stables for horses and stables for elephants, with barracks for the soldiers. O Kouravya! O Yudhishthira! There must be moats, highways and narrower roads. No one must be able to
detect what is secret. A king who is afflicted by the forces of the enemy must accumulate stores of all kinds of oil,
honey, clarified butter and medicines. He must arrange for stores of charcoal, kusha grass, munja grass, red lac, arrows, trees, fodder, kindling and poisoned arrows. The lord of men must arrange for stores of all kinds of weapons
-lances, swords, spears and armour. In particular, he must arrange for the collection of all kinds of medicinal
herbs, roots and fruits and the four kinds of physicians[This is probably a reference to the four kinds of toxins in Ayurveda.]. Actors, dancers, wrestlers and those skilled in the use of
maya should adorn the best of cities and amuse people everywhere. If there is any suspicion attached to servants,
ministers, citizens or even kings[Other kings.], he must endeavour to bring them under his control. O Indra among kings!
When a task has been accomplished, the doer must be honoured with stores of riches. Honour and various words of
appreciation must be appropriate to the person. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! When an enemy has been countered or slain, the king pays off the debts that are indicated for him in the sacred texts.

'"O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Listen to me. The king must protect seven things-his own person, his advisers, his treasury, his army, his allies, his country and his city. The kingdom consists of these seven and they
must be protected carefully. O tiger among men! He who knows about the collection of the six, the first three categories and the further three categories, enjoys the earth. O Yudhishthira! Listen to the collection of six that have
been mentioned-being seated after concluding a treaty, ensuring a treaty after marching out, being seated after
declaring war, seizing[The enemy.] after marching out, creating a division in the enemy and seeking asylum with the enemy.
Listen attentively to what is said to be the three categories-decay, maintenance of the status quo and increase.
The further three categories are the pursuit of dharma, artha and kama at the appropriate time. It is through dharma
that a lord of the earth protects the earth for a long period of time. In this connection, Angiras's son[Brihaspati was the son of Angiras.] himself has
sung two shlokas. O son of a Yadavi[Yudhishthira's mother, Kunti, was born in the Yadava lineage.]! O fortunate one! You should listen to them. 'Having performed all the
tasks well, having protected the earth and having protected the citizens in this way, one enjoys happiness in the
hereafter. If all the subjects are unprotected and dharma is disregarded, what will austerities do for a king like that?
What will his sacrifices achieve?'"'
