'Ashtaka asked, "O king! Who among these two[The ascetic and the householder who has learning.], though both exert like the sun and the moon, first attains
union with the gods?"

'Yayati replied, "He who has no home despite being a householder and has controlled his desires, and the mendicant who lives in the village but has no home, will reach first. Both those who don't attain old age and those who
do can deteriorate. Because even if austerities are performed, there will be more austerities. It is said that cruelty
finds no truth. O king! Even if one has no riches, but devotedly observes dharma without thinking of gains, one attains union with the eternal."

'Ashtaka said, "O king! You are young, handsome, garlanded and resplendent. Where have you come from and
where are you going? Whose messenger are you? O lord of the earth! Where is your place?"

'Yayati replied, "Since I have lost my merits, I am falling into the hell known as bhouma. I have been cast out
from the sky and am entering the earth. I will go there after telling you that I must fall more. The Brahmanas and
the rulers of the worlds are asking me to hasten. O lord of men! I obtained a boon from Shakra that I would fall
among righteous men when I fell on the surface of the earth, at a place where the ones with all the good qualities
were assembled."

'Ashtaka said, "O king! Do not keep falling. I ask you if there is any world for me here, in the sky or in heaven.
I think you know the subject of dharma."

'Yayati replied, "O lion among kings! There are many worlds for you to enjoy in heaven, as many as the cattle
and horses on earth and animals in the forests and in the mountains. This you must know."

'Ashtaka said, "O lord of kings! I give you all the worlds that are mine in heaven, be they in the sky or in heaven. O one who beats back enemies! Take them and go there quickly. Do not keep falling."

'Yayati replied, "O chief among kings! The likes of me, who are not Brahmanas or those who know the brahman, do not accept gifts. O lord of men! Earlier, I have always given to Brahmanas myself, as one must. Let no
one who is not a Brahmana earn a living through begging, nor should the Brahmana wife of a valorous husband. If
I act the way I have never done before, what righteousness will come of that?"

'Pratardana[As mentioned earlier, Pratardana was also a king.] said, "O one with beauty that leads to envy! My name is Pratardana. I ask if there are any worlds
for me, in heaven or in the sky, for I think that you know the subject of dharma."

'Yayati replied, "O lord of men! There are many worlds for you, dripping with nectar mixed with ghee and full
of bliss. Even if you live in each for seven days, they will last you eternally."

'Pratardana said, "I give them all to you. Do not keep falling. Whatever worlds are for me, in the sky or in heaven, take them quickly and go there, shedding all your delusions."

'Yayati replied, "O king! No king who is equal in energy will crave for and accept the possessions obtained by
another king through yoga. Even if affected with the adversity of destiny, no wise king should act in a cruel way.
An intelligent king will tread the path of dharma and fame and bear dharma in mind. A person like me, learned and
knowledgeable about dharma, will not act in the mean way you have advised. If I do[Accept gifts.] what others refuse to accept, how can that bring my welfare?" When King Yayati spoke these words, Vasumana, supreme among kings,
addressed him.'
