Vaishampayana said, 'O best of the Bharata lineage! Having heard this, Kounteya[Yudhishthira.] summoned his brothers in
private and spoke these words to them. "I have spies in the army of Dhritarashtra's son. When night had passed,
they brought me this news. Duryodhana asked the son of the river, the one who is great in his vows. 'O lord! How
long will you take to kill the soldiers of the Pandus?' He told the evil-minded son of Dhritarashtra that he would
take a month. Drona promised the same period of time. Goutama[Kripa.] said double the time. We hear that Drona's
son, skilled in the use of great weapons, promised ten nights. When Karna, skilled in the use of divine weapons,
was asked in the assembly of the Kurus, he promised to kill the army in five days. O Arjuna! Therefore, I wish to
hear your words. In how many days can you destroy the enemies in battle?" Thus addressed by the king, Gudakesha Dhananjaya looked towards Vasudeva and replied in these words. "All of them are great-souled and skilled in
the use of weapons. They can fight in many ways. O great king! There is no doubt that they will kill your soldiers.
But I speak the truth when I say that you should not be tortured in your mind. When I have Vasudeva as an aide, on
a single chariot, I can slay the three worlds in an instant, with the immortals, with their mobile and immobile objects, and with everything that is the past, the present and the future. That is my view. I possess the terrible and
great weapon that Pashupati gave me when there was a duel with the hunter[Shiva disguised as a hunter. This has been described in Section 31.]. At the end of a yuga, that is employed by Pashupati to destroy all the beings. O tiger among men! I know how to use that. Gangeya does not know
this, nor do Drona and Goutama. O king! Neither do Drona's son and the son of the suta. One should not use such
divine weapons to kill ordinary people in battle. Without resorting to deceit, we will vanquish our enemies in battle. O king! These tigers among men are your aides. All of them are skilled in the use of divine weapons. All of
them delight in war. All of them have bathed themselves in Vedanta[Literally, Vedanta means the end of the Vedas and is identified with the philosophy of the Upanishads.] and are invincible. O Pandava! They will
even kill the soldiers of the gods in battle. Shikhandi, Yuyudhana[Satyaki.], Parshata Dhrishtadyumna, Bhimasena, the
twins, Yudhamanyu, Uttamouja, Virata and Drupada, who are the equals of Bhishma and Drona in battle, and you
yourself are capable of annihilating the three worlds. You are like Vasava in your radiance. If a man looks at you in
anger, there is no doubt that he will soon cease to exist. O Kourava[Since Kuru was a common ancestor, the Pandavas can also be referred to as Kouravas.]! I know this."'
