'Dhritarashtra said, "Subhadra's unvanquished son was young. He performed deeds that befitted his lineage. He
never fled from the field of battle. He was borne on three-year-old horses that were extremely strong and born from
good lineages. They seemed to glide along the sky. When he penetrated there, which brave ones countered him?"

'Sanjaya replied, "Abhimanyu, the descendant of the Pandu lineage, penetrated your soldiers. He used his sharp
arrows and made all the kings retreat. At this, Drona, Kripa, Karna, Drona's son, Brihadbala and Kritavarma,
Hridika's son-these six rathas surrounded him. O great king! On seeing that Saindhava had assumed an extremely
heavy burden, your soldiers attacked Yudhishthira[Jayadratha was entrusted with the task of preventing the Pandavas from following Abhimanyu. Barring those
six rathas, all the other soldiers now supported him in this task.]. There were those who stretched bows that were as long as
palm trees. They showered down many arrows on Subhadra's brave son. But Subhdra's son, the destroyer of enemy heroes, used arrows in that battle to counter all those great archers, who were skilled in all forms of learning.
He pierced Drona with fifty arrows and Brihadbala with twenty, Kritavarma with eighty and Kripa with sixty arrows. Arjuna's son stretched his bow up to his ears and used ten extremely forceful and gold-tufted arrows to
pierce Ashvatthama. In the midst of the enemy, Phalguna's son used a yellow, sharp and tufted arrow to pierce
Karna in his ear. He brought down Kripa's horses and the two charioteers who guarded his flanks[Known as parshnis.]. He then
pierced him between the breasts with ten arrows. While your brave sons looked on, the powerful one then killed
the valiant Vrindaraka, the extender of the fame of the Kuru lineage[This Vrindaraka cannot be Duryodhana's brother. The brother Vrindaraka was killed by Bhima.]. While he was thus fearlessly slaughtering
the foremost among the enemy, Drona's son pierced him with twenty-five small arrows. O venerable one! However, while all the sons of Dhritarashtra looked on, Arjuna's son swiftly pierced Ashvatthama back with sharp arrows. But Drona's son pierced him with sixty extremely energetic arrows that were terrible, fierce and sharp. However, though pierced, he was like Mount Mainaka and did not tremble. The immensely energetic and powerful one
pierced Drona's son, who had caused him injury, with seventy-three gold-tufted and straight-flying arrows. Wishing to protect his son, Drona pierced him with one hundred arrows. Desiring to protect his father in the battle, Ashvatthama pierced him with sixty arrows. Karna pierced him with twenty-two broad-headed arrows, Kritavarma
with fourteen, Brihadbala with fifty and Sharadvata Kripa with ten. He pierced them back with ten arrows each.
Subhadra's son mangled all of them with sharp arrows. The lord of Kosala[Brihadbala.] pierced him in the chest with a
barbed arrow. But he[Abhimanyu.] brought his[Brihadbala's.] arrows, standard, bow and charioteer down on the ground. Bereft of his
chariot, the king of Kosala grasped a sword and a shield and wished to sever the head, decorated with earrings, of
Phalguna's son from his body. But he pierced the lord of Kosala, Prince Brihadbala, in his heart with an arrow.
With his heart shattered, he fell down. At this, ten thousand great-souled kings ran away, shouting words of abuse,
though they wielded swords and bows[It is not clear who these kings were abusing. They might have abused Abhimanyu. Or they might have abused
Duryodhana, for having brought this on.]. Having slain Brihadbala, Subhadra's son roamed around in the field of
battle. With a shower of arrows that were like rain, he paralysed the great archers and warriors on your side."'
