Sanjaya said, "O king! Surrounded by a large array of chariots, Drona's son swiftly descended on the spot where
the king[Yudhishthira.] was. On seeing him violently descend, the brave Partha[Arjuna.], with Shouri as his aide, violently checked
him, like the shoreline against the abode of makaras. O great king! At this, Drona's powerful son became enraged
and enveloped Arjuna and Vasudeva with arrows. The maharathas saw that the two Krishnas were afflicted. The
Kurus saw this and were overcome by great wonder. Arjuna seemed to smile and invoked a divine weapon. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In the battle, the brahmana countered it. Wishing to kill, whichever weapon Pan-
dava used in the battle was baffled by Drona's son, the great archer, in the encounter. O king! A terrible clash with
weapons ensued. We saw Drona's son in that encounter, like Death with a gaping mouth. Having enveloped the directions and the sub-directions with his arrows, he struck Vasudeva in the right arm with three arrows. Arjuna slew
all the horses of the great-souled one and in the encounter, made the earth flow with a river of blood. Arrows released from Partha's bow killed rathas and brought them down. Freed from their yokes, horses were seen to run
around here and there. On witnessing the deeds performed by Partha, Drona's son, the ornament of a battle, countered Krishna[Krishna is also one of Arjuna's names and this Krishna is clearly Arjuna.] in that encounter and covered him from every direction with sharp arrows. O great king! In the
battle, Drona's son used another arrow to strike Arjuna in the chest. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having
been severely struck in the battle by Drona's son, he picked up a terrible club and hurled it towards Drona's son.
That club was decorated with gold and descended. However, Drona's son suddenly shattered it and people applauded. O king! Shattered into many fragments by the arrows of Bharadvaja's son, it fell down on the ground, like
a mountain that has been shattered by the wind god. In the encounter, Arjuna pierced Drona's son with ten arrows
and used a broad-headed arrow to bring down his charioteer from his seat on the chariot. Drona's son, swift in his
valour, controlled the mounts himself and swiftly enveloped the two Krishnas with arrows. We beheld that wonderful sight. He controlled and drove the horses and fought with Phalguna. O king! In the battle, all the warriors
applauded this feat. When Drona's son advanced before Phalguna in the encounter, Jaya[Arjuna's name.] used a kshurapra arrow to slice down the harnesses that yoked the horses to the chariot. Driven by the force of the arrows, the horses
fled. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A loud uproar arose amidst your troops. Having obtained victory, the
Pandavas drove away your soldiers. Desiring victory, they released sharp arrows from every direction. O great
king! The large army of the sons of Dhritarasthra was repeatedly routed by the brave ones, who were urged on by
the prospect of victory.

' "O great king! Your sons, colourful in fighting, Shakuni Soubala and the great-souled Karna looked on. O lord
of men! But they were unable to rally the large army of your sons. Afflicted in every way, they no longer remained
in the battle. O great king! The warriors fled here and there. On seeing this, the large army of your sons was terrified and, extremely anxious, ran away. The son of a suta repeatedly asked them to remain. However, slain by the
great-souled ones, the soldiers did not stay there. O great king! Desiring victory, the Pandavas roared repeatedly,
having seen that the army of the sons of Dhritarashtra was running away in various directions. At this, Duryodhana
spoke these affectionate words to Karna. 'O Karna! Behold. The soldiers have been severely oppressed by the Pandavas. Though you are here, they are frightened and are running away in every direction. O mighty-armed one! O
destroyer of enemies! Knowing this, do what must be done. O bull among men! O brave one! Driven away by the
Pandavas in the battle, thousands of warriors are calling out to you alone.' Hearing these important words spoken
by Duryodhana, Radheya, the descendant of the suta lineage, spoke these words to the lord of Madra. 'O lord of
men! Behold the valour of my arms and my weapons. In the battle today, I will kill all the Panchalas, together with
the Pandus. O tiger among men! O lord of men! Drive the horses well.' Having spoken these words, the powerful
and brave son of a suta, picked up Vijaya, his ancient and excellent bow. O great king! Having strung it, he repeatedly rubbed the string. He asked the warriors to return.

' "The immensely strong one with an immeasurable soul took a pledge of truth and invoked the bhargava
weapon[Divine weapon obtained from Bhargava, that is, Parashurama.]. O king! In the great battle, thousands, millions, billions and crores of extremely sharp arrows issued
from it. They were extremely terrible and blazed, shafted with the feathers of herons and peacocks. The Pandava
soldiers were mangled and nothing could be seen. O lord of the earth! Great sounds of lamentation arose among
the Panchalas. In the encounter, they were afflicted by the power of the bhargava weapon. O king! Elephants and
men were brought down in thousands. O tiger among men! Chariots and horses were strewn around in every direction. O king! The slain were strewn around here and there and the earth trembled. The entire large army of the Pandavas was agitated. Karna alone was the foremost among warriors. He was like a fire without smoke. O tiger
among men! That scorcher of enemies consumed the enemy and was resplendent. Having been slain by Karna, the
Panchalas and the Chedis became unconscious. They were like elephants in a forest conflagration. O tiger among
men! Those best among men lamented loudly. In the field of battle, loud woes of the terrified ones could be heard.
O king! Terrified, they fled in different directions. There was the great sound of lamentation there, like that made
by beings at the time of a flood. O venerable one! They were seen to be slaughtered there by the son of a suta. All
the beings, including those belonging to an inferior species[Other than men, animals.], were frightened. The Srinjayas were slaughtered in
the battle by the son of a suta and repeatedly cried out to Arjuna and Vasudeva. They were unconscious, like those
in the city of the king of the dead, calling out to the king of the dead[Yama is the king of the dead.].

' "At this, Kunti's son, Dhananjaya, spoke to Vasudeva. 'Behold the extremely terrible bhargava weapon. O
Krishna! O mighty-armed one! Behold the valour of the bhargava weapon. There is no means of countering that
weapon in a battle. O Krishna! Behold the angry son of a suta in the great battle. The brave one is like Yama and
has performed a terrible deed. He is repeatedly casting extremely terrible glances towards me. I do not see any
means of running away from Karna in this battle. If a man remains alive in a battle, there may be victory, or there
may be defeat. O Hrishikesha! For the sake of victory, how can one be victorious if one is dead?' O venerable one!
Janardana wished to leave to see Yudhishthira and thought that Karna would be overcome with exhaustion in the
battle[That is, Krishna wanted to wait until Karna was exhausted.]. Krishna told Arjuna, 'The king[Yudhishthira.] has been severely wounded. O best among the Kuru lineage! Let us
reassure him first and you will kill Karna after that.' Dhananjaya also wished to see the king who had been afflicted with arrows. On Keshava's instructions, he abandoned the battle and quickly departed on his chariot. Kounteya
left, because he wished to see Dharmaraja. Though he looked at all the soldiers, he could not see his elder brother
anywhere. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having fought with Drona's son and having defeated the descendant of Bhrigu lineage[Ashvatthama. But this must be a typo. Ashvatthama was descended from the Bharadvaja lineage, not the Bhrigu lineage. The Critical edition states 'the son of Bhrigu'. Instead of Bhrigu,
other versions say guru. This fits, because Ashvatthama was Arjuna's preceptor's son.], whom even the wielder of the vajra found difficult to withstand in battle, he departed.
He defeated Drona's son, the wielder of a fierce bow. He thus accomplished an extremely difficult deed.

' "Dhananjaya, irresistible to enemies, then glanced towards his own soldiers. The bravest of the brave, who
were battling at the forefronts of their divisions, were delighted to see Savyasachi. They were famous because of
their earlier deeds and he instructed the rathas to be stationed with their divisions. However, the garlanded Kiriti
did not see the eldest of the warriors, his brother Ajamidha[Ajamidha is one of Yudhishthira's names. Ajatashatru (one without enemies) is also one of
Yudhishthira's names.]. He quickly approached Bhima and asked, 'How is
the king? Where is the king?' Bhima replied, 'King Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, has retreated. His limbs have
been mangled by Karna's arrows. I doubt that he is alive.' Arjuna said, 'Therefore, you should quickly go and find
out about the king, supreme among the Kurus. Having been severely pierced by Karna's arrows, there is no doubt
that the king has gone to his camp. When it was night[This is a reference to fighting throughout the night, described in Section 70 (Volume 6).], though he was severely and grievously struck by Drona,
the spirited one remained, desiring victory, and waited until Drona had been killed. In the battle today, the generous eldest among the Pandavas, has faced a disaster because of Karna. O Bhima! Quickly go and find out about
him. I will remain here and restrain the large numbers of the enemy.' Bhima replied, 'O magnaminous one! O bull
among the Bharata lineage! You go and find out how the king is. O Arjuna! If I go there, these brave ones[Referring to the Kouravas.] will
say that I am frightened.' At this, Arjuna told Bhimasena, 'The samshaptakas are arranged in a counter-formation
against me. Without killing them, it is not possible for me to abandon these large numbers of the enemy.' Bhimasena told Arjuna, 'O brave one amongst the Kuru lineage! In this encounter, I will rely on my valour and fight
against all the samshaptakas. O Dhananjaya! Go.' In the midst of the enemy, he[Arjuna.] heard these extremely difficult
words of assurance given by Bhimasena, his brother. Wishing to leave and see the best of the Kuru lineage[Yudhishthira.], he
then spoke these words to the best of the Vrishni lineage. 'O Hrishikesha! Drive the horses and let us leave this
ocean of chariots. O Keshava! I wish to see King Ajatashatru.' Before urging the horses, the foremost among the
Dasharha lineage spoke these words to Bhima. 'O brave one! For you, the task to be accomplished now is not at all
wonderful. O Bhima! I am leaving. Slay these masses of the enemy.' O king! O Indra among kings! Hrishikesha
then went to the spot where King Yudhishthira was, urging the steeds that were Garuda's equal to a greater and
greater speed, having stationed Bhimsena, the scorcher of enemies, in the counter-formation and having given
Vrikodara instructions about the fight. Those two, the best of men, approached the king, who was lying down
alone. They descended from the chariot and bowed in obeisance at Dharmaraja's feet[Krishna was also younger to Yudhishthira.]. On seeing that the bull
among men was well, those two bulls among men, the two Krishnas, were filled with delight, like the two Ashvins
on seeing Vasava. The king honoured them, like the fire god, the Ashvins, or the preceptor greeting Shakra and
Vishnu when the great asura Jambha was killed[The preceptor in question is Brihaspati, the preceptor of the gods. The asura Jambha is sometimes described as having been killed by Indra, sometimes by Vishnu, and sometimes by Indra
and Vishnu together.]. Thinking that Karna had been killed, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira
was delighted and addressed those two scorchers of enemies in a voice that was choking with joy." '
