'"Ashtavakra said, 'O king! There are kings who are assembled here, unrivalled in power, with their dreadful
armies. The ones who debate, like swans cackling in a great expanse of water, should not find a means of escape.
You pride yourself on being a great debater[This is being addressed to Bandi.]. When you engage with me today, you will not flow like a river's
current. O Bandi! My energy will blaze like fire on kindling. Stand firm before me today.'

'"Bandi replied, 'Do not awaken a sleeping tiger. The virulent snake is licking its mouth. If you kick it on the
head with your feet, you will not excape. Be sure that you will be bitten. The extremely weak man is insolent and
strikes a mountain, only to lacerate his hands and nails himself. No wounds can be seen on the mountain. Like all
mountains before Mainaka, like calves before a bull, all the other kings are inferior to the king of Mithila.'"

'Lomasha said, "Ashtavakra roared in that assembly. O king! His wrath was aroused and he spoke to Bandi.

'Tell me the answer to my question. I will tell you the answer to your question.'"

'"Bandi said, 'There is only one fire, but it is kindled in many forms. There is only one sun that illuminates
everything. There is only one warrior and slayer, the king of the gods. There is only one Yama, the lord of the
ancestors.'

'"Ashtavakra replied, 'Indra and Agni roam together, as friends. There are two devarshis, Narada and Parvata.
There are two Ashvins. There are two wheels to a chariot. As decreed by the creator, wife and husband live
together.'

'"Bandi said, 'Beings are born thrice as a result of their deeds[The act of conception, the birth and the related rituals and initiation at the time of the thread-bearing
ceremony.]. The vajapeya is united with three[A reference to the three Vedas recited at the sacrifice, the Atharva Veda not being included.]. Thrice
do the adhvaryus perform the act of pressing[Pressing to extract the soma juice. There are four types of officiating priests-hotar (one who recites from
the Rig Veda), udgatar (one who recites from the Sama Veda), adhvaryu (one who recites from the Yajur Veda) and
brahman (one who recites from the Atharva Veda).]. It is said that there are three worlds and three sources of
light[The sun, the moon and the stars.].'
'"Ashtavakra replied, 'There are four stages of life for a brahmana[Brahmacharya, garhasthya, vanavasa and sannyasa.]. Four are required to complete the sacrifice. There are four directions and four varnas. It has always been said that cows have four feet[This is a completely literal translation. However, the word go also means speech and in addition to feet, the
word pada means one-fourth of a shloka. This may very well have been the intended meaning.].'
'"Bandi said, 'There are five fires[The five sacred fires known as dakshina, garhapatya, ahavaniya, sabhya and avasathya. There are also believed to be five digestive fires in the body.]. The pankti has five feet[Again, the word used is pada. Pankti means any collection of five.]. There are five sacrifices[The five daily sacrifices required to be performed by any householder-adhyana (studying), brahma yajna,
pitri yajna, deva yajna and bhuta yajna.]. There are five
organs of sense. It has been seen in the Vedas that apsaras have five tufts of hair[Apsaras are believed to have five tufts of hair. We have deviated from the Critical Edition's text here. The
Critical Edition leaves it dangling and the line ends abruptly. So we do not know who has five tufts of hair. Other
versions mention apsaras.]. There are five sacred rivers in
the world[The five rivers of the Punjab-Shatadru, Vipasha, Iravati, Chandrabhaga and Vitasta.].'
'"Ashtavakra replied, 'When the sacrificial fire is prepared, six cows are the dakshina. There are six seasons in
the wheel of time. There are six organs of sense[The five standard organs and the mind.]. There are six in Krittika[The third of the twenty-seven nakshatras, the constellation Pleiades, consisting of six stars.]. It has been seen in all the Vedas
that there are six sadasykas[A sadasyka is a rite connected with a soma sacrifice and six such rites are performed on a single day.].'
'"Bandi said, 'There are seven kinds of domestic animals and seven that are wild[The seven types of domestic animals are a cow, a goat, a sheep, a man, a horse, a mule and an ass and the
inclusion of a man in listings of domestic animals is interesting. But this list does vary from one text to another.
The seven wild animals are a lion, a tiger, a boar, a monkey, a bear, an elephant and a buffalo.]. There are seven meters
that carry the sacrifice[Chhanda. The list of seven varies, but the standard list is gayatri, trishtupa, jagati, anushtupa, pankti, brihati
and kakupa.]. There are seven rishis[The saptarshis. The usual list is Marichi, Atri, Angira, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and Vasishtha.]. There are seven forms of offering homage[This listing is not immediately clear.]. The veena is
known to have seven strings.'

'"Ashtavakra replied, 'Eight shanas bear a hundred[This is probably a reference to coinage or weight. In coinage, shana or karshapana is mentioned and shatamana (literally, one hundred units) is also mentioned. This may refer to the conversion between shana and
shatamana.]. Sharabha, the destroyer of the lion, has eight feet[Sharabha is mythical and has evolved over time. Sharabha has eight legs, lives in the mountains, slays lions
and lives on raw flesh. In later versions, Sharabha is also described as an incarnation of Shiva's and in that form,
Shiva tamed Vishnu's half-man and half-lion (narasimha) incarnation.].
We have heard that among the gods, there is a class of eight Vasus. In all sacrifices, the sacrificial post has eight
corners.'

'"Bandi said, 'When kindling sacrifices for the ancestors, nine verses are used. It is said that there are nine
stages in creation. The brihati meter has nine syllables. Nine digits are always used in calculations[The numerals 1 to 9.].'
'"Ashtavakra replied, 'In the world of men, it has been said that there are ten stages[There is a problem in translating this. Does this mean there are ten stages in life and does each of these
stages refer to a decade? A typo is more likely. The text should probably read disha rather than dasha. In that case,
the ten directions are meant. Some non-Critical versions do read disha.]. It has been said that a
thousand is made up of ten complete hundreds. A woman who has conceived bears for ten months. There are ten
Dasherakas, Dashas and Dasharnas[This is difficult to understand. The Dasherakas, Dashas and Dasharnas are all tribes or clans of people mentioned in the Mahabharata. Perhaps this means that each of these tribes or clans were further subdivided into ten
subgroups.].'
'"Bandi said, 'Eleven animals are used in the ekadashi rite[Ekadashi is observed on the eleventh lunar day.]. There are eleven sacrificial stakes. There are
eleven changes in the breath of life[The meaning is unclear.]. It has been said that there are eleven Rudras among the gods.'

'"Ashtavakra replied, 'It has been said that there are twelve months in a year. The jagati meter is formed out of
twelve syllables. It has been said that an ordinary sacrifice lasts for twelve days. The brahmanas say that there are
twelve Adityas.'

'"Bandi said, 'It has been said that the thirteenth lunar day is terrible. The earth is formed out of thirteen islands
...'"632
'Lomasha said, "Having said this, Bandi fell silent. Then Ashtavakra completed the other half of the shloka.
Keshi travelled for thirteen days[The meaning is unclear.]. It has been said that the atichhanda meter has thirteen syllables." At that,
when they saw that the suta's son had fallen silent, a loud applause arose. His head was lowered and he was immersed in thought. But Ashtavakra went on reciting. In King Janaka's grand sacrifice, there was a tremendous uproar. Hands joined in salutation, all the brahmanas went to Ashtavakra and worshipped him.

'"Ashtavakra said, 'I have heard that, vanquishing learned brahmanas in debate, this one immersed them in water. Let Bandi follow the same dharma today. Seize him and immerse him also.'

'"Bandi said, 'I am the son of King Varuna. O Janaka! A sacrifice that will last for twelve years is taking place,
equal in duration to your sacrifice. Therefore, I have sent the foremost brahmanas there. All of them had gone to
witness Varuna's sacrifice. But behold. They are returning. I worship the venerable Ashtavakra. Because of him, I
will join the one who gave me birth.'

'"Ashtavakra replied, 'You immersed brahmanas in the water of the ocean. Though they were learned and intelligent, they lost in debate. I have now rescued their speech through my learning. Let the learned examine these
words. Jataveda[Jataveda is one of Agni's ephithets. Jataveda means one who knows the Vedas and is also generally used for
someone who knows.] Agni knows the houses of the learned and does not consume them. Thus the learned examine
the words that are spoken, even if they are uttered by children, sons and those to be pitied. Has your energy become lean because of shleshmataki[Shleshmataki is a kind of tree with bitter fruit. Has Bandi been weakened because of eating this fruit?]? Or is that flattery has intoxicated you? You are like an elephant that has
been goaded. O Janaka! You are hearing. But you are not paying attention to these words of mine.'

'"Janaka said, 'I am listening to your words. They are divine in form and superhuman. Your form is also celestial. Since you have vanquished Bandi in debate today, Bandi is yours, to do as you desire.'

'"Ashtavakra replied, 'O king! I have no use for Bandi alive. If Varuna is his father, immerse him in the water.'

'"Bandi said, 'I am the son of King Varuna. I have no fear from being immersed in the water. Ashtavakra will
soon see his father Kahoda, who had been destroyed a long time ago[Kahoda will be resurrected.].'"
'Lomasha said, "Then Varuna's great-souled son showed homage to all the brahmanas. All of them arose and
approached Janaka. Kahoda said, 'O Janaka! It is for this reason that men desire sons who will perform deeds. My
son has performed the deed that I was unable to. O Janaka! To a weak one may be born a strong son, to a foolish
one an intelligent one and to an ignorant one a wise one.' Bandi said, 'O king! May you be fortunate. Yama will
use your sharp axe to chop off the heads of your enemies. At this sacrifice of King Janaka's, there were great
recitations and the best of sama hymns were sung. Soma was drunk in copious amounts at the sacrifice. Delighted
in heart, the gods themselves partook of their sacred shares.' O king! When all the brahmanas arose, more resplendent than they had been before, Bandi obtained King Janaka's permission and entered the waters of the ocean.
Ashtavakra showed homage to his father. As is proper, he was worshipped by the brahmanas. Having vanquished
the Bandi, he returned to the best of hermitages with his uncle. O Kounteya! Therefore, with your brothers and
with the brahmanas, dwell here happily. O Ajamidha! With me, you will then go to other sacred places, devoted
and pure in your deeds."'
