'Sanjaya said, "The arm, with the sword and with a beautiful armlet, fell down on the ground and this caused
supreme grief in the world of living beings. Kiriti severed the arm while he was still unseen and it fell down on the
ground with great force, like a five-headed serpent. Having seen that he had been rendered unsuccessful by Partha,
Kourava let go of Satyaki and angrily censured Pandava. 'O Kounteya! You have performed an extremely cruel
deed. While unseen by me and without engaging with me, you have severed my arm. What will you tell King Yudhishthira, the son of dharma? "I killed Bhurishrava in the battle, though he was not fighting with me." Is this what
the great-minded Indra instructed you himself? O Partha! Are these the weapons you learnt from Rudra, Drona and
Kripa? It is said that you know more about dharma than anyone else in this world. How did you strike someone
who was not engaged with you in battle? Learned ones do not strike someone who is distracted, frightened and
without a chariot, or someone who seeks mercy or confronts a hardship. This is inferior conduct and is practised by
men who are wicked. O Partha! How did you then perpetrate this extremely difficult deed? O Dhananjaya! Noble
ones can easily perform deeds that are noble. But on this earth, noble ones find it extremely difficult to perform an
ignoble act. O Partha! Men quickly pick up the deeds and conduct of those they consort with. This can be seen in
you. You have been born in a lineage of kings and in particular, you are a Kouraveya. You were good in conduct
and observed good vows. How could you have transgressed the dharma of kshatriyas? You have performed this
wicked deed for the sake of Varshneya[Meaning Satyaki.]. This is no doubt because of Vasudeva's counsel, though this is not worthy of you. Other than someone who is Krishna's friend, which person can inflict such a hardship on someone who
is distracted and is fighting with another person? The Vrishnis and the Andhakas are vile[Vratya, also meaning outcaste.]. They are naturally
addicted to deeds that should be censured. O Partha! Why have you accepted them as a model?' Having thus spoken, the mighty-armed and immensely illustrious one, who had a sacrificial altar on his banner, abandoned Satyaki
in the battle. He decided to fast to death[The translation doesn't capture the nuance. The practice in question is prayopavesa. While this does mean voluntary fasting to death, it is adopted by someone who has no worldly desires left.]. The one with auspicious signs spread a bed of arrows with his left
hand. He wished to go to Brahma's world and offered his breath of life to the lord of the senses as an oblation. He
fixed his eye on the sun and his mind on pure water. He meditated on the great Upanishad and united with yoga,
became silent.

'"All the soldiers and all the men censured Krishna and Dhananjaya and applauded that bull among men.
Though censured, the two Krishnas did not say anything unpleasant in reply. Though praised, the one with the sacrificial altar on his standard, was not pleased either. O king! Dhananjaya could not mentally tolerate that your sons
should have uttered such words and spoke to them. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! His words were not angry, but he wished to remind them. Phalguna, Pandu's son, spoke these words. 'All the kings know about my great
vow. No one who is within the range of my arrows will be able to kill anyone on our side. O one with the sacrificial altar on your banner! Knowing this, you should not censure me. Without knowing about the nature of dharma,
one should not censure someone else. You possessed weapons and you were about to kill the brave one from the
Vrishni lineage in the battle. If I have severed your arm then, that is not against dharma. O father[The word used is tata.]! Which virtuous one will not condemn the slaughter of Abhimanyu, when he was without a weapon, without a chariot and without armour? He was only a child.' Thus addressed by Partha, he[Bhurishrava.] touched the ground with his head. With his left
arm, he offered his severed right arm. O great king! Having heard Partha's words, the immensely radiant one, with
the sacrificial altar on his standard, remained silent and hung his head down. Arjuna said, 'O Shala's elder
brother[Somadatta had three sons-Bhuri, Bhurishrava and Shala.]! The affection that I bear towards you is the same as the one I bear towards Dharmaraja, Bhima, Naku-
la, supreme among eloquent ones, and Sahadeva. Having taken my leave and also that of the great-souled Krishna,
go to the sacred worlds, where Shibi, the son of Ushinara, is[Shibi's story of generosity has been recounted in Section 31 (Volume 2).].' Having been freed by Somadatta's son, Shini's
descendant arose.

'"Desiring to sever the head of the great-souled one, he grasped his sword. Bhuridakshina, Shala's elder brother,
had already been slain by Pandu's son and was distracted. Satyaki wished to kill such an unblemished one. He was
seated with his arm lopped off, like an elephant with a severed trunk. All the soldiers censured the extremely evil-
minded one loudly. He was restrained by Krishna, the great-souled Partha, Bhima, the two protectors of the chariot
wheels[Yudhamanyu and Uttamouja.], Ashvatthama, Kripa, Karna, Vrishasena and Saindhava. The soldiers loudly asked him not to kill the
one who was devoted to his vows. However, Satyaki severed the head of the Indra among the Kouravas with his
sword, though his arm had been severed in the battle by Partha and he was fasting to death. The soldiers did not
applaud Satyaki's deed. The extender of the Kuru lineage had already been slain by Arjuna. The siddhas, the cha-
ranas and men saw Bhurishrava, who was an equal of the thousand-eyed one, being killed in the battle, though he
was fasting to death. Amazed at his deeds, the gods honoured him. The soldiers also took sides and debated in
many ways. 'This is not Varshneya's crime. This is destiny. Therefore, we should not fall prey to anger. Anger
causes misery for men. It was destined that the brave one would be killed and it is not for us to debate this. The
creator has ordained that in this battle, he will meet his death through Satyaki.'

'"Satyaki said, 'You tell me that one should not kill someone who should not be killed. You speak about dharma
and seem to be established in dharma. You wear the garments of dharma. Subhadra's son was a child. He was
bereft of weapons. When you slew him in the battle, where was your dharma then? At some time, I had insolently
taken a pledge. While I was still alive, if someone flung me down in battle and kicked me with his feet in anger, I
would slay that enemy, even if he were to adopt the vow of a sage. O ones with limited intelligence! I was struggling to counter him, with my arms and eyes intact. But you thought that I was already dead. O bulls among the
Kurus! It is very proper that I should have countered him in this way. Out of affection towards me, Partha protected his pledge[Of protecting those on his own side.]. But having severed his arm with the sword, he has deprived me. That which is ordained will
happen. Destiny works in this way. He has been killed while he was fighting. What adharma has been committed
by me? In ancient times, Valmiki sung this shloka on earth. "Men must always act so as to cause pain to their enemies."'"

'Sanjaya said, "O great king! When he had spoken in this way, no one among the Kouravas and the Pandavas
said anything. They worshipped him[Bhurishrava.] in their minds. He was sanctified with mantras. He was great in granting
boons. He was illustrious. He had given away thousands of donations. He was like a sage who had gone to the forest. No one was happy at his death. He had dark blue eyes. He was a benefactor. He was brave. His eyes were red,
like those of a pigeon. His head was severed, like that of a horse at a sacrifice and was then placed at the spot for
oblations. In the great battle, his energy sanctified the weapon that had severed his head. He was the granter of
boons. He was the recipient of boons. Because of his supreme dharma, he filled heaven and earth[Rodasi.] and ascended
above."'
