Vaishampayana said, 'Having said this about the destruction of the Kurus, with her divine eyesight Gandhari saw
everything there. She was immensely fortunate and was devoted to her husband. She was his equal in observing
vows. She was always engaged in fierce austerities and was truthful. Maharshi Krishna[Vedavyasa.], the performer of auspicious deeds, had granted her many different kinds of boons, including the strength of divine knowledge. The intelligent one[Gandhari.] could see things that were far away and not near, such as the bravest of men lying down in the field of
battle. This made the body hair stand up. It was strewn with bones and hair and there were torrents of blood. Many
thousands of bodies were scattered around in every direction. There were elephants, horses, chariots and warriors,
completely covered in blood. There were bodies without heads and a large number of heads without bodies. It was
strewn with elephants, horses and the bravest of men, deprived of their lives. The place was populated by jackals,
wild crows, ravens, herons and crows. It was full of rakshasas, maneaters and delighted ospreys. Inauspicious jackals howled and it was populated by vultures.

'Dhritarashtra, lord of the earth, obtained Vyasa's permission. With all the sons of Pandu, with Yudhishthira at
their head, with Vasudeva and the king who had lost his relatives[It is not clear who this king is. It can only be Satyaki, though Satyaki is
rarely described as a king.] leading the way, and assembling all the Kuru
women, he[Dhritarashtra.] went to the field of battle. The women, who had lost their lords, approached Kurukshetra. They saw
their slain sons, brothers, fathers and husbands there. They were being devoured by predatory beasts there, by jackals, wild crows, crows, demons, pishachas, rakshasas and many kinds of beings that roam around in the night. The
women saw that place, which was like Rudra's sporting ground. As they descended from their extremely expensive
vehicles, they screamed. The women of the Bharata lineage were miserable and saw a sight that they had not seen
earlier. Some roamed around amidst the bodies. Others fell down on the ground. They were exhausted and without
their protectors. Some lost their senses. The women of the Panchala and Kuru lineages were extremely miserable.
Their minds were numb because of the sorrow, and in every direction, they screamed.

'Subala's daughter[Gandhari.] was knowledgeable about dharma. She looked at that terrible field of battle. Having seen
the destruction of the Kurus, she approached Pundarikaksha Purushottama and spoke these sorrowful words. "O
Pundarikaksha! Look at these daughters-in-law, whose lords have been slain. O Madhava! Their hair is dishevelled
and they are shrieking like female ospreys. They arrived together, remembering the bulls among the Bharata lineage. They are running around separately now, after their sons, brothers, fathers and husbands. O mighty-armed
one! These are the mothers of heroes and their sons have been killed. Some are the wives of heroes and the brave
ones have been killed. The place is beautiful with those tigers among men, Bhishma, Karna, Abhimanyu, Drona,
Drupada and Shalya. They were like blazing fires. The great-souled ones wore golden armour, decorated with
molten gold and gems. They wore armlets and bracelets on their arms. They were ornamented with garlands.
Spears, clubs, sparkling and sharp swords, arrows and bows were released from the arms of the brave ones. Large
numbers of delighted carnivorous beasts have assembled in some places. In some places, they are sporting. In others, they are lying down. O lord! O brave one! Behold. That is how the field of battle looks. O Janardana! As I look
at it, I am tormented by grief. O Madhusudana! The Panchalas and the Kurus were like the five elements[The sense is that the five elements (earth, air, fire, water, sky) are not destroyed. So the Kurus and the Panchalas would not be destroyed either.]. I never
thought that they would be destroyed, or that they would be killed. Thousands of eagles and vultures are tearing
apart the best of armour, and dragging and devouring the mangled bodies. Who could have thought of the destruction of Jayadratha, Karna, Drona, Bhishma and Abhimanyu? O Madhusudana! They were regarded as those who
could not be killed. I see them slain now. They are being devoured by vultures, herons, wild crows, hawks, dogs
and jackals. Those wrathful ones were stationed under Duryodhana's command. Behold those tigers among men
now. They are like fires that have been pacified. All of them deserved to lie down on soft and clean beds. They
have been destroyed now and are lying down on the bare ground. At the appropriate time, they were always
praised by bards. They are now hearing the many horrible and inauspicious howls of jackals. Those illustrious and
brave ones used to lie down on beds earlier. Their limbs used to be smeared with the paste of sandalwood and aloe.
They are now lying down in dust. Vultures, jackals and crows are tearing away their ornaments. They are repeatedly emitting inauspicious and hideous howls. There are bows, arrows, yellow swords and sparkling clubs. They
were cheerful and prided themselves on fighting. They are radiant, as if they are still alive. There were many who
were extremely handsome, but have been torn apart by carnivorous beasts now. Some possessed eyes like bulls and
are lying down, wearing golden garlands. Others, with arms like bludgeons, are still holding their clubs. The brave
ones are lying down facing them, like women along their beloveds[The clubs are being compared to women lying down alongside their
beloved husbands.]. Others have dazzling armour and sparkling
weapons. O Janardana! Thinking that they are still alive, the predatory beasts are not oppressing them. Other great-
souled ones have been dragged away by the predatory beasts. Golden garlands have been scattered around in every
direction. Those fierce jackals have attacked the illustrious ones who have been slain. Thousands of necklaces have
been flung away from their necks. All of them would be praised by bards in the second half of the night[The text uses the word apararatri, meaning the second half of the night.]. In the
other half, accomplished minstrels would praise them with many offerings. These excellent women are miserable
with grief and are lamenting them now. O tiger among the Vrishni lineage! They are severely afflicted by sorrow
and are despondent. O Keshava! The faces of these excellent women are like red lotuses. They are handsome and
beautiful, but have dried up now. Some others are no longer crying. They are grief-stricken and reflecting. Miserable, the women of the Kuru lineage are rushing here and there. The women of the Kuru lineage possess golden
complexions, like that of the sun. But because of the anger and the tears, the faces now have the hue of copper.
Having lamented a lot, some have become quiet. The women no longer know what another one is lamenting. Some
have lamented and shrieked for a long time. Those brave ones are now trembling with sorrow and are casting aside
their lives. On seeing the many bodies, they are shrieking and lamenting. Others, with delicate hands, are beating
on their heads with their hands. The earth is beautiful, strewn here and there with fallen heads and hands and heaps
of other kinds of limbs that have been severed. There are horrible heads without bodies and bodies without heads,
a sight that arya women should not see. On seeing this, they are delighted and confused at the same time. Affixing
a body to a head, they are glancing at it senselessly. Miserably, they are saying, "This is not he. He is somewhere
else." There are hands, thighs, feet and other parts that have been cut down by arrows. Joining them, they are overcome by misery and are repeatedly losing their senses. There are other bodies without heads, devoured by animals
and birds. On seeing these, some of the Bharata women are not recognizing that these are their husbands. O Madhusudana! Others are seeing their brothers, fathers, sons and husbands, killed by the enemy, and are beating their
heads with their hands. There are arms holding swords and heads wearing earrings. The earth is impassable because of the mire that the flesh and the blood have created. These unblemished women do not deserve unhappiness
and have not been touched by misery earlier. The earth is scattered with their brothers, fathers and sons. O Janardana! Look at the large numbers of Dhritarashtra's daughters-in-law. Those young women, with excellent hair, are
like a herd. O Keshava! What greater misery can manifest itself before me, than that all these women should appear in this form and act in this way? O Keshava! It is certain that I have performed wicked deeds in my earlier
lives, since I see my sons, grandsons and brothers killed." Lamenting in this way, she saw her slain son.'
