Sanjaya said, "Prince Duhshasana accomplished an extremely difficult task in that tumultuous battle.
He severed Bhima's bow with a razor-sharp arrow and pierced his charioteer with six arrows. In an instant, the great-souled one then struck Bhimasena with many excellent arrows. Bhimasena hurled a
fierce club towards him. It struck Duhshasana and flung him a distance of ten bow-lengths away, rendering him like a wounded elephant with shattered temples. He was struck and fell down, trembling. O
Indra among kings! It[The club.] slew his horses and charioteer and having crushed the horses and the chariot,
fell down. His armour, ornaments and garments were destroyed and, completely immobile, he shrieked
in pain. The spirited Bhimasena remembered all the acts of enmity that had been performed by your
sons. He jumped down from the chariot onto the ground and eagerly looked at him. He grasped an extremely sharp sword and placed it against the throat of the trembling one. He tore apart the breast of the
one who had fallen down on the ground and drank the warm blood. He repeatedly savoured the taste.
Then, excessively angry, he glanced at him and spoke these words. 'This is superior to mother's milk,
honey, clarified butter, well-prepared liquor, celestial water and skimmed and churned milk. It is my
view today, that the blood of my enemies is tastier than all of these.' He again repeated these cheerful
and eloquent words. Whoever saw Bhimasena in that state then, fell down in distress and in fear. When
the men fell down there, the weapons also fell down from their hands. Others were terrified and
glanced at him with half-open eyes, uttering loud lamentations of woe. All those who saw Bhima drink
Duhshasana's blood were terrified and miserable and ran away in different directions. They said, 'This
one is not human.' In the hearing of the brave ones in the world, he[Bhima.] spoke these words. 'O worst of
men! I am drinking the blood from your throat. In great rage, you repeatedly called us cattle[At the time of the gambling match, described in Section 27 (Volume 2).]. When
I was asleep in Pramanakoti, you fed me poison and made me suffer the hardship of being bitten by
serpents[The Kouravas tried to poison Bhima in Pramanakoti. This has been described in Section 7 (Volume 1).]. You burnt us down in the house of lac. You robbed our kingdom through a gambling
match and made us dwell in the woods. We were robbed of the happiness in our homes and suffered
from weapons in battle. There were many other hardships and we have never known any joy. Dhritarashtra and his son have always acted maliciously towards us.' O king! O great king! Having spoken
these words, Vrikodara, who had obtained victory, again spoke these words to Keshava and Arjuna. 'O
brave ones! I had taken a vow about Duhshasana in the battle[At the time of the gambling match, Bhima took a pledge that he would
kill Duhshasana in the battle and drink his blood.]. I have accomplished that today. I
will accomplish the second vow now too, that of killing Duryodhana like a sacrificial animal. In the
presence of the Kouravas, I will press down the evil-souled one's head with my foot and obtain peace.'

Having spoken these words, he cheerfully roared, blood streaming from his body. The extremely powerful and great-souled one danced, like the one with one thousand eyes[Indra has one thousand eyes.] after Vritra's death." '
