'Yudhishthira asked, "How did Srinjaya's son become Kanchanashthivi[Both kanchana and svarna mean gold, so Svarnashthivi is the same as
Kanchanashthivi. Both words mean someone with golden excreta. Suvarnashthivi has the same meaning.]? Why did Parvata give him? How did
he die? At that time, men used to live for one thousand years. Why did Srinjaya's son die while he was still a
child? Was he Suvarnashthivi only in name? I wish to know the truth about Kanchanashthivi."

'Vasudeva replied, "O lord of men! I will tell you the details about what actually happened. The rishis Narada
and Parvata were worshipped by the worlds. They were maternal uncle and nephew[Narada was the maternal uncle and Parvata was his sister's son.]. Once they came down from
the world of the gods. The lords, the maternal uncle Narada and the nephew Parvata, cheerfully roamed around in
the world of men in those ancient times, discarding food in the form of sacrificial oblations and the food of the
gods. Though they possessed powers of asceticism, they wandered around on the surface of the earth. They
roamed around here and there, eating the food of humans. They were cheerful and had an agreement. 'Whatever
resolution either one of us has, good or bad, will be revealed to the other. If either one fails to do this and falsifies
the agreement, he will be cursed.' The maharshis, worshipped in the worlds, pledged this. They went to King Srinjaya, the son of Shvitya, and said, 'O child! For the sake of your welfare, we will dwell with you for some time. O
protector of the earth! Attend to our needs.' The king acted accordingly and honoured them with hospitality. After
some time, in great delight, the king told the great-souled ones who had arrived, 'This is my beautiful daughter and
I have only one. She will tend to your needs. Her limbs are lovely and she is virtuous in her conduct. This maiden
is known as Sukumari and her complexion is like the filament of a lotus.' Thus addressed, they agreed and the king
instructed his daughter. 'Tend to these brahmanas as if they are gods, or your father.' The maiden followed dharma
and, instructed by her father, agreed. As instructed by the king, she served them well.

'"While she served them in this way, because of her unmatched beauty, there was a swift and violent urge of desire in Narada. That desire increased in the great-souled one's heart, just as the moon slowly waxes during the
bright lunar fortnight. Though he knew about dharma, he was greatly ashamed of his desire and did not tell his
great-souled nephew, Parvata. Because of his ascetic powers and through signs, Parvata got to know. Enraged, he
severely cursed Narada, who was overcome by desire. 'You voluntarily had an agreement with me. Should there be
any resolution in our hearts, good or bad, that would be disclosed to the other. You have falsified that. O brahmana!
Those were your words and you are bound by them. Earlier, you did not tell me that you had this desire for the
maiden Sukumari. Because of that sin, I will curse you. You are knowledgeable about the brahman. You are my
senior. You are an ascetic. You are a brahmana. Despite that, you have falsified the agreement you made with me.
In great rage, I am cursing you. Listen to my words. There is no doubt that Sukumari will be your wife. O lord!
However, from the time you marry, your own form will be distorted. The maiden, and all other men, will see you
as an ape.' As soon as Narada got to know the words spoken by Parvata, he became enraged. The maternal uncle
cursed the nephew, 'You possess asceticism. You are a brahmachari. You possess truth and self-control. You are
always united with dharma. Despite this, you will not dwell in heaven.' Extremely enraged, those two rishis severely cursed each other. They rushed towards each other, like two angry and excellent elephants.

'"The great sage, Parvata, roamed around the entire earth. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He was honoured because of his energy. Narada, supreme among those who followed dharma, obtained the unblemished Suku-
mari, Srinjaya's daughter, in accordance with the rites of dharma. Because of the curse, as soon as the mantras connected with receiving her hand were pronounced, the maiden beheld that Narada had assumed the form of an ape.
Despite the devarshi having assumed the form of an ape, Sukumari did not disrespect him. She treated him affectionately. She presented herself to her husband and did not go to anyone else, not even in her mind. Faithful to her
husband, she did not wish that a god, another sage or a yaksha should be her husband.

'"After some time, the illustrious Parvata was roaming around in the forest and saw Narada there. Greeting
Narada, Parvata said, 'O lord! Show me your favours and let me go to heaven.' Narada saw that Parvata was standing miserably before him, hands joined in salutation. But he was even more distressed and said, 'You are the one
who cursed me first and said that I would be an ape. When you spoke to me in this way, I later cursed you in revenge, to the effect that henceforth, you would never dwell in heaven. Since you were like my son, you should not
have acted in that way.' The sages then withdrew their curses from each other.

'"Sukumari saw Narada in his prosperity, in a form that was like that of a god. Taking him to be someone else's
husband, she fled. On seeing that the unblemished one was running away, Parvata spoke to her. 'This is your husband. You should not doubt that. This is the illustrious lord and rishi Narada, with supreme dharma in his soul.
There is no doubt that his heart is completely yours.' The great-souled Parvata entreated her in many ways. When
she heard that her husband had been tainted because of the curse, she regained her natural state. Parvata went to
heaven and Narada went home. The great rishi, Narada, was a witness to all this himself. O supreme among men!
Ask him and he will tell you exactly what happened."'
