Vaishampayana said, 'So as to live in the forest, the Pandavas, bulls among the Bharata lineage, left the banks of
the Jahnavi with their followers and went to Kurukshetra. They worshipped at the Sarasvati, the Dhrishadvati and
the Yamuna[All three are famous rivers.] and travelling from forest to forest, headed in a western direction. At last, on the banks of the Sarasvati, they saw before them the forest of Kamyaka, beloved by sages and located on a desert plain. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Consoled and accompanied by the sages, the heroes settled down in that forest, teeming with
many animals and birds. Vidura then decided to meet the Pandavas. In a single chariot, he went to the prosperous
Kamyaka forest. Vidura reached that forest in a chariot drawn by swift horses. He saw Dharmaraja seated in a secluded spot, together with Droupadi, his brothers and brahmanas. From a distance, the truthful king saw Vidura
speedily approach and told his brother Bhimasena, "What will Kshatta say when he meets us? Is it possible that he
comes again at Soubala's words, to challenge me once more to a gamble with dice? Does the mean Shakuni wish
to win our weapons by playing once again with dice? O Bhimasena! If challenged by anyone, I am unable to
refuse. Yet if the Gandiva is uncertain[If the Gandiva is lost in such a match.], our winning back the kingdom is uncertain." O king! Then all the Pandavas stood up and welcomed Vidura. After the due homage had been shown, Ajamidha[Ajamidha is a name that is usually used for Yudhishthira or Dhritarashtra. It is now being used for Vidura.] sat down among the
sons of Pandu and made the usual enquiries.

'After Vidura had rested, those bulls among men asked him the reason for his coming. He told them in detail
about the conduct of Ambika's son, Dhritarashtra. Vidura said, "O Ajatashatru! Dhritarashtra maintains me. He
summoned me and after showing his respects, told me, 'This is what has happened. Now impartially, tell me what
is good for me and for them.' I told him what is good for the Kouravas and also what will bring welfare to Dhritarashtra. But he did not like what I said. I could not think of any other course that would bring welfare. O Pandavas! I told him what would bring supreme welfare. But Ambika's son did not listen to those words. Just as a sick
man does not like medicine[The word used is pathya, which also means the diet and regimen in times of illness.], my words did not find pleasure with him. O Ajatashatru! Like an unchaste woman
cannot be brought to the house of one who is learned, he cannot be brought to well-being. The bull among the
Bharata lineage did not like what I said, like a maiden does not like a husband who is sixty years old. O king! The
destruction of the Kouravas is certain. Dhritarashtra will never find supreme well-being. Just as water on a lotus
leaf does not stick there, my medicine[Pathya again.] did not stick to him. Then the angry Dhritarashtra told me, 'O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! Go wherever your respect takes you. I do not desire you as an adviser any longer, to rule
the earth or the city.' O Indra among men! Having been thus abandoned by King Dhritarashtra, I have now come
here to give you good advice. I will now repeat everything that I said in the sabha. Hear them and bear them in
mind. The man who pardons the terrible miseries caused by his enemies and waits for his time, gradually extending himself like feeding a fire, that self-controlled man rules the entire earth alone. O king! If one shares one's
riches with one's companions, the companions also share in one's adversity. That is the way to gather one's companions. It has been said that companions are the way to win the earth. O Pandava! Without any lamentations, truth
is best. Food should be equally shared with one's companions. One should never hold oneself above others. Such
conduct increases the prosperity of kings." Yudhishthira replied, "I will do what you advise me and, undisturbed
by passion, follow your supreme intelligence. In every time and place, I will completely follow what you say."'
