'Arjuna said, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! On this, an ancient history is recounted, the conversation between the ascetics and Shakra. Some brahmanas abandoned their homes and went to the forest. They had still not
developed beards[That is, they were young.]. Though they were born in good lineages, they were stupid and followed the wrong path. They
thought that they were following dharma and decided to observe brahmacharya. They abandoned their homes and
their fathers. Indra took pity on them. Adopting the form of a golden bird, the illustrious one came to them and
said, 'Men who eat leftover food perform an extremely difficult task. The lives of those who perform such meritorious acts should be praised. They are foremost among those who follow dharma and obtain the best of success and
objectives[It is easy to miss the sense. Leftover food is food left over after gods, ancestors and guests have had their share. That can be done even if one is a householder. Indra is making the point that one can be a householder and still follow dharma.].'
'"The rishis replied, 'Aha! This bird is praising those who eat leftover food. It must be praising us, since we subsist on leftover food.'

'"The bird said, 'I am not praising you. You are covered in mud and dust. You are wicked ones who eat impure
food. You are not the ones who eat leftover food.'

'"The rishis replied, 'We think that the path that we are following is the best. O bird! Tell us what is beneficial.
We have great faith in you.'

'"The bird said, 'If you do not doubt me and do not cause a division in your own selves[By suppressing the good inner inclinations with bad ones.], then I will speak
words that are truly beneficial.'

'"The rishis replied, 'O father[The word used is tata.]! We will listen to your words. You know about different paths. O one with dharma in your soul! Instruct us. We wish to be taught by you.'

'"The bird said, 'The cow is the best among quadrupeds and gold the best among metals. Mantras are the best
among words and brahmanas the best among bipeds. Mantras determine the sacraments for a brahmana as long as
he lives, from the time of birth to the time when he dies and is at the cremation ground. The rites of the Vedas are
the supreme path towards heaven. All deeds are said to become successful through mantras. In this world, the firm
words of the Vedas signify success, depending on the months, half-months, seasons, the sun, the moon and the
stars[This is extremely cryptic and brief. What is probably meant is the following.
Those who die during shuklapaksha attain the world of the sun. Those who
die during krishnapaksha attain the world of the moon. Those who are completely free attain the world of the stars after death.]. In this life, all beings are attached to action in accordance with this. This[The state of the householder.] is sacred and the greatest stage
of life and is the field for success. What path is followed by men who censure action? They are stupid, evil and are
deprived of artha. Those foolish ones subsist, but have abandoned the eternal path followed by the lineage of the
gods, the lineage of the ancestors and the lineage of Brahma[Those who follow such a path do not attain the worlds of the gods, the ancestors or Brahma.]. They traverse a path not approved by the sacred
texts. O ascetics! Therefore, this is the asceticism you should endeavour to follow. The offering of shares to the
eternal lineages of the gods, the ancestors and Brahma and servitude to preceptors are said to be the most difficult
of tasks. Having performed such difficult tasks, the gods obtained supreme prosperity. That is the reason I am
telling you that the burden of a householder is an extremely difficult one to take up. There is no doubt that this is
the best form of austerity for beings. It forms the base. Everything is established on the rules prescribed for a family. O brahmanas! Those who are not selfish and those who have gone beyond opposite sentiments say that this is
the best form of asceticism. People say that going to the forest is a middling kind of asceticism. Those who live on
leftovers and following the rites, morning and evening, divide up the food among relatives, attain an end that is extremely difficult to obtain. They first give to guests, gods, ancestors and relatives. They then eat the remnants and
are said to be those who live on leftovers. They are established in their own dharma. They are excellent in their
vows and are truthful. They become the preceptors of the worlds and are revered by everyone. They do not suffer
from envy. They attain the world of heaven, Shakra's heaven. Those people perform extremely difficult deeds and
dwell there for an eternal number of years.'

'"On hearing his words, which were full of dharma and artha, they abandoned the path of non-believers[The word used is nastika. Though this is often translated as atheist, it actually means non-believer.] and
resorted to the dharma of householders[This is Arjuna speaking again.]. O one who cannot be assailed! Therefore, you should also resort to eternal patience. O supreme among men! With all the enemies slain, rule over the entire earth."'
