Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing her words, Bhimasena was frightened. Entreating Gandhari, he spoke these
words to her. "Whether I acted in accordance with dharma or in accordance with adharma there, it was because of
fear and with a desire to save myself. Therefore, you should forgive me. If I fought in accordance with dharma,
there was no way I could have stood up to your immensely strong son. Hence, I acted in an unfair way. The valiant
one was the only one left from among the soldiers and having killed me in the encounter with the clubs, would
have obtained the kingdom. That is the reason I did what should not have been done. The princess Panchali was in
her season and was in a single garment. You know everything about what your son told her then. Without taking
care of Suyodhana, we would not have been able to enjoy the earth, with its oceans, unfettered. That is the reason I
did what should not have been done. Your son caused us injury, when he exposed his left thigh to Droupadi in the
assembly hall[At the time of the gambling match, described in Section 27 (Volume 2).]. O mother! Your son acted in a wicked way and that is the reason he had to be killed by us. At that
time, we abided by the instructions of Dharmaraja. O queen! It was your son who generated that great enmity. We
are the ones who always suffered in the forest. That is the reason I did what I did. Having seen the end of that enmity and having killed Duryodhana in the battle, Yudhishthira has obtained the kingdom and we have overcome
our rage."

'Gandhari said, "O son! You have praised my son and this is not about your killing him. He did everything that
you have recounted. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When Vrishasena killed Nakula's horses in the battle,
you drank the blood from Duhshasana's body[Vrishasena was Karna's son. This wasn't quite the way it happened.
These incidents are from Section 73 (Volume 7), Karna Parva. Vrishasena
killed Nakula's horses after Bhima had drunk Duhshasana's blood. The
incidents occur in different chapters; Vrishasena killed Nakula's horses in
the subsequent chapter.]. This was a terrible deed, befitting those who are not aryas, and
condemned by those who are virtuous. You performed a cruel deed. O Vrikodara! How could you have done it?"

'Bhimasena replied, "One should not drink the blood of someone else, not to speak of one's own. There is no
difference between one's own self and one's brother. O mother! Do not sorrow. His blood did not pass beyond my
teeth and my lips. Vaivasvata[Yama.] knows this. My hands were smeared with his blood. I cheered my brothers, who
were terrified on seeing that Nakula's horses had been slain by Vrishasena in the battle. At the time of gambling
with the dice, he had seized Droupadi by the hair. I had spoken words in anger then and those were in my mind[Bhima swore to drink Duhshasana's blood, described in Section 27 (Volume 2).].
O queen! Had I not accomplished my pledge, I would have been dislodged from the dharma of kshatriyas till eternity. That is the reason I did what I should not have done. O Gandhari! You should not believe that this was a
crime and censure me. In earlier times, when your sons injured us, you did not restrain them."

'Gandhari said, "You were not defeated and you killed one hundred of this aged one's sons. Why did you not
spare one, one who had committed the least crimes? O son! We are aged and have lost our kingdom. He would
have been our successor[There is a nuance that a translation cannot capture, the word in question
being santana. This means son or daughter. But it also means continuous
flow, which is the reason an offspring is called santana, ensuring the continuous line of succession.]. For these blind and aged ones, why could you not have saved a single one? O son! Had
you left one, I would not have felt this sorrow at your having slain our sons, as long as you acted in accordance
with dharma."'
