Sanjaya said, "The one with the supreme ape on his standard advanced at great speed. Ninety brave Kuru rathas
wished to fight with him and attacked him. In the battle, those tigers among men surrounded Arjuna, tiger among
men. However, the white horses were extremely swift and were decorated in gold. They were decorated with nets
of pearls and Krishna drove it towards Karna's chariot. As Dhananjaya, the slayer of enemies, advanced towards
Karna's chariot, the chariots of the samshaptakas[Those ninety rathas had taken a vow to die rather than retreat.] also followed him, showering down arrows with a desire to
kill. The brave Arjuna used his sharp arrows to swiftly kill all ninety of them, with their charioteers, bows and
standards. Slain by Kiriti's many different kinds of arrows, they fell down, like siddhas and their celestial vehicles
from heaven, when their stores of meritorious deeds have been exhausted. O supreme among the Kuru lineage! O
foremost among Bharatas! At this, the fearless Kurus attacked Phalguna, with their chariots, elephants and horses.
They released weapons. Supreme and mighty elephants that belonged to your son's large army obstructed Dhananjaya in the battle. The great archers, the Kurus, used lances, swords, spears, javelins, clubs, scimitars and arrows to
envelop the descendant of the Kuru lineage[Meaning Arjuna.]. The Kurus showered down weapons. However, Pandava used arrows that were like the rays of the sun to strike them down. At this, on the instructions of your son, mlecchas who
were astride thirteen hundred crazy elephants struck Partha from the side. They used barbed arrows, hollow arrows, iron arrows, spears, javelins, spikes, kampanas and catapults to afflict Partha's chariot. Having been struck
by the shower of weapons released by the yavanas[The yavanas and the mlecchas are being equated here.] on elephants, Phalguna smiled and severed those with his
sharp broad-headed arrows and arrows in the form of a half-moon. All those elephants were struck by large arrows
of many different forms. With their flags and riders, they were brought down, like mountains shattered by thunder.
Those gold-tufted arrows afflicted and killed the giant elephants that had golden harnesses. They fell down, like
mountains that were on fire. O lord of the earth! In that great roar, Gandiva's twang could be heard. Men, elephants
and horses shrieked and lamented. O king! The elephants were killed and fled in different directions. With their
riders slain, the horses ran away in the ten directions. O great king! Chariots were without their rathas and so were
the steeds. Thousands of them were seen, like the cities of the gandharvas. O great king! Horse riders ran hither
and thither. They were seen there, brought down by Partha's arrows. At that time, Pandava showed the strength of
his arms. Single-handedly, he defeated the riders, the elephants and the chariots in the battle.

' "O bull among the Bharata lineage! O king! Bhimasena saw that Kiriti was surrounded by a large army consisting of three kinds of forces[Only three, presumably because the chariots had been destroyed.]. O king! He abandonded the few remaining rathas who were left on your side
and swiftly advanced towards Dhananjaya's chariot. On seeing that Bhima was advancing towards his brother Arjuna, the soldiers who had not been killed were distressed and fled. There were some extremely fast horses that had
not been killed by Arjuna. In the great battle, with the club in his hand, Bhima slaughtered them. It[The club.] was as
fierce as the night of destruction and fed on men, elephants and horses. It was extremely terrible and could shatter
walls, mansions and the gates of cities. Bhima used that club against the men, elephants and horses who were
around. O venerable one! He slew many horses and horse riders. Pandava crushed men and horses plated in bronze
armour and terrified them. He uprooted them with the club. Slain, they fell down with a great noise. He then ascended his chariot again and followed Arjuna from the rear. The army of the enemy was slain or devoid of spirit
and retreated. Those soldiers were immobile and distracted. On seeing this, Arjuna shrouded them with arrows that
robbed lives. As they clung to each other, there were severe woes of lamentation. At that time, your soldiers
whirled around like a circle of fire. With the armour shattered by arrows, the soldiers blazed. Overflowing with
blood, they looked like a flowering grove of ashoka trees. On seeing Savyasachi's valour there, all the Kurus there
lost all hope of Karna remaining alive. In the battle, they could not withstand the downpour of Partha's arrows.
Having been defeated by the wielder of Gandiva, the Kurus retreated. Slaughtered by Partha's arrows, they abandoned the battle. They were terrified and fled in different directions, calling out to the son of a suta. Partha followed them, showering down many hundreds of arrows. The Pandava warriors, with Bhimasena at the forefront,
were delighted.

' "O great king! Your sons advanced towards Karna's chariot. They were submerged in fathomless waters and
Karna was like an island to them. O great king! The Kurus were like defanged serpents. Because of their fear of
the wielder of Gandiva, they sought shelter with Karna. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It was just as all beings, fearing death and because of their deeds, seek shelter with dharma. O lord of men! Karna, the great archer,
was like that to your sons. Terrified of the great-souled Pandava, they sought refuge with him. They were overflowing with blood and severely distressed on account of the arrows, and Karna told them, 'Do not be frightened.
Come to me.' He saw that your army had been destroyed because of Partha's strength. Wishing to kill the enemy,
Karna stretched his bow and while Savyasachi looked on, attacked the Panchalas again. The lords of the earth possessed eyes that were as red as wounds. In a short while, Karna showered down torrents of arrows on them, like
clouds pouring down on a large mountain. O venerable one! Thousands of arrows were shot by Karna. The
supreme among all living beings robbed many Panchalas of their lives. O lord of the earth! In that battle, great
sounds of lamentation arose among the Panchalas. To ensure the welfare of his friend[Duryodhana.], the son of a suta, the
slayer of enemies, slaughtered them." '
