'Sanjaya said, "On seeing that the army was routed, Kunti's son, Dhananjaya, immeasurable in his soul, advanced
against Drona's son, wishing to kill him. O king! Rallied because of the efforts of Govinda and Arjuna, those soldiers remained stationed there. It was Vibhatsu alone, supported by the Somakas, the Matsyas and some others,
who returned against the advancing Kouravas. Savyasachi quickly approached the great archer, who bore the mark
of the lion's tail on his banner. He spoke to Ashvatthama. 'Show me your strength, your valour, your knowledge,
your manliness, the affection that you bear towards the sons of Dhritarashtra, the hatred you bear towards us and
the great and supreme energy you possess. Parshata, Drona's killer, will shatter your insolence today. He is like the
fire of destruction and slaughters his enemies in a battle. Clash against him, or against me and Keshava.'"

'Dhritarashtra asked, "O Sanjaya! The preceptor's son deserves honour and is powerful. He bears affection towards Dhananjaya and Vasava's son[Indra's son, Arjuna.] bears affection towards him. Bibhatsu has never used such harsh words earlier. Why did Kounteya use such harsh words towards his friend?"

'Sanjaya replied, "When the prince[Of Chedi.], Pourava Vriddhakshatra and Sudarshana from Malava, who were duly
skilled in the use of weapons, were killed, and Dhrishtadyumna, Satyaki and Bhima were defeated, the lord Bib-
hatsu suffered from great grief, the likes of which he had not felt before. He also remembered the heart-rending
words Yudhishthira had addressed towards him and their hardships and felt miserable in his mind. It was because
of this internal fire that he used indecent and unpleasant words towards Drona's son. The preceptor's son deserved
honour and should not have been addressed in such harsh words, deserving of a coward. O king! Having been thus
addressed by Partha in harsh words that struck at the inner chords, the supreme of great archers sighed in rage.
Drona's son became angry with Partha, and especially with Krishna.

'"Stationed on his chariot, the valiant one touched the wind[Touched the water would have been more appropriate, as this is a necessary precursor to any sacred rite, such as
releasing divine weapons.]. He invoked the agneya weapon, which is extremely difficult for even the gods to resist. The preceptor's son directed this at the masses of enemies, whether
they were visible or invisible. He used mantras to invoke that weapon on a flaming arrow that was like a fire without smoke. The destroyer of enemy heroes was overcome with rage and released it in all the directions. At this, a
tumultuous shower of arrows was generated from the sky. Cold winds began to blow and the sun ceased to radiate
heat. Vultures shrieked hideously in all the directions. With a great roar, blood showered down from the sky. Birds,
animals, cattle and even sages who were rigid in their vows and supremely careful in controlling their souls, lost
all sense of peace. All the great elements were agitated and the sun was dislodged from its course. The three
worlds were tormented, feverish and distressed. Tormented by the energy of that arrow, elephants lay down on the
ground. Desiring to free themselves from that fierce energy, they sighed deeply. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The waterbodies were scorched and beings that lived in the water were burnt and could find no peace. Arrows showered down from the sky, the directions and the sub-directions. They descended on the high and the low,
with the force of Garuda or that of the wind. The enemies were burnt and fell down, like trees scorched by a fire.
Giant elephants were burnt and fell down in every direction, shrieking in woe. Their loud lamentation was like the
thunder of the clouds. Other giant elephants were burnt and fled. There were others that were terrified, as if when a
forest is burnt and enveloped by a fierce fire. O venerable one! O lord! Large numbers of horses and large numbers
of chariots were seen to be burnt and looked like the tops of trees consumed in a conflagration. Large numbers of
chariots fell down here and there, in thousands. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that battle, it was as if
those soldiers were being burnt by the illustrious Agni. It was like the fire of destruction[Samvartaka, the fire that rages in hell and the fire that destroys everything.] that destroys all beings
at the end of a yuga. O king! On seeing that the Pandava soldiers were being consumed in that great battle, those
on your side were delighted and roared like lions. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Those on your side wished
for victory and were cheerful. They quickly sounded thousands of trumpets of many different kinds. O king! In
that great battle, everything was covered in darkness and nothing could be seen, the entire akshouhinis or Pandava
Savyasachi. O king! We have not seen, or heard of, the likes of the weapon that Drona's son angrily released.

'"O great king! At this, Arjuna invoked brahmastra. The one who was born from a lotus[Brahma.] has decreed that this
is capable of repulsing all weapons. That darkness was dispelled in an instant. Auspicious winds began to blow
and the directions became clear. We then beheld an extraordinary sight. An entire akshouhini had been killed, burnt
by the maya of that weapon and their forms could not be distinguished[On the Pandava side, through the use of Ashvatthama's weapon.]. Freed from the darkness, the brave and
great archers, Keshava and Arjuna, were seen together, as if in the sky[An implicit comparison is being made with the sun and the moon.]. They were freed and were stationed on a
chariot that was terrible to those on your side. With their flags, standard, horses and supreme weapons, they were
uninjured and resplendent. Immediately, there were sounds of delight among the Pandavas. There were slapping
sounds and those of conch shells and drums. Both the armies had formed the view that they had been killed and
now saw that they had been freed. On seeing that they were uninjured, those on the side of the Parthas were delighted and cheerfully blew on supreme conch shells. Those on your side were distressed. On seeing that those
great-souled ones had been freed, Drona's son was extremely miserable. O venerable one! He reflected for a short
while about what should be done. O Indra among kings! Having thought for some time, he was overcome with sorrow. He released deep and warm sighs and was distracted. Drona's son cast aside his bow and descended violently
from his chariot. He said, 'Shame on everything. It is all false.' Saying this, he ran away.

'"As he ran away, he encountered the gentle and unblemished Vedavyasa, with the complexion of a cloud. He
saw Vyasa, the abode of Sarasvati[The goddess of learning.]. Drona's son saw the extender of the Kuru lineage[Both Dhritarashtra and Pandu were born through Vedavyasa.] stationed in front of him.
His voice choked with tears and he was extremely miserable. He honoured him and spoke these words. 'O honoured one! Is this maya? Is this a wish[On the part of the weapon.]? I do not know what has happened. Why have my weapons become fruitless? What have I contravened? This is completely unnatural and is like a defeat of the worlds by the two Krishnas,
who remain alive. It is impossible to cross destiny. This weapon that has been used by me cannot be countered by
asuras, gandharvas, pishachas, rakshasas, serpents, yakshas, birds and men. But having killed only one akshouhini,
this flaming weapon used by me has been calmed. Keshava and Arjuna are mortal. Why have they not been killed
by it? O illustrious one! I am asking you. Give me the complete answer.'

'"Vyasa replied, 'You have asked me a question in wonder and the answer is extremely deep. I will tell you
everything. Listen with an attentive mind. The one who is known as Narayana is older than the ancient ones. To
accomplish the objective of the universe, he was born as Dharma's son[Not to be confused with Yudhishthira.]. Stationing himself on Mount Mainaka,
he performed severe austerities. The immensely energetic one stood there, with his arms upraised. He blazed like
the sun. He was there for sixty-six thousand years. The lotus-eyed one dried his body and subsisted only on air. He
then tormented himself with other great austerities for twice that period. The space between heaven and earth was
filled with his energy. O son[The word used is tata.]! Because of those austerities, he became like Brahma. He then saw the lord of the
world and the universe, the lord who is the creator of the universe. He is supremely difficult to look at and is the
lord of all the gods. He is smaller than the smallest and larger than the largest. This is the wise and supreme Rudra,
bull among the gods. He is mobile and immobile. He is stationed in the hearts of all beings. He is difficult to resist.
He is difficult to look at. His anger is fierce. He is the great-souled one. He is the one who destroys everything. But
he is the one who is generous. He wields a celestial bow and quivers. His armour is golden and his valour is infinite. He holds the Pinaka[The name of Shiva's bow and also the name of his trident.], the vajra, a flaming trident, a battleaxe, a club and a large sword. His brows are excellent. His hair is matted. He wears the circular moon on his head. He is clad in tiger skin. He has a mace and a staff
in his hand. His armlets sparkle. His sacred thread is made up of snakes. He is surrounded by large numbers of
ganas from the universe and innumerable bhutas[Ganas are Shiva's attendants. Bhutas are also Shiva's attendants, though the word means spirit, demon or ghost.]. He is the single one. He is the recipient of austerities. He is
worshipped well by aged and eloquent ones. He is water, heaven, sky, the earth, the moon, the sun, wind and fire.
He is the measure of the universe. He is the one who has not been born. Those who deviate from their vows cannot
see him. Nor can those who hate brahmanas or kill them. He is the source of immortality. Brahmanas, those who
are virtuous in their vows, those who have been cleansed of sin and those who have banished sorrow can see him
in their minds. Because he was established in austerities and because his dharma did not decay, he[Narayana.] could see the
one with the universal form. Having beheld the lord of the gods, he was delighted in his speech, his mind, his intelligence and his body. Having beheld the origin of the universe, Narayana worshipped the one who wore a garland
of berries[Akshas or rudrakshas.] and was the recipient of supreme radiance. The pervasive lord was the granter of boons and was with
the fair-limbed Parvati. He was Ishana and had not been born. He was without decay. He was the supreme cause.
He did not fade. He worshipped Rudra, the slayer of Andhaka[Andhaka was an asura killed by Shiva.]. With great reverence, the lotus-eyed one[Narayana.] worshipped Virupaksha[Virupaksha is Shiva's name. Literally, this means one with distorted or malformed eyes. But for Shiva, this can
be translated as the three-eyed one.].

'"'"O one who should be worshipped[This is Narayana's prayer to Shiva.]! All the beings originate in you. You are the protector of the universe.
You are first among all the gods. You are the one who created the earth in earlier times and protected it. You have
penetrated it now. The gods are your creation. Gods, asuras, serpents, rakshasas, pishachas, men, birds, gandharvas, yakshas and other masses of beings and the entire universe-have all been created from you. We know this.
All the deeds done for Indra, Yama, Varuna, the lord of riches, Mitra, Tvashtra and Soma are actually being offered
to you[In this context, Mitra means the sun and Soma means the moon.]. Form, light, sound, the sky, wind, touch, taste, water, scent, desire, Brahma, the brahman, the brahmanas,
everything that is immobile and everything that is mobile originate in you. Vapour rises from bodies of water and
becomes separate raindrops. At the time of destruction, they unite and become one again. Those who are learned
know the separate and united nature of water and beings. Through your divine mind, you have created two birds[The human soul (atman) and the divine soul (paramatman).]
and a pippala tree with words as branches and seven guardians[The pippala tree is a metaphor for learning and wisdom. The seven guardians are the five elements, mind and
intelligence.]. There are ten others that hold up the city[The five senses and the five organs.].
They have been created by you. But you are distinct from them. The past, the present and the future cannot be tampered with. However, they have originated from you and so have this earth and this universe. I am devoted to you.
Favour the one who is worshipping you. Do not harm me through that which is pleasant or that which is unpleasant. You are the soul of all souls. You are beyond comprehension. Learned ones who know you as the seed attain
the brahman. I wish to satisfy you through my worship. O one who is worshipped by the gods! I desire to think
about you. Grant me the boons that I desire, even if they are extremely difficult to obtain. I am worshipping you.
Do not hide yourself from me."'

'"Vyasa said, 'Nilakantha[The one with the blue throat, Shiva's name.], the wielder of Pinaka, the one whose soul cannot be thought of, granted the boons
that the foremost among the gods[Narayana.], who deserved them, desired. Nilakantha said, "O Naryana! Through my
favours, your strength and soul will be immeasurable, among men, gods and gandharvas. Gods, asuras, giant serpents, pishachas, gandharvas, men, rakshasas, birds, snakes and other beings born in this universe will not be able
to withstand you. The gods will not be able to defeat you in a battle. Through my favours, no one will ever be able
to cause you injury through weapons, the vajra, fire, wind, an object that is wet or dry, or an object that is mobile
or immobile. Even if you advance in battle against me, you will be superior." In ancient times, these were the
boons that were obtained by Shouri. It is that god who is roaming around now[As Krishna.], confounding the earth with his
maya. It is through his austerities that the great sage named Nara was born. He is equal to that god and always
know him to be Arjuna. Those two supreme rishis are said to be older than the gods. To accomplish the objectives
of the world, they are born from one yuga to another. O immensely intelligent one! You have also performed all
the great deeds and austerities. Know that your energy and anger have also been born from Rudra. You were as
wise as a god. Knowing that the universe is pervaded by Bhava[Shiva's name.], you yourself emaciated yourself so as to
please him. O one who grants honours! You created a new and pure idol of that great being and worshipped him
with homage, offerings and meditation. Having been thus worshipped by you in earlier times, the god was satisfied. He granted you many splendid boons that you desired in your heart. Like them, from one yuga to another, you
worshipped that god in the form of a linga[Shiva's phallic form.] and the splendid outcome is your birth, deeds, austerities and yoga.
Knowing all the forms of Bhava, one who worships the lord in the form of a linga, obtains eternal knowledge
about his own self and about the sacred texts. This is the way the siddhas and the supreme rishis have worshipped
him, desiring a supreme and eternal station in the world hereafter. Keshava is devoted to Rudra and has been generated from Rudra. The eternal Krishna should be worshipped in all sacrifices. He who knows Bhava to be the origin of all beings and worships the lord in the form of a linga, he is the one who pleases the one with the bull on his
banner the most.'"

'Sanjaya said, "On hearing these words, Drona's maharatha son bowed in obeisance before Rudra and came to
show Keshava the greatest reverence. With his soul under control and with his body hair standing up, he showed
his respects to the maharshi. He glanced towards the soldiers and asked them to withdraw[Since it was night.]. O lord of the earth!
When Drona had been brought down in the battle, the Kouravas were distressed and withdrew. So did the Pandavas. O king! Having fought for five days and having killed many soldiers, the brahmana, learned in the Vedas,
went to Brahma's world."'
