'Shakuntala said, "O king! You see the faults of others, even though they are as small as a mustard seed. But you
do not see your own, even though they can be seen as large as a bilva fruit. Menaka is one of the thirty gods[There were originally thirty or thirty-three gods -eleven in heaven, eleven in the sky and eleven on earth.
Another way of getting the number is by adding twelve adityas, eleven rudras and ten vishvadevas.].
She is foremost among the thirty. O Duhshanta! My birth is nobler than your own. O lord of kings! You are established on earth. But I roam the sky. Know that the difference between you and me is that between a mustard seed
and Mount Meru. O king! Behold and understand my powers. I can go to the abodes of the great Indra, Kubera,
Yama and Varuna. O unblemished one! Not out of hatred towards you, but as an illustration, I am going to tell you
a popular saying. Therefore, pardon me and listen. Until he sees his face in a mirror, the ugly man thinks himself to
be more handsome than others. But when he sees his malformed face in a mirror, it is then that he realizes the difference between him and others. He who is extremely handsome never demeans others. He who slanders others a
lot is only considered to be evil-mouthed. Like a pig searches out filth, the fool seeks out evil words when he hears
good and evil in men's speech. But the swan always searches out milk from the water. Like that, the wise one
seeks out words of quality when he hears good and evil in men's speech. Honest ones are always pained to speak
ill of others. But wicked ones are satisfied at this. Good ones always find pleasure in paying respect to the aged[Alternatively, wise instead of aged.].
However, fools always derive pleasure from berating good men. Those who seek no evil live happily. But fools are
happy when they find evil. Even when they are injured by the words of evil ones, the good never do them injury. In
this world, there is nothing more ridiculous than the evil representing the good as evil. Even those who do not believe in god fear those who have been dislodged from truth, like snakes with virulent poison, not to speak of those
who believe in god. A man who has begotten a son like himself, but does not accept him, doesn't attain the superior worlds. The gods destroy his prosperity. The ancestors have said that the son establishes the family and the lineage and, thus, giving birth to a son is the best of all dharmas. Therefore, a son should never be abandoned. Manu
has said there are sons begotten on one's wife and five others-obtained, bought, reared, adopted and those begotten on other women. Sons support the dharma and fame of men and bring happiness to their hearts. Sons are like
the boats of dharma in transporting the ancestors from hell. O tiger among kings! Therefore, it is not proper for
you to forsake your son. O lord of the earth! Protect him like you protect yourself, truth and dharma. O lion among
kings! It is not proper for you to be deceitful on this. A pond[That is, the gift of a pond.] is better than that of a hundred wells. A sacrifice
is better than a hundred ponds. But a son is better than a hundred sacrifices. Truth is better than a hundred sons. If
1000 horse sacrifices and truth are weighed on a pair of scales, truth will weigh more than 1000 horse sacrifices. O
king! I tell you that truth is equal to studying all the Vedas and bathing in all the tirthas. There is no dharma higher
than the truth and nothing is superior to truth. And no evil is known to be fiercer than a lie. O king! Truth is the
supreme brahman. Truth is the great vow. O king! Therefore, do not violate your oath. Let truth and yourself be
united. However, if you are united with falsehood and if you yourself have no belief in my words, I shall go away
from here on my own. A relationship with one like you should not be sought after. O Duhshanta! But when you are
dead, my son will rule over the entire earth, crowned by the king of the mountains and surrounded by oceans in
four directions."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having uttered these words to the king, Shakuntala prepared to leave. Thereupon, a disembodied voice spoke to Duhshanta from the sky, as he sat surrounded by his officiating priests, his priest, his preceptors and his ministers. "O Duhshanta! The mother is only a vessel for holding water. Born from the father, the
son is the father himself. O Duhshanta! Support your son and do not reject Shakuntala. O god among men! A son
who has semen is the saver from Yama's abode. You are the creator of this embryo. Shakuntala has spoken the
truth. The wife gives birth to a son by dividing her body into two. O king! O Duhshanta! Therefore, protect this
son of yours, born from Shakuntala. To abandon one's own son and continue to live is a great misfortune. O descendant of the Puru lineage! Therefore, cherish this great-souled son of Shakuntala and Duhshanta. Since you will
maintain this son because of these words, this son will be known as Bharata[Bharata means to maintain.]." Having heard these words of
those who dwell in the sky, the king of the Puru lineage was delighted. He addressed his priests and advisers, "All
of you have heard what the messenger of the gods has to say. I myself know very well that this is my son. But if I
had accepted him today as my son on her words alone, there would have been suspicion among all the people and
he would never have been considered to be pure." O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The king was then cleared
of all suspicion because of the words of the messenger of the gods. He was extremely pleased and accepted his
son.

'He smelt his son's head and embraced him with affection. The Brahmanas pronounced their blessings on him
and he was praised by the bards. The king then enjoyed the great happiness one feels at the touch of one's own
son. Duhshanta also paid homage and accepted his wife according to the rites of dharma. The king pacified her and
told her, "O lady! My union with you was not known to the people. That is the reason I argued with you. It was
natural for people to think that the union I had with you was because you were a woman and had my son been instated by me in the kingdom, he would have been considered to be impure. Therefore, I thought about how best to
clear you. O beloved one! O large-eyed one! I have forgiven you all the harsh words you spoke in anger. I love
you." O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having thus spoken to his beloved queen, rajarshi Duhshanta honoured
her with garments, food and drink. Thereupon, King Duhshanta instated Shakuntala's son as the heir apparent and
the name of Bharata was conferred on him.

'From that day, the glorious wheel of the great-souled Bharata traversed the worlds with a great thunder, radiant,
divine and invincible. He conquered all the kings of the earth and brought them under his sway. He always trod the
path of dharma and attained supreme fame. That powerful king was known as Chakravarti[A universal monarch or sovereign of the world. Sarvabhouma has the same meaning.] and Sarvabhouma.
Like Indra, lord of the maruts, he performed many sacrifices. Like Daksha, he made Kanva the officiating priest at
a sacrifice and offered a lot of alms. The fortunate one performed a horse sacrifice that was named after the large
number of cows offered. At this, Bharata gave Kanva one thousand padmas[It is not clear what this means. A padma is a lotus. But this doesn't quite fit the requirement. Were one thousand lotuses given? A padma is also one trillion. In that case, one trillion of what is left unsaid. Perhaps a padma
simply connotes a large number and a large number of cows were given.] as the sacrificial fee. From Bharata
springs the fame of the Bharata lineage and others of the Bharata lineage. All other kings who followed him were
known as those of the Bharata lineage. In this Bharata lineage were born many greatly energetic and divine kings.
They were supreme kings, like Brahma himself, and their many names are beyond recounting. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! I shall only mention the names of the chief ones, those who were immensely fortunate and devoted to truth and honesty. They were like the gods themselves.'
