'Bhishma said, "He who has accomplished his objective, he who is about to perform a sacrifice, he who knows all
the Vedas, he who is discharging obligations to a preceptor, a father, or a wife, he who is pursuing the objective of
studying-such a brahmana is virtuous and is begging for the sake of dharma. In accordance with their learning,
one must give to them, since they have nothing of their own. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! To the others,
only dakshina is to be given. There are others for whom it is recommended that uncooked food must be given, but
away from the sacrificial altar. In accordance with what they deserve, the king must give every kind of jewel.
Brahmanas at a sacrifice must be given food and dakshina. A person who has enough to sustain his dependents and
servants for three years or more deserves to drink soma[Is wealthy enough to perform a soma sacrifice.]. A sacrifice may suffer because some single ingredient
is missing at the sacrifice. Especially if it is a brahmana's sacrifice, a king who follows dharma may take that ingredient away[And give it to the brahmana.] from the household of a vaishya who has many animals, but does not perform sacrifices or drink
soma. For the purpose of the sacrifice, the king may take that object away from his household. In his household, a
shudra possesses nothing that he actually owns. Therefore, from a shudra's household, he[The king.] can take away any object that he desires. If there is someone with one hundred cattle who does not have the sacrificial fire, or if there is
someone with one thousand cows who does not perform sacrifices, he can seize from those households too, without thinking about it. O lord! Having explained the reason, the king can always take from those who do not donate.
The dharma of a king who acts in this way will not suffer.

'"There may be a person who has not eaten six meals. And there may be another person who does not care for
tomorrow and does not perform deeds. For the seventh meal, one should take away from such a person[Though not explicitly stated, the person doing the taking is probably a brahmana. Because of poverty, he has
not had six meals. That is, he has starved for three days.]. This
can be taken from the place for husking, the field, the store, or from anywhere. However, this must be told to the
king, irrespective of whether he asks or does not ask. The king who knows about dharma will not follow dharma
and punish him. Brahmanas suffer from hunger because of the folly of kshatriyas. Having ascertained about the
conduct of a learned person, he must think of a means of sustenance[The king must think of a means of sustenance for brahmanas.]. He must protect him, the way a father protects a son born from his loins. At the end of every year, he[The king.] must always perform the sacrifice to the fire[Specifically, the sacrifice known as vaishvanara.]. In
ancient times, there was no alternative to dharma. What was spoken about in dharma was sufficient. However, because they were scared of death in times of catastrophe, the vishvadevas, the sadhyas, the brahmanas and the maharshis allowed for many kinds of substitution. But an evil-minded person who does not follow the primary course
and follows the secondary course instead, does not obtain any fruits in the world hereafter. A man must not tell the
king about brahmanas[Presumably about their transgressions.]. When he is told, he should know that he has no energy, compared to their learning and
excellent energy. Their energy is superior. That is the reason the king can never withstand the energy of those who
know about the brahman. As a creator, ruler and ordainer, a brahmana is said to be god. Therefore, nothing harmful
should be spoken to them. Nor must dry words be spoken. A kshatriya tides over his difficulties through the valour
of his arms. A vaishya and a shudra use riches. A brahmana uses mantras and offerings. Mantras are not for maidens, young women, or stupid people. Stupid people cannot serve at agnihotra sacrifices. Nor can those who have
not been cleansed. If such a person offers oblations there, he is flung into hell. Those who know about dharma say
that if an officiating priest who ignites the sacrificial fire at a prajapatya sacrifice is not given a horse as dakshina,
it is as if the sacrificial fire has not been ignited at all. There are others who perform auspicious deeds. They are
faithful and have conquered their senses. However, they can never perform sacrifices without offering dakshina at
those sacrifices. If dakshina is not offered at a sacrifice, this destroys the offspring, the animals and heaven for the
performer and diminishes his senses, fame, deeds and span of life.

'"All these follow the dharma of shudras-those who cohabit with menstruating women, those who are without
the sacrificial fire and those whose families lack knowledge of the Vedas. There may be a village with its supply of
water coming from a well[There is a negative connotation associated with water from a well.]. A brahmana may be the husband of a shudra woman and dwell there for twelve
years. In that case, he has become a shudra through his deeds. A brahmana who is married, but sleeps with a
woman who is not an arya and whom he has not married, is not thought of as a brahmana. He must sit on grass and
at the rear[Forsaking the rights of being a brahmana.]. O king! Hear my words about how he may be purified. If he performs that sin for a single night, the
brahmana assumes a black complexion[He is like a shudra. Brahmanas are associated with the white colour, kshatriyas with red, vaishyas with yellow
and shudras with black.]. He can pacify his own sin by observing the vow of standing during the
day and sitting during the night for a period of three years. O king! It is said that five kinds of lies are not sin-
words of jest that cause no harm, those spoken to women, those at the time of marriage, those for the sake of one's
preceptor and those for the sake of protecting one's own life. One who is faithful can obtain sacred learning even
from someone who is inferior. It has been determined that gold can be picked up, even from a filthy place. If a
woman is a gem, she may be taken from an inferior lineage. This is like drinking amrita from poison. According to
dharma, women, gems and water are not tainted. For the welfare of cattle and brahmanas and to protect himself,
when there is a mixing of varnas, a vaishya can take up the bow. The drinking of liquor, the killing of a brahmana
and the violation of the preceptor's bed-it is thought that these cannot be atoned for, as long as one bears life. The
stealing of gold, the theft of a brahmana's property, living a life of pleasure, the drinking of liquor[Though liquor occurs twice, the words used are different. Here, the word used is madya. In the earlier clause,
the word used is sura.] and sexual
intercourse with women one should not have intercourse with are sins. O great king! If one associates with those
who have fallen, even if they have been born as brahmanas, one soon becomes like them. If one associates with
those who have fallen, acts as an officiating priest for them, teaches them, travels with them, sits with them or eats
with them, one also falls within a year. For these and other things, atonement has been determined. By following
the rites of atonement, one is freed from the calamity within a period of time, as long as one does not indulge in
them again. At the funeral rites of someone who has committed the afore-mentioned three, unlike the funeral rites
of those who have not fallen down, one need not bother about whether the funeral oblations are offered
sideways[This is a messy shloka and needs explanation. For those who have not fallen down, funeral oblations are offered straight into the fire. If they are offered diagonally or sideways, they may fall down on the ground, outside
the fire, and wicked spirits may feed on them. The afore-mentioned three sinners are those who drink liquor,
those who kill a brahmana and those who violate a preceptor's bed. For these sinners, it does not matter.]. A person who follows dharma should abandon advisers and preceptors if they follow adharma. If they
do not perform rites of atonement, he must not even speak to them. A person who performs adharma can destroy
the sin by following dharma and performing austerities. If one addresses a 'thief', one incurs a sin. However, if
one addresses a person who is not a thief as a 'thief', one incurs double that sin.

'"A maiden who allows herself to be spoilt acquires three-fourths of the sin of killing a brahmana. The one who
does the spoiling acquires the remainder of the sin. Abusing a brahmana is a sin that removes one's status for one
hundred years. Touching[Physically causing harm to a brahmana.] is even more serious. For killing him, one dwells in hell for one thousand years. Therefore, one must not abuse him and never kill him. O king! As many particles of dust are needed to soak up a brahmana's wound, for that number of years one is whirled around in hell. If a person kills a foetus, he is purified if he
is slain through a weapon in the midst of a battle. Or one must offer oneself as kindling into a blazing fire and
thereby purify oneself. If one drinks liquor, one is freed from that sin by drinking hot varuni liquor[Varuni is a specific kind of liquor and sura is liquor in general.]. That act
burns him. Once he dies, he is purified after death. A brahmana then obtains the worlds. Indeed, there is no other
way that he can obtain them. A person who violates his preceptor's bed is evil in his soul and wicked in his intelligence. He must embrace a blazing surmi[A red-hot pillar, in the shape of a female figure, used for executing those guilty of adultery.] and death will purify him. Or he may himself sever his penis and testicles and holding them in his hands, walk straight in the southwest direction[The text says nairriti. This is the south-west direction, the direction presided over by Nirriti, the evil goddess of
chaos.], until he dies and falls down. If
he[This goes back to the sinner who is guilty of killing a brahmana.] gives up his life for the sake of a brahmana, he will be purified. Or he may perform a horse sacrifice, a cow
sacrifice or an agnishtoma sacrifice well and be purified in this world and in the next. A person who has killed a
brahmana can hold a skull in his hand for twelve years. He begs and lives as a brahmachari hermit, loudly proclaiming his deed. In this way, the slayer of a brahmana retires to the forest and performs austerities. Not knowing
whether she is pregnant or not, one may have intercourse with and kill an atreyi woman[An atreyi woman is a woman whose period is just over. She is ready to conceive. Killing her is equivalent to
killing a foetus.]. Killing an atreyi is
double the sin of killing a brahmana. A person who drinks liquor must be restrained in his food and observe brahmacharya. He must sleep on the ground for three years and perform an agnishtoma sacrifice. Finally, when he has
given away one thousand cows and a bull, he will obtain purification. Someone who has killed a vaishya must live
in that way for two years and then give away one hundred cows and a bull. Someone who has killed a shudra must
live in that way for one year and then give away ten cows and a bull. If one has killed a dog, a barbarian[Barbara.] or a
donkey, one must observe the same vow as for a shudra. This is also true of a cat, a blue jay, a frog, a crow, a vulture, or a rat. O king! For killing any other living being, the same dharma as for killing an animal must be
observed.

'"In due order, I will now tell you about the other kinds of atonement. If one violates another person's bed or indulges in theft, one must live separately for one year. This is said to be three years for the wife of a brahmana who
is learned in the Vedas and two years for someone else's wife[There is a contradiction between the two years and the earlier one year. It is possible that the two years is meant
for kshatriyas and the one year is meant for others who are not brahmanas.]. A person who makes the sacred fire impure must
follow the vow of a brahmachari and only eat during the fourth quarter of the day. He must stand during the day
and remain seated at night. For three days, he must arise and not sip any water. O Kouravya! If someone abandons
his father or his mother without a valid reason, he becomes fallen. That is the determination of dharma. It has been
determined that only food and garments need to be given to wives who are guilty of adultery, especially those who
have been imprisoned. Vows imposed on men who violate other men's wives must also be imposed on them. If a
woman abandons the bed of someone superior and desires that of someone wicked, the king must feed her to the
dogs in a place that is frequented by many people. A wise person[A wise king.] binds down such a man on an iron bed that has
been heated. Wood must be kindled underneath and the perpetrator of wicked deeds burnt there. O great king! This
is also the punishment for women who transgress their husbands. If a wicked person is accused for one year[This probably means that the sinner has not performed a rite of atonement within one year.], the
sin is doubled. If someone associates with such a person for two, three or four years, he must lead a difficult existence for five years. He must beg and observe the vow of a hermit. A man whose younger brother marries though
he is yet unmarried, a man who marries before his elder brother has married, the woman who marries the younger
brother and the one who conducts the marriage-under dharma, all of them are said to have fallen. All of them
must observe the vow meant for someone who kills a hero[Other than in war.]. Or they may observe chandrayana[A kind of fasting that follows the progress (ayana) of the moon (chandra). On the full moon night, one only
eats fifteen mouthfuls of food. For the fifteen lunar days following the full moon, this is decreased by one
mouthful per day. For the fifteen lunar days following the new moon, this is increased by one mouthful per day.] or some other
kind of fasting and thereby cleanse their sin. The younger brother who has married must offer his wife to his elder
brother, who has not married, as a daughter-in-law. Having obtained the permission of the elder, he then takes her
back again. Following dharma, this is the way she is freed and so are the other two.

'"If one has inhuman intercourse[With an animal.], provided it is not a cow, one is not stained, as long as one has not ejaculated[The word used in the text actually translates as showered.]. It is known that man is the lord of animals and their eater. However, one must don a hide with the hair on the
outside. One must take an earthen bowl in one's hand. With this, one must beg at seven houses, recounting one's
deed. If he eats what he has thus obtained, he is purified in twelve days. If he performs the vow without displaying
the signs[Without the hide and without proclaiming the sin.], he must observe it for one year. Even for men[Unnatural intercourse with men.], this is the supreme form of atonement. For all those
who are addicted to giving and receiving, that[The act of donations.] is recommended. Among non-believers, it is said that giving a
cow is like giving up a breath of life. If one has eaten the meat of dogs, boars, men, cocks or donkeys, or has drunk
urine or eaten excrement, one must perform the atonement of being cleansed again. If a brahmana who drinks
soma inhales the breath of someone who has drunk liquor, he can drink hot water for three days, or drink hot milk
for three days. He can also drink hot ghee for three days or only subsist on air for three days. These are the eternal
modes of atonement that have been indicated. This is especially true for brahmanas and has originated from those
who possess true knowledge."'
