'Bhishma said, "Drona's son sees it well. Kripa sees it well. Karna wishes to fight, in accordance with the dharma
of kshatriyas. No learned man can find fault with the preceptor. Considering the time and the place, it is my view
that we should fight. What learned man who possesses five armed enemies, as radiant as the sun[The five Pandavas.], will not be
confused at their ascendancy? Even men, who are conversant with dharma, are confused when it comes to their
own interests. O king! That is the reason I am speaking these words, whether they please you or not. What Karna
spoke, was for the purpose of inciting enterprise in us. The preceptor's son[Ashvatthama.] should pardon us, because a great
task has to be undertaken. Kounteya has arrived and this is not the time for dissension. You[Ashvatthama.], the preceptor and
Kripa must pardon everything. You are skilled in the use of weapons, like the sun in its radiance. Just as spots can
never be removed from the moon, you have the power of brahmanas and brahmastras are established in you[Drona, Ashvatthama and Kripa are brahmanas. Brahmastras are divine weapons, immensely powerful.].
The four Vedas may be seen together in one place[The four Vedas stand for knowledge.], and the power of kshatriyas in another single place. We have
not heard of these two together in any person, other than the preceptor of the Bharatas and his son. This is my
view. Brahmastras and the Vedas are not seen together anywhere else. The preceptor's son should forgive. This is
not the time for dissension. Let us all fight in unity with the son of the chastiser of Paka[Indra killed a demon named Paka.], who has now arrived.
The learned ones have spoken about the weaknesses of an army and it is the view of the learned ones that dissension is the foremost and the worst."

'Ashvatthama replied, "Let the preceptor forgive and there should be peace here again. If the preceptor was insulted, that was done in anger."'

Vaishampayana said, 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! At that, Duryodhana asked Drona's pardon, together
with Karna, Bhishma and the great-souled Kripa.'

'Drona said, "I have already been pacified by the words that Shantanu's son Bhishma spoke first. We should
now engage and decide on a supreme course of action so that when Duryodhana is engaged, no clouds descend on
the soldiers, out of rashness or out of confusion. Dhananjaya would not have shown himself, had the period of
dwelling in the forest not been over. He will not pardon us today, without having recovered the riches[The cattle.]. Let us
follow a course of action so that he cannot confront and defeat the sons of Dhritarashtra in any way. O Gangeya[The son of Ganga, Bhishma.]!
Remember the words that Duryodhana had addressed you earlier and speak what is right."'
