Sanjaya said, "That fierce battle continued, terrible in form. The army of your sons was shattered by the Pandavas. The maharathas made great efforts to restrain them and your sons fought against the Pandava soldiers.
Wishing to ensure your son's pleasure, the warriors on your side suddenly returned. When they returned, the battle
again assumed a fearful form. Those on your side and the enemy fought against each other in the battle, like the
gods and the asuras. The soldiers on your side, and that of the enemy, were unwilling to retreat. They fought
against each other through guessing and by means of signs[Because of the dust.]. As they fought against each other, there was a great
destruction.

' "King Yudhishthira was overcome by great rage. In the battle, he wished to vanquish the sons of Dhritarashtra
and the kings. He pierced Sharadvata with three arrows that were gold-tufted and had been sharpened on stone. He
slew Kritavarma's four horses with injurious arrows. Ashvatthama bore the illustrious Hardikya away. Sharadvata
pierced Yudhishthira back with eight arrows. In the battle, King Duryodhana dispatched seven hundred chariots
towards the spot where King Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, was. Those chariots possessed the speed of thought or
the wind and rathas rode them. In the encounter, they rushed against Kounteya's chariot. O great king! They surrounded Yudhishthira from all sides. With their arrows, they made him disappear, like clouds against the sun.
Rathas, with Shikhandi at the forefront, were unwilling to tolerate this and became angry. They attacked with the
best of swift chariots, decorated with nets of bells. They advanced to protect Yudhishthira, Kunti's sons. A terrible
battle ensued between the Pandavas and the Kurus. Blood flowed like water and it extended Yama's kingdom.
Having slain the seven hundred rathas that belonged to the Kuru assassins, the Pandavas and the Panchalas again
countered them. A great battle was fought between your son and the Pandavas. Nothing like this had been seen
earlier, nor heard of. That merciless battle continued in every direction. Warriors, on your side and that of the others, were slain. The warriors roared and blew on their conch shells. The archers roared like lions and shouted. O
venerable one! As that battle extended, the inner organs were mangled. In search of victory, the warriors dashed in
every direction. Every species on earth seemed to be destroyed and this generated sorrow. As the battle extended,
the best of women were deprived of their partings in the encounter[This requires explanation. Simanta is the parting of the hair and a marking on that indicates that the lady is married. The women were not deprived of the parting, but that marking. Stated simply, the women became
widows.]. That merciless and extremely fearful battle
continued. There was a sound, like that of the earth, with all its mountains and forests, during an earthquake. O
king! Torches with handles fell down in every direction. From the solar disc, meteors descended from the firmament onto the ground. Harsh winds blew from every side and showered down stones underneath. The elephants
shed tears and trembled severely. Disregarding these ominous portents, the extremely fearful battle raged on. Consulting each other, the kshatriyas weren't distressed and fought again on that beautiful and sacred region of Kurukshetra, desiring to go to heaven.

' "Shakuni, the son of the king of Gandhara, said, 'Station yourselves in the forefront of the battle. I will slay the
Pandavas from the rear.' At this, the spirited warriors from Madra cheerfully advanced, uttering many sounds of
delight and so did the enemy. Those invincible ones, unwavering in their aim, attacked us again. They brandished
their bows and arrows and showered down arrows. The soldiers of the king of Madra were slain by the army there.
On seeing this, Duryodhana's soldiers again retreated. The powerful king of Gandhara again spoke these words. 'O
wicked ones! O ones who are ignoring dharma! Return and fight. Why are you running away?' O bull among the
Bharata lineage! The king of Gandhara possessed an army of ten thousand horses, with warriors with sparkling
lances. He used this army and his valour and there was a destruction of men. He attacked the Pandava soldiers
from the rear and killed them with his sharp arrows. O great king! In every direction, the extremely large army of
the Pandus was destroyed and driven away, like clouds by the wind. From a close distance, Yudhishthira saw that
his own army was being routed. The immensely strong Sahadeva was in front of him and he urged him. 'Subala's
armoured son is afflicting our rear. O Pandava! Behold. The evil-minded one is slaying our soldiers. Advance with
the sons of Droupadi and kill Shakuni Soubala. O unblemished one! Protect yourself with an army of Panchala
chariots. Let all the elephants and horses go with you, and three thousand foot soldiers. Kill Shakuni Soubala.' At
this, seven hundred elephants, with bows in the hands of the riders, five thousand horses, the valiant Sahadeva,
three thousand foot soldiers and the sons of Droupadi combined and attacked Shakuni, invincible in a battle, in the
encounter. O king! However, the powerful Soubala, desiring victory, overcame the Pandavas and slaughtered the
soldiers from the rear. The spirited Pandava horse riders were angry. They penetrated Soubala's army and overcame his rathas. Those brave riders stationed themselves amidst elephants and enveloped Soubala's large army
with showers of arrows. The brave men used clubs and javelins. O king! Because of your evil counsel, a great battle raged. As the rathas watched, the twang of bowstrings was no longer heard, because one could not distinguish
those on one's own side from that of the enemy. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Javelins were hurled from the
arms of the brave ones among the Kurus and the Pandavas and one could see them descend like stellar bodies. O
lord of the earth! Sparkling swords were seen to descend there and covered the sky, rendering it exceedingly beautiful. O king! O supreme among the Bharata lineage! Beautiful javelins descended in every direction and were like
locusts in the sky. The limbs of horses were covered with blood and because they were wounded, fell down in hundreds and thousands. They fell against each other and crowded together. Wounded, they were seen to vomit blood
from their mouths. There was a terrible darkness and the soldiers were covered in dust. With wet eyes, those
scorchers of enemies retreated from the spot. O king! Horses and men were covered with dust. Some fell down on
the ground. Others vomited copious quantities of blood. The hair of some men got entangled with the hair of others
and they could not move. The immensely strong ones dragged each other from the backs of their horses and, clashing like wrestlers, slew each other. Many lost their lives and were dragged away by the horses. There were many
others who fell down on the ground, desiring victory. Those men, proud of their prowess, were seen here and there.
Blood flowed from their wounds. Their arms were severed. Their hair was shorn. The earth was seen to be strewn
with hundreds and thousands of them. Those who tried to use their horses could not travel a great distance away.
Horse riders were slain and the earth was covered with horses. Armour was smeared with blood. And there were
those who were armed with many terrible kinds of weapons, seeking to kill each other. They clashed against each
other in the battle and many soldiers were killed. O lord of the earth! Soubala fought in that battle for a short
while. He then retreated with the six thousand horses that still remained.

' "The horse riders on the Pandu side were also covered with blood. They engaged well in that battle, ready to
give up their lives. They also retreated with the six thousand horses that still remained. They said, 'One can no
longer use chariots or mighty elephants to fight here. Let chariots advance against chariots and elephants against
elephants. Shakuni has now retreated and has stationed himself inside his formation. King Soubala will not advance in the battle again.' Droupadi's sons and those crazy elephants then went to the spot where maharatha Pan-
chala Dhrishtadyumna was. O Kouravya! When that mighty cloud of dust arose, Sahadeva alone went to the spot
where King Yudhishthira was. When they had departed, Shakuni Soubala again became enraged and attacked
Dhrishtadyumna's army from the side. There was a dreadful battle again and they were ready to give up their lives.
Those on your side, and that of the enemy, attacked each other, wishing to kill each other. O king! In that clash of
brave warriors, they first glanced at each other, and then attacked, in hundreds and thousands. In that destruction of
men, heads were severed with swords and fell down with a great noise, like palm fruit. Devoid of armour, bodies
were mangled and fell down on the ground. O lord of the earth! Arms and thighs were severed with weapons.
There were loud noises and the body hair stood up. With sharp weapons, brothers, sons and friends were killed.
The warriors descended, like birds in search of meat. Extremely enraged, they attacked each other. 'I will be the
first. I am the first.' Saying this, thousands were killed. Because of that clash, horse riders lost their lives and were
dislodged from their seats. Horses fell down in hundreds and thousands. O lord of the earth! There was the neighing of swift horses. There were the roars of armoured men. A tumultuous sound was created by javelins and
swords. O king! Because of your evil policy, they pierced each other's inner organs. The wrathful ones were overcome by exhaustion. The mounts were exhausted and thirsty. Wounded by sharp weapons, those on your side retreated. Many became crazy because of the scent of blood and lost their senses. They killed whomever they could
approach, regardless of whether it was friend or foe. Many kshatriyas, desiring victory, lost their lives. O king!
They were covered with showers of arrows and fell down on the ground. Wolves, vultures and jackals emitted
fierce sounds of delight. While your son looked on, your army met with a terrible destruction. O lord of the earth!
The earth was covered with the bodies of men and horses. It was colourful with flow of blood and increased the
fear of cowards. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Those on your side, as well as that of the Pandavas, were
repeatedly struck by swords, javelins and spears and stopped attacking. As long as they had lives, they struck to
the best of their capacity. The warriors then fell down, vomiting blood from their wounds. Headless torsos could be
seen, grasping the hair[Their own hair. They grasped their own hair with one hand and wielded
a sword in the other.] and raising sharp swords smeared with blood. O lord of men! Many such headless torsos
rose up. Because of that scent of blood, the warriors were overcome by weakness.

' "When the sound became less, Soubala attacked the large army of the Pandavas with the few remaining horses.
The Pandavas desired victory and spiritedly attacked back. The foot soldiers, elephant riders and horse riders
raised their weapons. They protected themselves in every direction, by arranging themselves into an array. They
struck him with many kinds of weapons, wishing to bring an end to the hostilities. On seeing this attack, those on
your side rushed against the Pandavas, with horses, infantry, elephants and chariots. There were some foot soldiers
who no longer possessed weapons. In the battle, those brave ones attacked and brought down each other with feet
and fists. Rathas fell down from their chariots and elephant riders from their elephants. They were like siddhas falling down from celestial vehicles, after their store of good deeds has been exhausted. In the great battle, thus did the
warriors kill each other, fathers, brothers, friends, sons and others. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! Thus did
that fearful battle continue. It was extremely terrible and spears, swords and arrows were used." '
