Vaishampayana said, 'O bull among the Bharata lineage! Ambika's son Dhritarashtra let out a deep and hot sigh.
He summoned suta Sanjaya and told him, "The two Pandavas, Nakula and Sahadeva, are greatly illustrious sons of
the gods and are like the king of the gods in their resplendence. They are steadfast in battle, can fight from a distance and have resolution. Their hands are swift and they are steadfast in their anger. They are always firm and
speedy. When they advance in battle with Bhima and Arjuna at the forefront, they will be established with the valour of lions and will be as invincible as the Ashvins. O Sanjaya! I do not see any remnants of my soldiers left.
Those two sons of the gods are maharathas and cannot be repulsed in battle. Their anger at Droupadi's oppression
will not be assuaged. The Vrishnis are great archers. The Panchalas are greatly energetic. They are protected in
battle by Vasudeva, who never wavers from the truth. The Parthas will burn down the armies of my sons in battle.
O son of a suta! Led by Rama[Balarama.] and Krishna, when the Vrishnis advance in battle, even the mountains will not be
able to withstand the force. In their midst, is the mighty archer Bhima, whose valour is terrible. He will roam
around with an iron club that kills all warriors. The kings on my side will not be able to tolerate the roar of Gandi-
va, as loud as thunder, or the force of Bhima's club. It is then that I will remember the words of my well-wishers,
which should have been remembered, but which I did not heed earlier because I was obedient to Duryodhana."

'Sanjaya replied, "O king! That ignoring was your great transgression. Though capable, you were deluded and
did not restrain your son. Having heard that the Pandavas had been vanquished at dice, Achyuta Madhusudana
swiftly went to Kamyaka to show his respect to the Parthas. So did Drupada's sons, with Dhrishtadyumna at the
forefront. So did Virata, Dhrishtaketu and the maharatha Kekayas. O king! Through a spy, I have learnt everything
that they talked about when they met the defeated Parthas and I have told you that. When they met, they decided
that Madhusudana would be Phalguna's charioteer if there was a battle and Hari agreed[This is odd. Choosing a charioteer for Arjuna is premature and the question shouldn't arise at this stage. This
reinforces the general impression that this chapter was a later addition and doesn't quite belong.]. Krishna was also angered when he saw the Parthas in that state, attired in black deerskin for their upper garments. He told Yudhishthira, 'At the time of the rajasuya, I witnessed the prosperity of the Parthas in Indraprastha, so difficult to be obtained
by other kings. I saw all the lords of the earth there, terrified because of the energy of your weapons-Vangas, Angas, Poundras, Udras, Cholas, Dravidas, Andhrakas, those who live along the shores of the ocean, those who live
in cities, Simhalas, Barbaras, Mlecchas, those who live in forests, those from the western kingdoms, hundreds
from along the ocean, Pahlavas, Daradas, all the Kiratas, Yavanas, Shakas, Harahunas, Chinas, Tukharas, Saindhavas, Jagudas, Ramathas, Mundas, those from kingdoms ruled by women, Tanganas and many others who came
to serve you at the sacrifice. O bull among the Bharata lineage! That prosperity was transient and has been taken
away. I will take away the lives of those who have robbed you of it. O Kouravya! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! With Rama[Balarama.], Bhima, Arjuna, the twins, Akrura, Gada, Samba, Pradyumna, Ahuka, the brave Dhrishtadyumna and Shishupala's son[Shishupala's son is Dhrishtaketu.], I will today kill Duryodhana in battle, together with Karna, Duhshasana,
Soubala and whoever else stands against us in battle. You will live in Hastinapura with your brothers. You will
possess the prosperity that the sons of Dhritarashtra have. You will rule over this earth.' Then, in that assembly of
warriors, the king[Yudhishthira.] spoke to him and with the brave Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, they listened. 'O Janardana!
I accept these words of yours to be true. O mighty-armed one! You will kill my enemies and their followers, but
only after thirteen years have elapsed. O Keshava! Let me be true to my word. In the midst of the kings I gave my
promise that I would dwell in the forest.' On hearing these words of Dharmaraja, with Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, those present in the assembly gave their promise and pacified the wrathful Keshava with sweet words that
were appropriate for the occasion. Then, in Vasudeva's hearing, they told the unblemished Panchali[Droupadi.], 'O
queen[The word used is devi. This is a honorific form of address and doesn't mean goddess alone.]! It is certain that Duryodhana will part with his life because of your anger. O beautiful one! We promise
that this will be true. Do not sorrow. O Krishna! There are those who laughed at you then, on seeing you angered.
Their flesh will be devoured by laughing beasts and birds. Their blood will be drunk by vultures and jackals. There
were those who dragged you by the head[Specifically, the hair.] at the assembly hall. O Panchali! You will see their bodies strewn on
the ground, dragged and devoured relentlessly by carnivorous animals. There are those who oppressed you and
others who ignored you. They will be beheaded and the earth will drink their blood.' Such were the many words
that those bulls among men spoke. All of them were energetic warriors. All of them bore marks of battle. When
thirteen years have elapsed, those maharathas appointed by Dharmaraja will advance against us, with Vasudeva at
the forefront-Rama[Balarama.], Krishna, Dhananjaya, Pradyumna, Samba, Yuyudhana[Satyaki.], Bhima, Madri's sons, the
princes of Kekaya and the sons of Panchala, together with Dharmaraja. All these warriors of the world are great-
souled and invincible. They will be accompanied by their followers and soldiers. They will be like angry lions with
manes. Is there anyone who desires to live who can withstand them in battle?"

'Dhritarashtra replied, "At the time of the gambling, Vidura told me, 'O lord of men! If you defeat the Pandavas,
it is certain that this will bring about the end of the Kurus. A great fear will arise and there will be a torrent of
blood. O suta! I think that this will now happen, the way Kshatta had described it to me earlier. It is certain that
there will be a battle, after the time promised by the Pandavas has elapsed.'"'
