Yudhishthira asked, "O grandfather! There may be a lord of the earth who has been dislodged from his prosperity and is roaming around the earth. He may have been crushed by the rod of destiny. What intelligence
should he resort to? Tell me."

'Bhishma replied, "In this connection, the ancient history of a conversation between Vasava[Indra.]  and Bali, Virochana's son, is recounted. Having defeated all the asuras, Vasava went to the grandfather[Brahma.], joined his hands in
salutation and bowing down before him, asked him about Bali. 'O Brahma! I do not see Bali, whose wealth did not
dimish, despite his giving it away liberally[Bali was extremely generous. He was Virochana's son and Prahlada's grandson. He conquered the three worlds
and dislodged Indra from heaven. In his dwarf (vamana) incarnation, Vishnu took advantage of Bali's generosity
and robbed him of the three worlds. According to some stories, Bali was thereafter tied down by Varuna's
nooses.]. Tell me where Bali is. He was the one who set and arose, lighting up
the directions. He was the one who attentively showered down at the right time. I do not see Bali. O Brahma! Tell
me where Bali is. He was Vayu, Varuna, Ravi[The sun.], Chandrama[The moon.] and Agni, who heated beings and the earth. I do
not see Bali. O Brahma! Tell me where Bali is.'

'"Brahma replied, 'O Maghavan[Indra.]! It is not proper that you should ask about him now[Since Indra had defeated Bali.]. However, if one is
asked, one should not utter a falsehood. I will tell you about Bali. O Shachi's lord[Shachi is Indra's wife.]! He may be[Having been reborn.] among camels,
cows, asses or horses. He may be the best among those animals[This probably means that Bali may have been reborn as a man.] and may be alone in his apartment.'

'"Shakra asked, 'O Brahma! If I meet Bali, alone in his apartment, should I kill him, or should I not kill him? O
Brahma! Instruct me about that.'

'"Brahma replied, 'O Shakra! You should not cause injury to Bali. Bali does not deserve to be killed. O Shakra!
You should ask him about good policy. O Vasava! But you should do as you wish.'"

'Bhishma replied, "Having been addressed by the illustrious one, the great Indra went to the earth. He was surrounded by great prosperity and was ascended on Airavata's[The name of Indra's elephant.] shoulder. He saw Bali, in the form of an ass. As the
illustrious one had said, he was alone in that abode.

'"Shakra said, 'O danava! You have now obtained the form of an ass and are subsisting on chaff. You have been
born as an inferior species. Are you grieving or are you not grieving? I see what I have not seen earlier. You have
been brought under the subjugation of your enemies. You are devoid of your prosperity and friends. You have been
dislodged from your energy and valour. Earlier, when you advanced, you used to be surrounded by thousands of
your relatives. You scorched all the worlds and did not think that we were worth considering. The daityas looked
towards you and subjected themselves to your rule. It is because of your prosperity that the earth yielded crops,
even when it had not been tilled. You have now been reduced to this hardship. Are you grieving or are you not
grieving? In earlier times, you were full of pride and stationed yourself on the eastern shores of the ocean, dividing
your riches amongst your relatives. What was the state of your mind then? You were honoured by thousands of celestial women, who danced before you. For thousands of years, you sported in blazing prosperity. All of them[The celestial damsels.]
were adorned in garlands made out of lotuses and all of them were golden in complexion. O lord of the danavas!
What was the state of your mind then and what is it now? You used to possess a great and golden umbrella and it
was adorned with gems. In seven different ways, sixty thousand gandharvas danced before you. In your sacrifices,
there used to be a gigantic altar that was completely made out of gold. There, you gave away thousands and millions of cattle. You roamed around the entire earth, hurling the shamya according to the prescribed rites and performing sacrifices[A shamya is a wooden rod. It is hurled from the hand and a sacrifice is performed wherever it happens to land.
In this way, the entire earth is covered.]. What was the state of your mind then? I do not see the vessel now, nor the umbrella or the
whisks. O lord of the asuras! Nor do I see the garland that was given to you by Brahma.'

'"Bali replied, 'You do not see the vessel, the umbrella or the whisks. O Vasava! Nor do you see the garland that
was given by Brahma. You have asked me about my gems. They have now been hidden inside a cave. When my
time arrives, you will see them again. However, this conduct of yours is not appropriate for your fame or your lineage. When you see me amidst this adversity, why are you boasting about your prosperity? Learned ones who are
accomplished in wisdom, virtuous, content in their wisdom and tranquil, do not grieve in misery and find delight in
happiness. O Purandara! You are boasting because of your common knowledge. When your sentiments become
like mine, you will not speak in this way.'"'
