Janamejaya asked, 'O brahmana! After having obtained the kingdom, what did the immensely energetic
Dharmaraja Yudhishthira do next? You should tell me that. O rishi! What did the illustrious Hrishikesha,
the supreme preceptor of the three worlds, do? You should tell me that in detail.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'O Indra among kings! Listen. O unblemished one! I will recount that in detail,
about what the Pandavas did, with Vasudeva at the forefront. Having obtained the kingdom, the immensely energetic Dharmaraja Yudhishthira instructed the four varnas to be engaged in their own dharma. He
announced that one thousand great-souled snataka[A snataka is one who has completed the brahmacharya stage of studying
and is about to enter the householder stage.] brahmanas would be given one thousand golden
coins each. He arranged sustenance for the servants and the guests who sought refuge and gratified their
desires, even the distressed ones who were prone to debating[Those who used tarka (logic) and debated. Clearly, this means heterodox schools that questioned the basis of traditional dharma.]. He gave tens of thousands of cows to the
priest, Dhoumya, and also riches, gold, silver and many kinds of garments. O great king! He behaved towards Kripa as one would towards a preceptor. With dharma in his soul, he was careful in his vows and
honoured Vidura. The supreme among generous ones gave food, drink, many kinds of garments, beds and
seats and satisfied all those who resorted to him. O supreme among kings! Having obtained peace, the immensely illustrious king honoured Yuyutsu, Dhritarashtra's son. King Yudhishthira offered the kingdom to
Dhritarashtra, Gandhari and Vidura and informed them that the kingdom was safe. O Janamejaya! He satisfied everyone in the city in this way.

'With hands joined in salutation, he then went to the great-souled Vasudeva. He saw Krishna seated on
an expensive couch, decorated with jewels and gold. He looked like a blue rain cloud atop Mount Meru.
Decorated with divine ornaments, his form blazed. He was attired in yellow silk garments and was like a
jewel set in golden jewellery. The koustubha jewel was on his chest, radiant amidst other gems. He looked
like Mount Udaya[Mountain from which the sun rises.], with the sun blazing its crown. There was no one like him in the three worlds. He
approached the great-souled Vishnu, an idol in human form. Smiling first, he addressed him in gentle
words. "O supreme among intelligent ones! Have you spent the night in comfort? O Achyuta! I hope all
your senses are at ease. O supreme among intelligent ones! We sought refuge with you and the goddess of
your intelligence. That is how we obtained our kingdom back and the earth is under our subjugation. O
illustrious one! Through your valour, you covered the three worlds in three steps[A reference to Vishnu's vamana (dwarf) incarnation.] and you have shown
us your favours. Hence, we obtained victory and the best of fame. Nor have we deviated from dharma."

Dharmaraja Yudhishthira spoke to him in this way. However, the illustrious one was meditating. He remained silent and did not say anything in reply.'
