'Sanjaya said, "In the battle, maharatha Arjuna exerted himself against Shalya. In the encounter, he shrouded him
with straight-tufted arrows. He pierced Susharma and Kripa with three arrows each. O Indra among kings! In the
battle, he wounded Pragjyotisha, Saindhava Jayadratha, Chitrasena, Vikarna, Kritavarma, Durmarshana and the
two maharathas from Avanti with three arrows each. These were swift and were tufted with the feathers of herons
and peacocks. In the battle, the atiratha oppressed your army with arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In
the encounter, Jayadratha pierced Partha with arrows and while stationed on Chitrasena's chariot, swiftly pierced
Bhima. In the battle, Shalya and Kripa pierced the mighty-armed Jishnu, supreme among rathas, with many arrows
that struck at the inner organs. O lord of the earth! O venerable one! In the encounter, your sons, Chitrasena and
the others, struck each of them, Arjuna and Bhimasena, with five sharp arrows. But those foremost of rathas, the
Kounteyas, bulls among the Bharata lineage, continued to oppress the large army of the Trigartas in the encounter.
In the battle, Susharma pierced Partha with many sharp arrows. The powerful one roared and the sound echoed in
the sky. Other brave rathas pierced Bhimasena and Dhananjaya with sharp and swift arrows that were tufted with
gold. In the midst of those rathas, the Kounteyas, supreme among rathas, looked beautiful as they seemed to be
sporting and roamed around in their chariots. They were like powerful lions amidst a herd of cattle. They shattered
the bows and arrows of many brave ones in the battle. They brought down the heads of hundreds of brave kings.
They shattered many chariots and killed hundreds of horses. In the great battle, they brought down elephant-riders
from their elephants. O king! Many charioteers and riders were seen to be devoid of their lives. O king! They were
immobile in every direction. Elephants were slain. Foot soldiers and horses lost their lives. The earth was strewn
with many shattered chariots. Many umbrellas and standards were broken and were brought down. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! There were discarded goads and cushions, diadems, armlets, necklaces, hides of ranku deer
and discarded headdresses, whisks and fans. There were severed arms with sandalwood paste smeared on them.
The earth was strewn with the thighs of Indras among men.

'"We witnessed Partha's extraordinary valour in the battle. He used his arrows to restrain and strike all the warriors in your army. On seeing that Bhima and Arjuna were united, your son was frightened and quickly rushed towards Gangeya's chariot, in great fear. Kripa, Kritavarma, Saindhava Jayadratha and Vinda and Anuvinda from
Avanti were the ones who did not give up the battle then. In the encounter, Bhima, the great archer, and maharatha
Phalguna crushed the army of the Kouravas in terrible fashion. In the encounter, tens of thousands and millions of
arrows were quickly showered down on Dhananjaya's chariot. The maharatha repulsed that net of arrows. In the
encounter, Partha began to send them to the land of the dead. Maharatha Shalya became enraged in that battle. As
if playing, he struck Jishnu in the chest with a straight-tufted and broad-headed arrow. Partha used five arrows to
sever the bow from his hand. He then used other sharp arrows to severely wound him in his inner organs. In the
battle, the lord of Madra grasped another bow that was capable of bearing a heavy burden. O great king! He angrily wounded Jishnu with three arrows and Vasudeva with five. He struck Bhimasena in the chest and the arms with
nine. O great king! Drona and the maharatha from Magadha were instructed by Duryodhana and came to the spot
where Partha and Pandava Bhimasena were. O great king! The maharathas were slaying the great army of the
Kouravas. O bull among the Bharata lineage! In the encounter, the young Jayatsena pierced Bhima, who possessed
terrible weapons, with eight sharp arrows. Bhima pierced him back with ten arrows and again with seven. With a
broad-headed arrow, he brought down his charioteer from the seat of the chariot. The horses were no longer controlled and fled in different directions, dragging away the king of Magadha, while all the soldiers looked on. Detecting a weakness, Drona pierced Bhimsena with sixty-five extremely sharp iron arrows that had been sharpened
on stone. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Bhima prided himself in battle. In the encounter, he pierced his preceptor, who was like his father, with nine broad-headed arrows and followed it up with another sixty. Arjuna
pierced Susharma with many iron arrows and scattered his soldiers, like the wind dispersing a mass of clouds.

'"Bhishma, the king[Duryodhana.], Soubala and Brihadbala angrily attacked Bhimasena and Dhananjaya. The brave Pandavas and Parshata Dhrishtadyumna attacked Bhishma, who was advancing in the battle, like death with a gaping
mouth. Shikhandi approached the grandfather of the Bharatas. He was cheerful and had abandoned fear. He attacked the one who was rigid in his vows. The Parthas, headed by Yudhishthira, placed Shikhandi at the forefront.
Together with the Srinjayas, they fought against Bhishma in that battle. All those on your side placed the one who
was rigid in his vows at the forefront. They fought against the Parthas in that battle, with Shikhandi at the forefront. For the sake of victory over Bhishma, the battle that commenced there among the Kouravas[The Pandavas are being included as part of the Kouravas.] was terrible.
O lord of the earth! The sons of Pandu wished to triump over Bhishma and those on your side wished Bhishma's
victory in the battle. It was like gambling with the dice and victory or defeat became the stake. O great king!
Dhrishtadyumna incited all the soldiers. 'O supreme among men! Attack Gangeya. Do not be scared.' On hearing
the words of the commander, the army of the Pandavas quickly advanced against Bhishma. In that great battle,
they were ready to give up their lives. O great king! Bhishma, best of rathas, resisted that army as it descended on
him, like the shoreline against the great ocean."'
