Sanjaya said, "Your son, Yuyutsu, was driving away that large army[Yuyutsu was Dhritarashtra's son through a vaishya woman. He fought the war on the side of the Pandavas.
Uluka was Shakuni's son.]. Uluka asked him to wait and quickly attacked him. O king! At this, Yuyutsu used an arrow that was extremely sharp at the edges to strike Uluka, like Indra striking a mountain with his vajra. In that encounter, Uluka became angry with your son and slicing his bow
down with a kshurapra arrow[Arrow with a razor-sharp tip.], struck him with a barbed arrow. When his bow was severed, Yuyutsu picked up
another large bow that was more forceful. O bull among the Bharata lineage! His eyes red with rage, he pierced
Shakuni's son with sixty arrows. Striking his charioteer with three arrows, he pierced him[Uluka.] again. Uluka now
became wrathful in the battle and piercing him with twenty arrows that were adorned with gold, severed his golden
standard. With the pole shattered, that extremely large and lofty standard fell down. O king! Blazing in gold, it fell
down in front of Yuyutsu. On seeing that his standard had been uprooted, Yuyutsu became senseless with rage. He
struck Uluka between the breasts with five arrows. O venerable one! O supreme among the Bharata lineage! With
a broad-headed arrow that had been washed in oil, Uluka violently severed his charioteer's head. He then killed his
four horses and pierced him with five arrows. Having been severely struck by that powerful one, he[Yuyutsu.] departed
on his chariot. O king! Having defeated him, Uluka swiftly advanced towards the Panchalas and the Srinjayas and
began to slay them with sharp arrows.

' "O great king! Fearlessly, and in the twinkling of an eye, your son, Shrutakarma, advanced against Shatanika
and deprived him of his horses, his charioteer and his chariot[This doesn't quite fit. The standard listing of Duryodhana's brothers doesn't include Shrutakarma. The closest
one gets is Rudrakarma. Shrutakarma or Shrutakirti is Arjuna's son, through Droupadi. Shatanika is Nakula's
son.]. O venerable one! Though his horses were slain,
the immensely powerful Shatanika remained stationed on his chariot and extremely angry, flung a club towards
your son. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having reduced the chariot, together with its horses and charioteer,
to ashes, it fell down with great force and shattered the earth. Those two brave ones, the extenders of the fame of
the Kuru lineage, were both without chariots. They glared angrily at each other and withdrew from the battle.
Frightened, your son ascended Vivitsu's chariot[Vivitsu was one of Duryodhana's brothers.]. Shatanika quickly advanced towards Prativindhya's
chariot[Prativindhya was Yudhishthira's son.].

' "Angrily, Sutasoma[Bhima's son through Droupadi.] pierced Shakuni with sharp arrows, but could not make him tremble, like a wind
against a mountain. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing his father's supreme enemy, Sutasoma enveloped him with thousands of arrows. However, Shakuni was dexterous and colourful in fighting and wished to
be victorious in that encounter. He severed those arrows with other arrows. In that battle, having countered those
arrows with his sharp arrows, he angrily struck Sutasoma with three arrows. Your immensely valorous brother-inlaw used his arrows to bring down his horses and his charioteer and shattered his standard into fragments. At this,
all the people roared in applause. O venerable one! His horses were slain. He was without a chariot. His bow was
severed. However, the archer[Sutasoma.] descended from the chariot, stood on the ground and picked up a supreme bow.
He released gold-tufted arrows that had been sharpened on stone and enveloped your brother-in-law's chariot. The
shower of arrows released by the maharatha was like a torrent of insects. But on seeing this, Soubala was not distressed and remained stationed on his chariot. The immensely illustrious one countered those arrows with a storm
of his arrows. On witnessing Sutasoma's extraordinary deed of fighting on foot, while the king was on his chariot,
all the warriors, and all the siddhas who were assembled in the firmament, were satisfied and honoured him. The
king[Shakuni.] then used sharp and extremely forceful broad-headed arrows that possessed drooping tufts to sever his
bow and all his quivers. When his bow was severed in the encounter, he picked up a sword and roared. It possessed
the complexion of lapis lazuli or a lotus and had an ivory handle. It was as radiant as the clear sky, and the intelligent Sutasoma whirled it around. It seemed as if he was Death himself. O great king! He had the strength and
learning of fourteen techniques[There were different types of motions prescribed for fighting with a sword, variously described as twenty-one,
twenty-four and thirty-two.] and roamed around, violently whirling his sword in thousands of circular motions. The valiant Soubala shot arrows at him. But as they descended, he quickly severed them with his supreme
sword. O great king! Soubala, the destroyer of enemy heroes, became enraged at this and shot arrows that were
like venomous serpents towards Sutasoma. However, displaying his learning, strength and dexterity, the immensely radiant one, with valour like that of Tarkshya[Garuda.], used his sword to slice them down in that battle. O king! As
he was roaming around and executing circular motions, he[Shakuni.] used an extremely sharp kshurapra arrow to sever
that resplendent sword. Thus sliced down, the large sword fell down violently on the ground. When the sword was
severed, maharatha Sutasoma retreated six steps and hurled that part of the sword that was still in his fist. That
fragment was decorated with gold and diamonds. In that encounter, it quickly severed the great-souled one's[Shakuni's.]
bow and bowstring and fell down on the ground. After this, Sutasoma went to Shrutakirti's giant chariot. Soubala
picked up another terrible bow that was extremely difficult to withstand. Using this, he attacked the Pandava soldiers and killed large numbers of the enemy. O lord of the earth! On seeing Soubala fearlessly striding around in
the battle, a loud uproar arose amongst the Pandavas, when they saw that large, proud and armed soldiers were driven away by the great-minded Soubala. O king! It was like the army of the daityas being crushed by the king of the
gods. In that fashion, the Pandava soldiers were destroyed by Soubala.

' "O king! Kripa countered Dhrishtadyumna in the battle, like a sharabha[Sharabha has many meanings-young elephant, camel. It is also a mythical animal with eight legs, believed to
be stronger than a lion. In this context, one probably means the mythical animal.] in a forest, advancing and fighting
against a proud elephant. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Parshata was checked by the powerful Goutama
and could not advance a single step. On witnessing Goutama's form advancing towards Dhrishtadyumna's chariot,
all the beings were terrified and thought that he[Dhrishtadyumna.] was confronting destruction. The rathas and riders were distressed in their minds and said, 'The immensely energetic Sharadvata, supreme among men, is certainly extremely
enraged at Drona's killing. He is intelligent and skilled in the use of divine weapons. Will Dhrishtadyumna be safe
today from Goutama? Will this entire army be freed from this great danger? The brahmana will kill all of us together. His severe form is seen to be like that of the Destroyer. In this encounter, he will follow the footsteps of
Bharadvaja's son. The preceptor[Kripa was the preceptor of the Pandavas and the Kouravas before Drona turned up.] is light in the use of his hands and is always victorious in battle. He possesses
the valour of weapons and is angry as well. It can be seen that Parshata is now extremely reluctant to fight.' These
and other words were spoken by those on your side and on the side of the enemy. O king! Kripa Sharadvata
breathed angrily and enveloped Parshata, who was immobile, in all his inner organs. In that encounter, he was
struck by the great-souled Goutama. He was supremely confounded in that battle and did not know what he should
do. His charioteer said, 'O Parshata! Are you fine? I have never seen you face such a difficulty in a battle. These
arrows shot by that foremost among brahmanas are capable of penetrating the inner organs and are directed at your
inner organs. It is sheer fortune that you have escaped. I will withdraw the chariot from the spot, like the force of a
river driven back by the ocean. Your valour has been destroyed by this brahmana and I think that he cannot be
killed.' O king! At this, Dhrishtadyumna gently spoke these words. 'O son[The word used is tata.]! My mind has gone numb and there
is sweat on my body. Behold! My body is overcome by lassitude and my body hair is standing up. O charioteer!
Abandon the brahmana in the battle and slowly go to the spot where Achyuta, Arjuna and Bhimasena are, so that I
may obtain safety in the battle. In my view, that is what we should do.' O great king! At this, the charioteer urged
the horses towards the spot where the great archer, Bhima, was fighting with your soldiers. O venerable one! On
seeing that Dhrishtadyumna's chariot was going away, Goutama followed it and showered hundreds of arrows. The
scorcher of enemies repeatedly blew on his conch shell. He drove away Parshata, like the great Indra against
Shambara.

' "The invincible Shikhandi was responsible for Bhishma's death. In the battle, Hardikya[Kritavarma, Hridika's son.] smiled repeatedly
and repulsed him. Shikhandi advanced against the maharatha from the Hridika lineage and struck him between the
shoulder joints with five sharp and iron arrows. Kritavarma became angry and struck him with sixty swift arrows.
O king! The maharatha smiled and severed his[Shikhandi's.] bow with a single arrow. Drupada's powerful son then grasped
another bow and enraged, asked Hardikya to wait. O Indra among kings! He shot ninety arrows that were gold-
tufted and extremely forceful. But they were repulsed by his[Kritavarma's.] armour. On seeing that they were repulsed and fell
down on the ground, the powerful one used an extremely sharp kshurapra arrow to sever his bow. When the bow
had been severed, he[Kritavarma.] was like a bull with shattered horns and he[Shikhandi.] angrily struck him in the arms and the
chest with eighty arrows. Though he was angry, Kritavarma was mangled by these arrows. The lord picked up another stringed bow and affixing arrows, struck Shikhandi in the shoulder with those supreme arrows. With those
arrows sticking to his shoulders, Shikhandi looked beautiful. He was like a giant tree, with sparkling branches and
sub-branches. Having severely pierced each other, they were both covered with blood. They were as resplendent as
bulls that had wounded each other with their horns. Those two maharathas made supreme efforts to kill each other.
They roamed around on their chariots, executing a thousand circular motions. O great king! In that battle, Kritavarma pierced Parshata with seventy arrows that were gold-tufted and had been sharpened on stone. In that encounter,
Bhoja, supreme among strikers, quickly released a terrible arrow that was capable of robbing life. O king! Severely
struck by this, he[Shikhandi.] quickly lost his consciousness. He suddenly lost his senses and grasped the pole of his standard. His charioteer took the supreme of rathas away from the battle. Tormented by Hardikya's arrows, he sighed
repeatedly. O lord! Drupada's brave son was defeated. At this, the Pandava soldiers were slaughtered and fled in all
directions." '
