Sanjaya said, "Adhiratha's son heard these unpleasant words spoken by the lord of Madra. But he was not pacified and spoke to Shalya. 'Everything about Arjuna and Vasudeva is known to me. Shouri's skill in driving Arjuna's chariot, Pandava's strength and great weapons are just as you have said and are known to me. O Shalya! But
you have not directly seen this[That is, Shalya has heard about these accounts, but without being
present there himself.]. They are invincible and foremost among the wielders of weapons. However,
without being overcome with fear, I will fight with the two Krishnas. I am suffering from greater torment because
of Rama. That supreme brahmana has cursed me. In earlier times, wishing to obtain a divine weapon from Rama, I
lived with him, in the disguise of a brahmana. O Shalya! For the sake of Phalguna's welfare, the king of the gods
caused an obstruction there[Arjuna was Indra's son.]. He penetrated my thigh and entered my body in the distorted form of an insect.
Because of fear of my preceptor, I did not move[At that time, Parashurama was sleeping, with his head on Karna's
thigh. Karna was scared of waking Parashurama up.]. On waking up, the brahmana saw this. The maharshi asked
me who I was and on learning that I was a suta, he cursed me[A brahmana wouldn't have been able to bear the pain from an insect
drilling through. Karna was cursed because he studied under Parashurama under the pretext of being a brahmana.]. "O suta! You have obtained this weapon through
a deception. Therefore, when it is time to perform a task, it will not manifest itself before you[These were divine weapons. When summoned, they manifested themselves before the user.]. When it is the
time for your death, it will go elsewhere." The brahman can certainly not be present in a person who is not a brahmana. "O father[The word used is tata. It means father, but is affectionately used towards anyone who is senior.]! In this fierce and tumultuous battle today, I have forgotten that powerful weapon. The powerful and unfathomable lord of the waters dashes forward, to submerge many beings. The ocean is like a mighty
mountain. But the shoreline repulses that immeasurable object. In this world, Kunti's son is the foremost among
those who stretch bowstrings. He will release a mass of arrows that can't be resisted. They will be shafted and will
penetrate the inner organs, slaying heroes. However, I will counter him in the battle. He is supremely strong
amongst those who are strong. He possesses great weapons. He will shoot from an extremely long distance and
will be like the fierce ocean. The kings will be submerged in his waves of arrows. But, like the shoreline, I will
withstand Partha's arrows. I think that he has no equal among men who wield the bow. But I will fight with him in
the battle today, though he is capable of vanquishing the gods and the asuras in a battle. Behold my extremely terrible battle with him today. Pandava is extremely proud and desires to fight. He will advance against me with his
superhuman and great weapons. In the battle, I will counter his weapons with my own weapons. I will bring down
Partha with my supreme arrows. I will scorch like the rays of the sun. I will blaze like the illustrious one's rays.
Like clouds gather around the dispeller of the darkness, I will envelop Dhananjaya with my arrows. A flaming fire
has trails of smoke. Its energy scorches all the worlds. But like clouds pacify that fire, I will quench Partha with
my arrows in the battle. The fierce wind god is powerful and destroys with a storm. The angry and intolerant
Dhananjaya is like that. But, in the battle, I will withstand him like the immobile Himalayas. He is skilled and
knows about the circular motions of a chariot. He is always foremost among those who are borne in a battle. He is
supreme among all archers in the world. However, I will withstand that Dhananjaya in the battle. I think that there
is no archer who is equal to him among men. I know that he has withstood the entire earth. But today, I will encounter him in the battle. Savyasachi vanquished all the beings, together with the gods, in the region known as
Khandava. Which other man, with me being an exception, can fight with him and seek to protect his own life? I
will cheerfully speak about Pandava's manliness in an assembly of kshatriyas. O stupid one! O one who has lost
his senses! Why are you telling me about Arjuna's manliness? Those who are forgiving always forgive an inferior
and cruel person who speaks harsh and unpleasant words. I can kill one hundred who are like you. However, because I am forgiving and bearing the appropriate time in mind, I am forgiving you. For Pandava's sake, you have
spoken unpleasant words. You have censured me, like a stupid person who performs evil deeds. I did not deserve
it. Yet, you have used your tongue to lash me. You are one who hates friends. One with whom one walks seven
paces is a friend[Seven paces or saptapada. This is symbolic.]. The present time is full of death and is extremely terrible. Duryodhana has chosen this to advance in battle. I desire that his objectives are accomplished. But you act as if to counter them, as if you are one
who doesn't love him. A friend delights a friend, and always does that which brings him pleasure. He frees him,
honours him and shares in his delight. This is what the brahmanas have said earlier. Towards Duryodhana, I tell
you that all these traits exist in me. An enemy always chastises and sharpens his weapons. He causes injury, makes
us sigh and distresses us. These many harmful qualities are seen in an enemy and almost all of these exist in you.
You are showing them towards me. For the sake of accomplishing Duryodhana's objective and for bringing him
pleasure, for the sake of bringing glory to myself and for the sake of accomplishing what the gods want[Actually, the text uses the word god in the singular. But that doesn't
make it clear which god is meant. The use of the plural seems to convey
the sense better.], I will
endeavour to fight with Pandava and Vasudeva. Behold my deeds today. Behold my supreme weapons today, brahmastra and other divine and human weapons. I will cushion the one whose valour is fierce, like a supreme elephant
killing another crazy elephant. For the sake of victory, I will use my mental powers to hurl the brahmastra at
Partha. It is unrivalled and is victorious. In the battle, he will not be able to escape from it, unless my wheels get
stuck in uneven terrain. O Shalya! Know that I will not be frightened, even if Vaivasvata[Yama.] with his staff, Varuna
with his noose, the lord of riches[Kubera.] with his club, Vasava with his vajra, or any other assassin advances against
me. Therefore, I have no fear of Partha or Janardana. Today, there will be a clash between me and those two enemies. However, a brahmana told me, "Your miserable wheel will be stuck in the ground and you will confront
great fear in your heart, when you are fighting in a battle." Since then, I have greatly suffered from fright at the
brahmana's words. O Shalya! The brahmana was a store of austerities and I had unconsciously used my arrows to
kill the calf that had been born from his homa cow[Homa means oblations into the fire. The homa cow thus produced milk
products used for such oblations.], while it was roaming around amongst people. I gave that
foremost among brahmanas seven hundred tusked elephants and hundreds of servants and servant-maids. But he
was not satisfied with me. To obtain the favours of that supreme among brahmanas, I brought fourteen thousand
black cows, each with a white calf. I offered him a beautiful house, with every object of desire, and all the riches I
possessed. I honoured him with all this, but he did not wish to receive them. I had committed a crime and begged
him, so that I might remedy it. However, he told me, "O suta! What I have uttered will certainly happen. It cannot
be falsified. If I utter a falsehood, beings will be killed and I will commit a sin. Therefore, to protect dharma, I
have no interest in speaking a falsehood. You must perform atonement for causing violence towards what provides
a brahmana sustenance. There is no one in this world who can make my words false and you should accept them."

Though you have censured me, because I am a well-wisher, I have told you this. I know that you are the one who
is censuring me. But be quiet and listen to what I will tell you next.'" '
