'Bhishma said, "Having been thus addressed, Janamejaya replied to the sage. 'You are censuring someone who deserves to be censured. You are condemning someone who deserves to be condemned. You are shaming someone
who deserves to be shamed. Nevertheless, show me your favours. All this has come about because of what I have
myself done. I am being burnt, as if I am in the midst of a fire. It is not as if my mind is delighted at being associated with my deeds. I certainly suffer because of my terrible fear of Vaivasvata[Yama.]. Without uprooting that stake, how
can I possibly remain alive? O Shounaka[Shunaka's son, Indrota.]! Suppress all your anger towards me and instruct me. There used to be
a great kitchen for brahmanas[Before Janamejaya killed the brahmana.] and I will accomplish that objective again. There must be a remnant to this lineage. This lineage cannot be destroyed. But if we are cursed by brahmanas, if we do not have access to the sacred
texts and if we are not conscious of what has been determined in the Vedas, there will be no remnant left. I am in
great despair. I am telling you again about what confronts me. Those who are without dharma and without meditation are repeatedly not acknowledged[A minor liberty has been taken with the text here. As it stands, a translation is difficult.]. In the hereafter, their foundation is like that of the Pulindas and the
Shabaras[As examples of barbarians.]. Those who do not perform sacrifices do not obtain any worlds. O extremely learned one! I am ignorant. Impart wisdom to me, like that to a child, like a father to his son. O brahmana! O Shounaka! Be gratified with
me.'

'"Shounaka said, 'There is nothing surprising in a wise person performing many appropriate acts. A learned person is not concerned with what has happened or what will happen[He is concerned with the present.]. Having obtained the favours of wisdom, he
does not grieve about what other people sorrow over. As if he is stationed on the top of a mountain, he looks on the
entire universe with wisdom. Someone who is fickle, someone who is degraded in his soul and someone who is
shamed by all the virtuous people and hides himself, does not see the course of action. Knowing that there is freedom from fear, vigour and greatness in the Vedas and the sacred texts, perform a great rite of pacification. The
brahmanas are your refuge. If the brahmanas are no longer enraged with you, this will ensure your welfare in the
hereafter. This is on the assumption that you are repenting your wicked deed and are looking towards dharma.'

'"Janamejaya replied, 'I am repenting my wicked deed and I will never follow adharma again. O Shounaka! I
am looking for someone who will be affectionate and desire my welfare.'

'"Shounaka said, 'O king! Since you have given up your arrogance and pride, I desire to be affectionate towards
you. Remain established in the welfare of all beings and remember dharma. I am not summoning you[To perform a sacrifice.] because
of fear, weakness or avarice. The gods and the brahmanas will hear the truthful words I speak to you. I do not desire anything from anyone. I am summoning you to a rite of dharma, even though all the beings are uttering words
of shame towards you. They will say that I am ignorant about dharma and people who are not well-wishers will
speak in this way. If I hear such words from a well-wisher, I will be extremely anxious. There will be some immensely wise ones who will recognize that this is the right course of action[The performance of the sacrifice.]. O son[The word used is tata.]! O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Know that I am doing this for the sake of brahmanas. For my sake, act so that they may obtain
peace. O lord of men! Pledge that you will not show hatred towards brahmanas.'

'"Janamejaya replied, 'O brahmana! I touch your feet and pledge that I will never again injure brahmanas, in
words, thoughts and deeds.'"'
