'Shakuni said, "O Duryodhana! You should not feel any jealousy towards Yudhishthira, because the Pandavas have
always benefited from their good fortune. In the past, you have tried to kill them with many means. But those
tigers among men escaped because of their good fortune. They obtained Droupadi as a wife and Drupada and his
two sons as allies, and the valorous Vasudeva as an ally in winning the earth. O lord of the earth! They obtained an
undiminished share of paternal wealth and extended it through their own energy. What is there to lament in this?
Having satisfied the fire, Dhananjaya obtained the great bow Gandiva, two inexhaustible quivers and other celestial
weapons. He subdued the lords of the earth with that foremost among bows and the valour of his own arms. What
is there to lament in this? He freed the danava Maya from being burnt by the fire. Savyasachi, the scorcher of enemies, then made him build that sabha. On Maya's command, the terrible rakshasas named Kinkaras guard that sabha. What is there to lament in this? O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You have said that you have no
allies. That is not true, because your maharatha brothers are always there to help you. The mighty archer Drona
with his intelligent son[Ashvatthama.], Radheya the son of a suta[Karna, who was brought up by a suta or charioteer. The charioteer's wife was Radha, explaining Karna's
name of Radheya.], the maharatha Goutama[Kripacharya, who was descended from the Goutama lineage.], I and my brothers, and the valorous Soumadatti[Bhurishrava, the son of Somadatta.] are with you. With these as allies, conquer the entire world."

'Duryodhana replied, "O king! If you permit, I will defeat them[The Pandavas.] with you and the other maharathas. When I
have conquered them, the entire earth will be mine, and all the lords of the earth and the sabha with its great
riches."

'Shakuni said, "With the use of force, the masses of gods cannot defeat in battle Dhananjaya, Vasudeva, Bhimasena, Yudhishthira, Nakula, Sahadeva and Drupada and his son. They are maharathas, great archers, skilled in
use of weapons and invincible in battle. O king! But I know the means through which Yudhishthira himself can be
conquered. Listen and act accordingly."

'Duryodhana replied, "O maternal uncle! If there is a way to defeat them without any danger to our well-wishers
and other great-souled ones, please tell me."

'Shakuni said, "Kunti's son loves to gamble with dice, but does not know how to play. If challenged to play, that
Indra among kings will not be able to refuse. I am skilled in gambling with dice, there is no one on earth, or in the
three worlds, who is my equal. Challenge Kunti's son to a game of dice. O king! O bull among men! With my skill
in dice[Dyuta is the act of playing or gambling. Here, the text uses the word for a dice, that is, aksha.], there is no doubt that I will win for you the kingdom and the blazing prosperity. O Duryodhana! Tell the
king[Referring to Dhritarashtra.] all this. And if your father permits, there is no doubt that I will vanquish him[Yudhishthira.]."
'Duryodhana replied, "O Soubala! You yourself say all this to Dhritarashtra, foremost among the Kurus, in the
proper way. I will not be able to do it."'
