Janamejaya asked, 'O brahmana! While the Pandavas resided in the city of Matsya, what did the extremely valorous Pandavas do?'

Vaishampayana said, 'While the descendants of the Kuru lineage lived there in disguise, honoured by the king,
listen to what they did. O lord of the earth! As a courtier, Yudhishthira became the beloved of others in the assembly, as well as of Virata and his son. Pandava knew the heart of the dice and played with the dice as he pleased, as
if they were birds tied to a string. Unknown to Virata, Dharmaraja, tiger among men, distributed the riches that he
won among his brothers, to each one according to what he deserved. Bhimasena sold Yudhishthira meat and other
kinds of food that were given by Matsya. Arjuna sold the old garments that he obtained from the inner quarters and
passed on all the proceeds to the Pandavas. Pandava Sahadeva assumed the attire of a cowherd. He gave the Pandavas curds, milk and ghee. Because of his duties with the horses, Nakula satisfied the lord of men[Virata.] and obtained
riches. He gave this to the Pandavas. The ascetic Krishna looked after all the brothers. The beautiful one acted so
that they might remain undetected. O lord of men! Thus the maharathas[A maharatha is in general a mighty warrior. More specifically, a maharatha is skilled in the use of all weapons
and can take on ten thousand warriors single-handedly.] looked after each other, living in disguise, but looking after Krishna.

'There was a great festival of austerities in Matysa in the fourth month[The text states there was a brahmana festival and it is difficult to pinpoint the brahmana part of it. So we have
simply translated it as a festival of austerities. It could also mean a festival with Vedic rituals.]. Men honoured it and celebrated it with
great expense. O king! Thousands of wrestlers arrived there from all the directions. They were gigantic in size and
immensely valorous, like Kalakhanja asuras[The Kalakhanja asuras were probably the same as the Kaleyas or the Kalakeyas. They are believed to have been
descended from Vishnu.]. They were insolent of their valour and were proud of their strength
and were honoured by the king. Their shoulders, waists and necks were like those of lions. They were free from
dirt and were in great spirits. Before the king, they had been victorious and honoured in the arena earlier. There
was a gigantic one among them and he challenged all the wrestlers. As he strode around the arena, not a single one
dared to take him on. When all the other wrestlers were despondent and had lost their spirits, the king of Matsya
asked his cook to fight with the wrestler. Thus instructed, Bhima was unable to refuse the king in public and unhappily made up his mind[Because Bhima did not want to be detected.]. That tiger among men entered the giant arena with the light gait of a tiger and brought
delight to Virata. To the delight of the assembly, Kounteya girded himself. Bhima then challenged the wrestler,
who was like Vritra[Famous demon killed by Indra.] himself. Both of them were extremely energetic and both of them were terrible in their valour. They were intoxicated, like giant elephants that were sixty years old. Bhima, the destroyer of enemies, grasped
the roaring wrestler and tugged him with his arms. He also roared like a tiger seizing an elephant. Then the
mighty-armed and brave Bhima raised the wrestler up and whirled him around, to the supreme amazement of the
other wrestlers and the residents of Matsya. Having whirled him around a hundred times, until he lost his mind and
his senses, the mighty-armed Vrikodara flung him down on the ground. The brave Jimuta[The wrestler's name.], famous in the world,
was thus slain. Together with his relatives, Virata was greatly delighted. In his joy, the great-minded king gave a
lot of riches to Ballava in that great arena, like Vaishravana[Vaishravana is Kubera, the lord of riches.]. After having defeated a large number of wrestlers
and immensely strong men in the same way, he obtained the supreme of favours from the king of Matsya. No other
man could be found who was a match for him. He was then made to fight with tigers, lions and elephants. In the
presence of the women from the inner quarters, Virata repeatedly made Vrikodara fight with angry lions that were
extremely powerful.

'Pandava Bibhatsu satisfied Virata and all the women from the inner quarters with his singing and his excellent
dancing. O supreme among kings! Nakula satisfied the king with the trained and swift steeds that he assembled
there. On seeing Sahadeva's trained bulls, the king was delighted and gave him a lot of riches. Thus did those bulls
among men live there in disguise. They performed various duties for King Virata.'
