'Duryodhana said, "O great king! Do not be frightened. Do not sorrow on our account. O king! O lord! We are capable of defeating our enemies in war. When the Parthas were exiled to the forest, Madhusudana went to them with
a large army that had subjugated the kingdoms of enemies. The Kekayas, Dhrishtaketu, Parshata Dhrishtadyumna
and many other kings followed the Parthas. The maharathas assembled, not far away from Indraprastha. Having
assembled together, they censured you, together with the Kurus. Yudhishthira was near them, seated on an antelope
skin. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! With Krishna at the forefront, they showed him homage. The kings said
that he should act so as to take back the kingdom. They desired to uproot you, together with your followers. O
king! O bull among the Bharata lineage! When I heard this, I was scared that my relatives would be destroyed and
told Bhishma, Drona and Kripa then, 'It is my view that the Pandavas will stick to the time they have agreed to.
Vasudeva desires that we should be completely exterminated. It is my view that, with the exception of Vidura, all
of you great-souled ones will be slain. Dhritarashtra is knowledgeable about dharma. That supreme among Kurus
cannot be slain. O father[The word used is tata. There is a minor inconsistency, because this entire segment is in quotes and Dhritarashtra
wasn't present on the occasion. Duryodhana is recounting the conversation.]! Having uprooted all of us entirely, Janardana wishes to hand over the entire kingdom
of the Kurus to Yudhishthira. Has the time come for submission and running away? Will we fight against the enemy and give up our lives? If we fight against them, defeat will certainly be ours, because all the lords of the earth
are under Yudhishthira's suzerainty. The kingdom is dissatisfied with us and all our friends are enraged. We are being censured by all the kings and all our relatives. There is no taint in submitting to our relatives for an eternal period. But I grieve for my father. He is a lord of men and has wisdom as his sight. Is it because of my deeds that he
faces this unhappiness and endless hardships. Indeed, your sons restrained the others in order to bring me pleasure.
O supreme among men! You have always known this from earlier times. Driven by enmity and revenge, the maharatha Pandavas will exterminate the lineage of King Dhritarashtra and his advisers.' O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! At that, on seeing that I was extremely worried, with my senses tortured, Drona, Bhishma, Kripa and
Drona's son replied, 'O scorcher of enemies! There is nothing to fear if we are attacked by others. O lord of men!
The others are not capable of vanquishing us in battle. Each one of us is alone capable of vanquishing all the lords
of the earth. Let them advance. We will demolish their pride with sharp arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In earlier times, when his father had died, the angry Bhishma had defeated all the lords of the earth, alone on
a single chariot. Enraged, the best of the Kuru lineage had killed many of them and terrified, they had sought
refuge with Devavrata[Bhishma's name.]. When supported by us in battle, Bhishma is alone capable of defeating the enemy. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! Therefore, give up your fear.' At that time, this was the determination of these infinitely energetic ones. In earlier times, the entire earth was under the control of the enemies.

'"They are now incapable of defeating us in battle. The enemies have lost their allies and the Pandavas have lost
their valour. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The earth is now under our subjugation. The kings have joined
with us, in happiness and in grief. O scorcher of enemies! For my sake, all the kings are prepared to enter the fire
and the ocean. O supreme among the Kuru lineage! You should know this. They are laughing at you because of
your grief and your many terrified lamentations when you praise the enemy, thinking you to be mad. Each of these
kings is alone capable of countering the Pandavas. Each one thinks that to be true of himself. Dispel your fear.
Even Vasava is incapable of vanquishing our entire army. It cannot be destroyed even by Brahma, the one who created himself. O lord! Yudhishthira is frightened of my army and my prowess. Earlier, he only asked for five
villages.

'"You think Kunti's son, Vrikodara, to be capable. But that has no basis. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
You do not know my prowess. There is no one on earth who is my match in fighting with the club. There has never
been an equal and there will never be one. I undertook a lot of hardships to reach those shores of learning. Therefore, I have nothing to fear from Bhima, or anyone else. O fortunate one! When I studied under him,
Samkarshana[Balarama.] said, 'It is certain that there is no one who is equal to Duryodhana in wielding the club.' I am
Samkarshana's equal in battle. And in might, I am his superior on earth. Bhima will not be able to withstand the
blows of my club in battle. O king! With one angry, severe and swift blow, I will dispatch Bhima to
Vaivasvata's[Yama's.] domain. O king! I wish to see Vrikodara with the club in his hand. This has been my wish and the
desire of my heart for a very long time. Slain by my club, Partha Vrikodara will fall down lifeless on the ground,
with his body shattered. Struck by the force of my club, even the Himalaya Mountains will shatter into one hundred thousand pieces. He[Bhima.] knows it, and so do Vasudeva and Arjuna-there is no one equal to Duryodhana in
fighting with the club. Therefore, shed your fear of Vrikodara in the great battle. O king! I will kill him. Do not be
distracted.

'"O bull among the Bharata lineage! After he has been slain by me, many charioteers who are Arjuna's equal or
superior will swiftly overpower him. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Drona's son,
Karna, Bhurishrava, the lord of Pragjyotisha, Shalya and Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu-each one of them is
alone capable of killing the Pandavas. They will swiftly despatch them to Yama's abode. Why should the soldiers
of all the kings be unable to defeat Partha Dhananjaya alone? That is not reasonable. Hundreds and thousands of
arrows showered by Bhishma, Drona, Drona's son and Kripa will despatch Partha to Yama's abode. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! The grandfather[Bhishma.] was born from Ganga and Shantanu and is like a brahmarshi, difficult
for even the gods to overcome. His father was pleased and told him, 'You will not die unless you wish to do so.'

Drona was born in a wooden vessel, from the brahmarshi Bharadvaja. O great king! Drona's son, supremely
skilled in the use of weapons, has been born from Drona. Kripa is foremost among preceptors and was born
through maharshi Goutama in a clump of reeds. I think that this illustrious one cannot be killed. These three, Ashvatthama's father, mother and maternal uncle, were not born from human wombs[Ashvatthama's father is Drona. His mother is Kripi and his maternal uncle is Kripa. None of them had normal
births, Drona being born in a wooden vessel and Kripa and Kripi being born in a clump of reeds.]. O great king! That brave one
is also on my side. O great king! All these maharathas are the equals of the gods. O bull among the Bharata lineage! In a battle, they can even oppress Shakra. In my view, Karna is the equal of Bhishma, Drona and Kripa. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! Rama[Parashurama.] has told him that he is his equal. Karna possessed beautiful and radiant
earrings that he was born with. The great Indra obtained these from the scorcher of enemies for the sake of
Shachi[Shachi is Indra's wife. As recounted in Section 43 (Volume 3), there was no mention of Shachi.]. O great king! He obtained a supreme, terrible and infallible spear in return. When struck by that spear,
how can Dhananjaya survive? O king! My victory is certain, like a fruit in my hand. The complete defeat of our
enemies on earth is certain.

'"O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On a single day, Bhishma alone will kill ten thousand. Drona, Drona's
son and Kripa are great archers who are his equal. O scorcher of enemies! The band of samshaptaka kshatriyas[They were so named because they had taken the oath.]
have resolved, 'Arjuna will kill us, or we will kill Dhananjaya.' O lord! The kings think that they are capable of
killing Savyasachi. O king! Why do you then suffer from this grief? O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When
Bhimasena has been killed, which of the others will continue to fight? O scorcher of enemies! If you know of anyone amongst the enemy, tell me about him. There are the five brothers, Dhrishtadyumna and Satyaki. O king!
These seven warriors are the prime strength of the enemy. O lord of the earth! But our superior ones are Bhishma,
Drona, Kripa and the others-Drona's son, Vaikartana Karna, Somadatta, Bahlika, the king of Pragjyotisha,
Shalya, the king of Avanti, Jayadratha, Duhshasana, Durmukha, Duhsaha, Shrutayu, Chitrasena, Purumitra,
Vivimshati, Shala, Bhurishrava and your son Vikarna. O king! I have assembled eleven akshouhinis. With seven,
the enemy has fewer. How can there be defeat? Brihaspati has said that an army that is weaker by one-third, can be
fought. O king! My soldiers outnumber the enemy by one-third. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I see that the
enemy lacks in many qualities. O lord of the earth! I see that we possess many qualities. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! On knowing all this, the superiority of our army and the inferiority of the Pandavas, you should
not be prey to this confusion."'

Vaishampayana said, 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having spoken thus, that destroyer of enemy cities
questioned Sanjaya again, because he wished to know about what was appropriate for the time.'
