'Sanjaya said, "On seeing that your sons had fallen down, the powerful Karna was overcome by great rage and lost
all hope of remaining alive. Adhiratha's son censured himself[Because Duryodhana's brothers had been slain in his presence.]. Without any fear, he angrily attacked Bhimasena. Radheya smiled and pierced Bhima with five arrows. He again pierced him with seventy arrows that were gold-
tufted and sharpened on stone. Partha Vrikodara laughed at them and intolerantly, pierced Radheya with a hundred
arrows with drooping tufts. He again pierced him with five sharp and swift arrows. O venerable one! With a broad-
headed arrow, he severed the bow of the son of the suta. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Karna was distressed and took up another bow. In every direction, he enveloped Bhimasena with arrows. However, Bhima
smiled and killed his horses and his charioteer. Having done this, he laughed out loudly. O great king! The bull
among men severed his bow[Bhima severed Karna's bow.], with a golden back, with arrows and it fell down with a loud noise. At this, maharatha Karna descended from his chariot. In that battle, he grasped a club and hurled it at Bhimasena. O king! On
seeing that club suddenly descend, Vrikodara countered it with his arrows, while all your soldiers looked on. Wishing to kill the son of the suta, the brave and spirited Pandava shot a thousand arrows at him. In that great battle,
Karna countered these arrows with arrows of his own and with his arrows, brought down Bhimasena's armour.
While all the beings looked on, he then struck him with twenty-five kshudraka arrows and it was extraordinary. O
great king! O venerable one! Bhima became angry. In that battle, he dispatched nine sharp arrows with drooping
tufts towards the son of the suta. They pierced his armour and his right arm and penetrated the ground, like snakes
entering a termite hill. In that encounter, on seeing that Radheya was on foot and was agitated by Bhimasena, King
Duryodhana said, 'All of you hasten towards Radheya's chariot.' O king! On hearing the words of their brother,
your sons advanced against Pandava in the battle and shot sharp arrows. They were Chitra, Upachitra, Chitraksha,
Charuchitra, Sharasana, Chitrayudha, Chitravarma and Chitrayodhina. O king! In that battle, these maharathas suddenly advanced against Bhima. In that encounter, he killed them and their horses, charioteers, standards and
brought them down on the ground, like trees uprooted by a storm. O king! On beholding that your maharatha sons
had been killed, Karna's eyes were filled with tears and his face was full of dejection. He again mounted a chariot
that had been properly prepared. In that encounter, the brave one spiritedly attacked Pandava. They pierced each
other with gold-tufted arrows that were sharpened on stone. O great king! They looked as beautiful as blossoming
kimshukas. Pandava angrily struck the armour of the son of the suta with thirty six sharp and broad-headed arrows
that were fierce in their energy. They had deep wounds on their bodies, caused by the arrows, and they smeared red
sandalwood paste on these. They were covered with blood and were as resplendent as the sun that arises at the time
of destruction. Blood flowed from the wounds on their bodies. Their armour was shattered by arrows. Bereft of armour, they were as beautiful as snakes that had cast off their skins. Like tigers attacking each other with their teeth,
those tigers among men mangled each other with arrows that were like teeth. Those scorchers of enemies were resplendent in that arena, like clashing elephants. They were like crazy elephants in their valour and persecuted each
other with sharp arrows. In that battle, they enveloped each other with nets of arrows. O great king! As they
roamed around, their chariots roared in all the directions. Those chariots executed circular motions. Those great-
souled ones roamed around like Vritra and the wielder of the vajra. As he stretched his bow with his arms, with
arm-guards on them, Bhima roamed around in that battle like a cloud tinged with lightning. The twang of his bow
was like thunder and there was a shower of arrows from that great cloud. O great king! The cloud that was Bhima
rained down on the mountain that was Karna. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Pandava shot a thousand arrows from his bow and shrouded Karna with that dense shower, like rain on a mountain. Your sons witnessed Bhimasena's valour there. He enveloped Karna with arrows that were well-tufted with the feathers of herons. As Bhi-
ma fought with Karna in that battle, he delighted Partha[Arjuna.], the illustrious Keshava, Satyaki and the two who
guarded the chariot wheels[Yudhamanyu and Uttamouja, the two who were guarding Arjuna's flanks.]. O great king! Pandava knew about his own valour, strength of arms and fortitude.
But your sons witnessed it."'
