'Dhritarashtra said, "O suta! O Sanjaya! Though I sorrow, I think that this great calamity that has now confronted
us is especially because of what I did. But so far, I had the belief that what has happened, has happened. O Sanjaya! What should I do now? Tell me about the destruction of heroes that is going on. O Sanjaya! I have pacified
myself. Tell me about it."

'Sanjaya replied, "O great king! Karna and Bhima were both valorous. In that great battle, they showered down
arrows, like rain pouring down from clouds. There were gold-tufted arrows that were sharpened on stone and
marked with Bhima's name. These pierced Karna, as if penetrating his life. In that fashion, Bhima was struck in
that battle by hundreds and thousands of arrows released by Karna and these were like venomous serpents. O great
king! Those arrows descended in every direction and agitated the armies, which were like oceans. O scorcher of
enemies! The arrows released from Bhima's bow were as terrible as virulent serpents and killed your soldiers in
the midst of the army. O king! Elephants fell down and mixed with horses and men. They were seen to be strewn
around on the ground, like trees shattered by a storm. In that battle, they were slain by the arrows released from
Bhima's bow. Your warriors were driven away, exclaiming, 'What is this?' The great force of arrows released by
Karna and Pandava made the soldiers from Sindhus, Souviras and Kouravas move a great distance away. Many
horses, men and mounts were afflicted and slain by the arrows. They abandoned Karna and Bhima and fled in all
the directions, saying, 'There is no doubt that, for the sake of the Parthas, the residents of heaven are confounding
us, since the force of Karna and Bhima's arrows are killing our troops.' Having said this, the warriors on your side
were afflicted by fear. They moved away from the range of the arrows and stationed themselves, wishing to see the
encounter. In that great battle, a river, terrible in form, began to flow. It was beautiful and in particular, increased
the fear of cowards. This was created from the blood of elephants, horses and men. It covered the bodies of men,
elephants and horses, who had lost their lives. Housings, flags, elephants, horses and chariots were like ornaments.
There were shattered chariots and fragmented wheels, axles and yokes. There were extremely expensive bows that
were decorated with gold. There were gold-tufted arrows and thousands of iron arrows. These were released by
Karna and Pandava and were like snakes that had cast off their skins. There were masses of lances, spears, swords,
battleaxes, clubs, maces, spikes, vajras of different types, javelins, bludgeons and shataghnis. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! They were decorated with gold and made the ground beautiful. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were golden bracelets, armlets, sparkling and bejewelled earrings, body armour, palm-guards and
golden necklaces. There were garments and umbrellas and shattered whisks and fans. There were elephants, horses
and men who were mangled by weapons and ornaments from chariots. Shattered and broken, they were strewn
around here and there on the ground, making it as beautiful as the sky with the planets. These superhuman deeds
were extraordinary and could not be thought of. On beholding these, the charanas and the siddhas were overcome
by wonder. A fire, when aided by the wind, burns down dry grass. Like that, aided by Bhima and engaging with
him, Adhiratha's son fiercely brought down standards and chariots and slew horses, elephants and men. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As they engaged with each other in that battle, they were like a couple of elephants
amidst a clump of reeds. As they clashed in that supreme battle, Karna and Bhima, caused carnage in that great
army."'
