Vaishampayana said, 'O king! After a few days, the great festival of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas was held on
Mount Raivataka. The warriors gave away gifts to thousands of brahmanas in that festival of the Bhojas, Vrishnis
and Andhakas on that mountain. O king! The region all around the mountain was adorned with palaces full of jewels. Every tree there was decorated with lamps. Together, all the musicians played their musical instruments, the
dancers danced, and the singers sang songs. All the immensely energetic Vrishni youth were adorned with ornaments, as they rode on their colourful and golden chariots. Hundreds and thousands of citizens went there with
their wives, some on excellent chariots and others on foot. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! With Revati, the
lord Haladhara[Hala means plough and Haladhara is the wielder of the plough, that is, Balarama. Revati is Balarama's wife.] was intoxicated and was followed by many gandharvas[A gandharva is a celestial musician. But here, it probably means musicians in general.]. The powerful Ugrasena, king of the Vrishnis, was there with his one thousand wives and was praised by the musicians. Rukmini's son[Rukmini was married to Krishna and their son is Pradyumna.] and Samba, always invincible in battle, were intoxicated and wore divine garlands and garments, sporting themselves like the
gods. Akrura, Sarana, Gada, Bhanu, Viduratha, Nishatha, Charudeshna, Prithu, Viprithu, Satyaka, Satyaki,
Bhangakara, Sahachara, Hardikya, Kritavarma and others not mentioned were there, surrounded by their respective
wives and musicians. They then adorned Raivataka at the time of the festival.

'While this greatly wonderful commotion was going on, Vasudeva roamed around, Partha[Pritha's son, Arjuna.] with him. As they
wandered, they saw Vasudeva's[Though we have written it as Vasudeva, Krishna is actually Vaasudeva, because he is Vasudeva's son. Bhadra
or Subhadra is Vasudeva's daughter and is therefore Vaasudeva Krishna's sister.] beautiful daughter Bhadra, ornamented, and with her friends. On seeing her, Arjuna was struck by the god of love and Krishna noticed the signs that Partha's mind was intently riveted on her. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! The one with the eyes of a lotus smilingly spoke these words, "How is it that
the mind of one who lives in the forest is agitated by desire? O Partha! She is my sister and from the same womb
as Sarana[Though Krishna and Subhadra had Vasudeva as their common father, their mothers were different. Sarana and
Subhadra had the same mother too.]. If your mind is set on her, I can speak to my father myself." Arjuna replied, "She is Vasudeva's daughter and Vasudeva's sister. She is beautiful. How can I not be captivated? If this daughter of the Vrishni lineage,
your sister, becomes my wife, I must certainly have performed only good deeds. O Janardana[Krishna.]! Tell me how I can
obtain her. I will do everything that any man can." Vasudeva said, "O bull among men! A svayamvara[A ceremony where a bride chooses her husband from assembled suitors.] is the form
of marriage for kshatriyas. O Partha! But that is uncertain if one doesn't know the inclination. Those who are
learned in the ways of dharma say that for kshatriyas, who are warriors, abduction for marriage is permissible. O
Arjuna! Therefore, abduct my beautiful sister. Who knows what she might do in a svayamvara?"

'O king! Having thus decided on the course of action, Arjuna and Krishna then sent off swift men as messengers, to inform Dharmaraja in Indraprastha of everything. On hearing, the mighty-armed Pandava[That is, Yudhishthira.] agreed.'
