Vaishampayana said, 'O Kouravya! Partha Yudhishthira Dharmaraja had remained there only for a short while.
With Shakra at the forefront, all the gods arrived there. In embodied form, Dharma also presented himself, to
see the king. He came to the spot where Yudhishthira, king of the Kurus, was. The bodies of the gods dazzled.
Their births and deeds were auspicious. O king! When they arrived, the darkness was dispelled. The pain of the
evildoers could no longer be seen there. The river Vaitarani, the thorny shalmali trees, the iron pots and the terrible
mountains also vanished. In every direction, King Kounteya had seen malformed bodies. These also disappeared.
An auspicious breeze began to blow. It was pleasant to the touch and bore fragrant scents. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Since the gods had arrived, it was extremely cool too. The immensely energetic king, Dharma's
son, was at the spot. With Shakra, the Maruts, the Vasus, the Ashvins, the Sadhyas, the Rudras, the Adityas, all the
other residents of heaven, the Siddhas and the supreme rishis arrived there.

'Shakra, lord of the gods, was extremely prosperous. He comforted Yudhishthira and spoke these words to him.
'O Yudhishthira! O mighty-armed one! The large numbers of gods are delighted with you. Come. O tiger among
men! Come. O lord! You have obtained success. O king! You have obtained the eternal worlds. You should not
have any anger. Listen to my words. O son[The word used is tata.]! There is no doubt that all the kings must see hell. O bull among men!
There are accumulations of good and bad deeds. A person who enjoys the good deeds earlier, goes to hell later. A
person who goes to hell first, enjoys heaven later. A person who has committed many wicked deeds may enjoy
heaven first. O king! It is with your benefit in mind that I sent you there first[To hell.]. In connection with his son, you deceived Drona through a falsehood[By lying about Ashvatthama having died. The incident has been described in Section 71 (Volume 6).]. O king! Because of that falsehood, you had to see hell. You also saw Bhima,
Partha[Arjuna.], the twins and Krishna Droupadi, as if they had gone to hell. However, that was an act of deceit. O tiger
among men! Come. You have been freed from your sin. There are kings on your side who have been killed in the
battle. O  tiger among men! They  have  all  gone  to  heaven.  Come and see them. The  great  archer,  Karna,  was
supreme among those who wielded all kinds of weapons. You are tormented on his account. But he has obtained
supreme success. O lord! Look at that tiger among men, the son of the sun. He has obtained his own station. O
mighty-armed one! O bull among men! Conquer your grief. Look at your other brothers and the kings who were
on your side. They have obtained their respective stations. Get rid of this mental fever. O Kourava! Initially, you
suffered some kinds of hardship. Be without sorrow now and without disease. Pleasure yourself with me. O son!
You have yourself conquered these worlds through your auspicious deeds and austerities. O mighty-armed one! O
Pandava! You have obtained the fruits of your donations. The gods, the gandharvas and the divine apsaras, attired
in sparkling garments, will serve you now and ensure your comfort in heaven. You have conquered the worlds
through the royal sacrifice and it has been extended through the horse sacrifice. O mighty-armed one! You have
obtained the great fruits of austerities. O Yudhishthira! Your worlds are above those of kings. O Partha! They are
like those of Harishchandra. Pleasure yourself there. You will sport there like rajarshi Mandhata, King Bhagiratha
and Bharata, Dushhanta's son. O Partha! This sacred and divine river[Ganga.] purifies the three worlds. O Indra among
kings! Go and bathe in Akashaganga[Ganga which flows in heaven.]. Having bathed there, you will be freed from your human attributes. You will
be without sorrow and without effort. You will be freed from all enmity." Indra of the gods spoke in this way to
Yudhishthira, Indra among the Kouravas.

'In his personified form, Dharma himself spoke to his son. "O king! O immensely wise one! O son! I am pleased
with you, because of your devotion towards me, your truthfulness in speech, your forgiving nature and your selfcontrol. O king! This was the third test I devised for you. O Partha! But whatever be the reason, you are incapable
of being dislodged from your nature. Earlier, I came before you and tested you in Dvaitavana, when you were
searching for the kindling wood. But you passed that. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O son! Assuming the
form of a dog, I again tested you when your brothers and Droupadi died. This was the third, when you wished to
remain here, for the sake of your brothers. O immensely fortunate one! You are pure. Be happy. Be cleansed of sin.
O Partha! O lord of the earth! Your brothers are not in hell. This was arranged by me and by the great Indra, the
king of the gods. O son! There is no doubt that all the kings must see hell. Therefore, for a short while, you faced
supreme unhappiness. O king! However, Savyasachi, Bhima, the twins, bulls among men, and Karna, brave and
truthful in speech, do not deserve to be in hell for a long period of time. O Yudhishthira! Nor does the princess
Krishna deserve to be in hell. Come. O  best among the Bharata lineage! See Ganga, which flows  in the three
worlds." Your great grandfather, the rajarshi, was addressed in this way. With Dharma and the other gods, he went
to their abode. The sacred and divine river Ganga purifies everything and is praised by the rishis. The king bathed
there and gave up his human body. Dharmaraja Yudhishthira assumed a divine form. Having bathed in those waters, he was without enmity and without torment. Surrounded by the gods, the intelligent Yudhishthira, king of the
Kurus, left with them and with Dharma, praised by the maharshis.'
