Vaishampayana said, 'When the Pandavas, for whom truth was their valour, had been granted leave by Dharma,
they were ready to spend the thirteenth year in hiding and in disguise. Rigid in their vows, the intelligent ones seated themselves. Hands joined in salutation, those great-souled and righteous ones spoke to the ascetics, who had
lived in the forest out of affection for them. The ones who had lived there, steady in their vows, sought their permission[The Pandavas and the ascetics respectively.]. "All of you know everything about how the sons of Dhritarashtra have robbed us of our kingdom
through deceit and have injured us in many other ways. Amidst great hardship, we have lived in the forest for
twelve years. The thirteenth year, which must be spent undetected, still remains. We must spend that time in concealment and we seek your permission. The enemies who always resent us, the evil-souled Suyodhana and Karna
with Soubala[Shakuni.], will try to create difficulties for us, our citizens and our relatives, should they manage to detect us.
Will we again be established in our own kingdom and country, together with all the brahmanas?" Having spoken
these words, King Yudhishthira, the pure son of Dharma, was oppressed by grief and with his voice choking with
tears, lost his senses. Then all the brahmanas and his brothers comforted him.

'Dhoumya spoke these words, full of grave import, to the king. "O king! You are learned, self-controlled, true to
your promises and in control of your senses. Such men are not confounded when they confront a calamity. In times
of difficulty, even the great-souled gods have gone into hiding in many places, with the objective of subjugating
their enemies. To accomplish the task of subjugating the strength of his enemies, Indra went to a hermitage in the
land of the nishadhas, located on the slopes of a mountain, and hid there[Pursued by Vritra, Indra hid inside a mountain.]. To kill the daityas, Vishnu spent a long
time in hiding in Aditi's womb and was then born as Hayashira[Hayashira (head of a horse) or Hayagriva (neck of a horse) is one of Vishnu's incarnations. Vishnu, as an
Aditya, is also Aditi's son. There are different stories associated with Hayashira, some connected with killing a demon named Hayagriva, others connected with the demons Madhu and Kaitabha.]. Disguising himself in the form of a dwarf, the
one whose form is that of the brahman, used his valour to rob Bali of his kingdom[This is a reference to Vishnu's vamana (dwarf) incarnation.]. You have heard about this. O
son! You have heard everything about how brahmarshi Ourva accomplished the objective of the worlds while hidden in a thigh[Ourva was the son of Chyavana and the father of Jamadagni. He was born from his mother's thigh (uru).]. O one learned in dharma! You have heard how Hari hid himself in Shakra's vajra so that Vritra
might be killed. You have heard everything about how Agni entered and concealed himself in the water to accomplish the task of the gods. O son! The supremely energetic Vivasvat lived in hiding in earth and later burnt up all
his enemies. Vishnu, terrible in his deeds, lived in Dasharatha's house and in disguise, killed Dashagriva in
battle[This is a reference to Rama's story.]. Thus did the great-souled ones live in disguise. Then they conquered their enemies in battle and you will
also triumph in that way." Yudhishthira was thus comforted by the words of Dhoumya, who knew about dharma,
and using his own intelligence and knowledge of the sacred texts, no longer wavered.

'The mighty-armed and immensely strong Bhimasena, foremost among strong ones, spoke to the king and raised
his spirits. "O great king! Look at Gandivadhanva[Arjuna's name, the wielder of the Gandiva.
]. Because of his devotion to dharma and because of his own
intelligence, he has not acted foolishly yet. Nakula and Sahadeva, terrible in their valour, are capable of slaying the
enemies, but have always been restrained by me. We will not deviate from whatever task you assign to us. You
must tell us what we should do and we will swiftly carry it out and vanquish our enemies." When Bhimasena
spoke these words, the brahmanas pronounced supreme benedictions on them. Having bid farewell to the descendants of the Bharata lineage, all of them returned to their own houses. All those who were foremost in knowledge
of the Vedas, ascetics and sages, pronounced their blessings in the prescribed way and desired to see them again.
The five learned Pandavas arose with Dhoumya. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The brave ones set out with
Krishna. After traversing the distance of a krosha, they seated themselves at a spot. Those tigers among men were
ready to begin their sojourn of concealment. Each of them was separately learned in the sacred texts. But all of
them were also skilled in consultations. They were knowledgeable about when it was a time for peace and when it
was a time for war. Before departing, they sat down and consulted each other.'

This ends Aranyaka Parva.