'Janamejaya said, "Though he is but a child, he speaks like a wise old man. He is not a child. I think he is wise and
old. I wish to grant him a boon. O assembled Brahmanas! Give me the required permission."

'The sadasyas said, "Even though a child, a Brahmana deserves the respect of kings, even more so if he is
learned. This child deserves that you grant him his wishes, but not before Takshaka has swiftly come here."'

Souti said, 'The king was willing to grant the Brahmana boy a boon and was about to say, "Ask a boon from
me." But the hotar was not pleased at this and said, "Takshaka has not yet come to the sacrifice." Janamejaya said,
"Try your best to complete this sacrifice successfully. Use all your powers, so that Takshaka comes here without
any more delay. He is the one I hate the most." The ritvijas said, "O king! Takshaka now lives in fear in Indra's
palace. The shastras reveal this to us and the fire also confirms it." The great-souled suta Lohitaksha was well
versed in ancient tales and had known this before. Asked again by the king on this occasion, he said, "O god
among men! O king! What the Brahmanas have said is true. I know the ancient accounts and I say that Indra has
granted him a boon saying that he should live secretly near him and the fire will not be able to burn him." On hearing this, the king, who had been instated in the sacrifice, was angry and asked the hotar to perform his duties. He
chanted mantras and poured oblations into the fire.

'Thereupon, Indra himself arrived there. The great god came in his celestial chariot, worshipped by all the gods
surrounding him and followed by masses of clouds and large numbers of vidyadharas[Semi-divine species.] and apsaras. But the
snake[Takshaka.] hid himself inside Indra's garments. At that, the king, who was determined to destroy Takshaka, angrily
spoke to his priests who knew the mantras. "O Brahmanas! If Takshaka is in Indra's palace, hurl him into the fire
with Indra himself." The ritvijas said, "O king! Look. Takshaka is coming now and will soon be under your power.
His terrible roars and fearful cries can be heard. The snake has been given up by the wielder of the vajra. He has
fallen and his body has been disabled through our mantras. Deprived of his consciousness, the king of snakes is
falling from the sky. His sharp sighs and deep breaths can be heard. O lord of kings! Your deed is being properly
performed. It is now proper for you to grant a boon to this best of Brahmanas." Janamejaya said, "O one who is
beyond measure! You are so handsome and so childlike that I wish to grant you a worthy boon. Therefore, ask for
the desire that is in your heart. I promise you that I will grant it to you, if it can be granted." Takshaka, the king of
snakes, was about to fall into the sacrificial fire in a moment.

'At that very instant, Astika spoke. "O Janamejaya! If you wish to grant me a boon, I wish that this sacrifice
should be stopped. Let no more snakes fall down." O Brahmana! At these words, Parikshit's son wasn't happy and
told Astika, "O illustrious one! I will give you gold, silver, cows or whatever else you wish to possess. O Brahmana! I shall give you your boon. But let this sacrifice not be stopped." Astika replied, "O king! I do not ask you
for gold, silver or cattle. Let this sacrifice be stopped, so that my mother's relatives are safe." Thus addressed by
Astika, Parikshit's son repeatedly told Astika, greatest among eloquent ones, "O supreme among supreme Brahmanas! O fortunate one! O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! Choose another boon." But he[Astika.] refused. Thereupon, all the sadasyas, who were learned in all the Vedas, unanimously told the king, "Let the Brahmana have his
boon."'
