'Lomasha said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! To ensure the success of the king's objective, she contructed
a hermitage on a boat-both because the king ordered it and because it fitted with her own wishes. It was beautifully adorned with many artificial trees with flowers and fruit. It had many bowers and creepers that yielded succulent fruit to satisfy every desire. She made it extremely beautiful and enticing. That hermitage on a boat was beautiful, extraordinary and an unsurpassed sight. Then she moored the boat a short distance away from Kashyapa's
hermitage. She sent out some men to survey the area frequented by the sage. Deciding on a course of action and
perceiving a chance, the courtesan summoned her daughter, who possessed great intelligence, and sent her to
Kashyapa's son. That skilled one went to the hermitage and approached the rishi's son, who was always engaged
in austerities.

'"The courtesan said, 'O sage! Is everything well with the ascetics here? Are there plenty of roots and fruit? Do
you find pleasure in this hermitage? I have come here to visit you. Are the austerities of the ascetics increasing? I
hope your father has not diminished in energy. O brahmana! I hope he is pleased with you. O Rishyashringa! Are
you able to pursue your studies?'

'"Rishyashringa replied, 'You shine with radiance like the light. I think that you are worthy of showing obeisance. I will give you water to wash your feet, and according to dharma, fruits and roots to satisfy your desires.
Please be seated on this mat made of kusha grass, covered with black antelope skin and made comfortable. Where
is your hermitage? O brahmana! What is the name of the vow that you are observing, like a god?'

'"The courtesan said, 'O son of Kashyapa! My beautiful hermitage is three yojanas away, on the other side of
the mountain. My dharma is not to accept obeisance. Nor do I touch water to wash my feet.'

'"Rishyashringa replied, 'I will give you ripe fruit, bhallas[Marking-nuts.], amlakas[Myrobalans.], parushakas[Some unidentified fruit, probably harsh to the taste.], ingudas[Inguda is a medicinal tree.], dhanvanas[Probably some kind of berry.] and priyalas[The fruit of a kind of fig tree.] to satisfy your desires.'"

'Lomasha said, "But having discarded all of these, she gave him extremely expensive food. This was beautiful
to look at and extremely tasteful and they were very pleasurable to Rishyashringa. She gave him fragrant garlands
and radiant and colourful garments and the best of drinks. Then she played, laughed and amused herself. She
played at his side with a ball, like a flowering creeper that was moving around. She touched his body with hers and
embraced Rishyashringa again and again. She bent the branches and plucked the flowers from trees like sarjas[Shala trees.],
ashokas and tilakas[Tree with beautiful flowers.]. Then, as if without shame, and overcome with liquour, she tempted the maharshi's son.
Having seen the change in Rishyashringa, she pressed him again and again with her body. Then, pretending that
the time for agnihotra had come, she slowly went away, casting backward glances. At her departure, Rishyashringa
was overcome with desire and lost his senses. Because of his feelings for her, he felt emptiness. He sighed again
and again in distress.

'"At that instant, Kashyapa Vibhandaka appeared. His eyes were tawny, like a lion's. He was covered with body
hair, up to the tips of his nails. He possessed learning, conduct and meditative faculties. He approached and saw
his seated son, alone, immersed in thought, and with his mind disturbed. His eyes were raised up and he sighed repeatedly. Vibhandaka told his dejected son, 'O son! Why has wood for the sacrificial kindling not been brought?
Have you still not performed agnihotra today? Have the sacrificial ladles been cleaned? Have you brought out the
sacrificial cow and her calf today? O son! You do not seem as you used to be. You are immersed in thought and
have lost your senses. Why are you so dejected today? I am asking you. Who came here today?'"'
