'"Ashtavakra said, 'The road belongs to a blind one. The road belongs to a deaf one. The road belongs to a woman.
The road belongs to a bearer of loads. The road belongs to a king. But when a brahmana is encountered on the
way, the road must belong to the brahmana.'

'"The king replied, 'Then I now give up this road to you. Travel whichever way you desire. There is no fire that
is a minor one[Brahmanas are being compared to fires and there is no brahmana who is minor.]. Even Indra always bows down before brahmanas.'

'"Ashtavakra said, 'O son[The word used is tata. This means son and is used affectionately for any inferior. Ashtavakra is addressing
the gatekeeper, who is an inferior.]! We have come to see the sacrifice. Our curiousity cannot be greater. We have
come as guests. Let us enter. O gatekeeper! We are waiting for your command. We wish to see the sacrifice of Indradyumna's son[Indradyumna was Janaka's father.]. We wish to see and speak to King Janaka. O gatekeeper! We are being consumed with anger
and let that not cause affliction to you.'

'"The gatekeeper said, 'We are bound by the commands of Bandi. "Listen to the words I utter[These are Bandi's words.]. No brahmanas who are children will be allowed entry. Only the old and the learned, the best of brahmanas will be allowed
to enter."'

'"Ashtavakra replied, 'O gatekeeper! If entry is allowed to the aged, then I have a right to enter. We are aged because we have observed vows. We have a right to enter because of our knowledge of the Vedas. We have
served[The preceptor.] and are in control of our senses. We have faithfully trodden the path of knowledge. It is said that children should not be slighted. If touched, a young fire also burns.'

'"The gatekeeper said, 'If you know, recite the single-syllabled and many-formed verse invoking Sarasvati.
Look at your limbs. You are a child. Do not boast. It is difficult to obtain success in debates.'

'"Ashtavakra replied, 'Age cannot be deduced from the growth of the body, just as the number of knots on a
shalmali tree[The silk-cotton tree.] does not indicate its age. Whether it is short or small in form, it is aged because it is full of fruit.
A tree without fruit has no traits of age.'

'"The gatekeeper said, 'The young receive intelligence from the old, and in due course of time, become aged
too. It is impossible to obtain learning in a short time. Therefore, despite being a child, why do you speak as if
aged?'

'"Ashtavakra replied, 'One does not become old because one's hair has turned white. The gods know that, a
child who is learned is old. The rishis have not decreed that the merit of dharma depends on years, grey hair, riches
or relatives[That is, the number of relatives.]. "One who has learning is great[This is a quote being ascribed to the sages.]." I have come here to meet Bandi in the king's presence. Go
and announce this now to the king who is garlanded with lotuses. O gatekeeper! Today, you will witness me engaged in a debate with the learned. I may become superior, or I may become inferior, when all the others become
silent today.'

'"The gatekeeper said, 'You are only ten years old. How can you enter a sacrifice reserved for entry to the humble and the learned? I will have to devise a means for you to enter. But you must take due care.'

'"Ashtavakra said, 'O king! O supreme among those of the Janaka lineage! You are worthy of praise. You have
all the riches. You are the performer of sacrificial deeds, like King Yayati was the only one in ancient times. We
have heard that the wise Bandi, after defeating those who know the Vedas in debate, employs your servants to immerse those broken ones in water. Having heard this from the brahmanas, I have come here today to engage in debate. Where is Bandi? Where can I find him? I will destroy him today, like the sun causing the stars to fade.'

'"The king replied, 'You hope to vanquish Bandi without knowing the other's power with words. Those who
know his powers are incapable of speaking thus. He has been tested by brahmanas skilled in debate.'

'"Ashtavakra said, 'Those who debated were not like me. That made him like a lion and he roars thus. When he
meets me today, he will be destroyed, like a cart on the road with its axle broken.'

'"The king replied, 'He alone is supremely wise who knows what has six parts, twelve axles, twenty-four segments and three hundred and sixty spokes.'

'"Ashtavakra said, 'May the wheel[Of time. Twenty-four hours in the day, six seasons, twelve months and three hundred and sixty days.] with twenty-four segments, six parts, twelve axles and three hundred and
sixty spokes always protect you.'

'"The king asked, 'They are joined like horses and descend like hawks. Who among the gods gives them birth
and who do they give birth to?'

'"Ashtavakra said, 'O king! Let them steer away from your house and even from the houses of your enemies.
The one with the wind as a charioteer gives them birth and they also give birth to him[Agni or the fire-god has the wind as a charioteer and the two are thunder and lightning, causing fire and
originating in fire.].'
'"The king asked, 'What does not close its eyes when it sleeps? What does not move when it is born? What has
no heart? What increases in speed when force is imposed?'

'"Ashtavakra said, 'A fish does not close its eyes when it sleeps. An egg does not move when it is born. A stone
has no heart. A river increases in speed when force is imposed.'

'"The king replied, 'I do not think that you are a man. You possess divine energy. You are not a child. I regard
you as aged. There is no one who is your equal in the power of words. Therefore, I am throwing the gate open.
There is Bandi.'"'
