'Dhritarashtra asked, "How has Bhishma, bull among the Kurus, been killed by Shikhandi? My father was the
equal of Vasava. How has he been brought down from his chariot? O Sanjaya! What happened to my sons when
they were deprived of Bhishma? He was powerful and was like the gods. He observed brahmacharya for the sake
of his superior. 6 He was great in spirit and great in strength, a great archer. When that maharatha, a tiger among
men, was killed, what was the state of their 7 minds then? My mind is pierced with great grief on hearing that he
has been killed. He was a bull among the Kuru lineage. He was a brave one who did not waver. He was a bull
among men. When he advanced, who followed him? Who were the ones who preceded him? O Sanjaya! Who was
at his side and who advanced with him? He was a bull among kshatriyas who could not be dislodged. Which brave
ones were with that bull among rathas when he suddenly penetrated the formation of chariots? Who were at the
rear? 8 That destroyer of enemies, who was like the sun and an equal of the one with the thousand rays, suddenly
attacked the enemy soldiers and spread terror amidst the enemy. On the instructions of Kourava, 9 he performed
difficult deeds in battle. He devoured their ranks. Who tried to repulse him? O Sanjaya! He was accomplished and
unassailable. When Shantanu's son advanced against them in battle, how did the Pandavas counter him? He
slaughtered the soldiers. He possessed arrows for his teeth. He was swift. The bow was his gaping mouth. The terrible sword was his tongue. He was invincible. He was the ultimate of tigers among men. He was modest. He had
never been vanquished. How could Kounteya bring down such an unvanquished one in battle? He was a terrible
and fierce archer. He was stationed on his supreme chariot. With his sharp arrows, he sliced off the heads of enemies. On seeing him ready in battle, like the invincible fire of destruction, the great army of the Pandavas always
trembled. That destroyer of troops destroyed the soldiers for ten nights. After having accomplished extremely difficult deeds, he has now departed like the setting sun. Like Shakra, he created a shower of inexhaustible arrows. In
ten days, he slaughtered a hundred million warriors in battle. He is lying down on the bare ground, like a tree destroyed by the wind. This is because of my evil counsel. That descendant of the Bharata lineage did not deserve
this. On witnessing the terrible valour of Bhishma, Shantanu's son, how was the army of the Pandavas capable of
striking him down? How did the sons of Pandu engage with Bhishma in battle? O Sanjaya! While Drona was still
alive, how could Bhishma not be victorious? When Kripa was near him, and so was Bharadvaja's son, 10 how
could Bhishma, supreme among warriors, be killed? Bhishma was an atiratha. 11 Even the gods were incapable of
withstanding him. How could Shikhandi of Panchala kill him in battle? He always rivalled Jamadagni's extremely
powerful son 12 in battle. Jamadagni's son, who was Shakra's equal in valour, could not defeat him. How could
Bhishma, with the strength of a maharatha, be killed in battle? O Sanjaya! Without knowing about that brave one, I
cannot obtain any peace. O Sanjaya! Which of my great archers did not desert that undecaying one? On Duryodhana's instructions, which brave ones surrounded him? When all the Pandavas advanced against the undecaying
Bhishma, with Shikhandi at the forefront, were the Kurus frightened? Did they abandon him? The roar of his bow,
with its shower of arrows, was like a giant cloud. The great twang of his bow was like a tall and mighty cloud. He
showered arrows on the Kounteyas, together with the Panchalas and the Srinjayas. He slaughtered the brave warriors of the enemy, like the wielder of the vajra against the danavas.

'"He was like a terrible and surging ocean, with his invincible arrows like crocodiles. The bows were like
waves. That interminable ocean was without boats and without islands. The clubs and swords were like whirling
sharks. 13 The masses of horses and elephants were like crocodiles. There were many spirited horses, elephants,
infantry and chariots. All those warriors of the enemy were immersed in that battle. Through his energy and anger,
that scorcher of enemies consumed them. Which brave one could repulse him, like the shore against the abode of
sharks? 14 O Sanjaya! For Duryodhana's sake, Bhishma, the destroyer of enemies, performed deeds in battle. Who
were in front of him then? Bhishma was infinitely energetic. Who protected his right axle? With devotion and care,
who guarded him at the back from enemy warriors? So as to protect him, who were immediately in front of Bhishma? When that brave one fought in battle, which brave ones protected his front axle? O Sanjaya! Who were stationed at his left axle and attacked the Srinjayas? Who protected his unassailable advance guard? Who protected
his sides? He has traversed along the difficult path. 15 O Sanjaya! Who were the ones who fought with the enemy
warriors in general? If our brave ones protected him and were protected by him, how did he not swiftly vanquish
that invincible army 16 in battle? He was like the lord of all the worlds, the supreme god Prajapati. O Sanjaya!
How were the Pandavas capable of striking him? He was our refuge and the Kurus resorted to him when fighting
with the enemy. O Sanjaya! You have told me that Bhishma, tiger among men, has fallen. My son resorted to the
great strength of that valiant one and ignored the Pandavas. How could he have been slain by the enemy? My father was great in his vows. He was unassailable in battle. In earlier times, desiring to slay the danavas, all the gods
sought his help. When he was born, the immensely valiant Shantanu, the protector of the world, gave up sorrow,
grief and dejection. He possessed the qualities of a son. He was wise. He was devoted. He was a refuge. He was
devoted to his own dharma. He was pure. He knew the truth about the Vedas and the Vedangas. 17 How could he
have been killed? He was skilled in all weapons. He was modest. He was self-controlled. He was calm. He was
spirited. On hearing that Shantanu's son has been killed, I think that the rest of my army has already been slain. It
is my view that adharma has become stronger than dharma. The Pandavas desire the kingdom and have killed their
aged senior. Jamadagni's son, Rama, is supreme among those who know all weapons. In earlier times, when he
raised his weapons for the sake of Amba, he was defeated by Bhishma in battle. 18 He was the equal of Indra in
deeds. He was foremost among all archers. You have said that Bhishma has been killed. What can be a greater misery than this? Jamadagni's valiant son, Rama, the destroyer of enemy warriors, who made it a vow to kill kshatriyas, could not defeat him in battle. That extremely intelligent one has now been killed by Shikhandi. It is thus
evident that Drupada's son, Shikhandi, is superior in energy, valour and strength to the immensely valorous Bhargava, 19 invincible in battle. That brave one 20 was accomplished in battle. He was skilled in the use of all
weapons. He was knowledgeable about supreme weapons. That bull among the Bharata lineage has been killed. In
that assembly of enemies, who were the brave ones who followed that destroyer of foes? Tell me how the battle
between Bhishma and the Pandavas proceeded.

'"O Sanjaya! With that brave one killed, my army is like a woman without a son. My soldiers are like a demented herd of cattle, without a protector. In a great battle, his manliness was supreme in the worlds. When he fell,
what was the state of my army then? O Sanjaya! Despite being alive, what strength remains in us now? We have
caused our greatly valorous father to be killed, chief among virtuous ones in the world. We are immersed in fathomless water, without seeing a boat that we can use to cross. I think that my sons must be grief-stricken, extremely
miserable at Bhishma's death. My heart must be made out of extremely hard stone. On hearing about the death of
Bhishma, tiger among men, it is not being rent asunder. He was a bull among the Bharata lineage and possessed
weapons, intelligence and policy. He was immeasurable and unassailable. How was he killed in battle? One cannot
be freed from death through weapons, valour, austerities, intelligence, steadfastness or giving up. Destiny is extremely powerful and cannot be transgressed by anyone in the world. O Sanjaya! You have told me that Bhishma,
Shantanu's son, has been killed. Tormented by grief on account of my sons, I thought of the great misery and
sought salvation from Shantanu's son, Bhishma. O Sanjaya! When he saw Shantanu's son lying down on the
ground like a sun, to whom did Duryodhana resort? O Sanjaya! When I reflect with my intelligence on the lords of
the earth who are on my side and those of the enemy, I do not see what remnants will be left in either army. The
dharma of kshatriyas, as instructed by the rishis, is terrible, since, desiring the kingdom, the Pandavas have killed
Shantanu's son. We also desired the kingdom and have killed our grandfather. The Parthas, and my sons, are established in the dharma of kshatriyas and no crime attaches to them. O Sanjaya! When there is a great calamity, even
a virtuous person should perform this task. One should exhibit ultimate valour, to the best of one's capacity. This
has been laid down. He was modest and unvanquished. O son! 21 When he was engaged in slaughtering soldiers,
how did the sons of Pandu counter Shantanu's son? How were the soldiers arrayed and how did he fight with the
great-souled ones?

'"O Sanjaya! How was my father, Bhishma, killed by the enemies? When Bhishma was killed, what did Duryodhana, Karna, Shakuni Soubala and Duhshasana say? This gambling board is strewn with the bodies of men, elephants and horses. There are terrible arrows, lances, clubs, swords and spikes as dice. Those evil ones have entered
the assembly hall of this difficult war. Those bulls among men are gambling and have offered their lives as stakes.
Who was won? Who won? O Sanjaya! Who was successful in his objective? Other than Bhishma, Shantanu's son,
who else has been brought down? Tell me. After hearing that Devavrata 22 has been slain, I cannot obtain peace.
My father 23 was the performer of terrible deeds. On hearing this, I am grief-stricken. Thinking about the great injury that will befall my sons, my heart was anguished. O Sanjaya! You have made that fire blaze, by sprinkling
clarified butter on it. On seeing that Bhishma, famous in all the worlds, and the one who had accepted a great burden, has been slain, I think that my sons must be grieving. I wish to hear about the misery that has arisen from
Duryodhana's deeds. O Sanjaya! Therefore, tell me everything exactly as it has happened in that war that will destroy the earth, brought about by the evil intelligence of my son. O Sanjaya! Tell me everything, whether it is good
or bad. In his desire for victory, what did Bhishma finally accomplish in the battle? He possessed energy. He was
skilled in weapons. How was the battle between the soldiers of the Kurus and the Pandavas? Tell me exactly, in
due order, with the time of occurrence."'
