Vaishampayana said, 'Then trusted spies brought the news to the kings that the beautiful and fortunate Droupadi
had got the Pandavas as her husbands and that the great-souled one who had strung the bow and had pierced the
target was Arjuna, greatest among those who are victorious and a mighty wielder of the bow and arrows. The
great-souled and strong one who had lifted up Shalya, the king of Madra, and had whirled him around and had
frightened all men in the fight with a tree, himself without fear, was none other than Bhima, whose touch was terrible and who was the tormentor of armies of enemies. When they heard that Kunti's and Pandu's sons had assumed
the disguise of peaceful Brahmanas, those rulers of men were greatly surprised, because they had earlier heard that
Kunti and her sons had been burnt alive in the house of lac. Those rulers of men therefore regarded them[The Pandavas.] as having been born again. Remembering the extremely cruel deed of Purochana, they cursed Bhishma and the Kourava
Dhritarashtra. When the svayamvara was over, all the kings learnt that the Pandavas had been chosen and returned
the way they had come.

'On seeing that Arjuna, who was borne by white horses, had been chosen by Droupadi, King Duryodhana was
very depressed and returned with his brothers, Ashvatthama, his maternal uncle[Shakuni.], Karna and Kripa. Full of shame,
Duhshasana softly spoke to him, "O king! If Dhananjaya[Arjuna.] had not been disguised as a Brahmana, he would never
have succeeded in obtaining Droupadi. No one recognized him because of that. I think destiny is supreme and human endeavours are fruitless. O brother! Cursed be our human endeavours when the Pandavas are still alive."

Thus, talking to one another and blaming Purochana, they entered Hastinapura, miserable and downcast. They
were frightened and all their resolutions disappeared when they discovered that the immensely powerful sons of
Pritha[Kunti.] had escaped the fire and were allied with Drupada. They thought of Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi and all the
other sons of Drupada, all skilled in the art of war.

'On learning that Droupadi had chosen the Pandavas and that Dhritarashtra's sons had returned in shame, their
pride broken, Vidura was very happy. O lord of the people! The kshatta went to Dhritarashtra and said in great
wonder, "The Kurus[That is, the Pandavas.] are prospering from good fortune." O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing this
from Vidura, Dhritarashtra, the son of Vichitravirya, was overjoyed and exclaimed, "What great fortune!" In his
ignorance, the king of men, who only possessed the eyesight of knowledge, had thought that Droupadi had chosen
his eldest son, Duryodhana. He ordered that many ornaments be made for Droupadi and sent word to his son Duryodhana that Krishna[Droupadi.] should be brought in. It was then that Vidura told him that the Pandavas had been chosen,
that those warriors were all in good health and that they had been duly honoured by Drupada. They had many allies and relatives now, with large armies.

'Dhritarashtra said, "Pandu's sons are dearer to me than they were to Pandu. O Vidura! My joy is greater, now
that I know that those brave Pandavas are in good health, with friends. O kshatta! Which king, deprived of fortune
on earth and in search of power, would not desire to have an alliance with Drupada and his relatives?"'

Vaishampayana said, 'When the king uttered such words, Vidura replied, "O king! May this intelligence of
yours last for a hundred years." O ruler of the people! Then Duryodhana and Radha's son[Karna.] came to Dhritarashtra
and told him, "We cannot speak in Vidura's presence. We wish to speak to you in private. What do you want to do
now? O father! Do you take the prosperity of your rivals to be that of your own? O supreme among men! You applauded them before the kshatta. O one who is unblemished! You act one way when another needs to be done. O
father! We must always act in a way so as to weaken their strength. The time has come for us to counsel one another, so that they[The Pandavas.] do not swallow us up, with our sons, armies and relatives."'
