'Bhishma said, "O king! The fowler saw them in that celestial vehicle. On
seeing the couple, he grieved, thinking about attaining a good end.

'Through what kind of austerities can I attain the supreme goal?' Having
thought about this, he decided to set about his journey. Lubdhaka, who
earned a living from birds, embarked on mahaprasthana. He gave up all efforts, subsisted on air and gave up all sense of ownership, desiring to attain
heaven. He then saw an extremely large lake, adorned with lotus flowers.
The lake was full of cool and sparkling water and was frequented by a large
number of birds. He was afflicted by thirst and on seeing this, had no doubt
that he would be able to satisfy himself. O king! Because of the fasting,
Lubdhaka was extremely thin. In the forest frequented by predatory beasts,
he cheerfully crept along. Having summoned up great resolution, Lubdhaka
entered the forest and was grasped by some thorns. His limbs were mangled
by those thorns and he was covered with red blood. He roamed around in
that desolate spot, frequented by many kinds of animals. As the large trees
in the forest rubbed against each other, a great fire was ignited and fanned
by the wind. That forest was full of trees and covered with shrubs and
creepers. The fire angrily consumed them, as radiant as the fire at the end of
a yuga. It blazed with sparks that were fanned by the wind. It fiercely burnt
the forest, which teemed with animals and birds. Lubdhaka was delighted in
his mind. Desiring to free himself of his body, he rushed towards the raging
fire. Burnt by the fire, Lubdhaka's sins were destroyed. O supreme among
the Bharata lineage! He then attained supreme success. Devoid of all anxiety, he saw himself in heaven. Like Indra, he was radiant in the midst of
yakshas, gandharvas and siddhas. In this way, because of their auspicious
deeds, the male pigeon and the female pigeon which was devoted to its husband indeed went to heaven, accompanied by Lubdhaka. In this way, like
the she-pigeon, a woman who is devoted to her husband is quickly established in heaven and becomes radiant there. This is the ancient account of
the great-souled Lubdhaka and the pigeon. Because of their auspicious
deeds, they attained the objective of those who follow dharma. A person
who always hears this, or a person who recounts this, will never confront
anything inauspicious, even if he is confused in his mind. O Yudhishthira!
O supreme among those who uphold dharma! This great dharma provides
salvation to even the perpetrators of wicked deeds, such as those who kill
cows. But there is no salvation for someone who allows a person who seeks
refuge to perish."'
