'Karna said, "I see that all you honourable ones[The text uses the word ayushmat, which means someone with a long life. But it is also used for someone who
has been born in a noble lineage.] are frightened and terrified. All of you do not wish to fight and
are standing idly. Whether it is the king of Matsya or Bibhatsu who has come, I will restrain him, the way the
shoreline holds back the abode of makaras[A makara is a mythical aquatic animal, which can loosely be translated as crocodile or shark. The abode of
makaras is the ocean.]. Arrows with straight feathers will be shot from my bow and they will
not be repulsed, like gliding snakes. They have golden tufts and are extremely sharp at the tip. Released from my
hand, these arrows will cover Partha, like locusts covering a tree. These winged shafts will firmly strike against the
string of the bow, and the sound of the slapping of palms will be like that of a kettledrum. Bibhatsu has concentrated for eight and five years[Adding up to thirteen. Arjuna has been thinking of the impending battle for thirteen years.] and is fondly looking forward to a battle in which he will strike me. Kounteya, with
the qualities of a brahmana, is the right receptacle to receive thousands of arrows shot by me. This great archer is
famous in the worlds. O best of the Kurus! But in no way am I inferior to Arjuna. I will release these golden arrows, shafted with the feathers of vultures, and the sky will seem to be covered with fireflies. I gave my word to
Dhritarashtra's son[Duryodhana.] earlier and I will repay that debt today. I will kill Arjuna today. My feathered arrows will split
the sky and envelope the directions. They will appear like locusts in the firmament. Partha's touch is like that of
Indra's vajra and he is as energetic as the great Indra. But I will oppress him, the way an elephant is oppressed with
flaming torches. He is as unassailable as the fire. But I will assail him with swords, spears and arrows. The flaming
Pandava burns down enemies. But the force of my horses will be like a storm and the roar of my mass of chariots
will be like thunder. The shower of my arrows will be like a great cloud and I will pacify Pandava. The arrows released from my bow will be like the virulent poison of snakes to Partha. Those arrows will pierce him, like serpents gliding into a termite hill. I have obtained weapons from Jamadagni's son, supreme among rishis[Karna was taught by Parashurama, Jamadagni's son.]. Using
their power, I can fight with Vasava himself. With an arrow[The word used is bhalla, which can mean some other kind of missile too.], I will kill the monkey that is stationed on the top of
his standard. It will fall down on the ground today, uttering a terrible roar. The other beings who are stationed on
the enemy's flag will be tormented. Oppressed by me, they will fly in all the directions and their wails will rise up
into the sky. Today I will uproot with its roots the stake that has been impaled in Duryodhana's heart for a long
time. I will bring down Bibhatsu from his chariot. Today, the Kouravas will see Partha bereft of his chariot, with
his horses dead and his manliness destroyed, sighing like a serpent. Let the Kurus go as they wish, taking only the
riches[The cattle.] with them. Or let them be stationed on their chariots and witness my battle."'
