'Dhritarashtra said, "Shini's descendant proceeded towards Arjuna, crushing that large army. O Sanjaya! What did
my shameless sons do? When they confronted death in that battle, how did they hold up their spirits? The conduct
of Shini's descendant is like that of Savyasachi. In the midst of the soldiers, how could the kshatriyas bear to be
defeated? How did the immensely illustrious Satyaki pass through them in that battle? O Sanjaya! As long as my
sons were alive there, how could Shini's descendant progress in that battle? Tell me everything in detail. O
son[The word used is tata.]! What I have heard from you, about the clash between one and many, with maharathas on the side of the
enemy, is extremely wonderful. I think that destiny must be against my sons and they suffer from ill fortune, since
they are being slain in the battle by the great-souled Satvata. O Sanjaya! A single one is sufficient to counter my
entire army. When Yuyudhana is angry, let all the Pandavas remain standing[That is, there is no need for them to fight.]. He has vanquished Drona, who is
accomplished and unassailable in fighting, in the battle. Satyaki will kill my sons, like a lion against large numbers
of deer. There were many brave warriors, Kritavarma and the others. But in the battle, they were incapable of fighting with that bull among men and he will kill them. Phalguna himself was incapable of fighting in the way that
Shini's immensely illustrious grandson fought."

'Sanjaya replied, "O king! All this has happened because of Duryodhana's evil counsel and deeds. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! Listen attentively to what I am telling you. On your son's instructions, the samshaptakas
returned, having made up their minds to fight to their utmost. There were three thousand riders, with Duryodhana
at the forefront-Shakas, Kambojas, Bahlikas, Yavanas, Paradas, Kunindas, Tanganas, Ambashthas, Pishachas and
those from mountainous regions. They attacked Shini's descendant, like insects towards a flame. They were joined
by rathas from the mountainous regions, those who fought with stones. O king! Five hundred such brave ones attacked Shini's descendant. There were one thousand rathas and a hundred maharathas. There were one thousand
elephants and two thousand horses. Those maharathas showered many different kinds of arrows. In that battle, infantry attacked Shini's descendant. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O great king! Duhshasana urged all of
them to surround Satyaki and kill him. We witnessed the great and marvellous conduct of Shini's descendant.
Without any fear, he single-handedly fought against many. He slew that array of rathas, the army of elephants, all
the riders and all those dasyus. He mangled and routed them with his supreme weapons. Many wheels were shattered and beautiful chariot poles were destroyed. Bumpers were fragmented and standards brought down. The
earth was strewn with armour and whisks. O venerable one! There were garlands, ornaments, garments and yokes.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The earth was littered with these, like the sky with planets. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! The best of elephants, with the forms of mountains, were brought down. They were born in
the lineages of Anjana, Vamana, Supratika, Mahapadma, Airavata and many other lineages[The names of the eight elephants in charge of the eight directions are usually given as Airavata, Pundarika, Va-
mana, Kumuda, Anjana, Pushpadanta, Sarvabhouma and Supratika. Pundarika, Kumuda and Padma mean lotuses. So Mahapadma might mean either Pundarika or Kumuda.]. O king! The best
of tuskers were slain in large numbers and lay down there. O king! The best of horses, from Vanayu, mountainous
regions, Kamboja and Bahlika breeds, were slain there by Satyaki. There were foot soldiers who had been raised in
many different countries, born in many races. Hundreds and thousands of them were killed there by Shini's
descendant.

'"When the soldiers confronted death in this way, Duhshasana spoke to the dasyus. 'Return. You are not those
who are familiar with dharma[The reference to dharma is puzzling, other than the general statement that dasyus did not follow dharma. There
was adharma in many fighting with a single person, but that dharma was in any case not being followed.]. Why are you running away without fighting?' On seeing that they did not listen,
your son, Duhshasana, urged the brave ones from the mountainous regions, the ones who fought with stones. 'You
are skilled in fighting with stones and Satyaki is not familiar with this. You know about fighting with stones. Use
that mode to kill the one who desires to fight. None of the Kurus are skilled in fighting with stones. Do not be
frightened. Attack. Satyaki will not be able to approach you. Those mountain-dwellers raised boulders that were
like elephant cubs, and desiring death, advanced against Yuyudhana. Others hurled those at him, wishing to kill
Satvata. They were urged by your son and hemmed him in from all directions. On seeing them descend on him,
desiring to fight with boulders, Satyaki fought against them and released three hundred arrows. Those from the
mountainous regions rained down a tumultuous shower of boulders. However, the bull among the Shini lineage
countered these with iron arrows that were like serpents. These shattered the boulders and the fragments shone like
fireflies. O venerable one! Some of these slew the soldiers and sounds of lamentation arose. O king! There were
five hundred brave ones with giant boulders raised. Their arms were severed and fell down on the ground. Other
brave ones who fought with stones were stationed there. Many thousands of these were slain and it was extraordinary. The foremost among them again attacked, showering boulders from every direction. They held iron in
their hands. There were Daradas with spears in their hands and Khasas and Tanganas. There were Ambashthas and
Kunindas. They were enraged and Satyaki was also wrathful. The immensely strong one released iron arrows and
countered them. With his sharp arrows, he shattered those boulders in the sky. O king! This produced a noise that
made elephants, horses, rathas and infantry run away. Struck by shards from those boulders, powerful and armoured men were incapable of remaining there and roamed around. The remaining elephants[Those that had not been killed.] were covered
with blood. Their heads and frontal globes were shattered. They ran away from Yuyudhana's chariot. O venerable
one! A great noise arose among your soldiers when they were afflicted by Madhava, like that of the fierce ocean.

'"On hearing this tumultuous sound, Drona told his charioteer. 'O charioteer! In this battle, maharatha Satvata is
angry. As he roams around in the encounter, like Death, he is shattering the soldiers in many ways. O charioteer!
Take the chariot to the spot where the tumultuous sound has arisen. There is no doubt that Yuyudhana is fighting
with the mountain-dwellers. It is there that all the rathas are being destroyed and the horses are running away. The
foot soldiers are bereft of their armour. They are wounded and are falling down. In that melee, the charioteers can
no longer control their horses.' Having been thus addressed by Bharadvaja's intelligent son, the charioteer spoke to
Drona, supreme among those who wielded weapons. 'O one with a long life! The Kourava soldiers are running
away, in every direction. Behold. The warriors have been shattered and are fleeing here and there. The brave Panchalas and Pandavas have united. They are attacking us from every direction, wishing to kill you. O destroyer of
enemies! The time has come for you to decide what must be done. Should we remain here, or should we advance
further, towards where Satyaki is proceeding?' O venerable one! Thus did he speak to Bharadvaja's son. At that
time, Shini's descendant was seen, killing many different kinds of rathas. In the encounter, those on your side were
killed by Yuyudhana. They abandoned Yuyudhana's chariot and fled towards Drona's army. All of them were terrified and fled towards Drona's chariot. With other rathas, Duhshasana had already retreated there earlier."'
