Yudhishthira said, "There is adharma. There is dharma, which brings emancipation and freedom from all foundations. It frees from birth and death and also frees from good and evil deeds. It is always auspicious and
grants freedom from fear. It is always eternal and without decay. It is pure and always brings comfort. You should
speak to me about this."

'Bhishma replied, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In this connection, there is the ancient history of a conversation between Yajnavalkya and Janaka. Yajnavalkya was the best among rishis and was supreme among those
who knew the answers to all questions. The immensely illustrious King Daivarati, from Janaka's lineage, asked
him this question. 'O brahmana rishi! How many senses are there? How many kinds of prakriti are there said to
be? What is the unmanifest and supreme brahman? What is superior to even that? What is creation and destruction? What is the measurement of time? O Indra among brahmanas! You should tell me about this. I desire to obtain your favours. You are a store of knowledge. I am ignorant and am asking you. On all these doubts, I wish to
hear from you.' Yajnavalkya replied, 'O protector of the earth! Listen to what you have asked. This is the supreme
knowledge of yoga and in particular, that of sankhya. None of this is unknown to you. Nevertheless, you have
asked me. It is eternal dharma that one must answer when one has been asked. It is said that there are eight kinds
of prakriti and sixteen kinds of transformations. Those who have thought about adhyatma have said that there are
seven  kinds  of  the  manifest.  There  are  the  unmanifest,  Mahat,  ego,  earth,  wind,  space,  water  and  light  as  the
eight[Here, the unmanifest means prakriti. The other seven are manifest.]. These eight are known as prakriti. Listen to the transformations. These are the ear, the skin, the eye, the
tongue, the nose as the fifth, sound, touch, form, taste, scent, speech, the two hands, the two feet, the anus and the
penis[The two hands are counted as one and the two feet are also counted as one. When one adds the mind, which has
not been mentioned, one gets the sixteen transformations.]. O Indra among kings! O one from Mithila! Those that originate in the five great elements[The organs of action and the objects of the senses.] are known as
Vishesha and the senses of knowledge are known as Savishesha. Those who have thought about adhyatma say that
the mind is the sixteenth. You, and other intelligent ones who know the truth, also hold the same view. O king! The
Mahat atman is generated from the unmanifest. The learned say that this is the first and most important creation. O
lord of men! Ego[That is, consciousness.] is created from Mahat. Those who know about adhyatma say that this second creation is that of
intelligence. The mind is generated from consciousness and this creates qualities in beings. This is said to be third
creation, which results from consciousness. O lord of men! The five great elements are generated from the mind. I
say that this fourth creation is from the mind. Those who know about the elements say that sound, touch, form,
taste and scent are the fifth creation and concern the elements. The ear, the skin, the eye, the tongue and the nose as
the fifth, are said to be sixth creation by those who have thought a lot about the atman. O lord of men! Those that
are created after the ear and the other senses are said to be the seventh creation, concerning the senses[This isn't very clear, but probably refers to the organs of action.]. O lord of
men! There are the flows that rise upwards and move diagonally and the learned know these as the eighth and
straight creation[This refers to the various breaths of life, some of which rise upwards, while there are others that move
diagonally.]. O lord of men! There are also flows that move directly and diagonally downwards. The learned
call these the ninth and straight creation. O lord of men! This is the truth about the nine different kinds of creation.
The learned texts speak of these as possessing twenty-four signs. O great king! After this truth about the qualities,
the great-souled ones have spoken about the measurement of time. Listen to this.'"'
