'Sanjaya said, "When the night had passed and it was morning, in the midst of the entire army, your son again
asked the grandfather. 'O Gangeya! The supreme army of the Pandaveyas has many men, elephants and horses and
is full of many maharathas. It is protected by immensely strong and great archers, Bhima, Arjuna and the others,
with Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront. It is as if it is protected by the guardians of the world themselves[Lokapalas. The guardians (pala) of the worlds (loka) are eight in number-Indra, Vahni (Agni), Yama, Nairrita, Varuna, Maruta, Kubera and Isha (Ishana). Sometimes, Vayu is listed instead of Indra.]. It is
unassailable. It is as unstoppable as a raging ocean. In a great battle, this ocean of soldiers cannot be ruffled even
by the gods. O Gangeya! O immensely radiant one! By what time will you be able to destroy it, or the great archer
the preceptor, or the immensely strong Kripa? Or Karna, who prides himself in war, or Drona's son[Ashvatthama.], supreme
among brahmanas? All of you in my army are knowledgeable about the use of divine weapons. Therefore, I wish
to know this. I have always had a supreme curiosity in my heart about this. O mighty-armed one! Tell me about
this.'"

'Bhishma replied, "O foremost among the Kurus! O lord of the earth! This is indeed worthy of you, that you
should ask about the strengths and weaknesses of the enemy and about your own side. O king! O mighty-armed
one! Hear about the limits of my strength in battle, the limits of my weapons and the valour of my arms in battle.
In battle, an ordinary man must be fought without deceit. Those who know maya[Illusion.] must be fought with maya.
That is the determination of dharma. Let me divide the days, taking the forenoon of each day as my share. O immensely radiant one! I think that I can take ten thousand warriors as my share. It is my view that I can take one
thousand rathas as my share. O mighty-armed one! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In this fashion, I can kill
the soldiers of the Pandavas. In this way, always armoured and always ready, I can destroy this great army over a
certain period of time. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If I am stationed in battle and unleash my great
weapons, which are capable of killing hundreds and thousands, I can kill them in one month."

'Sanjaya said, "O Indra among kings! On hearing Bhishma's words, King Duryodhana then asked Drona,
supreme among the Angiras lineage. 'O preceptor! In how much time can you slay the soldiers of the sons of Pandu?' Drona smiled and replied, 'O best of the Kurus! I am aged. My energy and strength are weak. It is my view
that with the fire of my weapons, I can consume the army of the Pandavas in one month, just like Bhishma, Shantanu's son. That is the limit of my power and strength.' Kripa Sharadvata said two months and Drona's son
promised the destruction of the army in ten nights. But Karna, skilled in the use of great weapons, promised it in
five nights. When the son of the one who heads to the ocean[Bhishma, the son of a river.] heard the words of the suta's son, he laughed out
aloud and spoke these words. 'O Radheya! As long as you have not encountered Partha in battle, wielding arrows,
a sword and a bow, with Achyuta Vasudeva steering the chariot, till that time you can think in this way. You are
capable of speaking a lot and saying anything that you want.'"'
