Janamejaya asked, 'What did Dharma do to warrant a curse? Who was the brahmarshi because of whose curse he
was born in the womb of a Shudra woman?'

Vaishampayana said, 'There was a Brahmana who was known by the name of Mandavya. He had perseverance
and was learned in dharma. He was devoted to the truth and established in austerities. This great ascetic used to
seat himself at the foot of a tree near the entrance to his hermitage. While observing a vow of silence, the great
yogi raised his hands up high and meditated. He passed a long time in these austerities.

'One day, some robbers came to his hermitage with stolen property. O bull among the Bharata lineage! They
were pursued by many guards. O supreme of the Kuru lineage! The robbers hid their stolen property there. Before
the guards came, they also hid themselves in fear. No sooner had they done this, than the army of guards chasing
the robbers arrived and saw the rishi. O king! They asked the one blessed with the power of austerities, but he did
not move from his posture. "O supreme among Brahmanas! In what direction did the robbers go? O Brahmana!
Tell us, so that we can quickly pursue them." O king! Having been thus addressed by the guards, the one blessed
with the power of austerities did not utter a single word in reply, good or bad. At that, the king's officers began to
search the hermitage and found the robbers and the stolen property hidden there. The guards then began to suspect
the hermit himself. Together with the robbers, they seized him and brought him before the king. Along with the
robbers, the king sentenced him to death. In their ignorance, the guards impaled the great ascetic on a stake. Having impaled the sage on the stake, the guards then returned to the king with the stolen property they had recovered.

'The righteous Brahmana and rishi remained on the stake for a long time. But though he had no food, the rishi
did not die. O scorcher of enemies! The great-souled one continued to perform austerities on the tip of the stake
and summoned the supreme sages there. They were extremely aggrieved on finding him there and in the night returned in the form of vultures from every direction. Having shown themselves in their own forms, they then asked
that supreme of Brahmanas, "O Brahmana! We wish to know about the sin you have committed." At that, the tiger
among sages told the ones who were blessed with the power of austerities, "Whom shall I blame? There is no one
but me who has committed a sin." The king heard that he was a rishi and went there with all his advisers. He pacified the supreme rishi who was impaled on the tip of the stake. "O supreme among rishis! I have caused you harm
through delusion and ignorance. I seek your blessings. Please do not be angry with me." On hearing the king's
words, the sage was pacified. Having thus pacified him, the king then had him lowered from the stake. When he
had lowered him, he tried to draw out the tip of the stake, but was unsuccessful. So he cut it off at the end. In that
stage, with the stake still inside him, the sage continued to practise austerities and attained worlds that were difficult to obtain. Therefore, he was known as Animandavya[The word ani means point, usually of a needle.] in the world.

'One day, the Brahmana, who was well-versed in dharma and knew the supreme truth, went to the abode of
Dharma. On seeing the illustrious Dharma seated, he asked him, "In my ignorance, what sin have I committed?
Why have I suffered from such punishment? Tell me the truth immediately and then witness the power of my austerities." Dharma replied, "O one blessed with the power of austerities! You had once pierced an insect in its tail
with a blade of grass and you received the fruits of your action." Animandavya said, "You have imposed a grave
punishment because of a small fault. O Dharma! Because of this, you will be born as a man in the womb of a Shudra woman. Today, I will lay down a law in this world for the fruits of one's deeds. No sin will be committed by
anyone who is below the age of fourteen years[Animandavya was a child when he pierced the insect.]. It will be sin only when committed above that age." Because he
was cursed by that great-souled ascetic for that sin, Dharma was born as Vidura in the womb of a Shudra woman.
He was free from avarice and anger. He was skilled in the knowledge of dharma and artha. He was devoted to the
welfare of the Kurus, was far-sighted and equable.'
