'Narada said, "When Galava was thus addressed by the intelligent Vishvamitra, he could not sleep, sit or eat. His
body became skeletal and green, because he was overcome by worry and misery. He began to think excessively
and was consumed by his exasperation. 'Where can I get prosperous friends? Where can I obtain riches and treasure? Where can I get eight hundred horses that are as white as the rays of the moon? How can I devote myself to
eating? How can I devote myself to happiness? Though I am alive, I am not devoted to it. What is the point of this
devastated life? I will go to the other side of the ocean, or to the other side of the earth, and give up my life. What
is the point of remaining alive? I am without riches. I am unsuccessful. I have given up different kinds of fruits. I
am bearing the burden of a debt. How can such a person hope for happiness? If one has enjoyed the riches of one's
well-wishers, offered as a mark of affection, and is unable to repay the favour, death is superior to remaining alive.
Having promised to do something, if one does not accomplish that task, one is tormented with false words and all
the fruits of sacrifices are destroyed. There is no beauty in a liar. A liar does not obtain offspring. A liar obtains no
lordships. How can he find an auspicious end? How can there be fame for an ungrateful person, or a proper station,
or happiness? An ungrateful person is disrespected. There is no salvation for an ungrateful one. There is no life for
one without riches. Will such a wicked person sustain himself through crookedness? Unable to return a favour,
such a wicked person is certainly destroyed. I am such a wicked person. I am ungrateful. I am wretched. I am a
liar. Having succeeded in studying with my preceptor, I am unable to accomplish what he has asked me to do. After having undertaken supreme endeavours, I will free myself of this life. Never before have I asked for anything
from the gods. All the thirty gods revere me because of my sacrifices. I will go to Vishnu, the lord of the three
worlds and the god who is foremost among the gods. Krishna is the refuge and he is the supreme refuge for those
who seek it. He pervades all the gods and the asuras and all the comforts are established in him. I bow down, wishing to see that undecaying and great yogi.'

'"When he said this, his friend Garuda, Vinata's son, appeared before him. He was delighted and to undertake a
kind act, said, 'I think that you are my well-wisher. It is my view that a well-wisher must help, to the best of capacity, his well-wisher obtain the object that he desires. O brahmana! I possess the means. O brahmana! I have spoken
earlier to Vasava's younger brother[Vishnu.] on your behalf and he has acceded to my wishes. Let us happily go to the
region that is beyond this earth. O Galava! Let us swiftly go.'"'
