Vaishampayana said, 'That supreme of horses then headed towards Pragjyotisha and began to wander around
there. Bhagadatta's son, harsh is battle, came out there. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! King Vajradatta
found that the horse of Pandu's son had arrived within his kingdom and wished to fight. The king who was Bhagadatta's son emerged from his city. He seized the horse and left for his own city. On noticing this, the mighty-armed
bull among the Kuru lineage quickly stretched Gandiva and violently attacked. The king was afflicted by arrows
released from Gandiva. The brave one released the horse and attacked Partha. The supreme among kings entered
the city and armoured himself again. Desiring to fight, he ascended a supreme elephant and emerged again. A
white umbrella was held aloft his head. The maharatha was fanned with a white whisk. Confused by his childishness, in the battle, he challenged Kouravya Partha, the maharatha among the Pandavas, and clashed against him.
The elephant was foremost among elephants and musth exuded from its temples and mouth. It was angrily goaded
towards the white horses. The elephant descended on the enemy's elephants, like a cloud showering down rain.
Following the sacred texts, it had been readied for battle. It created terror and was indomitable in battle. The immensely strong king urged the elephant on with a goad. It was resplendent as it seemed to descend from the sky. O
king! On seeing it descend, Dhananjaya became angry. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Though he was on the
ground, he fought against the one who was on the elephant. Extremely enraged, Vajradatta swiftly released lances
towards Dhananjaya. These were as powerful as the fire and descended like locusts. As they descended, Arjuna
countered them with arrows released from Gandiva. These coursed through the sky and while the lances were still
in the sky, severed them into two or three fragments. On seeing that the lances had been shattered, Bhagadatta's
son quickly shot a line of arrows[So many arrows were shot that they seemed to form a continuous line.] at Pandava. Acting even more swiftly, Arjuna angrily shot gold-tufted arrows
at Bhagadatta's son. In the great battle, the immensely energetic Vajradatta was pierced by these. Severely struck,
he fell down on the ground. But he did not lose his memory. In the battle, he again climbed onto the supreme elephant. Desiring victory, he shot excellent arrows towards Vijaya. Extremely enraged, Jishnu released arrows that
were like venomous serpents. These arrows flamed like the fire. Pierced by these, blood began to flow from the giant elephant, like many streams flowing down from the Himalayas, Indra among mountains.'
