'Yudhishthira said, "O Sanjaya! What words have you heard from me, desirous of fighting, that you are frightened
of war? O son! The absence of war is superior to war. O suta! Having obtained that[Peace.], who goes to war? O Sanjaya! If all of a man's desires are satisfied, without his having done anything, I know that he will never do anything[Implying that if the desires are satisfied without going to war, why should one go to war?]. There is nothing more foolish than going to war. Why should a man go to war, unless he has been cursed
by destiny? The Parthas undertake tasks that bring about happiness, for the sake of dharma and the welfare of the
world. He, who undertakes tasks for the sake of happiness, avoids difficult tasks that bring on unhappiness. He desires happiness and tries to avoid unhappiness.

'"But one, who seeks to bring pleasure to his senses, is overcome by desire and torments his own body. Having
become confounded, he confronts unhappiness. A fire that has been kindled becomes more energetic and stronger
if more kindling is added. Thus, even if the objective has been attained, desire is not satisfied and is like a fire with
clarified butter added to it. Look at the great abundance of objects of desire that the king who is Dhritarashtra's son
enjoys. Compare it with our diminished lot. He is not the lord of inferior beings. He does not hear the songs of inferior beings. He does not inhale the fragrance of inferior garlands. He does not use inferior unguents. He does not
don inferior garments. Why have we then been banished from the land of the Kurus? Having thus driven us out,
his heart is still consumed by the desire in his body. The king is himself partial and it is not proper that he should
expect others to be impartial. The way one behaves towards others, is exactly reflected in the way others behave
towards one's own self. At the end of the cold season[The months Magha and Phalguna constitute the cold season.], in the height of summer, one has kindled a fire in a dense
forest with dry wood, so that it grows because of the wind. Having done this, one suffers when one tries to escape.
O Sanjaya! Having obtained the prosperity, why does King Dhritarashtra lament now? He has always accepted the
evil-minded advice of his evil son and his stupid advisers. Unworthy himself, Suyodhana flouted the good advice
rendered by the trustworthy Vidura. Because of affection towards his son, King Dhritarashtra knowingly deviated
from the path of dharma. He[Vidura.] is wise among the Kurus and wishes for the welfare of the Kurus. He is extremely
learned, eloquent and of virtuous conduct. But out of affection for his son, King Dhritarashtra did not listen to
Vidura. He[Duryodhana.] himself desires honour, but does not show honour. He is selfish and envious and transgresses dharma
and artha for the sake of his own interests. He is ill-spoken and is overcome by intolerance. He is addicted to desire
and his heart is evil. He is perverse and insults those who are superior. He seeks for revenge. He injures his friends.
O Sanjaya! He is evil-minded. Out of affection for that son, King Dhritarashtra knowingly deviated from the objective of dharma. O Sanjaya! When gambling, it occurred to me that the destruction of the Kurus might have arrived. Though Vidura spoke laudable and wise words, Dhritarashtra paid no attention to them. When they no
longer followed the advice of Kshatta[Vidura's name. The word means the son of a shudra mother and a kshatriya father.], the Kurus started to face hardships. As long as they followed his wise advice, the kingdom continued to prosper. O suta! Now hear from me about the ones who advise Dhritarashtra's son.
They are Duhshasana, Shakuni and the son of the suta[Karna.]. O son of Gavalgana! Behold his stupidity.

'"Therefore, when I reflect on it, I do not see how there can be welfare for the Kurus and the Srinjayas. Dhritarashtra has usurped the wealth of others and has exiled the far-sighted Vidura[Vidura was exiled, but was placated and brought back. This has been described in Section 29 (Volume 3).]. Dhritarashtra and his son now
aspire for a great kingdom on this earth, without any rivals. It is because of this that there cannot be any peace.
They think that whatever is mine, should also be theirs. Karna thinks that it is possible to take up weapons against
Arjuna in battle. There were many great battles in earlier times? Why was Karna not a source for recourse then[The text uses the word dvipa or island, the sense being that Karna was not a refuge like an island.]?
Karna knows and so does Suyodhana, Drona knows and so does the grandfather[Bhishma.], and all the other Kurus also
know that there is no wielder of the bow like Arjuna. All the Kurus know, and so do all the other assembled lords
of the earth, that Duryodhana can perform evil acts only if Phalguna, the destroyer of enemies, is not present. Dhritarashtra's son thinks that he can take away the riches that I have gathered, from the Pandavas. Knowing these intentions, Kiriti will fight with a bow that is as long as a palm tree. The sons of Dhritarashtra survive as long as they
have not heard the twang of the extended Gandiva. Overlooking the force of the angry Bhimasena, Suyodhana
thinks that he has been successful in his objective. O son! Even Indra cannot take away my riches as long as Bhimasena is alive. O suta! There are Dhananjaya, Nakula and the brave Sahadeva too. O suta! The aged king, together with his son, should use his intelligence. O Sanjaya! Otherwise, the sons of Dhritarashtra will be consumed by
the rage of the Pandavas in battle. You know the hardships that we have confronted. O Sanjaya! In your honour, I
pardon them. You know what we have obtained earlier from the Kouravas and the conduct that we have shown towards Dhritarashtra's son. We will behave in the same way today. As you have said, we will strive for peace. Let
me have my kingdom in Indraprastha. Let Suyodhana, foremost among the Bharatas, agree."'
