Parashara said, 'Fathers, friends, preceptors and women belonging to those who are devoid of qualities bring
them no status in the world. O king! Even if one is devoted to them, speaks pleasantly to them, ensures their
welfare and is obedient, that brings no gains. For men, the father is the supreme god. The father is said to be superior to the mother. Knowledge is said to be the supreme gain. By controlling the objects of the senses, one obtains
the supreme. If the son of a king faces the flames of arrows in the field of battle and is consumed by them and
killed, he goes to the immortal worlds that are extremely difficult to obtain. As he pleases, he obtains the fruits of
heaven there. O king! One should not strike the exhausted, the terrified, those who have lost their weapons, the
weeping, those who are not willing to fight, those who have been deprived of their mounts, those who are not exerting themselves, those who are ill, those who are seeking refuge, those who are very young and those who are
aged. One should fight someone who is mounted, properly equipped, ready to fight and one's equal. In a battle, a
king should engage against the son of a kshatriya. It is certain that it is best to be killed by someone who is an
equal or superior. Kings who are slain by inferiors and cowards are censured. O lord of men! It is said that if one is
slain by a wicked person who resorts to evil conduct, or is inferior, that is wicked and certainly leads to hell. O
king! If a person's fortune is over and he has come under subjugation[Meaning, if one's life is over.], then no one can save him. But if the lifespan is left, no one can assail him. If a person has attained one hundred years of age or he is senior in age, one
must gently restrain him from performing any injurious acts. O son! When a householder suspects that his end is
near, it is appropriate that his death should occur near a river or at a sacred place. When the lifespan is over, one
merges into the five elements. This can happen without reason and can also occur with reason[Respectively, accidental and natural deaths.]. Having obtained
a body, if a person gives it up in a mishap, after losing the body, he follows the same kind of course[That is, obtains a similar kind of body. This seems to mean accidents and suicides.]. This is like
a man going from one house to another house. There is no second reason for a person to obtain a similar kind of
body. That is the way he pursues the goal of emancipation. The body consists of a mass of arteries, sinews and
bones. It is terrible and impure. It is a mixture of the elements, the senses and the qualities. This body is then covered by a skin. Learned ones who have thought about adhyatma say this. When the qualities decay, the body becomes mortal. The body is abandoned and becomes immobile and senseless. The elements return to their natural
states and the body merges with the ground. Driven by the urge to act, the body is born, here and there. O ruler of
Videha! Whatever be the state in which the body dies, driven by the deeds it has performed, its next birth is seen to
be determined by that nature. O king! But the atman in the creature is not born again immediately. Like a giant
cloud, it roams around in the sky. O king! It is born again only after it has obtained a new receptacle. O king! The
atman is superior to the mind. The mind is superior to the senses. O king! Of the two kinds of creations, the mobile
are superior[Compared to the immobile.]. It is held that bipeds are supreme among mobile ones. Among bipeds, dvijas are held to be superior.
O Indra among kings! Among dvijas, the wise are held to be superior. Among the wise, those who know about the
atman are superior and among those who know about the atman, the ones who are humble. It is certain that men
who are born must die. Because of the qualities[Sattva, rajas and tamas. The fruits of deeds are not eternal.], subjects undertake tasks that also come to an end. O king! A
man who dies when the sun is in its northern solstice[The text uses the word kashtha, which has more than one meaning. Solstice fits best, though it might also mean
when the sun is in one of the northern cardinal directions.] and when the nakshatras and muhurtas are auspicious, is a
person who performs auspicious deeds. A person must undertake tasks to the best of his capacity. He must cleanse
himself of all wicked deeds and without causing hardship to people, face the natural course of death. Poison, hanging, burning, being slain by bandits and being bitten to death by animals are said to be inferior kinds of death.
Those who are the performers of auspicious deeds do not confront these and many other inferior kinds of death. O
king! The life forces of virtuous ones ascend upwards, those who are middling in merit remain towards the middle
and the perpetrators of wicked deeds head downwards. O king! For any man, there is only one foe and no second
enemy, and that happens to be ignorance. It is because he is enveloped by this that he is goaded to perform extremely terrible and loathsome deeds. For the sake of realization, one must serve the aged and follow the dharma
of the sacred texts. O prince! One must make efforts for success. That enemy can only be brought down through
the arrow of wisdom. One must study the Vedas, perform austerities and be a brahmachari. To the best of one's capacity, one must perform the five sacrifices[Brabma yajna, deva yajna, pitri yajna, manushya yajna and bhuta yajna.]. With a desire to obtain dharma, a man must then go to the forest. He
must control himself and seek to obtain what is best. However, he must not emaciate himself by giving up all material objects. O son! Birth as a human is extremely difficult to obtain, even as a chandala[Therefore, that life must be preserved.]. O lord of the earth!
This is the first kind of birth, because one can seek to save the atman by performing auspicious deeds. O lord! Who
will destroy such a life once it has been obtained? Using the sacred texts as a yardstick, men perform acts of dharma. But though the status as a human may be very difficult to obtain in this world, there may be a man who ignores
dharma. He is overcome by desire and thereby deceives himself. O son! A person who looks at all beings with
eyes of affection is not destroyed, like the flames of a lamp that have been protected. He comforts everyone and
speaks pleasantly to them. He is impartial towards delight and misery. He obtains greatness in the hereafter. Donations, renunciation, making the appearance pleasant and amiable, repeated purification of the body through bathing
and austerities-these must be undertaken near the Sarasvati, in Naimisha, in Pushkara, or in other sacred spots on
earth. For those who die in houses, it is recommended that their dead bodies should be taken out from there and
taken to cremation grounds in vehicles. Cremation must be performed in accordance with the rites of purification.
Rites, beneficial sacrifices, officiating at sacrifices, donations and efforts to undertake auspicious deeds according
to one's capacity-these have been recommended for the sake of the departed ancestors. A man also undertakes
these for his own self. O lord of men! The sacred texts, the Vedas and the six Vedangas have been laid down for
the benefit of men who perform unblemished deeds.'"

'Bhishma said, "O lord of men! The extremely great-souled sage related all this and, in those ancient times,
spoke to the king of Videha for his benefit.'"
