Shounaka said, 'O son! You have told us about the many valorous and invincible serpents. Now that you have told
me about their curse, what did they do after that?'

Souti said, 'The illustrious and greatly famous lord Shesha left Kadru and practised severe austerities. He lived
on air and observed rigid vows. He went to Mount Gandhamadana and practised his austerities in Badari, Gokarna,
Pushkararanya[This can also be translated as the forest of Pushkara.] and the slopes of the Himalayas. He spent his time in these sacred tirthas, always rigid in observing his vows and controlling his senses.

'The grandfather[Brahma.] saw him engaged in terrible austerities, a lord with matted hair and dressed in bark, his
skin, flesh and muscles dried up. Addressing the ascetic engaged in his austerities and truthful vows, the grandfather said, "O Shesha! What are you doing? Let the welfare of all beings also be in your thoughts. O unblemished
one! You are causing pain to all beings through your severe austerities. O Shesha! Tell me what the wish in your
heart is." Shesha replied, "My brothers who shared the same womb are wicked of mind. I do not wish to live with
them. Please allow me this. Like great enemies, they are always jealous of each other. I am therefore engaged in
austerities. I do not wish to see them. O grandfather! They show no kindness for Vinata or her son, though Vinata's
son is also our brother. They always show him hatred. So does he. Because of the boon granted by the great-souled
Kashyapa, our father, he is much stronger. Therefore, I shall carry on with these austerities until I have shed this
body of mine. I will not associate with my brothers, in this life or another."

'When Shesha uttered these words, Brahma said, "O Shesha! I know what all your brothers do. There is a great
danger that looms before them because of their mother's offence. O snake! But earlier, I have already provided for
an exception. O Shesha! Do not grieve for any of your brothers. Choose whatever boon you wish for from me. I
am extremely pleased with you and I wish to grant you a boon. O best of the snakes! It is good that your mind is
fixed on dharma. Let your mind be established even more firmly on dharma." Shesha replied, "O divine grandfather! O lord! I ask for the boon that my mind always delight in dharma, in tranquillity and in austerities."

'Brahma said, "O Shesha! I am extremely pleased with your self-denial and desire for tranquillity. For the welfare of all creatures, let the words that you have expressed be fulfilled at my command. O Shesha! This wide earth
is very unstable with its mountains and forests, towns, habitations and oceans. Bear it up properly and well, so that
it is stable." Shesha replied, "O divine Prajapati! O granter of boons! O lord of the earth! O lord of every being! O
lord of the universe! As you command, I will hold the earth steady. Please place it on my head." Brahma said, "O
best of the snakes! O Shesha! Go under the earth and she herself will open up a passage for you. By holding up the
earth, you will perform an act greatly valued by me." Shesha agreed. The first among the snakes, the first one to be
born, entered the passage in the earth and remained there. He carries the goddess earth, encircled by a girdle of
oceans, on his head.

'Brahma said, "O Shesha! You are the best of the snakes. You are the god of dharma, because you singly hold up
the earth, encircling her with your endless coils. This is no less than what I myself, or the cleaver of Bala[Indra.], can
do." Thus does the powerful snake Ananta[Another name for Shesha.] always live under the ground, holding up the earth on Lord Brahma's command. Then the grandfather, the illustrious lord who is the foremost among the gods, provided Vinata's
son Garuda to Ananta as a helper.'
