'Sanjaya said, "O king! Arjuna then witnessed Bhishma's valour in battle. He told Shikhandi, 'Advance towards
the grandfather. You should not exhibit the slightest fear of Bhishma today. I will bring down the supreme of rathas
with sharp arrows.' O bull among the Bharata lineage! Having been thus addressed by Partha and having heard
what Partha had said, Shikhandi attacked Gangeya. O king! Having heard what Partha had said, Dhrishtadyumna,
and the maharatha who was Subhadra's son, cheerfully attacked Bhishma. The aged Virata and Drupada and the
armoured Kuntibhoja attacked Bhishma, while your son looked on. O lord of the earth! Nakula, Sahadeva, the valorous Dharmaraja and all the other soldiers attacked Gangeya, having heard what Partha had said. The maharathas
on your side united and counter-attacked, according to their capacity and according to their endeavour. Listen. I
will describe it. O great king! Chitrasena attacked Chekitana, who was advancing in the battle against Bhishma,
like a young tiger attacks a bull. O great king! In the encounter, Dhrishtadyumna had swiftly approached Bhishma
and Kritavarma repulsed him. Bhimasena was enraged and wished to kill Bhishma. O great king! Somadatta's son
quickly countered him. The brave Nakula released many arrows. Wishing to ensure that Bhishma remained alive,
Vikarna repulsed these. Sahadeva was advancing towards Bhishma's chariot. In the battle, Sharadvata Kripa angrily countered him. On seeing that Bhimasena's immensely strong son, the rakshasa who performed cruel deeds,
wished to kill Bhishma, Durmukha powerfully attacked him. In the encounter, Rishyashringa's son angrily repulsed Satyaki. O great king! Abhimanyu was advancing towards Bhishma's chariot. O great king! Sudakshina of
Kamboja repulsed him. The aged Virata and Drupada, the destroyers of enemies, had united. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Ashvatthama was enraged and repulsed them. The eldest of Pandu's sons wished to kill Bhishma.
Bharadvaja's son made efforts in the battle to counter Dharma's son. Arjuna was hastening in the battle, with
Shikhandi at the forefront. O great king! He was approaching Bhishma, scorching the ten directions. Duhshasana,
the great archer, countered him in the battle. There were other Pandava maharathas who were advancing towards
Bhishma in the battle. Other warriors on your side countered their advance.

'"Dhrishtadyumna forcefully advanced against the immensely strong Bhishma alone. He repeatedly addressed
the soldiers. 'This Arjuna, the descendant of the Kuru lineage, is advancing against Bhishma in battle. Advance.
Do not be frightened. Bhishma will not be able to touch you. When Arjuna fights in a battle, even Vasava loses interest, not to speak of Bhishma. The brave one has lost his spirits in the battle. He has but a short time to live.' On
hearing the words of their commander, the Pandava maharathas cheerfully advanced towards Gangeya's chariot.
The bulls among men on your side cheerfully resisted them, as they advanced in that battle, like a powerful storm.
O great king! Maharatha Duhshasana abandoned his fear. He wished to ensure that Bhishma remained alive and
attacked Dhananjaya. In that encounter, the brave Pandavas advanced towards Gangeya's chariot and towards your
maharatha sons. O lord of the earth! We witnessed a wonderful and colourful incident. Having reached
Duhshasana's chariot, Partha was checked. He was restrained, like the shoreline checks the turbulent and great
ocean. The angry Pandava was repulsed by your son. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Both of them were the
best of rathas and were invincible. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Both of them were radiant and were as
handsome as the moon or the sun. Both of them were overcome with anger and wished to kill each other. They
clashed in that great battle, like Maya and Shakra in earlier times. O great king! Duhshasana wounded Pandava
with three arrows and Vasudeva with twenty. On seeing that Varshneya was wounded, Arjuna was overcome with
rage. He pierced Duhshasana with one hundred iron arrows. In the encounter, they penetrated his armour and drank
his blood. O best of the Bharata lineage! Duhshasana was angered at this. He pierced Partha in the forehead with
five straight-tufted arrows. O great king! With those arrows on his forehead, the supreme of Pandavas was radiant,
like Meru's lofty peaks. Pierced by your archer son in the battle, Partha, the great archer, looked like a blossoming
kimshuka tree. Thus wounded, Pandava became angry. Extremely angry, he attacked Duhshasana, like Rahu attacking the moon on the night of the new moon or full moon. O lord of the earth! Your son was afflicted by the
powerful one. In the battle, he pierced Partha with arrows that were sharpened on stone and tufted with the feathers
of herons. The spirited and valorous Partha sliced down his bow. After this, he struck your son with nine arrows.
Stationing himself in front of Bhishma, he[Duhshasana.] grasped another bow and shot twenty-five arrows at Arjuna's chest
and arms. O great king! At this, Pandava, the destroyer of enemies, became angry. He released many arrows that
were like Yama's staff. But though they were released by Partha, your son sliced them down before they could
reach him. It was wonderful. Your son pierced Partha with sharp arrows. Partha became wrathful in that battle and
fixed arrows to his bow. They were gold-tufted and sharpened on stone and he released them in the encounter. O
great king! These penentrated the great-souled one's body, like swans entering a pond. O great king! O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! Your son was afflicted by the great-souled Pandava. He avoided Partha in the battle and
swiftly found refuge in Bhishma's chariot. He seemed to be submerged in fathomless waters and Bhishma was like
an island. O lord of the earth! Your son was brave and valiant. When he regained consciousness, he again restrained Partha with extremely sharp arrows, like Vritra against Purandara. Though he was pierced by the immensely valorous one, Arjuna was not distressed."'
