The brahmana said, 'In this connection, an ancient history is recounted, about a conversation between Narada
and the rishi Devamata.

'"'Devamata asked, "When a creature is born, which comes first-prana, apana, samana, vyana or udana?"

'"'Narada replied, "When a being is created, it is the other one that comes first[This probably means that the breath of life comes before the physical body.]. Know that the breath of life
has two components-one that moves diagonally and one that moves upwards."

'"'Devamata asked, "When a being is created, who creates the other one that comes first? Who determines the
two breaths of life, one that moves diagonally and one that moves upwards? Tell me."

'"'Narada replied, "Delight is generated from resolution. It[Delight.] is also generated from sound. It is also generated
from taste. It is also generated from form. It is also generated from touch. It is also generated from smell. These are
the types that result from udana. Delight results from physical intercourse. Semen results from desire. Juices flow
from desire[This is a reference to the menstrual flow.]. Usually, the mixture of semen and blood results from the union of samana and vyana. When semen
and blood are mixed, the first result is that of prana. When the semen is transformed by prana, apana results. The
pair of prana and apana are said to move upwards. The pair of vyana and samana are said to move diagonally. Agni
represents all the gods. This is the instruction of the Vedas. This[Agni.] generates knowledge in brahmanas and confers
them with intelligence. Smoke is its terrible tamas form, the potent ashes represent rajas. Sattva is generated from
it when oblations are offered into it. Those who are learned and knowledgable about sacrifices say that samana and
vyana form the foundation. Prana and apana are the offerings of  clarified butter and the fire  is between them.
Learned brahmanas know that this is the supreme form of udana. I will also tell you about the pairs and what is
separate from them. Listen. Day and night are a pair and the fire is between them. Learned brahmanas know that
this is the supreme form of udana. The two ayanas[Uttarayana and dakshinayana.] constitute a pair and the fire is between them. Learned brahmanas know that this is the supreme form of udana. Existence and non-existence constitute a pair and the fire is
between them. Learned brahmanas know that this is the supreme form of udana. Good and bad constitute a pair
and the fire is between them. Learned brahmanas know that this is the supreme form of udana. Truth and falsehood
constitute a pair and the fire is between them. Learned brahmanas know that this is the supreme form of udana.
Samana comes first and the pervasive vyana undertakes its task. The third is the pervasive samana. Vamadeva[It is not quite clear what this means. There was a rishi named Vamadeva. However, Vamadeva is also equated
with the Rudras, that is, an aspect of Shiva.] is
for the sake of tranquility. Tranquility is the eternal brahman. Learned brahmanas know that this is the supreme
form of udana."'"'
