'Dhritarashtra asked, "How is Kounteya Dharmaraja Yudhishthira leaving? How about Bhimasena, Savyasachi and
the two sons of Madri? O Kshatta! How about Dhoumya and the ascetic Droupadi? I wish to hear everything. Describe to me every act of theirs[One shouldn't forget that Dhritarashtra is blind.]."
'Vidura replied, "Kunti's son Yudhishthira is departing, covering his face with his garment. Pandava Bhima is
spreading his long arms, as he goes. Savyasachi is following the king[Yudhishthira.], scattering sand. Madri's son Sahadeva has
smeared his face, as he goes. Nakula, the most handsome man in this world, follows the king. His mind is despondent and he has smeared his entire body with dust. The large-eyed and beautiful Krishna follows the king. She is
weeping and has covered her face with her hair. O lord of the earth! Dhoumya is chanting terrible sama hymns
connected with Yama and as he treads the path, he is holding kusa grass in his hand."

'Dhritarashtra asked, "The Pandavas are going in many different forms. O Vidura! Please tell me why they are
going in these different ways."

'Vidura replied, "Though your sons robbed him of his kingdom and his riches through deceit, the mind of the
intelligent Dharmaraja does not deviate from dharma. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! This king is always
kind to the sons of Dhritarashtra. Though he has been deprived through deceit, he refuses to open his eyes in anger.

'I will burn these people down if I look at them through my terrible eyes.' Thinking this, the Pandava king goes
with his face covered. Now listen to me, as I tell you why Bhima is going in this way. O bull among the Bharata
lineage! 'There is no one equal to me in strength of arms.' Knowing this, Bhima spreads his long arms as he goes.
Proud of the strength of his arms, he displays his arms. He wishes to perform acts on the enemy that do justice to
those arms. Kunti's son Arjuna is capable of using both arms to shower arrows. Savyasachi follows the king, scattering sand. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Just as he scatters sand, in that fashion, he will release showers
of arrows on his enemies. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! 'Let no one recognize my face today.' Thinking
this, Sahadeva travels with a smeared face. 'Along the route, I may steal the hearts of women who look at me.'

Thinking this, Nakula travels with his entire body covered in dust. Droupadi is attired in a single garment. She is
weeping and she is in her menses. Her hair has not been braided and her garment is smeared with blood. She has
spoken these words. 'In the fourteenth year, the wives of those who have caused my present plight, will find their
husbands dead, their sons dead, their relatives dead and their beloved ones dead. Their bodies will be covered with
the blood of their relatives. Their hair will not be braided and they will be in their menses. It is only after offering
water to the dead that those aryas[Some regional versions say bharya (wife) instead of the arya of the critical edition. Given the context, wives
makes better sense.] will enter Gajasahrya. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Dhoumya is the
self-controlled priest. He is chanting sama hymns connected with Yama and is leading them from the front, towards the south-west. He holds darbha grass[Another name for the sacred kusa grass.]. 'When the descendants of the Bharata lineage have been killed in
battle, the elders of the Kuru clan will chant these sama hymns.' Dhoumya is proceeding with these words. 'Alas!
Alas! Our lords are leaving. Witness this great misery.' This is what the miserable citizens are saying in every direction. The intelligent Kounteyas are leaving for the forest in this fashion, indicating through these signs and
marks the resolutions that exist in their hearts. As those foremost among men are leaving Gajasahrya, lightning is
flashing in the cloudless sky and the earth is trembling. O lord of the earth! Rahu has swallowed the sun, though
this is not the time of parvani[Parvani means the day of the full moon or the day of the new moon.]. Meteors are descending throughout the city. Predatory animals are screaming, together with vultures, jackals and crows, in the temples of the gods, in sanctuaries and from the tops of walls and
houses. O king! These are the great and terrible portents as the Pandavas leave for the forest. They indicate the
doom of the Bharatas, since you have acted in accordance with evil counsel."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Narada now appeared in the sabha and stood before the Kurus. He was surrounded by maharshis and spoke these terrible words, "In the fourteenth year from now, because of Duryodhana's crime and
through the strength of Bhima and Arjuna, the Kouravas who are here will be destroyed." Having uttered these
words, the supreme of devarshis, graced with the great prosperity of the brahman, arose to the sky and swiftly
disappeared.

'At this, Duryodhana, Karna and Soubala Shakuni thought that Drona would be their refuge and offered him the
kingdom[The Pandava kingdom.]. Drona spoke these words to the evil Duryodhana, Duhshasana, Karna and all the other Bharatas. "The
brahmanas have said that the Pandavas, sons of the gods, should not be killed[Cannot be killed, is also a possible translation. But should not be killed, seems more appropriate.]. But with all my strength, I will do
whatever I can for those who seek refuge with me. With all their hearts and devotion, the sons of Dhritarashtra and
their king have come to me and I cannot abandon them. Destiny is always supreme. In accordance with dharma,
the sons of Pandu have been defeated and have left for the forest. The Kouravas will live in the forest for twelve
years. They will practise brahmacharya. But since they will fall prey to anger and intolerance, the Pandavas will
return with enmity and be the cause of great grief to me. In a feud over friendship, I once dislodged Drupada from
his kingdom. O descendant of the Bharata lineage[This is specifically addressed to Duryodhana.]! In his anger, he performed a sacrifice to obtain a son who
would kill me. Through the austerities of Yaja and Upayaja[Sages. The story has been recounted in Volume 1.], he obtained a son named Dhrishtadyumna from the
fire and the slender-waisted Droupadi from the middle of the altar. He[Dhrishtadyumna.] was given by the gods and has radiance
like that of the fire. He was born with bow, arrows and armour. Since I am subject to the dharma of earth, I am possessed by great fear for him. This son of Prishata[Prishata is Drupada's name.], a bull among men, is now on their side. There will be great
fear to my life if I ever have to battle him. He is famous in the world because it has been heard that he will kill me.
Because of your deed, that time of destruction has arrived. Therefore, without any loss of time, do what is best for
you. This happiness will last for a short time, like the shade of a palm tree in the winter. Perform great sacrifices,
enjoy your pleasures and donate. In the fourteenth year, a great calamity will befall you. O Duryodhana! Depending on your inclinations, you have heard or understood. If you so desire, use pacification with the Pandavas." On
hearing Drona's words, Dhritarashtra said, "O Kshatta[From this it appears that Vidura is still describing the events to Dhritarashtra.]! What the preceptor[Drona.] has said is true. Go back to the
Pandavas. If they do not return, offer respect to the Pandavas. Let these fortunate sons go with arms, chariots and
infantry[Nothing happens to this instruction and there is disconnect with what happens next. The fortunate sons are
the Pandavas and Vidura doesn't go to try and bring them back. If they decide to go to the forest, Dhritarashtra is
offering the Pandavas weapons, chariots and infantry. However, this doesn't materialize. Both this chapter and the
next seem to have been added on later.]."'