'Sanjaya said, "At that time, Duryodhana was overcome by intolerance. He approached Drona, and wishing to inject joy and energy into him, said, 'In the battle, one should not have shown mercy to the exhausted ones, while
they were resting, especially because they are successful in their objective. The enemy was distressed in mind. We
showed them mercy only because we wished to bring you pleasure. The Pandavas have now rested and have become stronger. But we are losing energy and strength in every way. They are protected by you and are prospering.
You, in particular, possess all the divine weapons and the brahmastras and all of them are vested in you. I tell you
truthfully that the Pandavas, or we, or no other archers in the world, are your equals in fighting. O supreme among
brahmanas! You are knowledgeable about all weapons. There is no doubt that, with your divine weapons, you can
destroy all the worlds, with the gods, the asuras and the gandharvas. They are especially frightened of you. But you
are not angry with them, perhaps because you remember that they were your students. Or perhaps it is my misfortune.' Having been thus incited by your son, Drona became angry.

'"O king! He wrathfully spoke these words to Duryodhana. 'O Duryodhana! Though I am old, in this battle, I
am fighting to the utmost of my capacity. All of them do not know about these weapons. But desiring victory, I
cannot perform an inferior deed and kill those who are unacquainted with weapons. O Kouravya! But I give you
my word and it will not be otherwise. I will do whatever is in your mind, be it good or bad. O king! I tell you truthfully that I will exhibit my valour and take off my armour and weapons only after I have killed all the Panchalas.
You think that Kounteya Arjuna was exhausted in the battle. O mighty-armed one! O Kourava! Listen to what I
truthfully have to say about his valour. When Savyasachi is enraged in a battle, the gods, the gandharvas, the yak-
shas and the rakshasas cannot stand before him. In Khandava, he countered the illustrious lord of the gods
himself[This has been described in Section 19 (Volume 2).]. The great-souled one countered him with a shower of arrows. There were many other yakshas, serpents
and daityas, intoxicated of their strength. The Indra among men killed them and all this is known to you. At the
time of the expedition with the cattle, the gandharvas, Chitrasena and the others, were vanquished by him[This has been described in Section 39 (Volume 3).]. The
wielder of the firm bow freed you from bondage. The nivatakavachas were the enemies of the gods and could not
be killed by the gods in battle. They were defeated by that brave one. There were thousands of danavas who lived
in the city of Hiranyapura. That tiger among men vanquished them[These incidents have been described in Section 35 (Volume 3).]. How can humans withstand him? O lord of
the earth! You have yourself seen how your entire army made every effort, but was destroyed by the son of Pandu.'

O king! While he was thus praising Arjuna, your son was enraged.

'"He again spoke these words to Drona. 'I, Duhshasana, Karna and my maternal uncle, Shakuni, will kill Arjuna
in the battle. We will divide the army of the Bharatas into two parts[One part will be left with Drona and the other part used against Arjuna.].' Hearing this, Bharadvaja's son laughed,
but agreed to what the king had proposed and said, 'My blessings are with you. What kshatriya can slay that undecaying bull among kshatriyas? He is the wielder of Gandiva and blazes in energy. The lord of riches[Kubera.], Indra,
Yama, the lord of the waters[Varuna.], the asuras, the serpents and the rakshasas, with their weapons, cannot kill him. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! Such words are only spoken by fools like you. After having encountered Arjuna
in a battle, who can safely return home? You yourself are suspicious of everybody. You are cruel. Your resolution
is wicked. You censure even those who speak for your own welfare. Without any delay, for your own sake, advance against Kounteya. You are the one who desires the fight. You have been born in a noble lineage. You are a
kshatriya. All these kings have caused no offence. Why are you getting them killed? You are the root of the enmity.
Therefore, advance against Arjuna. This maternal uncle of yours is wise and is devoted to the dharma of kshatriyas. O Gandhari's son! He is addicted to deceitful gambling. Let him advance against Arjuna in the battle. He is
skilled in playing with the dice. He is crooked, deceitful in gambling and a cheat. Skilled in deceitful gambling, he
has often said that he will defeat the Pandavas. Because of your stupidity and delusion, together with Karna, you
have often cheerfully said in Dhritarashtra's presence, "O father! I, Karna and my brother, Duhshasana-these
three will unite and kill the sons of Pandu in the battle." This was what you boasted, in the hearing of the assemblage in the assembly hall. Accomplish that pledge now and make your words come true. This Pandava, your
worst enemy, is stationed in front of you. Follow the dharma of a kshatriya. Death at Jaya's hands would also be
praiseworthy. You have given donations. You have pleasured. You have studied. You have obtained the prosperity
that you desired. You have been successful. You do not have any debts. You should not be frightened of Pandava.'

Having spoken these words in the battle, Drona desisted from fighting the enemy. With the soldiers divided into
two, the battle commenced."'
