'Arjuna said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Through the favours of the great-souled Tryambaka, the god
of the gods, I happily spent the night there. When the night had passed and I had completed the morning rituals, I
saw the best of brahmanas whom I had met earlier. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I told him everything that
had happened and my meeting with the illustrious Mahadeva. O Indra among kings! That supreme of brahmanas
then happily told me, 'You have seen Mahadeva in a way that no one else has. O unblemished one! You will see
Vaivasvata[Each manvantara (era) is presided over by a sovereign known as Manu. It is because humans are descended
from Manu that they are known as manava. There are fourteen manvantaras and fourteen Manus to preside over
them. The present manvantara is the seventh and the Manu who presides over this is known as Vaivasvata, because
he was born from the sun (Vivasvat).] and all the other lords of the worlds. You will see Indra of the gods and he will give you weapons.'

O king! Having said this, he embraced me again and again. Then that brahmana, who was like the sun, went where
he desired.

'"O destroyer of your enemies! In the afternoon of that day, a pure breeze began to blow and it seemed to make
the world new again. Near me, at the foot of Shaishira mountain, divine, fragrant and fresh flowers appeared. The
sound of delightful and divine musical instruments was heard on all sides, together with chants in praise of Indra.
Masses of apsaras and gandharvas began to sing various songs in front of the god of the gods. Masses of
Maruts[Maruts are gods of the wind and Indra's companions. Indra is therefore known as Marutvan. Shachi is his
consort.] arrived in celestial vehicles, together with Mahendra's followers and those who live in his abode.
Marutvan, accompanied by Shachi, arrived in ornamented chariots yoked to tawny horses, together with all the
other immortals. O king! At that instant, Naravahana Kubera, supreme in prosperity, appeared before me. I saw
Yama established in the southern direction and Varuna and the king of the gods, each established in one's respective place. O great king! That bull among the gods then spoke to me in comforting words. 'O Savyasachi[Savyasachi is one of Arjuna's names and means one who is left-handed.]! Look
at all of us lokapalas established here. You have seen Shankara to accomplish a task for the gods. You will receive
weapons from all of us who are around here.' O lord! I then purified and prostrated myself before those best of the
gods. In accordance with the prescribed rites, I received those powerful weapons[There is an inconsistency, because Arjuna actually obtained those weapons in heaven.]. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! O destroyer of enemies! Having obtained the weapons, I obtained leave of the gods. Then all the gods returned the way they had come.

'"Maghavan, lord of the gods, ascended his splendid chariot. The illustrious one, the destroyer of the enemies of
the gods, smiled and spoke these words. 'O Dhananjaya! I had known you even before you arrived here. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! Later, I will reveal myself to you[Indra was the brahmana and Indra would show himself to Arjuna in heaven.]. O Pandava! You have earlier bathed in the
tirthas. You have earlier tormented yourself with great austerities. You will therefore go to heaven. You will have
to practise supremely terrible austerities again.' Then the illustrious one recounted all the austerities that would
have to be performed. 'On my instructions, Matali will take you to the world of the thirty gods. You are already
well known to the gods and the great-souled sages.' At this, I told Shakra, 'O illustrious one! Please show your
favours to me. O lord of the thirty gods! I seek you as my preceptor, so that I may learn about weapons from you.'

Indra replied, 'O son! O scorcher of enemies! You will perform terrible deeds. The reason for which you wish to
acquire weapons will be satisfied.' Then I said, 'O slayer of enemies! I will never use those celestial weapons
against humans, except to ward off their weapons. O lord of the gods! Therefore, give me those divine weapons. O
bull among the gods! I will later obtain the worlds that weapons can attain.' Indra replied, 'O Dhananjaya! I uttered those words in order to test you. Your words are worthy of someone who is my son. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! O extender of the Kuru lineage! Go to my abode and learn all the weapons there-those of Vayu,
Agni, Varuna, the masses of Maruts, of the Sadhyas, the grandfather[Brahma.], the gandharvas, the serpents and the rakshasas, those of Vishnu, the nairritas[In this context, a class of demons.] and my own.' Having spoken those words to me, Shakra disappeared.

'"O king! I then saw Indra's chariot arrive. It was yoked to tawny horses. It was divine, magical and sacred and
was driven by Matali. The lokapalas having left, Matali told me, 'O immensely radiant one! Shakra, the king of the
gods, wishes to see you. O mighty-armed one! First attain perfection. Then perform supreme deeds. Behold the regions earned by those with pure deeds. Go to heaven in your physical body.' At Matali's words, I took my leave of
Shaishira mountain. Circumambulating, I ascended that supreme chariot. Matali, expansive in generosity and an
expert about horses, drove those steeds in the proper fashion, with the speed of the mind and the wind. O king! On
seeing me seated steadily though the chariot was swinging, the charioteer was surprised and wonderingly said,
'Today, this seems to me to be wonderful and extraordinary. You are seated in this divine chariot, but have not
moved even a foot. O bull among the Bharata lineage! When the horses make their first movements, I have noticed
that even the king of the gods loses his balance. O extender of the Kuru lineage! But you are seated in this fashion,
though the chariot is swinging. It seems to me that your powers have surpassed those of Shakra.' O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having said this, Matali soared up into the sky and lovingly showed me Nandana
and many other groves of the gods. I saw Shakra's abode of Amaravati. It was adorned with divine trees that yielded every object of desire and jewels. The sun did not light it up. No chill or heat was felt there. O king! There was
no fatigue, dust, mud, darkness or old age. No sorrow, misery or pallor could be noticed there. O great king! O oppressor of enemies! There was no weariness among the inhabitants of heaven. O lord of the earth! There was no
anger or greed, nor anything inauspicious. Beings in the abodes of the gods are always satisfied and happy. There
are always flowers and fruit in trees that are green with foliage. There are many ponds full of lotuses and sougandhika flowers. The breeze is cool, fragrant, refreshing and pure there. There are many jewels everywhere and the
ground is strewn with flowers. There are many beautiful animals and birds, with sweet voices. Many immortals
can be seen, riding their vimanas. I saw the Vasus, the Rudras, the Sadhyas, the masses of Maruts, the Adityas and
the Ashvins and offered homage to all of them. They gave me their blessings for valour, fame, energy, strength, the
learning of weapons and victory in battle.

'"I then entered that beautiful city, worshipped by gods and gandharvas. Hands joined in salutation, I stood before the king of the gods, the one with a thousand eyes. Shakra, supreme among generous ones, was delighted and
offered me half of his throne. O one who is generous with gifts! Then Vasava honoured me and touched my body.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! For the sake of weapons and learning, I began to dwell in heaven, together
with the gods and the gandharvas. O king! Vishvavasu's[Vishvavasu is the name of the king of the gandharvas.] son Chitrasena became my friend and he taught me
everything that the gandharvas knew. O king! Having obtained the weapons and having been honoured, I lived
there happily in Shakra's abode, getting everything that I wished for. I heard the sounds of songs and the splendid
sounds of many musical instruments. O scorcher of enemies! I witnessed the dancing of the best of the apsaras. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! Without ignoring those, which I learnt properly, I specially devoted my attention to learning about weapons. At that, the thousand-eyed lord was satisfied with my wishes. O king! In this way,
the period of my residence in heaven passed."'
