'"Yudhishthira said, 'O mighty-armed one! When you left to fight with the army of the samshaptakas, the preceptor made efforts to capture me. But in every way, we succeeded in countering Drona's battle formation. In the battle, we made efforts to arrange our army of chariots in a counter-formation. He was checked by the rathas and I
was protected. Wishing to kill us swiftly, he oppressed us with sharp arrows. Thus afflicted by Drona, we were incapable of glancing at Drona's array and could not even think of penetrating it. All of us then spoke to Subhadra's
son, who was your equal in valour. "O son! O lord! Penetrate the array." Thus urged by us, the valiant one was like
a well-trained horse. He took that burden on himself, ignoring how difficult it was to bear. He was valiant and he
was instructed by you in the use of weapons. Though a child, the powerful one penetrated, like Suparna entering
the ocean. In that battle, we followed Satvati's brave son[Abhimanyu's mother, Subhadra, was born in the Satvata lineage.]. We wished to penetrate the army through the path
that he had followed. O son[The word used is tata. While this means son, it is affectionately used for anyone who is younger or junior.]! But because of a boon that he had obtained from Rudra, the vile Saindhava, King
Jayadratha, repulsed all of us. Then Drona, Kripa, Karna, Drona's son, Brihadbala and Kritavarma-these six
rathas surrounded Subhadra's son. All those warrior maharathas surrounded the child. Though he strove to his utmost, they were many and he was deprived of his chariot. When he had been deprived of his chariot, Duhshasana's
son struck swiftly, though he had himself confronted great danger earlier. It was destiny that he[Abhimanyu.] met his end. He
slaughtered many thousands of the enemy earlier, elephants, horses, charioteers and riders, one hundred of the
foremost among princes and many other unnamed and brave ones. He dispatched King Brihadbala to the world of
heaven. Thus, through destiny, the supreme among those with dharma in their souls, attained his end. Everything
that extends our grief took place in this way. Thus it was that the tiger among men attained the world of heaven.'

'Sanjaya said, "Arjuna heard the words that Dharmaraja had spoken. Lamenting, 'Alas, son!' he sighed in grief
and fell down on the ground in his sorrow. With distressed faces, everyone surrounded Dhananjaya. They were
overcome with misery and glanced at each other, without blinking their eyes. When he had recovered consciousness, Vasava's son became unconscious with rage. He seemed to tremble, as if in a fever, and sighed repeatedly. He
squeezed one hand with another and sighed, eyes bathed in tears. His glances were like one who was mad. He
spoke these words. 'Know this to be the truth. I will kill Jayadratha tomorrow. I will slay him, unless out of fear,
he abandons the sons of Dhritarashtra, or seeks refuge with us, or seeks sanctuary with Purushottama Krishna, or
with you. O great king! I will kill Jayadratha tomorrow. Engaged in doing what is pleasant to the sons of Dhritarashtra, he has forgotten his friendship with me. The evil one has been the reason behind the death of the child. I
will kill Jayadratha tomorrow. Wishing to protect him, whoever fights with me, even if it is the brave Drona or Kripa, will be covered by me with arrows. O bulls among men! O brave and revered ones! If I do not achieve this in
the battle, let me not attain the worlds meant for those with meritorious deeds. There are worlds meant for those
who kill their mothers and those who kill their fathers, for those who have intercourse with the wives of their
teachers and for those who are wicked, for those who hate virtuous ones and speak ill of others, for those who misappropriate wealth left in their custody and for those who violate trust and for those who speak ill of women they
have enjoyed earlier. There are worlds for those who kill brahmanas and those who kill cattle. There are worlds for
those who eat payasa[Rice mixed with sweetened milk.], food made of barley, herbs, dishes made of sesamum, cakes and meat without offering
them to the gods first. If I do not kill Jayadratha, let those worlds be mine. There are worlds for those who disrespect the best of brahmanas who are devoted to studying the Vedas, others who deserve honour, the aged, the virtuous and seniors. There are worlds attained by those who touch brahmanas, cattle and fire with their feet and those
who release phlegm, excreta and urine in water. If I do not kill Jayadratha, let those terrible ends be mine. There
are ends obtained by those who bathe naked and those who do not serve guests. There are ends obtained by those
who take bribes, those who are liars and those who are deceitful, those who harm their own souls and those who
speak false praises. There are ends obtained by wretches who eat sweetmeats in the sight of servants, sons, wives
and dependents, without offering them a share. If I do not kill Jayadratha, let those terrible ends be mine. There are
ends obtained by those who abandon virtuous and obedient dependents and those evil-souled ones who censure
those who have done them good deeds. There are ends for those who do not give deserving neighbours shares in
shraddha[Funeral rites.] offerings, for those who give to the undeserving, for those who have alliances with women of low
caste[The word used is vrishali, which does not necessarily mean shudra.], for those who are drunkards, for those who disrespect those who deserve honour, those who are ungrateful and those who speak ill of their brothers. If I do not kill Jayadratha, let those ends swiftly be mine. I have recounted the ends of those who do not follow dharma and there are others that I have not enumerated. If tomorrow's
night passes without my having killed Jayadratha, let those ends swiftly become mine. Listen to another pledge
that I am taking. If tomorrow's sun sets without my having killed the wretched one, I will enter the blazing fire at
this spot. O asuras! O gods! O men! O birds! O serpents! O ancestors! O those who wander in the night! O brahmanas! O mobile and immobile objects! O everyone else! You will be incapable of protecting my enemy. Even if
he descends to the fierce nether regions, even if he goes to the city of the gods or the city of the daityas, I will
strike him with a hundred arrows in the morning. I will slice off the head of my son's foe.' Having spoken thus, he
stretched Gandiva with his left hand and his right. The sound of his touching the bow transcended his own words.
When Arjuna took the pledge, Janardana blew on Panchajanya[The name of Krishna's conch shell.]. Enraged, Dhananjaya blew on Devadatta[The name of Arjuna's conch shell.].
Filled completely with the wind from Achyuta's mouth, Panchajanya made a loud sound. The sound released from
it made the lords of the universe, the nether regions and the directions tremble, like that at the destruction of a
yuga. When the great-souled one had taken the oath, the sons of Pandu roared like lions. Musical instruments were
sounded in every direction."'
