'Sanjaya said, "O great king! In the afternoon, there was again an encounter between Drona and the Somakas. It
was accompanied by a sound that was like that of clouds thundering. The foremost among men[Drona.] was stationed
on a chariot with red horses. He attacked the Pandus in that battle, resorting to a medium speed. The immensely
strong and great archer was engaged in what would bring you pleasure. He was born from a supreme pot[Drona was born in a pot.]. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! He used sharp arrows with colourful tufts and struck down the best of warriors.
O king! Bharadvaja's powerful son seemed to be sporting in that battle.

'"Maharatha Brihatkshatra from Kekaya, the eldest of five brothers and brave and indomitable in battle, advanced against him. He released sharp arrows and severely shrouded the preceptor. He was like a mighty cloud
that releases rain on Gandhamadana. O great king! At this, Drona became extremely angry. He released seventeen
arrows that were gold-tufted and had been sharpened on stone. Those terrible arrows were released from Drona's
bow and were like venomous serpents. However, in the battle, he cheerfully sliced down each of them with ten of
his own arrows. On beholding his dexterity, the best of the brahmanas laughed and dispatched eight arrows that
had drooping tufts. On seeing these arrows released from Drona's bow swiftly descend on him, he severed those
arrows with firm and sharp arrows of his own. O great king! Your soldiers were astounded at this. They beheld Brihatkshatra perform an extremely difficult deed. O great king! Drona also applauded Kekaya's special act. In that
battle, the greatly ascetic one then invoked the divine and invincible brahmastra. O king! But in that battle, the
mighty-armed Kekaya released his own brahmastra and countered it. Having destroyed the weapon of Bharadvaja's son in that encounter, he pierced the brahmana with sixty arrows with gold tufts that had been sharpened on
stone. At this, Drona, best among men, released an iron arrow. O supreme among kings! This penetrated his armour and entered the ground, like a cobra penetrating a termite hill when it is released. In that battle, the arrow
penetrated Kekaya and entered the earth. O great king! He was thus severely pierced by Drona, knowledgeable
about weapons, and became overcome by great rage. He dilated his beautiful eyes and pierced Drona with seventy
arrows that were gold-tufted and had been sharpened on stone. With a broad-headed arrow, he struck the charioteer
in the arms and the chest. O venerable one! Pierced by Brihatkshatra in many ways, Drona released many sharp
arrows towards Kekaya's chariot. Drona made maharatha Brihatkshatra anxious. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O great king! He released sharp arrows towards Kekaya and quickly struck him severely between the
breasts. The heart of that tiger among men was shattered and he fell down from his chariot.

'"O king! On the death of the maharatha from Kekaya, Shishupala's son became extremely angry and spoke to
his charioteer. 'O charioteer! Go to the spot where the armoured Drona is stationed and is slaughtering all the
Kekayas and the Panchalas and their armies.' On hearing his words, the charioteer took the supreme of rathas to
Drona, on swift horses that hailed from Kamboja. Dhrishtaketu, bull among the Chedi lineage was extremely
proud of his strength and suddenly attacked Drona, like an insect towards a flame. Having attacked, he pierced
Drona, his horses, his chariot and his standard with sixty arrows. He again used other sharp arrows, as if against a
sleeping tiger. As the powerful king endeavoured in the battle, Drona used a sharp kshurapra arrow to sever his
bow in the middle. Shishupala's maharatha son picked up another bow. He again pierced Drona with extremely
sharp and firm arrows. The immensely strong Drona killed his horses and his charioteer and pierced him with
twenty-five arrows. In that battle, the king of the Chedis was without a chariot and without his bow. He angrily
hurled a club towards the chariot of Bharadvaja's son. It was terrible in form and fearsome. It was heavy, completely made out of stone and embellished with gold. On seeing it suddenly descend, Bharadvaja's son brought it
down with many thousands of arrows. Bharadvaja's son used arrows to bring the club down onto the ground, like a
star with a red garland of clouds falling down from the sky. On seeing that the club had been destroyed, the intolerant Dhrishtaketu quickly hurled a javelin and a spear that was as bright as gold. In that great battle, Drona used his
arrows to shatter the javelin into three pieces. Using his lightness of hand, the immensely strong one also violently
severed the spear. He[Dhrishtaketu.] was trying to kill him. In that encounter, Bharadvaja's powerful son wished to kill him
instead and released an extremely sharp arrow. The arrow penetrated the armour and the heart of the infinitely energetic one and then penetrated the ground, like a swan entering a pond full of lotuses. O king! Just as an insect is
grasped by a hungry blue jay, in that great battle, the brave Drona devoured Dhrishtaketu. When the king of Chedi
was killed, his son wished to take up his father's burden. The son was supreme in the knowledge of weapons and
was overcome by intolerance. But Drona laughed at him and used his arrows to dispatch him to Yama's eternal
abode. The powerful one was like a huge tiger in a large forest, against a young deer.

'"O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The Pandavas were thus being decimated. Jarasandha's brave son himself attacked Drona. O great king! He enveloped Drona with his sharp arrows and swiftly made him invisible, like
the sun by clouds. On seeing his dexterity, Drona, the destroyer of kshatriyas, quickly released hundreds and thousands of arrows. In that encounter, Drona, supreme among rathas, remained stationed on his chariot. While all the
enemy archers looked on, he enveloped and killed Jarasandha's son.

'"Drona was like Death and devoured whoever dared to approach Drona. He was like death, which grasps all
beings when the right time has come. Drona, the great archer, proclaimed his name in that battle. He released many
thousands of arrows and stupefied the Pandaveyas. These arrows were gold-tufted, sharpened on stone and were
marked with Drona's name. In that battle, in every direction, he slew men, elephants and horses. They were
slaughtered by Drona, like Shakra against the great asuras. The Panchalas trembled, like cows afflicted by the cold.
O bull among the Bharata lineage! When the soldiers were thus slaughtered by Drona, a terrible uproar arose
among the Pandavas. In that encounter, they were confounded by the shower of arrows released by Bharadvaja's
son. The maharatha Panchalas were like those whose thighs had been grasped by crocodiles. O great king! The
Chedis, the Srinjayas and the Somakas sought to cheerfully fight against Bharadvaja's son and attacked, shouting,
'Drona has been slain. Drona has been slain.' Those tigers among men used their utmost strength against the immensely radiant one. In that encounter, they wished to dispatch Drona to Yama's abode. While those brave ones
strove, Bharadvaja's son used arrows that had been sharpened on stone to send them, especially the foremost
among the Chedis, to Yama. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing what had become to the foremost
among the Chedis, the Panchalas trembled and were oppressed by Drona's arrows. O venerable one! On witnessing Drona's form and deeds, they loudly called out, in the direction of Bhimasena and Dhrishtadyumna's chariots,
'There is no doubt that this brahmana has performed austerities that are difficult to perform and his conduct is
great. He is valiant in the battle and is consuming the bulls among the kshatriyas. Fighting is the dharma of kshatriyas and supreme austerities that of brahmanas. But an ascetic who is accomplished in learning can burn with his
sight. Drona's weapons are like fire to the touch and are penetrating the bulls among the kshatriyas. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage[Since this is within quotes, this address to Dhritarashtra does not belong.]! There are many who have approached this unassailable and terrible one and have been
consumed. The immensely radiant one is using the utmost of his strength, the utmost of his endeavour and the utmost of his spirits. Drona is killing our soldiers and is confounding all the beings.' Kshatradharma was stationed
there and heard these words.

'"He used an arrow that was in the shape of a half-moon to sever Drona's bow, with an arrow affixed to it.
Drona, the crusher of kshatriyas, became even more enraged. He grasped another radiant bow that was even more
forceful. He affixed a sharp arrow to it, one that sparkled, was firm and was capable of destroying a great load. The
powerful preceptor pulled the bow back up to his ear and released it. This killed Kshatradharma and penetrated the
earth. His heart was shattered and he fell down from the chariot, onto the ground. On the death of Dhrishtadyumna's son, the other soldiers trembled.

'"Maharatha Chekitana then attacked Drona and pierced Drona between the breasts with ten arrows. He used
four more to strike his charioteer and four arrows to strike the four horses. The preceptor then pierced his right arm
with sixteen arrows, his standard with sixteen arrows and his charioteer with seven. When his charioteer was slain,
the horses fled, dragging the chariot away, since in that encounter, they were covered with the arrows of Bharadvaja's son. O venerable one! On seeing that Chekitana's chariot had fled and that his charioteer had been slain, the
Panchalas and the Pandavas were overcome by a great fear. O venerable one! In every direction of that battle,
Drona drove away the assemblage of brave Chedis, Panchalas and Srinjayas and looked extremely beautiful. His
grey hair descended up to his ears. He was dark. He was more than eighty years old. But in that battle, the aged
Drona roamed around like one who was only sixteen years old. O great king. As Drona, the destroyer of enemies,
fearlessly roamed around in that battle, the enemy regarded him as the one with the vajra in his hand[Indra.].

'"O great king! O king! The intelligent Drupada spoke. 'This hunter is killing kshatriyas like a tiger against
small animals. The evil-minded Duryodhana will obtain the world of the wicked and face hardships there. It is because of his avarice that the bulls among the kshatriyas are being killed in this battle. Hundreds of them are lying
down on the ground, like wounded bulls. Their limbs are covered with blood and they have become food for dogs
and jackals.' O great king! Having said this, Drupada, the leader of an akshouhini, attacked Drona in that battle,
placing the Parthas in front of him."'
