Yudhishthira said, "O grandfather! O immensely wise one! O best among the Bharata lineage! I wish to hear
the truth about Pundarikaksha, Achyuta, the creator who himself has not been created, Vishnu, from whom
all beings originate and into whom they all return, Narayana, Hrishikesha, the unvanquished Govinda, Keshava."

'Bhishma replied, "I have heard the truth about this from Jamadagni's son, Rama[Parashurama.], when he spoke about it, from
devarshi  Narada  and  from  Krishna  Dvaipayana[Vedavyasa.].  O  son!  Asita-Devala[Famous sages, Asita and Devala, but often referred to together as Asita-Devala.],  the  immensely  ascetic  Valmiki  and
Markandeya have spoken about the extraordinarily great Govinda. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! Kesha-
va is the illustrious almighty lord. He is Purusha and pervades everything. The lord is heard of in many ways. O
mightyarmed one! O Yudhishthira! He is the wielder of the sharnga bow[Bow made of horn. Vishnu and Krishna's bow.]. Learned brahmanas in the world have
spoken about his greatness. Listen to this. O Indra among men! People who know about the ancient accounts speak
about this. Govinda's qualities are infinite and I will recount them to you. He is the great being. He is in all beings.
Purushottama is great in his soul. He created wind, energy, water, space and the earth. The lord, the god of all beings, looked at the earth. The great-souled Purushottama proceeded to lie down on the water. The first among all
the beings was full of energy and lay down on that supreme bed and created attraction[The text uses the word samkarshana. This is also interpreted as consciousness.]. We have heard that the
soul of all beings created this refuge of all beings through his mental powers and this sustains both the past and the
future. O mighty-armed one! After that had been created, a celestial lotus sprouted from the great-souled one's
navel and it had the radiance of the sun. O son! The illustrious god Brahma, the grandfather of all beings, was created from that lotus and the directions shone with his radiance. O mighty-armed one! When that great-souled one
manifested himself, there was a great asura named Madhu, who had earlier been born from darkness. He  was
fierce. He was fierce in his deeds and his resolution was fierce[Madhu wished to kill Brahma.]. To ensure Brahma's welfare, Purushottama slew
him. O son! Because of this act of slaying, all the gods, danavas and humans came to call that bull among all the
Satvatas by the name of Madhusudana[Madhusudana means the slayer of Madhu. The Satvatas are Yadavas and Krishna is the bull among the Satvatas.
Krishna is being equated with Vishnu.].

'"Through his mental powers, Brahma created seven sons, Daksha and the others-Marichi, Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha and Kratu[Accounts of creation and names differ and are not always consistent.]. O son! Through his mental powers, Marichi created his first son, Kashyapa. He was like
Brahma in his energy. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! Even before Marichi had been created, from his toe,
Brahma created the Prajapati named Daksha[Prajapati literally means the lord of beings. The term is applied to those of Brahma's sons who had offspring and
became lords of their creations.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thirteen daughters were first
born to him. The eldest of Prajapati's daughters was Diti. O son! Marichi's son, Kashyapa, knew about all forms of
dharma, was immensely illustrious and auspicious in his deeds. He became a husband to all of them. Daksha Prajapati, the immensely fortunate one, who knew about dharma, then had ten other daughters and gave them to Dharma. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Dharma's sons were the Vasus, the infinitely energetic Rudras, the Vishvadevas, the Sadhyas and the Maruts. He[Daksha.] then had twenty-seven younger daughters. The immensely fortunate
Soma[The moon.]  became  a  husband  to  all  of  them.  The  others[Kashyapa's other wives.]  gave  birth  to  gandharvas[Gandharvas are celestial musicians and are semi-divine.],  horses,  birds,  cattle,
kimpurushas[Kinnaras or kimpurushas are mythical beings who were followers of Kubera and could sing well. They were
also physically deformed, sometimes described as possessing human heads and bodies of horses.], fish, plants and trees. Aditi gave birth to the Adityas, the immensely strong ones who were foremost among the gods. The lord Vishnu, also known as Govinda, was born among them as a dwarf[Vishnu's vamana (dwarf) incarnation. In this incarnation, Vishnu tricked the demon king, Bali, and took his
kingdom away.]. Through his
valour, the prosperity of the gods increased and the danavas were vanquished. Diti's offspring were the asuras[There are three terms for demons, often used synonomously. Asura is actually the antithesis of sura, god.
Danavas are the offspring of Danu, while daityas are the offspring of Diti.].
Danu gave birth to danavas and Viprachitti was foremost among them. Diti gave birth to all the great-spirited
asuras.

'"Madhusudana also created day and night, the proper reckoning of time, forenoon and afternoon. Using his intelligence, he created clouds from the water and mobile and immobile objects. The immensely energetic one created the earth and its directions. O Yudhishthira! O bull among the Bharata lineage! The mighty-armed lord Krishna,
Keshava, then again created one hundred brahmanas from his mouth, one hundred kshatriyas from his arms, one
hundred vaishyas from his thighs and one hundred shudras from his feet. The immensely illustrious one thus created the four varnas. The lord made Dhata the supervisor of all beings[Meaning Brahma. The words Dhata and Vidhata are used synonymously, but have slightly different nuances.
Vidhata is more like creator, while Dhata is more like presever.]. In those days, men could live for as long as
they wished to and there was no fear on account of Yama. O bull among the Bharata lineage! At that time, offspring were generated from resolution alone and there was no need to resort to the dharma of sexual intercourse. O
lord of men! During the period of treta yuga too, offspring resulted from resolution and there was no need for the
dharma of sexual intercourse[Yuga is an era or epoch. Each of Brahma's days consists of four yugas-satya, treta, dvapara and kali. But before that, time is not the same for the gods and humans. Six human months correspond to a divine day and six
human months correspond to a divine night. Therefore, 360 human years are equivalent to one divine year. Measured in divine years, satya yuga is 4,000 years, treta yuga is 3,000 years, dvapara yuga is 2,000 years and kali
yuga is 1,000 years, giving a total of 10,000 years. But there are also some years as transition periods from one
yuga to another, so a four-yuga cycle actually consists of 12,000 divine years. A four-yuga cycle, known as mahayuga, is therefore 4,320,000 human years, satya yuga contributing 1,728,000, treta yuga 1,296,000, dvapara
yuga 864,000 and kali yuga 432,000 years, one thousand mahayugas are Brahma's day and another 1,000 mahayugas are Brahma's night. Each of Brahma's days is called a kalpa. The beginning of a kalpa is when creation
occurs and at the end of the kalpa, there is destruction.]. O king! During dvapara, offspring were generated through the dharma of sexual
intercourse. O king! In kali yuga, people began to live in pairs. O son! I have told you about the lord of all beings,
the one who rules himself. O Kounteya! I will now tell you about the ones who cannot be controlled-all those
who are born in the southern regions, the Talavaras, the Andhrakas, the Utsas, the Pulindas, the Shabaras, the
Chuchupas and the Mandapas. I will also recount to you those born in the northern regions, the Younas, the Kambojas, the Gandharas, the Kiratas and the Barbaras. O son! These are the performers of wicked deeds and roam
around on earth. O lord of men! They follow the dharma of dogs, crows, ravens and vultures. O son! They did not
roam around on earth during krita yuga. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Such people originated during treta
yuga. When that extremely terrible intervening period that comes at the end of a yuga arrived[Probably the intervening period between treta yuga and dvapara yuga.],  the kings approached each other and began to fight. O best of the Kuru lineage! In this way, the great-souled one created everything. Devarshi Narada has spoken about the god as the creator of all the worlds. O lord of men! O mighty-armed
one! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Narada thinks that Krishna is supreme and eternal. This is the nature of
Keshava, for whom, truth is his valour. Pundarikaksha is not only a man. He is inconceivable."'
