'Arjuna said, "O fortunate one! O venerable one! A golden altar, as radiant as the crest of the fire, is held aloft a
golden standard, decorated with golden flags. That is Drona's army. Take me there. His horses are seen to be red
and large and they have been trained to bear well. They are quiet and have the complexion of coral. Their faces
have the hue of copper and they are pleasant to look at. They are yoked to his supreme chariot and they have been
trained in every kind of knowledge. He has long arms and is extremely energetic. He is endowed with strength and
beauty. He is famous in all the worlds. He is the powerful Bharadvaja[Drona, written better as Bhaaradvaja. He is Bharadvaja's son.]. He is the equal of Ushanas[Shukracharya, the preceptor of the demons.] in his intelligence, the equal of Brihaspati[The preceptor of the gods.] in his knowledge of policy. The four Vedas are vested in him, and brahmacharya
too. All the divine weapons, with means of withdrawing them, and the entire knowledge of archery[Dhanurveda.], are always
vested in him. Forgiveness, self-control, truthfulness, non-violence, uprightness-these and many other qualities
exist in that supreme of brahmanas. I wish to fight with that immensely fortunate one in battle. O Uttara! Therefore, swiftly bear me to the preceptor."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Thus spoken to by Arjuna, Virata's son urged the horses, with golden harnesses, in
Bharadvaja's direction. Pandava, supreme among charioteers, descended with great force. Drona advanced towards
Partha, like a mad elephant towards another. He blew his conch shell, with the roar of a hundred drums, and the
entire army was agitated like the ocean. On seeing those excellent red horses mix in battle with ones that were the
colour of swans and as swift as the mind[Drona's horses were red and Arjuna's horses were white.], all the men who were in that fight were amazed. They saw those two
charioteers, endowed with valour, in the forefront of the battle, the preceptor and the disciple, Drona and Partha.
They were undefeated, learned, intelligent and immensely strong. Each was like the other and they engaged each
other. On seeing this, the great army of the Bharatas trembled repeatedly. On reaching Drona's chariot with his
own chariot, the valorous maharatha Partha smiled in delight. The mighty-armed Kounteya, the destroyer of enemy warriors, honoured him and spoke to him in soft and conciliatory words. "We have lived the stipulated duration
in the forest. We now wish for the act in return. Do not be angry with us. You are always invincible in battle. O unblemished one! I will not strike you first, unless you strike me. I have decided this in accordance with my intelligence. Now do what you deem to be fit." Thus addressed, Drona despatched more than twenty arrows at him. But
Partha, swift of hand, sliced them down before they could reach him. Displaying his swiftness in discharge of
weapons, the valorous Drona showered Partha's chariot with a thousand arrows. Thus the duel between Bharadvaja
and Kiriti commenced. In that battle, both equally released tufted arrows, blazing in energy, at each other. Both of
them were famous for their deeds, both were as swift as the wind. Both were knowledgeable in the use of divine
weapons. Both were extremely energetic. When they unleashed their nets of arrows, they confounded the kings.
All the assembled warriors were astounded and applauded and honoured the release of arrows. "Who but Phalguna
is capable of countering Drona in battle? The dharma of kshatriyas is terrible. He has to fight with his preceptor."

These were the words spoken by those who were stationed in the forefront of that battle.

'Those two brave maharathas drew near and covered each other with arrows, to defeat the other. Bharadvaja was
angered and drew an invincible and large bow that was plated with gold at the back. He countered Phalguna. He
discharged a net of arrows towards Arjuna's chariot. They were as bright as the sun and had been sharpened on
stone. They shrouded the rays of the sun. The mighty-armed maharatha pierced Partha with extremely fast and
sharp arrows, like clouds showering a mountain with rain. Pandava happily grasped the divine bow Gandiva, capable of destroying enemies at great speed and capable of bearing a supreme burden. He released many colourful and
golden arrows from that bow and repulsed the valorous Bharadvaja's shower of arrows. It was extraordinary.
Partha Dhananjaya roamed around on his chariot and it was a sight fit to behold. He displayed all his weapons simultaneously in all directions. With his arrows, he covered the entire sky with one large shadow. Drona could no
longer be seen, as if he was enshrouded in fog. When he was covered with these supreme arrows, his form seemed
to be like that of a mountain, with fires blazing in every direction. On seeing that his chariot was covered by
Partha's arrows in that battle, he drew his beautiful bow, with a roar that was like that of the clouds. He drew that
supreme and terrible weapon, which was like a circle of fire. Drona, the adornment of assemblies, then countered
all those arrows. A great sound arose, like that when bamboos are burnt. Gold-tufted arrows were discharged from
his supreme bow. The one whose soul was immeasurable enveloped the directions and the rays of the sun. Those
arrows were golden-tufted and straight. When they traversed the sky, they were seen to be like many beings[This is difficult to understand. It probably means that the arrows looked like beings that travel in the sky, such
as birds.].
The tufted arrows were released from Drona's bow and it seemed as if there was one long and single arrow in the
sky[The arrows were released so fast that they seemed to be joined to one another.]. Thus releasing great arrows that were decorated in gold, those two brave ones covered the sky, as if with
meteors. Decorated with the feathers of herons and peacocks, the arrows looked like a flock of geese travelling in
the autumn sky. There ensued a terrible and fearful battle between the great-souled Drona and Pandava, like that
between Vritra and Vasava[Vasava (Indra) killed a demon named Vritra.]. They wounded each other, like elephants with their tusks. They shot arrows at each
other from bows that were completely stretched. They fiercely decorated that field of battle. From one part of the
battlefield to another, they released divine weapons. Arjuna, supreme among victorious ones, used sharp arrows to
counter the arrows, sharpened on stone, released by the best of preceptors. Indra's son displayed his own terrible
aspect and swiftly covered the sky with many arrows.

'Drona, foremost among teachers and supreme among the wielders of arms, began to play with the supremely
energetic Arjuna, tiger among men, who was trying to kill him in that battle. He used arrows with straight shafts.
Bharadvaja unleashed divine weapons in that great battle. Phalguna countered every weapon with another weapon.
The duel between those two angry and intolerant lions among men was like that between the gods and the danavas.
Drona released Aindra, Vayavya and Agneya weapons[Divine weapons named after Indra, Vayu and Agni respectively.] and Pandava used his own weapons to devour them.
Those two brave and great archers released sharp arrows and covered the entire sky, like a shadow, with showers
of arrows. When Arjuna released arrows and they descended on the bodies[Of enemy warriors.], the sound that was heard was like
that of lightning on mountains. O lord of the earth! Elephants, charioteers and horses looked like blossoming
kimshuka flowers[A kimshuka is a tree with red flowers.], drenched in blood. When they fell down, the arms of the maharathas were adorned with
colourful armlets and their armour and pennants were golden. Oppressed by Partha's arrows, many warriors died
there. The armies were confounded in that encounter between Drona and Arjuna. Both of them brandished their
bows, capable of withstanding great burdens. In that battle, they covered each other with arrows and bore the retaliation. A voice was heard from the sky, praising Drona. "Drona has performed an extremely difficult task of fighting with Arjuna, who is the destroyer of enemies, extremely valorous, firm in his hand and unassailable. The maharatha is the conqueror of all the gods, the daityas and the snakes." On beholding Partha's fixedness, learning,
dexterity and great reach in battle, Drona was amazed. O bull among the Bharata lineage! In that battle, Partha
raised the invincible and divine bow Gandiva and drew it with his arms. He released a shower of arrows, like a
cloud of locusts. Even the wind was not capable of gliding through those arrows. There was not even an instant between Partha's shooting an arrow and the next one, no gap could be seen. In that extremely terrible battle of swiftly
released weapons, Partha shot the arrows faster and faster. Then hundreds and thousands of straight-tufted arrows
descended simultaneously on Drona's chariot. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The wielder of the Gandiva enveloped Drona with arrows and a great lamentation arose from the army. Maghavan[Indra.] himself applauded Panda-
va's swiftness with weapons and so did the gandharvas and apsaras who had assembled there.

'Then the preceptor's son, leader of charioteers, suddenly encircled Pandava with a great number of chariots.
Though Ashvatthama was greatly enraged with Partha, in his heart, the great-souled one applauded his deeds.
Overcome by anger, he confronted Partha in that battle and showered him with arrows, like Parjanya[The god of rain, Indra.] showering
rain. The mighty-armed one turned his horses towards Drona's son and thus Partha gave Drona a chance to retreat.
His armour and flag had been shattered with supreme arrows and getting the opportunity, the brave one left on his
swift horses.'
