Vaishampayana said, 'Then, one after another, the immensely powerful one visited all the other tirthas that were to
the west and all those that were on the shores of the western ocean. Having visited them, he reached Prabhasa.
When Madhusudana[The enemy of Madhu, Krishna's name. Vishnu had killed a demon named Madhu.] heard that the invincible Bibhatsu[Arjuna's name. The name literally means fearsome or terrible.] had reached the region of Prabhasa after visiting all
the tirthas, Madhava[Krishna.] went to meet him, unknown to Kounteya. Krishna and Pandava saw each other in Prabhasa.
They embraced each other and asked about each other's welfare. Then the beloved friends, who were like the rishis
Nara and Narayana of yore[Ancient sages, whose names invariably occur together. Narayana is also Vishnu's name and nara also means
man. Narayana is equated with Krishna and Nara with Arjuna.], sat down in the forest.

'Then Vasudeva asked Arjuna about what he had been up to and about why the Pandava was visiting all the
tirthas. Thereupon, Arjuna recounted to him exactly what had happened. On hearing this, the lord Varshneya[Krishna's name, since Krishna belonged to the lineage of the Vrishnis.] approved. As they desired, Krishna and Pandava sported themselves in Prabhasa. They then went to the mountain
Raivataka, to live there for some time. On Krishna's instructions, men had already decorated the mountain and
stored it with a lot of food. Accepting everything that was offered, Pandava Arjuna, together with Vasudeva,
watched the actors and dancers. Having given them permission to leave in accordance with the proper form, the
immensely radiant Pandava went to sleep on a well-made and divine bed. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He
told Satvata[Krishna's name. Strictly speaking, Vishnu's name.] about the tirthas, mountains, rivers and forests he had seen. O Janamejaya! As he was thus speaking, lying on a bed that was like heaven, sleep crept up on Kounteya. He was awakened in the morning, with the
sweet sounds of singing and the sounds of the veena[Musical instrument, lute.], chants and blessings. After he had performed the necessary
acts, Varshneya greeted him happily.

'Riding on a golden chariot, they set off for Dvaraka. O Janamejaya! In order to pay homage to Kunti's son,
even the huts of Dvaraka had been decorated. The citizens of Dvaraka were eager to see Kounteya and came out in
hundreds and thousands onto the road followed by kings. There was a great common assemblage of Bhojas, Vrishnis and Andhakas and hundreds and thousands of their women looked on. Having been respectfully worshipped by
all the Bhojas, Vrishnis and Andhakas, he returned homage to those who deserved it, and was welcomed by everyone. All the young men paid their respects to the brave one, in the proper form. Those who were of his own age,
embraced him again and again. With Krishna, he spent many nights in Krishna's beautiful home, full of jewels and
every object of pleasure.'
