'Sanjaya said, "When that battle between Karna and the rakshasa was going on, the valiant Alayudha, Indra among
the rakshasas, advanced. With a large army, he approached Suyodhana. He was surrounded by thousands of rakshasas with distorted forms. They had many different forms. The brave one remembered his earlier enmity. Baka,
his valiant relative who ate brahmanas, had been killed. So had the immensely energetic Kirmira, and his friend,
Hidimba. He had waited for a long time, remembering this earlier enmity. Knowing that a fight was raging in the
night, he wished to kill Bhima[The rakshasas become stronger in the night. Bhima had killed all three rakshasas. In Section 9 (Volume 1),
Bhima killed Hidimba and married his sister, Hidimbaa. Ghatotkacha was Bhima and Hidimbaa's son. In Section 10 (Volume 1), Bhima killed Baka. In Section 30 (Volume 2), he killed Kirmira.]. He was as crazy as an elephant and as angry as a serpent. Desiring to fight, he
spoke these words to Duryodhana. 'O great king! Know that the rakshasas Hidimba, Baka and Kirmira were killed
by Bhima. They were my relatives. He touched the maiden Hidimba in earlier times, disregarding us and all the
other rakshasas. O king! I am here to kill him and his followers, with the horses, chariots and elephants. I have arrived so that I can myself kill Hidimba's son and all his advisers. I will kill all the sons of Kunti, with Vasudeva at
the forefront, and devour them, with all their followers. Restrain all your soldiers. We will fight with the
Pandavas.' On hearing his words, Duryodhana was delighted. Surrounded by his brothers, he showed him honours
and spoke these words. 'We will fight with the enemy, with you and your followers at the forefront. With the enmity in their minds, my soldiers cannot remain neutral.' The bull among the rakshasas told the king that this was
acceptable.

'"With those eaters of human flesh, he advanced against Bhima. His body blazed and he was on a chariot that
was as radiant as the sun. O Indra among kings! It was like that of Ghatotkacha[The two chariots were similar.]. It possessed a roar that was its
equal and it was decorated with many gates. That giant chariot was as broad as a nalva and it was covered with
bear skins. The horses were as swift as his[Ghatotkacha's.]. They had the forms of elephants and the voices of asses. Their sizes
were gigantic and one hundred of them were yoked. They fed on flesh and blood. The roar of the chariot was like
his[Ghatotkacha's.] and it was like the rumbling of a giant cloud. The giant bow was like his. It was firm and more powerful.
The arrows were like his, as long as axles. They were gold-tufted and sharpened on stone. The mighty-armed one
was just as brave as Ghatotkacha. The blazing standard was like his, like the fire and the sun, and was protected by
jackals and wild crows. In form, he was more handsome than Ghatotkacha and his anxious face was brilliant. His
armlets blazed. His crown and garlands also blazed. He had a headdress and had girded his sword. He had clubs,
catapults, maces, ploughs and bows and arrows. His skin was like that of an elephant. The chariot was as radiant as
the fire, as he drove away the army of the Pandavas. He was resplendent in that battle and whirled around, like a
cloud tinged with lightning in the sky. There were the foremost of kings, brave warriors among the Pandavas. They
were immensely strong and possessed armour and shields. O king! When he arrived, they cheerfully fought with
him in every direction."'
