Vaishampayana said, 'When Bhishma said this and became silent, Yudhishthira left his presence and asked his
brothers, with Vidura as the fifth, "The conduct of people is based on dharma, artha[There is a typo and the Critical edition says ardha.] and kama. Which of these is
the most important? Which is medium and which is the least important? If one wishes to conquer all three categories together, which of these must one control? O wise ones! You should speak truthful words and satisfy me."

'Vidura was foremost among those who knew the truth about the progress of artha. He possessed qualities. Remembering the texts of dharma, he spoke these words. "A great deal of learning, austerities, renunciation, faith, the
performance of sacrifices, forgiveness, the purification of sentiments, compassion, truthfulness, restraint and richness of the soul-these must be cultivated and the mind must not waver. These are the foundations of dharma and
artha and can be subsumed in the single word of 'welfare'. The rishis crossed over through dharma. The worlds are
established in dharma. The gods obtained heaven through dharma. Artha is submerged in dharma. O king! Dharma
is the supreme in qualities. Artha is said to be medium. The learned ones say that kama is the worst. Therefore, a
person must control his soul and make dharma the most important."

'When he stopped, the attentive Partha, who knew the true words about artha, spoke. "O king! This world is the
arena of action and such conduct is praised-agriculture, trade, animal husbandry and many kinds of artisanship.
Among all these tasks, there is nothing that transcends the need for artha. The sacred texts have said that without
artha, dharma and kama cannot occur. A victorious person obtains artha and can pursue supreme dharma. He is capable of following kama, which is difficult for those with unclean souls to pursue. The sacred texts say that dharma
and kama take the form of artha. These two can be attained through the successful acquisition of artha. Those who
have been born in superior lineages surround the man who possesses artha, just as the beings always worship Brahma. Those who have matted hair, are clad in deerskin, are controlled and have smeared themselves with mud, those
who have conquered their senses, have shaven heads, have no offspring and dwell separately-even they hanker
after artha. There are others who are bearded and attired in ochre garments, covering themselves with humility.
They are learned and tranquil. They are free and have given up all their possessions. Even among them, some seek
heaven and others strive for artha. Some follow the practices of their lineages and are established in their own individual paths. There are believers and non-believers, completely engaged in supreme restraint. Lack of wisdom is
submerged in darkness and wisdom provides the radiance[Only some have truly renounced and have seen the light. Others are still
ignorant.]. A person who possesses artha can maintain his servants in pleasure and exert the rod against his enemies. O best among intelligent ones! That is the reason my view
is accurate. Now listen to the words of these two. Their voices are choking with words."

'Madri's sons, Nakula and Sahadeva, accomplished in dharma and artha, spoke these supreme words next.

"Whether one is seated, lying down, roaming around or standing, through the pursuit of superior and inferior
means, one must always attempt to firmly pursue the acquisition of artha. This is extremely difficult to obtain and
is supremely loved. In this world, once one has obtained this, there is no doubt that one can obtain kama. Artha is
united with dharma and dharma is united with artha. This is the way amrita is united with honey. Therefore, our
view is the following. There can be no kama without artha. How can there be dharma without artha? Thus, people
are scared of those who are outside the pale of dharma and artha. Therefore, even if a person thinks that dharma is
the most important, he must control his soul and seek to accomplish artha. If people trust a person, he can accomplish everything. One must first pursue dharma and then artha that is in conformity with dharma. Kama should be
pursued later. These are the fruits of the successful pursuit of artha." Having spoken these words, the sons of the
two Ashvins ceased.

'Bhimasena then spoke these words. "A person without kama does not desire artha. A person without kama does
not desire dharma. A person without kama cannot follow the path of desire. Therefore, kama is the best. It is because they are united with kama that the rishis are controlled in their austerities. They eat leaves, fruits and roots.
They subsist on air and are greatly restrained. There are others who are engaged in chanting the Vedas, they are devoted to studying. They perform funeral rites and sacrifices and receive donations. Merchants, farmers, herdsmen,
craftsmen and artisans are engaged in the tasks of the gods. But it is kama that drives the action. Driven by kama,
men enter the ocean. Kama has many different forms. Everything is driven by kama. There is nothing, there was
nothing and there will be nothing that is beyond the simple fact of kama. O great king! This is the essence and
dharma and artha are dependent on it. Kama is to dharma and artha what butter is to curds. Oil is better than what
is left of oilseeds after the extraction of oil. Ghee is better than what is left of milk after churning. Good fruit is
better than wood. Kama is superior to dharma and artha. Just as honey comes from the juice of flowers, like that,
happiness comes from kama. O king! Serve kama. Pleasure yourself with women who are attired in extremely
beautiful garments and are ornamented, mad with intoxication and pleasant in speech. Kama will come to you
swiftly. In this group, this is my view. O Dharma's son! You should not reflect about this for a long time. If virtuous people paid heed to these beneficial words, which are not shallow in import, there would be the greatest kindness. One must serve dharma, artha and kama in equal measure. If a man serves only one of these, he is the worst.
A person who is accomplished in two is said to be medium. The superior person is engaged in all three categories.
He is wise. His well-wishers smear him with sandalwood paste. He is adorned in colourful garlands and ornaments." Having spoken these words, briefly and in detail, Bhima, the younger brother, stopped.

'For an instant, Dharmaraja thought well about the words that had been spoken to him. Extremely learned and
supreme among the upholders of dharma, he smiled and spoke these truthful words. "There is no doubt that all
your determinations are based on the sacred texts of dharma and that you are acquainted with the proof. You have
carefully spoken these words to me and I have got to know about kama. You have said that it is essential in this
world. However, single-mindedly, listen to the sentiments in my words. A man who is engaged in neither good
deeds nor evil ones, and not engaged in artha, dharma or kama, is freed from all sins and looks on gold and stones
in the same way. He is successful in freeing himself from unhappiness and happiness. Beings are born and they
die. They face old age and decay. There have been repeated instructions on moksha and it has been praised. But we
do not know this. The illustrious Svayambhu[Brahma.] has said that one who is not bound down by affection does not suffer these[Birth, death, old age and decay.]. The learned ones have said that nirvana[Literally, extinction. Being used synonymously with moksha.] is supreme. Therefore, one should not act in accordance
with what is pleasant and what is unpleasant. However, a person who follows kama does not attach importance to
this. I act wherever I have been appointed. All the beings have been appointed by destiny. Know that destiny is
powerful in everything. One cannot attain the objective by performing deeds. Know that whatever is going to happen will happen. Even if a person is devoid of the three modes, he can attain this objective[The objective being moksha. The three modes are dharma, artha and
kama.]. Thus, this is the secret for the welfare of the worlds." These foremost words were pleasant to the mind and full of reason. They heard
them and were delighted. They joined their hands in salutation to the foremost one among the Kuru lineage. Those
words were extremely beautiful and adorned with letters, syllables and words. They were pleasant to hear and devoid of thorns. O king! On hearing the words spoken by Partha[Yudhishthira.], those Indras among men applauded those
words. The one who had never been dispirited[Yudhishthira.] again questioned the son of the river[Bhishma.] about supreme dharma.'
