Sanjaya said, "The blare of conch shells and the beating of drums became loud. Those two best among men,
Vaikartana, the son of a suta, and Arjuna, borne on white horses, clashed against each other. O king! This was because of the evil counsels of your son. They were like two elephants with shattered temples from the Himalayas,
attacking each other with their tusks in a desire for intercourse[Contending for the same she-elephant.]. The brave Dhananjaya and Adhiratha's son
rushed against each other with fierce force, as they willed. It was like a cloud dashing against another cloud, or a
mountain against another mountain. The twang of bowstrings and the sound of palms could be heard. The wheels
of the chariots rattled. They clashed and showered down arrows. They were like large mountain tops, covered with
trees and herbs and populated by many kinds of dwellers of mountains, dashing against each other. As they struck
each other with great weapons, those two immensely strong ones were like mountains that had been dislodged. The
clash between those two great ones was like that between the lord of the gods and Virochana's son[Bali.] in ancient
times. Arrows mangled their bodies and those of their charioteers and horses. This was impossible for others to
withstand. Blood began to flow like water. It was as if there were two large ponds filled with lotuses, lilies, fish and
turtles and resounding with the calls of a large number of birds. It was as if they were being gently stirred by the
wind. Those two chariots, with standards, were like that and they approached each other. Each of them possessed a
valour that was like that of the great Indra. Those two maharathas were as resplendent as the great Indra. Their arrows were like the vajra of the great Indra. They attacked each other, like the great Indra and Vritra. Both armies
possessed elephants, foot soldiers, horses and chariots. There were diverse colourful ornaments and garments.
Everyone, including those in the sky, trembled and was astounded at the clash between Karna and Arjuna. The
spectators raised their arms, with diamonds on their fingers. They were delighted and roared like lions. Adhiratha's
son attacked Arjuna, wishing to kill him, like a crazy elephant against another elephant. The Somakas roared and
urged Partha on. 'O Arjuna! Speed up. Pierce Karna. Sever his sparkling head without any delay. This is because
of the greed that Dhritarashtra's son has for the kingdom.' In similar fashion, many warriors from our side exclaimed, 'O Karna! Proceed. Advance. O Karna! Slay Arjuna without any delay. Let the Parthas again be banished
to the forest for a long time.'

' "With ten great arrows, Karna struck Partha first. Extremely angry, Arjuna pierced him back in the flanks with
ten sharp and fierce arrows. The son of a suta and Arjuna struck and wounded each other with extremely sharp arrows. So as to crush each other, they sought for a weakness in the adversary. Cheerfully, but fiercely, they attacked
each other in the great conflict. In the great conflict, the great-souled Bhimasena became wrathful and intolerant.
He squeezed his hands and bit his lips with his teeth. Dancing around like a musician, he asked, 'O Kiriti! How
was it that the son of a suta was able to pierce you first with ten great arrows? Do you remember the fortitude with
which you defeated all beings and satisfied Agni in Khandava? Use that fortitude and kill the son of a suta. Otherwise, let me bring him down with a club.' On seeing that Partha's arrows were being repulsed, Vasudeva spoke to
him. 'O Kiriti! How is it that in every way, your weapons today are being countered by Karna's weapons? O brave
one! Why do you look like someone who is confused? The Kurus are cheerfully roaring. All of them are honouring
Karna, knowing that all your weapons have been destroyed by his. In yuga after yuga, you have used fortitude to
destroy the weapons of darkness and terrible rakshasas. You slew Dambhodbhava and other asuras in
encounters[Dambhodbhava was a king who attacked the sages Nara and Narayana,
the incident having been described in Section 54 (Volume 4). The name
Dambhodbhava signifies someone who is inordinately insolent and
proud. In some versions of the Mahabharata, Dambhodbhava is equated
with Karna. Dambhodbhava was reborn as Karna.]. Use that fortitude and slay the son of a suta. Or use this sudarshana chakra now and slice off his
head. It is sharp at the edges and even the immortals cannot withstand it. It has been used by me earlier, like
Shakra using the vajra to strike Namuchi. The illustrious one, in the form of a hunter, was pleased by your greatness and fortitude[Arjuna fought with Shiva, who was in the disguise of a hunter, and
pleased him. This has been described in Section 31 (Volume 2).]. Resort to that fortitude again and slay the son of a suta, together with his relatives. Give this
earth, right up to the frontiers of the ocean, prosperous with its towns and villages, to the king[Yudhishthira.]. O Partha! Having slain large numbers of the enemy, obtain unlimited fame.' Having been thus urged by both Bhima and Janardana, he glanced towards his own self and remembered his spirit.

' "The great-souled one knew the reason for his birth and spoke to Keshava. 'I will release a great and fierce
weapon for the welfare of the worlds and for the death of the son of a suta. Let me have your permission, that of
the gods, Brahma, Bhava and all the ones who are knowledgeable about the brahman.' Having said this, he invoked the invincible brahmastra in his mind, in accordance with the prescribed rites. All the directions and sub-
directions were covered by extremely energetic arrows. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Many hundreds of swift
arrows were released from it. In the midst of this, Vaikartana also created many thousands of arrows. These descended on Pandava with a large roar, like showers of rain released from a cloud. He performed a superhuman
deed and pierced Bhimasena, Janardana and Kiriti with three arrows each. Terrible in his strength, he then emitted
a loud and fierce roar. Kiriti saw that Bhima and Janardana had also been struck by Karna's arrows. He became intolerant and shot eighteen arrows again. He pierced Sushena with one arrow, Shalya with four and Karna with
three. He then shot ten excellent arrows and killed Sabhapati[A Kourava warrior.], who was clad in golden armour. The head and
the arms of that prince were severed. He was without his charioteer, bow and standard. He was mangled and fell
down from the chariot, like a shala tree sliced down with an axe. He again pierced Karna with three, eight, two and
fourteen arrows. He slew four hundred elephants, stocked with weapons, eight hundred rathas, one thousand horses
and riders and eight thousand valiant foot soldiers. Karna and Partha fought on. They were the best of the brave
and the slayers of enemies. The spectators, who were assembled in the sky and on earth, controlled their mounts
and watched what was going on in the battle.

' "Pandava's bowstring was being drawn with great force and snapped, with a loud noise. At that moment, the
son of a suta struck Partha with one hundred kshudraka arrows. He pierced Vasudeva with sixty sharp iron arrows
that were washed in oil and were tufted with the feathers of birds. They were like snakes that had cast off their
skins. At this, the Somakas ran away. Partha became extremely angry. His body was mangled by Karna's arrows.
He stretched his bowstring and swiftly countered the arrows of Adhiratha's son. He made the Somakas return. The
sky was darkened because of this release of weapons and birds were unable to fly. Partha pierced Shalya's body
armour with ten arrows and laughed. He pierced Karna with twelve well-aimed arrows and pierced him again with
another seven. He was firmly struck by Partha's forceful arrows. Those arrows were fierce in their power. His body
was mangled and his limbs were wounded. Karna looked as beautiful as Rudra at the time of destruction. Dhananjaya was the equal of the lord of the gods. However, Adhiratha's son struck him with three arrows. Wishing to slay
Achyuta, he next shot five arrows that were like flaming serpents. They were decorated with gold and were aimed
well. They pierced Purushottama's armour with great force and passing through, entered the earth. Having bathed
there, they returned to Karna. Quickly, with well-aimed and broad-headed arrows, Dhananjaya sliced each of them
into three fragments and they fell down on the ground. They were mighty serpents that were on the side of Takshaka's son[Much is left implicit. Takshaka's son was Ashvasena, who vowed revenge on Arjuna because Arjuna had burnt down the serpents in Khanda-
va. The five serpents went to the nether regions, where the capital city of
the nagas, Bhogavati, is located. They bathed in the waters there and returned to Karna.]. The one with the diadem and the garland flamed in rage, like a fire that burns down dead wood. He
drew his bow all the way back to his ears and shot many flaming arrows that were capable of bringing an end to
the body. They pierced him[Karna.] in the inner organs and made him waver. However, he was extremely patient and
used that fortitude to withstand the grief. O king! Dhananjaya angrily covered Karna's chariot, all the directions
and the sub-directions with his torrents of arrows. These shrouded the radiance of the sun. The sky also seemed to
disappear, as if it was covered in snow. On the instructions of Duryodhana, there were those who were guarding
the chariot wheels, the feet, the front and the rear[Of Karna.]. These were excellent rathas and the best. In the battle,
Savyasachi slew all of them. He killed two thousand of the foremost Kurus, bulls among the Kuru lineage. O king!
In a short instant, the brave one single-handedly destroyed all of them, with their chariots, horses and charioteers.
They fled, abandoning Karna. And so did your son and the Kurus who were left. They abandoned those who were
slain and wounded by the arrows, including lamenting sons and fathers. All the directions were emptied and devoid of Kurus, because they were afflicted by fear. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! However, on seeing this,
Karna wasn't distressed. Cheerfully, he attacked Arjuna." '
