Vaishampayana said, 'The bull of the Bharata lineage then went to the sacred places of pilgrimage to the south,
near the ocean. These sacred places were adorned with ascetics. However, these ascetics stayed away from five
places of pilgrimage that had been frequented by ascetics in earlier times-Agastyatirtha, Soubhadra, the immensely purifying Poulama, the calm Karandhama that provided the fruits of a horse-sacrifice and the great
tirtha[Place of pilgrimage.] Bharadvaja, which washes away all sins. On seeing these places of pilgrimage abandoned and shunned by
intelligent sages who were devoted to dharma, the Pandava who was Kuru's descendant joined his hands in salutation and asked the ascetics, "Why have those who are learned in the brahman abandoned these tirthas?" The ascetics replied, "O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Five crocodiles live in them and drag away those who are
blessed with the power of austerities. That is the reason these tirthas are abandoned." On hearing this, the mighty-
armed and valorous one, supreme among men, went to see these tirthas, though the ascetics tried to restrain him.

'He went to Soubhadra, named after a maharshi, and supreme among tirthas. The brave one, scorcher of enemies, swiftly immersed himself to have a bath. At that, a giant crocodile that lived in the water came and grasped
Kunti's son Dhananjaya, tiger among men. But the mighty-armed Kounteya, supreme among those who are strong,
seized the aquatic creature which began to struggle and got out of the water. O king! As soon as the famous Arjuna
dragged the crocodile out, it turned into a beautiful woman, adorned in every ornament, radiant, charming, divine
of form and alluring. On witnessing this great and extraordinary event, Kunti's son Dhananjaya was extremely
pleased and asked the lady, "O, fortunate one! Who are you and how did you come to live in the water? Why have
you been committing such great sins earlier?"

'The lady replied, "O mighty-armed one! I am an apsara who used to roam in the forests of the gods. I am the
extremely powerful Varga, always the favourite of the lord of riches[Kubera.]. I had four beautiful friends, all capable of
going anywhere at will. With them, I was once going to the abode of the protector of the worlds[The word used is lokapala, which translates as protector or preserver of the worlds. In this context, it might
mean either Brahma or Vishnu. There are also eight lokapalas who are regarded as guardians of the eight directions. But that is clearly not meant.]. On our way, all
of us saw a brahmana who was rigid in his vows. He was extremely handsome and was studying alone, in his solitude. O king! That entire forest was radiant with the energy of his austerities. Like the sun, he seemed to have illuminated that entire region. On witnessing the extraordinary sight of his terrible austerities, we descended in that
region, so as to bring impediments to his pursuit of austerities. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I, Sourabheyi,
Samichi, Budbuda and Lata went to the brahmana at the same time. We sang and laughed and sought to tempt the
brahmana. O brave one! But he did not pay any attention to us, even for an instant. The immensely energetic and
pure one did not waver and was fixed in his austerities. O bull among kshatriyas! But the brahmana was angered
and cursed us that we would become crocodiles and live in the water for a hundred years."'
