'Bhishma said, "O mother! Listen to me as I again tell you how the Bharata dynasty can be certainly extended
through sons. Let a Brahmana with all the qualities be invited. Let him father sons on Vichitravirya's field[Vichitravirya's wives.]."'
Vaishampayana said, 'Satyavati then spoke to Bhishma, in a smiling and bashful voice. "O mighty-armed descendant of the Bharata lineage! You have spoken the truth. Because I have confidence in you, I will now say what
needs to be done to continue the lineage. Learned as you are about what dharma permits in times of distress, you
will not be able to reject it. You are the dharma of our dynasty, you are truth, and you are its supreme recourse.
Therefore, hear what I have to say and then act accordingly. My father was a righteous man and for the sake of
dharma, he maintained a boat. In the prime of my youth, I once plied that boat. The supreme rishi Parashara, greatest among those who know dharma, came to the boat because he wanted to cross the river Yamuna. When I was
taking him across the river, the best of sages felt desire for me. He approached me and pacified me in gentle words.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I was scared of his curse and I was also frightened of my father. I could not
refuse him. Therefore, I obtained a boon from him, one that is difficult to get. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
I was a young girl and he overcame me with his energy in the boat. But he enveloped the world with a dense fog.
Earlier, a foul smell of fish used to come from my body. But the sage removed that and gave me this divine fragrance. Then the sage told me that once I had delivered my son on an island in the river, I would once again become a virgin. Thus was born the great rishi famous as Dvaipayana, Parashara's son. He is a great yogi and was
born to me while I was still a virgin. That illustrious rishi has used the power of his austerities to divide the Vedas
into four parts. He is known in all the worlds as Vyasa[The word vyasa means to divide or distribute.]. Because he is dark, he is also known as Krishna. He is
always devoted to the truth, has destroyed his sins and is an ascetic who is free from all passion. Asked by me and
also asked by you, that immeasurably radiant one will surely agree to father excellent sons on your brother's field.
He has told me to think of him whenever a task has to be accomplished. O mighty-armed Bhishma! If you so desire, I will think of him now. O Bhishma! If you are willing, I am sure the great ascetic will father sons in Vichitravirya's field." When the maharshi's name was mentioned, Bhishma joined his hands and said, "He who knows
the three objectives of dharma, artha and kama and takes a decision after weighing how artha leads to more artha,
dharma leads to more dharma and kama leads to more kama, singly and jointly, he is truly wise. What you have
said is in line with dharma and is also for the welfare of our lineage. It is the best course and I approve." O descendant of the Kuru lineage! When Bhishma approved, Kali[Satyavati's name. She was so called because she was dark.] thought of the sage Krishna Dvaipayana.

'The wise one was then busy interpreting the Vedas. When he learnt that his mother was thinking about him, he
appeared at once. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! She welcomed her son in accordance with the proper rites.
Then she embraced him with her arms and bathed him with her tears, since the daughter of the fishermen tribe had
seen her son after a long time. On seeing her weep, maharshi Vyasa, who was her eldest son, washed her face with
water and paid homage. He said, "I have come to accomplish the task you desire. You know the ways of dharma.
Therefore, tell me what you wish me to do and I will do what pleases you." The priest then worshipped that
supreme among rishis and welcomed him with the prescribed mantras.

'When he was seated, his mother asked him about his welfare. After making the usual inquiries, Satyavati
looked at his face and said, "O wise one! There is no doubt that sons are born from both the father and the mother.
There is no doubt that they are their father's property as much as they are their mother's. According to destiny, you
are my oldest son. O brahmarshi! In that way, Vichitravirya is my youngest. Therefore, just as Bhishma is Vichitravirya's brother on the father's side, you are his brother on the mother's side. This is my view and I do not know
what yours is. Truth provides valour to Shantanu's son and he is devoted to the truth. For the sake of that, he is
mentally unwilling to beget offspring or rule over the kingdom. O unblemished one! Out of respect for your brother, for the sake of preserving Shantanu's lineage, to keep Bhishma's request and mine, out of compassion for all
beings and to protect everyone, without any cruelty in your heart, do what I am asking you to do. Your younger
brother has left two wives who are as beautiful as goddesses. They are in the full bloom of youth and beauty and
desire to have sons, in accordance with dharma. O son! Therefore, beget sons who are worthy of carrying forward
our lineage on them. You alone are worthy." Vyasa replied, "O Satyavati! You know dharma, in this world and the
next. Your mind is always fixed on dharma and in furthering the cause of dharma. With dharma as the objective, I
will do what you are commanding me to do. This is an eternal practice. For my brother, I will produce sons who
are the likes of Mitra and Varuna. Let the queens observe the vow I indicate for one year. They will then be purified. No woman can unite with me without having observed a rigid vow." Satyavati said, "Take steps so that the
queens can conceive immediately. The gods do not shower rain in a country that is without a king. O lord! How
can a country that has no king be protected? Therefore, let the conception take place and Bhishma will protect the
wombs." Vyasa replied, "If I have to produce a son for my brother quickly and before the appointed time, they
must observe the supreme vow that they will have to tolerate my ugliness. If Kousalya[Both Ambika and Ambalika, who were princesses from the kingdom of Kashi. Kousalya means a princess
of Kosala.] can bear my smell, my
form, my attire and my body, she wil conceive an excellent son today." Having uttered these words and pending
the time of union, the hermit disappeared.

'The queen then went and met her daughters-in-law in private and told them what was in accordance with dharma and artha and for the sake of welfare. "O Kousalya! Listen to what I have to say. This is in accordance with
dharma. On account of my misfortune, the Bharata lineage is about to become extinct. On seeing my misery at the
extinction of his paternal lineage, the wise Bhishma has advised me about what should be done to preserve the dynasty and protect dharma. O daughter! But whether it can be done, depends on you. Accomplish it and revive the
lost lineage of the Bharatas. O one with the beautiful hips! Bear a son who is equal in radiance to the king of the
gods. He will bear the heavy burden of our lineage and this ancestral kingdom." She somehow managed to obtain
the concurrence of that virtuous one to the proposal, since this was in accordance with dharma. Then she feasted
Brahmanas, devarshis and guests.'
