'Yudhishthira said, "O grandfather! You have said that greed is the foundation of everything that is injurious. O father[The word used is tata.]! I wish to hear about the true
nature of ignorance."

'Bhishma replied, "If a person commits a wicked deed as a result of ignorance, he does not know what is good for him. He hates people who observe
good conduct and people talk about him[In words of condemnation.]. Because of ignorance, he goes
to hell. Because of ignorance, he comes to an evil end. Because of ignorance, he suffers misery and is submerged in disaster."

'Yudhishthira said, "I desire to hear about wickedness-its inclination,
status, growth, increase and decrease, the source, its working, progress, periodicity, reasons and causes. O king! I wish to hear exactly and completely,
about the consequence of ignorance, since unhappiness in this earth has it as
its origin."

'Bhishma replied, "Attachment, hatred, confusion, delight, sorrow, arrogance, desire, anger, pride, procrastination, laziness, wishing, aversion, torment, suffering from the prosperity of others-these wicked acts are indicated as ignorance. You have asked about their working, their increase and
other things. O mighty-armed one! O lord of the earth! Therefore, listen to
this in detail. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O king! Know that both
ignorance and excessive greed are equal in consequences and equal in
wickedness. They are the same. The influence of greed is again increased if
ignorance increases. If one is constant, so is the other. If one decays, so
does the other. Each one has many courses. The source of greed is the great
influence of destiny. Even if one has severed greed in every way, the source
that is based on destiny remains. Thus, greed comes from ignorance and ignorance comes from greed. Greed is the source of all sins. Therefore, one
should avoid greed. Janaka, Yuvanashva, Vrishadarbhi, Prasenjit and other
lords of the earth attained heaven because they destroyed their greed. O
foremost among the Kurus! In this world, it is evident that you must cast
aside greed from your soul. Having abandoned greed, you will follow the
path of happiness in this world and the next."'
