Vaishampayana said, 'O king! The intelligent King Yudhishthira again humbly asked Shantanu's son about the
details concerning gifts of cows.

'Yudhishthira said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Yet again, tell me properly about the qualities associated with donating cows. O brave one! I am not satisfied with hearing this, which is like amrita."'

Vaishampayana continued, 'O king! Thus addressed by Dharmaraja, Shantanu's son again properly told him
about the qualities associated with the donation of cows.

'Bhishma said, "The cow must have a calf and possess all the qualities. It must be covered with a garment and
must be young. By giving such a cow to a brahmana, one is freed from all sins. There are worlds where there is no
sun. If one donates a cow that cannot drink water and eat grass, or one that does not yield milk or has had its senses destroyed, one goes there. A cow that is old and diseased is like a well that has dried up. By giving such a cow
to a brahmana, one enters darkness and faces hardships. A cow that is wicked, wrathful, diseased, weak, or one for
which the agreed price has not been given, should never be donated. If a cow causes hardship to the recipient brahmana, there are no fruits. There is no valour or fruits in the worlds thus obtained. A cow that is strong, fragrant and
good in conduct is praised by everyone. Just as Ganga is the best among rivers, a kapila is the best among cattle."

'Yudhishthira asked, "In acts of donating, all cows should be the same. Why then do the virtuous praise the gift
of a kapila? O excellent one! I particularly desire to hear about this. You are capable of telling me."

'Bhishma replied, "O son! The ancients spoke about this and I heard what they said. I will tell you the details
about how a rohini was created. Earlier, Svayambhu instructed Daksha to create offspring. Desiring the welfare of
the subjects, he first created a means for their subsistence. O lord! The residents of heaven subsist by resorting to
amrita. Like that, the subjects exist on the basis of a means of subsistence. The mobile are superior to the immobile
and men are best among the mobile. The brahmanas are best among men and sacrifices depend on them. Soma is
obtained through sacrifices and sacrifices depend on cows. When a means of subsistence was first arranged for
subjects, the gods were delighted[Because sacrifices would be performed.]. When beings were created, they began to clamour for a means of subsistence.
Thirsty,  and  seeking  a  means  of  subsistence,  they  approached  the  one  who  was  like  a  father  and  a  mother[Meaning Daksha.].
Through his mental powers, he himself discerned what the various categories of beings desired. To obtain strength,
Prajapati imbibed some of the amrita. When he was satisfied, a fragrance wafted out and Surabhi[The mother of all cows. There are alternative stories about creation. In other stories, Surabhi is the daughter of
the sage Kashyapa and Daksha's daughter, Rohini.] was created
from this. He saw the cow Surabhi, the daughter who had been born from his mouth. Surabhi had daughters who
are known as the mothers of all the worlds. They had complexions like gold and they were kapilas. They were
cows that provided a means of subsistence for the subjects. With a complexion like that of amrita, they began to
flow with milk in all directions. As it flowed, there were waves, and froth was created in the flow that resulted
from amrita. Some of this was dislodged from the mouths of calves and fell down on Bhava, who was then on
earth. When it fell down on his head, the lord was enraged. With the eye that was in the middle of his forehead, he
glanced at the rohinis, as if to burn them down. O lord of the earth! Like the sun tinging the clouds with many
kinds of colours, that energy of Rudra's created hues in the bodies of the kapilas. Some among them escaped by
seeking refuge with Soma. Those which managed to do this retained their own complexions. The others assumed
other colours.

'"Seeing that Mahadeva was angry, Prajapati[Daksha.] addressed him. 'You have been sprinkled with amrita. This is not
a leftover from the cows[After the calves had drunk the milk.]. Soma drinks up amrita and showers it down again. In that way, the rohinis shower
down milk and it has been created from amrita. The wind, the fire, gold and the ocean are never tainted. That is the
way with the amrita from cows, once the calves have drunk the amrita. They sustain the world with the milk and
the ghee. All of us enjoy that prosperity and the auspicious pervasiveness of amrita.' O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! Having said this, Prajapati gave Rudra a bull and cows and pleased his heart. Pleased with this, Mahadeva
made the bull his mount and placed it on his standard. Thus he became the one with the bull on his standard. Then
the gods made Mahadeva Pashupati[The lord of animals.]. He became the lord of cattle and came to be known as Vrishanka[The one with the sign of a bull.]. The
kapilas are extremely energetic and bear the original complexion. That is the reason why they are thought of first in
any act of donation. They are the best among creatures, and the means of subsistence of creatures flows from them.
They are placid and sacred. They grant life and all the objects of desire. A person who gifts a cow like that gives
all the objects of desire. These are the supreme ordinances about the power of cattle. If a man desires the auspicious, is pure and always reads this, he is freed from all sins and taints. He obtains beloved sons and the wealth of
animals. Havya, kavya, offerings of water, rites of pacification, gifts of vehicles and garments, the nurturing of the
aged and the young-all of these qualities are obtained through donations of cows. O king! The donor always obtains those benefits.'"

Vaishampayana said, 'Hearing the grandfather's words, King Ajamidha and his brothers followed what he had
said and made gifts of gold, brass and cows. Partha gave these to excellent brahmanas. He gave brahmanas hundreds and thousands of cattle. He instructed that sacrifices with dakshina should be performed. He obtained fame
and conquered supreme worlds.'
