Vaishampayana said, 'O bull among the Bharata lineage! When the great-souled Pandavas lived in the forest, they
spent eleven years in great difficulties. Although they deserved happiness, those supreme among men confronted
extreme misery and lived on fruits and roots. They kept thinking about when this period would be over. The
mighty-aremd rajarshi Yudhishthira thought that this supreme misery had befallen his brothers because of the sin
of his own deeds. The king did not sleep happily. His heart seemed to be pierced with stakes. At that time, he witnessed the calamity that had arisen from the game with the dice. On remembering the harsh words of the suta's
son, the Pandava sighed in misery, retaining the great poison of his anger. Arjuna, the twins, the famous Droupadi
and the immensely energetic Bhima, supremely strong among all of them, suffered extreme sorrow when they
looked at Yudhishthira. The bulls among men thought that only a short period of time remained. Their bodies were
so agitated with endeavour and anger that their appearances seemed to change.

'After some time, the great yogi Vyasa, Satyavati's son, came there to see the Pandavas. When Kunti's son Yudhishthira saw him arrive, he approached and welcomed the great-souled one in accordance with the proper rites.
Having satisfied Vyasa by prostrating himself, the descendant of the Pandava lineage, willing to serve and controlled in his senses, seated himself below him. On seeing that his grandson was lean from surviving on forest fare,
the maharshi was driven by compassion and spoke in a voice that was choked with tears. "O mighty-armed Yudhishthira! O foremost among those who uphold dharma! Listen to my words. Those who do not torment themselves with austerities, do not find great happiness in this world. In due order, men experience happiness and unhappiness. O bull among the Bharata lineage! No one experiences continuous happiness. A man who is wise has
superior insight and knows that fortune rises and sets. He does not rejoice or sorrow. When there is happiness, one
enjoys it. When there is unhappiness, one endures it, just as one who has ploughed the land waits for the right time.
There is nothing superior to austerities. Austerities lead to greatness. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Know
that there is nothing that austerities do not lead to. O great king! Truthfulness, honesty, restraint from anger, willingness to share, self-control, calmness, freedom from envy, non-violence, purity and control of the senses-these
are the methods used by men whose deeds are pure. People who are addicted to adharma, those who are deluded
and follow the ways of inferior species, achieve births that bring difficulties and never attain happiness. Whatever
acts are performed here, find fruits in the next world. Therefore, one should yoke one's body to austerities and
rules. O king! One should donate according to one's ability, happily and devoid of envy, to the right person at the
right time, showing homage and honours. One who is honest and truthful obtains a life without difficulties. One
without anger and malice obtains supreme contentment. One with self-control and serenity never confronts difficulties. One who has controlled his soul is not tormented on seeing the prosperity of others. A man who gives the
right share, and the one who receives, find happiness. One who is non-violent attains supreme health. He who honours those who deserve to be honoured, obtains birth in a great lineage. He who has conquered his senses, never
confronts misfortune. If one's intelligence is directed towards good deeds, following the law of time, because of
this, he obtains superior intelligence."

'Yudhishthira asked, "O illustrious one! O great sage! There is the dharma of giving and there are austerities.
Which of these has greater qualities in the next world and which is said to be more difficult?"

'Vyasa said, "It is said that nothing is more difficult in this world than giving. There is great thirst for wealth and
wealth is obtained through difficulty. Brave men give up the love for life and enter into great battles for the sake of
wealth. They enter oceans and forests. Men resort to agriculture and rearing cattle and become servants for the
sake of obtaining wealth. Therefore, it is extremely difficult to give up something that has been obtained with great
difficulty. Therefore, there is nothing more difficult than giving and I hold charity to be superior. It must specially
be said that riches that have been obtained through just means must be given away to virtuous ones, to the right
person, and at the right time and place. But if the riches have been obtained through unjust means, the deed of observing the dharma of charity does not save the giver from great danger. O Yudhishthira! It has been said that even
a small gift, given to the right person at the right time, and with a pure mind, brings eternal fruits in the hereafter.
On this, there is an ancient account about how Mudgala obtained great rewards by giving away a drona of rice."'
