'Dhritarashtra asked, "When Bhishma was especially angered and distressed because of my son and took that terrible vow in that battle, what did Bhishma do when he encountered the Pandaveyas. O Sanjaya! Tell me what the
Panchalas did to the grandfather."

'Sanjaya replied, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When the forenoon of that day had passed and when the
great-souled Pandavas were delighted at having accomplished victory, your father, Devavrata, learned in all kinds
of dharma, advanced on the swiftest of steeds towards the army of the Pandavas. He was protected by a large army
and by all your sons. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A tumultuous battle ensued between us and the Pandavas, because you did not follow dharma. It made the body hair stand up. There was the twanging of bows there,
as they struck against the palms. A tremendous sound arose and it was capable of splintering mountains. 'Wait', 'I
am stationed here', 'Know this one', 'Retreat', 'Be steady', 'I am steady here', 'Strike'-these were the sounds
that were heard everywhere. Golden body-armour, crowns and standards fell down and it was like the sound of
boulders descending on stony ground. Hundreds and thousands of heads and ornamented arms fell down immobile
on the ground. With the heads sliced off, some supreme among men still stood, with their bows raised and holding
weapons. An extremely swift river of blood began to flow. Its mud was terrible with flesh and blood and the bodies
of elephants were like stones in it. The bodies of excellent horses, men and elephants flowed in it then, as it flowed
towards the world of the hereafter. It was delightful to vultures and jackals. O king! A battle like this has not been
seen earlier, nor heard of. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Such was the one between your sons and the Pandavas. Because of the warriors who had been brought down in battle, chariots could not find a path there. The bodies of fallen elephants were like blue summits of mountains. O venerable one! Strewn with colourful armour, standards and umbrellas, the field of battle was as beautiful as the autumn sky. Though they were oppressed and
wounded by arrows, some armoured ones were seen to dash towards the enemy in battle, without any fear. Many
who fell down in the battle cried, 'O father! O brother! O friend! O relative! O companion! O maternal uncle! Do
not abandon me.' There were others who exclaimed, 'Come here. Why are you frightened? Where are you going? I
am stationed in battle. Do not be afraid.'

'"Bhishma, Shantanu's son, was there, his bow always stretched in a circle. He released blazing arrows that
were like the venom of virulent snakes. Rigid in his vows, he released arrows in all the directions. O bull among
the Bharata lineage! He picked out the Pandava charioteers and killed them. With a dextrous hand, he seemed to be
dancing around in the chariot. O king! He could be seen everywhere, like a circle of fire. Though the brave one
was alone in that battle, because of his dexterity, the Pandavas and the Srinjayas saw him as many hundreds and
thousands. Everyone there thought that Bhishma had used maya on his own self. In one moment, he was seen in
the eastern direction. In the next moment, he was seen in the western direction. They saw the lord in the north and
immediately saw him in the south. Thus the brave Gangeya was seen in that battle. There was no one among the
Pandaveyas who was capable of glancing at him. They only saw many arrows shot from Bhishma's bow. Having
seen him perform such great feats in the battle there, with the slaughter of the army, the brave ones uttered many
lamentations. Your father wandered around in superhuman form and driven by destiny, thousands of kings fell
down like insects, led to the fire of the angry Bhishma. In that battle, not a single one of Bhishma's arrows failed to
be successful, because of the large numbers that were arrayed against him, and descended on the bodies of men,
elephants and horses. With a single shafted arrow that was released well, he brought down an armoured elephant,
like the vajra shattering a mountain. With an extremely sharp iron arrow, your father killed two or three elephant-
riders, armoured and standing together, at a single stroke. Whoever approached Bhishma, tiger among men, in that
battle, was seen to be brought down onto the ground in an instant. Thus, Dharmaraja's large army was slaughtered
through Bhishma's valour and shattered in a thousand ways. Tormented by the shower of arrows, the large army
trembled, while Vasudeva and the great-souled Partha looked on. Though the brave ones made every endeavour,
they could not restrain the maharathas who were oppressed by Bhishma's arrows. He slaughtered that large army
with a valour that was like that of the great Indra. O great king! It was routed such that no two persons were seen
together. Men, elephants and horses were pierced. Standards and axle-shafts fell down. The soldiers of the sons of
Pandu lost their senses and lamented. Father killed the son and the son killed the father. Driven by the force of destiny, a friend challenged a beloved friend to a fight. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Many soldiers on the side
of the sons of Pandu were seen to run away, with their armour discarded and with their hair dishevelled. The soldiers of the sons of Pandu, and even the leaders among them, were seen to be as confounded as a herd of cattle.
They lamented in woe.

'"On seeing that the soldiers were routed, Devaki's son[Krishna.] stopped that supreme of chariots and spoke to Partha
Bibhatsu. 'O Partha! The hour that you desired, has now arrived. O tiger among men! If you wish to be free from
confusion, strike. O brave one! In earlier times, in the assembly of kings, you had said that you would kill the soldiers of the sons of Dhritarashtra, with Bhishma and Drona at the forefront, with all the relatives and those who
wished to fight against you in battle. O Kounteya! O destroyer of enemies! Act accordingly now and make your
words come true. O Bibhatsu! Behold. Your army is being driven back in every direction. Behold. All the kings in
Yudhishthira's army are running away, on having seen Bhishma in battle, with his mouth gaping open. They are
frightened and are being destroyed, like small animals by a lion.' Having been thus addressed, Dhananjaya replied
to Vasudeva, 'Drive the horses through this ocean of soldiers to where Bhishma is stationed.' O king! Madhava
then drove those silver-white steeds to the place where Bhishma's chariot, which was like the sun and was difficult
to look at, was stationed. Having seen the mighty-armed Partha advance to fight in the battle against Bhishma,
Yudhishthira's great army rallied again.

'"Bhishma, foremost among the Kurus, roared repeatedly, like a lion. He swiftly enveloped Dhananjaya's chariot with a shower of arrows. In an instant, with the horses and with the charioteer, the chariot disappeared. It was
covered by that great shower of arrows and could no longer be seen. But the spirited Vasudeva was not agitated.
Though the horses had been wounded by Bhishma's arrows, he patiently continued to drive them. Partha picked up
his divine bow, with a twang that was like the clap of thunder. He sliced down Bhishma's bow with three arrows.
With his bow sliced down, your father Kouravya again picked up a large bow and strung it in the twinkling of an
eye. He drew the bow with his two hands and its twang was like the roar of the clouds. But the enraged Arjuna
sliced down that bow too. At this, Shantanu's son applauded his dexterity. 'O Partha! O mighty-armed one! O descendant of Pandu! Wonderful. O Dhananjaya! Such a great deed is deserving of you. O son! I am pleased with
you. Fight hard with me now.' Having thus praised Partha and having grasped another large bow, in that battle, the
brave one released arrows towards Partha's chariot. Vasudeva displayed his supreme skill in handling horses. By
driving around in swift circles, he avoided all those arrows. O venerable one! However, with great force, Bhishma
used sharp arrows to pierce Vasudeva and Dhananjaya all over their bodies. Thus wounded by Bhishma's arrows,
those two tigers among men were adorned like two roaring bulls, with the scratches of thorns on them. Yet again,
extremely angry, Bhishma used straight-tufted arrows to cover the two Krishnas[Krishna is also one of Arjuna's names.] on every side. Though enraged, Bhishma repeatedly smiled and used his sharp arrows to make Varshneya tremble and wonder.

'"Krishna witnessed Bhishma's valour in battle and saw the mildness with which the mighty-armed Partha countered him. In that encounter, Bhishma created an incessant shower of arrows. In the midst of the two armies, he
was like the tormenting sun. He was killing the best of the best among the soldiers of Pandu's son. Bhishma was
like the fire of destruction amidst Yudhishthira's army. The lord Keshava, the destroyer of enemy heroes, could no
longer tolerate this. The one with the immeasurable soul thought that Yudhishthira's army would not be able to survive. In a battle, Bhishma was capable of destroying the gods and the danavas in a single day, not to speak of taking on the sons of Pandu, with their soldiers and their followers, in a fight. The large army of the great-souled Pan-
dava began to flee. Having seen the Somakas shattered and fleeing in that battle, the Kouravas were delighted and
advanced to the fight, gladdening the grandfather. He[Krishna.] thought, 'For the welfare of the Pandavas, I will armour
myself and kill Bhishma today. I will relieve the burden of the great-souled Pandavas. Though Arjuna has been
struck with sharp arrows in this battle, he does not know his duty in this encounter, on account of the respect he
has for Bhishma.' While he was reflecting in this way, the wrathful grandfather again unleashed arrows towards
Partha's chariot. Because of the many arrows that were flying around, all the directions were enveloped. The sky,
the directions and the earth could not be seen. Nor could the sun, the possessor of the rays, be seen. The tumultuous wind seemed to be mixed with smoke. All the directions were agitated.

'"Drona, Vikarna, Jayadratha, Bhurishrava, Kritavarma, Kripa, Shrutayu, the lord and king of Ambashtha[There were two Shrutayus, one was the king of Kalinga and the other one was the king of Ambashtha. Ambashtha was located in the area of the Punjab.],
Vinda and Anuvinda, Sudakshina, those from the east, all the large numbers of Souviras, the Vasatayas, the Kshudrakas and the Malavas-on the instructions of the king who was Shantanu's son, all of these swiftly advanced to
do battle with Kiriti. Shini's grandson saw that Kiriti was surrounded by a net with hundreds and thousands of
horses, infantry and chariots and a large number of elephants. Shini's brave descendant, foremost among the wielders of arms, swiftly advanced to where the soldiers were, wielding a giant bow. The brave one from Shini's lineage
suddenly arrived to aid Arjuna, like Vishnu helping the destroyer of Vritra. The elephants, horses, chariots and
standards were shattered and all the warriors were frightened by Bhishma. Yudhishthira's soldiers were running
away. On seeing this, Shini's brave descendant said, 'O kshatriyas! Where are you going? This is not the dharma
of virtuous men, as it has been recounted in the ancient texts. O brave ones! Do not forsake your oaths. Follow the
dharma of those who are brave.' Vasava's younger brother[Krishna.] was unable to tolerate the act of the foremost among
the kings running away. In that battle, he saw that Bhishma was exerting all his powers, that Partha was mild and
that the Kurus were advancing from every direction.

'"Unable to tolerate it, the great-souled and illustrious one, the protector of all the Dasharhas, spoke approvingly
to Shini's descendant. 'O brave descendant of the Shini lineage! Those who are running away, are indeed running
away. O Satvata! Let those who are still here, also flee. Behold. In this battle, I will today bring down Bhishma
from his chariot and also Drona and all their followers. O Satvata! There is no charioteer among the Kouravas who
will escape when I am enraged in battle today. I will grasp the terrible chakra and rob the one who is great in his
vows, of his life[The text uses the word rathanga. This can mean the wheel of a chariot, or it can mean a chakra. Krishna could
have been referring to the sudarshana chakra, or to the more mundane wheel of the chariot. Either translation is
correct.]. O descendant of Shini! I will kill Bhishma and his followers and Drona, the foremost among
charioteers. I will act so as to bring pleasure to Dhananjaya, the king[Yudhishthira.], Bhima and the two Ashvins[Nakula and Sahadeva.]. I will
kill all the sons of Dhritarashtra and the foremost among kings who are on their side. In a cheerful frame of mind, I
will today give the kingdom to King Ajatashatru.' Having said this, Vasudeva's son discarded the reins of the chariot and raised the chakra in his hand. It possessed an excellent handle and was like the sun in its radiance. It was
like the vajra in its power. The great-souled one made the earth tremble with his footsteps. With great force,
Krishna rushed towards Bhishma. The great Indra's younger brother was angry. He rushed towards Bhishma, as he
was stationed in the midst of his troops. He was like a lion that wished to kill a king of the elephants. He was blind
in his anger and agitated in his pride. The ends of his yellow garments trailed in the air and looked like a cloud
charged with lightning in the sky. Sudarshana looked like a glorious lotus, with Shouri's beautiful arm as the stalk.
It was like the original lotus, as resplendent as the morning sun, which emerged from Narayana's navel[The original lotus is the lotus at the time of creation, which emerged from Vishnu's navel.].
Krishna's anger was like the rising sun that caused the lotus to bloom and its beautiful petals were as sharp as a razor. On seeing that the great Indra's younger brother was angry and roaring and that he was wielding the chakra,
all the beings shrieked in lamentation. They thought that the destruction of the Kurus was nigh. Having grasped the
chakra, Vasudeva looked like the fire of destruction that consumes the world of the living. The preceptor of the
worlds arose like the fire of destruction that would destroy all beings. On seeing the god, foremost among men, advance with the chakra, Shantanu's son remained fearlessly stationed on his chariot, with the bow and arrows in his
hand. He said, 'O lord of the gods! O one whose abode is the universe! O wielder of the Sharnga bow! O one with
the chakra in your hand! Come. I am bowing down before you. O protector of the worlds! Bring me down from
this supreme chariot. You are the wonderful refuge of everyone in a battle. O Krishna! If I am killed by you today,
I will obtain supreme welfare in this world and in the next. O protector of the Andhakas and the Vrishnis! You
have shown me great honour and my valour will be celebrated in the three worlds.' However, Partha swiftly descended from his chariot and ran after the foremost of the Yadus. With his thick and long arms, he seized Hari's
large and thick arms. The original god, whose name is the great yogi, was consumed by great wrath. Though he
was seized in this way, Vishnu dragged Jishnu after him with great force, like a great storm carries away a tree. But
as he was swiftly advancing towards Bhishma, Partha forcibly grasped him by the feet. O king! Thus grasping him
with force, Kiriti succeeded in stopping him at the tenth step. When Krishna had stopped, bedecked with a beautiful and golden garland, Arjuna happily bowed down before him and said, 'O Keshava! You are the refuge of the
Pandavas. Control your anger. O Keshava! I swear in the names of my sons and brothers that I will not deviate
from the acts that I have promised to carry out. O younger brother of Indra! Instructed by you, I will certainly destroy the Kurus.' Hearing the promise and the pledge, Janardana was happy and was pacified. He was always engaged in the welfare of the supreme among the Kouravas[Since Kuru was a common ancestor, the Pandavas can also be referred to as the Kouravas. This is presumably
a reference to Arjuna, but can also be a reference to Yudhishthira.]. With the chakra, he again ascended on the chariot.

'"The slayer of enemies again grasped the reins. Shouri grasped his conch shell Panchajanya and blew on it,
making the directions resound with its roar. The foremost among the Kurus saw him, adorned with a necklace,
armlets and earrings. His curved eyelashes were smeared with dust. With gleaming teeth, he grasped the conch
shell and they set up a loud cry. Tambourines, drums, kettledrums and smaller drums began to sound, mixed with
the sound of chariot wheels. Lion-like terrible roars were uttered among the Kuru soldiers. There was the roar of
Partha's Gandiva, ascending into the sky and the directions like the clap of thunder. The bright and polished arrows
released from Pandava's bow covered all the directions. Together with Bhishma and Bhurishrava and an army, the
lord of the Kouravas[Duryodhana.] advanced against him. He held raised arrows in his hand and was like a fire[The word used in the text is dhumaketu. The natural meaning for this is comet or meteor. But the word also
means fire and fire seems more appropriate, given that dry wood or grass is referred to.] that would
consume dry wood. Bhurishrava shot seven gold-tufted and broad arrows at Arjuna. Duryodhana hurled an extremely forceful lance, Shalya a club and Shantanu's son a spear. But he used seven arrows to counter the seven
supreme arrows shot by Bhurishrava. With a razor-sharp arrow, he countered the lance that had been released from
Duryodhana's hand. Shantanu's son had hurled a spear at him, as resplendent as lightning. But as it descended, the
brave one used two arrows to cut this down and also the club that had been released from the arms of the king of
Madra. He used the strength of his two arms to draw the beautiful bow Gandiva, whose energy was immeasurable.
In accordance with the prescriptions, he invoked the extremely terrible and wonderful weapon of the great Indra
and made it appear in the sky. The great-souled and great archer, Kiriti, used that weapon to counter all the soldiers. It showered down a mass of polished arrows, with the complexion of the fire. The many arrows that were released from Partha's bow cut down chariots, standards and bows and the arms that held them. They penetrated the
bodies of the enemy kings, the gigantic elephants and the large number of horses. Having covered all the directions
and the sub-directions with his extremely sharp arrows, Partha created terror in their minds with the twang of Gan-
diva. Thus did Kiriti oppress them and as that terrible encounter raged, the sounds of conch shells and kettledrums
were surpassed by Gandiva's roar.

'"When they got to know the sound of Gandiva, the brave ones among men, with King Virata at the forefront,
and the valiant King Drupada of Panchala, went to the spot, with uplifted hearts. But wherever the sound of Gandi-
va was heard, all your soldiers were immersed in despair there and not a single one would venture forth. In that extremely terrible slaughter of kings, many brave ones were slain, together with their chariots and charioteers. Elephants were tormented and brought down with iron arrows, with their giant banners and seats made out of pure
gold. They lost their lives and were suddenly brought down, their bodies mangled by Kiriti. Partha used a firm
hand to bring them down with the force of his sharp, polished and broad-headed arrows. The implements of war
were shattered, the fortifications were destroyed. In that battle, Dhananjaya brought down large standards and the
best of pennants and large numbers of infantry, chariots, horses and elephants. Struck by the arrows, they lost their
lives. Their bodies became immobile and they fell down on the ground. O king! In that great battle, their armour
and their bodies were mangled by the supreme weapon named after Indra. With a flood of sharp arrows, Kiriti
made an extremely terrible river flow on the field of battle. The blood was the bodies of men wounded by
weapons. The foam was human fat. Its expanse was broad and it flowed swiftly. The banks were formed by the
dead bodies of elephants and horses. The mud was the entrails, marrow and flesh of men. Many hordes of rakshasas and demons populated it. The moss was formed by heads, with the hair attached. Thousands of bodies were
borne in the flow and the waves were formed by many shattered fragments of armour. The bones of men, horses
and elephants were the stones. A large number of crows, jackals, vultures and herons and many predatory beasts
like hyenas were seen to line up along its banks, as that terrible and destructive river flowed towards the nether regions. That terrible river was as cruel as the great Vaitarani[River that separates the world of the living from the world of the dead.]. Created through the masses of Arjuna's arrows,
that extremely fearful river conveyed fat, marrow and blood.

'"The Chedis, the Panchalas, the Karushas and the Matsyas, together with all the Parthas, began to roar. The soldiers and leaders of the army[Belonging to the enemy.] were terrified, like a herd of deer at the sight of a lion. The wielder of the Gandi-
va and Janardana roared in great delight. The Kurus, together with Bhishma, Drona, Duryodhana and Bahlika, saw
that Indra's terrible weapon had extended everywhere and was like the end of a yuga. Their limbs were sorely
wounded from the weapon and they saw the sun was withdrawing its rays. They saw that twilight was near and
that the sun was streaked with red. They decided to withdraw. Having performed deeds and won fame in the world,
Dhananjaya had triumphed over the enemies. Having completed his tasks, together with his brothers, the lord of
men retired to his camp for the night. When night set in, there was a terrible and great uproar among the Kurus. 'In
the battle, Arjuna has killed ten thousand charioteers and seven hundred elephants. All those from the eastern regions, all the masses of Souviras, the Kshudrakas and the Malavas have been brought down. Dhananjaya has accomplished a great deed. No one else is capable of accomplishing this. O king[This is being addressed to Duryodhana.]! King Shrutayu, the lord of Ambashtha, Durmarshana, Chitrasena, Drona, Kripa, Saindhava, Bahlika, Bhurishrava, Shalya and Shala, together
with Bhishma, have been vanquished by Kiriti, the maharatha of the world, through the valour of his own arms.' O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having spoken these words, all those who were on your side went to their
camps. There were thousands of torches to bring illumination and many beautiful lamps. All the warriors and leaders among the Kurus settled down for the night, terrified of Kiriti."'
