'"The messenger of the gods said, 'O maharshi! Are you still thinking about what should be done about the
supreme happiness of heaven? You have obtained a great honour and you are still deliberating about it, like one
who is not wise. Know that the world which exists above is known by the name of heaven. It is high up. O sage! It
has excellent streets, along which the vehicles of the gods travel. O Mudgala! Men who have not tormented themselves with austerities, those who have not performed great sacrifices, those who are untruthful and those who are
atheists cannot go there. Men with dharma in their souls, those who have conquered their souls, the serene, the
self-controlled, those who are without jealousy, those who are devoted to the dharma of giving and brave ones who
bear injury marks on their bodies, go there. Through serenity and self-control, they are the best practitioners of
dharma. O brahmana! Those worlds, meant for performers of pure deeds, are served by righteous ones. O
Moudgalya[Mudgala is being addressed thus because the Moudgalya lineage originated with him.]! The gods, the Sadhyas, the Vishvas[The Vishvadevas.], the maharshis, the yamas[The text says yaamaas, in the plural. Yaamaas are precepts of social discipline that are an integral part of
yoga, in combination with niyama. This must be a personification of that.], the dhamas[A dhama is a sacred place of pilgrimage and in the plural, these must be personifications of those.], the gandharvas
and the apsaras live there. The many separate worlds of these masses of gods are separate, and one after another,
are radiant, energetic and beautiful, satisfying all desires. The golden Mount Meru, the king of mountains, is there,
extending for thirty-three thousand yojanas. O Mudgala! The celestial gardens are there. There is the sacred Nandana[The name of Indra's pleasure garden.], where the performers of pure deeds can pleasure. There is no hunger, thirst, fatigue, cold, heat or fear
there, nor anything terrible or inauspicious, nor any disease. Fragrances, pleasing to the mind, are everywhere.
Everything is pleasurable to the touch. O sage! There are sounds everywhere and they are pleasant to the ear and
the mind. There is no sorrow or old age there, nor labour and repentance. O sage! The world that is obtained as the
fruit of one's own deeds is like this. It is possible for men to go there through their own good deeds. O Moudgalya!
The bodies of those who live there are resplendent because of their own deeds, and not a consequence of their
mothers or fathers. There is no sweat or bad smell, no excrement and urine. O sage! Dust does not soil one's garments there. The beautiful garlands, with celestial fragrances, never fade. O brahmana! The residents travel on
many celestial vehicles. They have no jealousy, sorrow or fatigue. They are devoid of confusion and envy. O great
sage! They live there in heaven, in happiness.

'"'O bull among sages! But beyond these worlds, and higher up, there are Shakra's worlds, with divine qualities.
O brahmana! Beyond these are the sacred and effulgent worlds of Brahma. O brahmana! Rishis who have been purified through their sacred deeds go there. The gods of the gods, by the name of the Ribhus[The Ribhus are Vedic gods, identified with the rays of the sun. They are often Indra's companions. There are
three gods-Ribhu, Vaja and Vibhvan, collectively known as the Ribhus. In later myths, Ribhu became Brahma's
son.], live there. These
worlds are supreme and are worshipped even by the gods. These worlds are radiant in their own lustre and they
yield every object of desire. These lords of the worlds[The Ribhus.] are not tormented on account of women and are free from
envy. They do not offer oblations, nor do they feed on amrita. They possess divine bodies and do not have physical
forms. These eternal gods of the gods do not crave for happiness. They are not transformed when the eras[Kalpa, one of Brahma's days, a very long period of time.]
change. How can they have old age, death, joy, pleasure or happiness? O sage! How can they have unhappiness,
happiness, affection or hatred? O Moudgalya! That supreme state is craved even by the celestials. But that supreme
salvation is difficult to obtain and cannot be got by those who are still subject to desire. There are thirty-three
worlds[The critical text uses the word loka. Some other versions say deva. Deva is more appropriate, since there are
thirty-three gods.]. The worlds of the learned are beyond these. Those who follow the best of restraints, or donate according
to the norms, attain these. You have attained that because of your generous deeds. Enjoy the happiness that you
have earned through your good deeds, illuminated by the radiance of your austerities. O brahmana! Such is the
bliss of heaven, in many different worlds. I have described the qualities of heaven to you. Now hear about the
taints. In heaven, while enjoying the fruits of deeds performed, one must enjoy them right up to the roots, and cannot perform any other deeds. In my view, this is a blemish, because there is a fall at the end of it and those who
minds have been full of bliss, must fall. O Mudgala! After having witnessed that brilliance and prosperity, the discontentment and regret that follow the relocation to a different region, must be extremely difficult to endure. For
those who fall, the consciousness is confounded. The passions cause agitation. The garlands fade and fear descends
on those who are falling. O Moudgalya! These are the terrible taints that exist all the way up to Brahma's abode.
But this is not true of the higher worlds of the performers of good deeds. For such men, the qualities are innumerable[Ayuta, also meaning ten thousand.]. O sage! There is another supreme characteristic of those who have been dislodged from heaven. After their
good deeds are over, they are born among men. They are born as immensely fortunate and enjoy their share of
prosperity. But if one does not attain wisdom there, one obtains an inferior status[A lower order in rebirth.]. The deeds performed in this
world are enjoyed in the next. O brahmana! It has been said that this is a world of deeds. The next is one of fruits.
O Mudgala! I have explained everything that you have asked me. Through your grace, without any delay, let us go
to the region of the righteous.'"

'Vyasa said, "When Moudgalya heard these words, he reflected on them in his mind. Having thought about
them, the best of sages replied to the messenger of the gods. 'O messenger of the gods! I bow down before you. O
father[The word used is tata, used affectionately towards any senior.]! Please go, according to your wishes. If there are such great taints, I have nothing to do with heaven or
happiness. There will be great unhappiness at the time of the fall, by those who have enjoyed heaven. There will be
extremely terrible regret. Therefore, I do not desire heaven. I will only look for the infinite region where there is no
sorrow, unhappiness or dislodging, once one has traversed the path and has reached there.' Having spoken these
words, the sage gave the messenger of the gods permission to leave. He returned to a life of collecting rice and
achieved supreme serenity. He looked on praise and blame equally. A brick, a stone and a piece of gold were the
same to him. Through the yoga of knowledge, he was always engaged in meditation. Having obtained strength
through the yoga of meditation, he obtained supreme wisdom. He attained the eternal and supreme success, the
marks of supreme salvation[Nirvana, a word with many different nuances. While it means extinction or extinguishing, it stands for absolute extinction or annihilation and the final emancipation and bliss that comes from union with the supreme soul.]. O Kounteya! Therefore, you should not sorrow. You have been dislodged from a
prosperous kingdom. But you will regain it through your austerities. Happiness follows unhappiness and unhappiness follows happiness in circles around a man, like the rim of a wheel. You have infinite valour and you will obtain the kingdom of your fathers and grandfathers, once the thirteen years have passed. You should discard the
fever in your mind."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having spoken these words to the descendant of the Pandava lineage, the illustrious and
wise Vyasa returned to his hermitage, for the performance of austerities.'
