'Yudhishthira asked, "What are the fruits obtained through the yoga of knowledge, the Vedas and rituals? How can
the atman in beings be known? O grandfather! Tell me this."

'Bhishma replied, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted. This is a conversation between Prajapati
Manu and maharshi Brihaspati. Prajapati was supreme on earth and maharshi Brihaspati was foremost amongst the
large number of devarshis. In ancient times, the student bowed down before the preceptor[Brihaspati was Manu's student.] and asked him a question. 'What is the cause[Behind creation.]? Where have mantras and ordinances come from? What are the fruits that brahmanas
say are attached to knowledge? O illustrious one! Tell me accurately, what are the things that mantras and sounds
are not able to reveal? There are those who know about artha, the sacred texts, the subsequent sacred texts[We have translated agama as this, as opposed to shastra.] and
mantras. They perform many supreme sacrifices, at which, they give away cows. What are the great fruits that flow
from these? Where are they found? From where have the earth, those on earth, the wind, the sky, aquatic creatures,
water, heaven and the residents of heaven originated? O illustrious one! Tell me this ancient account. Men desire
and exert for knowledge and their inclination turns towards what they know. But I have no knowledge of that
supreme and ancient one[The brahman. This is false because Brihaspati worships something that
he does not know.]. Therefore, how can I avoid being false in my inclinations? I have studied the large
material of the Rig Veda, the Sama Veda, the Yajur Veda, prosody, the paths of the nakshatras, nirukta[Etymology in the Vedas.], grammar, samkalpa[Concerning rituals.]and shiksha[Concerning accurate pronunciation.]. But I still do not know about the element that is in all nature. You should tell me
everything, about the fruits that follow from knowledge and deeds and about how an embodied being gives up a
body and again enters another body.'

'"Manu said, 'Anything that is agreeable is said to represent happiness. Similarly, anything disagreeable is said
to represent unhappiness. I will obtain happiness from this and not from that-one performs all rites and rituals because of such sentiments. However, those who are engaged in the pursuit of knowledge serve neither happiness,
nor unhappiness. Prosody and the yoga of action are because of this desire in the soul. However, if someone is
freed from this, he attains the supreme. In the pursuit of happiness, a man engages in many things along the path of
action. But he does not go towards the supreme. By freeing oneself from acts, one obtains the supreme. He is without desire and certainly obtains the supreme brahman. Subjects have been created through the mind and through
deeds. These are the two virtuous paths, revered by everyone. Acts are seen to have outcomes that are both eternal
and temporary. To obtain the eternal, there is no method other than renouncing any desire in the mind. When the
night is over and the atman is no longer enveloped in darkness, the eye can lead the atman. Similarly, when a person has the qualities of jnana and vijnana, he can see which inauspicious deeds need to be avoided. When men
know, they avoid snakes, the pointed ends of kusha and wells. In their folly, stupid people fall down there. In that
way, behold the superior fruits of knowledge. The complete utterance of mantras, sacrifices performed according
to the prescribed ordinances, the giving of dakshina, the donation of food and contemplation in the mind-these
five are said to be the fruits the atman obtains through action. The Vedas say that deeds have qualities in them[Sattva, rajas and tamas. Sattva action is driven by a desire for heaven,
rajas by a desire for superiority and victory and tamas by a desire to harm
others. The intentions are thus important.].
Mantras form the foundations of deeds and mantras also possess these. It is evident that rituals must also have
them. Fruits originate in the mind and the embodied being enjoys them. In the world of action, auspicious and sacred sounds, forms, taste, touch and scent can be successfully obtained as fruits. When acts are performed through
the body, they are also enjoyed through the body. The body is the frame for happiness. The body is also the frame
for unhappiness. However, if any tasks are performed through words, all of them are also enjoyed through words.
Whatever acts are performed through the mind, it is the mind alone that enjoys them. Whatever quality and category of action a person desires and acts accordingly, the fruits of his action are also like that. Those qualities become
attached and he enjoys the fruits of those auspicious and inauspicious deeds. Like a fish that swims against the tide,
one has to confront the deeds one has committed earlier. The embodied being is satisfied because of his good deeds
and is not satisfied because of his bad deeds. I will now tell you about the supreme one. Listen to me. He is the one
from whom everything in the universe has originated. It is through knowing him that one can overcome everything. He cannot be expressed through mantras and words. He is distinct from the many kinds of tastes and scent
and sound, touch and form. He is incapable of being understood by the senses. He is the one who is not manifest.
He is without complexion. He is the single one. He has created the five kinds of beings[Those born from wombs, eggs, sweat, plants and herbs and divinities.]. He is not female, male,
or neuter. He does not exist. But nor does he not exist. Men who know about the brahman can behold him. Know
that he is Akshara, without decay.'"'
