'Bhishma said, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! The yaksha heard Shikhandi's words. Overpowered by destiny,
he thought about this in his mind. O Kourava! This was indeed destined for my grief. He said, 'O fortunate one!
Listen to me. I will do what you desire, but there is a condition. For a limited period of time, I will give you my
male organ. But I tell you truthfully that when that time is over, you must return to me. I am a lord whose wishes
always come true. I can roam in the sky and can assume any form at will. Save your city and your relatives
through my favours. O daughter of a king! I will bear your female organ. Promise me this and I will do what
brings you pleasure.' Shikhandi replied, 'O illustrious one! I will return your male organ to you. O one who roams
in the night! You will only bear my female organ for a limited period of time. When King Hemavarma[Hemavarma has the same meaning as Hiranyavarma.] has returned to Dasharna, I will become a maiden again and you will become a man.' O king! Having said this, they
made an agreement with each other. They transferred to each other their respective organs. O lord of men! The
yaksha Sthunakarna wore the female organ and Shikhandi obtained the yaksha's blazing form. O king! Having become a man, Shikhandi from Panchala happily entered the city and went and met his father. He told Drupada
everything, exactly as it had happened. On hearing this, Drupada was overcome with joy. Together with his wife,
he remembered Maheshvara's words.

'"O king! He sent a message to the lord of Dasharna. 'My son is a man. You should have faith in me.' The king
of Dasharna suddenly approached. Drupada, the king of Panchala, was full of grief and anger. When the lord of
Dasharna approached Kampilya, he sent a messenger, supreme in the knowledge of the brahman, to him[To Drupada.], with
the words, 'Honour him well and tell him this, on my instructions. "O evil-minded one! You chose my daughter for
your daughter. There is no doubt that you will witness the fruits of that disrespect today."' O supreme among
kings! Having been thus addressed, the brahmana messenger left for the city, under the instructions of the king of
Dasharna. The foremost one approached Drupada in the city. O Indra among kings! Together with Shikhandi, the
king of Panchala honoured him well and offered him a cow and the gift given to a guest[Arghya.]. He did not accept those
honours and spoke these words in reply. 'The brave king Kanchanavarma has spoken thus. "O vile one! You have
deceived me for the sake of your daughter. O evil-minded one! You will reap the fruits of that wicked deed. O lord
of men! Give me a fight. In the head of the battle today, I will uproot you, together with your advisers, your sons
and your relatives."' O best of the Bharata lineage! In the midst of his ministers, the king heard all these insulting
words, spoken by the lord of Dasharna through that foremost messenger. He bowed and said, 'O brahmana! You
have delivered the words that my in-law has spoken. My messenger will carry the reply.' Drupada sent a brahmana
messenger, knowledgeable in the Vedas, to the great-souled Hiranyavarma. O king! He went to the king who was
the lord of Dasharna and repeated the words spoken by Drupada. 'Let proper enquiries be made to show that my
son is a man. Someone has uttered a falsehood. What has been heard should not be faithfully believed.' On hearing
Drupada's words, the king was distressed. He despatched supreme ladies, who were extremely beautiful in form, to
ascertain if Shikhandi was a woman or a man. Having been sent, they learnt the truth. O Indra among Kouravas!
They reported everything to the immensely powerful king of Dasharna-that Shikhandi was a man. Having done
this, the king was delighted. He approached his in-law and cheerfully dwelt with him. That lord of men happily
gave Shikhandi elephants, horses, cows and many hundreds of servant-maids. Having been honoured and having
again conveyed his daughter[Back to the marital state.], King Hemavarma was pacified that there had been no sin and returned happily.
Shikhandi was also delighted.

'"After some time had passed, Naravahana Kubera[Kubera is described as Naravahana, because he has a man (nara) as his mount or vehicle (vahana).] was touring through the worlds and arrived in Sthuna's
residence. The protector of riches hovered over his house[Kubera was in the air, in his celestial vehicle or vimana.] and inspected it. He saw that the yaksha Sthuna's
abode was colourfully ornamented, with many kinds of garlands. There was parched grain and fragrances and
beautiful canopies. It was delightful with the smoke of incense. It was adorned with flags and pennants. There was
food and drink, grain and meat and a supply of liquor. When he saw that place, decorated in every direction, the
lord of the yakshas spoke to the yakshas who were following him. 'O infinitely valiant ones! Sthuna's residence is
decorated well. But why is the extremely evil-minded one not appearing before me now? The evil-souled one
knows that I am here. But he does not appear before me. It is my view that a severe punishment should be levied
on him.' The yakshas replied, 'O king! A daughter named Shikhandi was born to King Drupada. For her, and for
some reason, he has given her his marks of a man. He has accepted the marks of a woman. Having become a
woman, he remains in his house. That is the reason he has not appeared. He is ashamed that he now has the form
of a woman. O king! That is the reason you have not seen Sthuna today. Having heard this, do what you think is
proper. Let the vimana be stationed here.' The lord of yakshas replied, 'Let Sthuna be brought here.' And repeatedly said, 'I will punish him.' O lord of the earth! O great king! On being summoned by the Indra among the yak-
shas, he went and stood there, ashamed in his female form. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! The lord of riches
was extremely wrathful and cursed him. 'O guhyaka! This female form of the sinful one will remain.' Thus did the
great-souled lord of the yakshas speak. 'O one who has committed an evil act! Since you have insulted the yakshas
in your wicked wisdom and have given your organ away to Shikhandi, accepting the organ of a woman, in your
extremely vile intelligence, you have committed an act that has never been done before. Therefore, from now on,
you will be a woman and not a man.' For the sake of Sthuna, the yakshas sought to appease Vaishravana[The son of Vishrava, Kubera.]. They
repeatedly asked him to set a time limit to the curse. O son[The word used is tata.]! Then the great-souled Indra among the yakshas
replied to his followers, all those masses of yakshas, wishing to set a limit to the curse. 'When Shikhandi has been
killed in battle, the yaksha Sthuna will regain his old form. Let the great-spirited one not be anxious.' Having thus
spoken, the illustrious god, worshipped by the yakshas and the rakshasas, departed with all his followers, who
could travel in an instant.

'"Having been cursed, Sthuna lived there. At the appointed time, Shikhandi came to the one who travels in the
night. He approached him and said, 'O lord! I have arrived before you.' Sthuna was delighted and repeatedly told
him, 'I am pleased with you.' On seeing that the prince Shikhandi had arrived, without being deceitful about it, he
told him everything that had transpired. The yaksha said, 'O son of a king! It is because of you that Vaishravana
has cursed me. Go and happily travel the world, as you desire. I think that this, your coming here and the sight of
Poulastya[Kubera. Kubera was the son of Vishrava and Vishrava was the son of Pulastya.], has been destined from earlier and cannot be countered.' O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having been thus addressed by the yaksha Sthuna, Shikhandi was filled with great joy and returned to his city. He worshipped brahmanas, gods, sanctuaries and crossroads with many fragrances and garlands and a great deal of riches.
Drupada of Panchala and his relatives found extreme delight in his son, Shikhandi, who had accomplished his objective. O bull among the Kurus! He gave Shikhandi to Drona as a student. O great king! This was a son who had
been a woman earlier. Shikhandi, the son of a king, together with Parshata Dhrishtadyumna and all of you, learnt
the four parts of Dhanurveda. O son[The word used is tata.]! Through spies, who pretended to be stupid and were deaf and blind, appointed by me against Drupada, I got to know exactly what was going on. O great king! Thus, Drupada's offspring
is both a woman and a man. O foremost among the Kouravas! He became a supreme ratha[A ratha is a great warrior.]. The eldest daughter of the king of Kashi was known by the name of Amba. O bull among the Bharata lineage! She was born in Dru-
pada's lineage as Shikhandi. When he appears before me with a bow in his hand, desiring to fight, I will not glance
at him even for an instant and will not strike. This has always been my vow and it is renowned throughout the
earth. O descendant of the Kourava lineage! I will not shoot arrows at a woman, one who has earlier been a
woman, one who has the name of a woman and one who has the form of a woman. Because of this reason, I will
not kill Shikhandi. O son[The word used is tata.]! I know the truth about Shikhandi's birth. Therefore, I will not kill him, when he
seeks to slay me. Bhishma would rather kill himself than kill a woman. When I see him stationed in battle, I will
not kill him."

'Sanjaya said, "On hearing this, King Kouravya Duryodhana thought for some time, reflecting that this was worthy of Bhishma."'
