'Duryodhana asked, "O Gangeya! How did the one who had been a maiden earlier become Shikhandi? O grandfather! O foremost among men in a battle! Tell me that."

'Bhishma said, "O Indra among kings! O lord of the earth! The beloved wife and queen of King Drupada did not
have any sons. O great king! At that time, King Drupada satisfied Shankara for the sake of an offspring. Having
determined to bring about our death, he resorted to terrible austerities[This doesn't make sense. There was no enmity between Drupada and Bhishma. However, the plural 'our' is
used in the text, not 'mine'. So this could be a reference to Drona and Drupada's enmity with Drona. However,
Drupada had already obtained Dhrishtadyumna to ensure Drona's death.]. He said, 'O illustrious one! I wish to have
a son to exact vengeance on Bhishma.' But he obtained a daughter from Mahadeva, not a son. The god of gods
replied, 'You will have a female child, who will be male. O lord of the earth! Return. It will not be otherwise.' He
returned to the city and told his wife, 'O queen! I have made endeavours for a son and have performed great austerities. But Shambhu has said that we will have a daughter who will later become a man. When I repeatedly
pleaded with him, Shambhu replied, "That is destiny and it cannot be otherwise. It is fated that way."' When her
season arrived, King Drupada's spirited wife purified herself and united with Drupada. As had been decreed by
destiny, she conceived at the right time, through Parshata[Parshata is Drupada's name.]. O lord of the earth! This is what Narada told me. O
descendant of the Kuru lineage! O descendant of the Kuru lineage! When the lotus-eyed queen conceived, out of
hope for a son, the mighty-armed King Drupada happily tended to his beloved wife. King Drupada was childless.
O lord of men! At the right time, Drupada's illustrious queen gave birth to a daughter who was supreme in her
beauty. O Indra among kings! The king was without a son and had it proclaimed, 'A son has been born to me.' O
lord of men! King Drupada concealed the facts and had all the rites performed for a son, as if he had a son. Drupada's queen protected the secret and made every effort to say that a son had been born. Other than Parshata, no one
else in the city knew. Out of respect for the words of the god with extraordinary energy[Meaning Shiva.], he concealed that it was
a daughter and said that it was a son. The king performed all the rites connected with birth and everything else that
was decreed, as if it was a male child. He was known as Shikhandi. I alone knew, through a spy, through Narada's
words, through the words of the god[Shiva.] and through Amba's austerities."'
