'Markandeya said, "That forest was full of many roots and fruits and had plentiful supplies of water. Kakutstha
made his army live there and protected it appropriately. Following the sacred texts, Ravana fortified Lanka. It was
naturally unassailable and had firm walls and turrets. There were seven moats filled with deep water, infested with
fish and crocodiles. While these were invincible, they were bolstered with stakes made out of khadira[Kind of tree and its wood.]. It was
difficult to attach because of catapults[The text has the word karnatta yantra. This is difficult to translate. Yantra is a machine and can also be a
watchtower. Karnatta should mean in the shape of an ear, but an ear-shaped watchtower sounds odd. However, kar-
natta yantra also means a catapult.], watchtowers and rocks. The soldiers had pots that were full of venomous snakes and resin powder. They were armed with clubs, firebrands, iron spikes, spears, swords and axes.
There were shataghnis[Weapons capable of killing one hundred at a time.] and maces dipped in beeswax[Madhuchhishta. Presumably, there was poison in the beeswax.]. All the gates to the city were guarded by mobile and
stationary posts. There were large numbers of infantry and many horses and elephants.

'"Arriving at Lanka's gate, Angada made himself known to the Indra of the rakshasas and entered fearlessly. In
the midst of many crores of rakshasas, the immensely strong one was as radiant as the sun, surrounded by garlands
of clouds. Having approached Poulastya, who was surrounded by his advisers, the eloquent one delivered Rama's
message. 'O king! The immensely famous Indra of Kosala, Raghava, has sent you words that are appropriate to the
occasion. Listen to them and act accordingly. Countries and cities that obtain kings who are unrefined in their souls
and are the performers of injurious acts, are themselves injured and destroyed. You alone are guilty of forcibly abducting Sita. But this will lead to the destruction of others who are innocent. Intoxicated by strength and insolence,
you have earlier injured many rishis who lived in the forest and have insulted the gods. You have killed rajarshis
and abducted their weeping wives. The time has now come for the fruits of your evil deeds to be reaped. I will kill
you, together with your advisers. Be a man on the field of battle. O stalker of the night! Though I am a mere human, you will witness the valour of my bow. Free Sita Janaki. If you do not release her, with my sharp arrows, I
will rid the world of all rakshasas.' Hearing the harsh words of the messenger, King Ravana could not tolerate
them and became senseless with rage.

'"At the signs of their lord, four stalkers of the night seized him[Angada.] by his four limbs, like birds against a tiger.
Angada leapt up onto a terrace of the palace, with the roamers of the night hanging onto his limbs. The force of his
jump made the roamers of the night fall down on the ground, their hearts shattered from the blow. He again leapt
and descended from the top of the palace. He jumped over the city of Lanka and returned to his army. The energetic monkey then went to the Indra of Kosala and told him everything. Praised by Raghava, he then rested. Then
the descendant of the Raghu lineage, with the efforts of all the monkeys, who were as swift as the wind, had the
walls of Lanka breached. With Lakshmana leading the way, Vibhishana and the lord of the bears[Jambavan.] demolished
the impregnable southern gate of the city. He[Rama.] then invaded Lanka with a hundred thousand crore of monkeys.
They were skilled in battle and their complexions were as red as that of young camels[Karabha, alternatively, young elephant.]. The monkeys leapt up
and jumped down and moved sideways. As a result of the dust that was raised, the sun became invisible and its
light was dimmed. O king! In every direction, the rakshasas, with their wives and their elders, were amazed. They
saw the walls turn tawny because of the monkeys, which seemed to be like shoots of rice, with the complexion of
shirisha blossoms, like the rising sun and as white as reeds. They destroyed the pillars made of jewels and the turrets of the catapults. They shattered, broke and flung away the implements of war. With great strength, they
grasped the shataghnis, chakras, iron bars and rocks, and with the force of their arms, hurled them into the middle
of Lanka. Attacked by hundreds of monkeys, the masses of travellers in the night who were stationed on the turrets, ran away.

'"Then, on the instructions of their king, hundreds and thousands of rakshasas issued out. They could assume
any form at will and their shapes were distorted. With a shower of arrows, they drove away the forest dwellers.
Resorting to supreme valour, they established themselves on the walls. Those terrible-looking stalkers of the night
cleared the walls of the monkeys and hung on there, like masses of flesh. Pierced by lances, many bulls among the
monkeys fell down. Many stalkers of the night also fell down, crushed by broken pillars and ramparts. Thus the
battle raged on between rakshasas and monkeys, as the brave ones pulled each other by the hair and fought and devoured with nails and teeth. The monkeys and rakshasas were struck, died and fell down on the ground there, but
they did not let go of each other. Like clouds, Rama rained down a net of arrows. Having reached Lanka, those
killed the stalkers of the night. The indefatigable and firm-bowed Soumitri sought out rakshasas who were stationed on the fortifications and killed them with iron arrows. With Lanka breached and the objective towards victory having been attained, on Raghava's orders, the army then withdrew."'
