'Dhritarashtra asked, "How could the Pandavas and the Srinjayas kill Drona in battle? Among those who wielded
all weapons, he was extremely skilled. Did his chariot break? When he was striking, did his bow shatter? Was
Drona distracted and was that the reason for his death? O son[The word used is tata.]! How could Parshata slay him? He was incapable
of being oppressed by enemies. He showered large numbers of gold-tufted arrows. The foremost among brahmanas possessed dexterity of hand. He was accomplished and colourful in fighting. He could shoot from a great
distance. He had self-control. He was skilled in war. The maharatha was undecaying and supreme. He was careful
and performed terrible deeds in battle. It must be destiny that Panchala's son killed him. It is my view that it is
manifest that destiny is superior to human endeavour. The brave Drona has been killed by the great-souled Parsha-
ta. The four types of weapons were established in the brave one[Usually, five types of weapons are mentioned-mukta (those that are released from the hand, like a chakra),
amukta (those that are never released, like a sword), muktamukta (those that can be released or not released, like
a spear), yantramukta (those that are released from an implement, like an arrow) and mantramukta (magical
weapons unleashed with incantations). These are categories of weapons. Alternatively, especially for magical
and celestial weapons, there are the five techniques of employing, restraining, returning, pacifying and counteracting. However, Dhanurveda (the art of war) is usually described as having four parts. In the category-wise
classification, this means that mantramukta weapons are not included.]. The preceptor Drona knew supreme weapons
and has been slain. He used to be on a golden chariot, covered with the skins of tigers and decorated with pure
gold. On hearing that he has been killed, I am now overcome with sorrow. O Sanjaya! No one dies because of the
hardship that someone else faces. On hearing that Drona has been slain, I am dead, though I am alive. My heart is
made out of hard stone. Despite learning that Drona has been killed, it has not shattered into a hundred parts. He
was worshipped by brahmanas and princes who desired the qualities of knowledge of the brahman, the Vedas and
weapons. How could he have been taken away by death? This is like the ocean drying up, Mount Meru moving, or
the sun falling down. I cannot tolerate Drona's downfall. He restrained the proud and protected those who followed
dharma. The scorcher of enemies was prepared to give up his life to attain the objective of my wicked and evil
sons. Their victory depended on his valour. He was the equal of Brihaspati and Ushanas in his intelligence. How
could he have been killed? His large Saindhava horses were crimson. They were garlanded in gold. They were fleet
as the wind and were yoked to his chariot. They were beyond the reach of all sounds of battle. They were powerful
and neighed in joy. Those Saindhavas were controlled and were trained in bearing[Bearing the chariot.]. They were firm in the midst
of battle and never suffered from distress or exhaustion. They withstood the trumpeting of elephants in battle and
the sound of conch shells and drums. They tolerated the twanging of bowstrings and the shower of arrows and
weapons. They had conquered their breathing and had conquered pain and they assured victory over the enemy.
Those fleet horses quickly bore the chariot of Bharadvaja's son. How could they be overpowered? They were
yoked to the golden chariot and controlled by the foremost of men. O son! How could they not cross that Pandava
army? He was mounted on a supreme chariot, decorated with pure gold. What feats did Bharadvaja's brave son not
accomplish in war? He made warriors weep. All the archers in the world depended on his knowledge. Drona was
devoted to the truth. He was powerful. What did he accomplish in battle? He was foremost among all the great
ones who wielded the bow, like Shakra in heaven. He was the performer of terrible deeds. Which rathas countered
him in battle? On seeing the one on the golden chariot, did the Pandavas run away? Unleashing divine weapons,
did he destroy that inexhaustible army? Or did Dharmaraja, together with his younger brothers and with Panchala
as the harness, surround Drona from every direction with all the soldiers? Did Partha restrain the rathas with his
arrows? Parshata, the performer of evil deeds, must have assailed Drona then. With the exception of Dhrishtadyumna, protected by the terrible Kiriti, I do not see anyone capable of killing the vigorous one. When the
Kekayas, the Chedis, the Karushas and the other kings surrounded and agitated the brave preceptor, while he was
performing a difficult deed, like ants against a serpent, the wicked Panchala must have killed him then. That is my
view. He studied the four Vedas and the fifth one about the accounts[Itihasa-Purana, the epics and the Purana literature, are referred to as the fifth Veda.]. He was the refuge of the brahmanas, like
the ocean is of the rivers. How could that aged and powerful brahmana have been killed through a weapon? He
was intolerant and proud, though he often suffered on my account. Though he did not deserve it, he reaped the
fruits of his action through Kounteya. All the wielders of the bow on earth depended on his deeds for their livelihood. He was devoted to the truth. He performed good deeds. How could he have been killed by those who desire
prosperity? He was foremost. He was great-spirited and extremely strong, like Shakra in heaven. How could he
have been killed by the Parthas, like a whale by smaller fish? He was dexterous in the use of his hands. He was
powerful. He was firm in wielding the bow. He was the destroyer of enemies. No one, wishing to remain alive,
faced him on the field and remained alive. As long as he was alive, two sounds never left him-the sound of the
brahman by those who desired the Vedas and the sound of the bowstring by those who wielded the bow. I cannot
tolerate Drona being killed in battle. He was like the lion and the elephant in his valour. O Sanjaya! He was invincible. The fame of his strength was never assailed. Who protected the great-souled one on the right flank and on
the left? When he fought in the battle, which brave one was in front of him? Who were the brave ones who confronted him and gave up their lives, traversing the path of death? Who were the brave ones who faced Drona in
battle and attained the supreme objective? O Sanjaya! Even if one faces a great hardship, one must do one's duty,
in accordance with one's valour and one's capacity. All of this was established in him. My mind is distracted. O
son! Let us stop for some time. O Sanjaya! I will ask you again, after I have regained my senses."'
