'Bhishma said, "The king must generate his treasury from his own kingdom or the kingdoms of others. O
Kounteya! Dharma results from the treasury and establishes the foundation of the kingdom. Therefore, the
treasury must be generated and once it has been accumulated, it must be protected. Having protected, he
must show compassion. This is the eternal dharma. The treasury cannot be generated through virtue and purity only, or through violence alone. To accumulate a treasury, one must follow a middle path. How can there
be a treasury for someone who has no army? How can there be an army for someone who has no treasury?
How can there be a kingdom for someone who has no army? How can there be Shri for someone who has no
kingdom? For someone of superior conduct, the destruction of Shri is like death. Therefore, the king must
increase the treasury, the army and friends. Men disrespect a king whose treasury has been destroyed. They
are dissatisfied with little and are not interested in the work[A reference to the rewards a king offers his servants.]. It is because of Shri that a king receives the
greatest regard. It hides his sins, like garments hide the private parts of women. Men he has earlier injured
follow him because of his wealth. They are like dogs[Alternatively, jackals. But dogs is more appropriate. Like vicious dogs,
they wish to injure him, but serve him because of his riches.], finding delight in an opportunity to kill him. O
supreme among the Bharata lineage! How can a king like this be happy[A king without a large treasury.]? The king must always show enterprise and not be languid. There is manliness in exertion. He must break at the joints, rather than bow down
before anyone. He can resort to the forest and roam around with large numbers of bandits. However, he must
not roam around with bandits who are against all restraints. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Among the
bandits, one can easily obtain soldiers who are fierce in their deeds. Everyone certainly trembles before a
person who does not follow any restraints. Even bandits, who are without compassion, tremble before such a
person. He must establish restraints and gladden the minds of people. Even a little bit of restraint is respected
by the people. There are some people who have decided that this world and the world hereafter do not exist.
One should not trust such a nastika. He is driven by doubt and fear. Bandits regard non-violence the same
way as righteous people regard taking from others[Righteous people regard taking from others as adharma and bandits regard non-violence as adharma.]. However, even among bandits, people find delight in
agreements. The slaying of someone who is not a combatant, the ravishing of wives[Other people's wives.], ingratitude, the
seizure of the possessions of brahmanas, the complete destruction of everything and the abduction and confining of women-these are censured even among bandits. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Since they
avoid these, if one has a pact with them, one should not exterminate them completely. That has been determined. Instead of completely exterminating them, they should be brought under one's subjugation. Because
one is stronger, one should act violently towards them. O son! Those who exterminate them see their own
extermination in every direction. Those who exterminate always have to suffer a fear because of that act of
extermination[Probably because there will always be some survivors and they will seek
vengeance.]."'