Yudhishthira asked, "O best among the Bharata lineage! I have heard about giving flowers, incense and offerings, about the rites to be followed and the fruits. However, you should tell me about this again. What are the
fruits from giving incense and lamps? Why do householders hurl offerings down[On the ground.]?"
'Bhishma replied, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about a conversation between Nahusha
and Agastya and Bhrigu. O great king! Rajarshi Nahusha was an extremely great ascetic. Through his excellent
and good deeds, he obtained the kingdom of heaven. O king! Though Nahusha went to heaven and resided there,
he performed many kinds of human and divine rites. O king! Though the great-souled one was in heaven, he performed all the human rites and the eternal divine ones. He ignited the fire, collected kindling, kusha grass and
agreeable objects. He made offerings of food, parched grain, incense and lamps. All of these continued to be practised in the great-souled king's house. Though he dwelt in heaven, he performed the sacrifice of meditation and the
sacrifice of mental control. The lord of the gods[Nahusha, who had dislodged Indra from his throne.] worshipped all the gods in the proper way. O scorcher of enemies! He continued to do everything in the indicated way, just as he had done earlier. But after some time, the fact
of having become Indra, led to insolence penetrating him. O king! He ignored all the rites and began to suffer. Intoxicated at having been granted a boon[From Brahma.], he made the rishis carry him. Since his observance of the rites had diminished, he also became weak. When it was time for the foremost among sages, stores of austeries, to bear him,
he became overcome with a great deal of insolence. One after another, the rishis carried him. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! It was then time for Agastya to bear him. At that time, the immensely energetic Bhrigu, supreme
among those who knew about the brahman, had gone there. He reached Agastya's hermitage and asked, 'O great
sage! Why do we have to tolerate Nahusha? Since he has become Indra of the gods, the evil-minded one shows us
disrespect.'

'"Agastya replied, 'O great sage! How can I curse him? You know that the granter of boons has given him a
boon. When he arrived in heaven, he asked for a boon from that god. "Anyone that my eyes turn towards will
come under my subjugation." This boon was granted. Therefore, there is no doubt that I won't be able to burn him
down. That is also the reason why the other supreme rishis have not been able to curse him or bring him down. O
lord! In earlier times, the great-souled gave him amrita to drink. That is the reason we can't bring him down. It is
evident that the god has granted this boon to cause misery to all beings. That is the reason the worst among men
displays this adharma towards brahmanas. O supreme among eloquent ones! The time has arrived. Tell me what
should be done. All of us will act exactly as you tell us to.'

'"Bhrigu said, 'I have come here because I have been asked to do so by the grandfather. This is to counter
Nahusha's strength and insolence. Today, the extremely evil-minded king of the gods will yoke you to his chariot.
Today, I will use my energy to uproot him from the status of Indra. Behold. Today, I will establish Shatakratu as
Indra again. That extremely evil-minded and wicked person will be dislodged from his status as Indra. Today, the
evil Indra of the gods will strike you with his foot. His consciousness will be affected by destiny and that evil-
minded one will destroy himself. He will transgress dharma and I will thus be able to strike the one who causes the
injury. O best among brahmanas! In my anger, I will curse him, "May you become a snake." I will thus shame that
extremely evil-minded one. O great sage! While you look on, I will bring him down to earth. Nahusha is the performer of wicked deeds. He is intoxicated because of his prosperity and strength. O sage! If it pleases you, I will
act in this way.'"

'Bhishma continued, "Thus addressed by Bhrigu, the undecaying son of Mitravaruna, Agastya, was extremely
pleased and his anxiety was dispelled."'
