'Yudhishthira asked, "O Nakula! O son[The word used is tata.]! You are delicate, brave, handsome and used to pleasure. What will you
do and how will you act?"

'Nakula replied, "I will become a keeper of horses for King Virata. I find pleasure in that kind of work and will
give myself the name of Granthika. I am skilled in training horses and also in treating horses. O king of the Kuru
lineage! I have always loved horses, just as much as you have. If people in the city of Virata question me, I will tell
them that this is how I find pleasure."

'Yudhishthira asked, "O Sahadeva! How will you find pleasure before him[Virata.]? O son[The word used is tata.]! What task will you undertake? How will you disguise yourself while roaming there?"

'Sahadeva replied, "I will tend to the cows of King Virata. I am skilled in tending to cattle, milking them and
counting them. Know that I will be called by the name of Tantipala. I will conduct myself skilfully and do not be
anxious on my account. In earlier times, you have naturally used me for tending to cattle. O lord of the earth! I am
acquainted with all the skills connected with that task, the traits and conduct of cattle and the auspicious marks. O
lord of the earth! I know all this and other things extremely well. O king! I know which bulls possess marks that
deserve worship, and the smell of whose urine makes barren cows give birth. I will conduct myself in this way, for
this always brings pleasure to me. O king! No one will be able to recognize me and you will be happy."

'Yudhishthira said, "This is our beloved wife, dearer to us than our lives. She should be protected like a mother
and worshipped like an elder sister. What duty will Krishna Droupadi perform and how will she conduct herself?
She is not familiar with any of the duties and tasks that women perform. She is delicate and young and is a famous
princess. She is immensely fortunate and devoted to her husbands. How will she conduct herself? Ever since birth,
this beautiful one has known garlands, fragrances, ornaments and varied garments."

'Droupadi replied, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In this world, there are unprotected maidservants
known as sairandhri[Sairandhri is a class of independent maidservants who work in the inner quarters of a palace, or as artisans in
someone else's house. This is also the proper name Droupadi adopts.]. It is known to people that no other women conduct themselves in this fashion. If asked, I
will call myself Sairandhri, adept at dressing the hair. Concealing myself in this way, I will enter the service of
Sudeshna, the king's famous wife. On obtaining me, she will protect me. Do not be unhappy in this way."

'Yudhishthira said, "O Krishna! You speak well, deserving of one who has been born in a noble lineage. You do
not know any sin. You are virtuous and always base yourself on righteous vows."'
