'Surya said, "O Karna! Do not act against your own interests, or those of your well-wishers, sons, wives, mother
and father. O supreme among those who live! Seek to obtain fame in this world and continued fame in heaven
without sacrificing your life. There is no doubt that the eternal fame that you wish for, will disappear, if it is at the
cost of your own life. O bull among men! In this world, as long as one is alive, one can perform tasks for the father, the mother, the sons and other relatives. O tiger among men! Learn from me that kings perform virile deeds
the same way. O immensely radiant one! Men have fame when they are alive. When the body has been reduced to
ashes, what use does fame serve one who is dead? It is not the dead, but living ones that know fame. The fame of a
dead human is like a garland on one who has lost his life. It is because you are devoted to me that I am telling you
this for the sake of your own welfare. This is for the reason that all my devotees should be protected by me. O
mighty-armed one! I know that this one here is my greatest devotee and is devoted towards me. Therefore, act in
accordance with my words. There is something supreme in you, created by a god. It is because of this that I am addressing you in this way and act without hesitation. O bull among men! This is a secret even to the gods and you
cannot know this. Therefore, I cannot recount this secret to you. In due course of time, you will know it. O Rad-
heya[Because he was brought up by Radha, Radheya is Karna's name.]! I am telling you this again. Listen to my words. When the wielder of the vajra begs for the earrings, you
should not give them to him. O immensely radiant one! With your beautiful earrings, you will be as resplendent as
the azure moon in the sky, in the midst of the two Vishakhas[Vishakha is the twenty-first of the twenty-seven nakshatras. It has four main stars and the name itself means
one that is fork-shaped, with branches, usually interpreted as possessing two forks or branches. That is because the
two forks are identified with Indra and Agni.]. Know that fame is useful to a man as long as he is
alive. O son! Therefore, you should refuse Purandara when he comes for the earrings. O unblemished one! You
will be able to repulse the desire of the king of the gods for the earrings with many kinds of words and by citing
reasons again and again. O Karna! Use sweetly adorned words to repulse Purandara's design, reinforced by intelligent arguments. O tiger among men! You are Savyasachi's challenger. And Savyasachi, brave in battle, is your
challenger. As long as you possess the beautiful earrings, Arjuna cannot vanquish you in battle, even if Indra himself becomes his arrows. O Karna! Therefore, if you desire to defeat Arjuna in combat, do not give your beautiful
earrings to Shakra."'
