Yudhishthira said, "O grandfather! O immensely wise one! O one who is accomplished in all the sacred texts!
You are the one who is famous in our lineage. There are many kinds of extensive sacred texts. They are about
the truth of dharma and artha and about how happiness can be brought. O destroyer of enemies! I wish to hear
about the wonderful worlds that can be obtained. A time has arrived when kin and friends are extremely difficult to
find. O bull among the Bharata lineage! With your exception, there is no one else who can instruct us. O unblemished one! O king! If you wish to show me and my brothers a favour, you should answer a question that I am asking you. This Narayana is handsome and is revered by all the kings. But he shows you a great deal of honour,
serves you and indulges you. In his presence and before all these kings, and for doing what is agreeable to my
brothers, you should speak to me about the nature of this affection."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Hearing his respectful words, Bhishma, Bhagirathi's son, was filled with affection and
spoke these words.

'Bhishma continued, "I will tell you about an extremely enchanting account. O king! It is about the power this
Vishnu showed in ancient times and I heard about it. Also hear from me about the power of the one who has a bull
as his sign. Hear about the doubts of Rudrani and the couple[Shiva and Parvati.]. Krishna, with dharma in his soul, observed a vow
for twelve years. When he had initiated himself, Narada and Parvata went there to see him. Krishna Dvaipayana,
Dhoumya, supreme among those who meditate, Devala, Kashyapa and Hastikashyapa were also there. There were
other virtuous and self-restrained rishis who had initiated themselves. Those stores of austerities were like the gods
and they were followed by all their disciples. Devaki's son was delighted. Taking them to be the equals of the
gods, he worshipped them with all the honours that were due to guests, befitting their lineages. Happily, the maharshis sat down on seats that were green and gold, new and made out of the feathers of peacocks. While the stores
of austerities resided there, there were pleasant conversations on topics connected with dharma, and about rajarshis
and gods. At that time, because of the vow that was being observed, Narayana's energy arose from the kindling. In
the form of a fire, it emerged from the mouth of Krishna, the performer of wonderful deeds. That fire started to
burn the mountain, with its trees, creepers and bushes, with the large numbers of birds, animals, predatory beasts
and reptiles. Many kinds of animals lost their senses and began to utter cries of lamentation. The summit of the
mountain was mangled and assumed a blazing appearance. The mighty and raging fire burnt down everything else.
It then approached Vishnu and touched his feet, like a disciple. Seeing that the forest had been burnt down, Vishnu,
the afflicter of enemies, cast his benign eye towards it and brought it back to its natural state. The mountain again
became full of blossoming trees and creepers. There were large numbers of birds and predatory beasts and reptiles.
On witnessing this extraordinary sight, the large numbers of sages began to think. They were astounded and their
body hair stood up. They showed signs of fear. Narayana, supreme among eloquent ones, saw that the rishis were
astounded. In gentle and sweet words, he asked them a question. 'What has happened to these bulls among rishis?
You are always devoid of attachment. You have renounced and are without a sense of ownership. Why are you
overcome by this wonder? O unblemished ones! I have a doubt about the precise nature of this. O rishis! O stores
of austerities! You should speak to me and explain this.'

'"The rishis replied, 'You create the worlds and you withdraw them back again. You are winter. You are summer. You are the monsoon. You are the father and the mother of every object that exists on earth, mobile and immobile. You are the lord and you are the source of creation. O Madhusudana! This itself is wonderful and praiseworthy. O benign one! However, you should explain the fire that emerged. O afflicter of enemies! That is the reason we are suffering from fright. O Hari! You should speak to us about what we have heard and what we have
seen.'

'"Vasudeva said, 'What emerged from my mouth is Vaishnava energy. It has black trails and it is the fire of destruction at the end of a yuga. The mountain was mangled by this. O rishis! Why are you afflicted? You have conquered anger. You have conquered your senses. You are the stores of austerities and are like the gods. Nevertheless, you are distressed and are seeking assurance. I am observing a vow. I am following the vow of an ascetic.
That is the reason the fire arose from me. You should not be pained by this. I came to this auspicious mountain to
observe the vow. A son who will be my equal in valour will be created through these austerities. That is the reason
the soul in my body emerged in the form of this fire. It has gone to see the grandfather of all the worlds, the granter
of boons. O best among sages! He told me that I would have a son. This son would use half of my energy and
would be born as Vrishadhvaja[One with a bull on his banner.]. It is he who assumed the form of a fire and appeared before my feet, restored to
his nature, as if he was a peaceful disciple wishing to serve me. This is the mystery about the intelligent Padmanabha[With a lotus in his navel. Vishnu's name.]. Out of affection, I have told you this. O ones rich in austerities! You should not be scared. Without any
anxiety, you can go everywhere. You are far-sighted. You are ablaze in the vow of asceticism. You are full of jnana
and vijnana. Tell me about something supremely wonderful that you have heard of, or seen, in heaven or on earth.
I wish to taste the amrita that emerges as words from your lips. O ones who reside in hermitages! Anything that
you speak about will be like that. O ones who are pure in vision! Everything wonderful and divine that I see in
heaven or on earth is part of my own supreme nature, which no one can obstruct. There is nothing that manifests
itself as wonderful unless that wonder originates in me. But everything that is spoken by the faithful and the virtuous must be heard. They have remained on earth for a long time and are like the writing on the rocks. Now that
you have assembled, that is the reason I wish to hear something from the mouths of the virtuous. You continuously
speak about topics that illuminate the intelligence of men.'"

'Bhishma continued, "At this, all those numerous sages were comforted and approached Krishna. With eyes that
were like lotus petals, they looked at Janardana. Some of them glorified him. Others worshipped him. Those eloquent ones used hymns from the Rig Veda to chant Madhusudana's praises. All the sages appointed Narada, who
could see the words and who was eloquent with words, to speak on their behalf. They said, 'O lord! There was an
extraordinary and unthinkable event on Mount Himalaya. This was experienced by a large number of sages who
had gone on a visit to the tirthas.' He was urged by those large numbers of sages. As instructed, for everyone's
welfare, he told Hrishikesha everything. The illustrious sage and rishi, devarshi Narada, spoke about the auspicious
incident that had occurred in earlier times."'
