Vaishampayana said, 'The king who was Kunti's son was freed from his fever. Cheerfully, he sat down on a
supreme and golden seat, facing the east. Satyaki and Vasudeva, the scorchers of enemies, were seated on a seat
facing him and it was strewn with expensive coverings. With the king between them, the great-souled Bhima and
Arjuna were seated on soft seats decorated with gems. Pritha, with Nakula and Sahadeva, was seated on a
sparkling seat that was made out of ivory and decorated with gold. Sudharma[The priest of the Kouravas.], Vidura, Dhoumya and Kourava
Dhritarashtra were seated on separate seats and seemed to blaze. Yuyutsu, Sanjaya and the illustrious Gandhari sat
down where King Dhritarashtra was seated.

'Seated there, with dharma in his soul, the king[Yudhishthira.] cheerfully touched the white flowers, the svastika signs, the
unhusked grain, the ground, gold, silver and jewels. With the priest at the forefront[There is a minor inconsistency. This priest can only be Dhoumya and he
is seated.], all the ordinary people came
to see Dharmaraja. They brought many auspicious objects with them-earth, gold, many kinds of gems and all the
other vessels and equipment required for the consecration. There were full pots that were made out of clay, gold,
copper and silver. They were filled with water, parched grain, sacrificial grass and milk. There was kindling of shami, palasha and pumnaga[Names of trees.]. There was honey and clarified butter. There were ladles made out of udumbara[The sacred fig tree.]
and gold-embellished conch shells. With Dasharha's[Krishna's.] permission, the priest Dhoumya marked out an auspicious
altar that sloped towards the north and the east. The great-souled one and Krishna, Drupada's daughter, were made
to sit on a soft sarvatobhadra[Literally, a seat that is fortunate or auspicious in all directions. This can
also be interpreted as a seat that is symmetric in all directions, such as
circular, or even in the form of a square.] seat with sturdy legs, covered with the skins of tigers. It was as radiant as the fire.
The intelligent one[Dhoumya.] poured oblations into the fire. Pronouncing mantras, he sprinkled water on Yudhishthira,
Kunti's son, instating him as the lord of the earth. So did rajarshi Dhritarashtra and all the ordinary people. Cymbals, small drums and kettledrums were sounded. Following dharma, Dharmaraja received all this. He then honoured the brahmanas, who pronounced benedictions on him, in the proper way and gave away large quantities of
donations and one thousand golden coins. These brahmanas were accomplished in studying the Vedas and of good
conduct. They were delighted and wished the king well. Making sounds like those of swans, they praised Yudhishthira. "O Yudhishthira! O mighty-armed one! O Pandava! It is through good fortune that you have been victorious. O immensely radiant one! It is good fortune that you have obtained this through your own dharma and valour. O king! It is through good fortune that the wielder of Gandiva, Pandava Bhimasena, you and the Pandavas
who are Madri's sons are well. You have slain the enemy and have escaped from a battle that has been destructive
of heroes. O Pandava! Swiftly do the tasks that must be undertaken next." Dharmaraja Yudhishthira was thus honoured by those virtuous ones. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! With his well-wishers, he received that large
kingdom.'
