Sanjaya said, "Vasudeva was stationed on his chariot. He said, 'O Radheya! It is fortunate that you remember
dharma. Quite often, when they are immersed in hardships, inferior ones censure destiny, but not their evil deeds.
O Karna! When you, Suyodhana, Duhshasana and Shakuni Soubala brought Droupadi to the assembly hall in a
single garment, did dharma not show itself to you? When, in the assembly hall, Yudhishthira, who was not skilled
at dice, was defeated by Shakuni, who was skilled at dice, where did dharma go then? O Karna! During her season,
Krishna[Krishnaa, Droupadi.] was under Duhshasana's subjugation in the assembly hall and you laughed at her. Where did dharma
go then? O Karna! Resorting to the king of Gandhara and coveting the kingdom, you challenged the Pandavas[To the gambling match.].
Where did dharma go then?' When Vasudeva addressed Radheya in this way, Pandava Dhananjaya remembered all
this and was overcome by great rage. Energetic flames of anger seemed to issue out from all the pores on his body
and it was extraordinary.

' "On seeing this, Karna again invoked brahmastra against Dhananjaya. He showered down arrows and tried to
extricate his chariot. Pandava countered those weapons with his own weapons. Kounteya then released another
weapon, beloved of the fire god, towards Karna. It blazed fiercely. Karna pacified the fire through a varuna
weapon. He covered all the directions with clouds and it was as dark as a rainy day. Pandaveya was not frightened.
While Radheya looked on, the valiant one used the vayavya weapon and dispelled all the clouds. The supreme
one's standard had the marks of an elephant's housing. It was decorated with gold, pearls, jewels and diamonds. It
had been crafted by excellent artisans over a long period of time. It was expensive and beautiful in form. It always
inspired your soldiers and terrified and frightened the enemy. It was renowned in the world and blazed like the sun
and the moon. Kiriti used a razor-sharp arrow that was gold-tufted and pointed. With that, he brought down the
handsome and blazing standard of the great-souled maharatha, Adhiratha's son. O venerable one! When that standard was uprooted, fame, dharma, victory and everything that was dear to the hearts of the Kurus also fell down.
Great sounds of lamentation arose.

' "To ensure Karna's death, Pandava took out an anjalika arrow. It was like the great Indra's vajra, or like a rod
that was made out of fire. It blazed in its rays, like the one with one thousand rays[The sun.]. It was capable of penetrating the inner organs and smearing itself with blood and flesh. It was extremely expensive and was like the fire and
the sun. It could destroy men, horses and elephants and was three cubits long, with six tufts[Ratni is a measure of distance and is equal to one cubit.]. It travelled straight
and possessed a great force. In its energy, it was like the vajra of the one with one thousand eyes. It was as difficult
to withstand as predatory beasts. It was like the pinaka and Narayana's chakra. It was fearful and destructive of living beings. He invoked mantras and affixed that supreme and great weapon to Gandiva. He loudly said, 'I am
grasping this great weapon, which is in the form of an arrow. It is extremely difficult to withstand and is capable of
destroying the body. If I have tormented myself through austerities and have satisfied my seniors, if I have listened
to what my well-wishers have told me, through that truth, let this arrow slay my armoured enemy, Karna, and bring
me victory.' Having said this, for the sake of Karna's death, Dhananjaya released that terrible arrow. It was as
fierce as rites performed by Atharvan and Angiras. It blazed and was impossible to be endured in a battle, even by
Death itself. Kiriti cheerfully said, 'Let this arrow bring me victory.' Wishing to slay Karna, bring about his end
and convey him to Yama, he released the arrow, which was as radiant as the sun and the moon. Cheerfully, so that
he could be conveyed towards victory, the one with the diadem and the garland shot the arrow. It was as radiant as
the sun and the moon. He harboured feelings of enmity and wished to slay his enemy. That weapon, blazing like
the sun, was shot. Like the sun, it lit up the earth with its radiance. The head of the commander of the army was
severed. Like the sun, with a red disc, it seemed to set. The body of the one who performed generous deeds was
always reared in happiness. Like a person who is reluctant to leave a house filled with great riches, the head parted
from the body with great difficulty. Without the armour, the body was mangled by arrows and lost its life. Karna's
body was severed and fell down. Blood oozed from the wounds, like red chalk flowing from the slopes of a mountain, when the summit has been struck by thunder. When Karna's body fell down, a flaming mass of energy arose
and rose up into the sky. O king! When Karna was slain, all the men and warriors witnessed this great wonder.

' "On seeing that he had been slain and was lying down, with their soldiers, the Somakas roared in delight. They
joyfully blew on their trumpets and waved their garments and hands around. Other troops danced around. They
embraced each other, roaring in delight. They saw that Karna had been destroyed and was lying down on the
ground. The ratha had been slain and mangled by the arrows. It was as if the untainted and extinguished fire was
lying down in the expansive sky, after the end of a sacrifice. All his limbs were mangled by arrows and torrents of
blood flowed from them. Karna's body was beautiful, like the rays of the sun in the firmament. He had tormented
the soldiers of the enemy with flaming arrows that were like the sun's rays. The powerful Karna was like the setting sun, conveyed to death by Arjuna. When the sun sets, all its radiance also departs. Like that, the arrow took
away Karna's life. O venerable one! It was the late part of the afternoon then. Severed by the anjalika in the battle,
the head and the body of the son of a suta fell down. While the soldiers of the enemy looked on, it swiftly severed
Karna's head and body.

' "The brave Karna fell down on the ground. Mangled by arrows, blood flowed out from his body. On seeing
that he was lying down on the ground and seeing that the standard had been severed, the king of Madra withdrew
on the chariot. When Karna was slain, the Kurus fled. They were severely struck in the battle and were afflicted
with fear. They repeatedly glanced at Arjuna's great standard, blazing in form. He[Karna.] had performed deeds like
those of the one with one thousand eyes. His face was as beautiful as one with one thousand petals[A lotus.]. He was like
the one with one thousand rays, at the end of the day. Thus did his head fall down on the ground." '
