Parashara said, 'It is appropriate that the inferior varna[A shudra.] should earn a living by serving the other three. If
this designated service is rendered affectionately, that person always remains devoted to dharma. Even if the
ancestors of the shudra were not engaged in such an occupation, it is certain that he should not engage himself in
any means of sustenance other than servitude. It is my view that under all circumstances, it is proper that they[This is specifically directed at shudras.]
should always associate with virtuous people who know about dharma, not with those who are wicked. When they
are close to Mount Udaya[The mountain behind which the sun rises.], objects blaze. Similarly, an inferior varna blazes when it is associated with the virtuous. A white garment assumes the colour with which it is dyed. They assume their appearances in the same way.
Therefore, one should rejoice because of qualities and never because of taints. The lifespan of mortals, whether
mobile or immobile, is temporary. If an accomplished person only acts in accordance with good policy, whether he
faces joy or misery, he faces fortune in this world. An intelligent person does not deviate from virtue, even if that
act of deviation from dharma yields great fruits. If a king steals thousands of unprotected cattle and then gives
them away as a gift, he only obtains the fruits that the sound of that action makes. He is actually a thief. Right at
the beginning, Svayambhu created Dhata, revered in the worlds. Dhata created a son who is engaged in sustaining
beings[Dhata's son is regarded as the god of the clouds.]. It is through worshipping him that vaishyas earn wealth and prosperity. The kings must think of means
to protect brahmanas. Shudras should, honestly, faithfully and without anger, clean the objects used to offer havya
and kavya. Through such acts, dharma is not destroyed. If dharma is not destroyed, subjects are happy. O Indra
among kings! Through their happiness, the gods in heaven are delighted. A king who follows dharma and protects
is revered. So are brahmanas who study, vaishyas who are enaged in the welfare of people and shudras who serve,
always in control of their senses. O Indra among men! If they act in any other way, they deviate from their own
dharma. Not to speak of thousands, even if a few kakinis[Cowrie shells used as money.] are earned lawfully and donated, without causing grief
to one's life, that leads to great fruits. If a lord of men honours brahmanas and always donates to them, he earns
fruits that are commensurate. If one seeks out the donee and satisfies him, that is said to be the best. When one
gives when asked, the learned say that this is medium. Sages who are truthful in speech say that gifts given indifferently and disrespectfully are the worst. Through transgressions, men are always submerged in different ways.
Therefore, one should make efforts so that one is freed from one's doubts. A brahmana is always radiant through
self-control, a kshatriya through victory, a vaishya through riches and a shudra through skill.'"'
