'"Hotravahana said, 'O child! You will see Rama, Jamadagni's son, in the great forest. He is engaged in terrible
austerities.He is devoted to the truth. He is extremely strong. The rishis[Sages.], those who are learned in the Vedas, the
gandharvas[Gandharvas are celestial musicians and semi-divine.] and the apsaras[Apsaras are celestial dancers who serve Indra, sometimes regarded as wives of gandharvas.] always worship Rama on Mahendra, the foremost among mountains. O fortunate
one! Go there. He is aged in austerities and is firm in his vows. After saluting him by lowering your head, tell him
these words of mine. O fortunate one! Tell him once again about what you desire. On hearing my name, Rama will
do everything that you wish for. O child! Rama is my friend. He is affectionate towards me and is my well-wisher.
The brave one is Jamadagni's son. He is supreme among those who wield all weapons.'

'"While King Hotravahana was speaking to the maiden in this way, Akritavrana, Rama's devoted follower, appeared[Though not explicitly stated, this is clearly Bhishma speaking again.]. All the sages arose in their thousands and so did King Hotravahana from Srinjaya, aged in years. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! As is appropriate, those residents of the forest asked about each other's welfare.
Then they seated themselves around him[Akritavrana.] and conversed about delightful subjects, beautiful and celestial ones. O
Indra among kings! They were happy and delighted. When they had finished, the great-souled rajarashi Hotravahana asked Akritavrana about Rama, foremost among maharshis. 'O Akritavrana! Where is it possible to see Jamadagni's powerful and mighty-armed son, foremost among those who have knowledge of the Vedas?'

'"Akritavrana said, 'O lord! O king! Rama always speaks about you. "Rajarshi Srinjaya is my beloved friend."

It is my belief that Rama will be here tomorrow morning. You will see him when he comes here, desiring to meet
you. O rajarshi! Why has this maiden come to the forest? Who does she belong to and what is her relationship to
you? I wish to know this.'

'"Hotravahana replied, 'O lord! She is my daughter's daughter. She is the beautiful daughter of the king of
Kashi. O unblemished one! She is the eldest and, with her sisters, was at the svayamvara. She is famous by the
name of Amba and she is the eldest daughter of the lord of Kashi. O one rich in austerities! Ambika and Ambalika
are younger to her. O brahmarshi! For the sake of these maidens, all the kshatriya kings gathered in the city of
Kashi and there was a great festival. Then the immensely valorous and greatly energetic Bhishma, Shantanu's son,
slighted the kings and abducted the three maidens. O descendant of the Bharata lineage[There is a minor inconsistency, since Akritavrana is being addressed. However, Bhishma is repeating the conversation to Duryodhana.]! The pure-souled Bhishma vanquished the lords of the earth and went to Gajasahrya[Another name for Hastinapura, gaja meaning elephant.] with the maidens. The lord then handed them over
to Satyavati, for the sake of a marriage with his brother Vichitravirya. O bull among brahmanas! On seeing that
arrangements had been made for a marriage, in the midst of the ministers, this maiden told Gangeya, "In my mind,
I have chosen the brave lord of Shalva as my husband. O one who is learned about dharma! When I have thought
of someone, you should not give me to someone else." When he heard these words, Bhishma consulted with his
ministers. Bhishma made up his mind to give her up and with Satyavati's permission, gave her leave to go to Shal-
va, the lord of Soubha. O brahmana! The maiden was delighted at that time and went and told him, "I have been
given up by Bhishma. Act towards me in accordance with dharma. O bull among kings! In my mind, I have chosen
you earlier." However, suspicious of her conduct, Shalva rejected her. Deciding to undertake austerities, she came
to this hermitage. I recognized her when she recounted her lineage. She thinks that Bhishma alone is responsible
for her unhappiness.'

'"Amba said, 'O illustrious one! It is just as Srinjaya King Hotravahana, the creator of my mother's body, has
said. O one rich in austerities! I do not wish to go back to my own city. O great sage! I will be insulted there and
am ashamed. O supreme among brahmanas! I will do what the illustrious Rama asks me to. O illustrious one! It is
my view that this is what I should do.'"'
