Janamejaya asked, 'What was the secret that the one with the strong rays did not tell Karna? What were the earrings like? What was the armour like? O excellent one! Where did the earrings and the armour come from? O one
rich in austerities! I wish to hear all this. Tell me.'

Vaishampayana said, 'O king! I will tell you about Vibhavasu's secret, about what the earrings were like and
about what the armour was like. O king! In earlier times, a brahmana presented himself before Kuntibhoja[Kuntibhoja was Kunti or Pritha's father. The brahmana in question was the sage Durvasa.]. He
was terrible in energy and extremely tall. He had a beard and matted hair and held a staff in his hand. He was
agreeable to look at and his limbs were flawless. He seemed to be ablaze in his energy. His complexion was the
colour of honey and he was sweet in his speech. He adorned himself with austerities and studying.

'The immensely ascetic one told King Kuntibhoja, "Without being refused, I wish to beg for a meal in your
house. O unblemished one! If you so desire, I will dwell in your house, provided that you or your followers do not
cross me in any way. I will come and go as I desire. O king! No one should insult me about my bed or my seat."

Kuntibhoja replied to him in pleasant words. "It shall be that way, and more than that." He told him again, "O great
brahmana! My daughter, by the name of Pritha, is famous. That beautiful one has good conduct and is virtuous.
She is self-controlled and honourable. She will wait on you and worship you, without showing you disrespect. You
will be satisfied with her conduct and virtue." Having spoken in this way and having worshipped the brahmana in
accordance with the prescribed rites, he spoke to his daughter Pritha, whose eyes were wide with wonder when she
arrived. "O daughter! This immensely fortunate brahmana wishes to reside here. I have promised him that he can
live in my house. O daughter! I have confidently told him that you know how to satisfy a brahmana. Act in a way
so that my words are not falsified. The illustrious brahmana is an ascetic and is devoted to studying. Whatever the
immensely ascetic one asks for, should be given without any hesitation. Brahmanas are supreme energy. Brahmanas are supreme austerities. It is because of the worship of brahmanas that the sun shines in the sky. Disrespecting those who deserve to be honoured, the great asura Vatapi and Talajangha were killed through the curse of a
brahmana[The story of Agastya's destruction of Vatapi has been told in Section 33. The Talajangha connection is less
direct. The Talajanghas were destroyed by Sagara and the brahmana Aurva gave Sagara the weapon for the
destruction.]. O daughter! A great burden is being placed on you. With self-control, always seek to satisfy the brahmana. O one who increases my joy! I know that from childhood, you have been attentive to brahmanas, all the elders, all the servants, friends, kin, mothers and me myself, in the appropriate way and with due honour. O one with
the flawless limbs! There is no one among the subjects, in the city, in the inner quarters or among the servants, who
is dissatisfied with you. I therefore think that you can handle this brahmana, who is prone to anger. O Pritha! You
became my daughter in your childhood. You were born in the lineage of the Vrishnis and are Shura's beloved
daughter. Earlier, when you were still a child, your father affectionately handed you over to me[Shura was Kuntibhoja's friend and Kuntibhoja had no offspring. So Shura gave Pritha to Kuntibhoja as an
adopted daughter.]. You are Vasudeva's sister and the foremost among my daughters. You became my daughter because he[Shura.] promised his firstborn
child to me. You were born in such a lineage and raised in such a lineage. You have moved from one kind of happiness to another kind of happiness. You are like a lotus that has moved from one pond to another. O beautiful one!
Those who are born in low lineages, even if they are kept under check when they are children, often become deviants later. O Pritha! You have been born in the lineage of a king and possess extraordinary beauty. O beautiful
one! You have all the qualities. O beautiful one! Discard your pride, insolence and vanity. O Pritha! Worship the
brahmana, the granter of boons. That will ensure your welfare. O fortunate one! O unblemished one! Through this,
you are certain to obtain good fortune. But if you anger the foremost among brahmanas, he will burn down my entire lineage."'
