'Sanjaya said, "O great king! It was morning and with its one thousand rays, the sun arose. The one with the thousand rays arose and its complexion was like that of molten gold. In the forefront of the battle, the armoured ones
worshipped it and as the world became illuminated, the battle commenced again. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Those who were engaged with each other earlier, continued to fight with each other after the sun arose.
Rathas fought with horse riders, horse riders with elephant riders, infantry with elephants, horses clashed with
horses and foot soldiers with foot soldiers. In that battle, the warriors attacked, sometimes together and sometimes
separately. They were exhausted because of the deeds they had performed during the night. The sun's energy made
them hungry and thirsty. Many of them lost all sensation in their limbs. There was the sound of conch shells,
drums and battle drums, together with the trumpeting of elephants. There was the sound of bows being stretched
and drawn. O king! O bull among the Bharata lineage! The sound that was generated seemed to touch the sky.

'"The foot soldiers fled and weapons descended. The horses neighed and the chariots rattled. There were angry
roars and there was a great and tumultuous sound. That loud and fierce noise spread and reached up into the sky.
As warriors were brought down, there were woes of lamentation. That great and piteous wail could be heard all
over the ground. Foot soldiers, horses, chariots and elephants fell down, or were falling down. All the battle formations clashed against each other and there was a general melee. Some killed those on their own side, as well as that
of the enemy. Some engaged with their own side. Others engaged with the enemy. Swords could be seen, hurled
from the brave arms of warriors, or from the backs of elephants. They looked like garments amassed for washing.
As they were raised up in the arms of brave warriors, the swords made a sound like that of garments being beaten
at the time of washing. There were daggers[Ardhasi, or half-sword.], swords, lances and battleaxes. They were used in that clash and
there was a great and fearful sound. The brave ones created a river out of the blood of elephants and horses and the
bodies of men flowed along. It was full of fish in the form of weapons. The flesh and blood was the mire. The
lamentations were the roar and the flags and garments were the foam. It flowed along to the world of the hereafter.
They were afflicted by arrows and spears. They were exhausted from the night. They were confused and senseless.
All their limbs were motionless. The elephants and horses were weak. The faces of the brave ones were dry,
though their heads were decorated with beautiful earrings. Here and there, diverse implements of war could be
seen. The place was full of carnivorous beings and those who were dead and dying. There was no space for the
chariots or the warriors to pass. The wheels of chariots got stuck and the horses which bore them depended on their
spirits. But some of them were extremely tired. The horses trembled and were afflicted by the arrows, though they
were spirited and born in noble lineages, possessing strength and sizes like those of elephants. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! At that time, everyone was distracted and agitated. With the exception of Drona and Arjuna, both
armies were overtaken by fright. These two became the refuges of the distressed ones on their respective sides.
Others[From the side of the enemy.] encountered them and departed for Vaivasvata's eternal abode. The entire large army of the Kouravas
was shattered. The Panchalas gathered together and one could not distinguish one from the other. That fierce carnage increased the fear of those who were cowards. O king! There was a great destruction and the earth was like a
cremation ground. Karna, Drona, Arjuna, Yudhishthira, Bhimasena, the twins, Panchala, Satyaki, Duhshasana,
Drona's son, Duryodhana, Soubala, Kripa, the king of Madra, Kritavarma, the others, one's own self, the earth or
the directions, could not be seen there. O king! When the soldiers clashed, everything was covered in dust. A fierce
and terrible cloud of dust arose. We thought that a second night had arrived there. One could not distinguish the
Kouraveyas from the Panchalas and the Pandavas. The directions, the sky, heaven and earth and plain and uneven
terrain could not be distinguished. In that battle, desiring victory, men brought down others through the touch of
the hand, without differentiating the enemy from those on one's own side. However, a wind arose and dispelled the
dust, which was also pacified through the sprinkling of blood. The dust that arose from the earth was pacified and
was soon driven away by the wind. With blood flowing from their wounded limbs, the elephants, horses, warriors,
rathas and foot soldiers there looked as beautiful as a grove of parijata[A divine flower.] blossoms.

'"Duryodhana, Karna, Drona and Duhshasana-these four rathas clashed against four on the Pandava side.
Duryodhana and his brother clashed against the twins, Vrikodara against Radheya and Bharadvaja's son against
Arjuna. Everyone else looked on at that great and terrible wonder. It was a fierce and superhuman encounter between those bulls among rathas. Their chariots traversed wonderful paths. The chariots executed diverse motions.
Those warriors were colourful in fighting and all the warriors witnessed that wonderful battle. They[The eight who fought.] were brave
and made endeavours to vanquish each other. They showered down arrows, like a cloud at the end of summer.
Those bulls among men were stationed on chariots that were as radiant as the sun. They were as beautiful as a
mass of clouds during autumn. The great archers challenged each other. They made efforts in wielding their bows.
They attacked each other, like crazy bull elephants.

'"It is true that one does not discard one's body until the time has come, since those maharathas were not simultaneously killed in that battle. Arms and feet were severed and so were heads with beautiful earrings[This is a general description and not restricted to the eight who were immediately fighting.]. There
were hollow arrows and razor-sharp arrows, iron arrows, nails, lances and javelins and many other kinds of sharp
and supreme weapons. There was diverse and colourful armour for the body. Many chariots were shattered. Many
elephants and horses were slain. With the standards brought down, the chariots looked like empty cities. Bereft of
men, the frightened horses dragged the chariots here and there, with a speed like that of the wind. There were
brave warriors with ornaments, whisks, mail and standards. They were brought down. There were umbrellas, ornaments, garments and fragrant garlands. There were necklaces, crowns, diadems, headdresses and large numbers of
bells. There were gems on the breasts and jewels worn on golden headgear. With these beautiful objects scattered
around, the place looked like the sky, adorned by a large number of stars.

'"Duryodhana was intolerant and angry. He clashed against Nakula, who was also intolerant and angry. Madri's
son cheerfully struck your son on his right side with a large number of arrows and a loud roar broke out. In that
battle, he was struck on his right flank by his cousin brother[Bhratrivya has several meanings. It means a father's brother's son and a cousin in general, but it also means an
enemy. Instead of cousin brother, a translation as enemy is equally acceptable.] and became intolerant. Thus angered, he also struck
back on the right flank. Having been thus attacked by your son from the right flank, the energetic Nakula executed
wonderful circles and countered him. However, he[Duryodhana.] repulsed all these and afflicted him with his net of arrows.
Having forced Nakula to retreat, he was honoured by the soldiers. However, Nakula asked your son to wait, remembering all the hardships that had been caused by your evil counsel."'
