'Bhishma said, "Drupada took great care about all his relatives. O Indra among kings! Shikhandi[The text doesn't actually mention the name. It has been inserted here for the sake of clarity.] became
supremely skilled in painting and the arts. In the use of arrows and other weapons, she became Drona's student. O
great king! The beautiful[Literally, fair in complexion.] mother asked the king to find a wife for the daughter, as if she were a son. Parshata
saw that his daughter had become mature. Knowing that she was a woman, with his wife, he began to worry. Dru-
pada said, 'My daughter has become mature and this increases my sorrows. Following the words of the one who
wields the trident, I have concealed her. O great queen! That can never turn out to be false. How can the creator of
the three worlds utter a falsehood?' The wife replied, 'O king! If it pleases you, listen to the words that I have to
say. O son of Prishata! Having heard, you should then carry out your own tasks. O king! Let her take a wife in accordance with the prescribed rites. It is my firm view that his[Shiva's.] words will come true.' Having thus decided on a
course of action, the couple chose as a bride the daughter of the lord of Dasharna. King Drupada, lion among men,
asked about all the kings who had pure lineages. As Shikhandi's wife, he chose the daughter of the king of Dasharna. The king of Dasharna was known as Hiranyavarma. The lord of the earth gave his daughter away to Shikhandi.
King Hiranyavarma of Dasharna was an extremely powerful king. He was unassailable and possessed a large army.
He was high-minded.

'"O supreme among kings! When the marriage had been performed, the maiden attained maturity and so did the
maiden Shikhandi. Having obtained a wife, Shikhandi returned to Kampilya[The capital of Panchala. Later known as Kampilgarh and Koil. Now known as Aligarh.]. For some time, the maiden did not
know that she[Shikhandi.] was a woman. When Hiranyavarma's daughter got to know this about Shikhandi, she was
ashamed and reported to her nurses and friends that Shikhandi, the daughter of the king of Panchala, was a maiden.
O tiger among kings! The nurses from Dasharna were supremely distressed and sent messengers[To Hiranyavarma.] with the news.
All the messengers told the lord of Dasharna about the deception, exactly as it had happened and the king was
filled with anger. O great king! At that time, Shikhandi conducted himself like a male in the royal household. Disregarding the fact that he was a woman, he sported himself happily. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O Indra
among kings! When Hiranyavarma heard about this a few days later, he was afflicted with anger. The king of
Dasharna was overcome with terrible rage. He sent a messenger to Drupada's abode. Kanchanavarma's[Both hiranya and kanchana mean gold or golden. Hiranyavarma and Kanchanavarma are synonyms.] messenger went to Drupada. He took him aside and privately said, 'O king! The king of Dasharna has spoken these words.
O unblemished one! He is extremely enraged at having been deceived by you. "O king! I have been insulted by
you and your bad counsel, that out of the delusion in your heart, you have sought my daughter for your own
daughter. O evil-minded one! You will now reap the fruits of that deception. Be steady. I will uproot you, with
your relatives and your advisers."'"'
