'Yudhishthira said, "You have spoken about the four ashramas and about rajadharma. You have separately spoken
about many different kinds of history. O immensely intelligent one! I have also heard many true accounts connected with dharma. However, I still have a doubt and you should remove it. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I
wish to hear about the fruits obtained by japakas[Japa is the recitation of a mantra in a low tone. A japaka is a person who
does this.]. What fruits are obtained by the japakas who recite in this
way? O unblemished one! You should tell me about all the norms that have been laid down for japa. What are the
different rules and procedures that have been laid down for japakas in sankhya and yoga[Since both sankhya and yoga have multiple meanings, this causes problems of translation and understanding. The following seems to be a reasonable interpretation. In sankhya, the use of no particular mantra is recommended, sankhya being equated with Vedanta. In yoga, there is the
recitation of a particular mantra.]? What are the ordinances for sacrifices? What is recommended for japa? Tell me all this. It is my view that you know everything."

'Bhishma replied, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted, about what transpired in ancient times between Yama, Time and a brahmana. Vedanta has said that renunciation is meditation. The words of the Vedas are
about withdrawal, tranquility and resort to the brahman. The paths[Sankhya and yoga.] can be resorted to, or not resorted to. O king!
I will tell you about the reasons for resorting to it[This is a reference to resorting to sankhya, without any specific mantra
in mind. However, there is an emphasis on rituals. In contrast, in the
mode of abstention, there are no rituals, but one meditates on a specific
mantra.]. It has been said that the mind must be controlled and the
senses must be conquered. One must be truthful and tend to the fire. One must immerse oneself in reflection, with
meditation, austerities, self-control, forgiveness, lack of jealousy, restraint in food, withdrawal from material objects, frugality in speech and tranquility. This is the way dharma flows. Listen to the mode of abstention now.
Those who follow the path of the brahman perform japa and withdraw from rituals. As I have said, all these must
be completely renounced. There are three paths one can resort to, external, internal and without any[These shlokas are not very clear and are also difficult to translate. External probably means external rituals. Internal probably means internal rituals, japa with a specific mantra. However, meditation is also possible
without any mantra at all.]. He must
seat himself on kusha grass. He will hold kusha in his hand and tie kusha around his hair. He must surround himself with tattered rags and in its midst, attire himself in kusha. He must bow down before material objects and after
that, no longer think of material objects. He must be tranquil in his mind and fix his mind on his mind. With his intelligence, he must meditate on the brahman and engage in japa for his benefit. He must then withdraw from even
this and immerse himself in samadhi[The final stage of meditation, where one is completely immersed in the
brahman.]. Having resorted to meditation, he must use his concentrated powers.
Through austerities and self-control, he will purify his atman. He will withdraw from all hatred and desire. He will
be without attachment and confusion. He will not sorrow. Nor will he be delighted. He does not think of himself as
the doer, nor as the one who enjoys from this action. Nor does he suffer from the action. In yoga, the mind has no
sense of ego. Nor does he seek to establish anything. He is not engaged in receiving anything for himself. But he
does not ignore this[Action.]. Nor does he not perform acts. He is engaged in the task of meditation. He is engaged in
meditation, having set his mind on meditation. Through the meditation, he obtains samadhi and then gradually
gives it up[The process of meditation.]. In that state, he obtains the bliss that is obtained by renouncing everything. He is not interested in
this world. He has renounced everything. He gives up his life and merges with the body of the brahman. Or perhaps he does not desire to merge into the body of the brahman then. He follows the path upwards, never to be born
again. He resorts to knowledge about the brahman. He is tranquil and without disease. He is immortal and free
from all passions. He obtains the purity of his atman."'
