Vaishampayana said, 'O king! The maharathas[The Pandavas.] then went from one forest to another, killing many animals and
travelling fast, through the lands of Matysa, Trigarta, Panchala and Kichaka, where they saw many beautiful
woods and lakes. All of them had their hair in matted locks and they wore barks of trees and deerskin. Those great-
souled ones and Kunti assumed the form of ascetics. Sometimes, the maharathas had to hasten, and carried their
mother. Sometimes, they proceeded slowly and in the open[They hastened when their disguise was threatened and travelled slowly when there was no danger.]. They studied about the brahman in the Vedas and all
the Vedangas and nitishastra[Texts about morals and ethics.].

'At that time, those wise ones met their grandfather[Vedavyasa.]. Having respectfully saluted Krishna Dvaipayana, those
scorchers of enemies[The Pandavas.] and their mother stood before him with joined palms. Vyasa said, "O bulls of the Bharata
lineage! I had known in advance how Dhritarashtra's sons would not follow the righteous path and would unjustly
banish you. Having known this, I have now come for your welfare. It is not right to sorrow. Know that this will
bring future happiness. There is no doubt that you and they are equal in my eyes. But men love more those who
suffer from ill fortune or are young. Therefore, my love for you is now greater. As a result of that love, I wish to do
something good for you. Listen to me. Not far from here, there is a beautiful town that is a safe place for you. Go
and live there in disguise and wait for my return." After he had thus comforted the Parthas[The sons of Pritha, that is, the Pandavas.], the conquerors of
enemies Vyasa led them to Ekachakra.

'The lord[Vyasa.] also comforted Kunti. "O daughter! Live. Your son Yudhishthira, the son of dharma, will rule righteously over all the kings on earth. Well versed in righteousness, he will conquer the earth through his virtue, aided
by the might of Bhima and Arjuna. There is no doubt that he will rule. Your sons and those of Madri, all maharathas, will enjoy themselves happily in their own kingdom. Conquering the entire earth, those tigers among
men will perform rajasuya[Royal sacrifice.],ashvamedha[Horse-sacrifice.] and other sacrifices, in which the alms given will be very large. They
will rule over the kingdom of their father and grandfathers and ensure their friends and relatives enjoy pleasures
and prosperity." Having said this, rishi Dvaipayana took them to the house of a Brahmana and told the best[The eldest, Yudhishthira.] of
the Parthas, "Wait for me. I will return for you. You will find great happiness if you learn to adjust to time and
place." O ruler of men! With joined hands, they said, "So it shall be." Lord Vyasa, the fortunate rishi, then went
away where he wanted to.'
