'Narada said, "The tiger among the Bhrigu lineage[Parashurama.] was pleased with the strength of Karna's arms, affection, selfcontrol and the service he showed towards his preceptor. He was also excellent in austerities. Therefore, in the
proper way, that supreme of ascetics[Parashurama.] taught him everything about brahmastra, about its release and means of
withdrawal. Having obtained this knowledge, Karna was delighted and dwelt in the hermitage of the one descended from the Bhrigu lineage. His valour was extraordinary and he strove to learn dhanurveda.'

'"One day, the intelligent Rama was wandering around near the hermitage, with Karna. He was afflicted because
of the fasting and was also confident of Karna's affection. Therefore, Jamadagani's descendant went to sleep with
his head on his lap. While the tired preceptor was sleeping, a terrible worm approached Karna. It fed on phlegm,
fat, flesh and blood and was terrible to the touch. With blood-stained teeth, it penetrated his thigh. Because of fear
on account of his preceptor[Fear of waking up Parashurama.], he was unable to kill it, or fling it away. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! His
thigh was pierced by that worm. But scared that his preceptor would wake up, the son of a suta ignored it. Karna
bore that pain with fortitude and ignored it. He did not tremble and continued to bear Bhargava. Eventually, the
blood from the limbs touched the extender of the Bhrigu lineage. The energetic one awoke and in torment, spoke
these words. 'Alas! I have become impure. What have you done? Cast aside your fear and tell me the truth about
what has happened.' Karna then told him how the worm had bitten him. Rama also saw that the worm looked like
a pig. It had eight feet and sharp teeth and was covered with bristles that were like needles. It was known as Alarka
and it shrivelled[Alarka is a mythical animal that looks like a boar and has eight legs.]. As soon as Rama looked at it, the worm gave up its breath of life. It shrunk in the blood that it
had drunk and it was extraordinary.

'"At that time, a rakshasa was seen in the sky. It was gigantic in form and was terrible in visage. Its neck was
red, its limbs were dark and it was riding on the clouds. Its wishes having been satisfied, it joined its hands in salutation and addressed Rama. 'O tiger among the Bhrigu lineage! May you be well. I will go where I had come from.
O supreme among sages! You have saved me from this hell.' Jamadagni's mighty-armed and powerful son replied,
'Who are you? How did you descend into hell? Tell me about it.' He said, 'Earlier, in the yuga of the gods[Meaning satya yuga.], I was
a great asura named Praggritsa. O father[The word used is tata.]! I was of the same age as Bhrigu. I forcefully abducted Bhrigu's
beloved wife. Because of the maharshi's curse, I became a worm and fell down on earth. Your great grandfather[Meaning, Bhrigu. Bhrigu's son was Chyavana, Chyavana's son was Our-
va, Ourva's son was Richika, Richika's son was Jamadagni and Jamadagni's son was Parashurama.]
angrily spoke these words to me. "You will subsist on urine and phlegm. O wicked one! You will live a life that is
like hell." I asked him, "O brahmana! When will this curse come to an end?" At this, Bhrigu told me, "There will
be Rama, born of the Bhrigu lineage, and he will free you." It is because of this that I attained such a wicked end.
O virtuous one! But having met you, I have been freed from that evil birth.' Having said this, the giant asura
bowed before Rama and departed.

'"Rama angrily spoke these words to Karna. 'O foolish one! No one who has been born as a brahmana can endure such great suffering. Your patience is like that of a kshatriya. I wish to hear the truth.' Karna was frightened
of being cursed. He sought his favours and said, 'O Bhargava! Know me to be between a brahmana and a kshatriya, born as a suta[A suta was born from a kshatriya father and a brahmana mother.]. People on earth speak of me as Radheya Karna. O brahmana! O Bhargava! Pardon me. I
was greedy for the weapons. A father isn't just the biological one. The lord, who is a preceptor and gives one the
Vedas and learning, is also one such. That is the reason why, in your presence, I described myself as a Bhargava.'

The foremost among the Bhrigu lineage was incensed at this and he[Karna.] had fallen down on the ground, trembling,
distressed and hands joined in salutation. However, he[Parashurama.] smiled and said, 'You acted in this false way because of
your greed for weapons. O stupid one! In a different place, when the time for your death has come, you will be engaged in a fight with someone who is your equal and the brahmastra will not manifest itself before you. The qualities of a brahmana will never remain with someone who is not a brahmana. Leave this place, since this is not
meant for an untruthful one like you. There will be no kshatriya on earth who will be your equal in battle.' Having
been thus addressed by Rama, he took his leave and departed. He went to Duryodhana and said, 'I have become
accomplished in the use of weapons.'"'
