'Sanjaya said, "O great king! It was midday and the encounter raged. There was a terrible battle, destructive of
people, between Bhishma and the Somakas. Gangeya, best among rathas, pierced the Pandava soldiers with hundreds and thousands of sharp arrows. Your father, Devavrata, crushed those soldiers, like a herd of cattle, crushing
reaped paddy. Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi, Virata and Drupada attacked Bhishma in that battle and struck the maharatha with arrows. He pierced Dhrishtadyumna and Virata with three arrows each. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! He then dispatched an iron arrow towards Virata. O king! Pierced by Bhishma, the destroyer of enemies,
in that battle, those great archers became as angry as serpents that have been trod upon. Shikhandi pierced the
grandfather of the Bharatas. But the undecaying one thought him to be a woman and did not strike him back. In
that battle, Dhrishtadyumna was overcome with rage, like a flaming fire. He used three arrows to pierce the grandfather in the arms and the chest. Drupada pierced Bhishma with twenty-five arrows, Virata with ten arrows and
Shikhandi with twenty-five. O great king! The great-souled Bhishma was pierced in that battle and was as beautiful as a blossoming red ashoka tree in the spring. Gangeya pierced them back with three arrows that travelled
straight[Three arrows for Dhrishtadyumna, Drupada and Virata. He did not touch Shikhandi.]. O venerable one! He severed Virata's bow with a broad-headed arrow. In the forefront of that battle,
he took up another bow and pierced Bhishma with five sharp arrows and his charioteer with three. O great king!
Bhima, Droupadi's five sons, the five brothers from Kekaya and Satvata Satyaki, desiring Yudhishthira's welfare,
attacked Gangeya. They wished to protect Panchala Dhrishtadyumna in that battle. O lord of men! All those on
your side raised their weapons to protect Bhishma and attacked the Pandu soldiers with their own soldiers.

'"There was an extremely terrible battle between those on your side and those on their side. It involved men,
horses, chariots and elephants and extended Yama's kingdom. Charioteers clashed with charioteers and sent them
to Yama's abode. Others attacked, men, elephant-riders and horse-riders. They used straight-tufted arrows to dispatch each other to the hereafter. O lord of the earth! Many terrible weapons were used there. Chariots lost their
horses, rathas and charioteers and in that battle, were dragged away in different directions. O king! In that battle,
they crushed many men and horses. They seemed to be like the wind, or like the cities of the gandharvas. Energetic
and armoured rathas were bereft of their chariots. They were adorned with earrings and headdresses and all of
them were ornamented with golden armlets. They were the equals of the sons of the gods in beauty and bravery
and Shakra's equal in fighting. They surpassed Vaishravana[Kubera.] in prosperity and Brihaspati in wisdom. O lord of
the world! The brave ones who were there were the lords of all the worlds. They were seen to be driven away, like
ordinary men. O best of men! The tuskers were bereft of the best of riders. They ran around and fell down, shrieking loudly and crushing their own ranks. O venerable one! Their armour, whisks, umbrellas and standards were
strewn around, as were the housings, bells and lances. Devastated, they were seen to run away in the ten directions.
They were like mountains or clouds and roared like rain clouds. O lord of the earth! Some elephant-riders were deprived of their elephants, both on your side and on theirs. They were seen to run away in that encounter. There
were horses that had come from many countries and were decorated with gold. They were as fast as the wind and
were there in hundreds and thousands. With the horses slain, horse-riders grasped swords in every direction. They
were seen to run away, or chase others away, in that encounter. In that great battle, elephants clashed with elephants that were running away and swiftly crushed infantry and steeds. O king! In that battle, elephants crushed
chariots and chariots clashed against infantry and horses. O king! In that battle, horses crushed men in the course
of the encounter. O king! In this fashion, they crushed each other in diverse ways. That terrible battle raged and it
gave rise to great fear. A fearful river began to flow, with blood as its waves. It was choked with masses of bones
and the hair[Of slain combatants.] was like moss and weeds. Chariots were the lakes and arrows were the currents, with horses as the
unassailable fish. It was covered with heads as pebbles. It was infested with elephants as crocodiles. Armour and
headdresses constituted the foam. Bows were islands and swords were turtles. Flags and pennants were trees along
the banks. Men were the banks that the river destroyed. It was infested with large numbers of predatory creatures
and it extended Yama's kingdom. O king! In that great battle, many brave kshatriyas gave up their fear. They
sought to cross the river on boats made out of horses, elephants and chariots. In that battle, this river conveyed all
the cowards who had become overcome by lassitude, just as Vaitarani conveys all those who are dead to the capital
of the king of the dead. The kshatriyas present witnessed the great carnage. They exclaimed, 'It is because of
Duryodhana's crimes that the Kouravas are headed towards destruction. The sons of Pandu possess many qualities.
Why did Dhritrashtra's son, the lord of men, hate them? He is evil in his soul. He has been overcome by avarice.'

O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Many words of this kind were heard there. They were full of praise for the
Pandavas and were extremely terrible about your sons. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing these
words spoken by all the warriors, your son, Duryodhana, who had caused offence to all the worlds, spoke these
words to Bhishma, Drona, Kripa and Shalya. 'Fight with pride. What is the reason for delay?' O king! The extremely terrible battle between the Kurus and the Pandavas raged again, a consequence of the gambling with the
dice. O Vichitravirya's son! You paid no attention when the great-souled ones tried to restrain you then. Behold the
fruits of that. O king! O lord of the earth! The sons of Pandu, their soldiers, their followers and the Kouravas do
not desire to protect their lives in this battle. That is the reason there is this terrible destruction of people. O tiger
among men! O king! It has been caused by destiny and your evil policy."'
