'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! Hear about Vasudeva's divine deeds. Govinda performed them and no other man
can ever replicate them. O Sanjaya! When the great-souled one was brought up as a child in a family of cowherds,
he made the strength of his arms known to the three worlds. When he dwelt in the forests along the Yamuna, he
killed the king of horses[This is the demon Keshi, sent by Kamsa to kill Krishna. Keshi adopted the form of a horse. Having killed Keshi,
Krishna came to be known as Keshava.], who was like the wind in speed and Uchchaishrava's equal in strength. There was a
terrible danava in the form of a bull[Arishtasura, also sent by Kamsa to kill Krishna.]. He arose among the cows, like death. Though still a child, he killed him
with his arms. The one with lotus eyes also killed great asuras like Pralamba, Naraka, Jamba, Pitha and Muru, who
was like a mountain. The immensely energetic Kamsa was protected by Jarasandha. But with his valour alone[That is, without using any weapons.],
Krishna killed him and his followers in battle. The brave Sunama, the king of Shurasena, was the leader of an entire akshouhini. The valiant one was the second brother of Kamsa, the king of Bhoja. With Baladeva as his second,
Krishna, the slayer of enemies, spiritedly consumed him in a battle, with all his soldiers. The brahmana rishi Dur-
vasa was extremely prone to rage. He worshipped him with his wife and obtained a boon from him[The wife in question is Rukmini. There is a story about Durvasa visiting Krishna and Rukmini and their worshipping him with rice and milk. Durvasa asked Krishna to smear the remnants all over his body. Krishna did
this, leaving out the feet. Durvasa granted Krishna the boon that he would not be killed through any part of the
body that had been smeared with the remaining rice and milk.]. The lotus-
eyed and brave one vanquished many kings at the svayamvara of the daughter of the king of Gandhara[Satyabhama was the princess of Gandhara.]. As if
they were born horses, the intolerant kings were yoked to the wedding chariot and lacerated with whips. The
mighty-armed Jarasandha was the leader of an entire akshouhini. Janardana thought of a way so that he might be
killed by someone else[Jarasandha was killed by Bhima, but Bhima was instigated by Krishna. The incident has been described in Section 22 (Volume 2).]. The brave and powerful king of Chedi was the leader of kings. In the dispute over the
arghya, he was killed like an animal[The king of Chedi is Shishupala. The incident has been described in Section 25 (Volume 2).]. Soubha, the city of the daityas, was established in the sky. It was protected
by Shalva and was invincible. Through his valour, Madhava brought it down into the ocean[This has been described in Section 31 (Volume 2).]. He defeated in battle Anga, Vanga, Kalinga, Magadha, Andhaka, Kasi, Kosala, Vatsa, Garga, Karusha and Pundra. O Sanjaya! Avanti, the south, the mountains, Dasheraka, Kashmiraka, Ourasaka, Pishacha, Samandara, Kamboja, Vatadhana, Chola,
Pandya, Trigarta, Malava and Darada were difficult to conquer. Ashvas, Shakas and Yavanas and their followers
arrived from different directions. But Pundarikaksha vanquished them. In earlier times, he penetrated the abode of
makaras, inhabited by aquatic creatures. In the midst of the waters, he vanquished Varuna in battle[Nanda (Krishna's foster-father) was abducted by Varuna's servants and rescued by Krishna and Balarama.]. Hrishikesha
slew Panchajana, who resided in the nether regions of patala and obtained the divine conch shell Panchajanya[The sage Sandipani was Krishna's teacher and Sandipani's son was abducted by the demon Panchajana. Krishna
killed Panchajana the conch shell Panchajanya was made out of Panchajana's bones.].
Together with Partha, the immensely strong one satisfied Agni in Khandava and obtained the invincible agneya
weapon, the chakra[Sudarshana chakra.]. He rode on Vinata's son and caused terror in Amaravati[Vinata's son is Garuda and Amaravati is Indra's capital.]. The brave one brought parijata
from the great Indra's residence. Knowing his valour, Shakra tolerated this. We have not heard of any king who
has not been vanquished by Krishna. O Sanjaya! Pundarikaksha performed an extremely wonderful deed in my assembly hall[This is a reference to Krishna manifesting his own self. The incident has been described in Section 54 (Volume
Four).]. Who else can do this? Because of that, I have sought refuge with him in devotion. I look upon
Krishna as the lord. I know everything about it, having witnessed it myself. There is no end to his valour, or to his
intelligence. O Sanjaya! Nor can anyone reach the limit of Hrishikesha's deeds.

'"Gada, Samba, Pradyumna, Viduratha, Agavaha, Aniruddha, Charudeshna, Sarana, Ulmuka, Nishatha, Jhalli,
the valiant Babhru, Prithu, Viprithu, Samika, Arimejaya-these and other powerful Vrishni heroes are skilled in
striking. They will station themselves in battle, in the ranks of the Pandava army. They will be summoned by the
great-souled hero among the Vrishnis, Keshava. It is my view that everything will then confront a great danger.
Where Janardana is, the brave Rama will be there[Balarama. However, Balarama decided to remain neutral and went away on a pilgrimage.]. He wields the plough and wears a garland of wild flowers.
His strength is like that of ten thousand elephants. He is like the summit of Kailasa. The brahmanas describe Vasudeva as the father of everything. O Sanjaya! Will he fight for the cause of the sons of Pandu? O son[The word used is tata.]! If Kesha-
va dons his armour for the sake of the Pandavas, there is no one in our army who can withstand him. If all the Kurus manage to defeat all the Pandavas, for their sake, Varshneya will take up his supreme weapons. That mighty-
armed tiger among men will kill all the kings and the Kouravas in battle and give the earth to the sons of Kunti.
Hrishikesha is the charioteer and Dhananjaya is the warrior in that chariot. Where is the ratha in our army who will
confront them in battle? There is no means whereby the Kurus can be seen to obtain victory. Tell me everything
about how the battle continued. Arjuna is Keshava's soul and Krishna is Kiriti's soul. Arjuna is always victorious
and Krishna's deeds are eternal. All the qualities are vested in Keshava, beyond measure. Because of his delusion,
Duryodhana does not know Krishna Madhava. Because of his delusion and because he is driven by destiny, the
noose of death is in front of him and he does not know Dasharha Krishna and Pandava Arjuna. Earlier, those great-
souled ones were the gods Nara and Narayana. They were a single soul and are seen by men on earth as divided
into two. They are famous and invincible. If they wish, they can destroy the army with their minds. But because
they are humans, they do not wish that[Having been born as men, they resort to human means alone.]. The destruction of the yuga is near and the people are deluded. O son!
That is the reason for the death of Bhishma and the great-souled Drona. Death can never be prevented through
brahmacharya, the study of the Vedas, rites or weapons. Those brave ones were revered by the worlds. They were
skilled in the use of weapons and were invincible in battle. O Sanjaya! On hearing that Bhishma and Drona have
been slain, why should I remain alive? After learning about the death of Bhishma and Drona, we will now have to
seek refuge with Yudhishthira, about whose prosperity we used to be jealous earlier. This destruction of the Kurus
has come about because of my deeds. O suta! When one is ripe for slaughter, even a blade of grass is like the vajra.
Yudhishthira will obtain unmatched prosperity in this world. It is because of his anger that the great archers, Bhishma and Drona, have been brought down. Dharma is naturally on his side, though humans typically have adharma.
Destiny is cruel and it is time for everything to be destroyed. O son! Even learned men cannot think of means to
counteract it. Everything progresses because of destiny. That is my view. Therefore, tell me everything, exactly as
it happened, about that supreme hardship, without discarding anything. It cannot be crossed and leads to grievous
reflection."'
