Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing Dhritarashtra's words, Bhishma and Drona again spoke in his support to Duryodhana, who was not acting according to the instructions. "As long as the two Krishnas[Krishna and Arjuna.] are not armoured, as long
as the Gandiva is resting, as long as Dhoumya[The priest of the Pandavas.] does not offer the foremost forces of the enemy into the fire of
war, as long as the modest and great archer Yudhishthira does not angrily glance at your soldiers, till then, we may
find peace. As long as we do not see the mighty archer Partha Bhimasena take his position among the divisions of
his own army, till then, we may find peace. As long as he does not roam around and increase the delight of the soldiers, as long as he does not shatter the heads of those who are fighting on elephants in the war, as long as the destroyer of enemies does not use his club, as if against fruits on trees that have been ripened with time, till then, we
may find peace. As long as Nakula, Sahadeva, Parshata Dhrishtadyumna, Virata, Shikhandi and Shishupala's son,
all skilled in the use of weapons, do not armour themselves and swiftly penetrate, like crocodiles in the great
ocean, till then, we may find peace. As long as arrows tufted with the feathers of vultures do not descend on the
delicate bodies of kings, till then, we may find peace. As long as those swift and great archers do not use great iron
arrows that can travel far to strike the breasts of warriors who have been anointed with sandalwood and aloe and
are adorned with gold plates and necklaces, till then, we may find peace. Let Dharmaraja Yudhishthira, elephant
among kings, hold you by the hands, while you bow your head down. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Let that
extremely generous one[Literally, the one who has given a lot of stipends, Yudhishthira.] place his right hand, marked with the signs of a pennant, goad, elephant and flag, on
your shoulder as a mark of peace. When you are seated, let him place his hands, adorned with gems and with jewels on the fingers, on your back. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Let the mighty-armed Vrikodara, whose shoulders are like a shala tree, embrace you and speak to you in conciliatory tones, for the sake of peace. O king! Honoured by the three, Arjuna and the twins, you will affectionately inhale the fragrance of their heads. On seeing you
united with the brave Pandava brothers, let these lords of men release tears of joy. In a spirit of fraternity, let this
be proclaimed in all the capital cities of the kings of the earth. Enjoy this and be bereft of fever."'
