'"Indra said, 'It is energetic in this way and all the dharmas are secured by it. The dharma of kshatriyas is best
among all kinds of dharma. In this world, it must be observed by those like you, who are broad and are like lions.
Otherwise, the subjects may be destroyed. The king who is engaged in the yoga of samskara[The word samskara has different meanings-refining, polishing, cleansing.] must know that the
foremost components of royal dharma are improvement of the earth[This probably means the act of rendering the ground fit for agriculture.], not living by alms, protecting the subjects,
compassion towards all beings and giving up one's life in battle. The sages say that renunciation is the best and a
person who gives up his body is the foremost among all. In rajadharma, everything is always being given up. It is
evident how the kings gave it up[Gave their lives up in the battle.]. It is said that a kshatriya always observes dharma through a lot of learning,
serving the seniors, slaying the enemy and brahmacharya. One who desires dharma follows that single ashrama[Effectively, the householder stage, the sense being that there is no need for
renunciation.].
In conduct towards ordinary people, he must make endeavours to discard his own likes and dislikes[Be impartial.]. He must
establish and protect the four varnas and engage them in their tasks and rituals. It is said that out of all endeavours
and ashramas, the dharma of kshatriyas is the best, because all the dharmas result from it. If all the varnas are not
engaged in their own dharmas, one cannot say that dharma is being followed. Men who are cruel and are always
engaged in the destruction of their prosperity are said to be like animals[This should probably be interpreted as praise of the householder stage.]. Because the dharma of kshatriyas advances from greed for riches to policy, it is said to be the best of ashramas. The three kinds of learning[The three Vedas.] are said
to the objective for brahmanas and this is said to be the ashrama for brahmanas. This is said to be the foremost task
for brahmanas. One who acts contrary to this should be killed with a weapon, like a shudra. O king! A brahmana
must follow the dharma of the four ashramas and the dharma of the Vedas. Know that there is nothing else for him.
If he acts contrary to this, no livelihood has been planned for him. Dharma is evident in one's tasks and without
this, he[The brahmana.] is like a dog. If a brahmana bases himself in perverse deeds, he does not deserve respect. The learned
say that someone who is not engaged in his own tasks is not to be trusted. This is the dharma of all the varnas and
it is uplifted through the valour in the dharma of kshatriyas. Therefore, rajadharma is the foremost and no other. I
think that this dharma of valiant ones is foremost in its enterprise.'

'"Mandhata asked, 'What dharma should be followed by Yavanas, Kiratas, Gandharas, Chinas, Shabaras, Bar-
baras, Shakas, Tusharas, Kahvas, Pahlavas, Andhras, Madrakas, Odras, Pulindas, Ramathas, Kachas, all the mlecchas, those who are a mix of brahmanas and kshatriyas, vaishyas and men who are shudras, when they reside within the kingdom? How can those like me establish all those who earn a living by being bandits? O illustrious one! I
wish to hear all this. Tell me. O lord of the gods! You are a friend to us kshatriyas.'

'"Indra replied, 'All those who are bandits must serve their mothers and fathers. They must serve their teachers
and seniors and all those who live in hermitages. All those who are bandits have a duty to serve the king. Their
dharma is said to be the rites of dharma laid down in the Vedas. They must perform sacrifices for the ancestors and,
at the right time, must dig wells, create places for drinking water and shelters for sleeping, and donate to brahmanas. Non-violence, truthfulness, lack of anger, living off and protecting what has been inherited, sustaining
wives and children, purity and lack of enmity are also recommended. Those who desire prosperity must grant dakshina at all the sacrifices. For all those who are bandits, it is a duty to observe extremely expensive pakayajnas. O
unblemished one! These and other techniques were laid down in ancient times. O king! These are the tasks and duties for all the people.'

'"Mandhata said, 'In the world of men, it is seen that bandits exist among all the varnas. Though they disguise
themselves, they are present in all the four ashramas.'

'"Indra replied, 'O king! When dandaniti is destroyed and rajadharma is neglected, kingship is demeaned and all
the beings are confounded. There will be innumerable mendicants of different types. When this krita yuga is over,
alternative kinds of ashramas will be thought of. They will pay no heed to the foremost objective and the ancient
dharma. Overcome by desire and anger, they will follow perverse paths. When great-souled ones use dandaniti,
wickedness is restrained and the supreme and eternal dharma is established and made to circulate. The king is said
to be the supreme preceptor of the world. If a person disrespects him, his donations, oblations and funeral rites
never yield any fruits. The eternal king of men originated with the gods. Even the gods exhibit a lot of reverence
towards a king who desires dharma. The illustrious Prajapati created everything in the universe. He desired that
kshatriyas should follow the dharma of commencement and restraint[Commencement of the virtuous and restraint of the wicked.]. I revere and worship the established kshatriya who remembers that objective and uses his intelligence to encourage dharma.'"

'Bhishma said, "Surrounded by large numbers of the Maruts, the illustrious lord spoke in this way. He then went
to his own undecaying and supreme state and residence, that of Vishnu[One should remember that this was Vishnu, disguised as Indra.]. O unblemished one! In this way, dharma was observed and followed well in ancient times. How can anyone who possesses great learning disrespect
kshatriyas? There are those who have engaged and those who have withdrawn[Engaged in action and withdrawn from action.]. Internally, they face destruction,
like those without eyes on a road[Because the engagement and withdrawal is not in accordance with dharma.]. In the beginning, a wheel was established and in the beginning, they followed
it. O tiger among men! O unblemished one! I have told you about that conduct."'
