Vaishampayana said, 'When Vasudeva spoke to him in this way, the one who was always angry and intolerant,
controlled himself like a well-trained horse and instantly replied, "O Achyuta! You have not completely understood what I wish to do. Truth is my valour and I am delighted at the prospect of war. O Dasharha! Because you
have lived with me for a long time, you know my spirit. Or is it that you do not know me at all, like one swimming
in a lake without a boat? Is that the reason you are censuring me with words that are off the mark? O Madhava!
How can someone who knows me, Bhimasena, speak in the perverse way that you have chosen to do? O descendant of the Vrishni lineage! Therefore, let me tell you a few words about my own manliness and my strength.
These are not equalled by anyone else. It is always the case that an arya should not praise himself. But because you
have excessively reviled me, I will tell you about my own strength. O Krishna! Behold. This is earth and that is
heaven, from which, all beings and all immobile objects have originated. It is the mother of everything. If these
two[Heaven and earth.] suddenly collide in anger, like mountains, I will hold them apart with my arms, with all their mobile and immobile objects. Behold the space between my two arms. They are like giant clubs. I do not see a man who can escape after having been grasped by them. The Himalaya mountains, the oceans and the wielder of the vajra and the
killer of Bala himself-even if all three try together, they cannot free one whom I have grasped with my strength. I
call kill all the kshatriyas who have assembled for the war, wishing to kill the Pandavas. I can fling them down on
the ground and trample them with my feet. O Achutya! You are not unfamiliar with my valour and the way in
which I defeated all the kings and brought them under my control. O Janardana! If it is the case that you do not
know me, with radiance like that of the rising sun, you will find out when you see me in the fierce turmoil of battle.
O unblemished one! Why have you pierced me with harsh words, like pricking a boil with a needle? I have told
you what I think I am. But know that I am greater than that. You will see me when the turmoil of battle begins.
You will see elephants, charioteers and riders destroyed by me. You and the worlds will see me angrily kill men
and bulls among the kshatriyas, destroying the supreme among the best. My marrow has not wasted away and my
mind is not trembling. Even if all the worlds are enraged, I have no fear. O Madhusudana! It is only because of
goodness of heart that I have shown compassion and have patiently endured all the hardships, so that the Bharatas
are not annihilated because of us."'
