Arjuna asked, "O delighter of the Kourava lineage! Why have you come here? Why is the mother of the lord of
Manipura in the field of battle? O daughter of a serpent! I hope you do desire this king's welfare. O one with
restless eyes! I hope you do wish for my welfare. O one with the wide hips! O one who is beautiful to see! I hope I,
or Babhruvahana, have not caused you any displeasure inadvertently. O beautiful one! Has Chaitravahini Chitrangada, your co-wife, caused you any injury?"'

Vaishampayana continued, 'At this, the daughter of the lord of the serpents laughed and replied, "You, or King
Babhruvahana, has not committed any crime. His mother follows my commands, like a servant maid. Listen to
how I have brought everything about. You should not display anger towards me. I bow down my head and seek
your favours. O Kouravya! O unblemished one! I have done everything to bring you pleasure. O mighty-armed
one! O Dhananjaya! Listen to everything. In the Mahabharata war, you slew the king who was Shantanu's son by
resorting to adharma. O Partha! My act has freed you from that. O brave one! You did not bring down Bhishma
while he was fighting with you. He was slain by you while he was engaged in a duel with Shikhandi. Had you given up your life without pacifying that sin, there is no doubt that because of that wicked deed, you would have descended into hell. Through your son you have now obtained pacification. O lord of the earth! O immensely intelligent one! Earlier, when the Vasus were with Ganga, I heard the Vasus talk about this, when they came to the banks
of the Ganga after the king who was Shantanu's son had been slain. Having approached the great river, the gods,
the Vasus, bathed there. With Bhagirathi's permission, they then uttered these terrible words. 'This Bhishma, Shantanu's son, has been slain by Savyasachi, though he was not fighting in the battle with him. O beautiful one! He
was engaged with someone else. O beautiful one! Because of that reason, we are pronouncing a curse on Arjuna.'

She agreed to this. My senses were greatly afflicted and I reported this to my father. On hearing this, he was also
plunged in supreme grief. For your sake, on many occasions, my father went to the Vasus and repeatedly tried to
seek their favours. They eventually told him, 'O immensely fortunate one! The lord of Manipura is young. Using
his arrows, in the midst of the battle, he will bring him down to the ground. O Indra among serpents! If this is
done, he will be freed from the curse.' He returned and told me about what the Vasus had said. Having heard this
from him, I have freed you from the curse. Even the king of the gods is incapable of defeating you in a battle. The
son is said to be like one's own self and you have been vanquished by your own self. O lord! No sin attaches to
me. What do you think?" Thus addressed, Vijaya was delighted and said, "O queen! Everything that you have done
for me is extremely agreeable." Having said this, Jaya spoke to his son, the lord of Manipura, while Chitrangada,
the daughter-in-law of the Kouravyas, heard. "Yudhishthira's horse sacrifice will take place in the next month of
Chaitra. O king! With your advisers and your mothers, go there." This is what Partha told King Babhruvahana.
With tears in his eyes, the intelligent one replied to his father. "O one who knows about dharma! Because of your
command, I will certainly go there. At the great horse sacrifice, I will serve the brahmanas. O slayer of enemies!
But to show me your favours, with your wives, please enter your own city[Meaning Babhruvahana's capital.]. You should not reflect about this. O
lord! Without any pain, happily spend one night in your own residence. O supreme among victorious ones! Then
follow the horse again." Thus addressed by his son, Kounteya, the one with the ape on his banner, smiled and
replied to Chitrangada's son. "O mighty-armed one! You know about the initiation I am following now. O large-
eyed one! That is the reason I cannot enter the city. This sacrificial horse goes as it wills and I have to follow it.
May you be fortunate. I have to depart and there is no place where I can tarry." The son of Paka's chastiser was
then worshipped in the proper way. Having taken leave of his wives, the supreme one among the Bharata lineage
departed.'
