Janamejaya asked, 'O great brahmana! When Lomasha conveyed Indra's message to Pandu's son, Yudhishthira, he
spoke these words. "When Savyasachi has gone from here[Heaven, where Arjuna had gone to obtain divine weapons.], I will remove the terrible fear that you do not talk
about." O foremost among learned ones! What was that great fear concerning Karna? Why did the great-souled
one[Yudhishthira.] not talk about it to anyone?'

Vaishampayana said, 'O tiger among kings! Since you have asked, I will tell you about it. O best of the Bharata
lineage! Listen to my words. When twelve years were over and the thirteenth year had started, Shakra wished to
ensure the welfare of the Pandavas and went begging to Karna. O great king! But learning about the intentions of
the great Indra concerning the earrings, Vibhavasu Surya went to Karna[Vibhavasu is the sun-god's name and Karna was his son.]. The brave and truthful one, devoted to
brahmanas, was lying down on an expensive bed that was covered with admirable spreads. O Indra among kings!
The one with the rays showed himself in the night, at the end of a dream. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He
was driven by great compassion and love for his son. Through his powers of yoga, Surya assumed the form of a
handsome brahmana, learned in the Vedas. For the sake of Karna's welfare, he spoke these comforting words to
him. "O Karna! O son! O foremost among those who speak the truth! Listen to my words. O mighty-armed one!
Out of affection towards you, I will now speak words that are for your welfare. O Karna! To ensure the welfare of
the Pandavas, Shakra will approach you in the form of a brahmana, so that he can take away your earrings. It is
known in the entire world that your conduct is such that when righteous ones beg you for something, you give and
do not wish anything in return. O son! You give to brahmanas whatever riches and other things they ask for. You
do not refuse. Knowing this to be the case, the chastiser of Paka[Indra killed a demon named Paka.] will arrive himself. He will beg you for your earrings and armour[Karna was naturally born with these.]. When he asks for the earrings, you must not give them to him. Entreat him as best as you can,
because that will ensure your supreme welfare. O son! When he talks to you about the earrings, you must again
and again refuse him by citing many different kinds of reasons. Offer him other riches. Appease Purandara, who
desires the earrings, through gems, women, objects of desire, riches of different kinds and by citing examples. O
Karna! If you give away the beautiful earrings that you were naturally born with, your life will be shortened and
you will come under the power of death. O one who is reverent! Arrayed in your armour and earrings, you cannot
be slain by your enemies in battle. Remember these words. These two treasures arose from amrita. O Karna! If you
desire to live, they must therefore be carefully protected by you." Karna asked, "Who are you, who have shown
yourself to me as my supreme well-wisher? O illustrious one! If you wish, tell me who you are, dressed in the attire of a brahmana." The brahmana said, "O son! I am the one with the thousand rays. I have given you this advice
as your well-wisher. Act in accordance with my words. That will be supremely beneficial for you."

'Karna said, "It is certainly in my best interests that the illustrious lord of the cows[The sun is the lord of the cows.] is speaking to me today for
my welfare. Listen to my words. O granter of boons! I am propitiating you and am speaking these words to you out
of affection. If I am dear to you, you should not restrain me from observing this vow. O Vibhavasu! The entire
world knows about this vow of mine. It is certain that I will give my life away to the foremost among brahmanas.
O supreme among those who travel the skies! O foremost among the gods! If Shakra comes to me in the disguise
of a brahmana and begs my excellent earrings and armour for the welfare of the sons of Pandu, I will give them to
him. Then my deeds, famous in the three worlds, will not be destroyed. For those like us, ill fame, even if it saves
one's life, is not appropriate. A glorious death that is approved of by the world is appropriate. Therefore, I will
give the earrings, together with the armour, to Indra. If the slayer of Bala and Vritra[Bala and Vritra were demons killed by Indra.] comes to me and begs for the
earrings to ensure the welfare of the sons of Pandu, it will extend my fame in the world and increase his ill fame. O
radiant one! Even at the expense of my life, I desire for fame in this world. The famous one attains heaven. The
one with ill fame is destroyed. Like a mother, fame ensures the life of a man in this world. Even if the body is
alive, ill fame destroys life. O Vibhavasu! O lord of the world! The creator himself has recited an ancient shloka
about how fame is life itself. 'In the next world, fame ensures the supreme objective for a man. In this world, pure
fame extends a man's life.' By giving away these objects that are natural to my body, I will obtain eternal fame, by
giving them as gifts to brahmanas in accordance with the prescribed rites. By offering my body in battle, by performing this difficult deed and by vanquishing my enemies, I will obtain nothing but fame. O destroyer of Svarbhanu[Svarbhanu is a name for Rahu, who causes eclipses.]! By offering protection to those who are terrified in battle and seek to save their lives, by freeing the aged,
the young and brahmanas from great danger, I will obtain supreme fame in this world. Know that my vow is to
protect fame, even at the expense of my life. O god! By giving this supreme gift to Maghavan, in the disguise of a
brahmana, I will traverse along the supreme path in this world."'
