Bhishma said, "Having been thus addressed by Narayana, the supreme being and best among men, for the welfare of
the worlds, the best among men[Narada.] spoke these words to Narayana. 'In four forms, you have obtained this excellent birth in Dharma's house for a reason. For the welfare of the worlds, let that objective be accomplished.
I will now see Prakriti. O protector of the worlds! I have studied the Vedas. I have tormented myself through austerities. I have never uttered a falsehood. I have always worshipped my seniors. I have never revealed the secrets
of others. Following the secret texts, I have protected the four[The hands, the feet, the stomach and the penis, the hands and the feet being counted in the singular. Protection
means that they have not been improperly used.]. I have always treated enemies and friends equally. I have always single-mindedly worshipped the original god and not several. Having purified myself in these
special  ways,  why  should  I  not  be  able  to  see  the  eternal  lord?'  Hearing  the  words  of  Parameshthi's  son[While there are different stories about Narada's birth, here he is being described as Brahma's son.],
Narayana, the protector of the dharma of the Satvatas[The Satvatas are the Yadavas.], honoured him with many kinds of rites and said, 'O
Narada! Go.' Having been given permission to leave, Parameshthi's son also worshipped the ancient rishi[Narayana.].

'"Having ascended into the sky with great force, he suddenly descended on Meru's peak. For a short while, the
sage remained in a solitary spot on the peak of that mountain. He then glanced towards the north-western direction
and beheld an extraordinary sight. There is an extensive region named Shvetadvipa to the north of the ocean of
milk. The wise ones have said that it is thirty-two thousand yojanas to the north of Meru. Those who dwell there
are beyond any senses and do not eat. Their eyes do not blink and their bodies possess fragrances. The men in
Shveta have been cleansed of all sins. They uproot the eyes of men who perform wicked deeds. Their bones and
bodies are as firm as the vajra and they are impartial towards respect and disrespect. They are divine in form and
are marked with auspicious signs. Their heads are like umbrellas and their voices rumble like the clouds. Their feet
bear the marks of four pushkaras and one hundred rajivas[Pushkara and rajiva are different types of blue lotuses.]. They possess sixty white teeth and eight smaller
ones. They have many tongues and with these, they seem to lick the bright rays of the sun. They are devoted to the
god from whom all the people in the universe, the Vedas, dharma, the sages, the tranquil gods and all their offspring have been generated."

'Yudhishthira asked, "They do not possess senses. They do not eat. Their eyes do not blink and they emit fragrances. How were these men born? What is the supreme end that they attain? O supreme among the Bharata lineage! What are the signs of emancipation exhibited by the men who are the residents of Shvetadvipa? I have great
curiosity. Sever my doubt about this. You are the repository of all the accounts and we depend on you."

'Bhishma replied, "O king! This is an extensive account that I heard from my father. What I will tell you is regarded as the essence of all accounts. There used to be a king on earth, by the name of Uparichara. He was famous
as Akhandala's[Akhandala is Indra's name.] friend and was devoted to Hari Narayana. He was always devoted to dharma and always attentive towards his father. In ancient times, he obtained his kingdom as a boon from Narayana. Earlier, the satvata rituals had emerged from Surya's mouth[The satvata rituals are the pancharatra vows, observed over five nights.]. He first used these to worship the lord of the gods and then used the
remnants to worship the grandfather[He first worshipped Narayana. With the leftovers, he worshipped Brahma.]. With what remained, he first worshipped the ancestors and then divided up
the rest among brahmanas. He was truthful and only ate what remained thereafter. He did not cause injury to any
creature. In every kind of way, he was faithful to Janardana, the god of the gods. O destroyer of enemies! His devotion to Narayana was great. Because of this, Shakra, the king of the gods, shared his own bed and his own seat
with him. He[Uparichara.] regarded his own self, his kingdom, his riches, his wives and his mounts as having been obtained
from the illustrious one[Narayana.] and offered all these to him. He desired to perform many sacrifices and excellent rites.
Following the satvata rituals, he observed all of these. In the great-souled one's household, there were many foremost ones who knew about the pancharatra rites and instructed by the illustrious one, they generally ate before all
the others[Uparichara instructed that these brahmanas should be fed first.]. Thus, the slayer of enemies followed dharma and ruled his kingdom. He did not speak any falsehood
and there were no wicked thoughts in his mind. Nor did he perform any exceedingly wicked deeds.

'"Marichi, Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and Vasishtha-these seven extremely energetic sages were
known as the Chitrashikhandins[Saptarshis, Chitrashikhandin are names used for Ursa Major.]. The Chitrashikhandins came together and prepared an excellent sacred text.
They were like seven Prakritis and Svayambhu was the eighth. The sacred text that emerged from their mouths is
studied by all the worlds. Those sages were single-minded in their attention, devoted to restraint and self-control.

'This is the best. This is the brahman. This constitutes the greatest welfare.' Thinking about the worlds in this way,
they created the sacred text. This speaks about dharma, artha and kama. Later, it also speaks about moksha. It prescribes the many kinds of ordinances that heaven and earth should resort to. Together, all those rishis performed
austerities and worshipped the lord god, Hari Narayana, for one thousand celestial years. For the welfare of the
worlds, instructed by Narayana, the goddess Sarasvati entered all those rishis. That is the reason those brahmanas
could engage so well in the composition of that first creation-full of words, meanings and reasons. Right at the
beginning, the sacred text was ornamented with the syllable 'Om'. The rishis first recited it at the spot where the
compassionate one[Narayana.]  was. The illustrious Purushottama was  pleased. Unseen  by  the rishis and in an invisible
voice, he instructed them, 'You have composed one hundred thousand excellent shlokas. So that dharma is observed, everything in the worlds will flow from this. Notions of pravritti and nivritti will be generated from this, so
will Rig, Sama, Yajur and Atharva of Angiras[The Atharva Veda is believed to have been compiled by Angiras.]. As proof of this, I have created Brahma through my favours,
Rudra from my anger, all of you brahmanas from my nature, the sun, the moon, the wind, the earth, the water, the
fire, the large number of nakshatras and everything that is known as a creature. Those who speak about the brahman are regarded as authorities. In that fashion, all proof will be found in this excellent sacred text. It is my instruction that this will be taken to be proof. Based on this, Svayambhuva Manu will himself promulgate dharma.
When Ushanas[Shukracharya.] and Brihaspati are born in the future, they will also base their instructions on this sacred text.
The worlds will think of this as the sacred texts on dharma prepared by Svayambhuva, Ushanas and the intelligent
Brihaspati. O supreme among brahmanas! King Vasu[Uparichara.] will obtain the sacred text prepared by you from Brihaspati. That king will think about me and be devoted to me. All the rites in the worlds will be performed in accordance with that sacred text. Among all the sacred texts, this sacred text will be known as the best. Artha, dharma
and supreme fame will be based on this. Having propounded it, you will have offspring. The great King Vasu will
also be prosperous. This eternal sacred text will exist as long as that king is there, but will disappear after that. I am
telling you this truthfully.' Having said this in that invisible voice, Purushottama left the rishis. As they wished,
they too left for the different directions. Thus, those ancestors of the worlds[The rishis.] thought about the welfare of the
worlds and compiled that sacred text. It is the eternal source of all dharma. When Brihaspati was born in the lineage of Angiras in the first yuga, he established that sacred text, with the Vedangas and the Upanishads. The upholders of all the worlds[The original rishis.], the propounders of all kinds of dharma, left for their desired destinations, having determined to perform austerities."'
