'Gandhari said, "The one from Avanti was brought down by Bhimasena[This doesn't quite fit. The famous ones from Avanti were Vinda and
Anuvinda. However, they were killed by Arjuna, not Bhima. There was
no famous warrior from Avanti who was killed by Bhima.]. Though he had many relatives, he is
like one without relatives, and is being devoured by vultures and jackals. O Madhusudana! Look at him. He created great carnage among the enemy. Covered with blood, he is lying down on a bed meant for heroes. Behold the
progress of time. Jackals, herons and carnivorous beasts are separately tugging at him. The brave one advanced in
the battle and is lying down on a bed meant for heroes. The women from Avanti have surrounded him and are
weeping.

'"Pratipa's son, the great archer, Bahlika, has been slain by a broad-headed arrow. O Krishna! Look at the spirited one. He is like a sleeping tiger. Though he has been slain, the complexion of his face is extremely radiant. It is
like the full moon that has arisen on the night of the full moon.

'"Vriddhakshatra's son was brought down in the battle by the son of the chastiser of Paka[The chastiser of Paka is Indra and Indra's son is Arjuna. Vriddhakshatra's
son is Jayadratha.]. He was tormented
by sorrow on account of his son and was accomplishing the pledge that he had made[This is a reference to Arjuna's vow, made when Abhimanyu was killed.], ensuring that it came true.
Look at Jayadratha, who has been slain. Though he was protected, the great-souled one defeated eleven armies[Arjuna defeated the eleven Kourava akshouhinis.].
The spirited one was full of insolence and was the lord of Sindhu and Souvira. O Janardana! Jackals and vultures
are devouring Jayadratha. They are howling and are dragging him into deep hollows. The women from Sindhu,
Souvira, Gandhara, Kamboja and yavanas[Identified with Greeks, Ionians.] have surrounded the mighty-armed one and are trying to save him. O
Janardana! Jayadratha should have been killed by the Pandus when he seized Krishna[Krishnaa, Droupadi. Jayadratha's abduction of Droupadi has been described in Section 42 (Volume 3).] and ran away, together
with the Kekayas. Out of respect for Duhshala[Jayadratha's wife, Duryodhana's sister.], they released Jayadratha then. O Krishna! In that case, why did
they not show her respect again? She is my young daughter and is lamenting in great grief. She is trying to kill herself and is censuring the Pandavas. O Krishna! What can be a great misery for me than this? My young daughter
has become a widow and the husbands of my daughters-in-law have been killed. Alas! Shame! Look at Duhshala.
She seems to be without sorrow and fear. Searching for her husband's head, she is running hither and thither. He
restrained all the Pandavas, when they looked for their son[When Abhimanyu penetrated the formation, Jayadratha guarded the entry
and prevented the Pandavas (Arjuna was away) from entering. This has
been described in Section 67 (Volume 6).]. He slew a large number of soldiers and has himself
come under the subjugation of death. The brave one was extremely difficult to defeat and was like a crazy elephant. The women, with faces like the moon, have surrounded him and are weeping."'
