Vaishampayana said, 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When all the kings had assembled, Shantanu's son,
Bhishma, spoke these words to Duryodhana. "Once, Brihaspati and Ushanas[Shukracharya.] presented themselves before Brahma. So did Indra with the Maruts, the Vasus, the Ashvins, the Adityas, the Sadhyas, the celestial saptarshis, the
gandharva Vishvavasu and the masses of beautiful apsaras. They bowed in obeisance before the ancient grandfather of the worlds. The denizens of heaven surrounded the lord of the universe. Then the ancient gods, the two
rishis Nara and Narayana, departed-as if drawing out the minds and energy of the residents of heaven. Brihaspati
asked Brahma, 'O grandfather! Who are these two? Tell us. They do not worship you.' Brahma replied, 'These two
ascetics illuminate heaven and earth. They are blazing and resplendent, pervasive and extremely strong. They are
Nara and Narayana, who travel from one world to another world. Because of the fruits of their austerities, they
possess great energy and valour. Through their deeds, these two certainly bring delight to the worlds. They are
worshipped by the gods and the gandharvas, for the destruction of the asuras.' Having heard this, together with the
masses of all the gods, with Brihaspati at the forefront, Shakra went to the place where these two were performing
their austerities. At that time, the residents of heaven were terrified because of the war between the gods and the
asuras. They desired a boon from the great-souled Nara and Narayana. O supreme among the Bharata lineage!
They asked Shakra to choose a boon. When he asked for their help, they told Shakra that they would act according
to his wishes. With their help, Shakra conquered the daityas and the danavas. In a battle for Indra's cause, Nara,
the scorcher of enemies, killed hundreds and thousands of his enemies, the Poulamas and the Kalakhanjas[This has been described in Section 35 (Volume 3). However, there is no mention of Jambha there. Jambha was a
demon killed by Vishnu.]. Stationed on a chariot that whirled around in the field of battle, Arjuna used his arrows to kill Jambha, who was ready
to swallow the sacrifice. He penetrated Hiranyapura, which was on the other side of the ocean, after vanquishing
sixty thousand Nivatakavachas in battle. This scorcher of enemy cities has vanquished the gods, together with Indra. The mighty-armed Arjuna satisfied the god of fire[This has been described in Section 19 (Volume 2).]. In the same way, Narayana killed many others in that battle. Behold! These two immensely valorous ones have arrived as the maharatha warriors Vasudeva and Arjuna. It is
said that they are the ancient gods Nara and Narayana. They are invincible in the world of men, and even against
Indra, the gods and the asuras. It is said that Narayana is Krishna and Phalguna[Arjuna.] is Nara. Narayana and Nara are
one being, but have been divided into two. They have earned eternal and indestructible worlds because of their
deeds. When the time for war has arrived, they are repeatedly born there and here. This is the task that they have to
perform. That is what Narada, knowledgeable about the Vedas, told the assembled circle of the Vrishnis. O Duryodhana! O son[The word used is tata.]! When you see Keshava with the conch shell, chakra and club in his hands, the terrible archer Arjuna grasping his weapons, and the two eternal and great-souled Krishnas[Krishna is also one of Arjuna's names.] stationed on a single chariot, you will
then remember my words. Why else has this destruction of the Kurus presented itself? O son[The word used is tata.]! Your intelligence
has turned away from dharma and artha. If you do not heed my words, you will hear that many have been killed.
All the Kurus pay attention to your inclinations alone. O bull among the Bharata lineage! You follow the instructions of only three people-the low-born son of a suta, Karna, who was cursed by Rama[Parashurama. Karna studied under Parashurama, pretending to be a brahmana, and was cursed by Parashurama
when the deception was found out.]; Shakuni Soubala; and
your mean and wicked brother Duhshasana."

'Karna replied, "O grandfather! You have lived for a long time. You should not speak in this way. I have been
established in the dharma of kshatriyas and have not given up my own dharma. What is the evil conduct for which
you are censuring me? The sons of Dhritarashtra know that there is no sin in me. Instead, in every deed, I have
sought to please King Dhritarashtra and Duryodhana, because he is the one who rules the kingdom."'

Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing Karna's words, Shantanu's son, Bhishma, again spoke to the great king Dhritarashtra. "He always speaks about killing the Pandavas. But he is not a sixteenth part[A kala, sixteen kalas constitute a whole.] of the great-souled Pandavas. Know that the calamity that is about to confront your evil-souled sons is the work of this evil-minded son of
a suta. Your evil-minded son Suyodhana depends on him. He ignores those brave sons of the gods, the destroyers
of enemies[The Pandavas.]. What extremely difficult task has he[Karna.] accomplished in the past that can rival any one deed accomplished by any one of the Pandavas earlier? In Virata's city, he saw his own beloved brother killed through
Dhananjaya's valour[This has been recounted in Section 47.]. What did he do then? Dhananjaya attacked all the Kurus together, defeated them and won
back the cattle. Was he not there then? In the expedition over the cattle, your son was captured by the
gandharvas[This has been recounted in Section 39 (Volume 3).]. The son of a suta is behaving like a bull now. Where was he then? Wasn't it Partha and the great-
souled Bhima, together with the twins, who defeated the gandharvas then? O bull among the Bharata lineage! O
fortunate one! He is deficient in dharma and artha and has always spoken many such falsehoods." When the great-
souled Bharadvaja[Drona.] heard Bhishma's words, he showed his respects to Dhritarashtra in the midst of those kings
and said, "O king! O best of the Bharata lineage! Act in accordance with what Bhishma has said. You should not
follow the advice of those who are greedy for kama and artha. Before embarking on a battle, I think that we should
negotiate with the Pandavas. I know that Pandava Arjuna will do everything that he has spoken in the words reported by Sanjaya. There is no archer who is his equal in the three worlds." But ignoring the superior words spoken by Bhishma and Drona, the king asked Sanjaya about the Pandavas. When the king did not properly answer
Bhishma and Drona, all the Kurus lost any hope of remaining alive then.'
