'Sanjaya said, "On hearing these words of the great-souled Keshava, Subhadra was extremely miserable and
lamented, because of grief over her son. 'Alas, my son! I am unfortunate! You were equal to your father in valour.
O son! Having gone forth to fight, how could you have been slain? Your face was as dark as a blue lotus[Indivara.]. It possessed beautiful teeth and beautiful eyes. O son! It is now seen to be covered with the dust raised by battle. You
were brave and did not retreat from battle. You possessed an excellent head, neck and arms. Your chest was broad.
Your stomach was flat. All your limbs were decorated with ornaments. You possessed excellent eyes. You are now
mangled with wounds from weapons. On seeing you fall, there is no doubt that all the beings are glancing at you,
as if at a rising moon. Earlier, your bed used to be covered with white and expensive sheets. You were used to happiness. Pierced by arrows, how can you sleep on the bare ground now? The brave and mighty-armed one used to
be served by supreme women earlier. How can he now have been brought down on the field of battle, served by
jackals? Earlier, you used to be delighted by bards, raconteurs and minstrels. You are now served by masses of carnivorous and fierce creatures that are howling. O lord! You had the Pandavas and the brave Vrishnis as your protectors. There were also the brave Panchalas. How could you have been slain, like one without a protector? O son!
O unblemished one! I have not been satisfied from looking at you. I am wretched. It is evident that I will have to
go to Yama's eternal abode now. You possessed large eyes. The tips of your hair were excellent. Your words were
pleasant and fragrant. Your face was without any blemishes. O son! When will I see it again? Shame on Bhimasena. Shame on Partha, supreme among archers. Shame on the valour of the brave Vrishnis. Shame on the strength of
the Panchalas. Shame on the Kekayas, the Chedis, the Matsyas and the Srinjayas. When you went to fight, they did
not know how to prevent the fall of the brave one. Today, I see the earth to be empty, bereft of its beauty. Without
being able to see Abhimanyu, my eyes are full of sorrow. You were the son of Vasudeva's sister and that of the
wielder of Gandiva. O brave one! How can I see you bereft of your chariot, and brought down by others? Alas,
brave one! You are like riches seen in a dream, which have been destroyed now. Man is transient, as temporary as
a bubble in water. This is your young wife. She is overcome with grief on your account. How will I comfort her? I
am myself like a cow that has lost her calf. O son! You have left me at a wrong time, when you were about to accomplish great things. You have departed without reaping the fruits. I am yearning to see you. There is no doubt
that the ways of destiny are extremely difficult to fathom, even by those who are wise. You had Keshava as your
protector. But in the battle, you were like one without a protector. There are those who perform sacrifices, donate
and are of good conduct. There are brahmanas who control their souls. There are those who follow brahmacharya
and bathe in sacred places of pilgrimage. There are those who are grateful and generous. There are those who serve
their preceptors. There are those who give a thousand dakshinas. All these attain their ends. These ends are obtained by brave ones who fight without retreating. These ends are obtained by brave ones who are slain on the field
of battle. May you attain those ends. There are ends obtained by those who donate a thousand cows or perform
sacrifices with donations. There are ends for those who give away acceptable houses as gifts. May those ends be
yours. Sages, rigid in their vows, attain ends through brahmacharya. There are ends for women with a single husband. O son! Go to those ends. Kings with good conduct attain eternal ends and those who purify and protect
themselves and follow the four sacred ashramas in due order[The four stages (ashrama) of life followed in due sequence-brahmacharya (celibate stage when one is a student), garhasthya (householder stage), vanaprastha (dwelling in the forest) and sannyasa (renunciation).]. There are those who are always compassionate
towards the miserable and divide everything equally[Without taking the entire share alone, such as dividing it among gods, ancestors, guests and dependents.]. They refrain from wicked tendencies. O son! May you attain those ends. There are those who follow good conduct and observe dharma. There are those who serve their seniors and do not leave their guests dissatisfied. O son! May you go to those ends. Intelligent ones have intercourse
with their own wives at the right season. They do not serve the wives of others. O son! May you go to those ends.
There are those who look on all beings peacefully. They are devoid of malice and attain ends. There are those who
do not cause injury and forgive. They attain ends. There are those who abstain from liquor, meat, vanity and falsehood and those who do not cause pain to others. O son! May you attain those ends. There are those who are modest and learned in all the sacred texts. They are satisfied and have controlled their senses. There are ends obtained
by those who are righteous. O son! May you attain those ends.' Distressed and overcome by sorrow, Subhadra
lamented in this way.

'"At this time, Panchali and Virata's daughter arrived there[Droupadi and Uttara respectively.]. They wept a lot and lamented in great misery. O
king! They were mad with grief and fell down on the ground, bereft of their senses. Krishna was himself extremely
miserable. But he sprinkled water on them and spoke these beneficial words, when they had regained their senses,
but were still lamenting and weeping. Pundarikaksha[Arjuna.] spoke these words to his sister. 'O Subhadra! Do not sorrow. O Panchali! Comfort Uttara. Abhimanyu, bull among the kshatriyas, has attained an objective that is extremely desired. O ones with beautiful faces! Let other virtuous ones from our lineage also attain that. All of us will go
to the end that the illustrious Abhimanyu has achieved. All of us, with all our well-wishers, wish to accomplish the
kind of deed that he has achieved. Your son, the maharatha, has accomplished this alone.' Having comforted his
sister, Droupadi and Uttara in this way, the mighty-armed scorcher of enemies returned to Partha's side. O king!
Krishna and the lord[The lotus-eyed, Krishna's name.] took the permission of the kings and the relatives and retired to their inner quarters. The
others also went to their own abodes."'
