Vaishampayana said, 'O, unblemished one! With Chitrangada killed when his brother was still a child, Bhishma
ruled over the kingdom. He was always obedient to Satyavati. When he saw that his brother had become an adult,
Bhishma, that supreme among intelligent ones, thought about marrying Vichitravirya off. O king! Bhishma heard
that the three daughters of the king of Kashi, all equal to apsaras, would be married through a svayamvara. With
his mother's permission, the best of charioteers wore his armour and with a single chariot, set out for the city of
Varanasi.

'There Shantanu's son Bhishma saw the three ladies and the prosperous kings who had come from all directions.
O king! When the names of all the thousands of kings were being recounted, the lord Bhishma himself arrived
there. O king! Raising the ladies onto his chariot, Bhishma, supreme among warriors, addressed the kings in a
voice that was like thunder. "The learned have said that daughters may be given to virtuous men who have been
invited, with ornaments, depending on one's power. Others can give after accepting riches[That is, through a system of bride price being paid.], others after accepting a couple of cows. Some give their daughters after accepting a price. Others take them away by force. Some
women are taken involuntarily. Others are married with their consent. This is the eighth form of marriage, svayamvara, which learned ones remember and kings praise[The eight forms of marriage actually are brahma, daiva, arsha, prajapatya, asura, gandharva, rakshasa and
paishacha.]. However, those who know dharma have said that the
bride who is taken away by force is the best. O rulers of the earth! I am therefore taking these maidens away by
force. Use all your strength to try and defeat me, or be defeated instead. O lords of the earth! I am standing here,
resolved to do battle." Challenging the kings and the king of Kashi in this way, the valorous Kourava raised the
maidens onto his chariot and inviting them to fight, swiftly drove off with the maidens.

'All the kings arose in great anger, slapping their arms and grinding their teeth. They quickly cast off their ornmaments and donned their armour, creating a great uproar. O Janamejaya! The radiant ornaments and armour resembled shooting stars. Their brows were contracted and their faces red with anger. The ornaments and armour
dangled, as the brave ones dashed towards the chariots the charioteers had brought, yoked with excellent horses.
Armed with all kinds of weapons, they ascended the chariots and went in pursuit of the Kourava, who was in a
solitary chariot. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Then the hair-raising battle between the one and the many
occurred. The kings hurled 10,000 arrows at him at the same time. However, before they could reach, Bhishma
sliced all of them off. Then all the kings surrounded him from all directions and rained arrows down on him, like a
mountain being showered with clouds of rain. But he stopped all the showers of arrows with his own and pierced
each of the kings with three arrows. Such was the charioteer's skill in defending himself in battle, as compared to
that of other men, that his enemies applauded him. Having defeated all of them in battle, the one who was supreme
among those who were skilled in arms, the descendant of the Bharata lineage, left with maidens for the land of the
Bharatas.

'Then, in the battle, the maharatha King Shalva, whose spirit was indomitable, struck Shantanu's son Bhishma
from the back. He was like a bull elephant that was the leader of its herd, using its tusks to attack a rival from the
rear, when it was mounting a cow elephant in heat. The king told Bhishma, "Stay, stay." The mighty-armed King
Shalva was driven by his anger. Bhishma, tiger among men and destroyer of enemy armies, was angered at these
words. Blazing like a fire that was without smoke, he followed the dharma of Kshatriyas and without any signs of
fear, the maharatha turned his chariot towards Shalva. On seeing him turn, all the other kings wished to witness the
duel between Bhishma and Shalva. Like two powerful and raging bulls fighting over a cow in heat, the two turned
on each other with great strength. King Shalva, best among men, covered Shantanu's son Bhishma with hundreds
and thousands of swift arrows. On seeing that Shalva had first covered Bhishma, the assembled kings were astounded and exclaimed, "Blessed, blessed." All the kings saw his dexterity in battle and delightedly applauded
King Shalva. Hearing the shouts of the Kshatriyas, Shantanu's son Bhishma, the conqueror of hostile cities, was
incensed and cried, "Stay, stay." He angrily commanded his charioteer, "Drive up to that king. I will instantly kill
him, the way the king of birds[Garuda.] kills a snake." O lord of men! The Kourava then attached the varuna weapon to
his bow and used it to wound King Shalva's four horses. O tiger among men! The Kourava used his weapons to
fend off all of King Shalva's weapons and used a single arrow to kill his charioteer and with another weapon, he
killed the excellent horses. For the sake of the maidens, Shantanu's son Bhishma defeated that supreme among
kings, but let him off with his life. O bull among the Bharatas! Thereupon, Shalva left for his own city. O conqueror of enemy cities! The kings who had come to witness the svayamvara also departed for their own kingdoms.

'Bhishma, supreme among those who wielded arms, thus won the maidens and left for Hastinapura, where the
king of the Kouravas[Vichitravirya.] was. O king! Within a short time, the valorous one who killed innumerable men in battle
but was himself never hurt, passed many forests, rivers and mountains with trees in them. The great-souled son of
the one who goes into the ocean[Ganga.] took care of the daughters of the king of Kashi like daughters-in-law, younger
sisters or daughters and brought them to the land of Kuru. Bhishma had brought the ones who had all the qualities
by force and gave them to his younger brother Vichitravirya. The one who was learned in dharma accomplished
this superhuman deed in accordance with dharma and began to make arrangements for his brother Vichitravirya's
marriage, following the consultation with Satyavati.

'When Bhishma was preparing for the wedding, the eldest daughter of the king of Kashi, one who was devoted
to the truth, came and told him, "I have earlier chosen the king of Soubha[Soubha is the name of the kingdom. The king's name is Shalva.] as my husband. Earlier, he has also
accepted me and this is my father's desire too. At the svayamvara, I would have chosen Shalva as my husband.
You know dharma well. Now knowing this, decide what the course of dharma entails." At these words of the maiden, spoken in an assembly of Brahmanas, the brave Bhishma began to think about what should be done. After consulting the Brahmanas, who were learned in the Vedas, the one who had knowledge about dharma, gave permission to Amba, the eldest daughter of the king of Kashi, to leave. In accordance with the prescribed rites, he then
gave the two others, Ambika and Ambalika, in marriage to his younger brother Vichitravirya.

'Vichitravirya had dharma in his soul. But when he had accepted their hands, since he was proud of his beauty
and youth, desire took over his soul. They were tall. Their heads were covered with blue-black hair that was
curled. Their nails were red and pointed. Their breasts and hips were heavy. They felt they had obtained a husband
who was their equal in beauty and the fortunate ones worshipped Vichitravirya. He matched the Ashvins in beauty
and was the equal of the gods in his prowess. He was capable of stirring the hearts of all women. The lord of the
earth pleasured with his wives for seven years. Though young, he was then attacked by consumption. His friends
consulted physicians to try and find a cure. But like the setting sun, the Kourava went to Yama's abode. In accordance with Satyavati's wishes, Bhishma, together with the priests and the chiefs among the Kurus, performed the
funeral rites for King Vichitravirya.'
