'Vidura said, "On being addressed by righteous men, if a man acts without success in mind and without transgressing his capacity, then he quickly finds fame. When they are gratified, righteous ones can bring about happiness. He
who gives up a great objective that is tainted with adharma, without being induced, sleeps in peace and discards all
his unhappiness, like a snake that casts off old skin. Falsehood by the superior, treachery towards a king and constant falsehood before a preceptor-these are equal to slaying a brahmana. Even the slightest bit of jealousy, death
and discord destroy prosperity. Lack of servitude, haste, boastfulness-these are the three weapons that destroy
learning. How can a person who seeks happiness find learning? How can a person who seeks learning find happiness? A person who seeks happiness should give up learning. A person who seeks learning should give up happiness. Fire is never satiated with wood. The great ocean is never satiated with rivers. Death is never satiated with all
the beings. A woman with beautiful eyes is never satiated with men. Hope destroys steadfastness. Death destroys
prosperity. Anger destroys riches. Miserliness destroys fame. Failure to tend destroys animals. O king! Even one
single angry brahmana destroys a kingdom. A goat, brass, a chariot, honey, antidotes[To poison.], a bird, a learned
brahmana[Shrotriya.], an aged relative and a friend who faces adversity-these must always be kept in the house. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Manu[This is clearly a reference to Manu Smriti, ascribed to Svayambhuva Manu. Manu Smriti is the most important
of the Dharmashastra texts.] has said that for the sake of good fortune, a goat, an ox, sandalwood, a veena,
a mirror, honey, butter, iron, copper[The word used is udumbara. This has different meanings, including the name of a tree and its wood, the threshold of a house and copper. Copper seems to be the most appropriate.], a conch shell, gold, the nave of a wheel and yellow pigment for honouring
gods, brahmanas and guests must be kept in a household. O father[The word used is tata.]! I am telling you all these supreme and sacred
words that are extremely special. Do not give up dharma out of desire, fear, greed, or even for the sake of life itself. Dharma is eternal. Happiness and unhappiness are transient. Life is eternal. Its constituent elements are transient[The cycles, the ups and the downs.]. Give up the transient and establish yourself in the eternal. Be content. Contentment is the supreme gain.

'"Behold the immensely fortunate Indras among men who possessed great strength. After ruling the earth, full
of grain and riches, they gave up their kingdoms and extensive objects of desire and came under the power of
death. O king! People raise and take out of the house a son, reared with difficulty, who has been killed. Their hair
is dishevelled and they lament piteously. They fling him into the midst of the funeral pyre, like a piece of wood.
Once a person is dead, another person enjoys the riches, just as crows[Alternatively, birds in general. Since dead bodies are being talked about, crows are more appropriate.] and the fire consume the elements of the
body. Surrounded by two things, merits and demerits, one goes to the other world. After casting it[The body.] away, relatives, well-wishers and sons return. But for the man who has been flung into the fire, his own deeds follow him.
Above this world, and below the next, there is the greatest expanse of darkness. O king! Know that the senses are
greatly deluded there. May you not attain it. After listening to these words, if you follow them entirely, you will
obtain supreme fame in this world of the living and you will confront no fear, here or in the hereafter. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The soul is a river. Purity represents its tirthas. Truthfulness is its water. Steadfastness
constitutes the banks. Self-control represents the waves. Bathing in these, a performer of pure deeds purifies himself. The soul becomes pure and is like water in the eternal waters. There is a river in which the five senses are the
water and desire and anger are the crocodiles. Make a boat out of steadfastness and cross the difficult eddies of repeated birth. After due honours, one who asks the counsel of his relatives who are aged in wisdom, aged in dharma, aged in learning and years, and follows them about what should be done and what should not be done, is never
deluded. Protect your penis and stomach with steadfastness, the hands and the feet with the eyes, the eyes and the
ears with the mind and the mind and speech with deeds. A brahmana who is always attached to ablutions, always
dons the sacred thread, always studies, avoids food offered by outcasts[Alternatively, avoids food that has fallen down on the ground.], speaks the truth and follows the tasks instructed by the preceptor-is never dislodged from Brahma's world. A kshatriya who studies the Vedas, offers
oblations to the fire, performs sacrifices, protects the subjects, wields weapons for the sake of cattle and brahmanas, purifies his soul and is killed in battle-goes to heaven. A vaishya who studies, distributes his wealth at the
right time to brahmanas, kshatriyas and those who are dependent on him and inhales the sacred smoke of the three
pure fires[The three sacrificial fires-garhapatya, ahavaniya and dakshina.]-obtains divine happiness in heaven after death. A shudra who shows homage in due order to brahmana, kshatriya and vaishya classes[The word used is varna.] and satisfies them-enjoys happiness in heaven after he has given up his
body, because his sins are burnt up. I have told you about the dharma of the four varnas. Listen to the reason why I
have told you this. O king! Pandu's son[Yudhishthira.] is falling short of the dharma of kshatriyas. You should instruct him to
follow the dharma of kings."

'Dhritarashtra replied, "This is just as you have always been instructing me. O amiable one! My mind also turns
towards that which you have told me. My inclination has always been to turn towards the Pandavas. But whenever
I meet Duryodhana, it turns in a contrary direction. No mortal one is capable of transgressing destiny. I think that
destiny is the one who acts and human endeavour is futile."'
