Vaishampayana said, 'Pritha's two illustrious sons went to the potter's house and to Pritha. With happiness in their
hearts, those chiefs among men presented Yajnaseni and said, "See what alms we have got." She was inside the
house and without seeing her sons, replied, "Share it together." Later, Kunti saw the lady and was miserable at
what she had said.

'She was anxious not to commit adharma and began to think about what might be done. She took the happy Yajnaseni by the hand and went to Yudhishthira and said, "This daughter of Drupada was presented to me as 'alms'

your younger brothers had obtained. O king! O son! As I am in the habit of doing, but in ignorance, I said what I
thought was proper, 'Share it together.' O bull among the Kurus! Now tell me how those instructions of mine don't
become a lie. How can the Panchala king's daughter not be touched by adharma, committing that which hasn't
been done before?" Having been thus addressed by his mother, the wise king Yudhishthira, chief among the Kurus,
sat for a while and thought.

'He consoled Kunti and spoke to Dhananjaya. "O Pandava! You are the one who won Yajnaseni. It is proper that
you should make this princess happy. Let the sacred fire be lit and offerings made. You should marry her in accordance with the proper rites." Arjuna said, "O king of men! Since this is not the law that others accept, do not make
me tread this path of adharma. You should marry her first, followed by the mighty-armed Bhima of wonderful
deeds, then I, then Nakula after me and finally the energetic Sahadeva. O king! Vrikodara, I and the twins think
that the lady should be yours. This is the state of affairs. After reflecting on it, please do what is appropriate, in accordance with dharma and fame and the welfare of the king of Panchala. Instruct us. We are all waiting for your
command." Then they all looked at the illustrious Krishna who was standing there. They looked at each other and
sat down, her image in their hearts.

'When those immensely radiant ones looked at Droupadi, their love for her arose and put their senses into turmoil. Panchali's charming form was created by the creator himself. It beguiled all living beings and was supreme
to all others. Kunti's son Yudhishthira knew from their appearance what was going through their minds. O bull
among men! He remembered Dvaipayana's words. Fearing that conflict might arise between the brothers, the king
said, "This fortunate Droupadi will be a wife to all of us."'
