Yudhishthira said, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! O immensely wise one! Visiting the tirthas, bathing in them
and hearing about them is said to be superior. I desire to hear the truth about this. You should tell me about all
the sacred tirthas on earth. O lord! I have controlled myself and wish to hear about them."

'Bhishma replied, "O immensely radiant one! Angiras spoke about a listing of all the tirthas. O fortunate
one! Listen to that and you will obtain supreme dharma. The brave Goutama, rigid in his vows, went to the hermitage of the brahmana and great sage, Angiras, and asked him.'O illustrious one! I have a doubt about which of
the tirthas bring dharma. I wish to hear about all of them. O great sage! Instruct me. O sage! What fruits are obtained by bathing in the waters of these tirthas? What does one get after death? O immensely wise one! Tell me the
truth about this.'

'"Angiras said, 'If one fasts for a week and bathes in the waters of the Chandrabhaga or the Vitasta[Respectively Chenab and Jhelum.], which
has garlands of waves, then one loses all sense of ego and becomes like a sage. In the circle of rivers that flow
through Kashmira, there are many great rivers that flow into the river known as Sindhu[Indus.]. If one bathes there, one
obtains good conduct and goes to heaven. If one bathes in Pushkara, Prabhasa, Naimisha, the waters of the ocean,
Devika, Indramarga and Svarnavindu, know that one then ascends a vimana and is served by apsaras[Pushkara is in Rajasthan, Prabhasa is in Gujarat, by Naimisha one probably means the waters of the Gomati,
Devika is in Udhampur, Indramarga and Svarnavindu (also known as Suvarnavindu) are rivers in Kashmir. The
identification of most of these is difficult.]. If one restrains one's agitation and reverentially bathes in Hiranyavindu, Kusheshaya and Devatva, one is cleansed from all
sins. If a man controls and purifies himself and then approaches and bathes in Indratoya, which is near Gandhamadana, and in Karatoya, which is in Kuranga, after having fasted for three nights, he obtains the fruits of a
horse sacrifice. If one bathes in Gangadvara, Kushavarta, Vilvaka, which is in the Nemi mountains, and in Kankhala[All these places are near Haridwar, Uttarakhand.], one is cleansed of sins and goes to heaven. If a person is a brahmachari, conquers his anger, is devoted to the
truth and is non-violent, and if he bathes in the lake known as Apa, he obtains the fruits of a vajapeya sacrifice.
Bhagirathi Ganga flows in a northern direction, in a spot favoured by Maheshvara. If a man fasts for one month
and then bathes there, he can then see the gods themselves. However, even if a man worships at Sapta-Ganga, Tri-
Ganga and Indramarga and tastes the water there, he has to be born again[The rivers Ganga, Yamuna, Godavari, Sarasvati, Kaveri, Narmada and Sindhu are known as Sapta-Ganga. By
Tri-Ganga, one usually means Bhagirathi, Jahnavi and Alakananda.]. If a person observes agnihotra, purifies himself, fasts for one month and then bathes in Mahashrama, he obtains success within a month. If a person
frees himself from avarice, fasts for three nights and bathes in the great lake known as Bhrigutunga[This is probably Lake Bhrigu, in Kullu district of Himachal Pradesh.], he is freed
from the sin of having killed a brahmana. If one bathes in the waters of Kanyakupa and Balaka, one obtains fame
like that of the gods and blazes in that reknown. If a man bathes in the waters of Deshakala and in Lake Sundarika,
after death, he obtains beauty and radiance that is like that of the Ashvins. If one fasts for a fortnight and bathes in
Mahaganga and Krittikangaraka, one sparkles in heaven. If one bathes in Vaimanika and in the hermitage known
as Kinkinika, one obtains greatness and divinity, can roam as one wishes, and dwells with apsaras. If one conquers
anger, observes brahmacharya for three nights and bathes in the hermitage of Kalika, in the waters of Vipasha[River Beas.],
one is freed from rebirth. If one bathes in the hermitage of Krittika and worships the ancestors, one satisfies Mahadeva and obtains sparkling heaven. If a man fasts for three nights and bathes in Mahapura, he is freed from fear
of all immobile objects and also discards fear of bipeds. If a man purifies himself, fasts for seven nights and bathes
in the waters in the forest of Devadaru, he cleanses himself and obtains the world of the gods. If one bathes in the
waterfalls in Koushanta, Kushastamba and Dronasharmapada, one is served by large numbers of apsaras. If one
fasts and bathes in Chitrakuta, Janasthana[Chitrakuta is in Madhya Pradesh and Janasthana has been identified as Nashika (Maharashtra), the capital of the
Dandaka kingdom.] and in the waters of the Mandakini, one obtains royal prosperity. If
one goes to the hermitage known as Shyama, fasts and resides there for three nights and bathes there, one dwells in
the city of the gandharvas. If one fasts for one month and bathes in the beautiful waters of Gandhatarika, one obtains the powers of disappearing at will. If a man goes to Koushikidvara, casts aside all greed and survives only on
air for twenty-one nights, he ascends to heaven. If one bathes in Matanga, one becomes successful in a single
night. If one conquers one's senses and bathes in the eternal waters of Analamba, Andhaka, Naimisha or Svargatirtha, within one month, one obtains the fruits of purushamedha[Purushamedha is a sacrifice where human beings were sacrificed.]. If one bathes in the waters of Gangahrada
and Utpalavana for a month, one obtains the fruits of a horse sacrifice. If one bathes in the tirthas that are along the
Ganga and the Yamuna and in the sixty lakes that are in Mount Kalanjara[In the Bundelkhand region of Uttar Pradesh.], this is superior to all kinds of donations. O bull among the Bharata lineage! In the month of Magha, ten thousand tirthas and another thirty crore
tirthas assemble in Prayaga[Prayaga is the confluence of the Ganga and the Yamuna and is in Uttar Pradesh. Magha is January-February.
Bathing in Prayaga during the first half of Magha is believed to be extremely auspicious.]. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! If one is controlled, rigid in vows and
bathes in Prayaga in the month of Magha, one obtains sparkling heaven. If a man bathes in Marudgana, in the sacred hermitage of the ancestors and in the tirtha of Vaivasvata, he becomes like a tirtha himself. If one goes to
Brahmashira and bathes in the waters of the Bhagirathi, after having fasted for one month, one obtains the world of
the moon. If a man fasts for twelve days and bathes in the waters of Kapotaka and Ashtavakra, he obtains the fruits
of a human sacrifice. If one goes to Munjaprishtha, the divine mountain of Nirriti and Krouchapadi, all three of
which are in Gaya, one is freed from the sin of having killed a brahmana[Gaya is in Bihar The hills around Gaya were formed out of the body of a demon named Gayasura. Since Nirriti
means demon, that probably explains Mount Nirriti.]. If one bathes in Kalashya, know that
one will obtain a great deal of water. If a man bathes in the city of Agni, in the waters of Vishala and in Devahrada,
he becomes radiant and merges with the brahman. If a man is controlled and non-violent and bathes in Purapavartana, Nanda or Mahananda, he goes to Nandana[Indra's pleasure garden.] and is served by apsaras. At the conjunction of Urvashi and
Krittika, as is ordained, if one is self-controlled and bathes in the Lohitya, one obtains the fruits of a pundarika
sacrifice[Lohitya is the Brahmaputra. Krittika is a nakshatra. But what does the conjunction of Urvashi and Krittika
mean? While this is difficult to understand, urvashi also means wide.]. If one fasts for twelve days and bathes in Ramahrada and in the waters of Vishala, one is freed from
all sins. If a man purifies his mind and bathes in Mahahrada, fasting for one month, he obtains the end got by Jamadagni. If one is non-violent and devoted to the truth, tormenting oneself in Vindhya and standing on one foot for
six months, one will be purified within a month. If one fasts for a fortnight and bathes in the waters of Narmada
and Surparaka, one becomes a prince. If one goes to Jambumarga and is controlled and self-restrained for three
months, one obtains success within a single day and a single night. If one goes to the hermitage of Chandalika and
bathes  in  Kokamukha,  subsisting  on  vegetables  and  attired  in  rags,  one  obtains  ten  maidens.  If  one  resides  in
Kanyahrada, one goes to the world of the gods and never goes to Vaivasvata's[Yama's.] abode. O mighty-armed one! If a
man is controlled and bathes in Prabhasa on the night of the new moon, when he is reborn, he obtains success
within a single night. If one bathes in Ujjanaka, in the hermitages of Arshtishena and Pinga, then, one is freed from
all sins. If one purifies oneself and fasts for three nights, bathing in the waters of Kulya and chanting the aghamarshana mantra, one obtains the fruits of a horse sacrifice. If a man fasts for one night and bathes in Pindaraka, then,
as soon as night is over, he is purified and obtains the fruits of an agnishtoma sacrifice. If one goes to Brahmasara,
adorned by the forest known as Dharmaranya, then, as soon as night is over, one is purified and obtains the fruits
of a pundarika sacrifice. If one bathes in Mount Mainaka for a month, performing the morning and evening prayers
and conquering desire, one then obtains the fruits of all sacrifices. The Himalayas are sacred and famous. They are
Shankara's father-in-law. They are a store of all jewels and are frequented by the siddhas and the charanas. There
may be a brahmana who knows about Vedanta and knows that life is transient. If he worships the gods, bows to the
sages and, following the prescribed rites, fasts and gives up his life there, he obtains divine success. He goes to
Brahma's eternal world. There may be a person who dwells in a tirtha, having given up desire, anger and avarice.
Since he has gone to a tirtha, there is nothing that he cannot obtain. Even if one wishes to go to all the tirthas, some
tirthas are inaccessible and difficult to reach. In that case, one should approach them mentally. They are like sacrifices. They make one fortunate. They yield divine bliss. It is a great secret that even the gods purify themselves by
bathing there. This secret can be divulged in the hearing of brahmanas, the virtuous, sons, well-wishers and devoted disciples."'

'Bhishma continued, "The great ascetic, Angiras, told Goutama about this, after having obtained the permission
of his preceptor, the intelligent Kashyapa[The text doesn't say this explicitly. But this is obviously Bhishma continuing.]. What the maharshi said is pure and supreme and should be chanted.
If one chants it when one wakes up, one is cleansed and obtains heaven. This mystery was obtained from Angiras.
If one hears it, one is born in an excellent lineage and remembers one's past life."'
