Vaishampayana said, 'King Duryodhana was intolerant and was still determined to fast to death. O king! Shakuni
Soubala spoke gently to him. "O Kourava! You have heard what Karna has told you and his words are right. Out of
delusion, why should you throw away the riches that I obtained for you? O supreme among kings! Like a foolish
one, why do you desire to give up your life? It seems to me that you have never visited the elders[Thus imbibing their wisdom.]. If one does
not control sudden happiness or unhappiness, even if one obtains prosperity, it is destroyed, like an unbaked vessel
in water. A king who is extremely timid, extremely impotent, procrastinating, absent-minded and addicted to the
senses-is not served by prosperity. You have been served by a good act. Why do you exhibit this contrary sentiment of sorrow? You should not destroy the good act of the Parthas by resorting to this sorrow. You should reward
the good act of the Pandavas by being happy. O Indra among kings! Instead, you are sorrowing and acting in a
contrary way. Be gracious and do not give up your life. Be satisfied and remember the good deed. Return the kingdom to the Parthas and earn fame and dharma. By performing this act, you will show your gratitude. Be fraternal
towards the Pandavas and give them their places again. You will be happy if you return the ancestral kingdom to
them." Having heard Shakuni's words, and glancing with brotherly affection at Duhshasana prostrate at his feet,
who was brave but was now acting timidly, he embraced Duhshasana, the scorcher of enemies, with his well-
formed arms and raised him. He lovingly smelt the fragrance of his head.

'King Duryodhana was already sorrowful. Having heard Karna and Soubala's words, he was overcome with
shame and became extremely despondent. Having heard his well-wishers, he angrily said, "I am no longer concerned with dharma, riches, friendship, prosperity or acts of pleasure. Do not be frustrated. Leave. I have made up
my mind that I will fast to death. All of you return to the city and show honour to my superiors." But they replied
to the king who was the destroyer of his enemies. "O Indra among kings! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The
path that you traverse is also ours. How can we return to the city without you?" He was addressed in many different ways by his well-wishers, advisers, brothers and relatives. But he had made up his mind and would not waver.
In accordance with his resolution, Dhritarashtra's son spread darbha on the ground[Darbha or kusha is a sacred grass.]. He purified himself by
touching water and sat down on the ground. He was attired in rags and a garment made of kusha and established
himself in the supreme rite. The tiger among kings maintained silence. He was desirous of going to heaven. He
controlled his mind and cut himself off from the external world.

'On learning of his resolve, the daityas and the danavas, the terrible denizens of the nether regions, who had earlier been defeated by the gods, knew that their own side would be weakened because of Duryodhana[Because of Duryodhana's decision. Duryodhana was born on earth to accomplish the tasks of the demons. If
he died through fasting, that purpose would not be accomplished.]. They performed a sacrifice so as to summon him. They were skilled in mantras and pronounced mantras uttered by Brihaspati and Ushanas. They performed the rites mentioned in the Atharva Veda and the Upanishads, those that were
capable of being performed through mantras and prayers. There were brahmanas who were learned in the Vedas
and the Vedangas and extremely firm in their vows. Extremely attentively, they uttered mantras and poured offerings of milk into the fire. When those rites were completed, Kritya arose from the fire[Kritya is a she-demon or a malevolent goddess.]. O king! She was extremely wonderful and had a gaping mouth. "What must I do?" she asked. Extremely happy in their souls, the daityas
told her, "The king who is Dhritarashtra's son is fasting to death. Bring him here." Thus commanded, Kritya
agreed that she would do this, and departed. In an instant, she went to where King Suyodhana was. She grasped the
king and entered the nether regions[Strictly speaking, rasatala. There are seven nether regions-atala, vitala, sutala, rasatala, talatala, mahatala
and patala.]. Within an instant, she brought him and handed him over to the danavas. On
seeing that the king had been brought, the danavas assembled at night. All of them were delighted in their minds
and their eyes were dilated in delight. They then spoke these proud words to Duryodhana.'
