Sanjaya said, "O great king! The kshatriyas wished to kill each other. They bore feelings of enmity towards each
other and slew each other in the battle. O great king! Large numbers of chariots, throngs of horses, masses of men
and numerous elephants clashed against each other in every direction. There were clubs, maces, kanapas[Unidentified weapon made out of iron.],
lances, catapults; and bhushundis[Unidentified weapon, probably something like a mallet that was tied to
a rope.] were seen to move everywhere. They descended in that extremely fierce battle. In every direction, showers of arrows descended like locusts. In the encounter, elephants clashed against elephants and killed each other. Horses clashed against horses, chariots against chariots, infantry against large numbers of infantry and large numbers of horses against horses. O king! In that encounter, foot soldiers, chariots, elephants, rathas, elephants, horses and elephants were seen to swiftly crush the other three kinds of forces[This shloka is not composed very well and there is repetition. The four
kinds of forces are elephants, horses, chariots and infantry. What is meant
is that each of these fought against the other three kinds of forces.]. The
brave foot soldiers roared at each other. That terrible encounter was like a sacrificial spot for animals. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Covered in blood, the earth was beautiful. It was as if the earth was covered by large
numbers of shakragopa insects during the monsoon[Shakragopas are cochineal insects, crimson in colour.]. The earth was as beautiful as a young lady[The word used is shyama. While the word also means dark, in this context, it means a lady who has not given birth, or is not married, and is
therefore a virgin. Therefore, we have used the word young.] dressed in
a white garment that had been dyed with saffron[Because of the blood.]. With the colourful flesh and blood, it seemed to be decorated
in gold. Heads, arms and thighs were severed. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Earrings and ornaments were
dislodged. Golden necklaces and armour were dislodged from the bodies of the archers. With large numbers of
flags, they fell down on the ground. Elephants engaged with elephants and gored each other with the tips of their
tusk. Wounded by the tusks, the elephants looked beautiful. Their limbs were covered with blood and they looked
like mobile mountains full of minerals, with red chalk flowing down their sides. The elephants destroyed many
lances hurled by their opponents, including those that were still held horizontally in the hands. With their armour
destroyed by iron arrows, those supreme elephants looked dazzling. O great king! They were like mountains deprived of clouds at the onset of winter. The best of elephants were pierced with gold-tufted arrows. O venerable
one! They looked like beautiful mountain tops, lit with torches. Some elephants, as large as mountains, were struck
by other elephants and fell down on the ground. They fell down in that battle, like mountains with wings[That is, with the wings lopped off. At one point, mountains were believed to have possessed wings.]. Other
elephants were struck by arrows and oppressed by their wounds. These fled. With their temples and frontal globes
shattered, they shrieked and fell down in that great battle. There were others that emitted terrible roars like lions. O
king! There were others that shrieked and ran hither and thither. Horses with golden harnesses and trappings were
killed by the arrows and weakened. They screamed and ran in the ten directions. Others that were afflicted and rendered unconscious, fell down on the ground. Oppressed by the arrows and javelins, they screamed in many different kinds of ways. O venerable one! Men were slain there. They screamed and fell down on the ground. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Others saw their relatives, fathers, grandfathers and others running away from the enemy. On seeing this, they called out the names of their lineages and their own names and summoned each other. O
great king! Bedecked with golden ornaments, their arms were severed and having fallen, or while falling down,
were immobile or writhed. Thousands of these fell down on the ground and quivered. In that battle, they quivered
powerfully, like serpents. O lord of the earth! Those arms were like the bodies of serpents, smeared with sandalwood. Drenched with blood, they were as beautiful as golden standards. A fierce encounter ensued in every direction. Without recognizing[Without being able to differentiate friend from foe.], they fought and killed each other. Because of that descent of weapons, the earth was
covered with dust. O king! Since everything was covered in darkness, one could not differentiate those on one's
own side from that of the enemy. A terrible and large river with currents of blood, fierce in form, was created there
and began to flow. The severed heads were like rocks. The hair constituted weeds and moss. It was full of the best
of bows and arrows and large numbers of bones. Flesh constituted the mud and mire. There were extremely terrible
currents of blood. The river that was created there extended Yama's kingdom. That river was fearsome in form and
conveyed them to Yama's abode. It generated fear in the minds of the kshatriyas who submerged and immersed
themselves in it. O tiger among men! Carnivorous beasts roared in various places there. That horrible field of battle
looked like the city of the lord of the dead[Yama.]. In every direction, large numbers of headless torsos were seen to
rise up. Satisified with the flesh and the blood, large numbers of demons danced around. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! They drank the blood there. They drank the marrow. Satiated with the fat and the marrow, crows,
vultures and smaller crows were seen to run around. O king! In that battle, the brave ones cast aside all fear,
though it is difficult to give that up. They resorted to the vow of warriors and performed their tasks without any
fear. There were large numbers of arrows and lances on the field of battle and it was infested with innumerable
predatory beasts. The brave ones roamed around there, displaying their manliness. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They made each other listen to their names and lineages. In the encounter, they recounted the names of their
fathers and their families. O lord of the earth! In diverse ways there, the warriors made others listen to these. They
attacked each other, with spears, javelins and battleaxes. An extremely terrible battle commenced, fearsome in
form. The Kourava army was weakened, like a shattered boat on the ocean." '
