'Sanjaya said, "In that battle, on seeing that Bhima was within the grasp of the rakshasa, Vasudeva spoke these
words to Ghatotkacha. 'O mighty-armed one! O immensely radiant one! Behold. Bhima is being devoured by the
rakshasa, while all the soldiers are looking on. Abandon Karna. O mighty-armed one! Quickly kill Alayaudha, Indra among the rakshasas. Kill Karna later.' Hearing Varshneya's words, the valiant one abandoned Karna. Ghatotkacha started to fight with the Indra among rakhasas, Baka's brother. In the night, there was an extremely tumultuous battle between the rakshasas. Alayudha's warriors were rakshasas, terrible in form. Those brave ones
grasped their bows and arrows and descended with force. As they advanced with their weapons, maharatha Yuyudhana, Nakula and Sahadeva cut them down with sharp arrows. O king! In that encounter, Kiriti Bibhatsu shot arrows in all directions and uprooted all the bulls among the kshatriyas. O king! In that encounter, Karna drove away
many kings-Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi and other Panchala maharathas. On seeing that they were being killed,
Bhima, terrible in valour, quickly advanced against Karna in that battle, showering arrows. Having killed the rakshasas, Nakula, Sahadeva and maharatha Satyaki also went to the spot where the son of a suta was. They fought
with Karna, and the Panchalas with Drona.

'"Alayudha struck Ghatotkacha, the scorcher of enemies, on the head with a large club. Having been thus struck,
Bhimasena's immensely strong son seemed to lose his senses somewhat. Having regained his senses, in that battle,
the valiant one hurled a club that was like the flaming fire. It was decorated with a hundred bells. It was decorated
with gold. Released with great force by the one whose deeds were terrible, it crushed the horses, charioteer and
chariot 251 that made a large noise. Resorting to maya, the rakshasa quickly leapt down from the chariot, whose
horses, charioteer, axle and yoke had been destroyed and shattered, not to speak of the chariot itself. He used maya
and showered down copious quantities of blood. The sky seemed to be covered with dark clouds that were tinged
with lightning. There was the sound of thunder and lightning. In that great battle, there were loud sounds of slapping and this caused fright. On seeing the maya created by the rakshasa, the rakshasa who was Hidimba's son rose
up and destroyed the maya with his own maya. On seeing that the maya was destroyed by maya, the one who used
maya showered down an extremely heavy downpour of stones on Ghatotkacha. The valiant one[Ghatotkacha.] dispelled that
terrible shower of stones with a shower of arrows in all the directions and it was wonderful. They showered down
many weapons on each other-iron clubs, spears, maces, bludgeons, mallets, tridents, swords, spikes, javelins,
kampanas, iron arrows, sharp broad-headed arrows, arrows, chakras, battleaxes, slabs of stone[Ayoguda.], catapults, the
horns of cattle and ulukhalas[Ulukhala is a stone mortar used for grinding spices.]. They uprooted the large branches of many kinds of trees and struck each other
with these-shami, pilu, karira, shamyaki, ingudi, badari, flowering kovidara, palasha, arimeda, plaksha, nyogradha and pippala[The shami tree is Prosopsis spicigera, a medicinal tree, commonly known as khejri or sangri. Pilu is Salvadora
persica, usually mentioned in conjunction with shami. Karira or karavira is Nerium indicum. It is not clear what
shamyaki is, probably some subspecies of shami. Ingudi is Balanites roxburghii. Badari is Zizyphus mauritania
or ber. Kovidara is Bauhinia variegeta or kachanar. Palasha and kimshuka are identical, Butea monosperma.
Arimeda is Acacia farnesiana. Plaksha is the sacred fig tree, Ficus religiosa. Nyogradha or nyagrodha is the
banyan, Ficus bengalensis. Pippala is the Indian long pepper, Piper longum.]. They used many kinds of mountain peaks, decorated with diverse kinds of minerals. There
was a mighty sound, like the clapping of thunder. O king! The terrible battle between Bhima's son and Alayudha
was like that between Hari and Indra and like that between Vali and Sugriva in ancient times. O king! They fought
with many different kinds of terrible weapons, such as arrows. They grasped sharp swords and struck each other
with these. Those extremely strong ones advanced and seized each other by the hair. O lord of men! Their bodies
were wounded and began to excrete sweat. Blood trickled down from the giant forms and it was as if it was raining
down on mountains. Hidimba's son advanced with great force. He picked up the rakshasa and flung him down with
great strength, severing the large head. That head, decorated with earrings, was severed. The extremely strong one
let out a mighty roar.

'"On seeing that Baka's relative, the scorcher of enemies with a giant body, had been slain, the Panchalas and
the Pandavas roared like lions. Thousands of battle drums and tens of thousands of conch shells were sounded by
the Pandaveyas, signifying that the rakshasa had been brought down. That night, with signs of their victory, became extremely resplendent. The garlands of lamps were as beautiful as lightning. Bhimasena's immensely strong
son took Alayudha's head and flung it down before Duryodhana, who was bereft of his senses. King Duryodhana
saw that Alayudha had been killed. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Together with his soldiers, he became extremely anxious. Remembering his earlier enmity, he[Alayudha.] had come to him on his own, promising to fight and kill
Bhimasena in the battle. The king had thought that his[Bhima's.] death was certain and that he and his brothers would live
for a long time. Having seen that he[Alayudha.] had been killed by Bhimasena's son, he thought that Bhimasena's
pledge[About killing Duryodhana and his brothers.] had already been fulfilled."'
