'Varga said, "O supreme among those of the Bharata lineage! We were all extremely distressed and sought the
refuge of the brahmana, who was blessed with the power of austerities and never decayed. We said, 'O brahmana!
The god of love made us arrogant because of our youth and beauty. We did what should not be done. Please forgive us. That we had come to tempt a self-controlled one blessed with the power of austerities, who is rigid in his
vows, is sufficient death for us. Those who think about dharma are of the view that women should not be slain.
You are learned in dharma and because of that dharma, do not kill us. O you who are learned in dharma! It is said
that a brahmana is a friend to all beings. Let this saying of the learned come true and bring welfare. Those who are
good protect those who seek their refuge. We have sought refuge with you. You should therefore forgive us.'"'

Vaishampayana said, 'O brave one! At these words the brahmana, the performer of good deeds and with dharma
in his soul, and as resplendent as the sun and the moon, was pacified. The brahmana said, "The words hundreds,
thousands and forever are always used to indicate eternity. But the word hundred used by me should be understood
as a limited period and not as eternity. Becoming crocodiles, you will seize and drag men down into the water. But
a supreme man will drag you out of the water and onto land and you will then regain your earlier forms. Never before have I uttered a falsehood, not even in jest. From now on, all these tirthas will be famous everywhere as the
tirthas of women. Those who are learned will know them to be sacred and the cleansers of all sins."

'Varga said, "We then paid our homages to the brahmana and circumambulated him. We left that region in misery, thinking, 'When and how soon will we meet the man who will return our earlier forms?' O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! While we were thus thinking, the immensely fortunate devarshi Narada appeared instantly before
us. O Partha! On seeing the devarshi whose radiance is infinite, all of us were filled with joy. Paying our homages
to him, we stood there, with misery on our faces. He asked us the reason for our sorrow and we told him everything. Having heard exactly what had happened, he spoke to us. 'There are five tirthas in the southern marshes of
the ocean. They are sacred and beautiful. Go there immediately and live there. Pandava Dhananjaya, tiger among
men, pure of soul, will certainly arrive there soon and free you from your misery.' O brave one! On hearing these
words, all of us came here. O unblemished one! It is true that you have set me free today. But my four friends are
still there in the other waters. O brave one! Perform a good deed and set them all free."'

Vaishampayana said, 'O lord of the earth! Then the brave one, the best of the Pandavas, happily freed them all
from that curse. O king! On ascending from the waters, the apsaras regained their own forms and looked as they
had earlier. Purifying those tirthas and permitting them to leave, the lord went to the city of Manalura to see Chitrangada again. Through her, he had given birth to a son named King Babhruvahana. O king! Having seen him, the
Pandava left for Gokarna.'
