Vaishampayana said, 'The army of the Kurus could be seen, with the foremost among archers. It moved like clouds
stirred by gentle winds at the end of the summer. The horses were nearby, mounted by armed warriors. There were
elephants that were terrible in form, goaded by clubs and hooks. O king! Then Shakra arrived, riding handsomely,
and with the masses of gods-together with the Vishvadevas, the Ashvins and the masses of Maruts. Crowded
with gods, yakshas, gandharvas and giant serpents, the cloudless sky was dazzling, as if with the planets. They had
come to witness the power of their weapons, when used by humans and the terrible and great fight that was imminent between Bhishma and Arjuna. The vimana[Celestial chariot.] of the king of the gods had one hundred thousand golden pillars. It possessed other gems and jewels that held up the palace. It was divine and was capable of travelling anywhere at will. It was decorated with all kinds of jewels. It was radiant in the sky. Together with Vasava, there were
thirty-three gods there and gandharvas, rakshasas, snakes, ancestors and maharshis. There were the kings Vasumana, Balaksha, Supratardana, Ashtaka, Shibi, Yayati, Nahusha, Gaya, Manu, Kshupa, Raghu, Bhanu, Krishashva, Sagara and Shala. They were extremely resplendent and could be seen on the vimana of the king of the gods.
Agni, Isha, Soma, Varuna, Prajapati, Dhata, Vidhata, Kubera, Yama, Alambusha, Ugrasena and the gandharva
Tumburu were there, each in the place appointed for him and each in his vimana. All the classes of gods, the Siddhas and the supreme rishis arrived to witness the fight between Arjuna and the Kurus. The sacred fragrance of all
the divine garlands was everywhere, like flowers in the forests at the beginning of spring. The red and red-tinged
umbrellas of the gods could be seen while they stood there, and their garments, garlands and fans. All the dust of
the earth subsided and it was permeated by rays. Carrying the divine fragrance, the wind gratified the warriors. The
sky seemed to be colourfully decorated and ornamented by the vimanas that had already arrived and those that
were arriving. These were decorated with many gems and were colourful and wonderful, brought by the supreme
gods.'
