Dhritarashtra asked, "O Sanjaya! My son's head was kicked with the foot and his thighs were shattered. He was
lying down on the ground. He was extremely proud. What did he say? The king was extremely wrathful and firm
in his enmity towards the Pandus. In that great battle, when that great calamity overtook him, what did he say?"

'Sanjaya replied, "O king! Listen. O lord of men! I will tell you exactly what happened and what the king spoke,
when he was shattered and he was overtaken by that calamity. O king! The king's thighs were shattered and he was
covered with dust. He gathered his flowing locks and glanced in the ten directions. Having carefully collected his
locks, he sighed like a serpent. He was angry. With tears flowing from his eyes, he glanced towards me. For a short
while, like a crazy elephant, he struck the earth with his hands. Then he shook his locks and gnashed his teeth. He
censured the eldest Pandava and sighing, spoke these words[As will become clear, Duryodhana is actually speaking to Sanjaya.]. 'As my protector, I had Bhishma, Shantanu's son,
Karna, supreme among the wielders of weapons, Goutama, Shakuni, Drona, supreme among the wielders of
weapons, Ashvatthama, the brave Shalya and Kritavarma. However, I have been reduced to this state. Destiny is
difficult to cross. I was the lord of eleven armies[Akshouhinis.]. But I have been reduced to this state. O mighty-armed one!
When the time comes, no one can cross it. Those on my side who are still alive should be informed about how I
have been brought down by Bhimasena, violating rules of fairness. The Pandavas have indeed performed many
cruel deeds-Bhurishrava, Karna, Bhishma and the prosperous Drona. This is yet another infamous and cruel deed
that the Pandavas have perpetrated. On this account, it is my view that they will be reprimanded by virtuous ones.
If victory is obtained unfairly, what pleasure can virtuous men obtain from that? Which learned one will approve
this violation of rules? Having obtained victory through adharma, learned ones do not rejoice in the way that the
wicked Vrikodara, Pandu's son, is delighted. My thighs have been shattered. What can be more extraordinary than
the angry Bhimasena kicking my head with his foot? O Sanjaya! If a man acts in such a way towards a powerful
and prosperous person who still has relatives, will he be honoured? My mother, my father and I are not ignorant
about the dharma of kshatriyas. O Sanjaya! They will be miserable. Tell them my words. I have performed sacrifices. I have sustained servants. I have ruled the earth, up to the oceans. When my enemies were alive, I placed my
feet on their heads. I have given gifts, to the best of my capacity. I have done pleasant deeds towards my friends. I
have countered all my enemies. Who can be more fortunate than I am? I have advanced against the kingdoms of
enemies and have subjugated those kings, like slaves. I have truly acted well towards virtuous ones. Who can be
more fortunate than I am? I have honoured all my relatives and have been honoured and revered by men. I have
served the three objectives[Dharma, artha and kama.]. Who can be more fortunate than I am? I have commanded the foremost among
kings. I have obtained honour that is extremely difficult to get. I have gone to my place of birth. Who can be more
fortunate than I am? I have studied and donated, in accordance with the prescribed rites. I have lived a long and
healthy life. Based on my own dharma, I have conquered the worlds. Who can be more fortunate than I am? It is
through good fortune that I have not been defeated in the battle and made to serve my enemies. It is through good
fortune that my great prosperity goes to another one only after my death. Based on their own dharma, my kshatriya
relatives attained their desired objective. That same death has been obtained by me. Who can be more fortunate
than I am? An ordinary person is subjugated in the course of an enmity. It is through good fortune that I have not
been subjugated by the enemy in that way. It is through good fortune that I have not been vanquished after performing a despicable act-like killing one who is asleep, one who is mad, or killing someone through the use of
poison. I have been slain through adharma, through the contravention of fair rules. The immensely fortunate Ashvatthama, Satvata Kritavarma and Kripa Sharadvata should be told these words of mine. "The Pandavas have engaged in many acts of adharma. You should not trust them. They violate the rules." '

' "The king, your son, for whom truth was his valour, then addressed the bards. 'In the encounter, I have been
brought down by Bhimasena through the use of adharma. I will now go to heaven, like Drona, Shalya, Karna, the
immensely valorous Vrishasena, Shakuni Soubala, the immensely valorous Jalasandha, King Bhagadatta, the great
archer who was Somadatta's son[Bhurishrava.], Saindhava Jayadratha, my brothers who were my equal, with Duhshasana as
the foremost, Duhshasana's valiant son and my son, Lakshmana. There were many thousand of others on my side.
They followed me from the rear. But I am now like a traveller without any riches. On hearing about the death of
her brothers and her husband, how will my sister, Duhshala[She was married to Jayadratha.], be? She will weep in sorrow. When they are overcome by sorrow, what will become of my father, the aged king, and Gandhari, and their daughters-in-law and
granddaughters-in-law? There is no doubt that with her son and her husband slain, Lakshmana's mother[Duryodhana's wife, Bhanumati.], fortunate and large-eyed, will swiftly die. The immensely fortunate mendicant, Charvaka, is eloquent in the use of
words. If he learns about this, he will certainly exact vengeance on my account[There was a famous Charvaka, the founder of a materialist and atheist
school of philosophy. This is not the famous Charvaka. The word Char-
vaka means someone who is beautiful in speech.]. The sacred Samantapanchaka is
famous in the three worlds. By dying here today, I will obtain the eternal worlds.' O venerable one! On hearing the
lamentations of the king, thousands of men fled in the ten directions, their eyes full of tears. The earth, with its
oceans and forests, and mobile and immobile objects, trembled violently and made a loud noise. The directions
were clouded.

' "They[The messengers.] went to Drona's son and told him how the king had been brought down in the duel with the clubs. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! When they had reported the account to Drona's son, all of them remained immersed in thought for a long time. Then, sorrowfully, they[The messengers.] went to wherever they had come from." '
