Janamejaya asked, 'The grandfather of the Bharatas was lying down on a bed of arrows. How did he give up his
body? What kind of yoga did he resort to?'

Vaishampayana replied, 'O king! O tiger of the Kuru lineage! Purify yourself and listen attentively to how the
great-souled Bhishma gave up his body. Pierced by hundreds of arrows, Bhishma was stretched out, like the sun
with its rays. As soon as the sun turned towards uttarayana, he controlled himself and immersed himself in his atman. In his supreme prosperity, he was surrounded by the best of brahmanas-Vyasa, known for his learning in the
Vedas, Narada, the rishi of the gods, Devasthana, Vatsya, Ashmaka and Sumantu. These, and large numbers of other immensely fortunate and great-souled sages surrounded him. With faith and self-control, they surrounded him,
like the moon by the planets. Bhishma was a tiger among men, in his deeds, thoughts and words.

'Lying down on that bed of arrows, he joined his hands in salutation and worshipped Krishna. In a loud voice,
he praised Madhusudana, the lord of yoga, Padmanabha[The one with a lotus in his navel.], Vishnu, Jishnu, the lord of the universe. He joined his
hands in salutation and purified himself. Bhishma was supreme among eloquent ones and had great dharma in his
soul. He praised the lord Vasudeva. "O Krishna! I wish to worship you. O Purushottama! May you be pleased with
my words, which will be both brief and extensive. You are pure. You are the essence of purity. You are the
swan[The swan (hamsa) is superior to all beings in flight and is often used as a description of the supreme being.]. You are supreme. You are the supreme creator. You are in all atmans and you are the lord of beings. You
enter and are established in all beings in the universe. You are the qualities in beings. You are the lord of qualities,
like a string which holds gems together. Your limbs constitute the universe. You perform deeds in the universe.
Everything in the universe is strung together in you, like a garland strung together by a firm thread. You are Hari.
You are the one with one thousand heads. You are the one with one thousand feet and one thousand eyes. You are
known as the god Narayana. You are the refuge of the universe. You are finer than the finest. You are larger than
the largest. You are heavier than the heaviest. You are better than the best. In the vakas, the anuvakas, the nishads
and the Upanishads, you are the one who is praised as the performer of truthful deeds[The vakas are mantras. The anuvakas are chapters of the Vedas. The nishads are musical renderings of the
mantras.]. You are truth. You are in
the truth of the samas. There are four parts to your atman[This can be interpreted in different ways. Each being has the four components of jivatman, paramatman, mind
and consciousness. In the world, the manifestations of the supreme being are worshipped as Vasudeva, Samkarshana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha. The four names of the supreme being are Vishnu, Hari, Nara and Narayana.]. You are in all understanding and you are the lord of
the Satvatas. Your supreme and secret names are worshipped by the celestial gods. You are the god who was born
to the goddess Devaki and Vasudeva, for the sake of protecting brahmanas on earth and they were like two sticks
rubbed together to kindle a blazing fire. When one cleanses oneself, controls and withdraws from all desire, desiring the infinite, one sees the unblemished atman of Govinda in one's own atman. In the Puranas, you have been
spoken of as Purusha. At the beginning of a yuga, you are Brahma. When the time for destruction has arrived, you
are known by the name of Samkarshana. I am worshipping the one who should be worshipped. Your deeds surpass
those of Vayu and Agni. You surpass the sun and the fire in your energy.
Your atman is beyond the reach of intelligence and the senses. I am seeking refuge with that Prajapati. You are
the creator of the universe. You are the lord of everything in the universe. That is how the universe speaks of you.
You are the supervisor. You are without decay. You are the supreme state. Your complexion is like that of gold.
Though you are one, for the sake of destroying the daityas, Aditi bore twelve different parts in her womb[The twelve Adityas or gods.]. I am
bowing down to the one whose atman is the sun. I bow down before the one whose atman is the moon. He is the
king of the brahmanas and gratifies the gods in shuklapaksha and the ancestors in krishnapaksha[In the form of soma offerings.]. You are the
blazing and resplendent being who is beyond the great darkness. Knowing you, one goes beyond death. I am bowing down to the one who is everything that there is to be known. In the great ukthas[Verses that are recited.], the large number of brahmanas chants of you as the great one and as the fire in the great sacrifice. You are the soul of the Vedas and I bow
down before you. Your abode is in the Rig, Yajur and Sama hymns. You are the five kinds of oblations[Clarified butter, milk, grain, cakes and soma (or water).]. You are
the seven strands[The seven main Vedic metres.]. You are the soul of a sacrifice and I bow down before you. You are the bird named Yajur. The
metres are your limbs and the three forms of chanting[Rig, Yajur and Sama.] constitute your head. The brihat and rathamtara[Forms of sama hymns.] are
the eyes. You are the hymns and I bow down before you. When the creators performed a sacrifice with one thousand flows[Of soma.], you were the rishi who appeared. You are the bird with a golden complexion. Your atman is the
swan and I bow down before you. I bow down to the one whose atman is speech. He is said to be the eternal akshara[Akshara has several meanings. It is the syllable om, representative of the brahman, and means something that is
immutable. It also means word, speech, syllable or letter of the alphabet.].
The words[Padas, alternatively, lines.] are his limbs. The joints are sandhi[Rules of grammar for combining words.]. The vowels and the consonants are the manifestations. For
the sake of the virtuous, you build a bridge from the false to the truth. Your limbs are the use of dharma and artha.
I bow down to the one who is the truth. There are those who follow different dharmas. They desire fruits through
the pursuit of these different kinds of dharma. They worship you through these different kinds of dharma. I bow
down to the one who has dharma in his soul. The maharshis think of you as the unmanifest within the manifest.
You are the kshetrajna in the kshetra[Literally, kshetrajna means the one who knows the kshetra, kshetra meaning field. Kshetra is usually interpreted
as the body and more rarely, as intelligence. Kshetrajna is thus the knower of the field, that is, the atman.]. I bow down to the one who has his atman in the kshetra. I bow down to
the one who is the atman of samkhya, who is spoken of in samkhya as the seventeenth and who, firm with the atman in the self, is surrounded by the sixteen qualities[This is a reference to the samkhya school of philosophy. The sixteen qualities are the five organs of sense, the
five organs of action, the mind and the five elements.]. Without sleep, controlling the breath, established in the
self and restraining the senses, those who are engaged in yoga see a light. You are the atman of that and I bow
down before you. Without any fear of rebirth, peaceful sannyasis obtain the supreme you, beyond the good and the
bad. You are the atman of salvation and I bow down before you. At the end of one thousand yugas, you are the
blazing flames of fire and devour all beings. You are the atman of the terrible and I bow down before you. Having
consumed all beings and having rendered the entire universe into a single ocean, you sleep alone, like a child. You
are the atman of maya and I bow down before you. You are the thousand-headed being and your atman is infinite. I
bow down before the one who is the atman of this yoga of sleep, in each of the four oceans in turn[The four is probably a reference to the four forms of Hari, Krishna, Vishnu and Narayana.]. You are the
lotus in the navel of the one who has not been born. The entire universe is established in you. You are Pushkara
and Pushkaraksha. I bow down before the one who is the atman of the lotus. The clouds are your hair. The rivers
flow through all the joints of your body. The four oceans are in your stomach. I bow down before the one who is
the atman of water. You flow through the yugas in the form of days, seasons, ayanas[Period of six months.] and years. You are the
cause of creation and destruction. I bow down before the one who is the atman of time. The brahmanas are your
mouth, the kshatriyas are your arms, the vaishyas are your thighs and stomach and the shudras find refuge in your
feet. I bow down before the one who is the atman of the varnas. The fire is your face. The firmament is the crown
of your head. The sky is your navel and the earth constitutes your feet. Your eyes are the sun. The directions are
your ears. I bow down before the one whose atman is in the worlds. You are present in objects in the form of
vaisheshika qualities[Vaisheshika means specific or distinctive. But this is also a reference to the vaisheshika school of philosophy.]. You are spoken of as the protector of objects. I bow down before the one whose atman is
in all protection. You are the one who sustains beings through food, drink and riches and extends their juice and
breaths of life. I bow down before the one whose atman is in the breath of life. You are beyond time. You are beyond sacrifices. You are beyond notions of truth and falsehood. You have no beginning. You are the origin of the
universe. I bow down before the one whose atman is in the universe. He is the one who confounds beings through
the bonds of affection and hatred. This is for the sake of preserving creation. I bow down before the one whose atman is in confusion. Knowledge about the atman is knowledge one can obtain while still remaining established in
the five[The five senses or the five elements.]. Those who obtain that knowledge go to him. I bow down before the one whose atman is in knowledge.
His body cannot be measured. His infinite eyes see everything. He is infinite and cannot be measured. I bow down
before the one whose atman is in thought. He is matted and always carries a staff.
His body has an elongated stomach. The water pot is his quiver[This is a description of Brahma.]. I bow down before the one whose atman is in
Brahma. He wields a trident and is the lord of the gods. He is great-souled and three-eyed. His body is smeared in
ashes and his linga is turned up[This is a description of Shiva.]. I bow down before the one whose atman is in Rudra. He is the embodiment of
the five elements. He is the creator and destroyer of all beings. He is without anger, without malice and without
confusion. I bow down before the one whose atman is in peace. Everything is in him. He is in everything. He is
everything. Everything comes from him. He is always made up of everything. I bow down before the one whose
atman is in everything. I bow down before the one whose deeds are the universe. You are the soul of the universe.
The universe originates in you. Etablished beyond the five[The five elements.], you are the fulfilment of all beings. In the three
worlds, I bow down before you. I bow down before you in everything that is beyond those three. I bow down before you in all the directions. You are the refuge of everything. I bow down before the illustrious Vishnu, the origin
of the worlds. O Hrishikesha! You are the unvanquished creator and destroyer. I see your divine form in the three
paths[Heaven, the earth and the nether regions.]. I can see the truth about your eternal form. The heaven is pervaded with your head and the goddess earth
with your feet. You are the eternal being whose valour is in the three worlds. Your complexion is like the atasi
flower[A blue flower, Linum usitatissimum.]. You are Achyuta in your yellow garments. Those who bow down before Govinda have no fear. Just as
truth is full of Vishnu, oblations are full of Vishnu. Since everything is full of Vishnu, the wicked deeds that I have
done will be destroyed. Faithfully, I am seeking refuge with you. I wish to attain the best objective. O Pundarikaksha! O supreme among gods! You will think of what is best. You are the source of learning and austerities. You are
Vishnu, who has no origin. I have worshipped the god with my words. May Janardana be pleased with me." With
devotion in his mind, Bhishma spoke these words. Having said this, he bowed down before Krishna.

'Through his powers of yoga, Madhava got to know about Bhishma's devotion and went there[Krishna had not been there physically and Bhishma had prayed to him in his mind. Before Krishna went there
physically, the knowledge was also delivered mentally.]. Hari gave him
divine knowledge and sight about the three kinds of time[The past, the present and the future.]. When the immensely wise Bhishma's words ended,
those who were knowledgeable about the brahman applauded him loudly, their voices choking with tears. The
foremost among brahmanas praised Keshava Purushottama. Then, in gentle words, all of them again praised
Bhishma. On discerning Bhishma's yoga of devotion, Purushottma was joyful. He suddenly arose and ascended his
vehicle. Keshava and Satyaki advanced on a single chariot. The great-souled Yudhishthira and Dhananjaya were
on another one. Bhima and the two twins were on a single chariot. Kripa, Yuyutsu and the suta Sanjaya went on
another chariot. Those bulls among men went on chariots that were like cities. These made the earth tremble with
the roar of their axles. As he[Krishna.] advanced along the road, the best of men was extremely joyful on hearing the
words of praise spoken by the brahmanas. There were other men who bowed down before him, hands joined in
salutation. The slayer of Keshi[Krishna killed a demon named Keshi.] was delighted and greeted them.'
