'Dhritarashtra asked, "O Sanjaya! How did the immensely valorous Bhishma, Shantanu's son, fight on the tenth
day of the battle against the Pandavas and the Srinjayas? How did the Kurus repulse the Pandavas in the battle?
Tell me about the great battle fought by Bhishma, the ornament of all battles."

'Sanjaya replied, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I will describe to you the battle between the Kurus and
the Pandavas and the detailed account of that encounter. Listen. Using his supreme weapons, from one day to another, Kiriti killed the angry charioteers on your side and sent them to the next world. The victorious Kouravya,
Bhishma, also stuck to his pledge and always created a great destruction among the army of the Parthas. On seeing
Bhishma fight amidst the maharatha Kurus and Arjuna with the Panchalas, people were uncertain[As to which side would be victorious.]. On the tenth
day, Bhishma and Arjuna encountered each other. There was an extremely dreadful carnage. O king! Bhishma,
Shantanu's son and the scorcher of enemies, skilled in supreme weapons, slaughtered many tens of thousands of
warriors. O king! There were many whose families, names and lineages were not known. All of them refused to
retreat and the brave ones were slain by Bhishma's weapons. Having scorched the army of the Pandavas for ten
days, the scorcher of enemies, with dharma in his soul, gave up all desire to remain alive. He desired a quick death
and stationed himself at the forefront of the battle. 'I will no longer kill the best of men in the forefront of the battle.' O great king! Having thought in this way, Devavrata, your mighty-armed father, addressed these words to the
Pandava who was near him. 'O Yudhishthira! O immensely wise one! O one who is knowledgable in all the sacred
texts! O son[The word used is tata.]! Listen to my words. They are about attaining dharma and heaven. O son! O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! I am extremely disgusted with this body of mine. I have spent a lot of time in slaying a large number of beings in battle. Therefore, place Partha at the forefront, with the Panchalas and the Srinjayas. If you wish to
do that which brings me pleasure, make endeavours to kill me.' Knowing that this was his command, Pandava,
who knew about the truth, made efforts to fight against Bhishma in the battle, together with the Srinjayas. O king!
On hearing Bhishma's words, Dhrishtadyumna and Pandava Yudhishthira instructed their army. 'Advance and
fight. Vanquish Bhishma in the battle. You will be protected by Jishnu, who is unwavering in his aim and who is
triumphant over enemies. This great archer, Parshata, is the commander. It is certain that Bhimasena will protect
you in the battle. There is no need to fear Bhishma. The Srinjayas have no task other than to fight. With Shikhandi
at the forefront, there is no doubt that we will obtain victory over Bhishma.' On the tenth day, the Pandavas took a
vow to triumph or to go to Brahma's world. They advanced, senseless with rage. They placed Shikhandi and Pan-
dava Dhananjaya at the forefront. They resorted to supreme efforts to bring about Bhishma's downfall.

'"The kings of many countries were instructed by your son. They were with Drona and his son and with an immensely strong army. The powerful Duhshasana was there, with all his brothers. Bhishma was in the midst of the
battle and they sought to protect him. The brave ones on your side placed the one who was rigid in his vows at the
forefront. In the battle, they fought with the Parthas, who had placed Shikhandi at the forefront. With Shikhandi at
the forefront, the Chedis, the Panchalas and the one with the monkey on his banner advanced towards Bhishma,
Shantanu's son. Drona's son fought with Shini's grandson and Dhrishtaketu with Pourava. Yudhamanyu fought
with Duryodhana and his advisers, Virata and his soldiers with Jayadratha, the scorcher of enemies and Vriddhakshatra's heir[Jayadratha was Vriddhakshatra's son.], and his soldiers. The great archer, the king of Madra, fought with Yudhishthira and his soldiers.
With due protection, Bhimasena advanced against the army of elephants. Drona was invincible and impossible to
resist. He was supreme among those who wielded all weapons. Panchala[Dhrishtadyumna.] and the Somakas advanced against
him. Prince Brihadbala had a lion on his standard. He advanced against Subhadra's son, the scorcher of enemies
who had a karnikara flower on his standard. Together with the kings, your sons attacked Shikhandi and Pandava
Dhananjaya in the battle, wishing to kill them.

'"Both the armies were valorous and the advance against each other was extremely terrible. As the soldiers advanced, the earth trembled. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The two armies clashed against each other. Both
those on your side and those of the enemy were delighted to see Shantanu's son in the battle. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! As they angrily advanced against each other, a terrible sound arose in every direction. There was
the sound of conch shells and drums. Elephants trumpeted. The soldiers roared terribly, like lions. All the Indras
among men had complexions like that of the sun and the moon. The armlets and diadems the brave ones wore lost
their brilliance because of the cloud of dust that was raised. The weapons seemed to be flashes of lightning. The
terrible twang of bows could be heard. There was the sound of arrows and conch shells and the great roar of
drums. In both the armies, the clatter of the chariots could be heard. There were large numbers of spears, lances,
swords and masses of arrows hurled by both the armies, and because of this, the sky lost its lustre. In that great battle, charioteers and riders struck each other. Elephants fought with elephants, infantry with infantry. A great battle
raged between the Kurus and the Pandavas for the sake of Bhishma. O tiger among men! It was like hawks fighting
over a piece of meat. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There was a terrible encounter between the warriors.
They sought to kill each other and defeat each other in that battle."'
