Vaishampayana said, 'Bhishma, Shantanu's son, was the grandfather of the Bharatas. He was learned in the sacred
texts and knew about places and time and the nature of everything. He knew all about dharma. After the preceptor
had spoken, he praised those words. To ensure the welfare of the Bharatas, he addressed these words to them. In
accordance with his devotion towards dharma, he spoke about his affection for Yudhishthira, who knew about
dharma. Such words are always liked by the virtuous and the strict, but are difficult for dishonest ones to accept.

'Bhishma thus spoke words that are honoured by the righteous. "It is exactly as brahmana Drona, who knows
everything about artha, has said. The Pandavas possess all the auspicious marks and cannot be destroyed. They are
learned and have good conduct. They observe righteous vows. They follow the instructions of the aged. They are
devoted to truthful vows. They know about auspicious times and follow rites at those times. They are pure in their
vows. They cannot be destroyed when they uphold the ways of the virtuous. The Pandavas are protected through
dharma and through their own valour. It is my view that they cannot have been destroyed. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! I will tell you my thoughts on what should be done about the Pandavas. This is the right policy
and it can only be appreciated by those who follow good policy, not by others. When we think about the Pandavas,
we should do what it is possible for us to do. Listen to me when I tell you. We should use intelligence, not animosity. O son[The word used is tata.]! I never give such counsel to those who are dishonest. One who follows the instructions of elders is always established in truthfulness. Good advice must always be given, and never that which is evil. If one wishes for
dharma, one must always speak according to one's intelligence. I do not think the way these other people do.
Wherever King Yudhishthira is, whether it is in the city or the countryside, the people will not be envious, malicious, insolent or jealous. The people there will all be devoted to their own dharma. There will be many incantations to the brahman[The supreme soul, brahman or paramatman.]. Oblations will be completed. There will be many sacrifices, with a lot of gifts. There is no
doubt that the rain god will always shower there at the right time. The earth will be full of grain and free from disease. The grain will be succulent and the fruit will have all the qualities. The garlands will be fragrant and the
words will be soft and auspicious. The wind will be pleasant to the touch and all meetings will be friendly. Where
King Yudhishthira lives, there will not be any fear. The cows will be plentiful, not weak and difficult to milk. Milk,
curds and butter will be tasty and good for the health. Whatever be the country where King Yudhishthira is, food
and drink will be succulent, with all the qualities. Taste, touch, smell and sound will possess all the qualities.
Wherever King Yudhishthira is, all sights will be delightful. Everything will possess its own qualities in this thirteenth year. O son! In the country where the Pandavas obtain protection, people will be content, cheerful, pure,
health, honourable towards gods and guests, devoted towards all beings, generous, with great energy and devoted
to the eternal dharma. They will discard the impure and serve the pure. They will sacrifice and observe good vows.
Such will people be, wherever King Yudhishthira is. O son! They will give up false speech. Everything will be
pure, beneficial and auspicious. Wherever King Yudhishthira lives, everyone will strive for the auspicious and possess auspicious intelligence. The men there will always seek to ensure welfare. O son! The one with dharma in his
soul is invisible and cannot be detected by brahmanas. How can ordinary men then be capable of finding out the
Partha? Truth, perseverance, generosity, complete peace, extreme forgiveness, humility, prosperity, fame, great energy, non-violence and honesty exist in him. The intelligent one has taken care about his disguised place of residence. I have described his destination with due care. What else can I say? Now think about this and decide what
seems beneficial to you. O Kouravya! If you have any faith in me, do this quickly."'
