'Markandeya said, "Thus did the mighty-armed Rama, whose energy was infinite, confront misfortune and live in
the forest in earlier times. O tiger among men! Do not grieve. O scorcher of enemies! You are a kshatriya. On the
basis of the valour of your arms, you are traversing a road that is blazing in its resolution. Not even the slightest bit
of sin is to be found in you. Even Indra, and the gods and the asuras, may become despondent along this path. Together with the Maruts, the wielder of the vajra killed Vritra, the invincible Namuchi and the rakshasi
Dirghajihva[By implication, by travelling along this path. Vritra and Namuchi were demons killed by Indra. Dirghajihva
was also a demoness killed by Indra.]. Everything in this world stays with those who have aides. Who cannot be overcome in battle by
someone who has Dhananjaya as his brother? Bhima is terrible in his valour and is foremost among strong ones.
Madri's two twin sons are young and great archers. O scorcher of enemies! With such aides, why do you grieve?
With such aides, you can vanquish the soldiers of the wielder of the vajra, together with the Maruts. O bull among
the Bharata lineage! With such great archers as aides, who are the equals of the gods, you will vanquish all your
enemies in battle. Look at Droupadi Krishna. She was abducted forcibly by the evil-souled Saindhava, who was
intoxicated with his valour. But these great-souled ones accomplished the difficult task of obtaining her back, after
vanquishing and subjugating King Jayadratha. Rama got Vaidehi back without any such allies. Through his terrible
valour, he killed the rakshasa Dashagriva in battle. O king! Use your own intelligence to think about this. Monkeys
and black-faced bears were his allies, creatures from a different species. O best of the Kurus! O bull among the
Bharata lineage! Therefore, do not sorrow. O scorcher of enemies! Great-souled ones like you do not sorrow."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Thus consoled by the intelligent Markandeya, the king discarded his weakness of spirit
and spoke again.'
