'Sanjaya said, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! Then King Yudhishthira arranged his soldiers in a counter-formation against Bhishma's and said, 'O extenders of the Kuru lineage! The Pandavas are arrayed in a counter-formation, in accordance with the injunctions. Desiring to attain supreme heaven, fight well.' Protected by
Savyasachi, Shikhandi stood in the middle of the army. Protected by Bhima, Dhrishtadyumna was in the front. O
king! The southern segment was protected by the handsome Yuyudhana, 66 foremost archer among the Satvatas
and Shakra's equal. Yudhishthira was on a chariot that was like the great Indra's vehicle. It bore an excellent standard with gold and jewels and had a golden harness. He was stationed in the midst of his array of elephants. An
extremely white and beautiful umbrella, with a handle made of tusks, was held aloft his head. Maharshis circumambulated him and sung his praises. Priests, maharshis and aged ones chanted his praises so that his enemies
would be destroyed. They used meditation, mantras and herbs and pronounced words of benediction. The supreme
among Kurus gave the great-souled brahmanas garments, cows, fruits, flowers and gold. He advanced like Shakra
of the immortals. Arjuna's chariot possessed one hundred bells. It was embellished with the best of gold and was
as resplendent as the fire, blazing like a thousand suns. It was yoked to white steeds and possessed excellent
wheels. It had an ape on its banner. It was driven by Keshava and he 67 was stationed on it, with the Gandiva and
arrows in his hands. There was no archer who was equal to him on earth. Nor will there ever be such a one. Bhimasena assumes a terrible form for the destruction of your sons. Without any weapons and with his bare hands, in
a battle, he can reduce to ashes men, horses and elephants. The twins were with Vrikodara and they protected the
brave charioteers. In this world, he 68 is like the great Indra himself. He was like an angry lion that was playing.
Vrikodara was as insolent as a king of elephants. On seeing him in the vanguard of the army, the spirit of your soldiers was overcome by fear and anxiety and they trembled, like elephants caught in the mud.

'"O foremost among the Bharata lineage! Janardana then spoke to Gudakesha, 69 the invincible prince who was
stationed in the midst of the army. Vasudeva said, 'Bhishma will attack our soldiers like a lion. He will protect with
his power and strength. He is the flag of the Kuru lineage. That performer of three hundred horse sacrifices is there.
Other soldiers surround the illustrious one, like clouds enveloping the one with the virtuous rays. O foremost
among brave ones! Slay those troops, wishing to fight with the bull among the Bharata lineage.'"

'Dhritarashtra asked, "O Sanjaya! Which warriors from which side were delighted and advanced to fight first?
Who were confident in their minds and who were dejected and dispirited? Who struck first in the battle that makes
the heart tremble? Was it from my side or that of the Pandavas? O Sanjaya! Tell me all this. Amidst whose soldiers
were garlands and pastes fragrant? 70 Whose warriors roared and uttered auspicious words?"

'Sanjaya said, "At that time, the soldiers from both sides were cheerful. The garlands and pastes of both sides
were equally fragrant. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The soldiers were arrayed in battle formation and when
they met each other, there was an extremely terrible encounter. There was the tumultuous sound of musical instruments, intermingled with that of conch shells and drums. There was the trumpeting of elephants and the soldiers
were filled with joy."'
