'Narada said, "On witnessing this great destruction, all the devarshis, the siddhas[Siddhi means accomplishment. Siddhas are semi-divine species who have attained these superhuman accomplishments or faculties.] and the supreme rishis were
extremely distressed. They were ones who had conquered anger, mastered their souls and senses. Stirred by compassion for the universe, they went to the grandfather's abode. There they saw the grandfather seated with the
gods, surrounded by siddhas and brahmarshis[Rishis who know the nature of the brahman, the supreme being.]. The god Mahadeva[Literally, great god. Shiva.] was there, with Agni[The god of fire.] and Vayu[The god of wind.]. The
moon[The moon-god Chandra.] and the sun[The sun-god Aditya.] were there and Dharma and Parameshthi[Parameshthi is an epithet for various gods-Brahma, Shiva, Vishnu and Agni. Since Brahma, Shiva and Agni
have been separately mentioned, here it probably means Vishnu.] and Budha[Budha is someone who is wise, it is also a name for Mercury.]. The vaikhanasas[Hermits.] were there
and the valakhilyas[Sages, numbering 60,000  who were the sizes of thumbs. They preceded the sun's chariot.], those who had resorted to the forest, the marichipas[This must be a class of sages, but the meaning is unclear. Perhaps it means those who were descended from
Marichi, one of Brahma's mental sons, that is, a son born through Brahma's mental powers.], the unborn ones, those who were
not deluded and other ascetics who were born from energy. All these rishis were paying homage to the grandfather.
All the maharshis[Great sages.] went there and recounted the deeds of Sunda and Upasunda-what they had done, how they
had done it, and in what order. Having recounted everything to the grandfather, all the masses of gods and the
supreme rishis pressed him to act.

'"On hearing all their words, the grandfather thought for an instant, trying to decide what should be done. Determining how they might be killed, he summoned Vishvakarma[The architect among the gods.]. When he saw Vishvakarma, the grandfather ordered, 'O, great ascetic! Create a lady who will be desired.' Paying homage to the grandfather and listening attentively to his words, he thought about it and carefully created a divine damsel. First he carefully collected whatever
was beautiful in the three worlds, mobile or immobile. He placed millions of gems on her body. The divine beauty
that he created was the essence of gems. She was created by Vishvakarma with a great deal of diligence and was
unmatched in beauty among all the women in the three worlds. There wasn't the tiniest part of her body that
wasn't perfect in the wealth of its beauty and that failed to attract the gaze of the beholder. She was like Shri[Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth and prosperity.]
herself, beautiful and desirable. She captivated the eyes and the hearts of all beings. Because she had been created
bit by bit from the essence of all gems, the grandfather gave her the name of Tilottama[Tila means a small particle, while uttama means best or excellent. The best of the small bits had been used in
creating Tilottama.]. The grandfather said, 'O
Tilottama! Go to the asuras Sunda and Upasunda. O fortunate one! Seduce them with your desirable beauty. Act in
a way so that you create dissension among the two of them, when they see how perfect your beauty is.' She agreed
to do this.

'"Paying homage to the grandfather, she circumabulated the gods assembled there. The illustrious one[Brahma.] faced
the east, Maheshvara[Mahadeva or Shiva.] faced the south. The other gods faced the north, while all the rishis faced various directions. But while she was thus circumabulating the gods, only Indra and the illustrious god Sthanu[Shiva.] managed to
maintain their composure. But so great was his[Shiva's.] desire to see her as she passed by his side, that another face with
eyes having curved lashes emerged from the southern side. When she went behind him, another face emerged from
the western side and when she went north, another face emerged on the northern side. For the great Indra too, one
thousand large and red-tinted eyes appeared everywhere, on his back and on his sides. Thus, in ancient times, Mahadeva Sthanu came to possess four faces and the slayer of Bala[Bala was a demon and Indra killed him. Thus, Indra is the slayer of Bala.] came to possess a thousand eyes. As Tilottama
walked around, all the masses of gods and the rishis turned their faces in the direction that she followed. But for
the god who was the grandfather, the eyes of all the great-souled ones were on her body. When the one with richness of beauty left for her appointed task, all the gods and the supreme rishis thought that the act had already been
accomplished. After Tilottama had departed, the one with the welfare of the worlds in his mind[Brahma.], asked all the
gods and the rishis to leave."'
