Yudhishthira asked, "Through what behaviour, what conduct, what learning and what devotion can one obtain
Brahma's abode, which is certainly beyond nature[We have translated prakriti as nature. Brahma is not affected by the transformations of prakriti.]?"
'Bhishma replied, "If one is engaged in the dharma of moksha, is controlled and limited in diet and controls his
senses, then he obtains Brahma's abode, which is certainly beyond nature. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In
this connection, an ancient history is recounted, about the conversation between Jaigishavya and Asita. Jaigishavya
was immensely wise and knew about the path of dharma. Asita-Devala spoke to the great rishi, who was never enraged. 'You are not delighted when you are praised. You are not angered when you are criticized. What is this wisdom and whence has it come? How have you found refuge in it?' Having been thus addressed, the great ascetic
replied. Those great and auspicious words left no doubt and were full of deep import. 'O brahmana! You have
asked me about the supreme objective, devotion, tranquility and the performance of auspicious deeds. I will tell
you. O Devala! There are those who regard censure and praise equally. They hide their vows and good deeds. They
do not hurt through words. Nor are they engaged in speaking anything injurious. They do not wish to strike back
those who strike them. Such people are learned. They do not grieve over what is yet to come. They act in accordance with what has presented itself. They do not sorrow over what is past and do not even remember it. O De-
vala! For both kama and artha, they honour what has presented itself. They accomplish their vows and forcefully
act in accordance with what has presented itself. Their learning is mature and they are immensely wise. They have
conquered anger and have vanquished their senses. They never commit any crimes, in mind, deeds and words.
They never desire harm or injury to anyone else. Those patient ones are not tormented at someone else being prosperous. They do not speak words of praise or censure about others. Nor do they ever react to words of praise or
censure about their own selves. They are tranquil in every way and are engaged in the welfare of all beings. They
are not angered or delighted. They do not cause injury to others. They have released themselves from all the bonds
that bind the heart down and are happy. They have no friends. Nor are they friends to others. They have no enemies. Nor are they enemies to others. Mortal ones who act in this way always live happily. O supreme among brahmanas! They know about dharma and observe dharma. They are happy, but that is not true of those who have deviated from the path. I have resorted to that path. What else is there to say? Whether I am criticized or praised, that is
no cause for any joy. Depending on what they desire, men advance along different paths. However, censure and
praise cannot affect my growth or decay. A person who knows about the truth is content with this, as if it is amrita.
An accomplished person will always regard the two[Censure and praise.] equally and treat them like poison. He will then be freed
from all sins. If a person ignores this, he will be destroyed. There are some learned ones who desire the supreme
objective. Those people, who seek refuge in this vow, obtain happiness. A person who has conquered his senses is
regarded as having performed all the sacrifices. He obtains Brahma's abode, which is certainly beyond nature.
Gods,  gandharvas,  pishachas  and  rakshasas  are  incapable  of  climbing  up  to  that  objective  and  obtaining  that
supreme end.'"'
