Sanjaya said, "O great king! Your son, supreme among rathas, was stationed on his chariot in the battle. He was
resplendent and difficult to resist, like the powerful Rudra. The earth was covered with thousands of his arrows. He
showered the enemy with arrows, like rain pouring down on a mountain. In the great battle, there wasn't a man
among the Pandavas, or a horse, elephant or a ratha, who was not wounded by his arrows. O lord of the earth! O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! Whichever warrior I saw in the encounter was struck by your son with his arrows. The soldiers in the army[The Pandava army.] were covered by dust and were seen to be mangled by the great-souled one's arrows. O lord of the earth! The earth seemed to be made out of arrows that were released by the archer Duryodhana,
swift in the use of his hands. Among the thousands of warriors on your side, or that of the enemy, it seemed to me
that Duryodhana was the only man. We beheld your son's wonderful valour. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
He was single-handed. But the united Parthas could not advance against him. O bull among the Bharata lineage!
He pierced Yudhishthira with one hundred arrows, Bhimasena with seventy, Sahadeva with seven, Nakula with
sixty-four, Dhrishtadyumna with five, Droupadi's sons with seven each and pierced Satyaki with three. O venerable one! He severed Sahadeva's bow with a broad-headed arrow. Casting aside the severed bow, Madri's powerful
son picked up another great bow and attacked the king. In the battle, he pierced Duryodhana with ten arrows. The
brave and great archer, Nakula, pierced the king with nine arrows and roared, assuming a terrible form. Satyaki
struck the king with an arrow with drooping tufts. Droupadi's sons struck him with seveny-three and Dharmaraja
with seven. Bhimasena struck the king with eighty arrows. He was afflicted from every direction by storms of arrows shot by those great-souled ones. O great king! However, while all the soldiers looked on, he did not waver.
All the beings and all the men witnessed the dexterity, skill and prowess of the great-souled one. O Indra among
kings! Some sons of Dhritarashtra had only fled a short distance away. On seeing the king, those armoured ones
surrounded him. When they attacked, they created a tumultuous sound. It was like a turbulent ocean on a monsoon
night. In the battle, those great archers approached the unvanquished king and counter-attacked the Pandava
assassins.

' "In the encounter, Drona's son repulsed the enraged Bhimasena. O great king! Arrows were released in all the
directions. The brave ones could not be distinguished in the battle, nor the directions or the sub-directions. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Both of those resplendent ones[Ashvatthama and Bhima.] were the performers of cruel deeds and were extremely difficult to resist. They assumed fearful forms and fought, acting and neutralizing each other. The entire
universe was terrified because of the twangs of their bows and their words. In the battle, the brave Shakuni attacked Yudhishthira. Subala's powerful son slew the four horses that belonged to the lord and roared. This made all
the soldiers tremble. At that time, the powerful Sahadeva bore the brave and unvanquished king[Yudhishthira.] away from the
field of battle on his chariot. Dharmaraja Yudhishthira ascended another chariot. He pierced Shakuni with nine arrows and pierced him again with five. The best among all archers then roared loudly. O venerable one! The battle
was wonderful and fearful in form. It generated delight among the spectators and was applauded by the siddhas
and the charanas. Uluka, immeasurable in his soul, attacked the great archer, Nakula, invincible in battle, and
showered him with arrows from every direction. In that way, the brave Nakula repulsed Soubala's son in the encounter and repulsed him with a great shower of arrows. They were brave maharathas, born in noble lineages.
They were seen to fight with each other, enraged with each other. O king! In that way, Kritavarma fought against
Shini's descendant, the tormentor of enemies, and was resplendent, like Shakra in an encounter against Bala. In the
battle, Duryodhana severed Dhrishtadyumna's bow. When his bow had been severed, he pierced him with sharp
arrows. While all the archers looked on, in that encounter, Dhrishtadyumna grasped a supreme weapon and fought
against the king. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The clash between those two was exceedingly great. They
were like two supreme and crazy elephants, with shattered temples, exuding musth. In the battle, the brave Goutama became angry and pierced Droupadi's immensely strong sons with many arrows with drooping tufts. That clash
between them and him was like that between a being and the senses[There are five senses and Droupadi had five sons.]. It assumed a fierce and terrible form and
neither side was inclined to show mercy. They afflicted him, like senses oppressing a stupid person. He angrily
fought against them in that battle. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thus the colourful battle between them and
him raged on. O lord! It was like the one that always takes place between a being and the senses.

' "Men fought with men. Tuskers fought with tuskers. Horses clashed against horses and rathas against rathas. O
lord of the earth! The battle became tumultuous and fearful in form. O lord! It was wonderful in one spot and terrible and fierce in another. O great king! There were many terrible clashes. Those scorchers of enemies clashed
against each other in the encounter. They pierced, struck and killed each other in the great encounter. Because of
the weapons, a terrible dust was seen to rise. O king! As they ran away, it was also created by the horses and the
horse riders and was fanned by the wind. The dust was created by the chariots and the breaths of the tuskers. It was
like a tawny cloud in the evening and obstructed the path of the sun. The sun was covered by the dust and lost its
brilliance. The earth and the brave maharathas were shrouded. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! But in a
short while, the earth was sprinkled with the blood of the brave ones and, in every direction, became free of the
dust. That terrible dust, fierce in form, was pacified. O great king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Those extremely fearful duels could again be seen, as the best and the eldest fought against each other at midday. O Indra
among kings! The armour was seen to blaze in resplendent brilliance. As arrows descended in that battle, a tumultuous sound was raised. It was as if a large forest of bamboos was being burnt in every direction." '
