'Shantanu said, "Who was Apava? What evil act was committed by the vasus that they were all cursed to be born
in human wombs? What has this son Gangadatta done that he must now live among men? The vasus are lords of
all the worlds. O Jahnavi[Ganga. Jahnavi is Ganga's name because Ganga is Jahnu's daughter.]! Why were they born among men? Tell me everything."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having been thus addressed, the divine goddess Jahnavi Ganga addressed her husband
King Shantanu, bull among men.

'Ganga said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Varuna once had a son-the sage Vashishtha, later famous
as Apava. His holy hermitage was along the side of Meru, the king of the mountains. It was populated with deer
and birds and was always covered with flowers. O best of the Bharata lineage! Varuna's son, supreme among those
who perform sacred deeds, performed austerities in that forest, which had a plentiful supply of tasty roots, fruit and
water. Daksha had a proud daughter named Surabhi. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Through Kashyapa, that
goddess gave birth to a cow for the welfare of that entire world. This supreme cow was capable of fulfilling every
desire. Varuna's righteous son obtained this cow for the sake of performing sacrifices and the cow lived in that forest, populated by sages. Fearlessly, she grazed in those sacred and lovely woods. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Once, all the divine vasus, with Prithu at their head, came to visit that forest, frequented by the gods and the
devarshis. With their wives, they roamed in the forest and made love in its lovely mountains and woods. O you
who are as valorous as Vasava[Indra.] himself! A slender-waisted wife of one of the vasus saw the supreme cow,
which belonged to the sage Vashishtha and was capable of fulfilling every desire, roaming in the forest. She was
amazed at its conduct, power and riches and showed it to Dyou[Dyou was her husband.], who had eyes like those of a bull.

'"The cow was well fed and yielded plenty of milk. It had a beautiful tail and handsome face. It had all the qualities and was supreme in its conduct. O lord of kings! O descendant of the Puru lineage! So great were its qualities
that the vasu's wife showed it to the vasu. O you who are like the king of elephants! O you who are like Indra in
valour! Dyou saw that cow, with its beauty and qualities. O king! He then told the goddess, 'O goddess with the
dark eyes! O one with the beautiful hips! O one with slender waist! This supreme cow belongs to the rishi who is
Varuna's son. He is the owner of this supreme forest. A person who drinks this cow's tasty milk will live for
10,000 years with undiminished youth.' O supreme among kings! When that slender-waisted goddess of unblemished form heard these words, she told her husband, whose energy was radiant. 'I have a friend in this world of
men and she is the daughter of a king. Her name is Jinavati and she is young and beautiful. She is the daughter of
rajarshi Ushinara, who is truthful and intelligent. This daughter is famous in the world of men because of the
wealth of her beauty. O immensely fortunate one! I wish to obtain this cow and its calf for her. O best of the gods!
O one who increases good deeds! Please bring them quickly. O one who grants pride! On drinking the milk, my
friend will be the only one in the world of men to be freed from age and disease. O immensely fortunate one! O
unblemished one! Please do this for me. There is no other pleasure that would please me more.' Hearing the words
of the goddess, Dyou wished to please her and stole the cow with the help of Prithu and his other brothers. O king!
Instructed by his lotus-eyed wife, Dyou did not think about the great ascetic powers of the rishi who owned her. He
failed to consider that the stealing of the cow would lead to his downfall.

'"In the evening, Varuna's son returned to the hermitage with the fruit he had collected. He did not see the cow
and her calf in that supreme wood. Then the one blessed with the power of austerities looked for her in the forest.
But though he searched, the sage could not find her. Through his divine sight, he then found that she had been
stolen by the vasus. His anger arose and he cursed the vasus. 'Because the vasus have stolen my cow which yields
sweet milk and has a handsome tail, there is no doubt that they will all be born as men.' O bull among the Bharata
lineage! Thus did the illustrious Apava, supreme among sages, curse the vasus in his anger. Having cursed them,
the illustrious one returned to his austerities. O king! Thus, in his wrath, did the one blessed with the power of austerities curse the eight vasus. The rishi was immensely powerful and knew the nature of the brahman. As soon as
they knew that they had been cursed by the rishi, the gods went to the hermitage of the great-souled one. O bull
among kings! The vasus tried to pacify the rishi. O tiger among men! But they failed to obtain the grace of Apava,
who was learned in all dharma and was supreme among rishis. The righteous sage said, 'O Dhara! You and the
other vasus have been cursed. But you will all be freed from your curse within a year. But Dyou is the one whose
act has led to your being cursed by me. Because of his own deeds, he will have to live in the world of men for a
long time. Though uttered in anger, my words cannot amount to a falsehood. However, the great-souled one[Dyou.]
will not have offspring in the world of men. He will be devoted to dharma and will be skilled in the usage of all
weapons. He will be engaged in doing that which brings his father pleasure and he will forsake pleasure with
women.' Having addressed all the vasus in this way, the great rishi went away. And all the vasus then came to me
together.

'"O king! They craved a boon from me. 'O Ganga! As soon as each one of us is born, you should yourself throw
us into the water.' O supreme among kings! I agreed and acted accordingly, in order to free them from a life in the
world of men, a consequence of the curse. O best of kings! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O king! Dyou
alone will have to live in the world of men for a long time, because of the rishi's curse."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having completed the account, the goddess immediately vanished. Taking her son with
her, she went away to wherever she wished to go. That son of Shantanu came to be known under two names-Devavrata and Gangeya. He surpassed Shantanu in all his qualities. With sorrow in his heart, Shantanu then returned
to his own capital. I will now recount for you Shantanu's many qualities and the great fortune of this famous king,
who was from the Bharata lineage and whose illustrious history is known as the Mahabharata.'
