'Bhishma said, "O Partha! I will now tell you about the four kinds of meditation in yoga[Dhyana yoga. The number four never becomes clear.]. The supreme rishis
who know this, advance towards eternal success in this world. Yogis engage themselves in this kind of meditation.
These are maharshis who are satisfied with their knowledge and have set their minds on emancipation. O Partha!
They are freed from the taints of this world and do not return again. The sins associated with their births are destroyed and they become established in their natural states. They are free of opposite sentiments and are always
based in their selves. They are always based in freedom. They are without attachments. They do not debate. They
seek to bring about tranquility in their minds. They are single-mindedly devoted to studying and hold up their at-
mans. Such a sage is seated like a piece of wood, crushing his senses. He does not hear any sound through his ears.
His skin does not know anything through touch. His eyes do not know any form and his tongue does not know any
tastes. He smells nothing. Immersed in the yoga of meditation, he experiences nothing. The valiant one does not
desire anything that ignites the five categories[The senses.]. The accomplished person withdraws the five categories into his
mind. He uses the five senses to control his wavering mind. Since they no longer have a support, they do not wander. The five gates[Of the body.] are mobile, but are rendered immobile. Inside, the patient person first controls his mind to the
path of meditation. He uses his mind to crush the senses. I have described this path of meditation to you first. Having controlled these first, the sixth one, the mind[The five senses having come earlier.], is then restrained. It is as fickle as lightning flashing around in
the clouds. A drop of water on a leaf is unstable and always moves around. In the process of meditation, the consciousness is first like that. However, after one has meditated for some time, it becomes controlled. However, if the
mind again strays into the path of the wind[The wind is being used as a metaphor.], it becomes like the wind. But a person who knows is not disturbed
by this. He strives single-mindedly, without malice. He restrains his consciousness in meditation again, engaged in
the yoga of meditation. Engaged in meditation, the sage first accomplishes discrimination, reasoning and judgement[The translation doesn't capture the nuance. The terms used in the text
are respectively vichara, vitarka and viveka. All three are generally reasoning and judgement. However, in the progression of yoga, these are regarded as higher and higher levels of discernment, vichara being the lowest and viveka being the highest.]. At first, in the process of meditation, the sage first fixes his mind. Disturbed by it, he controls it. A sage
must not engage in despair, but must seek to ensure benefit for his atman. Heaps of dust and ashes from burnt cow
dung do not become wet when they are sprinkled with water. Even if they become slightly wet, that dust still
seems to be dry. They must be continuously and slowly sprinkled before they become wet. The senses must be
slowly controlled, in that way. In this way, the senses are gradually controlled. They are gradually restrained and
finally pacified. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! By incessantly pacifying the mind through yoga, one first engages the mind and the five categories in the path of meditation. The happiness obtained through manliness or destiny is nothing compared to what is obtained through the control of the atman. United with such bliss, he remains
engaged in the task of meditation. Without any disturbance, the yogi then advances towards emancipation."'
