'"Manu said, 'When the manifest body is asleep, consciousness roams around in his dreams. Like that, consciousness is separated from knowledge and the senses after death. There are both existence and non-existence[This is a difficult shloka to translate and the interpretation is the following. In dreams, the manifest body is inactive and consciousness is active.
After death, consciousness is separated from the senses and from knowledge. Knowledge remains and though the body is no longer existent,
knowledge exists in that state of non-existence.]. When the water is clear, the eyes can see the image in it. In that way, when the senses are clear,
knowledge can be used to see what should be known. When the water is agitated, the image cannot be seen.
In that way, when the senses are agitated, knowledge cannot be used to see what should be known. Lack of
intelligence leads to lack of wisdom. Lack of intelligence taints the mind. When the mind is tainted, the five
which are based in the mind[The five senses.] are also tainted. If one is immersed in material objects, one is ignorant and
not satisfied. One does not see. Though the atman is pure, not being able to see, it circles around in material
objects. Because of the sins, a man's thirst is never satisfied. The thirst is conquered only when one has destroyed the sins. The attachment to material objects has a tendency to perpetuate. The mind hankers for what
one should not desire, and the supreme is not obtained. To obtain knowledge, a man must destroy his wicked
deeds. When the sight is clear, one sees the atman in one's own self. If the senses are not controlled, one is
miserable. When they are restrained, one is happy. Therefore, one must use one's atman to sever that attachment one has for objects of the senses. The mind is above the senses and the intelligence is above that.
Knowledge is above intelligence and the supreme[The atman.] is above knowledge. The soul originates in what is not
manifest. Knowledge comes from the soul. Intelligence comes from knowledge. The mind comes from intelligence. The virtuous see that the mind is united with hearing and the other senses and sounds and the like.
He who casts aside sounds and the like and everything that is manifest is freed from everything that is natural
and ordinary. Having been freed, he enjoys immortality. When the sun rises, it creates a circle of rays. When
it sets, it withdraws what it had itself created. In that way, the atman enters the body and spreads the rays of
the senses, obtaining the qualities of the five senses. But when it sets, it restrains them. A person is repeatedly conveyed along the path of action. Though there is dharma in the soul, he grows old, having obtained the
fruits of these deeds. If a person withdraws, material objects also withdraw from him. If a person has beheld
the supreme, he abandons objects of desire and desire also leaves him. When the intelligence has rid itself of
qualities associated with action and has immersed itself in the mind, there is destruction[Of the senses.] and one obtains
the brahman. This is not something that can be touched, heard, tasted, seen or smelt. This is beyond debate. It
is only the spirit that can penetrate that supreme being. Everything created by the mind can be drawn back
into it. The mind can be withdrawn into intelligence. Intelligence can be withdrawn into knowledge. Knowledge can be withdrawn into the supreme. The senses cannot ensure the mind's success. The mind cannot understand intelligence. Intelligence cannot comprehend what is not manifest. The subtle soul can alone see.'"'
