Vaishampayana said, 'O bull among the Bharata lineage! With his brothers, whose beautiful eyes were like lotus
petals and who were tigers among men, the king resided in that hermitage. There were immensely fortunate
ascetics who had assembled from many countries. They wished to see the sons of the king of the Kurus, the broad-
chested Pandavas. They said, "We wish to know this. Which one among these is Yudhishthira? Where are Bhima,
Arjuna and the illustrious Droupadi?" The suta recounted all their names. Sanjaya also introduced them to Droupadi and all the other Kuru women. "This one is fair, with a complexion that is like that of pure gold. His body is like
that of a grown and large lion. His nose is sharp and his eyes are long and large. His complexion is coppery. This is
the king of the Kurus. This one's gait is like of a mad king among elephants. He is fair and his complexion is like
that of pure and heated gold. He is large and his arms are long and thick. Look. This is Vrikodara. Behold him.
Next to him, there is the one with the large bow. He is young and dark, with a complexion like that of the leader of
a herd of elephants. His shoulders are like that of a lion and his gait is like that of an elephant that is sporting. His
eyes are like lotus petals. This is the brave Arjuna. The supreme men who are near Kunti are the twins, equal to
Vishnu and the great Indra. Among all the men in this world, there is no one who is their equal in beauty, strength
or good conduct. This one has eyes like lotus petals. She is middle-aged and is like one from heaven. Her complexion is like that of a blue lotus. This is Krishna, like Lakshmi personified, like the deity of a city. Next to her there is
one with a golden complexion. Her complexion is like that of Gouri[Parvati.] personified. O foremost among brahmanas!
This unmatched one in the middle is the sister of the one who has the chakra as a weapon[This is a reference to Subhadra, Krishna's sister.]. There was a prosperous king who was the leader of an army. That king always challenged Krishna and this one, with a complexion like
that of a blue lotus, is his sister[The king who challenged Krishna was Shishupala. This is one of the rare instances where one is told that Bhima
married Shishupala's sister. Even if one ignores Droupadi, this sister was certainly not Bhima's chief wife.]. This is the one who is Vrikodara's chief wife. This is the daughter of the famous
king of Magadha, Jarasandha. Her complexion is like that of a champaka flower and she is the wife of Madravati's
younger son[Sahadeva married her.]. This one has a body that is like a blue lotus and there is no one who is her equal on earth. Her eyes
are like lotus petals and she is the wife of Madravati's older son[Nakula. Nakula's wife was Karenumati, Shishupala's daughter.]. This fair one has a complexion like that of heated gold. She is the daughter of King Virata and this is her son[Uttara and Parikshit.]. She is the wife of Abhimanyu, the one who was
slain in the battle when he was without a chariot, though Drona and the others were on their chariots. These ones
are attired in white upper garments and do not have the partings in their hair[Signs of married women.]. They are the wives of the king of
men[Duryodhana.]. They are also the daughters-in-law of the aged king, who lost one hundred of his brave sons. They are thus
without protectors. O brahmanas! O upright ones! O those who are spirited and intelligent! I have recounted the
names of the foremost ones. These are the ones you have asked me about. O ones who are pure in intelligence!
These are the wives of lords of men." The aged king of the Kurus was like a god among men and he thus met his
sons. When all the ascetics had gone, he asked all of them about their welfare. The warriors seated themselves
around the hermitage, in a clear area that was free of fallen leaves. As is proper, the women, the aged and the
young seated themselves and he asked them about their welfare.'
