Yudhishthira asked, "O supreme teacher! In determining what task to pursue, should one decide quickly or take time
over the decision? We are always confronted with extremely difficult tasks."

'Bhishma replied, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about what happened earlier, concerning the conduct of Chirakara, born in the lineage of Angiras[Chirakara means a person who acts after a long time, so there is a pun.]. A person who acts after a long time is
fortunate. A fortunate person is one who acts after a long time. A person who acts after a long time is intelligent
and does not commit a sin in his acts. Goutama's son acted after a long time and was immensely wise[Chirakara was the sage Goutama's son and Goutama was born in the Angiras lineage.]. He took a
long time to decide on all tasks. He thought about the objective for a long time. He remained awake for a long
time. He slept for a long time. He completed tasks after a long time. Therefore, he was known as Chirakara. He
was also spoken of as lazy and limited in intelligence. People said that he was foolish in intelligence and lacked
far-sightedness. On one occasion, his father was angry at his mother's promiscuous behaviour[Goutama's wife was Ahalya and she was seduced by Indra. Since Indra did this in Goutama's disguise, this
wasn't quite Ahalya's fault. In the standard story, Ahalya was cursed by Goutama that she would turn to stone
and be eventually liberated by Rama.]. Ignoring the other sons, he told him, 'Kill this mother of yours.' Though he agreed when he was asked, as was his nature, Chirakara thought about this for a long time[Here, the text uses the word Chirakarika. But Chirakarika and Chirakara mean the same thing.]. He was cautious and always thought for a long time about what should
be done. 'How will I follow the instructions of my father and yet not kill my mother? While apparently following
dharma,  how  will  I  avoid  being  submerged,  like  a  wicked  person?  Following  the  instructions  of  the  father  is
supreme dharma. Yet, protecting my mother is my own dharma. Since a son is not independent, how can I avoid
being afflicted? How can one be happy after killing a woman and a mother? How can one obtain status after ignoring a father's orders? I cannot ignore what my father has said. I must nurture and protect my mother. How will I
resist suffering on either score? How will I not cross either? The father's own self enters the wife and is born, so
that conduct, character, lineage and family can be sustained[The son is believed to be part of the father's own self, born through the mother.]. I am my father's own self. But I am also my mother's son. Since I know how I have been born, why should I not possess knowledge about this[That is, there is no doubt about the father or the mother.]? My father spoke
words at the time of my jatakarma and other minor rites. Those are sufficient to firmly establish the reverence that
is due to my father. Because the father nurtures and instructs, it is supreme dharma to regard him as the foremost
among instructors. That is dharma, conclusively determined in the Vedas. The only source of delight to the father
is the son. The father is everything for the son. The body and everything else have been given by the father alone.
Therefore, one must act in accordance with one's father's words and not think about it at all. If one acts in accordance with one's father's words, all one's sins are cleansed. In sight of all the worlds, he provided fortune and objects of pleasure at the time of delivery. He was a party to the union and acknowledged this is the simantonnayana
ceremony[These are references to the father accepting paternity before the son is born. Simantonnayana is parting of the
hair and the husband applies colour (usualy vermilion) to the parting on his wife's hair. Before delivery, this is
done in the fourth, sixth or eighth month.]. The father is heaven. The father is dharma. The father is the supreme of austerities. When the father
is pleased, all the gods are pleased. Any benedictions pronounced by a father serve a man. When the father praises,
there is cleansing of all sins. The flower is severed from the stalk. The fruit is also severed from the stalk. But even
if the son's affection decreases, the father's affection remains.' These were the son's thoughts about the reverence
that was due to the father. 'The father does not occupy an inferior station. Let me now think about my mother. I
have been born on earth as a compound of the five elements. But my mother was the origin, like the two pieces of
wood used to create a fire. For the body of any man, the mother represents those sticks and saves him from all
hardships. When she is there, there is no reason for sorrow. When she is not there, there is hardship. Even when a
person is divested of riches, his mother is there in the house. Even if a person has many sons and grandsons, even
if he is one hundred years old, when he approaches his mother, he behaves like a two-year-old. Whether a person is
capable or incapable, whether a person is fat or thin, the mother protects the son. According to the ordinances,
there is no one else who sustains in that way. When he is separated from his mother, he ages, he is distressed and
the entire world seems to be empty. There is no shelter that is equal to a mother. There is no objective that is equal
to a mother. There is no sanctuary equal to a mother. There is no protection equal to a mother. Because she bears
him in her womb, she is known as Dhatri. Because she gives birth, she is known as Janani. Because she nurtures
his limbs, she is known as Amba. Because she gives birth to a brave one, she is known as Virasu. Because she nurtures the child, she is known as Sushru. There is no difference between a mother and one's own body. Unless his
head is empty and he is devoid of his senses, which man will kill such a person? When a couple unites to bear life,
there is resolution in both the mother and the father, but success in accomplishing that objective depends on the
mother. The mother knows the gotra and the mother knows whom he has been born from[The implied suggestion is that Chirakara knows that Goutama is his father only because his mother has told him
that.]. The mother's pleasure
comes from nurturing alone. The father's affection is from a desire to have offspring. If a man himself accepts a
woman's hand for the sake of following dharma together and then goes to another woman, he is not slain on those
grounds. A husband is known as Bharta because he sustains his wife. He is known as Pati because he protects his
wife. When these two traits disappear, a husband is neither a Bharta nor a Pati. A woman cannot commit a crime.
It is the man who commits the crime. While adultery is a great crime, it is the man who has commited the crime[One can speculate about why this should be the case. In all probability, this is because of the patriarchal view
that a man was committing a crime against another man's property. Hence, the woman was absolved of guilt.].
For the wife, it has been said that the husband is the greatest protector and the supreme god. She gave herself up to
someone who was in the form of that supreme person[Indra in Goutama's disguise.]. In all acts that involve crimes, women never commit the
crimes. We have been given the injunction that women are never satisfied with intercourse[Given this proclivity, they cannot be blamed.]. There is no doubt
about this evident nature of dharma and it should be remembered. She is a woman and a mother and occupies a position of greatest reverence. Even brutish animals know that such a person should not be killed. It is known that the
father is alone a collection of all the gods. But because of her affection, the mother is a collection of all mortal beings and the gods.' In this way, because he took a long time to act, he reflected a lot.

'"After a long period of time had elapsed, Goutama returned. After having engaged in austerities, the immensely
wise Medhatithi Goutama returned. He had also thought about it for a long time and had decided that what he had
proposed for his wife was improper. He was tormented by great grief and tears flowed from his eyes. Because of
the effects of his learning, he was overcome with repentance. 'Purandara, the lord of the three worlds, came to my
hermitage. He was in the form of a brahmana, following the vow of being a guest. At that time, I comforted him
with words. I welcomed and honoured him. As is proper, I gave him the gift due to a guest and water for washing
the feet[Arghya and padya respectively.]. As is proper, I bowed down before him and spoke to him obediently. A woman belongs to an incompetent species and cannot be held to have committed a transgression. Thus I, my wife, or the lord of the thirty gods,
did not commit a crime[Why is Indra not being blamed? Probably because Goutama did not wish to blame anyone else, especially a
guest. Alternatively, Indra had lost his senses and was therefore not in control over himself.]. It is dharma's fault that delusion led to the offence. Those who hold up their seeds have
said that all hardships emanate from envy. It is because of jealousy[Indra's jealousy.] that I have been destroyed and flung into this
ocean of great grief. I confront this hardship because I have had a virtuous and beloved woman killed. I should
have protected my wife. Who will save me now? I acted hastily and commanded the intelligent Chirakara. But because he takes a long time to act, perhaps he can still save me from this sin. A person who takes a long time to act
is fortunate. A fortunate person takes a long time to act. If you have taken a long time to act now, you will truly be
Chirakara. Save me, your mother and all the austerities that I have accomplished. If you also save yourself from
that sin, you will truly be Chirakarika. You naturally take a long time to act and this long time is indicative of your
wisdom. Make the truth about your name successful today and be Chirakarika. Your mother expected you for a
long time. She bore you in her womb for a long time. Make that long period of time you take also true today. Be
Chirakarika. Is he taking a long time[To come and greet Goutama on return.] because of repentance? Has he been delayed because he has slept for a long
time? Perhaps Chirakarika is not showing himself because of the great torment it will cause to both of us.' O king!
In this fashion, maharshi Goutama was miserable at the time. Then he saw his son, Chirakarika, standing close to
him. On seeing his father, Chirakarika was extremely miserable. He threw the weapon away and bowed his head
down, to seek favours. Goutama saw that his son was prostrate before him on the ground, with his head bowing
down. He was extremely delighted to see that his wife was without harm. The great-souled one had gone away
alone, separating himself from his wife and his intelligent son in that hermitage. The son stood there humbly, with
the weapon in his hand, expecting to be reprimanded[However, we were earlier told that the son had flung the weapon away.]. He asked if he should complete the task that had been assigned to him. The father saw that the intelligent son was still prostrate at his feet. He was terrified and was seeking his pardon for at all having picked up the weapon. The father praised him for a long time and inhaled the fragrance of his head for a long time. He embraced him for a long time and said, 'May you live for a long time.' Because of his son, Goutama was thus filled with joy and delight.

'"The immensely wise one praised him and spoke these words. 'O fortunate one! O Chirakarika! For a long
time, may you take a long time to act. Because of the long time you took, I have been saved from great misery for
a long period of time.' The learned one, supreme among sages, then sung this chant. 'Patient people, should take a
long time to act, because that course is full of qualities. One should take a long time before severing a friendship.
One should act so as to discard him, only after a long period of time. One should take a long time before making a
friend. But having done this, one should sustain him for a long time. Whether it is in anger, insolence, pride, hatred, wicked deeds or unpleasant tasks, a person who takes a long time is praised. When an accusation against a
relative, a well-wisher, a servant or a woman has not been proved, a person who takes a long time is praised.' O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thus was Goutama pleased with his son. O Kouravya! Therefore, on any task,
you should also take a long time. If a man thus thinks about every task for a long time and then makes up his mind,
he will not be tormented for a long time. If a man holds his anger for a long time and if he embarks on action after
a long time, he does not suffer repentance because of his deeds. The aged must be worshipped for a long time. One
must sit near them for a long time. One must serve dharma for a long time. One must spend a long time in enquiry.
One must serve the learned for a long time. One must attend to the virtuous for a long time. One must restrain
one's atman for a long time. Then, one will be respected for a long time. When one is asked by others, one must
spend a long time in replying, in words that are full of dharma. One must think for a long time before answering.
Then, one will not be subjugated for a long time. The extremely great ascetic[Goutama.] performed a lot of worship in his
hermitage for many years. With his son, the brahmana then went to heaven."'
