Sanjaya said, "Their soldiers possessed large standards and advanced, swelling in
numbers. Trumpets and other musical instruments blared in the vanguard, like large
masses of clouds roaring at the end of summer. The mighty elephants were like
clouds. There were the sounds of musical instruments, axles and the slapping of
palms. The colourful weapons, decorated with gold, were like lightning. The giant
chariots raised a mighty sound. Currents of blood began to flow with a great
force[The image is of a river.]. It was full of swords and bore along the lives of kshatriyas. There was
carnage of beings, cruel, like a shower at the wrong time that brings destruction.
Chariots, charioteers, horses and elephants and all the other enemies were made to
die by Partha's storm of arrows. He killed horses with their riders and large numbers of foot soldiers. Kripa and Shikhandi clashed against each other in the battle
and Satyaki attacked Duryodhana. Shrutashrava fought with Drona's son and Yudhamanyu with Chitrasena. Uttamouja from the Srinjayas clashed against Karna's
son, the ratha Sushena. Sahadeva rushed against the king of Gandhara, like a hungry lion attacking a giant bull. The young Shatanika, Nakula's son, attacked Karna's son, the young Vrishasena, with a storm of arrows. Karna's brave son struck
the Panchala with many showers of arrows[Sushena and Uttamouja. This shloka should have come earlier.]. Madri's son, Nakula, colourful in
fighting and a bull among rathas, attacked Kritavarma. Yajnasena's son, the lord of
Panchala[Dhrishtadyumna, Yajnasena was one of Drupada's names.], attacked Karna, the overall commander, and his soldiers. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! With the army of the Bharatas, extended by the arrays
of the samshaptakas, Duhshasana attacked Bhima, supreme among wielders of
weapons and unassailable because of his force, in the battle. The brave Uttamouja
attacked Karna's son and severed his head, which fell down on the ground. He then
roared loudly and that sound echoed in the sky. On seeing that Sushena's head had
fallen down on the ground, Karna adopted a fearful form. He used extremely sharp
arrows to sever his[Uttamouja's.] horses, chariot and standard. Uttamouja used sharp arrows
to strike Kripa and used a radiant sword to slay his horses and parshni charioteers.
He then ascended Shikhandi's chariot. Shikhandi was stationed on his own chariot.
On seeing that Kripa was without a chariot, Shikhandi wished to strike him with
arrows. However, Drona's son repulsed him with his chariot. He saved Kripa, who
was submerged, like a cow in mud. Meanwhile, Bhima was clad in golden armour
and used his sharp arrows to torment the soldiers of your son. He was like the sun,
at the auspicious time when it is midday." '
