'Sanjaya said, "O venerable one! Drona's son, Bhurishrava, Shalya, Chitrasena[In what follows, the warrior seems to be Shala and not Chitrasena.] and Samyamani's son[Samyamani is another name for Shala.]
fought with Subhadra's son. While he was fighting with these five tigers among men alone, people saw that he was
extremely energetic and was like a young lion against elephants. No one was equal to Krishna's son[The Krishna here is Arjuna and Krishna's son is Abhimanyu.] in sureness
of aim, courage, valour, knowledge of weapons and dexterity. When Partha saw his son, the scorcher of enemies,
thus displaying his valour in that battle, he uttered a roar like a lion. O lord of the earth! O Indra among kings!
Having seen your grandson oppress your soldiers in this way, those on your side surrounded him from all directions. But Subhadra's son, the destroyer of enemies, was not dispirited. Using his energy and strength, he attacked
the sons of Dhritarashtra. When he was fighting with the enemy in that battle and using his large bow, he was like
the sun in radiance and was seen to use dextrous moves. He pierced Drona's son with one arrow and Shalya with
five. He sliced down the standard of Samyamani's son with eight. Somadatta's son[Bhurishrava.] hurled a gold-shafted and
giant lance at him and it was like a serpent. But he cut it down with sharp arrows. Arjuna's heir repulsed the hundreds of extremely terrible arrows that Shalya shot and slew his four horses. Bhurishrava, Shalya, Drona's son,
Samyamani's son and Shala were struck with terror at the strength of arms displayed by Krishna's son and could
not withstand him.

'"O Indra among kings! The Trigartas, the Madras, the Kekayas, with a number of twenty-five thousand, were
urged by your son. They were foremost among those who were skilled in the use of weapons and were incapable
of being vanquished by enemies in battle. They surrounded Kiriti and his son, desiring to kill them. O king! The
Panchala general, conqueror of enemies, saw from a distance that the father and son, bulls among charioteers, had
been surrounded. With many thousands of elephants and chariots and surrounded by hundreds of thousands of
horse-riders and infantry, the scorcher of enemies angrily stretched his bow and advanced against the army of
Madras and Kekayas. Protected by the illustrious and firm wielder of the bow and with masses of chariots, elephants and horses, that army was resplendent as it advanced towards the fight. O descendant of the Kuru lineage!
While he was advancing towards Arjuna, Panchala struck Sharadvat[Kripa.] in the shoulder with three arrows. He
killed ten Madrakas with ten arrows. With a broad-headed arrow, he cheerfully killed Kritavarma's horses. With an
iron arrow that was broad at the tip, the scorcher of enemies killed Damana, the heir of the great-souled Pourava.
At this, Samyamani's son pierced Panchala, who was invincible in battle, with thirty arrows and his charioteer with
another ten. Having been thus wounded, that great archer licked the corners of his mouth with his tongue and used
a broad-headed and extremely sharp arrow to slice down the bow[Of Samayamani's son.]. O king! He swiftly wounded him with another twenty-five and killed his horses and the two charioteers who protected his flanks[Parshnis. Parshni has different meanings. When four horses are attached to a chariot, it means one of the outside horses. It can also mean one of the two charioteers who drive the outside horses, as opposed to the main
charioteer (sarathi), or someone who guards the axles.]. O bull among the Bharata
lineage! With his horses slain, Samyamani's son remained stationed on the chariot and looked at the great-souled
son of Panchala[The word Panchala is being used both for Drupada and for his son, Dhrishtadyumna.]. Grasping an extremely terrible sword that was made out of iron, he advanced on foot towards
the chariot of Drupada's son. He was like a large wave, or like a serpent descending from the sky. He whirled his
sword and with the blazing sword, looked like the resplendent sun at the time of destruction. He was like a crazy
elephant in his valour. The Pandavas and Parshata Dhrishtadyumna saw him. On seeing him advance towards him,
with a sharp sword in his hand and holding a shield, Panchala's son was overcome with rage. He was beyond the
range of arrows, but was swiftly advancing towards the chariot. The enraged general shattered his head with a
club. O king! When he fell down dead, the extremely polished sword and shield were loosened from his hands and
fell down on the ground. Thus did the great-souled son of the king of Panchala exhibit his terrible valour and having killed him with his supreme club, obtained supreme fame.

'"O venerable one! When the prince, the maharatha and great archer, was killed, loud cries of lamentation arose
among your soldiers. Having seen that his son had been slain, Samyamani angrily and forcefully advanced against
Panchala, invincible in battle. A great battle commenced between those two brave ones, both of whom were invincible in battle and all the kings among the Kurus and the Pandavas looked on. Samyamani, the destroyer of enemy
heroes, struck Parshata with three arrows, like a mighty elephant with goads. Shalya, the adornment of any assembly, also angrily struck the brave Parshata on his chest and another encounter commenced."'
