'Bhima said, "O king! Your understanding has become clouded, just like a scholar of the Vedas who has limited
intelligence and recites passages from the Vedas, without realizing their true purport. O bull among the Bharata
lineage! If you had made up your mind to be lazy and censure the dharma of kings, then what has been gained
from this destruction of the sons of Dhritarashtra? Forgiveness, compassion, pity and non-violence-with the exception of you, there is no one who treads the path of kshatriyas who is tied down by these. Had we got to know
that your intentions would be of this type, we would never have picked up our weapons and killed anyone. We
would have roamed around and sustained ourselves through begging, until it was time to free ourselves from our
bodies. This terrible battle between the kings would not have taken place. The wise ones have said that everything is meant to sustain life. Everything, mobile and immobile, is food to sustain life. Therefore, anyone who
stands in the way of obtaining the kingdom must be slain. Those who are wise and learned about the dharma of
kshatriyas have said this. Those killed by us were wicked. They stood in the way of the kingdom. O Yudhishthira!
Having slain them, we should follow dharma and enjoy the earth. We are like a man digging a well, who stops in
his task before having reached the water, and is therefore only covered in mud. We are acting like someone who
climbs a tall tree for honey, but falls down and dies before he has been able to obtain it. We are acting like a man
who sets out on a great journey with high hopes, but who despairs and returns. O supreme among the Kuru lineage! We are acting like a man who slays his enemies and then kills himself. We are acting like someone who is
hungry, but having obtained food, does not eat it because he does not feel like it. We are acting like someone who
is driven by desire, but having obtained a beautiful woman, does not perform the act. However, we are the ones
who should be censured. We are the ones who are limited in our intelligence. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! We have followed you, merely because you are the eldest. We possess the strength of arms. We are accomplished in our learning. We are spirited. But because we follow the words of a eunuch, we are like ones who
are incapacitated. We are the refuge of those who do not have a refuge. However, our prosperity will be destroyed
and our objectives will be unsuccessful. When people see us in this way, what will they think of us? It has been
instructed that renunciation should be resorted to in times of distress, by someone who has been overtaken by old
age, or by someone who has been defeated by his enemies. Those who are accomplished in wisdom do not recommend renunciation in a situation like this. Those who are subtle in discernment think that this is a transgression of dharma. Therefore, how can you resort to a state that is not recommended for you? You should censure it
too, and not faithfully accept it[The state of sannyasa or renunciation.]. Men who are without prosperity and riches, those who are atheists, have propounded this view about the learning in the Vedas. This is falsehood in the garb of truth. If a man who is capable
resorts to this state of shaving his head, he is deluding himself. He is resorting to false dharma. Though he subsists, he does not live. Then again, though he is capable of sustaining sons, grandsons, gods, rishis, guests and ancestors, he decides to lead a solitary life of happiness in the forest. Even animals, boars and birds cannot obtain
heaven in this way. People do not say that this is an auspicious way of life. O king! If one could obtain success
only through sannyasa, then mountains and trees would have swiftly obtained success. They are always seen not
to cause injury towards others and are based on sannyasa. They have no possessions and always live on their
own. If success can be obtained through one's own fortune[A reflection of past deeds.] and not that of others, one should undertake action.
There can be no success without action. Aquatic creatures have no one but themselves to sustain. If that is the criterion, they would obtain success. Notice that everyone in this universe is preoccupied with his own tasks. Therefore, one should act. There can be no success without action."'
