Yudhishthira said, "O lord! I am reassured by what you have spoken about dharma. O grandfather! But I will
relate the doubts that I have. Tell me about these. O immensely radiant one! What are said to be the fruits of
vows and what is their nature? What are the fruits of rituals[We have translated vrata as vow and niyama as ritual. Both are principles of observance and conduct. However,
there is a sense of worship in the former, missing in the latter. A vrata can also be a specific case of a niyama.]? What are the fruits of studying on one's own? What
are the fruits of self-restraint and of sustaining the Vedas? What are the fruits of teaching? I wish to know about all
these. O grandfather! In this world, what are the fruits of not accepting gifts? What are heard and seen to be the
fruits for those who give? What are the fruits obtained by brave ones who are engaged in their own acts? What are
said to be the fruits of truth? What are the fruits of brahmacharya?. What happens as a result of serving the father
or serving the mother? What about serving the instructor or the preceptor? What about lack of anger and compassion? O grandfather! O one who knows about dharma! I desire to know the truth about all this, in detail. My curiosity is great."

'Bhishma replied, "A person who follows the instructions, commences a vow and completes it properly, obtains
the eternal worlds. O king! The fruits of rituals are directly seen. You have obtained the fruits of rituals and sacrifices. The fruits of studying on one's own are seen in this world and in the world hereafter. There is artha in this
world and eternal bliss in Brahma's world. O king! Listen in detail to the fruits of self-restraint. A self-restrained
person is happy everywhere. A self-restrained person is detached everywhere. Self-restrained people can go wherever they wish and can destroy all their enemies. There is no doubt that self-restrained people obtain what they desire. O Pandava! Those who are self-restrained obtain all the objects of desire everywhere. Because of their valour
and austerities, they find bliss in heaven. There are many kinds of sacrifices with donations. A self-restrained and
forgiving donor is not enraged. Therefore, self-restraint is superior to donations. If a person is enraged after the act
of giving, his eternal worlds of giving are destroyed because of that rage. Therefore, self-restraint is superior to donations. O great king! There are tens of thousands of invisible abodes in heaven. The rishis are conveyed to all
those worlds and the gods go there. O king! The supreme rishis go there because of their self-restraint. As they
wish, they can go to those great places. Therefore, self-restraint is superior to donations. O lord of men! If an instructor follows the instructions and offers oblations into the fire, by virtue of his efforts, he obtains the fruits of
Brahma's undecaying world. Having studied the Vedas, if a person legitimately passes on that knowledge, having
praised the deeds of his preceptor, he obtains greatness in heaven. If a kshatriya is engaged in studying, performs
sacrifices, gives donations and saves others in battle, he too obtains greatness in heaven. A vaishya who donates
and is engaged in his own tasks obtains greatness. A shudra who serves and is engaged in his own tasks goes to
heaven. Many kinds of valiant ones have been spoken of, and listen to what is earmarked for them. There are indicated destinations for brave ones and fruits for brave ones. There are those who are brave in sacrifices, brave in
self-restraint and brave in truth. Men are said to be brave in battle and brave in donating. Others are brave in intelligence and still others are brave in forgiveness. There are men who are brave in uprightness, or brave in tranquility. There are many other virtuous ones who are brave in rituals. There are those who are brave in studying the
Vedas and those who are brave in teaching. There are those who are brave in serving preceptors and brave in serving fathers. Others are brave in serving mothers, or brave in begging for alms. There are many who are brave in
practice of sankhya. There are others who are brave in practice of yoga. There are those who are brave in the forest, in the household and in worshipping guests. Because of  the fruits they have conquered through their own
deeds, all of them go to the supreme worlds. Upholding all the Vedas or bathing in all the tirthas may, or may not,
always be equal to speaking the truth. One thousand horse sacrifices and truth were weighed on both sides of a balance and truth was superior to one thousand horse sacrifices. The sun heats because of truth. The fire blazes because of truth. The wind blows because of truth. Everything is established in truth. The gods, the ancestors and
brahmanas are delighted by the truth. Truth is said to be the supreme dharma. Therefore, truth must not be violated. The sages are devoted to the truth. The sages possess truth for their valour. The sages pledge by the truth.
Therefore, truth is superior. O bull among the Bharata lineage! A person who is devoted to the truth finds delight in
the world of heaven. Self-restraint leads to the fruits of truth being obtained. Thus, with all my soul, I have spoken
about it. There is no doubt that all those who are humble in soul obtain greatness in heaven. O lord of the earth!
Hear  from  me  about  the  qualities  of  brahmacharya.  O  lord  of  men!  In  this  world,  if  a  person  practises  brahmacharya from birth to death, know that there is nothing he cannot obtain. There are many crore of rishis who
dwell in Brahma's world. They have always been devoted to the truth. They have been self-restrained and have
held up their seed. O king! A person who follows brahmacharya destroys all sins. This is especially true of a brahmana. A brahmana is said to be like the fire. This fire is evident in an ascetic brahmana. If a brahmachari is enraged, even Shakra is terrified. Thus, the fruits of brahmacharya are seen in the rishis. Hear about the dharma that
results from worshipping the mother and the father. O king! If a person serves the father without any malice, if he
serves the mother, the preceptor or the instructor without any sense of ego, know that his fruits are a supreme state
in the world of heaven. With a cleansed soul, if a person serves his preceptor, he doesn't have to see hell."'
