'Sanjaya said, "On seeing that the spirited Chitrasena was without a chariot, your son, Vikarna, picked him up on
his own chariot. An extremely tumultuous and fierce battle raged there. Bhishma, Shantanu's son, swiftly attacked
Yudhishthira. With their chariots, elephants and horses, the Srinjayas trembled. They thought that Yudhishthira was
already inside the mouth of death. However, the lord Kouravya Yudhishthira, together with the twins, attacked the
great archer and tiger among men, Bhishma, Shantanu's son. In that battle, Pandava shot thousands of arrows.
They enveloped Bhishma, like clouds covering the sky. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Gangeya received a
net of innumerable arrows, in hundreds and thousands. O venerable one! Bhishma also released a net of arrows. It
looked like a swarm travelling through the sky. In that battle, in an instant, Bhishma, Shantanu's son, made
Kounteya invisible in the encounter through the net of arrows he shot in groups. King Yudhishthira was enraged
and despatched an iron arrow at the great-souled Kouravya. It was like a virulent serpent. O king! But before it
could reach him in that encounter, maharatha Bhishma used a kshurapra arrow to slice down the weapon released
from the bow. Having destroyed the iron arrow in battle, which was like death, Bhishma killed the horses, decorated with gold, of the Indra among Kouravas. With the horses slain, Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, abandoned the
chariot and swiftly ascended the chariot of the great-souled Nakula. Bhishma, the destroyer of enemy cities, was
extremely enraged in that battle. He attacked the twins and covered them with arrows. O great king! On seeing that
they were oppressed by Bhishma's arrows, he[Yudhishthira.] desired Bhishma's death and anxiously thought about the means.

'"Yudhishthira addressed all the kings and well-wishers who were following him. 'All of you unite and kill
Bhishma, Shantanu's son.' All the kings heard the words that Partha had addressed and they surrounded the grandfather with a large number of chariots. Your father, Devavrata, was surrounded in every direction. O king! He
seemed to be playing with his bow and brought down those maharathas. While all the Parthas looked on, Kourava
strode around on that field of battle, like a lion cub in the forest amidst a herd of deer. He roared in the battle and
frightened the brave ones with his arrows. O great king! They were frightened on seeing him, like a herd of deer at
a lion. The kshatriyas saw the movements of that lion among the Bharata lineage in that battle. He was like a fire
consuming dry wood, aided by the wind. In that encounter, Bhishma brought down the heads of the rathas, like a
skilled man bringing down ripe fruit from a palm tree. O great king! As those heads fell down on the ground, there
was a tremendous sound, like that of stones falling down. There was a tumultuous and extremely terrible battle.
There was great and extreme confusion among all those soldiers. The vyuhas of the kshatriyas were thus shattered.
In that battle, they challenged one another to a fight. Shikhandi forcefully approached the grandfather of the
Bharatas, asking him to wait. But Bhishma avoided Shikhandi in that battle, remembering Shikhandi's feminine
nature[Earlier, Shikhandi had been the lady Amba.]. Instead, he angrily attacked the Srinjayas. On seeing maharatha Bhishma, the Srinjayas were delighted.
They roared like lions and uttered many other shouts. These mingled with the sound of conch shells. O lord! This
was a time when the sun was stationed on the other side of the directions[It was afternoon and the sun was in the western sky.]. A battle with chariots and elephants
commenced.

'"Panchala Dhrishtadyumna and maharatha Satyaki oppressed the soldiers terribly, using a shower of spears and
javelins. O king! In that battle, they used many arrows to strike down those on your side. O bull among men!
Though those on your side were killed in that battle, the noble ones were resolved to fight in that battle and did not
retreat from the encounter. In that battle, those maharatha men strove to the best of their endeavours. But a great
lamentation arose among the great-souled ones on your side. On hearing this terrible lamentation amidst the maharathas on your side, Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti attacked Parshata. Those swift maharathas slew his horses. They enveloped Parshata with a shower of arrows. At this, the extremely strong Panchala quickly jumped down
from his chariot. He swiftly ascended the chariot of the extremely great-souled Satyaki. King Yudhishthira was
surrounded by a large army. With this, in that battle, he angrily attacked the scorchers of enemies from Avanti. O
venerable one! Your sons made every effort to surround Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti. O bull among the kshatriya lineage! Arjuna angrily fought against the kshatriyas. He fought in that battle, like the wielder of the vajra
against the asuras. Drona was also angry in that battle, wishing to do that which would bring your son pleasure. He
began to consume all the Panchalas, like a fire amidst a mass of cotton. O lord of the earth! With Duryodhana at
the forefront, your sons surrounded Bhishma in that battle and fought against the Pandavas.

'"O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When the sun assumed a reddish tinge, King Duryodhana spoke to all
those who were on your side. 'Do not delay.' They fought on and accomplished extremely difficult tasks. But the
sun ascended the Asta mountain[Mountain behind which the sun sets.] and could no longer be seen. An extremely terrible river began to flow and its
current and waves were made out of blood. It was infested with masses of jackals and it was the moment of twilight. Jackals let out fearful howls and it was inauspicious. The terrible field of battle was infested with the spirits
of the dead. Rakshasas, pishachas and others who fed on flesh were seen in every direction, in hundreds and thousands. Arjuna vanquished the kings who followed Susharma, together with their followers. In the midst of his divisions, he then proceeded towards his own camp. O Indra among kings! Since it was night, surrounded by the soldiers and with his brothers, King Kourvaya Yudhishthira also went to his own camp. Having vanquished the rathas
headed by Duryodhana in battle, Bhimasena also went to his own camp. In the great battle, Duryodhana was surrounded by the kings. With Bhishma, Shantanu's son, he swiftly went to his camp. Surrounded by all their armies,
Drona, Drona's son, Kripa, Shalya and Satvata Kritavarma also went to their camps. O king! Surrounded in the
battle by all the warriors, Satyaki and Parshata Dhrishtadyumna also went to their camps. O great king! When it
was night, thus did the scorchers of enemies, on your side and on that of the Pandavas, retreat. The Pandavas and
the Kurus went to their own camps. O great king! They entered and honoured each other. The brave ones made
arrangements for protecting themselves and set up outposts, according to the prescribed methods. They removed
the stakes[From the wounds.] and bathed in different kinds of water. Benedictions were pronounced and all of them were praised
by bards. Those illustrious ones sported, to the sound of singing and the playing of musical instruments. For a
short while, everything seemed to be like heaven. The maharathas did not speak at all about what transpired in the
battle. O king! Having been exhausted, all the people in the armies slept. O king! With the large numbers of elephants and horses, it was seen to be beautiful."'
