'"Kripa said, 'O one without decay! It is through good fortune that you have decided to take revenge. Even the
wielder of the vajra himself is incapable of restraining you. When it is morning, both of us will follow and accompany you. However, cast aside your armour and standard and rest tonight. When you advance against the enemy, I
and Satvata Kritavarma will armour ourselves and follow you on our chariots. O best among rathas! United with
us, you will use your valour to slaughter the enemy, the Panchalas and their followers, in the encounter. You are
capable of doing this through your prowess. But rest during the night. O son[The word used is tata. This means son, but is affectionately used towards
anyone who is younger or junior.]! You have not slept for a long time.
Sleep during this night. O one who grants honours! You are exhausted and without sleep. Rest, and then clash
against the enemy in the battle. There is no doubt that you will slay them. You are the best among rathas! When
you grasp your supreme weapons, no one is capable of defeating you, not even the gods, with Agni's son[The text uses the word Pavaki, Pavaka's (Agni, the fire god) son. This
means Kartikeya.]. When
you advance angrily in the battle, with Kripa and Kritavarma, which warrior is capable of fighting against Drona's
son. Not even the king of the gods. Let us overcome our exhaustion and lack of sleep. Let us get over our anxiety.
When the night is over and it is morning, we will kill the enemy. There is no doubt that you possess divine
weapons. So do I. Satvata is a great archer and is always skilled in fighting. O son! We will unite and advance
against the enemy. We will strike and kill them in the battle and obtain complete happiness. However, you should
rest first. Sleep happily during the night. O supreme among men! When you advance, Kritavarma and I will unite
and follow you. We are archers and can scorch the enemy. When you advance swiftly on your chariot, we will armour ourselves and station ourselves on our chariots. You will go to the camp[The camp of the Panchalas and the Pandavas.] and proclaim your name in the
battle. You will fight against the enemy and cause great carnage. When it is morning and the day is clear, you will
create that carnage. You will roam around, like Shakra destroying the great asuras. You are capable of destroying
the Panchala formations in the battle. You will be like the enraged slayer of all the danavas[Probably meaning Indra.], against the army of
the daityas. When you are united with me in the battle and are protected by Kritavarma, the lord who is the wielder
of the vajra is himself incapable of withstanding you. O son! Neither I, nor Kritavarma, will ever retreat from an
encounter without having defeated the Pandus in the battle. We will kill all the inferior and united Panchalas and
Pandus in the battle and return. Or we will be killed by them and go to heaven. When it is morning, we will aid
you through every possible means. O mighty-armed one! O unblemished one! I am telling you this truthfully.'

'"The maternal uncle of Drona's son thus spoke these beneficial words to him[Though not explicitly stated, this is Sanjaya speaking again. Ashvatthama's mother was Kripi, Kripa's sister. Kripa was hence his maternal uncle.]. O king! But having been thus
addressed by his maternal uncle, his eyes became red with rage. He replied, 'If a man is afflicted and intolerant,
how can he sleep? This is also true of someone who is thinking about artha and kama. Behold. I confront all these
four reasons today. Even one of these four can destroy my sleep in the night, not to speak of the grief of someone
like me who remembers the slaughter of his father. My heart is tormented now and I can find no peace during the
day or at night. In particular, all of you have witnessed the wicked way in which my father was killed and this is
tearing at my vitals. On this earth, how can someone like me remain alive even for an instant, after hearing the
words the Panchalas spoke to me when Drona was killed? Without killing Dhrishtadyumna, I am not interested in
remaining alive. Since he and the united Panchalas killed my father, they deserve to be slain by me. On hearing the
lamentations of the king with shattered thighs[Duryodhana.], is there anyone who is so cruel that his heart will not be tormented? On hearing the piteous words of the king with the shattered thighs, whose eyes will not overflow with tears?
While I am alive, the side of my allies has been defeated. This increases my sorrow, like a torrent of water flowing
into an ocean. I am single-mindedly focused on this now. How can I sleep happily? They are protected by Vasudeva and Arjuna. O maternal uncle! I think that even the great Indra cannot withstand them. I am incapable of restraining myself from this course of action. Nor do I see anyone in this world who can restrain me from this course
of action. The messengers have told me about the defeat of my friends and the victory of the Pandavas. My heart is
tormented. While the enemies are sleeping, I will cause carnage among them today. Then, bereft of fever, I will
rest and sleep.'"'
