'Yudhishthira said, "O grandfather! You have spoken about how one can resort to the sacred rajadharma. O king!
You should tell me about the best dharma for those who are in the ashramas."

'Bhishma replied, "There are many doors to dharma and the rites are never unsuccessful. Everywhere, dharma,
the path to heaven, truthfulness and the fruits of austerities have been indicated. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! Whatever rules one has thought of, and has determined to observe, is understood to be the only one-there
being no other. Whenever one meditates, there is no doubt that detachment is generated and this world becomes
like a fabric. O Yudhishthira! When the world is full of deception and many taints, an intelligent man must try to
accomplish the objective of moksha for his soul."

'Yudhishthira asked, "O grandfather! When riches are destroyed and a wife, a son or a father dies, how can one
use one's intelligence to dispel that sorrow? Tell me that."

'Bhishma replied, "When riches are destroyed and a wife, a son or a father dies, one laments in grief. However,
one must act so as to dispel that sorrow through meditation. On this, an ancient history is recounted about the
words that were spoken by a brahmana to Senajit, when the king was tormented by grief on account of his son and
was distracted with misery. On seeing that his face was sorrowful, the brahmana spoke these words. 'You are as
stupid as a millstone. Why are you sorrowing? What are you grieving about? There are those who will sorrow over
you and those mourners will also advance to the same end. O king! You, I, and all the others who worship you, all
of us will go to the spot where we have come from.' Senajit asked, 'O brahmana! O one who is rich in austerities!
What intelligence, austerities, meditation, wisdom and learning can be obtained, so that one does not grieve?'

'"The brahmana replied, 'Behold. All the beings are tied down in misery. For me, my atman is not mine. But the
entire earth is mine. What is mine also belongs to others. Because of this intelligence, I am not distressed. Having
obtained this intelligence, I am neither delighted, nor distressed. Just as a piece of wood approaches another piece
of wood in the great ocean, comes together and drifts apart, that is the way beings meet each other. Sons, grandsons, kin and relatives are like that. One should not be attached to them, since separation from them is certain. He[The son.]
came from what cannot be seen. He has gone to what cannot be seen. He did not know you. You did not know him.
Who are you? Who are you sorrowing over? Misery is an affliction created by desire. Happiness results when that
affliction of sorrow becomes less. Then again, misery is repeatedly generated by joy. Unhappiness comes after
happiness. Happiness comes after unhappiness. Unhappiness is not permanently obtained. Nor is happiness permanently obtained. Friends are truly not the reason for happiness. Enemies are truly not the reason for unhappiness.
One cannot obtain riches through wisdom. Nor indeed can riches bring about happiness. One cannot obtain riches
through intelligence. Nor is stupidity the reason for penury. It is only a wise person, and no one else, who understands the progress of the world. The intelligent, the stupid, the brave, the coward, the foolish, the wise, the weak,
the powerful-all of them enjoy happiness because of destiny. The cow simultaneously belongs to the calf, the
cowherd, the master and the thief. But it is certain that the cow actually belongs to the person who drinks her
milk[The others have an illusory sense of owning her. One should not sorrow because of
an illusory sense of ownership.]. Those who are the most foolish in the world and those who have attained supreme intelligence-only these
men can enjoy happiness. People who are in between are miserable. The wise find delight in the two extremes, not
in the ones that are in the middle[This is a reference to the four states of consciousness-wakefulness (jagrata),
dreaming (svapna), deep sleep (sushupti) and pure consciousness (turiya). The
wise take delight in wakefulness and pure consciousness, not in dreaming or deep
sleep. While the earlier sentence has a reference to the most foolish, it is possible
that this is meant to represent the statement of wakefulness, while supreme intelligence is equated with pure consciousness.]. It is said that happiness is associated with the two extremes and unhappiness
with the ones that are intermediate. Those who have obtained happiness through their intelligence and those who
are free from opposite sentiments[Like happiness and unhappiness, pleasure and pain.], devoid of jealousy-are never distressed by prosperity or adversity. However,
there are also foolish people who have not obtained that intelligence. They have not been able to go beyond excessive delight and extreme misery. There are foolish ones who are bereft of consciousness. They are haughty because
of their strength and are given to incessant delight, as if they are like the large numbers of gods in heaven. However, because of their laziness, such happiness terminates in unhappiness. And because of skill, unhappiness can give
rise to happiness. Riches and prosperity dwell with those who are accomplished, not with those who are lazy.
Whether it is happiness or unhappiness, whether it is unpleasant or pleasant-whatever has been obtained must be
enjoyed with an unvanquished heart. From one day to another, there are a thousand reasons for misery and a hundred reasons for joy. Stupid people are submerged in these, but not those who are learned. If a man is intelligent,
accomplished in his wisdom, given to servitude[Of elders, seniors and preceptors.] and lack of envy, and is self-controlled, having conquered his
senses-sorrow cannot touch him. The wise person resorts to this intelligence and guards his consciousness. Sorrow cannot touch a person who knows the origin and the end of everything[The brahman.]. The reasons behind sorrow, fright, unhappiness and exertion must be severed from the roots, like casting aside one of the limbs in the body. If objects of
desire are cast aside, this fills one with happiness. A man who follows desire is destroyed by that desire. The happiness obtained from the pursuit of desire in this world or the great bliss obtained in heaven is not even one-sixteenth of the happiness obtained from the extinction of desire. The deeds committed in an earlier body, good or
bad, and the consequences of those deeds are felt by the wise, the foolish and the brave. In this way, the pleasant
and the unpleasant, unhappiness and happiness, incessantly circulate among living beings. Knowing this and resorting to this intelligence, a person with qualities lives in joy. He disregards all desire and turns his back on all attachment. The wise regard this kind of approach of the heart as equivalent to mental death. A tortoise draws in all
its limbs. Like that, such a person contracts desire and with a shining atman, is pleased with his atman. Even if
there is the slightest sense of ownership left, that will give rise to repentance and pervade everything. He is not
frightened of anything. No one is frightened of him. He has no desire and no hate. He is then immersed in the brahman. He gives up truth and falsehood, sorrow and joy, fear and freedom from fear, pleasant and unpleasant. Having
abandoned these, he is tranquil in his soul. That resolute person does not do anything wicked towards any being, in
deeds, thoughts and words. He is then immersed in the brahman. He abandons the thirst[Desire.] that is so difficult for the
evil-minded to give up, a fear that does not diminish with age and is like a disease that brings an end to life. Having done this, he obtains happiness. O king! On this, a verse sung by Pingala has been heard. This is about how she
obtained eternal dharma at a time of hardship. A prostitute named Pingala went to the place meant for the rendezvous, but was rejected by her lover. Despite facing that calamity, by resorting to her intelligence, she found
peace.

'"'Pingala said, "I have been crazy for a long time. In my madness, I have dwelt with my beloved. Because my
beloved was nearby, I did not pursue the path of virtue earlier. This pillar has nine gates and I will cover it[The body is the pillar and the nine gates are two eyes, two ears, one mouth, two
nostrils, one anus and the genitals. It will be covered with knowledge.]. Even
when he[Meaning the brahman. The text does not have a gender. But it is difficult to translate this without using the gender.] approaches, which woman in this world regards him as a beloved? I have been thwarted in my desire.
But, in the form of desire, those crafty ones[Human lovers.] are like hell. They will not deceive me again. I know now and have
woken up. Depending on destiny and earlier deeds, failure gives rise to success. I have now conquered my senses
and have obtained the realization that I am without form. I am without any hope and am happy. There is great happiness when there is nothing to hope. Having destroyed hope, Pingala sleeps in happiness."'"

'Bhishma said, "The learned brahmana mentioned these and other reasons. King Senajit was comforted and
found joy and happiness."'
