Janamejaya asked, 'He had dharma in his soul. He was great in spirits and did not waver from the truth. He had
conquered his soul. He was immensely fortunate and without decay. Devavrata was lying down on that bed of arrows. Bhishma, Shantanu's son, was lying down on a bed meant for heroes. The Pandavas presented themselves
before Gangeya, tiger among men. What conversation took place at that gathering of heroes, after all the soldiers
had been killed? O great sage! Tell me that.'

Vaishampayana said, 'Bhishma, who bore the great burden of the Kouravas, was lying down on the bed of arrows. O king! The rishis and siddhas, with Narada at their head, arrived there. There were also the kings who had
not been slain, with Yudhishthira at their head, Dhritarashtra, Krishna, Bhima, Arjuna and the twins. They approached the great-souled grandfather of the Bharatas. They sorrowed over Gangeya, who was like the sun when it
has fallen down. Narada, who looked like a god, thought for a short while. Then he spoke to the Pandavas and all
the remaining kings. "The time has come for Bhishma to be asked. O descendant of the Bharata lineage[Narada is primarily speaking to Yudhishthira.]! Like
the sun, Gangeya is about to set. Before he gives up his breath of life, everyone should question him. He knows
everything about the diverse kinds of dharma followed by the four varnas. He is aged and has already obtained
worlds, for the time when he gives up his body. Quickly ask him about any doubts that you might have." Having
been thus addressed by Narada, the kings approached Bhishma. But they were unable to ask him and glanced towards each other.

'Yudhishthira, Pandu's son, then spoke to Hrishikesha. "No one other than Devaki's son is capable of questioning the grandfather. O invincible one! O Madhusudana! You ask first. O son[The word used is tata.]! Among all of us, you are the one
who knows about the supreme forms of all kinds of dharma." Having been thus addressed by Pandava, the illustrious Keshava approached the unassailable one[Bhishma.]. Achyuta spoke to him. Vasudeva said, "O supreme among kings!
Have you spent the night in happiness? Is your intelligence present and clear? O unblemished one! Is your entire
knowledge shining? Is your heart without pain? Is your mind without anxiety?" Bhishma replied, "O Govinda! O
unblemished one! Because of your favours, subjugation, confusion, exhaustion, fatigue, languor and agony have
just disappeared. O supremely radiant one! Like a fruit in my hand, I can see everything in the past, the present and
the future. O Achyuta! Because of the boon you have granted me, I can see everything about the dharma laid down
in the Vedas and uttered in Vedanta[The word Vedanta is usually used for the Upanishads.]. The dharma cited for virtuous ones is circling around in my heart. O Janardana! I know the dharma for countries, clans[Jatis.] and families. The dharma of the four types of ashramas is established in my heart. O Keshava! I understand everything about the dharma of kings. O Janardana! I will state everything that needs to be said. Through your favours, an auspicious intelligence has penetrated my mind. I have been
strengthened by meditating on you and seem to be young again. O Janardana! Through your favours, I am able to
speak about what is beneficial. Why don't you yourself tell Pandava about what is beneficial? O Madhava! Quickly tell me why you are not doing this."

'Vasudeva replied, "O Kourava! Know me to be the source of fame and everything that is beneficial. All sentiments, good and bad, originate in my soul. Who in the world will wonder if it is said that the moon's rays are cool?
In that way, who will wonder that I am full of fame? O immensely radiant one! However, I desire that your fame
should be kindled. O Bhishma! That is the reason my greatness has pervaded your intelligence. O protector of the
earth! As long as the earth exists, it is certain that your undecaying deeds will circulate throughout the world. O
Bhishma! On being asked by Pandava, whatever you say will be established on the surface of the earth, like the
declarations of the Vedas. Anyone who himself follows what you have adduced as proof will, after death, reap the
fruits of all meritorious deeds. O Bhishma! That is the reason I have granted you divine intelligence. I have granted
you a fame that will spread. How can it be extended further? It is certain that as long as a man's fame is spoken of
among people on this earth, so long does he possess an undecaying state. O king! The kings who have not been
slain are seated around you. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They wish to ask you about dharma. Tell them.
You are aged and senior. You possess learning and good conduct. You are accomplished about the past and future
dharma of kings. Since you were born, no one has seen any transgression in you. All the kings know you as someone who is conversant with the dharma of Manu[The Critical edition says manudharma, which brings in Manu. Some
non-Critical versions say sarvadharma, which means all forms of dharma, without bringing in Manu.]. O king! Address them, like a father to his sons, and tell them
about supreme policy. You have always worshipped the rishis and the gods. As I see it, you should speak to them
without leaving anything out. These virtuous ones have repeatedly asked you and wish to learn about dharma. The
wise say that when a learned one is asked about dharma, he must speak. O lord! If one does not answer, one suffers
from a sin. Your sons and grandsons have asked you about eternal dharma. They desire learning. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! Therefore, you should speak to them."'
