Yudhishthira asked, "O one who knows about conduct! O one who knows about dharma! After discarding human objects of pleasure, what conduct did Janaka, the lord of Mithila[This Janaka is not to be confused with Sita's father. This Janaka was descended from that Janaka's lineage and is
also referred to as Janaka.], follow, so as to advance towards
emancipation?"

'Bhishma replied, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted. By following this conduct, the one who
knew about conduct, advanced towards great happiness. In Mithila, there was a lord of men named Janadeva and
he was descended from Janaka. He thought about the dharma that would uplift him beyond the body. One hundred
preceptors always dwelt in his residence. They showed him different kinds of dharma and some of them were
heretical. But basing himself on the sacred texts, he was not satisfied with what they repeatedly told him about
their determinations about death, birth after death and the nature of the atman. There was a great sage named Panchashikha, the son of Kapila. Having travelled the entire earth, he came to Mithila. He had ascertained the true
knowledge about all kinds of dharma connected with renunciation. He had settled all the meanings, was free from
opposite sentiments[Like pleasure and pain, happiness and unhappiness.], and all his doubts had been dispelled. He was said to be the only rishi who was beyond the
desire that characterizes humans. He desired the ultimate and eternal happiness that was so difficult to obtain. People  were  astounded  at  his  form  and  thought  that  he  was  the  supreme  rishi,  Prajapati  Kapila,  who  expounded
samkhya[One of the six schools of philosophy.], himself. He was the first disciple of Asuri and was said to be immortal. For one thousand years, he[As will be evident, this is a reference to Asuri and not to Panchashikha. Kapila was also known as Asuri.]
had performed the sacrifice known as panchasrota[Literally, the one with five flows, a description of the mind.]. There was a circle of the followers of Kapila and they were
seated. They wished to hear from him about the supreme being, who was not manifest. Because of his own sacrifices and austerities, the sage had become successful. He had obtained divine sight and had understood the difference between kshetra and kshetrajna. The single Akshara of the brahman is seen in many different forms. In that
circle, Asuri spoke about the one who is not manifest. There was a brahmana lady by the name of Kapila[That is, Kapilaa.] and she
was Asuri's wife. Panchashikha became his[Asuri's.] disciple and suckled milk at her breast. Because he suckled milk
from the breasts of Kapila's wife, he came to be known as his son and obtained supreme intelligence. The illustrious one told me about how he became Kapila's son[It is not clear who told Bhishma the story. It is presumed to have been Markandeya or Sanatkumara.]. He also told me about how Kapila's son obtained every kind
of supreme prosperity.

'"Kapila's son knew about supreme forms of dharma and also knew that those one hundred ordinary preceptors
were confused about the reasons. Kapila[Panchashikha.] therefore presented himself there and Janaka became devoted to him.
He abandoned those one hundred preceptors and started to follow him. For the sake of supreme welfare, following
dharma, he bowed down before him. He taught him about supreme emancipation, described as samkhya. He spoke
to him about being free from birth and about being free from action. Having spoken to him about being free from
action, he spoke to him about being free from everything. He spoke about being attached to action, and about the
fruits  those  acts  lead  to.  'These  cannot  be  trusted,  since  they  are  certain  to  be  temporary  and  subject  to
destruction[The text does not indicate this clearly. But this seems to be the place where Panchashikha's quote begins.]. There are some who argue that people can directly witness the destruction. They therefore say that
the supreme words of the sacred texts have evidently been defeated[Since the body is destroyed, nothing beyond the body can exist.]. They say that there is no atman and one's
self is subject to death, hardship, death[The word death is used twice, one for the body, the second for the atman.], old age and decay. A person who holds the view that the atman is different is completely confused. If something that does not exist is thought of as without decay and without death, then
the king should also be thought of in that way[If a non-existent entity is thought of in that way, an existent entity must also be thought of in a similar way.]. Whether something exists or does not exist should be determined
by the signs of its existence. How can the progress of people be determined to be based on such an object? The
foundations of a conclusion must be based on what can be directly seen. Even if the sacred texts hold a different
view, without direct evidence, one cannot arrive at such a conclusion. One's sentiments cannot be influenced by
guesses. Thus, the view that there is another being in the body should actually be held to be the view of non-believers[Instead of the other way round. The word used is nastika. The various arguments advanced here are those of
non-believers, specifically, some aspects of Buddhism.]. A banyan tree results from a single seed. Clarified butter results from the process of cooking. These are
said to be properties of different species. Lodestone and the sun-crystal[Ayaskanta and suryakanta respectively.] drink up water[These instances illustrate that though there are tranformations, there is some direct evidence.]. When one is dead,
why should there be a being that approaches the gods? There is certain proof that once one is dead, there is a cessation of action. However, these are not valid arguments for something that does not have a form. The immortal cannot be realized by ordinary mortals. There are some who say that rebirth is because of ignorance and because of
the attempt to undertake action. The reasons are avarice and confusion and inclination towards sin. Ignorance is
said to be the field, and deeds performed earlier are like the seed. Thirst generates affection and that leads to rebirth. It lies hidden in the consciousness. When the mortal body is burnt, it is born again in a different body, preserving the spirit[As distinct from the atman.]. This has been heard from some as the truth. However, since the body that one is born in may
be a completely different one, how can there be an association between the two? In this case, what desire can there
be for donations, learning and the strength of austerities, since the results of all such deeds are held to be obtained
by someone else[The next body.]? There are others who are miserable because of the deeds that they have performed earlier. One
must arrive at a determination after looking towards this misery and joy. When the body is crushed by a club and is
born again, it is sometimes held that the consciousness that results is a different one. This is held to be like seasons, years, lunar days, cold, heat, the pleasant and the unpleasant. Like these, one passes on[From one body to another.], but the spirit is
preserved. However, this[The spirit, distinct from the atman.] will be overcome by old age and be destroyed by death. Like a house that is progressively weakened, it will eventually be destroyed. The senses, the mind, the wind, the blood, the flesh and the bones
are all progressively destroyed and enter the elements that created them. There are many reasons that arise in the
mind about the paths followed by people, the obtaining of the fruits from the dharma of donations, the meaning of
the words in the Vedas and the conduct of people. But none of these would be valid[If one believed the non-believers.]. Reflecting on such things,
different people head in different directions. Some submerge in them and obtain intelligence. Others age like trees.
Every being is made miserable because of good and bad deeds. The sacred texts bring them back, like elephants by
those who control elephants. Thus, there are many who desire happiness, but are unwilling to pay the price. They
are overcome by greater misery and like people who have been separated from their meat[There is an implicit image of carnivores craving for meat.], come under the subjugation of death. Everyone is certain to be destroyed. What is the point of relatives, friends and possessions? If one
abandons these in an instant and then departs, one does not return. Earth, space, water, fire and the wind always
nourish the body. If one thinks of this, how can one be freed of desire? However, these are also destroyed and there
is no happiness in these.' These words were supreme and were without deception. With the atman only as a witness, they were beyond disease. Hearing them, the king was astounded. He glanced towards him[Panchashikha.] and got ready
to ask him once again."'
