'Uttara said, "These weapons of the great-souled Parthas, who are swift in their deeds, are decorated in gold and
are resplendent in their beauty. But where are Partha Arjuna and Kouravya Yudhishthira, Nakula, Sahadeva and
Pandava Bhimasena? All of them are great-souled and are capable of destroying all enemies. But after they lost
their kingdom in the game of dice, nothing has been heard about them. Where is the famous Panchali Droupadi, a
jewel among women? After they were defeated in the game of dice, Krishna followed them into the forest."

'Arjuna replied, "I am Partha Arjuna. The gamester is Yudhishthira. Ballava, who cooks dishes for your father,
is Bhimasena. Nakula is the one who tends to the steeds and Sahadeva is with the cattle. Know that Sairandhri, because of whom the Kichakas were slain, is Droupadi."

'Uttara said, "I have heard ten names of Partha[Arjuna.] earlier. I will have faith in your words if you can recount all of
them to me."

'Arjuna replied, "I will tell you my ten names-Arjuna, Phalguna, Jishnu, Kiriti, Shvetavahana, Bibhatsu, Vijaya, Krishna, Savyasachi and Dhananjaya."

'Uttara asked, "Why are you named Vijaya? Why are you Shvetavahana? Why is your name Kiriti? Why are
you Savyasachi? Why are you Arjuna, Phalguna, Jishnu, Krishna, Bibhatsu and Dhananjaya? Tell me everything in
detail. I have heard the reasons why the brave one obtained those names."

'Arjuna replied, "I have conquered all the countries and obtained all their wealth. I stand in the midst of riches.
That is the reason I am known as Dhananjaya[Dhana means riches and jaya means to win.]. When I go out to fight against those who are indomitable in battle,
I never return without vanquishing them. That is the reason I am known as Vijaya[Vijaya means victory.]. When I fight in battle, white
steeds with golden harnesses are yoked to my chariot. That is the reason I am Shvetavahana[Shveta means white and vahana means mount.]. I was born on the
slopes of the Himalayas when the two nakshatras of Purva and Uttara Phalguni were in the firmament[In the list of twenty-seven nakshatras, Purva Phalguni is eleventh and Uttara Phalguni is twelfth. Both are in the
constellation of Leo, Uttara Phalguni being Denebola.]. That is
the reason I am known as Phalguna. In earlier times, when I fought with the bulls among the danavas, Shakra gave
me a diadem, as radiant as the sun, for my head. That is the reason I am Kiriti[Kirita means a diadem or crown and one who wears it is Kiriti.]. I have never committed a terrible
act in battle. Therefore, I am known among gods and men as Bibhatsu[Bibhatsu means someone who terrifies. There is a bit of a contradiction, since Arjuna does perform terrible
deeds in battle.]. Both my hands are right hands when I
draw the Gandiva. Therefore, I am known among gods and men as Savyasachi[Savyasachi actually means the left-handed one. Most people draw the string of the bow with the right hand. Arjuna could do this with the left hand too. Thus, he was Savyasachi. But he could do this with the right hand also
and both of his hands were like right hands. Thus, he was ambidextrous.]. My complexion is rare on this
earth with its four corners. I perform pure deeds and that is the reason I am known as Arjuna[Arjuna means white or clear.]. I am difficult to
reach. I cannot be repressed and I do the repressing. I am the son of the chastiser of Paka[Arjuna is Indra's son and Indra killed a demon named Paka.]. That is the reason I am
famous among gods and men as Jishnu[Jishnu means one who is victorious or triumphant and it is also one of Indra's names.]. Affectionately, my father gave me my tenth name of Krishna, since the
child had a dark complexion[Krishna means dark or black.]."
Vaishampayana said, 'Then Virata's son showed his homage to Partha and said, "My name is Bhuminjaya and I
am also known as Uttara. It is my good fortune that I have beheld Partha. O Dhananjaya! You are welcome. O red-
eyed one! O mighty-armed one! O one with arms like the trunks of a king among elephants! You should pardon me
for what I have said out of ignorance. You have earlier performed many wonderful and difficult deeds. I have now
overcome my fears and I feel great affection towards you."'
