Vaishampayana said, 'Then the Pandava[Yudhishthira.] again spoke to Markandeya. "Tell me about the account of Vaivasvata
Manu."

'Markandeya replied, "O king! O tiger among men! Vivasvat[The sun-god.] had a son. He was a maharshi and was extremely powerful. He had radiance equal to that of Prajapati. Manu surpassed his father and grandfather in vigour, energy, success and specifically, austerities. This lord of men practised terrible and great austerities, with his arms
raised and standing on one foot, in Vishala Badari[Vishala is the name of a jujube tree in Badari or Badarikashrama.]. His head faced down and he did not blink. Firmly, he tormented himself with these terrible austerities for ten thousand years. Once, he was engaged in these austerities,
clad in wet bark and with matted hair. A fish came up to him on the banks of the Virini[A river believed to flow from the Malaya mountains.] and spoke to him. 'O illustrious one! I am a small fish and am frightened of the larger ones. You are good in your vows. Therefore, save
me from those fish, especially because it is the rule among fish that large fish prey on smaller ones. This has always been decreed to be our conduct from time immemorial. Therefore, save me from this great sea of terror in
which I am immersed. If you save me, I will return the deed.' On hearing these words of the fish, Manu was overcome with compassion. He grasped the fish in his hands. The fish had a body that shone like the moon's rays.
Vaivasvata Manu took it out of the river and placed it in a small water pot. O king! Thus tended to well, the fish
grew up and Manu specifically looked after it like a son. After a long period of time, the fish became so large that
there was no longer any room for it in the water pot. When the fish saw Manu, it again told him, 'O illustrious one!
Find a different place for me to live in.' Then the illustrious Manu took it out of the water pot. Manu took the fish
to a large pond and threw it in. O destroyer of enemy cities! Thus thrown by Manu, the fish began to grow, for
many years. The pond was two yojanas long and one yojana wide. O lotus-eyed one! O lord of the earth! O
Kounteya! The fish could no longer move in that pond. On seeing Manu, the fish again said, 'O illustrious one! O
righteous one! O father[The word used is tata. While it does mean father, it is affectionately used for anyone who is senior.]! Please take me to the Ganga, the wife of the ocean. I will live there, or wherever else
you desire.' On hearing these words of the fish, Manu, the self-controlled lord, took it to the river Ganga and
placed it there with his own hands.

'"O chastiser of enemies! The fish began to grow there for some time. On seeing Manu again, the fish spoke
these words. 'O lord! Because of my large size, I cannot move around in the Ganga. O illustrious one! Therefore,
show me your favours and quickly take me to the ocean.' O Partha! Manu then himself took the fish out of the waters of the Ganga. He took it to the ocean and placed it there. Despite the fish's great size, Manu could carry it easily. Its touch and smell were also pleasant. When the fish was thrown into the ocean by Manu, it seemed to smile
and uttered these words. 'O lord! You have always protected me with great care. Now hear from me about the task
you should perform when the time is right. O illustrious one! O immensely fortunate one! The destruction of
everything on this earth, mobile and immobile, is near. The time for purging this world has arrived. Therefore, listen to what will bring your greatest welfare. The fear of destruction is nigh for everything that moves, stands, stirs
and does not stir. That terrible time of destruction has arrived. You must therefore build a strong and sturdy boat
and tether a rope to it. O great sage! You must then ascend it with the saptarshis. Take with you all the seeds that I
have mentioned to you earlier. Ascend on the boat and preserve them separately. O one who is beloved of the
sages! Wait for me on the boat. O ascetic! I will come to you and you will know me from my horn. I will now depart. Act according to my instructions. O lord! Do not be anxious.' He replied to the fish in these words, 'O lord! I
will act accordingly.' Then they took leave of each other and went where they wished.

'"O great king! O brave one! O destroyer of enemies! As he had been instructed by the fish, Manu collected all
the seeds. He built an excellent boat and sailed on the waves of the ocean. O lord of the earth! O destroyer of enemy cities! Manu thought about the fish. Knowing about his thoughts, the fish arrived. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! It had a horn. O Indra of Indras among men! When Manu saw the fish in the waters of the ocean, with
the form of a large mountain, with a horn as it had said, he tied a noose around the rope and fastened it to the fish's
head. O tiger among men! O destroyer of enemy cities! Tethered to the noose in the rope, with great speed, the fish
tugged the boat into the waters of the ocean. O lord of men! The boat was tossed around in the ocean. It danced
around on the roaring waves, like a drunken woman. On that great ocean, the boat was battered around by great
waves. O destroyer of enemy cities! It was whirled around. The earth could not be seen, nor the directions. Everything was enveloped. O bull among men! There was water everywhere, including the sky and heaven. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! The world was covered by this turbulence. Everything was invisible, except for the
seven rishis, Manu and the fish. O king! In this way, for a large number of years, the fish unceasingly pulled the
boat on that flood of water. O bull among men! O descendant of the Kuru lineage! The fish then pulled the boat to
the highest peak of the Himalayas. In a smiling and soft tone, it told the rishis, 'Immediately tie the boat to this
peak of the Himalayas.' O bull among the Bharata lineage! On hearing the words of the fish, they quickly moored
the boat there, to the peak of the Himalayas. O Kounteya! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Know that since that
day, the highest peak of the Himalayas has been known as 'Nau-bandhana[The place where the boat (nau) was tied (bandhana).]'.

'"Then, without any hesitation, it spoke to the rishis who were assembled there. 'I am Prajapati Brahma. There
is no one superior to me. I have saved you from this fear in the form of a fish. Manu will create all beings-gods,
asuras and men, all the worlds, everything that moves and everything that does not move. Through terrible austerities and my favours, he will possess these powers of creating classes of beings and will not suffer from delusion.'

Having spoken these words, the fish instantly disappeared. Vaivasvata Manu himself desired to create all beings. In
the process of creating classes of beings, he was overtaken by delusion and performed great austerities. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! Through these great austerities, Manu was himself able to create all beings, exactly. I
have recounted for you the ancient account known by the name of the fish. This famous account is the cleanser of
all sins. A man who listens to Manu's account every day, is happy, is successful in all objectives and goes to the
world of heaven."'
