'Sanjaya said, "In that battle, Nakula was impetuously slaughtering your soldiers. Enraged, Soubala advanced
against him, asking him to wait. Those two brave ones were firm in their enmity and wished to kill each other.
They drew their bows completely back and struck each other with arrows. O king! Just as Soubala swiftly released
showers of arrows, Nakula also exhibited his skills in fighting. O great king! In that battle, those two brave ones
were covered with the thorns of arrows and were as beautiful as shalmali trees with thorns. O king! They dilated
their eyes and glanced obliquely at each other. Their eyes were red with rage and they consumed each other with
their sight. Your brother-in-law was extremely angry and laughing at Madri's son, pierced him in the heart with a
sharp and barbed arrow. Having been severely wounded by your archer brother-in-law, Nakula sank down on the
floor of his chariot and lost his senses. O king! Beholding that his ultimate and insolent enemy, firm in his enmity,
was in that state, Shakuni roared like a cloud at the end of summer. Having regained his senses, Nakula, Pandu's
son, rushed against Soubala again, like Death with a gaping mouth. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Enraged, he
pierced Shakuni with sixty arrows. He again struck him between the breasts with one hundred iron arrows. He then
severed the bow in his[Shakuni's.] hand, with an arrow still affixed to it. He swiftly severed his standard and brought it
down from the chariot onto the ground. O great king! O unblemished one! Having been severely wounded, your
brother-in-law sank down on the floor of his chariot and in the forefront of that army, on seeing that he had fallen
down and had lost his senses, his charioteer quickly bore him away on his chariot. The Parthas and their followers
roared loudly. Having vanquished the enemy in the encounter, Nakula, the scorcher of enemies, angrily told his
charioteer, 'Take me to Drona's battle formation.' O king! On hearing the words of Madri's intelligent son, in the
battle, his charioteer took him to the spot where Drona was fighting.

'"O lord of the earth! In that encounter, Shikandi wished to get at Drona. With great speed, Sharadvata Kripa
sought to check him. Goutama swiftly advanced in Drona's vicinity. Shikhandi, the scorcher of enemies, seemed to
be laughing, and pierced him with nine broad-headed arrows. O great king! The preceptor[Kripa was the preceptor before Drona and therefore, is also referred to as the preceptor.] wished to do that
which would ensure the welfare of your sons. He struck him[Shikhandi.] with five swift arrows and again pierced him with
twenty. O lord of the earth! The great battle that took place between them was terrible in form, like the encounter
between Shambara and the king of the immortals in the battle between the gods and the asuras[There were several asuras named Shambara. One of these was killed by Indra.]. The two maharathas covered the sky with nets of arrows. O foremost among the Bharatas! The night was naturally fierce in
form and was rendered even more terrible by those two warriors, who were skilled in fighting. It was terrible in
form and engendered fear. It was like a night of destruction[The word used is kalaratri, meaning a night that brings death to all beings.]. O great king! With an arrow that was in the shape
of a half-moon, Shikandi sliced down Goutama's giant bow and shot many arrows at him. O king! Kripa became
angry at this and hurled a fierce javelin. The shaft was golden and it was sharp at the tip, having been polished by
artisans. As it descended, Shikhandi struck it down with many arrows. It flamed as it fell down on the ground, dazzling and immensely radiant. O great king! Goutama, supreme among rathas, picked up another bow and shrouded
Shikhandi with sharp arrows. Shikhandi, supreme among rathas, was enveloped in that encounter by the illustrious
Goutama and losing his senses, sank down on the floor of his chariot. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Beholding that he had become unconscious in the battle, Sharadvata Kripa wished to kill him and struck him with
many arrows. Seeing that Yajnasena's maharatha son could no longer fight in the encounter, the Panchalas and the
Somakas surrounded him from all sides. Similarly, your sons also surrounded that best of brahmanas[Kripa.] with a
large army and the battle resumed again.

'"O king! In that encounter, rathas rushed against others. There was a tremendous sound, like that of clouds
thundering. O lord of the earth! Horse riders and elephants were driven away. O king! They attacked each other
and the field of battle became cruel. O great king! As the foot soldiers rushed, the earth trembled with their footsteps, like a lady trembling with fear. Rathas attacked even more powerfully, astride their chariots. O king! They
were like crows, grabbing many locusts[Alternatively, insects in general.] in the air. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were elephants
with shattered temples, rushing against other giant elephants with shattered temples and trampling them with their
feet. Horse riders clashed against horse riders and infantry against infantry. In that encounter, they angrily rushed
against each other. The soldiers advanced, retreated and returned again to the encounter. In the process, in the
night, they raised an extremely loud uproar. There were blazing lamps on the chariots, elephants and horses. O
great king! They seemed to be like giant meteors that had been dislodged from the sky. O foremost among the
Bharata lineage! O king! The field of battle was illuminated by those lamps and it seemed to be like day. It was
like a spreading sun that destroys the darkness in the world. In that fashion, that terrible darkness was dispelled by
the light of those blazing lamps. All the weapons, the armour and the gems of the great-souled ones were overshadowed by the light from those blazing lamps. At the commencement of the night, there was a melee in the battle. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! In that encounter, the son killed the father and the father killed the son.
The friend killed the friend, the relative killed the relative and the maternal uncle killed his sister's son. They were
confused. In that battle, they killed those on their own side, as well as on that of the enemy. They fought fearlessly
during that terrible night and this engendered fear."'
