'Vasudeva said, "O tiger among men! King Shalva, the great enemy, was engaged in battle with me and again
arose into the sky. O great king! In his desire for victory, the evil-minded Shalva angrily hurled shataghnis, giant
clubs, flaming lances, bludgeons and swords at me. With my fast arrows, I warded them off as they descended towards me from the sky. I sliced them into two and three parts. At that, a great uproar arose in the sky. He covered
Daruka, my horses and my chariot with a hundred thousand nataparva arrows. Daruka was afflicted and spoke to
me, 'O brave one! Though I am suffering from Shalva's arrows, I will stay here, because I must.' On hearing these
pitiful words of my charioteer, I looked at him and saw that the charioteer had been wounded by the arrows. O best
of the Pandavas! There was not a spot on his chest, his head, his torso and his two arms that had not been wounded
by an arrow. Blood freely flowed from the wounds the shower of arrows had caused. He looked like a mountain of
red chalk after a shower of rain. O mighty-armed one! I saw that though the charioteer still held the reins in battle,
he was fatigued. He was suffering from Shalva's arrows and I cheered him.

'"O descendant of the Bharata lineage! At this time, a man swiftly came to me from Dvaraka and spoke to me,
in my chariot, like a well-wisher. O brave one! He was Ahuka's servant and he carried a message from him. O
Yudhisthira! Listen to what he told me in a sad and breathless voice. 'O valiant one! Ahuka, the lord of Dvaraka,
has sent a message for you. O Keshava! Know what your father's friend has told you. O descendant of the Vrishni
lineage[The word used is nandana.]! O invincible one! While you were restrained, Shalva has attacked Dvaraka today. He has forcibly
killed Shura's son[Shura's son is Vasudeva, Krishna's father.]. O Janardana! Therefore refrain from fighting here. Your greatest task now is to defend
Dvaraka.' Having heard his words, my mind was extremely distressed. I could not make up my mind about the
right course of duty. O brave one! Having heard those unpleasant words, I mentally censured Satyaki, Baladeva
and maharatha Pradyumna. O descendant of the Kuru lineage[The word used is nandana.]! Having entrusted the task of protecting Dvaraka
and my father to them, I had come for the destruction of Soubha. How could the mighty-armed Baladeva, the destroyer of enemies, still be alive? What about Satyaki, Rukmini's son, the valiant Charudeshna and the others led
by Samba? The thought made me miserable. Had those tigers among men been alive, not even the wielder of the
vajra[Indra.] himself would have been able to kill Shura's son[Krishna's father Vasudeva.]. But it was clear that Shura's son had been killed and
therefore it was clear that so had the others. I presumed that all the others, with Baladeva as the chief, had also
been killed. I repeatedly kept thinking about all their destruction. O great king! Though I was greatly overwhelmed, I continued to fight with Shalva. O great king! I then saw that warrior, Shura's son, himself fall from
Soubha and at this, confusion overtook me. O lord of men! I saw the exact form of my father falling down, like
Yayati fell down from heaven to earth after all the merits of his good deeds had been exhausted[This story has been recounted in Section 1, Volume 1.]. I saw him faded, deprived of his headdress. His garments and hair were dishevelled. He could be seen falling, like a planet that
has lost all its merits. O Kounteya! Then Sharnga, supreme among bows, fell down from my hand and in complete
bewilderment, I sat down on my chariot. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing me bereft of my senses, a
loud wail of lamentation arose from all my army, because they could see me on my chariot, as if I had lost my life.
I saw the form of my father drop like a vulture[The word used is shakuna, alternatively shakuni. Specifically, this is a vulture, kite or eagle. But the word
can also be used for any bird in general.] from the sky, with his arms extended and his feet extended. O
mighty-armed one! As he fell, powerful warriors struck at him with lances and spears in their hands. My heart began to tremble.

'"O brave one! But I regained my senses in an instant. When I did, I could no longer see Soubha, or the enemies, or Shalva in that great battle. Nor could I see my old father. I then concluded in my mind that this was certainly nothing but maya. On regaining my senses, I again began to shoot hundreds of arrows."'
