'Markandeya said, "Having killed the mean Ravana, the Indra of the rakshasas and enemy of the gods, Rama, together with Soumitri, was extremely delighted. Dashagriva having been slain, the gods, with the rishis at the forefront, praised the mighty-armed one and pronounced benedictions of victory over him. All the gods praised the lotus-eyed Rama, as did the gandharvas and residents of heaven, and showered down flowers and words of praise.
Having thus honoured Rama, they returned to where they had come from. O one without decay! It was as if a great
festival was being held in heaven.

'"Having killed Dashagriva, the immensely famous lord Rama, the destroyer of enemy cities, handed Lanka
over to Vibhishana. The immensely wise and aged adviser Avindhya emerged, with Sita at the forefront, and with
Vibhishana leading the way. With great humility, he told the great-souled Kakutstha, 'O great-souled one! Accept
this goddess. Janaki is of good conduct.' Hearing these words, the descendant of the Ikshvaku lineage descended
from his supreme chariot. He looked at Sita, who was enveloped in tears. Her limbs were beautiful and she was
seated on a vehicle, oppressed by grief. All her limbs were covered with dirt. Her hair was matted. She was attired
in a black garment. On seeing her, Rama was concerned that Vaidehi had been touched by another. He told her, 'O
Vaidehi! You are free. Go. I have done my duty. O fortunate one! You once had me as a husband and therefore, I
did not think that you should grow old in the house of that rakshasa. Hence, I killed the stalker of the night. How
can a man like me, who knows the ways of dharma, accept a woman, even for an instant, who has been held in another man's arms? O Maithili! Whether you are of good conduct or evil conduct, I no longer have any interest in
enjoying you now. You are like oblations that have been licked by a dog.' On hearing these terrible words, the
young goddess suddenly fell down on the ground, like a severed plantain tree. Her face had been flush with delight. But that disappeared in an instant, like breath on a mirror. Hearing these words spoken by Rama, all the monkeys, together with Lakshmana, stood around motionless, as if they were dead.

'"Then the pure-souled and four-faced god, the grandfather and the creator of the world[Brahma.], descended from a
celestial chariot and appeared before Raghava, as did Shakra, Agni, Vayu, Yama, Varuna, the illustrious lord of the
yakshas and the unblemished saptarshis. King Dasharatha arrived in a radiant and divine form, astride an extremely expensive celestial chariot that was resplendent and was drawn by swans. The firmament was then crowded with
all the gods and gandharvas. It was as beautiful as the autumn sky, studded with stars. The illustrious Vaidehi arose
in their midst and the beautiful one spoke these words to Rama, whose chest was wide. 'O prince! I do not blame
you, because I know the ways of women and of men. But listen to these words of mine. The air that is inside beings is always in motion. If I have committed an evil act, let it free my breath of life. If I have committed an evil
act, let fire, water, space, earth and air[The five elements.] free my breath of life.' Then a sacred voice spoke from the firmament. It
echoed in all the directions and gladdened the great-souled monkeys. Vayu said, 'O Raghava! This is the truth. I
am the wind that is always in motion. O king! Maithili is without taint. Unite with your wife.' Agni said, 'O descendant of the Raghu lineage! I am the wind that resides in the bodies of all beings. O Kakutstha! Maithili has not
committed a crime, even in the slightest way.' Varuna said, 'O Raghava! The juices in the bodies of beings owe
their existence to me. I am asking you to accept Maithili back.' Brahma said, 'O son! This action on your part is
not surprising. You are acquainted with the dharma of rajarshis. You are virtuous and follow the path of good conduct. Listen to these words of mine. O brave one! You have brought down the enemy of the gods, the gandharvas,
the serpents, the yakshas, the danavas and the maharshis. Through my favours, he had earlier become invincible to
all beings. For a specific reason, I ignored that evil one for some length of time. It was for the sake of his own
death that the evil-souled one abducted Sita. But I protected her through Nalakubara's curse. He had earlier been
cursed by him[Nalakubara.] that if he forced himself on any woman against her wishes, his head was certain to shatter into a
hundred fragments as a consequence. O immensely radiant one! You should not have any doubt on this. You are
the equal of the gods and the immortals and you have performed a great deed.' Dasharatha said, 'O son! O fortunate one! I am pleased with you. I am your father Dasharatha. O supreme among men! I grant you permission to
rule the kingdom.' Rama replied, 'O Indra among kings! I bow down before you, if you are indeed my father. On
your instructions, I will go to the lovely city of Ayodhya.' O lord of men! On hearing these words, his father was
delighted and said, 'O Rama! O one with the red eyes! Go and rule Ayodhya.' Bowing to the gods and worshipped
by his well-wishers, he was united with his wife, like the great Indra with Poulomi[Indra's wife, Shachi, was the daughter of Puloma.]. The scorcher of enemies
then granted a boon to Avindhya and honoured and gave riches to the rakshasi Trijata. Brahma and all the gods,
with Shakra at the forefront, then told him, 'O son of Kousalya! What boons that you desire shall we grant you today?' Rama chose devotion to dharma, victory over enemies and revival of the monkeys who had been killed by
the rakshasas. O great king! When Brahma pronounced words granting this, all the monkeys regained their senses
and arose. The immensely fortunate Sita granted a boon to Hanuman and said, 'O son! You will live for as long as
Rama's fame lasts. O Hanuman! O one with the yellow eyes! Through my favours, divine delicacies will always
be present before you.' Then, while all those with unsullied deeds watched, the gods, with Shakra leading the way,
vanished.

'"On seeing Rama united with Janaki, Shakra's charioteer was extremely delighted and, in the midst of his well-
wishers, spoke these words. 'O one for whom truth is valour! You have removed the misery of the gods, the gandharvas, the yakshas, men, asuras and serpents. Therefore, all the worlds, with the gods, the asuras, the gandharvas,
the yakshas, the rakshasas and the serpents will speak of your deeds as long as the earth exists.' Speaking these
words to Rama, supreme among all wielders of weapons, he[Matali, Indra's charioteer.] took his leave and having honoured him, departed
in the chariot that was as resplendent as the sun. With Sita at the forefront, together with Soumitri, together with all
the monkeys, with Sugriva leading the way, Rama arranged for the protection of Lanka. With Vibhishana at the
forefront, he again crossed the bridge over the abode of sharks[Makaras.]. Surrounded by his chief advisers who followed
him, he used the Pushpaka vimana, which travelled through the sky and could go wherever it willed[Vishvakarma constructed Pushpaka vimana for Kubera. Ravana possessed it, when he drove Kubera out of
Lanka.]. With all
the monkeys, the king with dharma in his soul stayed for a while on the shores of the ocean, where he had slept
earlier. When the time was right, Raghava assembled them and honoured them. He satisfied them with gems and
gave them leave to depart. When the chiefs among monkeys, the monkeys with tails like cows and the bears had
left, Rama returned to Kishkindha with Sugriva. With Vibhishana following and with Sugriva, from Pushpaka vimana, he showed Vaidehi the forest. Having arrived at Kishkindha, Rama, foremost among warriors, instated An-
gada, who had accomplished his appointed tasks, as the heir apparent[Yuvaraja.]. Together with them, and with Soumitri,
Rama followed the same road[The road he had followed when exiled.] towards his city. Having reached Ayodhya, the lord of the kingdom sent Hanuman as a messenger to Bharata and he[Hanuman.] observed the signs and told him[Bharata.] all the pleasant news. When Vayu's
son had returned, he[Rama.] went again to Nandigrama. He saw Bharata there, his limbs covered with dirt and attired
in garments made of bark, seated on his seat, with Rama's sandals before him. O bull among the Bharata lineage!
Having been united again with Bharata and Shatrughna, valorous Raghava, together with Soumitri, rejoiced. On
being reunited with their elder and on seeing Vaidehi, Bharata and Shatrughna were delighted. Having held the
kingdom as a honoured trust, Bharata was extremely happy and returned it to the one who had come back. On an
auspicious day, under the nakshatra Vaishnava[Another name for the nakshatra Shravana.], Vasishtha and Vamadeva consecrated the brave one. Having
been consecrated, he granted leave to his well-wishers to depart for their homes-Sugriva, foremost among monkeys, and Vibhishana, the son of Pulastya. He honoured them with all kinds of jewels and they were extremely
happy and rejoiced. Having done his duty, he unhappily gave them permission to go. Having shown homage to
Pushpaka vimana, Raghava, the descendant of the Raghu lineage, happily returned it to Vaishravana[Kubera.]. Assisted
by the devarshis, he performed ten horse sacrifices, without any obstructions, on the banks of the Gomati, where
three times the normal stipends were given[The text uses the word jaruthyan. This means three times the normal dakshina, or three different types of
dakshina.]."'