'Sanjaya said, "O lord of the earth! The soldiers returned to their own camps and retired, according to their respective ranks, arrays and divisions. Having asked the soldiers to withdraw, Drona was supremely distressed. He
glanced towards Duryodhana, and in shame, spoke these words. 'I had told you earlier that if Dhananjaya is
present, even the gods are incapable of capturing Yudhishthira in the battle. All of you endeavoured against Partha,
but you were repulsed. Do not doubt my words that Krishna and Pandava are invincible. O king! But if the one
with the white horses can be taken away, then Yudhishthira will come under your control today[This is happening on the eve of the next day's battle.]. In the battle, let
someone challenge him in a different part of the field and I will not return without vanquishing Kounteya[Yudhishthira.]. O
king! While Dhrishtadyumna looks on, I will use the void, while Arjuna is absent from the battle, to penetrate the
army and capture Dharmaraja. Know that you will see me find ways to seize him. O king! If Pandava Yudhishthira,
Dharma's son, stays before me even for an instant in the battle, there is no doubt that I will forcibly seize him today, with all his men and soldiers. This will be superior to an overall victory in the battle.' O king! On hearing
Drona's words, the lord of Trigarta, together with his brothers, spoke these words. 'O king! The wielder of Gandi-
va has always treated us badly. O bull among the Bharata lineage! We have not caused him injury, but he has injured us. We remember those many instances of injury and are consumed by the fire of wrath. We can never sleep
at night. The one with the divine weapons is now before our eyes. We will do everything that your heart desires
and brings you pleasure and also brings us fame. We will draw him away from the field of battle and kill him. Let
the earth be without Arjuna today, or without the Trigartas. We swear this before you and this pledge will not be
falsified.' O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O great king! Satyaratha, Satyadharma, Satyavarma, Satyeshu and
Satyakarma-these five brothers arrived[Before Duryodhana.], with ten thousand chariots, and spoke in this way. They took the pledge
in that battle. The Malavas and the Tundirekas came with thirty thousand chariots. Susharma of Trigarta, tiger
among men and the lord of Prasthala[Prasthala is the capital of Trigarta.], came with the Machellakas, Lalitthas and Madrakas, with ten thousand
chariots and his brothers and took the oath. There were another ten thousand from many different countries. They
arrived specially, for purposes of taking the oath.

'"They brought kindling so that each one could separately light a fire. They brought garments of kusha grass and
colourful armour. They donned the armour, smeared themselves with clarified butter and clad themselves in the
garments of kusha grass. The brave ones used bowstrings as girdles. They had given away hundreds and thousands
of dakshina and had performed many sacrifices. They had sons. They had performed deeds to obtain worlds[In the hereafter.]. Having performed the deeds, they were ready to lay down their lives. They had devoted their souls to fame and victory.
Through an excellent fight, they quickly aspired to obtain worlds that can be got through sacrifices at which a lot of
dakshina is offered and rites, of which, brahmacharya and the study of the sacred texts are the foremost. Each of
them separately satisfied the brahmanas by giving them gold coins, cows and garments. Then they addressed each
other affectionately. They lit fires with black trails and took an oath for the battle. In front of the fires, firm in their
resolution, they took the pledges. They took that oath for slaying Dhananjaya and loudly spoke these words, in the
hearing of all beings. 'There are worlds for those who lie, those who kill brahmanas, drunkards, worlds for those
who have intercourse with the preceptor's wife, those who rob the property of brahmanas, those who steal a king's
grant[A royal grant is given in the expectation of a quid pro quo. Stealing means violating the conditions of the grant.], those who forsake someone who seeks refuge, those who kill someone who seeks a favour, those who are
arsonists, those who kill cows, those who are wicked, worlds for those who hate brahmanas, those who are overtaken by folly and do not have intercourse with their wives when it is the right season or have intercourse on the
day of a shraddha, those who injure their own souls, those who misappropriate something left in trust, those who
destroy learning, those who fight out of anger, those who follow inferior ones, worlds for those who are atheists,
those who abandon their fires and their ancestors and there are worlds for those who are evil in conduct. If we return from the battle without killing Dhananjaya, or if we retreat because we are afflicted by his weapons, those[Those worlds.]
will be ours. If in this battle, we accomplish feats that are difficult to perform in this world, there is no doubt that
we will obtain desirable worlds.' O king! Having spoken in this way, they advanced to do battle. The brave ones
challenged Arjuna in the southern direction[Literally translated, the text means the region inhabited by the ancestors. This is the southern direction.].

'"Partha, tiger among men and the destroyer of enemy cities, was thus challenged and quickly spoke these
words to Dharmaraja. 'I have a vow that I will not retreat if I am challenged. O king! The samshaptakas are repeatedly challenging me. Susharma, together with his brothers, is challenging me to a battle. You should give me permission to kill him, together with his followers. O bull among men! I am incapable of tolerating this challenge.
Know that these enemies have already been killed in battle. I tell you this truthfully.' Yudhishthira replied, 'O
son[The word used is tata.]! You have heard what Drona desires to do. Act so that his intentions become false. Drona is brave and powerful. He is skilled in the use of weapons and has conquered fatigue. O maharatha! He has sworn to capture me.' Arjuna said, 'O king! This Satyajit will protect you in battle today. As long as this Panchala is alive, the preceptor's
desire will not be fulfilled. If this lord Satyajit, tiger among men, is killed in the battle, you should never remain
here, even if you are surrounded by everyone on our side.' At this, the king gave Phalguna the permission and embraced him. He glanced at him affectionately and pronounced many benedictions on him. Having made these
arrangements, the powerful Partha advanced against the Trigartas. He was like a hungry lion, hunting a herd of
deer to satisfy his hunger. Duryodhana's soldiers were filled with great delight. With Arjuna gone, they were extremely wrathful at the prospect of capturing Dharmaraja. With great energy, the soldiers rushed towards each other, like the powerful Ganga and Sarayu at the time of the monsoon, when they are overflowing with water."'
