'Yudhishthira said, "O scorcher of enemies! You have described the dharma, the conduct, the subsistence, the
means of subsistence and the fruits for brahmanas, kshatriyas, vaishyas and shudras, the conduct of kings, the treasury, the means of making the treasury great, the means of increasing the qualities of the advisers, the prosperity of
ordinary people, the six qualities[Of the kingdom.] one must think of, the policy concerning the army, the means of knowing the
wicked, the characteristics of the virtuous, the signs of those who are equal, inferior and superior, the means to satisfy neutral ones so that prosperity can be enhanced, the recommended means for sustaining those who have limited resources and about the method indicated in the texts against countries that are weaker. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! You have also described the conduct of someone who desires victory. O supreme among intelligent ones! I now wish to hear about the conduct towards ganas[The word gana has multiple meanings. In this context, it clearly means a
small assembly or body. Beyond this, the context makes it difficult to pin
it down. It could either mean an aristocracy around the king, or it could
mean smaller countries that were like federations, ruled by an aristocracy,
without a king.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! How do
ganas prosper? How can they be prevented from breaking up? How do they conquer the enemy and obtain well-
wishers? What is the cause of dissension in ganas and how do they confront destruction? It is my view that their
sorrow results from the fact that there are many and it is difficult to keep counsel a secret. O scorcher of enemies! I
wish to hear everything about this in entirety. O king! Tell me everything about how they can be prevented from
breaking up."

'Bhishma replied, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! O lord of men! Greed and intolerance ignite enmity within ganas, families and royal lineages. Avarice begins to consume and intolerance comes after that. These two unite
and reinforce each other, until everything is destroyed. They[Different components of the gana.] use spies, secret counsel, force, seizure, conciliation, gifts and dissension and other techniques of decay, destruction and fear to weaken each other. Large numbers
of ganas that work together are broken apart through gifts. Having been broken, all of them are distressed in their
minds and, because of their fear, are quickly subjugated. The ganas are destroyed because of their divisions and,
having been shattered, have to bow down before the enemy. Therefore, the ganas must always try to work together.
If they are united, their strength and manliness increases and so does their prosperity. When they act together in
this way, outsiders seek their friendship. Those who are learned and aged praise a situation where they serve each
other. Having not retreated from that object of unity, they obtain happiness in every way. The best of the ganas follow dharma in conduct, establish themselves in their sacred texts and, following these, become prosperous. They
are always engaged in good policy and do not hesitate to punish sons and brothers. The best among ganas prosper
because they accept those who are humble. O mighty-armed one! In every way, these ganas are always engaged in
ensuring prosperity through spies, secret plans, following ordinances and enhancing the treasury. O king! The
ganas are prosperous when they always revere the wise, the brave, those who are great archers and those who base
themselves on manliness in all their tasks. When ganas face difficulties and are confused-those who are wealthy,
those who are brave, those who are knowledgeable about weapons and those who are accomplished in the sacred
texts save them. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! Anger, dissension, fear, punishment, affliction, imprisonment and death immediately lead to ganas becoming subjugated. O king! That is the reason the foremost members
of the gana must be given importance. The progress of other people depends mostly on them. O afflicter of enemies! Secret counsels and information about spies must be restricted to the foremost members. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! The entire gana should not get to hear about secret plans. The foremost members of the gana must
work together for the welfare of the gana. When members of a gana act separately, have differing views or are divided in some other way, its prosperity suffers and it faces a disaster. When they have broken away from each other and base themselves on individual strengths alone, it is the task of the learned and foremost ones to swiftly restrain them. O king! If there is a conflict within the family and the aged ones in the family ignore this, this ensures
that the gotras[Clans.] break away from the gana. One must protect against internal dangers. External dangers are easier
to handle. If an internal danger is generated, it severs the roots. If there are sentiments of sudden rage, avarice and
natural confusion, and they do not speak to each other, this is a sign of defeat. They[The members of the gana.] are similar in birth. All of
them are equally noble in lineage. But they are not equal in valour, intelligence, beauty and prosperity. If ganas
suffer from the confusion of being disunited, they bow down before the enemy. That is the reason it is said that
unity is the great refuge of ganas."'
