Vaishampayana said, 'But he[Duryodhana.] disregarded his mother's sensible words. He had no control over his soul and he
again left in anger. Having left the assembly hall, Kourava sought the advice of King Soubala Shakuni, skilled in
dice. They decided on a course of action-Duryodhana, Karna, Shakuni Soubala and Duhshasana as the fourth.

"Janardana is swift in his action. Before he captures us, with King Dhritarashtra and Shantanu's son, we will
forcibly capture Hrishikesha, that tiger among men, like Indra seized Virochana's son[Virochana's son is Bali. Bali was eventually vanquished by Vishnu is his vamana (dwarf) incarnation.]. On hearing that Varshneya has been seized, the Pandavas will lose their spirits. They will lose all their enterprise, like serpents whose
fangs have been destroyed. That mighty-armed one is the refuge and armour for all of them. When the bull among
all the Satvatas, the granter of boons, has been captured, all the Pandavas, together with the Somakas, will lose
their initiative. Therefore, despite Dhritarashtra being angered, let us capture Keshava, who is swift in his action.
Let us imprison him and fight with the enemies." Satyaki was wise and knew how to understand signs. He swiftly
got to know about the wicked intentions of those wicked and evil-souled ones.

'Having got to know, he emerged with Hardikya[Hridika's son, that is, Kritavarma.]. He told Kritavarma, "Swiftly yoke the army and arrange
them in battle formations. Armour them and wait at the gate of the assembly hall. Meanwhile, I will talk to
Krishna, whose deeds are unsullied." The brave one entered the assembly hall, like a lion entering a mountainous
cavern and communicated the intention to the great-souled Keshava. Thereafter, he laughingly told Dhritarashtra
and Vidura about their intention. "They wish to perform a deed that is against dharma and artha and is censured by
virtuous ones. The wicked ones wish to perform a task that cannot be performed. These foolish and evil-souled
ones have gathered to commit crimes earlier. They have been overcome by desire and anger and have fallen prey
to wrath and avarice. The ones with limited intelligence wish to capture Pundarikaksha. Like children and idiots,
they wish to capture a flaming fire in a piece of cloth." Hearing Satyaki's words, the far-sighted Vidura told the
mighty-armed Dhritarashtra in that assembly of the Kurus. "O king! O scorcher of enemies! Destiny is encompassing all your sons. They are attempting to commit a reprehensible deed that is incapable of being performed. They
plan to overcome, capture and oppress Pundarikaksha, the younger brother of Vasava himself. This tiger among
men is invincible and unassailable. They will no longer exist, like insects before a fire. If Janardana so wishes, he
can despatch all of them to Yama's abode, like an enraged lion with deer. But he will never embark upon a reprehensible act. Achyuta Purushottama will never deviate from dharma." On hearing Vidura's words, Keshava
glanced towards Dhritarashtra and, in the hearing of his well-wishers, spoke these words. "O king! If those enraged ones wish to capture me with their energy, let them try. O lord of the earth! I know their strength and I will
be able to control those angry ones. But I am not interested in doing anything that can be censured. By desiring the
riches of the Pandavas, your sons will lose their own. If this is what they want, Yudhishthira will accomplish his
objective. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O king! At this instant, I can capture them and their followers and
hand them over to the Parthas. There can be nothing wrong with that act. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O
great king! But I do not wish to perform such a reprehensible deed in your presence, generated out of anger and
evil intelligence. O king! But if this is what Duryodhana wants, so be it. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I
will allow for all possibilities." On hearing this, Dhritarashtra told Vidura, "Quickly go and bring that wicked Suyodhana, who is greedy for the kingdom, together with his friends, his advisers, his brothers and his followers. Let
me again see if I can bring him to the right path." Kshatta again brought the reluctant Duryodhana to the assembly
hall, together with his brothers and surrounded by all the kings.

'King Dhritarashtra then spoke to Duryodhana and Karna, Duhshasana and the kings who surrounded them. "O
cruel one! O one born in sin! With your assistants, you are embarking on a heinous deed. Your aides are wicked.
Together with them, you wish to perform an evil deed. This is incapable of being done. It brings ill fame. It is censured by those who are righteous. Only foolish ones like you, who bring ill repute to their lineages, can think of
this. Pundarikaksha is indomitable and unassailable. Together with your evil advisers, you wish to oppress and
capture him. All the gods, together with Vasava, are incapable of using force against him. But you desire that like a
wicked one, like a child asking for the moon. You do not know that gods, men, gandharvas, asuras and serpents are
incapable of withstanding Keshava in battle. No hand can grasp the wind. No hand can touch the moon. No head
can bear the earth. No force can grasp Keshava." After Dhritarashtra had spoken in this way, Kshatta Vidura spoke
these words to Dhritarashtra's intolerant son Duryodhana, who was looking on. "At the gate of Soubha, Dvivida,
Indra among the apes, enveloped Keshava with a mighty shower of rocks[This has been described in Section 31 (Volume 2).]. Desiring to capture Madhava through
his valour, he made every kind of endeavour. But he was incapable of grasping him and now you wish to use force.
At Pragjyotisha, Naraka and the other danavas could not grasp Shouri and now you wish to use force. In his childhood, when he was a mere infant, he killed Putana[Demoness killed by Krishna.]. O bull among the Bharata lineage! He held up Govardhana
to protect the cows. He slew Arishta, Dhenuka, the immensely strong Chanura, Ashvaraja and the wicked
Kamsa[Krishna killed a demon named Arishta, in the form of a bull. Dhenuka was a demon in the form of an ass. Cha-
nura was a wrestler. Some of these were sent by Kamsa to kill Krishna. There is no demon named Ashvaraja (king
of the horses). However, the demon Keshi was in the form of a horse and that is probably what is meant.]. He slew Jarasandha, Vakra, the valiant Shishupala and Bana and killed many kings in battle. He has
conquered King Varuna and the infinitely energetic fire god. When he stole the parijata flowers, he defeated
Shachi's consort himself. When he was asleep on the single and large ocean, he killed Madhu and Kaitabha[Demons killed by Vishnu.]. In
another birth, he killed Hayagriva[Hayagriva means the neck (griva) of a horse (haya). Hayagriva is one of Vishnu's forms and is also the name of
a demon. Vishnu killed the demon Hayagriva in his form of Hayagriva.]. He is the one who does everything. He has not been created. He is the source
of all virility. Without any effort, he does whatever he wishes to do. You do not know Govinda Achyuta, whose
valour is terrible. His anger is like that of a virulent serpent. His mass of energy cannot be vanquished. You are
seeking to assail the mighty-armed Krishna, whose deeds are unsullied, like an insect against a fire. You and your
advisers will be destroyed."'
