'Dhritarashtra said, "The immensely strong Bhimasena was roaring and the sound was like that of thundering
clouds. Which brave ones surrounded him? O Sanjaya! I do not see anyone in the three worlds who is capable of
standing before an enraged Bhimasena in battle. When he raises his club in a great battle, he is like Death. O
son[The word used is tata.]! I do not see anyone who can stay in the field of battle. Who will remain stationed in a battle, with the exception of Shatakratu? The wrathful Bhimasena wishes to kill my sons. They have united for Duryodhana's welfare and are stationed in front of him. In front of the conflagaration that is Bhimasena, my sons are like grass.
Which brave ones stationed themselves at the forefront of that battle? In that encounter, my sons must have looked
upon him as Death. When he acted like Death against all the beings, who surrounded him? When the fire of Bhima
raged and consumed my sons, who were the brave ones who attacked him? O Sanjaya! Tell me that."

'Sanjaya replied, "When maharatha Bhimasena was roaring, the powerful Karna emitted a tremendous sound
and rushed against him. The powerful one became extremely intolerant and stretched his bow. The powerful Karna
wished to exhibit his strength in battle. At the clash between Karna and Bhima, everyone's limbs began to tremble.
Both rathas and riders heard the slapping of the palms. In the field of the battle, they heard Bhimasena's terrible
roar. The bulls among the kshatriyas thought that the sky and the earth were covered with this sound. The great-
souled Pandava roared fiercely again. In that battle, the bows of all the warriors fell down on the ground. O great
king! The mounts were extremely distressed and in terror, repeatedly discharged urine and excrement. There were
many terrible omens that could be seen. O king! There was a tumultuous clash between Bhima and Karna. Karna
struck Bhima with twenty arrows and swiftly pierced his charioteer with five arrows. The immensely strong and
swift Bhimasena laughed and pierced Karna back in that battle with sixty-four arrows. Karna, the great archer, shot
four more arrows. O king! But before they could reach him Bhima displayed the dexterity of his hands and used
arrows with drooping tufts to slice them down into many fragments. At this, Karna enveloped him with many torrents of arrows. The descendant of Pandu's lineage was shrouded by Karna in many ways. However, the maharatha
severed Karna's bow in his hand and pierced him with many arrows with drooping tufts. The son of the suta picked
up another bow and strung it. The maharatha, the performer of terrible deeds, pierced Bhima in that encounter.
Bhima became extremely angry. He powerfully struck the son of the suta in the chest with three arrows with
drooping tufts. With those arrows stuck to his breast, Karna looked beautiful. O bull among the Bharata lineage!
He was like a mountain with three peaks. Pierced by those supreme arrows, blood began to flow from him, like
minerals and red chalk flowing from the slope of a mountain. Severely struck, Karna wavered a little. O venerable
one! He then fixed an arrow to his bow and pierced Bhima. He again shot hundreds and thousands of arrows. He
was suddenly enveloped by Karna, the one with the firm bow. However, the descendant of the Pandu lineage
smiled and quickly severed the string of his[Karna's.] bow. With a broad-headed arrow, he dispatched the charioteer to
Yama's abode. In that battle, the maharatha deprived the four horses of their lives. O lord of the earth! With the
horses slain, Karna descended from the chariot. The maharatha ascended Vrishasena's chariot. Having vanquished
Karna in the battle, the powerful Bhimasena let out a mighty roar that was like the thunder of rain clouds. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing this roar, Yudhishthira was delighted, since he deduced that Karna had
been defeated by Bhimasena.

'"In every direction, the Pandu soldiers blew on their conch shells. On hearing the noises made by the enemy
soldiers, those on your side also roared. Partha stretched Gandiva and Krishna blew on his conch shell. But surpassing all this noise, there were the roars emitted by Bhima. O great king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
All the soldiers heard this. Then those two scorchers of enemies[Karna and Bhima.] struck each other separately with arrows.
However, Radheya struck mildly and Pandava struck powerfully[The account of the duel between Karna and Bhima resumes again later. Karna probably fought mildly because
he had given his word to Kunti that he would not harm any of the Pandavas other than Arjuna.]."'