'Nakula said, "O Madhava! Dharmaraja knows about dharma and is also generous. He has spoken many words
that are in conformity with dharma. O Madhava! Bhimasena knows the king's mind. O Madhava! He has spoken
about peace, but also about the strength of his arms. In the same way, you have heard what Phalguna had to say. O
brave one! You have also spoken about your own views. O Purushottama! Having heard what everyone has to say,
at the appropriate time, you should do what you think to be the best. O Keshava! Different views are expressed at
different times. O scorcher of enemies! But at the right time, a man himself has to decide on the task. Something
may be thought of in one way, but actually happens in another way. O Purushottama! Therefore, in this world, the
views of men change. When we lived in the forest, we had one kind of view. O Krishna! We had another when we
lived in concealment, and yet another when we revealed ourselves. O Varshneya! The love for the kingdom that we
have now, did not exist as much when we roamed around in the forest. O brave one! O Janardana! When you heard
that our period of exile in the forest was over, these seven akshouhinis have been assembled through your grace.
These tigers among men have strength and manliness that is impossible to think of. On seeing them take up arms
in battle, which man will not tremble? Therefore, in the midst of the Kurus, you should speak words of pacification. Speak words such that the evil Suyodhana is not hurt and frightened. Yudhishthira, Bhimasena, the unvanquished Bibhatsu, Sahadeva, I, Rama[Balarama.], Keshava, the immensely valorous Satyaki, Virata and his sons, Drupada
and his advisers, Parshata Dhrishtadyumna, the brave king of Kashi and Dhrishtaketu of Chedi are here. Which
mortal man of flesh and blood will fight them on the field of battle? O mighty-armed one! There is no doubt that
you will accomplish the objectives of Dharmaraja merely through the act of going there. O unblemished one!
Vidura, Bhishma, Drona and Bahlika are capable of understanding what is good for them, when you explain it to
them. They are the ones who will persuade Dhritarashtra, lord of men, and the wicked Suyodhana and his advisers.
O Janardana! With you speaking and Vidura listening, what can the two of you not counter and prevent from deviating from the path?"'
