'"The lord said, 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Absence of fear, pureness of heart, 549 steadiness in jnana
yoga, 550 donation, and control, 551 yajnas, self-study, 552 practice of austerities and simplicity, 553 absence of
injury to others, truthfulness, lack of anger, renunciation, tranquility, lack of criticism of others, compassion towards beings, lack of avarice, gentleness, sense of shame, 554 steadfastness, energy, forgiveness, perseverance,
cleanliness, absence of hatred, absence of ego-these belong to the person born towards divine wealth. 555 O
Partha! Arrogance, insolence, egoism, anger, cruelty and ignorance-these belong to birth towards demonic
wealth. Divine wealth is for liberation. Demonic wealth is for bondage. O Pandava! Do not sorrow. You have been
born towards divine wealth. O Partha! In this world, two types of beings are created, divine and demonic. The divine has been stated in detail. Hear from me about the demonic. Demonic people do not know about inclination
and disinclination. 556 In them, there is no purity nor righteousness, nor even truthfulness. They say the world is
full of falsehood, 557 without basis, 558 without a lord, created without continuity 559 and with no reason other
than to satisfy desire. Resorting to such views, with distorted minds, little intelligence and cruel action, they perform evil deeds. They are born to destroy the world. Seeking refuge in insatiable desires, deluded with a sense of
insolence, pride and arrogance, accepting search of the untrue 560 and performing impure rites, they act. Resorting
to immeasurable thoughts till the time of destruction, 561 convinced certainly that the enjoyment of desire is
supreme, tied down with the noose of a hundred hopes, prone to lust and anger and accepting evil means for the
sake of desire gratification, they wish to accumulate wealth. Today I have gained this. I will get that desired object
later. I have this and again that wealth will also be mine. This enemy has been killed by me. I will also kill the others. I am the lord, I am the enjoyer. I am the successful, strong and happy. I am wealthy and of noble descent. Who
is there equal to me? I will perform yajnas, I will donate. 562 I will pleasure myself. Deluded by ignorance in this
way, minds distracted by many thoughts, caught in the net of delusion, addicted to gratification of desires, they are
hurled into impure hell. Self-glorifying, haughty, proud because of wealth, they insolently perform unsanctioned
rites that are yajnas only in name. Resorting to vanity, strength, insolence, desire and anger, they hate me in their
own bodies and in the bodies of others and are disfavoured. In this world, I hurl those hateful, cruel, evil and worst
among men into demonic births, 563 several times. O Kounteya! From birth to birth, the deluded don't attain me
and obtaining demonic births, go down even further. 564 Desire, anger and avarice-these are the three types of
doors to hell and destroyers of the atman. Give up these three. O Kounteya! The man who is freed from these three
dark doors and follows that which is good for the atman, thereafter attains the supreme goal. He who deviates from
the prescription of the shastras 565 and acts as he desires like doing, that person doesn't attain liberation or happiness or the supreme goal. Therefore, in deciding what should be done and what should not be done, the shastras are
your test. In this, 566 get ready to perform action knowing what the shastras prescribe.'"'
