'Bhishma said, "The king must consider both dharma and artha and their differences, which are often unfathomable, and then appoint a priest who is extremely learned in the sacred texts. When the king has a royal priest
who has dharma in his soul and is learned in dharma, and the king also possesses similar qualities, everything is
well. Those two make subjects, the earlier and the later gods and the ancestors prosper. They should be similarly
established in dharma, devoted and extremely austere. They should have fraternal feelings towards each other, revere each other and be similar in temperament. When the brahmana and the kshatriya revere each other, the subjects obtain happiness. When they show each other disrespect, the subjects are destroyed. It is said that the brahmana and the kshatriya are the root of all dharma. On this, an ancient history is recited. O Yudhishthira! Listen to
this conversation between Aila and Kashyapa.

'"Aila asked, 'When the brahmana abandons the kshatriya and the kshatriya abandons the brahmana, which
among the two should be revered? In such a situation, who should not be revered?'

'"Kashyapa replied, 'In the kingdom of a kshatriya where the brahmana and the kshatriya fight with each other,
there is no one to revere and bandits are worshipped. Virtuous ones think that there is no one in control there. Bulls
do not thrive, nor do cows. There is no churning in the pots and no sacrifices. When the brahmanas abandon the
kshatriyas, the sons do not study the Vedas. The bulls that are born in those houses do not prosper. The subjects do
not study, nor do they sacrifice. When the brahmanas abandon the kshatriyas, they[Probably the kshatriyas.] degenerate and become like
bandits. The two are always connected and support each other. The kshatriya was born from the brahmana's
womb. The brahmana was born from the kshatriya's womb. Both of them always depend on each other. Supporting
each other, they obtain great prosperity. If that ancient alliance is destroyed, everything becomes confounded. It is
like someone who no longer has a boat trying to reach the other shore. Or like a boat tossed around on the giant
ocean. The four varnas are then confounded and all the subjects confront a state of destruction. When the tree that
represents brahmanas is protected, honey and gold shower down. When it is always unprotected, tears and sin
shower down. When a brahmana is not a brahmachari, deviates from studying, but nonetheless seeks protection in
Brahma[This happens when protection from a kshatriya is absent.], the gods shower down in strange ways. Terrible misery penetrates there. A person may commit the sin
of killing a woman or a brahmana, but is not reprimanded in assembly halls there and is not frightened to approach
the king. Then, there is fear for the kshatriya. Extremely wicked persons pile up sin on sin and the god Rudra arises then. The piling up of sin on sin leads to the birth of Rudra. He then kills everyone, the virtuous and the wicked
alike.'

'"Aila asked, 'Where does Rudra come from? What is Rudra's form? It is beings who are seen to kill other beings. O Kashyapa! Tell me all this. Where is the god Rudra born from?'

'"Kashyapa replied, 'The soul of Rudra is in the hearts of men. He kills his own body and also the bodies of others. It is said that Rudra is like the stormy wind. His form is like a forest conflagration or the cloud.'

'"Aila said, 'No one can control the wind. Nor do clouds shower down and forest conflagrations are not seen
within people[Therefore, how can Rudra be inside men?]. Men are set free and also slain because of desire and hatred.'

'"Kashyapa replied, 'The fire may be lit in one house. But it swiftly burns down an entire village. In that way,
the god causes confusion and touches everything, the good and the wicked.'

'"Aila asked, 'If chastisement touches everyone, the good and the wicked, especially because of the sins committed by the wicked, what is the reason to perform good deeds? What is the reason not to perform wicked deeds?'

'"Kashyapa replied, 'Similar chastisement touches those who have not performed wicked deeds, because their
sentiments are mixed. They have not abandoned those who perform wicked deeds. Because of mixed sentiments,
wet wood is burnt along with the dry. There should never be any mingling with the performers of wicked deeds.'

'"Aila said, 'The earth supports both the virtuous and the wicked. The sun heats both the virtuous and the
wicked. The wind blows on both the virtuous and the wicked. The water bears along both the virtuous and the
wicked.'

'"Kashyapa replied, 'That is the way of the world. O prince! But it is not like that there[In the world hereafter.]. After death, there is a
specific difference between those who perform good deeds and those who are wicked. The world of virtuous ones
is full of honey and radiant with golden rays into which clarified butter has been poured. It is the navel of immortality. After death, the brahmachari finds delight there. There is no death there. Nor is there old age or unhappiness.
The world of the wicked is hell, without any light. There is eternal unhappiness and a lot of sorrow. There, the self
sorrows over one's wicked deeds. He descends for many years and cannot find a place to rest. When there is dissension between brahmanas and kshatriyas, the subjects are submerged in intolerable grief. Knowing this, it is the
king's duty to make a learned person, one who is not knowledgeable about just one subject, the priest. He is the
one who should be consecrated. That is what dharma decrees. According to dharma, the brahmana is said to be the
foremost among everyone. Those who are learned about dharma say that brahmanas were created first. Because he
is honoured as the first, everything that came later belongs to him. Therefore, the brahmana must be revered and
worshipped and he enjoys the best of everything. According to dharma, everything that is best and distinguished
must be offered to him. This is a mandatory duty for a king, even if he is powerful. The brahmana makes the kshatriya prosper. The kshatriya makes the brahmana prosper.'"'
