Janamejaya said, 'Before the war started, with Keshava's permission, the lord Rama had left with the Vrishnis,
saying, "O Keshava! I will not help the sons of Dhritarashtra, or the sons of Pandu. I will go where I wish." Having spoken those words, Rama, the destroyer of enemies, had departed. O brahmana! You should again tell me
everything about his return. Tell me in detail about Rama's arrival. How did he witness the battle? You are a
supremely skilled narrator.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'O mighty-armed one! The great-souled Pandavas set themselves up in Upaplavya and
sent Madhusudana to Dhritarashtra, for the sake of peace and for the welfare of all beings[This is a reference to Krishna's mission of peace, described in Section 54 (Volume 4).]. He went to Hastinapura and met Dhritarashtra. In particular, he spoke truthful and beneficial words to him. As you have already been
told, the king did not pay any attention to these words. O lord of men! Unable to obtain peace, the mighty-armed
Krishna Purushottama returned to Upaplavya. O tiger among men! Dismissed by Dhritarashtra's son, Krishna returned unsuccessful and spoke to the Pandavas. "Goaded by destiny, the Kurus have not acted in accordance with
my words. O Pandaveyas! With me, set out under the nakshatra Pushya." Armies were being arrayed on both sides.
Rohini's great-minded son, supreme among strong ones, spoke to his brother, Krishna. "O mighty-armed one! O
Madhusudana! Let us help them[The text leaves it as 'them'. Balarama meant helping the Kouravas.]." However, Krishna did not act in accordance with these words. At this, the immensely illustrious descendant of the Yadu lineage, the wielder of the plough, was overcome by supreme rage and
set out on a pilgrimage towards the Sarasvati. With all the Yadavas, he set out when the conjunction of nakshatras
known as Maitra[Maitra or Mitra is more a muhurta, rather than a conjunction of nakshatras. Depending on when the sun rises,
it is usually between 7.30 a.m. and 8.30 a.m.] occurred. Bhoja, scorcher of enemies[Kritavarma.], was on Duryodhana's side. With Yuyudhana, Vasudeva was on the side of the Pandavas. When Rohini's brave son set out under Pushya, Madhusudana placed the Pandaveyas at the forefront and advanced towards the Kurus.

'While setting out on his route, Rama instructed his servants, "Bring all the objects and equipment that will be
needed for a pilgrimage. Bring the fire from Dvaraka[A sacred fire burns in every household. That is carried at the time of a pilgrimage.] and the priests. Bring gold, silver, cows, garments, horses,
elephants, chariots, mules, camels and carts. Swiftly bring all the garments that are required for a pilgrimage. Let
us quickly go towards the flow of the Sarasvati. Bring officiating priests and hundreds of bulls among brahmanas."

O king! Having given these instructions to his servants, the immensely strong Baladeva set out on a pilgrimage at a
time when the Kurus confronted a calamity. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Along the flows of the Sarasvati, he
proceeded towards the ocean, with officiating priests, well-wishers, supreme among brahmanas, chariots, elephants, horses and servants. He was surrounded by many carts that were drawn by cattle, mules and camels. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In many countries along the path, large donations were given to the weary, tired of
limb, children, the hungry and those who were distressed and waited for alms in different ways. O king! In all
those places, brahmanas were instantly given food and whatever objects they desired. O king! On the instructions
of Rohini's son, men were stationed, with large quantities of food and drink. To brahmanas who desired happiness,
extremely expensive garments, beds, covers and objects of worship were given. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Whenever a brahmana or a kshatriya wanted anything, it was seen that the object was unhesitatingly given.
All those who advanced, or stayed, were happy. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Vehicles were given to those
who wished to travel, drinks to those who were thirsty and tasty food to those who were hungry. The men there obtained garments and ornaments. O king! The path along which they advanced was happy in every possible way. O
brave one! The men who travelled seemed to be in heaven. They were always happy and tasty and good food was
always available. There were shops and stalls with merchandise, frequented by hundreds of men. There were many
kinds of trees and beings, decorated with many kinds of jewels. The great-souled one was unwavering in his soul
and observed rites. O king! The foremost among the Yadu lineage, the wielder of the plough, gave riches and sacrificial donations to brahmanas at sacred places of pilgrimage. He also gave away one thousand cows that yielded
milk. They were covered in excellent garments and their horns were encased in gold. There were diverse horses
that had been born in many countries. These, and servant-maids, were given to the brahmanas. There were gems,
pearls, jewels, diamonds and the best of sparkling gold and silver. Rama gave the best of brahmanas iron and copper vessels. In this way, in the best of tirthas along the Sarasvati, the great-souled one gave away a large quantity
of riches. His deeds and power were unlimited. Eventually, he cheerfully returned to Kurukshetra.'

Janamejaya asked, 'O best among men! Tell me about the qualities and origins of tirthas along the Sarasvati,
their fruits and the deeds that must be done when one is there. O illustrious one! Tell me about these tirthas in due
order. O brahmana! O supreme among those who know about the brahman! My curiosity is great.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'O king! The qualities and origins of all the tirthas will be extensive. O Indra among
kings! However, I will tell you about these sacred spots in entirety. Listen. O great king! With the officiating
priests, well-wishers and large numbers of brahmanas, the foremost among the Yadu lineage first went to the sacred Prabhasa. O Indra among men! The lord of the stars[The moon.] was afflicted by tuberculosis and was freed of his curse
there. Having regained his energy, he lights up the entire universe. This is the foremost tirtha on earth. Because he
obtained his radiance there, it is known as Prabhasa[The word prabha means radiance.].'
Janamejaya asked, 'Why was the illustrious Soma afflicted by tuberculosis? How did Chandra[Chandra, Soma and Shashi are names for the moon god.] bathe in that
supreme of tirthas? Having bathed there, how did Shashi regain his energy? O great sage! Tell me everything about
this in detail.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'O lord of the earth! Daksha had twenty-seven maidens as daughters and Daksha gave
them to Soma[These were the twenty-seven nakshatras, married to Soma, the moon.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They are always united with the nakshatras and are used for
computing time. O Indra among kings! Those auspicious ones became the wives of Soma. All of them were large-
eyed and were unmatched on earth in terms of their beauty. But in the richness of her beauty, Rohini was
superior[Rohini is Aldebaran and is brighter than the others.]. Therefore, the illustrious moon god was especially affectionate towards her. She was in his heart and
he always enjoyed her alone. O Indra among kings! In those ancient times, Soma dwelt with Rohini for a long
time. At this, the other nakshatras became angry with the great-souled one. They quickly went to their father, Prajapati[Daksha.], and said,"Soma does not dwell with us. He always resides with Rohini. O lord of beings! Therefore, all of
us will live with you. We will live here, be restrained in our diet and perform supreme austerities." On hearing
their words, Daksha told Soma, "Treat all your wives equally, so that a great adharma does not touch you." Daksha
told all of them, "Go to Soma. On my instructions, Chandra will treat all of you equally." Dismissed by him, all of
them went to Shitamshu's abode[Shitamshu is another name for the moon, meaning the one with the cool rays.]. O lord of the earth! However, as earlier, the illustrious Soma repeatedly dwelt
only with Rohini and pleased her alone. The others united and again went and told their father, "We will serve you
and dwell under your refuge. Soma does not dwell with us and has not acted in accordance with your words." On
hearing their words, Daksha told Soma, "O Virochana[Another name for the moon god.]! Treat all your wives equally, so that I do not have to
curse you." However, the illustrious Shashi paid no attention to Daksha's words. He continued to live with Rohini.
The others were enraged and went to their father. They lowered their heads in salutation and said, "Soma does not
dwell with us. Grant us refuge. The illustrious Chandra always dwells with Rohini. Therefore, save us, so that
Soma accepts all of us." O lord of the earth! On hearing these words, the illustrious one became angry. In his rage,
he inflicted tuberculosis on Soma and the lord of the stars became afflicted. Overcome by tuberculosis, Shashi decayed from one day to another. O king! He made many efforts to free himself from the tuberculosis. O great king!
The moon performed many different kinds of sacrifices. However, he could not free himself of the curse and was
immersed in decay. As Soma began to decay, herbs ceased to grow. All of them were tasteless and without juices.
All of them lost their energy. When the herbs decayed, the destruction of beings started. When the moon decayed,
all the subjects became emaciated. O lord of the earth! At this, all the gods assembled and went to Soma. They
asked, "Why is your form like this, without any radiance? Tell us everything about the reason behind this great
fear. Having heard your words, we will think of a means." Having been thus addressed, the one with the mark of a
hare[Shasha or shashaka is a rabbit or hare. Because the moon bears the mark of a hare, it is known as Shashi or
Shashanka.] replied to all of them. He told them about the reason behind the curse and about his own tuberculosis. Having heard his words, the gods went to Daksha and said, "O illustrious one! Be pacified. Take away your curse from
Soma. Chandra has decayed and only a little bit of him can be seen. O lord of the gods! Because of his decay, all
the subjects have been overcome by decay. Many different kinds of creepers, herbs and seeds are wasting. O preceptor of the worlds! You should be pacified." Having been thus addressed, Prajapati thought and spoke these
words. "My words cannot be transgressed. It cannot be otherwise. O immensely fortunate ones! However, there is
a means whereby this can be withdrawn. Let Shashi always treat all of his wives equally. Let the one with the mark
of the hare bathe in the supreme tirtha along the Sarasvati. The god will then wax again. These words of mine are
true. For one half of the month, Soma will always wane. But for another half of the month, Soma will always wax.
These words of mine are true." On the instructions of the rishi[Daksha.], Soma went to the Sarasvati. Along the Sarasvati,
he went to the supreme tirtha of Prabhasa. The immensely energetic and immensely radiant one bathed there on the
day of the new moon. He obtained his cool rays back and radiated the world again. O Indra among kings! All the
gods also went to Prabhasa. With Soma, they presented themselves before Daksha. Prajapati gave all the gods permission to leave. Pleased with Soma, the illustrious one again spoke these words to him. "O son! Never disregard
women. Never disregard brahmanas. Depart and always follow my instructions." O great king! Having taken his
leave, he again returned to his own abode[Chandra took Daksha's leave.]. All the subjects were delighted and lived as they had earlier. This is
the entire account about how the moon was cursed. This is how the tirtha of Prabhasa came to be the foremost
among all tirthas. O great king! The one with the mark of the hare always bathes there on the day of the new moon.
Having bathed in the supreme tirtha of Prabhasa, he obtains his handsomeness back. O lord of the earth! That spot
is known as Prabhasa, because bathing there, Chandra obtained his supreme radiance back.

'After this, the undecaying and powerful one[Balarama.] went to Chamasodbheda. People know that spot as Chamasodbheda. The one with the plough as his weapon gave away many precious donations there. He spent a night there and
bathed in accordance with the prescribed rituals. Keshava's elder brother then quickly went to Udapana. Great
fruits are obtained from observing rites there. O Janamejaya! The herbs and the earth are cool there. O Indra
among kings! Though the Sarasvati has been destroyed there[The Sarasvati has been destroyed in the sense of becoming invisible and flowing underground.], the siddhas know this.'
