'Sanjaya said, "The armoured Satyaki raised his weapons against Bhishma in the battle. The great archer who was
Rishyashringa's son repulsed him in the encounter. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Madhava[Satyaki.] was
enraged in the battle and, as if he was smiling, pierced the rakshasa with nine arrows. O king! O Indra among
kings! The enraged rakshasa wounded Madhava, the bull among the Shini lineage, with sharp arrows. Madhava,
Shini's descendant and the destroyer of enemy heroes, became wrathful in the battle and released a shower of arrows towards the rakshasa. The rakshasa roared like a lion and pierced Satyaki, the mighty-armed one for whom
truth was his valour, with sharp arrows. In the battle, Madhava was severely wounded by the rakshasa. But the
spirited one resorted to his patience. He laughed and roared. In the encounter, the angry Bhagadatta wounded Madhava with sharp arrows, like a mighty elephant being goaded. Shini's descendant, supreme among rathas, gave up
the encounter with the rakshasa. He released straight-tufted arrows towards Pragjyotisha. The king of Pragjyotisha,
skilled in the use of his hands, grasped a sharp and broad-headed arrow and sliced down Madhava's giant bow. The
destroyer of enemy heroes grasped another one that was even more powerful. In the encounter, he angrily pierced
Bhagadatta with sharp arrows. The great archer was pierced and repeatedly licked the corners of his mouth. He
grasped a firm and iron javelin that was decorated with gold and lapis lazuli. It was as terrible as Yama's staff and
he hurled this towards Satyaki. It was hurled through the force of his arms. O king! On seeing it suddenly descend
in the battle, Satyaki severed it into three fragments with his arrows. It fell down on the ground, like a giant meteor
that has lost its brilliance. O lord of the earth! On seeing that the javelin had been destroyed, your son[Duryodhana.] surrounded Madhava with a large number of chariots. On seeing that maharatha Varshneya had been surrounded,
Duryodhana was extremely happy and spoke to all his brothers. 'O Kouravas! Act so that the warrior Satyaki may
not escape with his life. Go there with a large number of chariots. If he is killed, I think that the great army of the
Pandavas will also be slain.' The maharathas accepted his words and agreed to do this. With Bhishma at the forefront, they began to fight with Shini's descendant.

'"Abhimanyu was advancing against Bhishma in the battle. The powerful king of Kamboja restrained him in the
encounter. Arjuna's son pierced the king with straight-tufted arrows. O king! He again pierced the king with sixty-
four arrows. Wishing to see that Bhishma remained alive, in that encounter, Sudakshina pierced Krishna's son with
nine arrows and his charioteer with nine. When those two valorous ones clashed, the encounter was wonderful and
great. Shikhandi, the scorcher of enemies, attacked Gangeya. Virata and Drupada, the aged maharathas, rushed forward to battle Bhishma, resisting that large army. Ashvatthama, supreme among rathas, became angry and repulsed
them. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A battle commenced between them. O king! O scorcher of enemies!
Virata used ten broad-headed arrows to strike Drona's son, the great archer who was the ornament of any battle.
Drupada also used three sharp arrows to pierce him. The preceptor's son stationed himself in front of Bhishma. As
the aged Virata and Drupada advanced towards Bhishma, Ashvatthama pierced them with ten arrows. We witnessed the extraordinary and great conduct of those aged ones. In the battle, they repulsed the terrible arrows shot
by Drona's son. Sharadvata Kripa rushed against the advancing Sahadeva, like an angry elephant attacks another
elephant in the forest. O king! In that battle, maharatha Kripa quickly struck Madri's son with seventy arrows decorated in gold. But Madri's son used his arrows to slice down his bow into two. Once the bow had been severed, he
pierced him with nine arrows. Wishing to ensure that Bhishma remained alive, he[Kripa.] grasped another bow that
was capable of bearing a great burden. In anger, but cheerfully, he struck Madri's son in that battle with ten sharp
arrows. O king! Desiring to kill Bhishma, Pandava was angry and struck back the intolerant one. The battle that
raged was terrible and fearful. Wishing to ensure that Bhishma remained alive, Vikarna, the scorcher of enemies,
angrily pierced Nakula in that battle with sixty arrows. Nakula was severely wounded by your archer son. But he
pierced Vikarna back with seventy-seven arrows that had been sharpened on stone. For the sake of Bhishma, those
scorchers of enemies and tigers among men bravely fought against each other, like two bulls fighting in a pen.

'"Ghatotkacha was engaged in fighting, slaying your soldiers. For Bhishma's sake, your valiant son, Durmukha,
confronted him in battle. O king! But Hidimba's son was enraged. He struck Durmukha, the scorcher of enemies,
in the chest with ninety sharp arrows. The brave Durmukha used sixty arrows that were crafted well at the tip to
pierce Bhimasena's son and in the forefront of the battle, roared in great delight. Wishing to kill Bhishma, Dhrishtadyumna advanced in the battle. But wishing to ensure that Bhishma remained alive, Hardikya countered him.
Varshneya struck the brave Parshata with five iron arrows and again quickly struck him between the breasts with
fifty arrows[In this context, Varshneya means Hardikya Kritavarma, descended from the Vrishni lineage, while Parshata
means Dhrishtadyumna.]. O king! Parshata struck Hardikya with nine sharp arrows that were decorated with the feathers of
herons. For Bhishma's sake, they severely confronted each other in that great battle. They encountered each other
like Vritra and the great Indra. The immensely strong Bhimasena advanced against Bhishma. In the battle, Soma-
datta's son used an extremely sharp and gold-tufted iron arrow to strike Bhima between the breasts. O supreme
among kings! With that stuck to his chest, the powerful Bhimasena looked like Krouncha in earlier times, struck
by Skanda's javelin[In fighting against the demon Taraka, Skanda (Kartikeya) hurled a javelin at Mount Krouncha, within which,
Taraka was hiding.]. They angrily attacked each other in that battle and repeatedly released arrows that were
like the sun and had been polished by artisans. Wishing to kill Bhishma, Bhima fought with the maharatha who
was Somadatta's son. Wishing to ensure Bhishma's victory, Somadatta's son fought with Pandava. They performed
tasks and out-performed each other in that battle. O great king! Surrounded by a large army, Yudhishthira advanced towards Bhishma and was countered by Bharadvaja's son. The roar of Drona's chariot was like the sound
of the clouds. O king! O venerable one! On hearing it, the Prabhadrakas trembled. O king! In the battle, the great
army of Pandu's son was checked by Drona and could not move a single step. O lord of men! Chekitana was enraged in the battle and advanced towards Bhishma. But your son, Chitrasena, repulsed the one who was angry in
form. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! For Bhishma's sake, the brave maharatha Chitrasena fought against
Chekitana to his utmost capacity. Chekitana also fought against Chitrasena and the battle between the valiant ones
was extraordinary. Arjuna was restrained in many different kinds of ways. But he repulsed your son[This seems to be a reference to Duhshasana.] and
crushed his soldiers. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Duhshasana resisted Partha to his utmost capacity, having determined that Bhishma could not be killed. The soldiers of your son were slaughtered in the battle. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They were agitated there by the best of the rathas[On the Pandava side.]."'