'Bhishma said, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted. A bandit who followed restraints was
not destroyed after his death. There was a ruler of the nishadas by the name of Kapavya. He was brave, intelligent and a striker. He was learned and was not violent. He protected dharma against any decline and
worshipped brahmanas and seniors. His father was a kshatriya and his mother was a nishada. He protected
the dharma of kshatriyas. Though he was a bandit, he obtained success. In the morning and in the evening,
he would agitate herds of animals in the forest. He knew about different kinds of animals and about where
they came to drink. He knew about all the different groves and regions and roamed around Mount Pariyatra.
He knew about the dharma for all beings. His weapons were firm and he never missed his aim. He could
single-handedly defeat hundreds of soldiers. In that great forest, he worshipped his aged and blind parents.
He honoured them well and gave them food in the form of honey, meat, roots, fruit and grain that was superior and inferior. He tended to them. He protected the brahmanas who resided in the forest and passed
through it. In that great forest, he brought them animals that he had killed. There were some who had
doubts about receiving food from a bandit. For these, at the right time, he would leave it outside their houses and leave. There were thousands of dishonourable bandits who were pitiless. They desired to make him
their leader.

'"The bandits said, 'You are wise and know about the time and the place. You have good conduct and
wield firm weapons. You are respected by all of us. Be our leader and our chief. We will do whatever you
ask us to. According to proper policy, protect us, like a mother and a father.' Kapavya replied, 'Do not kill
women, those who are frightened, those who are children and those who are ascetics. Do not slay those
who are not fighting. Do not forcibly abduct women. Under no circumstances should a spirited warrior slay
a woman. Cattle and women should not be harmed and war must not be waged on their account. Grain must
not be destroyed and one should not pointlessly create obstructions in ploughing, or in the worship of gods,
ancestors and guests. Among all the beings, brahmanas deserve to be freed[A brahmana should not be captured.]. One must compensate them,
even if one has to give up all of one's property. If they are extremely enraged and chant their mantras, there
is no one in the three worlds who will be saved and will not be defeated. A person who speaks ill of brahmanas or wishes for their destruction will be destroyed. This is as certain as the rising of the sun. Dwell
here and receive the fruits. Those who do not give according to their capacity will be attacked by our soldiers. The rod has been intended for the sake of ensuring virtue. It is certain that it is not meant to inflict
death. However, it has been said that if a person obstructs virtuous people, it is dharma to kill him. There
are some who obtain a living by causing injury to the kingdom. They are compared to worms inside a carcass. However, even if someone is a bandit, if he conducts himself in accordance with the sacred texts of
dharma, despite being a bandit, he will swiftly obtain success.' All of them honoured Kapavya's instructions. All of them obtained a livelihood and abandoned their wicked ways. Because of his deeds, Kapavya
obtained great success. He acted so as to ensure safety for the virtuous and restrained the bandits from
wicked deeds. If someone regularly recounts this conduct of Kapavya, he will never be afflicted by any fear
from residents of the forest, or from beings. There will never be any fear from mortals or immortals, from
the virtuous or the wicked. O king! He will be like a leader in the forest."'
