'Yudhishthira said, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! I wish to hear about the true nature of evil's foundation and
about how sin propagates."

'Bhishma replied, "O lord of men! Hear about the foundation of evil. Greed alone is the great grasper. Evil is
propagated by greed. It is from this that evil, adharma and supreme misery flow. This is the foundation for misdeeds and makes people commit sin. Anger results from greed. Desire results from greed. Confusion and delusion
result from greed and so do pride, arrogance, malice and lack of forgiveness. Modesty is abandoned. Prosperity is
destroyed and dharma decays. Anxiety and lack of wisdom-all of these result from greed. There are also lack of
fairness, lack of reflection and the performance of perverse deeds. One becomes learned in deceit and is proud of
one's beauty and prosperity. One is distrustful of all beings. One is crooked towards all beings. One acts injurious-
ly towards all beings. One behaves inappropriately towards all beings. One steals the property of others. One ravishes other people's wives. There is violence in words and thought. There is violence in criticizing. There is turbulence in one's groin and belly. There is the terrible turbulence that is associated with death. There is the violence of
envy. The strong impulse to lie is extremely difficult to give up. It is difficult to withstand the impulse of passions.
It is impossible to withstand the impulse to hear bad words and boasting. One is malicious, wicked and perpetrates
evil deeds. One is rash in every kind of deed and action. At birth, childhood and youth, a man cannot give up the
consequences of the deeds that he has done. Though he decays, these do not decay. O extender of the Kuru lineage! One is incapable of satisfying greed through acquisitions. It is always like an ocean, incapable of being filled
by deep-flowing rivers. Greed is not satisfied. Nor is desire satiated. O king! Its true nature is not known by the
gods, the gandharvas, the asuras, the great serpents and all the large numbers of other beings. One who conquers
greed and delusion conquers his soul. O Kouravya! Insolence, hatred, criticism, maligning and malice-these are
found in greedy people who have not perfected their souls. There are those who are extremely learned, the repositories of the extremely great sacred texts. They can sever doubt. But on this, even they can have limited intelligence and are afflicted. They become addicted to hatred and anger and are cast out by those who are good in conduct. Though they are harsh inside, their words may be sweet. They are like pits that have been covered with grass.
Though they hold up the flag[Of dharma.], they are inferior and against dharma. They steal from the universe. They resort to
the strength of arguments and follow many different kinds of paths. But because they base themselves on greed
and ignorance, they destroy every kind of path. If evil-souled ones, driven primarily by greed, take over dharma,
they deform it. But that practice tends to be established. O Kouravya! Arrogance, anger, pride, laziness, delight,
sorrow, extreme vanity-these are seen among the greedy and the ignorant. Know that they have not been instructed. They are always full of greed. Ask those who have been instructed. I will tell you about the ones who are auspicious in their vows. They do not have any fear about their conduct. Nor do they fear the world hereafter. They
find no delight in flesh, nor are they addicted to the agreeable and the disagreeable. Good conduct is agreeable to
them. Self-control is established in them. They are beyond happiness and unhappiness. They are devoted to the
truth and the ultimate. Though they are compassionate, they are neither givers, nor receivers. They are always devoted to the ancestors, the gods and guests. They always exert, in every kind of way. They follow every kind of
dharma. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They are engaged in the welfare of all beings. They are prepared to
give up everything. Having reached the ultimate shore of dharma, they are incapable of being dislodged and
moved from their conduct, which was fashioned by virtuous people in ancient times. They are based on the path of
virtue and are not frightened, fickle or fierce. They are beyond desire and anger. They are without a sense of ownership and without a sense of the ego. They are good in their vows and firm in their honour. O Yudhishthira! You
should worship them and ask them. They do not seek cattle or fame, only dharma. They do perform the functions
of the body, because that is necessary. But they do not know fear, anger, fickleness and sorrow. They do not fly the
flag of dharma and there is nothing that is secret among them. They do not suffer from greed and delusion. They
are upright and devoted to the truth. O Kounteya! You should find delight in them. Their minds are attentive. They
find no delight in acquisitions. Nor do they grieve if there are no acquisitions. They are without sense of ownership
and without sense of ego. They are based on the truth and look on everything equally. O son! Gain and lack of
gain, happiness and unhappiness, pleasant and unpleasant, death and life-these are the same to them, because
they are firm in their valour. They are full of intelligence and base themselves on the truth. They are extremely
powerful. Attentively and according to your capacity, you should do what brings them happiness and is agreeable.
Words used in conversation may be good or bad. Like that, through the working of destiny, all beings may have
qualities[The suggestion seems to be that the acceptance of Bhishma's instructions depends on destiny.]."'