'Arjuna said, "You have addressed me as the descendant of Tapati. Therefore, I wish to know what that precisely
means. O blessed one! We are the sons of Kunti and are known as Kounteya. Who is Tapati and why are we called
Tapatya[Descendant of Tapati's lineage.]? I wish to know."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having been thus addressed by Kunti's son Dhananjaya, the gandharva recounted the story that is famous in the three worlds.

'The gandharva said, "O Partha! O chief among those who follow dharma! I will tell you this virtuous and wonderful story exactly as it happened. Listen attentively to what I have to say and you will understand the reason why
I have called you Tapatya. He who pervades the entire firmament[The next sentence makes it clear that this is the sun-god.] with his energy had a daughter named Tapati
who was equal to him. Tapati was born to Vivasvat[The sun.] after Savitri and was famous in the three worlds because of
her austerities. There was no one equal to her in beauty among the gods, the asuras, the yakshas, the rakshasas, the
apsaras and the gandharvas. She was symmetrical in form and unblemished in features. She had large and black
eyes. She was dressed in beautiful garments. She was pure in conduct. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On
seeing her, Vivasvat thought that no one in the three worlds possessed beauty, conduct, learning and qualities equal
to her so as to be her husband. On seeing that his daughter had grown and attained the age of marriage, he had no
peace of mind, thinking about whom to give her to.

'"O Kounteya! The mighty King Samvarana, the son of Riksha and a bull among the Kurus, always used to worship the sun, with offerings and garlands, observing fasts and rituals and practising various austerities. Puru's descendant worshipped Anshuman[The one with many rays; a name for the sun.] when he arose, with devotion, obedience, selflessness and purity. On seeing
that Samvarana was learned in the path of dharma and was unparalleled on earth for his handsomeness, Surya decided that he was the best husband for Tapati. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Surya desired to give his daughter
to that supreme king, whose lineage was famous. Just as the blazing rays of the sun suffuse the sky with radiance,
King Samvarana filled the earth with his splendour. O Partha! Just as those who know the brahman worship the rising sun, all subjects other than Brahmanas worshipped Samvarana. The fortunate king surpassed the moon in
benevolence towards those who wished him well and the sun in scorching those who wished him ill. O descendant
of the Kuru lineage! Tapan[A name for the sun.] himself decided that Tapati should be given to a king who had such great virtue and
qualities.

'"O Partha! It is told that once the king, blessed with such great good fortune and immensely famous on earth,
went out to hunt in the woods on the slopes of a mountain. O son of Kunti! When he was hunting, his unequalled
horse, overcome with hunger and thirst, died on that mountain. O Partha! Abandoning the dead horse, the king
walked on that mountain on foot and saw a lady who had large eyes and was unrivalled in the worlds in beauty.
That scorcher of enemies, a tiger among kings, was alone. That lady was also alone. He stood motionless and
stared at her with an unwavering gaze. From her beauty, the king thought that she might be the goddess Shri[Another name for Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth.]. He
again thought that her beauty was the manifestation of the sun's rays on earth. The black-eyed lady stood on the
mountain slope, with its trees and creepers, like a statue of gold. Having seen her, the king became contemptuous
of all other beings and considered that his eyes had now accomplished their purpose. The king thought that nothing
that he had seen from the date of his birth could rival her beauty. He thought that the creator had created the beauty
of this large-eyed lady after churning the worlds of gods, asuras and men. The king's heart and mind were tied up
in the noose of her perfection. Deprived of his senses, he was rooted to the spot. Thus, King Samvarana then decided that the lady's richness of beauty was unmatched in the three worlds.

'"As soon as he had seen that fortunate one, the king of noble lineage was pierced by the arrows of the god of
love and began to worry. Burning with the fierce fire of desire, he spoke to the illustrious lady, who was an adult,
but was still innocent, 'O lady with thighs like that of a plantain tree[The word used is rambha, which means a plantain tree. Thus, one with thighs like a plantain tree. However,
Rambha is also the name of a beautiful apsara and one can also translate this as one with thighs like those of
Rambha.]! Who are you? Who do you belong to?
Why have you come here? O lady with the beautiful smile! Why are you wandering alone in this lonely forest?
You are unblemished in every limb and adorned in every ornament. You are like a coveted ornament to those ornaments themselves. You don't seem to be a goddess or an asuri, or a yakshi or a rakshasi, or a nagini or a gandharvi,
or a human. O supreme among beautiful ones! None of the beautiful women I have seen, or heard of, can match
you.' Thus, struck by desire, did the ruler of the earth then speak to her in the lonely forest.

'"But she did not utter a word in reply. When the king kept asking, the large-eyed lady vanished like a flash of
lightning. Like one who had lost his senses, the king wandered around in the forest, looking for the lady with eyes
like a lotus. Having failed to find her, that best of the Kuru lineage lamented a lot and for a long time remained
motionless in grief."'
