'Sanjaya said, "I will describe everything to you, exactly as I saw it, about how Drona was made to sit down and
was brought down by the Pandus and the Srinjayas. Having been appointed the commander, in the midst of all the
soldiers, Bharadvaja's maharatha son spoke these words to your son. 'O king! You have shown me great honour by
appointing me the commander today, after that bull among the Kouravas, the son of the one who goes to the ocean.
O king! You will obtain fruits that are commensurate with your action. What desire of yours can I satisfy today?
Tell me what you desire.' At this, Duryodhana thought and consulted Karna, Duhshasana and the others. He told
the invincible preceptor, foremost among victorious ones, 'If you wish, grant me the boon that you will capture
Yudhishthira, foremost among charioteers, alive and bring him before me.' On hearing your son's words, the preceptor of the Kurus, spoke these words, bringing delight to all the soldiers. 'The king, Kunti's son, whom you wish
to be captured, is fortunate. O extremely invincible one! You have only asked for the boon that he should be captured, not that he should be killed. O tiger among men! Why did you not desire that he should be killed? O Duryodhana! There is no doubt that you know about what should be done. It is wonderful that Dharma's son should not
have an enmity like that towards you. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! If you wish to remain alive and protect your own lineage, then after vanquishing the Pandavas in battle, give them a share of the kingdom and act according to fraternal relations. The king who is Kunti's son is fortunate. The intelligent one has been born auspiciously. He is truly Ajatashatru[Ajatashatru is Yudhishthira's name and means someone who has no enemies.]. Even you are affectionate towards him.' O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Thus addressed by Drona, your son suddenly displayed the sentiments that always course through him. Even
someone like Brihaspati is incapable of controlling his countenance. O king! Therefore, your son joyfully spoke
these words. 'O preceptor! If Kunti's son is killed by you, I will not be able to obtain victory. If Yudhishthira is
slain, there is no doubt that the Parthas will slaughter all of us. They are incapable of being killed in battle, even by
all the immortals. The one among them who is left, will destroy us. But he[Yudhishthira.] is truthful in his pledges. When he is
brought here, we will defeat him again in a gambling match. The Kounteyas will follow him again to the forest.
Thus my victory will manifest itself for a long time to come. That is the reason I do not desire Dharmaraja's
death.' Drona was intelligent and was knowledgeable about artha. Having ascertained his crooked intention, he
thought about this for some time and then granted him the boon.

'"Drona replied, 'If Yudhishthira is not protected by the brave Arjuna in battle, you can think that the eldest Pan-
dava has already been brought under your control. O son[The word used is tata.]! But Partha is incapable of being repulsed in battle,
even by Indra and the gods and the asuras. That is the reason I cannot advance against him. In the knowledge of
weapons, there is no doubt that he has been my disciple earlier. He is young and has accomplished many deeds. He
is single-minded in purpose. He has obtained many weapons from Indra and Rudra. O king! You have also incensed him and I cannot advance against him. Let Partha be removed from the field of battle, by whatever means
that are possible, and Dharmaraja will be vanquished. O bull among men! Once he has been captured, you think
that victory will be yours. Think of means, so that his capture is beyond doubt. I will capture the king, who is devoted to truth and dharma. O king! There is no doubt that I will bring him under your control today, as long as he
is stationed in the battle before me, even for an instant. But let Dhananjaya, Kunti's son and tiger among men, be
removed. With Phalguna present, Partha Yudhishthira is incapable of being captured in battle, even by Indra and
the gods and the asuras.'"

'Sanjaya said, "After Drona promised the king's capture, your extremely foolish sons thought that he had been
already captured. Your son knew that Drona was partial towards the Pandavas. Therefore, to make him stick to the
pledge, he made the counsel generally known. O destroyer of enemies! Duryodhana proclaimed among all the soldiers that Pandava would be captured."'
