'Sanjaya said, "On seeing Somadatta stretch his large bow, Satyaki addressed his charioteer. 'Take me towards Somadatta. Without killing the enemy, Bahlika's son and the worst of the Kouravas, in the battle today, I will not return from the encounter. O suta! I tell you this truthfully.' Thus addressed, the charioteer urged those extremely
fast horses from the Saindhava region. They possessed the complexion of conch shells and were capable of withstanding all sounds in the battle. They were as fast as thought or the wind and bore Yuyudhana. O king! They were
like Indra's tawny steeds in earlier times, when he ventured to kill the daityas. On seeing that Satvata was powerfully descending in the encounter, the mighty-armed Somadatta was not frightened and attacked him. He released
showers of arrows, like clouds showering down rain. He shrouded Shini's descendant, like clouds covering the
sun. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Satyaki was also not frightened in that battle. In every direction, he enveloped the bull among the Kuru lineage with a torrent of arrows. Somadatta pierced Madhava in the chest with
sixty arrows. O king! Satyaki pierced him back with sharp arrows. Wounded by each other's arrows, those bulls
among men looked resplendent. They were like blossoming kimshuka trees with beautiful blossoms at the time of
flowering. The limbs of the illustrious ones from the Kuru and Vrishni lineages were covered with blood. They
glanced at each other and seemed to burn each other down with their sight. Those scorchers of enemies roamed
around in chariots that traversed circular paths. They were terrible in form and were like clouds that showered
down rain. O Indra among kings! With arrows mangling their bodies everywhere and wounded by those arrows,
they looked like porcupines. Those arrows were well tufted and struck by these, they were beautiful. O king! They
looked like trees during the monsoon, covered by fireflies. The limbs of the maharathas blazed with those arrows.
In that battle, they looked like angry elephants, covered with flaming torches.

'"O great king! In that encounter, maharatha Somadatta used an arrow in the shape of a half-moon to slice down
Madhava's great bow. He then swiftly struck him with twenty five arrows. At a time when speed was of the essence, he again struck him with ten arrows. Satyaki took up another bow that was more powerful. He quickly
pierced Somadatta with five arrows. O king! In that encounter, Satyaki seemed to smile. He used another broad-
headed arrow to cut down the golden standard of Bahlika's son. On seeing that his standard had been brought
down, Somadatta wasn't scared. He struck Shini's descendant with twenty-five arrows. Satvata became enraged in
that battle. In that encounter, he used a sharp kshurapra arrow to slice down the archer Somadatta's bow. O king!
He[Somadatta.] was like an elephant with its tusks shattered and he struck him in many ways with a hundred gold-tufted
arrows that flew straight. Maharatha Somadatta took up another bow. The immensely strong one enveloped Satyaki
with a shower of arrows. Extremely wrathful, Satyaki pierced Somadatta in that battle. Somadatta also afflicted
Satyaki with his net of arrows.

'"For Satvata's sake, Bhima struck Bahlika's son with ten arrows. However, without any fear, Somadatta struck
Shini's descendant with arrows. For Satvata's sake, Bhimasena took up a new, firm and terrible club and hurled it
towards Somadatta's chest. On seeing that the club, terrible in form, was descending towards him in the battle,
Kourava laughed and sliced it down into two fragments. That large and iron club was seen to be shattered into two
fragments and fell down, like the giant summit of a mountain that has been shattered by thunder. O king! In that
encounter, Satyaki used a broad-headed arrow to slice down Somadatta's bow and used five more to cut down his
arm-guards. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He quickly struck his four supreme horses with four arrows and
sent them to the king of the dead. With a broad-headed arrow with drooping tufts, he severed the charioteer's head
from his body. The tiger among rathas, the bull among the Shini lineage, laughed. O king! Satvata then released an
extremely terrible arrow that flamed like the fire. It was gold-tufted and had been sharpened on stone. With great
force, Shini's descendant shot that supreme of arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! That terrible arrow
quickly struck the lord and brought him down. Severely wounded by the powerful maharatha Satvata, the mighty-
armed Somadatta fell down and died.

'"On seeing that Somadatta had been killed, the maharathas attacked Yuyudhana and brought down a great
shower of arrows on him. They attacked him with a large army and with Drona's battle formation. The immensely
strong ones on your side were angry. While Bharadvaja's son looked on, Yudhishthira drove them away with arrows. On seeing that the soldiers were being driven away by Yudhishthira, Drona attacked with great force. His
eyes were red with rage. He pierced Partha with seven extremely sharp arrows. Having pierced him, the mighty-
armed one licked the corners of his mouth and severed Yudhishthira's standard and bow. In that encounter, with his
bow severed, and at a time when speed was of the essence, the supreme among kings swiftly took up another firm
bow. The king pierced Drona with a thousand arrows and his horses, charioteer, standard and chariot too. It was
wonderful. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! For a short while, Drona was distressed and oppressed by that
storm of arrows. He sank down on the floor of his chariot. However, in a short while, the supreme of brahmanas
regained his senses. He was overcome by great rage and invoked the vayavya weapon. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! However, the valiant Partha was not frightened in the battle and stretched his bow, repulsing that
weapon with a weapon of his own.

'"Vasudeva spoke to Yudhishthira, Kunti's son. 'O Yudhishthira! O mighty-armed one! Listen to what I tell you.
O supreme among the Bharata lineage! Give up this battle with Drona. Drona has always desired to seize you in
the battle. I do not think that you should fight with him in this way. The one who has been created to kill him[Dhrishtadyumna.]
will kill him tomorrow. Abandon the preceptor and go to the spot where King Suyodhana is. Bhima, tiger among
rathas, is fighting with the Kouravas there.' Having heard Vasudeva's words, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira thought for
an instant. He then went to the spot where Bhima, the destroyer of enemies, was stationed and was fighting a fierce
battle. He was slaying your warriors, like Death with a gaping mouth. Pandava[Yudhishthira.] made the earth resound with the
great clatter of his chariot. It was as if a cloud was roaring in the ten directions, at the end of the summer. To kill
the enemy, he positioned himself along Bhima's flank. At the commencement of the night, Drona also began to kill
the Pandus and the Panchalas."'
