Janamejaya said, 'The illustrious Hari is affectionate towards all beings who are single-minded in their devotion
to him. The illustrious one himself accepts offerings made according to the ordinances. There are people who
have burnt up the kindling[Extinguished their desire.], are free of good and bad deeds and have followed the instructions that have progressively been passed down[Through the chain of succession from preceptor to disciple.]. They advance towards the fourth objective of Purushottama[Vasudeva or Purshuttoma is the fourth, higher than Aniruddha, Pradyumna and Samkarshana. The sense is that
through knowledge, one goes to Vasudeva, but progressively, through the the other three. However, with faith or
devotion, one directly goes to Vasudeva, bypassing the others.]. Those single-minded
ones go to the supreme objective. There is no doubt that the dharma of being single-minded is the best and is loved
by Narayana. They do not have to pass through the other three, but directly go to the undecaying Hari. There are
brahmanas who study the Vedas and the Upanishads properly, following the strictures and observing the dharma of
ascetics. I know that men who are single-minded in their devotion are superior to them. Was it a god or a rishi who
first propounded this kind of dharma? O lord! When did this single-minded mode of worship develop? Please dispel my doubt about this. My curiosity is great.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'The armies of the Kurus and the Pandavas were arrayed in the battle. When Arjuna
was distracted, the illustrious one himself sung about this, about the ends that are obtained and the ends that are not
obtained[In the Bhagavadgita, in Section 63 (Volume 5).]. I have told you about this earlier. This dharma is deep and is difficult for those who have not cleansed
their souls to comprehend. This is in conformity with the Sama Veda and was thought of in the first yuga[Krita yuga.]. O
king! It was sustained by the lord Narayana himself. O great king! Partha asked the immensely fortunate Narada
about the purport of this, in the midst of the rishis and in the hearing of Krishna and Bhishma. O supreme among
kings! My preceptor heard what was said[Making it clear that the Krishna in the previous sentence is Krishna Dvaipayana Vedavyasa.]. He heard what Narada said. O lord of the earth! Brahma was born
through Narayana's mental powers and heard what emerged from Narayana's mouth. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! Following dharma, Narayana himself performed the divine rites that any father should. The rishis who
subsist on foam then obtained the dharma. The Vaikhanasas obtained the dharma from those who lived on foam.
Soma obtained it from the Vaikhanasas. But it then disappeared again. O king! Brahma had a second birth from the
eyes[Narayana's eyes.]. Then, the grandfather obtained and learned this dharma from Soma. O king! He  gave this, which has
Narayana as its soul, to Rudra. O king! In that ancient krita yuga, Rudra immersed himself in yoga and taught this
dharma to all the Valakhilya rishis. However, because of the god's[Narayana's.] maya, it disappeared again. Brahma had a
third birth from his[Narayana's.] great speech. O king! The dharma was again generated from Narayana himself. A  rishi
named Suparna obtained it from Purushottama and tormented himself with austerities, following self-restraint and
rituals. Suparna followed this supreme dharma thrice a day. Because of this, on earth, he came to be known as
Trisouparna[Trisouparna is the same as Trisuparna. The Yajur Veda has three mantras that are recited together and these are
known as trisuparna.]. These are read when one studies the Rig Veda and the vows to be followed are extremely difficult.
O best among men! From Suparna, this eternal dharma was obtained by the wind god, who is known as the one
who sustains life in the universe. Vayu gave it to the rishis who only subsist on leftovers. The great ocean obtained
the supreme dharma from them. However, it disappeared again and merged into Narayana. The great-souled one,
Brahma, was again born from his ear[Brahma was born from Narayana's ears.]. O tiger among men! I will tell you what happened. Listen. The god, Hari
Narayana, himself thought of creating the universe. The lord, who is the creator of everything in the universe,
thought of a being. When he thought of this, the being, his son, emerged from his ears. The lord of the universe
spoke to Brahma, the creator of different categories of subjects. "O son! Create. Create everyone from your mouths
and feet. O one who is excellent in vows! I will do what is beneficial for you. I will give you the strength and the
energy. Also receive this dharma from me. It is known as satvata. Use it to create and establish all the rites of krita
yuga." At this, Brahma bowed down before the god Harimedha. He eagerly accepted the dharma, with its mysteries and collections and groups of Aranyakas. These arose from Narayana's mouth. With infinite energy, he instructed this dharma to Brahma and said, "You know about the dharma of krita yuga, which has the traits of being without desire and without deeds." Having said this, he[Narayana.] departed to beyond tamas, to the place where the unmanifest
is  established.  Then,  Brahma,  the  god  who  grants  boons  and  is  the  grandfather  of  the  worlds,  created  all  the
worlds, with their mobile and immobile objects. That is how the first sacred krita yuga commenced. The dharma of
satvata pervaded everything in the world. Brahma, the creator of the various worlds, used that original dharma to
worship the lord Hari Narayana, the lord of the gods. For the welfare of the worlds and for the sake of establishing
this dharma, he then taught it to Svarochisha Manu[There are fourteen manvantaras in every kalpa. In the present kalpa, we are in the seventh manvantara of
Vaivasvat Manu. The six earlier Manus were Svayambhuva, Svarochisha, Uttama, Tamasa, Raivata and
Chakshusha.]. O king! In ancient times, Svarochisha, the lord and protector of all the worlds, himself carefully taught it to his son, Shankhapada. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Shankhapada taught it to his son Sudharma, the protector of the directions. When treta yuga commenced, it[The dharma.] disappeared again. O supreme among kings! Then, in ancient times, Brahma was born from the nose. In Brahma's
presence, the lord and god, the lotus-eyed Hari Narayana, himself chanted this dharma. O king! The illustrious
Sanatkumara studied it. O tiger among the Kuru lineage! From Sanatkumara, at the beginning of krita yuga, Prajapati Virana obtained this dharma and studied it. Having studied it, Virana gave it to the intelligent Rouchya and
Rouchya gave it to his son Shudra, who was excellent in his vows and great in his intelligence. He gave it to Kuk-
shi,  who  protected  the  directions[The suggestion seems to be that Kukshi was Shudra's son.].  However,  the  dharma  that  arose  from  Narayana's  mouth  vanished  again.
Brahma was again born as Hari's son, from an egg and this dharma arose again, from Narayana's mouth. O king!
Brahma  received  it,  and  following  the  instructions,  applied  it.  O  king!  He  taught  it  to  the  sages  named
Barhishada[Literally, sages who seated themselves on sacrificial grass.].  A  brahmana  who  knew  about  the  Sama  Veda  obtained  it  from  the  Barhishadas.  His  name  was
Jyeshtha and because of this, he came to be known as Jyeshtha Hari, the follower of the Sama vows. King Avikampana obtained it from Jyeshtha. O king! Then the dharma that had been received from the lord Hari disappeared
again. O king! Brahma had a seventh birth from the lotus and Narayana himself spoke to him about this dharma.
At the beginning of the yuga, the sacred grandfather was the upholder of the worlds. In those ancient times, the
grandfather gave this dharma to Daksha. O supreme among kings! Daksha gave it to Aditya, who was the eldest of
his grandsons through his daughters and was also older than Savitri. Vivasvat obtained it from him[From Aditya.]. At the beginning of treta yuga, Vivasvat gave it to Manu. For the prosperity of the worlds, Manu gave it to his son, Ikshvaku. When Ikshvaku spoke about it, it spread in all the worlds. O king! At the end of the destruction, it will again
merge into Narayana. O supreme among kings! This is the dharma that is practised by the mendicants. With the
collection of the ordinances, it has been recounted in Hari Gita[The Bhagavadgita.]. O king! Narada obtained this dharma, with its
mysteries and its collections, from the protector of the worlds himself. O king! These are the origins of this great
and eternal dharma. It is difficult to comprehend and it is difficult to practise. It is always sustained by those with
sattva. Those who know about dharma appropriately apply it in their deeds. This dharma is without violence and it
pleases the lord Hari. Some worship him in one form and some in two forms[Aniruddha and Aniruddha and Pradyumna respectively.]. He is sometimes enumerated in
three forms[With Samkarshana added.]. He is sometimes seen in four forms[With Vasudeva added.]. Hari is kshetrajna. He is without a sense of ownership and
he is without parts. He is the atman in all beings and is beyond the five elements. O king! He is spoken of as the
mind that controls the five senses. He is the intelligent one who ordains the worlds. He is the creator of the worlds.
He is not the doer. But he is also the doer. He is the cause and the effect. O king! He is the immutable Purusha,
who sports as he wills. O supreme among kings! I have spoken to you about the dharma of single-minded devotion. It is difficult for those with unclean souls to understand. I have obtained it through my preceptor's favours. O
king! Men who are single-minded in their devotion are difficult to find. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Had the
worlds been full of many such people, who are non-violent and devoted to their atmans, engaged in the welfare of
beings, then it would have been krita yuga. People would have been free of desire and freed from rites. O lord of
the earth! This is what the illustrious Vyasa, my preceptor, the one who knows about dharma, and supreme among
brahmanas, told Dharmaraja. O king! This was in the hearing of the rishis and of Krishna and Bhishma. He had
earlier been told this by Narada, the immensely ascetic one. Narayana is the god who is the supreme brahman. He
is immutable and fair in complexion, with the radiance of the moon. Those who are single-minded go to him.'

Janamejaya asked, 'Those who have been awakened practise many different kinds of dharma. Why don't other
brahmanas follow this too, instead of devoting themselves to diverse vows?'

Vaishampayana replied, 'O king! Those who are bound in bodies possess three kinds of nature. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! They follow sattva, rajas and tamas. O extender of the Kuru lineage! Among those who are
bound in bodies, the best man is one who follows sattva. O tiger among men! It is certain that he will be emancipated. A man who is devoted to the brahman and is attached to Narayana is known and spoken of as a sattvika person. Such a person thinks of Purushottama and obtains learning. He is always devoted to Narayana and is singleminded in his faith. There are some learned people who desire emancipation. Hari, who looks after yoga and kshema[Yoga means getting what has not been obtained. Kshema means protecting what has been obtained.], eliminates their thirst[That is, desire.]. Know that if a man is born and Madhusudana looks favourably at him, he is
sattvika and his emancipation is certain. The dharma of those who are single-minded is equal to sankhya and yoga.
A person who has Narayana in his soul obtains liberation and goes to the supreme destination. Such  a person
cheerfully comprehends Narayana. O king! However, unless he so desires[Unless Narayana desires.], knowledge is not awakened. It is
said that a nature that has rajas and tamas is confused. O lord of the earth! A person with these traits in his soul is
born again. If a person possesses these attributes of attachment, Hari does not look at him himself. If a man is immersed in rajas and tamas, he is born again and it is Brahma, the grandfather of the worlds, who looks at him. O
supreme among kings! The gods and the rishis desire sattva. However, sattva is subtle and those who deviate from
it are said to undergo transformations[Even gods and rishis can deviate and undergo transformations of growth and destruction.].'
Janamejaya asked, 'How can a man with transformations advance towards Purushottama?'

Vaishampayana replied, 'Purusha is united with the subtlety of sattva. It is united with the three syllables[Om, written as AUM.].
Abstaining from acts, a man goes to the one who is the twenty-fifth. He is the single one who has been spoken
about in sankhya, in yoga, in the Vedas, in the Aranyakas, in the other limbs and in the doctrines of pancharatra.
Those who are single-minded in their dharma go to Narayana, the paramatman. O king! The waves of the ocean
seem to retreat from it, only to return to it again. In that way, the great waves of knowledge again merge into
Narayana. O relative of the Yadus[Through Subhadra, Janamejaya was descended from the Yadavas.]! I have spoken to you about satvata dharma. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If you can, follow it properly. This is what the extremely fortunate Narada told my preceptor, about the single-minded  mendicants  of  Shvetadvipa,  who  followed  the  immutable  one.  Vyasa  affectionately  recounted  it  to
Dharma's intelligent son[Yudhishthira.]. Passed down from my preceptor, I have also told you about it. O supreme among
kings! This dharma is extremely difficult to follow. There are others who are so confused that they do not follow it.
It is Krishna, the creator of the worlds, who confuses them in this way. O lord of the universe! That is because he
is also the reason behind destruction.'
