Vyasa said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about a
conversation between Brihaspati and Marutta. On hearing about the agreement made between the son of Angiras[Brihaspati.] and the king of the gods, King Marutta was enraged. Karandhama's grandson made up his mind to organize
a sacrifice and made the arrangements. The eloquent one went to Brihaspati and spoke these words. 'O illustrious
one! O store of austerities! O preceptor! When I came to you earlier, you asked me to perform a sacrifice. I have
made up my mind to do this now and have collected all the ingredients. O virtuous one! I wish to make you the officiating priest. Therefore, accept these and perform the rites.' Brihaspati replied, 'O lord of the earth! I do not
wish to be your officiating priest. I have been engaged by the king of the gods and have given him an undertaking.'

Marutta said, 'You have been the priest for my ancestors and I revere you greatly. I have obtained you as an officiating priest. Since I am devoted to you, you should also be devoted to me.' Brihaspati replied, 'Having been an officiating priest for immortals, I can't be an officiating priest for humans. O Marutta! Whether you stay or whether
you go, I have now withdrawn from being your officiating priest. Since I will not be your officiating priest, choose
whomever you want. O mighty-armed one! Find a priest who will perform the sacrifice for you.'

'"Having been thus addressed, King Marutta was ashamed. He was anxious. While he was returning, he met
Narada along the road. The king met devarshi Narada. In the proper way, he joined his hands in salutation and
stood there. Narada asked, 'O rajarshi! O unblemished one! You do not seem to be happy. Is everything well with
you? Where had you gone? Which is the place where you experienced such cheerlessness? O king! O bull among
kings! If I can hear about it, tell me. O lord of men! I will make every attempt to dispel your rage.' Marutta was
thus addressed by maharshi Narada and told him everything about how he had been rebuffed by his preceptor. 'I
went to Brihaspati, the preceptor of the gods and the son of Angiras. I met him to request him to be the officiating
priest at my sacrifice. However, he did not give me reason for joy and rebuffed me. I no longer desire to remain
alive now. O Narada! Having been abandoned by my preceptor, I am tainted.' O great king! Having been thus addressed by the king, Narada replied in words that brought life into Avikshit's son. 'O king! Angiras  has  a son
named Samvarta and he is devoted to dharma. He is confusing all creatures and is wandering around in all the directions, naked. If Brihaspati does not wish to be your officiating priest, go to him. O great king! If Samvarta is
pleased with you, he will be your officiating priest.' Marutta said, 'O Narada! I have been revived by your words.
O supreme among eloquent ones! Tell me where I can see Samvarta. How can I ensure that he remains with me
and how can I ensure that he doesn't abandon me? If he also refuses me, I will not be interested in remaining
alive.' Narada replied, 'He sports the attire of a mad man and has all those signs. He has resorted to a life of begging in the city of Varanasi. O lord of the earth! Approach its gates and place a corpse there. If you see someone
repelled by this, he will be Samvarta. Follow him from the rear and go wherever that valiant one goes. Approach
him, join your hands in salutation and seek refuge with him. O slayer of enemies! If he seems to be pained and
asks you who told you about him, tell him it was Narada. He may ask you to follow me and seek to persuade me.
In that case, without any hesitation, tell him I have entered the fire.' The rajarshi agreed to this and honoured Narada. Having taken his permission, he went to the city of Varanasi.

'"Having gone there, the immensely illustrious one remembered Narada's words. He placed a corpse in front of
the gate. Through a coincidence, the brahmana entered the gate at the same time. On seeing the corpse, he suddenly retreated. On seeing this, the king who was Avikshit's son joined his hands in salutation and followed him from
the rear, desiring to be instructed by Samvarta. When he[Samvarta.] saw the king in that desolate spot, he covered him with
dirt, mud, spittle and excrement. The king was thus made to suffer by Samvarta. However, he joined his hands in
salutation and entreated the rishi, seeking his favours. Eventually, Samvarta desisted. He was exhausted. He sought
out the cool shade of a banyan tree with many branches and sat down there."'
