'Brihadashva said, "The one with the unblemished limbs heard the words of the leader of the caravan. Desirous of
seeing her husband, she accompanied him. After a long time and many days had passed, the merchants saw a pond
in the midst of that large and terrible forest. It was extensive and beautiful on all sides. It was fragrant with lotuses.
It was charming, with a lot of grass and kindling and had a lot of roots and fruit. It was frequented by masses of
many kinds of birds. They saw that the water was clean and delightful and brought pleasure to the mind. Since the
animals of transport were extremely tired, they resolved to rest there. With the permission of the leader of the caravan, they entered that supreme forest. When the day moved westwards, that great caravan settled down to rest.
When it was midnight, everything was quiet. The tired caravan was asleep.

'"A herd of elephants arrived to drink at a mountain stream and the water overflowed with their musk. They saw
the supreme caravan asleep along their path, together with other elephants[The elephants who were part of the caravan.]. They suddenly trampled them, as
they were asleep on the ground. A wail arose from the merchants as they sought for protection. They were blind
from sleep and in their great fear, dashed towards the creepers in the forest. Some men were killed by the tusks of
the elephants. Others were trampled by the feet. In great fear, a large number of cattle, donkeys, camels and horses
and those who were on foot, fled. They injured each other. Uttering terrible roars, they fell down on the ground.
Some climbed trees and when those broke, fell down on the uneven ground. In this way, that prosperous group of
merchants was destroyed. When it was morning, the men who were still alive emerged from the creepers in the
forest and sorrowed over the slaughter that had taken place. O lord of men! They grieved for brother, father, son
and friend. The daughter of the king of Vidarbha lamented, 'What evil act have I committed in the past? I found an
ocean of men in this deserted forest. Through my ill fortune, they have now been destroyed by a herd of elephants.
It is certain that I will suffer more, for a long time to come. I have heard from the aged that no one dies before the
time has come. Had that not been true, my miserable self would have been killed by this herd of elephants today.
Indeed, nothing befalls men, if not brought about by destiny. I committed no sin, not even as a child, or in deeds,
thought or words. What has brought about this misery? At the time of the svayamvara, the assembled gods who are
the lords of the worlds were rejected by me for the sake of Nala. It must be because of their influence that I suffer
this separation now.' The beautiful-limbed one sorrowed and lamented in this fashion. O tiger among men! She left
with the brahmanas, learned in the Vedas, who had survived. She was miserable and overcome with sorrow.

'"After travelling for a long time, she arrived in the evening at a great city. This belonged to Subahu, the truthful
king of Chedi. She entered that supreme city, clad only in half a garment. She was pale, thin and miserable. Her
hair was loose and had not been washed. She walked like one who was demented. The citizens saw her enter the
capital of Chedi in this way. In their curiosity, vulgar boys followed the lady. Surrounded by them, she approached
the royal residence. The king's mother saw her from the palace, surrounded by these people. She restrained the
people. O king! In her amazement, she made Damayanti ascend into that supreme palace and asked her, 'You have
clearly been overtaken by misfortune. How is your form so beautiful? You blaze like lightning in the clouds. Tell
me. Who are you and whom do you belong to? Even though you are shorn of ornaments, your form cannot be human. Your radiance is like that of an immortal or a brahmana. Though helpless, you have not been scared of these
men.' On hearing these words, Bhima's daughter replied thus, 'Know me to be a woman who follows the same
vows as her husband. Know me to be a sairandhri[A sairandhri is a female servant who works in the inner quarters and is therefore superior to a common
slave girl. This was also the name Droupadi used when she became a servant to Sudeshna, King Virata's wife. By
describing herself as a sairandhri, Damayanti is signifying her desire to work in the palace.] of noble birth. I am a maidservant and live wherever I wish.
I live alone on fruits and roots and find a bed wherever evening falls. My husband has innumerable qualities and
has always been devoted to me. I have always followed my valiant husband, like a shadow. It was through ill fortune that he was extremely addicted to gambling. He was defeated in a game of dice and left alone for the forest.
The brave one was clad in a single garment and was maddened with grief. So as to comfort him, I followed him
into the forest. One day, in that forest, the brave one was overcome by hunger and thirst and had to go elsewhere.
He was careless and lost even the single garment that he possessed. He was naked and maddened and lost whatever senses he possessed. I followed him, clad in my garment. But I could not sleep for many nights. Then, after a
long time, I fell asleep and he abandoned me, though I had done no harm. He sliced my garment into two. I have
been searching for my husband, tormented by grief, day and night. But I have not been able to find my beloved,
who is the lord of my life and riches and like an immortal to me.' Her eyes filled with tears, she lamented thus in
many ways. Bhima's daughter suffered. The king's mother, who herself suffered with her, then told her, 'O fortunate one! Stay with me, I am pleased with you. O blessed one! My men will hunt out your husband. Or perhaps,
while he is roaming around here and there, he may arrive here on his own. O blessed one! Live here and you will
get your husband back.' On hearing these words of the king's mother, Damayanti replied, 'O mother of brave
ones! I can live with you, but I will not eat leftover food. Nor will I wash the feet of others. I will never speak to
other men. If any man solicits me, he must be punished. But in the course of searching for my husband, I will see
brahmanas. If this can be done, I will certainly stay with you. But if it is otherwise, my heart will never allow me
to stay.' The king's mother told her with a happy mind, 'I will do all this. A vow like this should be praised.' O
lord of the earth! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing the words of Bhima's daughter, the king's mother told her daughter Sunanda, 'O Sunanda! Though she will be a sairandhri, know her to be like a goddess. Always
enjoy yourself with her, without any anxiety in your mind.'"'
