Vaishampayana said, 'Having shown homage to his grandfather[Bhishma.] and preceptor[Drona.] and having welcomed them,
Yudhishthira spoke these words to Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Drona's son[Ashvatthama.] and Vivimshati[One of Duryodhana's brothers.]. "All of you must
show me every favour at this sacrifice. All my great riches here are yours. Be kind towards me, without any constraints, and as you desire." The eldest of the Pandavas had already been instated in the sacrifice. Having thus spoken, he immediately appointed each with a suitable office in the sacrifice. Duhshasana was put in charge of food
and other objects of pleasure. Ashvatthama was appointed to the task of tending to the brahmanas. Sanjaya was appointed to the task of welcoming the kings. The immensely wise Bhishma and Drona were in charge of what
should be done and what should not be done. The king gave Kripa the task of looking after the gold, gold coins
and jewels and also the distribution of dakshina. Similarly, he appointed other tigers among men to other tasks.

'Having been brought there by Nakula, the guests Bahlika, Dhritarashtra, Somadatta and Jayadratha enjoyed
themselves, as if they were the masters. Kshatta[Vidura's name. The word means the son of a kshatriya father.] Vidura, knowledgeable in every aspect of dharma, was in
charge of the treasury. Duryodhana received all the tribute that was brought. All the worlds assembled there, wishing to see Dharmaraja Pandava's sabha and participate in the supreme fruits. No one came there with a tribute that
was less than one thousand[The text doesn't specify one thousand of what. The sense is that irrespective of the type of gift, the threshold
was at least one thousand.]. Everyone made Dharmaraja prosper with many jewels. The kings rivalled each other and, donating riches, proudly said, "Let the Kouravya attain the sacrifice with my riches alone." O king! The
sacrificial grounds of the great-souled Kounteya were resplendent with dwelling houses which had chariots in
front, guards, soldiers, chariots of the lords of the earth[The kings.], brahmana dwelling houses, mansions constructed like
divine chariots and decorated with many colourful jewels, the assembled kings, wealth and prosperity. Yudhishthira seemed to rival the god Varuna in riches. The sacrifice had six fires and large amounts of dakshina. Everyone
was satisfied with every object of desire-abundance of grain and plenty of food. It was crowded by well-fed people. A large amount of gifts of jewels were brought to the assembly. Those skilled in the knowledge of mantras offered libations, clarified butter and oblations at the sacrifice and gratified the gods and the maharshis. Like the
gods, the brahmanas were also gratified with gifts, food and great wealth. All the varnas were delighted at the
sacrifice.'
