'Dhritarashtra asked, "O Sanjaya! Having gathered on the holy plains of Kurukshetra, wanting to fight, what did
my sons and the sons of Pandu do?"

'Sanjaya said, "At that time, on seeing the Pandava soldiers assembled in battle formation, King Duryodhana
went to the preceptor 71 and spoke the following words. 'O preceptor! Look at this great army of the Pandavas,
assembled in battle formation by the son of Drupada, 72 your talented student. Here there are courageous warriors
with mighty bows, the equals of Bhima and Arjuna in battle-Yuyudhana, 73 Virata, Drupada and other maharathas, Dhristaketu 74 and Chekitana, 75 the valiant king of Kashi, Purujit from the Kuntibhoja clan and
Shaibya, greatest among men, the powerful Yudhamanyu, 76 the brave Uttamouja, 77 the son of Subhadra, 78 the
sons of Droupadi-all of them are maharathas. O best among brahmanas! Now you should know the main warriors
and leaders in my army. For your knowledge, I am naming them. You yourself, and Bhishma, and Karna, and Kripa, who wins battles, Ashvatthama, and Vikarna 79 and the son of Somadatta. 80 There are many other brave warriors, ready to give up their lives for my sake. All of them are skilled in battle and they are armed with various
weapons of attack. 81 That army of ours, protected by Bhishma, is unlimited. But this army of theirs, protected by
Bhima, is limited. 82 All of you occupy your respective positions at all the entry points to the army formations. It
is Bhishma who must be protected.'

'"Creating happiness in his 83 heart, the powerful eldest of the Kuru clan and the grandfather roared loudly like
a lion and blew his conch shell. Then, suddenly, conch shells and kettledrums, other kinds of drums and trumpets
began to blare. That sound became tremendous. Then, seated in a great chariot to which white horses were harnessed, Madhava 84 and Pandava 85 blew their divine conch shells. Hrishikesha 86 blew the conch shell named
Panchajanya and Dhananjaya 87 blew the conch shell named Devadatta. Vrikodara, 88 whose deeds give rise to
fear, blew the giant conch shell named Poundra. King Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti, blew the conch shell named
Anantavijaya. Nakula blew the conch shell named Sughosha and Sahadeva blew the conch shell named Manipushpaka. The king of Kashi, with the great bow, and maharatha Shikhandi, Dhristadyumna, Virata and Satyaki, who is
never defeated, Drupada, the sons of Droupadi, and the mighty-armed son of Subhadra, all of them blew their separate conch shells, O lord of the earth! That tremendous sound echoed in the sky and on earth and pierced the
hearts of those who were on the side of the sons of Dhritarashtra. Then, the son of Pandu, 89 with the monkey on
his banner, saw the friends of Dhritarashtra thus arranged in battle formation and got ready to use his weapons. O
lord of the earth! He raised his bow and told Hrishikesha the following words. 'O Achyuta! 90 Place my chariot in
between the two armies, while I look at those who are desirous of battle and are assembled here. Let me see with
whom I will have to fight in this war-related business. In a desire to do good to the evil-hearted son of Dhritarashtra, they have gathered here, desirous of fighting. I want to see them.' O, descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thus
spoken to by Gudakesha, 91 Hrishikesha placed that magnificent chariot between the two armies, in front of Bhishma, Drona and all the other rulers of the earth and said, 'O Partha! Look at those of the Kuru clan who are assembled here.' There, Partha saw fathers and grandfathers, teachers and maternal uncles, brothers, sons, grandsons and
friends, 92 fathers-in-law and well-wishers in those two assembled armies.

'"Seeing them, all the friends and relatives assembled there, the son of Kunti was overcome with great pity. 93
And in sadness, uttered the following words. 'O Krishna! Having seen these relatives here, assembled with a desire
to fight, my body is going numb and my mouth is going dry. My body is quivering and my body hair is standing
up. My skin is burning and the Gandiva is slipping from my hands. O Keshava! I cannot stand and my mind is in a
whirl. The omens that I see are ill ones. I don't see any good that can come from killing one's relatives in a war. O
Krishna! I don't want victory. Nor do I want the kingdom or happiness. O Govinda! What will we do with the
kingdom or with pleasures or with life itself? Those for whose sake we want the kingdom and pleasures and happiness, they are gathered here in war, ready to give up their lives and their riches-preceptors, fathers, sons and
grandfathers, maternal uncles, fathers-in-law, grandsons, brothers-in-law and other relatives. O Madhusudana! I
don't want to kill them, even if they kill me. Forget this earth, even for the kingdoms of the three worlds. O Janardana! What pleasure will we derive from killing the sons of Dhritarashtra? Although they are assassins, 94 sin
alone will be our lot if we kill them. Therefore, we cannot kill the sons of Dhritarashtra, with their friends. O Madhava! How can we be happy after killing our relatives? Although their minds are befuddled with greed and they do
not see the sin that comes from opposing friends or from destroying the family line. O Janardana! We can see the
sin that comes from destroying the family line. Why should we not have the knowledge to refrain from committing
this sin? When the lineage is destroyed, the traditional family dharma is also destroyed. When dharma is destroyed, evil overwhelms the entire lineage. O Krishna! When evil arises, the women of the family become corrupted. O descendant of the Vrishnis! When the women are corrupted, hybrid castes are born. 95 Hybrid castes ensure that the lineage, and those who destroyed the lineage, both go to hell. Because their ancestors fall 96 and are
deprived of offerings of funereal cakes and drink. From those sins of those who destroy the lineage and from hybrid castes being generated, the ancient dharma of the castes and the dharma of the family are both destroyed. O
Janardana! If the family dharma is destroyed, those men are doomed to spend an eternity in hell. So we have heard.
Alas! Because of our greed for the kingdom and for happiness, we have got ready to kill our relatives. We are certain to commit a great sin. With me unarmed and unresisting, if the sons of Dhritarashtra, with weapons in their
hands, kill me in battle, that will be better for me.' Saying this, in that battlefield, Arjuna sat down in his chariot.
He threw away his bow and arrows, his mind overwhelmed with grief."'
