Brahma said, "That is unmanifest. It cannot be identified. It pervades everything. It is permanent and does
not move. It is known as a city with nine gates, with three qualities and five elements[The nine gates of the body are two eyes, two ears, two nostrils, the mouth, the anus and the genital organ. The
three qualities are sattva, rajas and tamas.]. The mind discriminates inside and pervades the eleven[Three qualities, five elements, intelligence, ego and the senses being counted as a single entity.]. Intelligence is the supreme lord over these eleven. This is repeatedly nurtured by three flows. These are the nadis[Veins, arteries, nerves.] and the qualities flow along these, known as the qualities of tamas, rajas and sattva. All of these are joined to each other in pairs and obtain support from each other. They find refuge
with each other and also follow each other. The three qualities are attached to each other and also to the five elements. Tamas is mixed with sattva. Sattva is mixed with rajas. Other than rajas being mixed with sattva, sattva is
also mixed with tamas. When tamas is restrained, rajas flows there. When rajas is restrained, sattva flows there.
Among the three qualities, tamas should be known as the night, since it has signs of confusion. It has the attributes
of adharma and is always associated with wicked deeds. Rajas is said to progressively stimulate enterprise and action. In all beings, when it flows, its signs are generation. Radiance, dexterity and faith-in all beings, these are
seen to be the forms of sattva and dexterity is respected by the virtuous. I will now tell you about the nature of
these qualities and their reasons. Understand from me the truth about these qualities, individually and collectively.
Confusion, ignorance, lack of detachment, inability to take a decision about acting, sleep, insolence, fear, greed,
sorrow, censure of good acts, lack of memory, distress, lack of belief, perverse conduct, lack of discrimination,
blindness, vileness in conduct, boasting about action even when no action has been performed, belief in knowledge
despite being ignorant, lack of friendliness, contrary action, lack of faith, stupidity in beliefs, crookedness, lack of
sense, wicked sentiments in action, heaviness, despondency, darkness and degradation-brahmanas recount these
as the qualities of tamas. There are other sentiments that constrain one in this world, laced with signs of confusion.
Wherever they cause those constraints, those are the qualities of tamas. Such people always censure the gods,
brahmanas and the Vedas. Attachment, insolence, confusion, anger, lack of forgiveness and malice towards creatures-such conduct has the attributes of tamas. People begin futile tasks. They donate in vain. They eat in vain.
Such conduct has the attributes of tamas. Speaking a lot, lack of patience, jealousy, pride, lack of faith-such conduct has the attributes of tamas. There are men in this world who perpetrate such wicked deeds. They break the ordinances. All such people are tamas. Their sentiments lead them downwards and they are born as inferior species.
They become immobile objects, animals, beasts of burden, predatory beasts, snakes, worms, insects, birds, creatures born from eggs, all the other kinds of quadrupeds, or those who are mad, deaf and dumb, or those who suffer
from other vile diseases. Because of the consequences of their deeds, these evildoers are immersed in tamas. Their
course is downwards. From one kind of tamas, they submerge into greater tamas. I will next tell you what such
people can do for their benefit. Through such means, they become the performers of auspicious deeds and can obtain worlds meant for the virtuous. Those born as inferior species should be engaged in their own deeds, bring
pleasure to brahmanas and take part in their rites[A liberty has been taken in this translation. Otherwise, the meaning wouldn't have been clear. Even if one is
born as inferior species, if one participates in rites followed by brahmanas, one is capable of uplifting one's own
self.]. If one endeavors to ensure this process of cleansing, one ascends to superior worlds. It is even possible to be with the gods in heaven. This is what is said in the sacred texts
of the Vedas. Those born as inferior species should be engaged in their own deeds. Thereby, they become human,
though they have to be born again. They obtain inferior births, like those of chandalas. Or they are dumb, or stammer. However, progressively, they obtain better and better varnas. They transcend birth as a shudra and other qualities of tamas. But those who indulge in the qualities of tamas continue to remain submerged in that flow. The attachment to desire is said to be a great delusion. Desiring happiness, even rishis, sages and gods become confused.
Darkness, confusion, great confusion, the darkness known as anger, death and blinding ignorance-of these, the
darkness of rage is said to be the worst. O brahmanas! I have recounted to you the truth about different kinds of
birth. I have also told you everything about tamas. Who is the virtuous one who understands it? Who is the virtuous one who sees it? Taking falsehood to be the truth is indeed a characteristic of tamas. The qualities of tamas
have been recounted in many ways. I have also told you about what is superior to tamas. A man who knows these
qualities will always be freed from all the qualities of tamas."'"'
