'Sanjaya said, "Karna, the destroyer of enemy heroes, was delighted at seeing Parshata in the battle. He struck him
in the chest with ten arrows that were capable of penetrating the inner organs. O venerable one! Dhrishtadyumna
swiftly pierced him back with five arrows, cheerfully asking him to wait. In that encounter, those great maharathas
used other arrows to envelop each other and drawing their bows all the way back, pierced each other. In that battle,
Karna used his arrows to pierce the charioteer and the four horses of Dhrishtadyumna, foremost among the Panchalas. He severed his supreme bow with sharp arrows and used a broad-headed arrow to bring down his charioteer from the seat on the chariot. Dhrishtadyumna was without a chariot. His horses were slain. His charioteer was
killed. He grasped a terrible club and crushed Karna's horses. He[Dhrishtadyumna.] was severely wounded by many arrows that
were like venomous serpents. O venerable one! He advanced towards Yudhishthira's army on foot and climbed
onto Sahadeva's chariot. The charioteer yoked other horses to Karna's chariot. They possessed the complexion of
conch shells and were extremely fast. They were from the Saindhava region and were controlled well[The horses were controlled well.]. Successful in attaining his objective, Radheya afflicted the maharatha Panchalas with his arrows, like clouds raining down
on a mountain. The large army of the Panchalas was afflicted by Karna. They fled in fright, like deer assailed by a
lion. Horses and elephants fell down on the ground. Here and there, men were seen to swiftly fall down from their
chariots. In the great battle, Karna killed the fleeing warriors with his kshurapra arrows and severed arms and
heads, still adorned with earrings. O lord of the earth! O venerable one! The thighs of those who were astride elephants, those who were on the backs of horses and those who were on the ground, were severed. But as they fled in
the battle, many maharathas did not feel that their limbs or their mounts were severed by arrows. Slaughtered in
the battle, the Panchalas and the Srinjayas thought that even the stirring of a blade of grass was the son of the suta.
As they were frightened and fled in the battle, the warriors were deprived of their senses and took those on their
own side to be Karna and fled in fright. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As the shattered army fled, Karna
quickly pursued it from the rear, showering arrows. They glanced at each other, unconscious and bereft of their
senses. They were incapable of standing before the great-souled one, who was like Death. O king! The Panchalas
were struck by Karna's supreme arrows. Others glanced towards Drona and fled in all the directions.

'"King Yudhishthira saw that his own army was running away. Thinking that retreat was preferable, he spoke
these words to Phalguna. 'Behold. The great archer, Karna, is stationed with a bow in his hand. Though it is a
dreadful night, he is scorching like the sun. The whizzing sounds of Karna's arrows are being incessantly heard. O
Partha! Your relatives seem to be without a protector. He is swiftly affixing and releasing arrows. It is certain that
he will destroy us and I see that the valiant one's victory is certain. The time has come. Adopt the course of action
that you think to be appropriate next. O Dhananjaya! Do what needs to be done to kill Karna.' Having been thus
addressed, the mighty-armed Partha spoke to Krishna. 'The king is frightened of the supreme valour of Radheya,
the son of Kunti. Karna's army is repeatedly acting and the time has come. Our army is running away and we must
quickly decide on a course of action. O Madhusudana! They are being mangled by Drona's arrows. They are
frightened of Karna and are unable to take a stand. Behold. Karna is fearlessly roaming around there. He is showering sharp arrows and driving away the best of rathas. O tiger among the Vrishni lineage! Like a snake that has
been stepped on with a foot, I cannot bear to see him wander around thus on the field of battle and remain oblivious. Therefore, swiftly go to the spot where maharatha Karna is. O Madhusudana! I will kill him. Or let him kill
me.' Vasudeva replied, 'O Kounteya! I have seen Karna roaming around in the battle, like the king of the gods. He
is a tiger among men and superhuman in his valour. O Dhananjaya! O tiger among men! With the exception of you
and the rakshasa Ghatotkacha, there is no one else who can counter him in battle. O unblemished one! O mighty-
armed one! I do not think that the time has come for you to confront the son of a suta in battle. He possesses a
blazing spear that he obtained from Vasava. O mighty-armed one! It is terrible in form and he has retained it for
you. Let the immensely strong Ghatotkacha advance against Radheya. He has been born from the powerful Bhima
and is like the gods in valour. He possesses divine weapons and also those of the rakshasas and asuras. Ghatotkacha has always been devoted to you and has your welfare in mind. It is my view that there is no doubt about
his defeating Karna in the battle.' Having thus spoken to Partha, the mighty-armed and lotus-eyed one summoned
the rakshasa.

'"O lord of the earth! He arrived before them, with armour, arrows, sword and bow. He paid his respects to
Krishna and Pandava Dhananjaya. He cheerfully addressed them, 'Command me.' He was like a cloud. He was
radiant and was adorned with blazing earrings. Dasharha smiled and spoke to Hidimba's son. 'O Ghatotkacha! O
child! Listen to what I tell you. The time has come for you, and no one else, to show valour. Be a raft to your relatives, who are submerging. You possess many kinds of weapons and the maya of rakshasas. O Hidimba's son! Behold. The Pandava army is being driven away by Karna in the field of battle, like cattle by a herdsman. It is my
view that this great archer, Karna, is firm in his valour. The bull among kshatriyas is slaughtering the Pandava soldiers. The one with the firm bow is releasing a great shower of arrows. Oppressed by the rays of his arrows, no one
is capable of standing before him. In this night, the son of a suta is afflicting them with his shower of arrows. The
Panchalas are being driven away, like frightened deer before a lion. O one who is terrible in valour! With your exception, there is no one else who can be seen, capable of countering the son of a suta, when he is thus engaged in
battle. O mighty-armed one! Perform the deeds that only you are capable of. You possess the energies of your maternal uncle[Ghatotkacha's mother was Hidimbaa and her brother was the powerful rakshasa, Hidimba, killed by Bhima.] and fathers and have the strength of your weapons. O Hidimba's son! It is for reasons like this that
men desire sons, to save them in times of difficulty. Therefore, save your relatives. The strength of your weapons is
fierce. Your maya is difficult to withstand. O son of Bhima! You have always fought in a battle. The Pandavas have
been routed by Karna's sharp arrows. O scorcher of enemies! They are sinking in the ocean of the sons of Dhritarashtra and cannot reach the shore. During the night, the rakshasas become invested with extreme valour, power
and bravery. They roam around valiantly and are invincible. Using maya in the battle, slay the great archer, Karna,
during the night. The Parthas, with Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, will kill Drona.' O Kouravya! On hearing the
words of Keshava, Bibhatsu, the scorcher of enemies, also spoke to the rakshasa Ghatotkacha. 'O Ghatotkacha! In
my view, you, the mighty-armed Satyaki and Pandava Bhimasena are the best among all our soldiers. In the night,
go and engage in a duel with Karna. Maharatha Satyaki will protect your rear. Aided by Satvata, slay the brave
Karna in the battle, just as Indra, aided by Skanda, struck Taraka in ancient times[However, Indra was actually vanquished by Taraka.].' Ghatotkacha replied, 'I am a
match for Karna, the supreme Drona and all the other kshatriyas who are skilled in the use of weapons. In this
night, I will present the son of the suta with a battle. People will speak about it as long as this earth lasts. I will not
save brave ones, or those who are frightened and join their hands in salutation. I will resort to the dharma of rakshasas and kill everyone.' Having spoken thus, Hidimba's mighty-armed son, the destroyer of enemy heroes, violently advanced against Karna, frightening your soldiers.

'"On seeing that he was angrily descending, like an insect towards a flame, the son of a suta, the supreme archer,
received him. At night, a battle commenced between Karna and the rakshasa. O tiger among kings! They roared at
each other, like Shakra and Prahlada."'
