'Sanjaya said, "Having regained his senses, King Duryodhana once again repulsed the undecaying Bhima with
showers of arrows. Yet again, your maharatha sons united together. With raised weapons, they fought with Bhima
in that battle. In that battle, Bhimasena again climbed onto his own chariot. The mighty-armed one went to the spot
where your sons were. He grasped an extremely forceful, firm and colourful bow that was capable of slaying the
enemy. In the battle, he pierced your sons with arrows. At this, King Duryodhana pierced the immensely strong
Bhimasena in his vital parts with an extremely sharp iron arrow. Thus pierced by your archer son, the great
archer's eyes became red with rage. He forcefully drew his bow and wounded Duryodhana in the arms and the
chest with three arrows. But despite being wounded, the king remained there, like an immobile king of mountains.
All of Duryodhana's brave younger brothers were ready to give up their lives. In the battle, they saw the two angry
ones striking one another and remembered their earlier resolution of afflicting the one whose deeds were terrible.
O great king! As they descended on him, the immensely strong Bhimasena rushed against them, like an elephant
against other elephants. O great king! In great rage, the energetic one struck your immensely famous son, Chitrasena, with an iron arrow. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He also struck your other sons in that conflict, with
many different kinds of arrows, gold-tufted and extremely fast.

'"Those twelve maharathas, Abhimanyu and the others, had been sent by Dharmaraja to follow in Bhimasena's
footsteps. O great king! They advanced against your immensely strong sons. Those brave ones were stationed on
chariots that were like the sun and the fire in their energy. All of them were great archers and blazed in their prosperity. On seeing them resplendent in that great battle, with shining and golden armour, your immensely strong
sons gave up the fight with Bhima. But Kounteya was unable to tolerate the sight of their leaving alive. In that battle, Abhimanyu, accompanied by Bhimasena, attacked. On seeing them, and on seeing Parshata, your maharatha
soldiers, Duryodhana and the others, grasped their bows. Borne by fast horses, they went to the spot where those
rathas were stationed. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In the afternoon, there was a terrible battle between the powerful ones on your side and on the side of the enemy. Abhimanyu killed Vikarna's extremely swift
horses. He then pierced him with twenty-five kshudraka[Small arrow.] arrows. O king! With his horses slain, maharatha
Vikarna abandoned his chariot and climbed onto Chitrasena's radiant chariot. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Stationed on a single chariot, those two brothers, the extenders of the Kuru lineage, enveloped Arjuna's son with a
net of arrows. Durjaya and Vikarna pierced Krishna's son[Arjuna is being referred to as Krishna here.] with five iron arrows. However, Krishna's son did
not waver and was immobile, like Mount Meru. O venerable one! In that encounter, Duhshasana fought with the
five from Kekaya. O Indra among kings! It was an extraordinary fight. Enraged in battle, Droupadi's sons repulsed
Duryodhana. O lord of the earth! Each of them pierced your son with three arrows. But your son was invincible in
that battle with Droupadi's sons. O king! He wounded each of them separately with sharp arrows. Pierced in return, he was covered in blood and was radiant. He was like a mountain, with streams mixed with minerals flowing
down it.

'"O king! In that battle, the powerful Bhishma killed the Pandava soldiers, like a herdsman driving large numbers of animals. O lord of the earth! The roar of Gandiva was heard then, as Partha began to slaughter the soldiers
along the right flank. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that battle, headless torsos stood up in every direction, amongst the soldiers of both the Kurus and the Pandavas. It was like an ocean of blood, with the chariots as
the eddies. The elephants were the islands and the horses were the waves. The chariots were boats that tigers
among men used to cross that ocean of soldiers. The best of men were without arms, without armour and without
bodies. They were seen to fall down, in hundreds and thousands. Crazy elephants were slain, their bodies splattered with blood. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! The earth seemed to be strewn with mountains. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! We witnessed an extraordinary sight, both among those on your side and theirs.
There was no man there who did not wish to do battle. Thus did the brave ones fight, striving for great fame. Those
on your side fought with the Pandavas, desiring victory in battle."'
