'Dhritarashtra asked, "O son! After the king of Sindhu was killed in the battle by Savyasachi, and so was Bhurishrava, what was the state of your mind then? In the assembly of the Kurus, Duryodhana spoke in that fashion to
Drona. O Sanjaya! What did he[Drona.] say after that? Tell me all this."

'Sanjaya replied, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing that Saindhava and Bhurishrava had been
killed, a loud and great lamentation arose among your soldiers. All of them censured the counsel of your son. Because of that policy, hundreds of bulls among kshatriyas had been slain. On hearing the words of your evil-minded
son, Drona reflected for a short while. He was grievously hurt and said, 'O Duryodhana! Why are you striking me
with words that are like arrows? I have always told you that Savyasachi cannot be defeated in battle. O Kourava!
We know what Arjuna is capable of accomplishing in the battle. Protected by Kiriti, Shikhandi killed Bhishma in
the battle. The one who could not be killed by gods and men was killed in the encounter. On seeing this, I knew
that the army of the Bharatas would be destroyed. We regarded that man as the foremost among all brave ones in
the three worlds. On that hero having been killed, who else can we depend on? O son[The word used is tata.]! Shakuni played with dice
in the assembly of the Kurus. However, those dice were not dice at all. They were sharp arrows capable of tormenting enemies. O son! Those arrows are now being released by Jaya and are killing us. In his lamentations, the
great-souled Vidura described them thus and spoke grave and auspicious words for your benefit. But you did not
listen. That is the reason for this terrible and great calamity. O Duryodhana! By ignoring his words, you have
caused it. Krishna[Krishnaa, Droupadi.] was born in a noble lineage and in her conduct, followed all forms of dharma. She did not deserve it. But in our sight, you had her brought to the assembly hall. O son of Gandhari! You are reaping the fruits
of that adharma now. This is nothing and greater evils will befall you in the world hereafter. This is because you
used deceit to defeat the Pandavas in the gambling match and exiled them to the forest, dressed in the skin of ruru
deer. They are like my sons and have always followed dharma. Tell me. In this world of men, is there any other
brahmana other than me, who will injure them? In the assembly of the Kurus, with Shakuni and with Dhritrarashtra's sanction, you excited the wrath of the Pandavas. Duhshasana supported you and Karna increased it. Ignoring
the words of Kshatta[Vidura.], you yourself repeatedly increased it. All of you surrounded Arjuna and sought to protect
the king of Sindhu. How was he killed in your midst? O Kouravya! How was Saindhava killed when you, Karna,
Kripa, Shalya and Ashvatthama were alive? To protect the king of Sindhu, all the kings fought and used their fierce
energy. How was he killed in their midst? O Duryodhana! In particular, the lord of the earth[Jayadratha.] sought assurance
from you and me to save him from Arjuna. But he did not obtain that rescue and Phalguna killed him. I do not see
any means for my remaining alive. I see that I will myself be immersed in the disease that is Dhrishtadyumna, until
I kill the Panchala and Shikhandi. Since I am myself tormented, why are you striking me with these stakes of
words? O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You have been incapable of rescuing the king of Sindhu. Bhishma
was never exhausted in his deeds. He possessed a golden standard and was unwavering in his aim. Since you do
not see him in the battle, how can you hope for victory? Saindhava has been killed in the midst of the maharathas
and Bhurishrava has also been slain. What do you think the outcome will be? O king! Kripa is invincible and is
still alive. I honour him for not having followed the king of Sindhu[To the land of the dead.]. Bhishma was incapable of being killed in a
battle, even by the gods, with Vasava. He was the performer of extremely difficult deeds. O king! When I saw that
he was brought down, while you and younger brother, Duhshasana, looked on, I thought that the earth no longer
belonged to you. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O venerable one! The formations of the Pandavas and the
Srinjayas are united and are attacking me now. Without killing all the Panchalas, I will not take off my armour. O
son of Dhritarashtra! For your welfare, I will perform deeds in the battle. O king! Go and tell my son Ashvatthama
that I have said that in this battle, he should protect his life and destroy the Somakas. "Follow the words and instructions of your father. Establish yourself in non-violence, self-control, truth and virtue. Observe dharma, artha
and kama, but without transgressing dharma and artha. You must always perform deeds in which dharma is the
most important. With the eye and the mind, brahmanas must be satisified and served to the best of one's capacity.
Do not do anything to cause them displeasure. They are like the flames of the fire[This is Drona's message to Ashvatthama, to be conveyed by Duryodhana.]." O king! I have been tormented by the stakes of your words and will wage a great battle. O destroyer of enemies! I will penetrate this battle formation[Of the Pandavas.]. O Duryodhana! If you can, go and protect your army. The angry Kurus and Srinjayas will fight, even
during the night.' Having said this, Drona proceeded against the Pandavas and the Srinjayas. He wished to sap the
energy of the kshatriyas, like the sun does to the stars."'
