Janamejaya said, 'O illustrious one! When my great-grandfather Partha left Kamyaka forest, what did the Pandavas[Meaning the other Pandavas.] do without Savyasachi? It seems to me that the great archer, the vanquisher of enemy armies, was their
refuge, like Vishnu is that of the Adityas. Without him, who is the equal of Indra in valour and has never withdrawn from the field of battle, how did my brave grandfathers spend their time in the forest?'

Vaishampayana replied, 'O son! When Pandava Savyasachi left Kamyaka forest, the Kouravas were immersed
in sorrow and grief. The Pandavas looked like jewels from a string that has been broken or birds whose wings have
been clipped. All of them were unhappy. Without the one whose deeds are undecaying, the forest became like
Chaitraratha[Kubera's park or pleasure garden.] when Kubera is not there. O Janamejaya! In his absence, the Pandavas, tigers among men, lived
joylessly in Kamyaka. O best of the Bharata lineage! Those valorous maharathas use pure-tipped arrows to kill
many kinds of sacrificial animals for the brahmanas. Those destroyers of enemies, tigers among men, collected forest fare every day, and after having spread it out, offered it to the brahmanas. O king! After Dhananjaya's departure, those bulls among men lived there, unhappy in their minds and anxious about him.

'In particular, Panchali remembered the husband who was in the middle, the brave one who was absent. She told
the foremost of the Pandavas[Yudhishthira.], "In the absence of the two-armed Arjuna, the equal of the many-armed
Arjuna[The many-armed Arjuna is Kartavirya Arjuna, the king of the Haihayas who was killed by Parashurama.] and the best of the Pandavas, this forest seems cheerless to me. Wherever I look, the earth seems to be
empty to me. This forest, with its many marvels and blossoming trees, no longer seems to be attractive in
Savyasachi's absence. This Kamyaka is as blue as monsoon clouds and is frequented by elephants in rut. But without Pundarikaksha[Pundarikaksha means lotus-eyed, since pundarika is a white lotus and aksha means eye. Pundarikaksha is a
proper name for Vishnu, and Krishna. Pundarikaksha is not quite a proper name for Arjuna, unless he is equated
with Vishnu or Krishna. Perhaps Droupadi simply means that Arjuna has eyes like those of a lotus.], it has no charm. The twang of his bow is like the roar of the thunder. O king! I remember
Savyasachi and without him, I cannot find any peace of mind." O great king! On hearing this lamentation, Bhimasena, the destroyer of enemy warriors, told Droupadi, "O beautiful one! O slim-waisted one! The words that
you speak please the mind and they gladden my heart, like a sip of ambrosia. His arms were long and smooth and
thick like clubs. They were round and marked from the string of the bow. With swords, weapons and clubs, with
golden rings and arm-guards, they were like five-headed serpents. Without that tiger among men, the forest seems
to have lost its sun. Depending on that mighty-armed one, the Panchalas and the Kurus do not fear even the powerful gods in battle. All of us found refuge in the arms of that great-souled one. We considered that we had routed
our enemies and had obtained the earth. Without the brave Phalguna, I find no mental peace in Kamyaka. As I look
upon this earth, it seems to me to be empty everywhere." Nakula said, "He went to the northern directions and defeated immensely powerful ones in battle. Vasava's son[Vasava is Indra and Arjuna is Indra's son.
] obtained hundreds of excellent gandharva horses. O
king! They had the colour of partridges and were dappled. They were as fast as the wind. He gave them to his
beloved brother at the time of the great rajasuya sacrifice. Without that terrible archer, Bhima's younger brother,
without the one who is an equal of the gods, I no longer wish to live in Kamyaka forest." Sahadeva said, "He won
riches and women in battle. He defeated maharathas. In earlier times, he brought them all to the king at the time of
the great rajasuya sacrifice. He is an immensely radiant one who vanquished all the Yadavas in the field of battle.
With Vasudeva's consent, he single-handedly abducted Subhadra. When I see that Jishnu's seat is empty in our
house, there can never be any peace in my heart. O great king! I think we should no longer live in this forest. O destroyer of enemies! Without that brave one, none of us finds this forest to be attractive."'
