'Sanjaya said, "Duhshasana angrily attacked Sahadeva. The terrible force of his chariot made the earth tremble.
However, on seeing him advance, Madri's son, the destroyer of enemies, swiftly severed the helmeted head of his
charioteer. Sahadeva performed this act with such great speed that Duhshasana and none of the soldiers noticed
that the charioteer's head had been cut off. Without the reins being controlled by anyone, the horses ran around as
they willed. At this, Duhshasana got to know that the charioteer had been killed. He[Duhshasana.] was skilled in the handling
of horses and grasping the reins of the horses himself, fought colourfully, with dexterity and skill. He was foremost
among rathas and in that encounter, this deed of his was applauded, by those on his own side, as well as by the enemy. With the charioteer slain, he was still astride the chariot and roamed around without any fear. Sahadeva
pierced those horses with sharp arrows and afflicted by those arrows, they swiftly ran away in different directions.
To grasp the reins, he[Duhshasana.] had to cast aside his bow. Then he took up the bow to use it, casting aside the reins. Seizing the opportunity, Madri's son covered him with arrows.

'"To protect your son, Karna rushed there. At this, Vrikodara drew his bow back up to his ears and carefully
piercing Karna in the arms and in the chest with three broad-headed arrows, roared. Karna stopped[From attacking Sahadeva.], like a snake
that has been struck by a staff. A tumultuous encounter commenced between Bhima and Radheya there. They were
as angry as bulls and dilated their eyes in rage. They struck each other with great force and attacked in rage. They
found great delight in fighting and were very close to each other. They were so close to each other that they could
not shoot showers of arrows. The duel continued with clubs. O king! Bhimasena used his club to swiftly shatter the
pole of Karna's chariot and it was extraordinary. The valiant Radheya picked up a club and hurled it towards Bhi-
ma's chariot, but he[Bhima.] shattered the club with his own club. Bhima again picked up a heavy club and hurled it towards Adhiratha's son. Exercising great care, Karna used ten gold-tufted arrows to strike it. He struck it with more
arrows and sped it back towards Bhima. It descended and brought down Bhima's giant standard. Struck by that
club, his charioteer also lost his senses. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He[Bhima.] was senseless with anger and
shot eight arrows at Karna, striking his standard, his bow and his quiver. Radheya used his arrows to swiftly kill
his horses, with complexions like those of bears, and his two parshni charioteers. When his chariot faced this difficulty, Bhima climbed onto Nakula's chariot. That scorcher of enemies was like a lion leaping onto the peak of a
mountain.

'"Meanwhile, maharatha Drona and Arjuna fought in wonderful ways. O Indra among kings! They were preceptor and student and warriors who were skilled in the use of weapons. They were dexterous and firm in aim and in
that encounter, their chariots roamed around. They confounded the eyes and the minds of men. All the warriors, on
our side and on theirs, desisted, to watch the encounter between the preceptor and the student, the likes of which
had not been seen earlier. In the midst of those soldiers, those two brave ones executed wonderful motions of the
chariot, wishing to place each other on the right[It is easier to shoot an arrow if the opponent happens to be on the right. But this logic should not work for
Savyasachi, who was left-handed.]. The warriors witnessed their prowess and were struck with
supreme wonder. There was a great battle between Drona and Pandava. O great king! It was like that between two
hawks in the sky, fighting over a piece of meat. Whenever Drona tried to do something to defeat Kunti's son, he
was swiftly nullified by the striving Pandava. Drona could not establish his superiority over Pandava in any way.
The one who was skilled about the motions of weapons then invoked special weapons-aindra, pashupata, tvashtra, vayavya and varuna[Divine weapons named after Indra, Pashupati, Tvashtra, Vayu and Varuna respectively.]. However, as soon as these were released from Drona's bow, Dhananjaya destroyed
them. When his weapons were duly destroyed by Pandava's weapons, Drona released supreme and divine weapons
towards Partha. However, every weapon that was invoked with a desire to vanquish Partha, was duly destroyed by
Arjuna with another weapon. When those weapons, including the divine ones, were duly destroyed by Arjuna,
Drona honoured Arjuna in his mind. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Since, in the midst of everyone, his student had countered him, he considered himself to be better than all those who knew about weapons on earth.
Partha repulsed him in the midst of those great-souled ones. Pleased at Arjuna's enterprise, he countered him in
turn. There were gods, thousands of gandharvas, rishis and masses of siddhas in the sky, assembled as spectators.
There were also many apsaras, yakshas and rakshasas. The sky was beautiful, as if with a mass of clouds. An invisible voice was repeatedly heard in the firmament. It praised Drona and great-souled Partha. 'The ten directions
seem to be flaming, because of the weapons that have been released. It is evident that this is not a battle involving
a man, an asura, a rakshasa, a god or a gandharva. There is no doubt this is one with the qualities of the brahman.
This is wonderful and extraordinary. We have not seen, or heard of, something like this. The preceptor seems to
prevail over Pandava. Then Pandava seems to prevail over Drona. No one is capable of distinguishing between the
weapons they are using. If Rudra divides himself into two and those two parts fight with each other, one may be
able to find a parallel, not otherwise. The preceptor possesses knowledge. Pandava possesses knowledge and yoga.
The preceptor possesses valour. Pandava possesses strength and valour. No enemy is capable of withstanding either of these great archers in battle. If they so wish, they can destroy the entire world, with the immortals.' O great
king! On beholding those bulls among men, all the visible and invisible beings spoke such words.

'"The immensely intelligent Drona invoked brahmastra. It scorched Partha and all the invisible beings. The
earth, with all its mountains and trees, began to tremble. Turbulent winds began to blow and the oceans were agitated. When the great-souled one invoked that weapon, there was terror among the Kuru and Pandava soldiers and
all the beings and a great uproar arose. O Indra among kings! However, Partha was not frightened. He countered
that weapon with his own brahmastra and everything became peaceful again. Neither of them could establish his
superiority over the other. The general battle continued, causing anxiety. O lord of the earth! While the tumultuous
engagement between Drona and Pandava was going on in the course of the battle, nothing could again be seen.
The sky was covered with nets of arrows, as if with nets of clouds. Creatures which travelled through the air could
not find a passage."'
