'Arjuna said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Grasping weapons in order to do battle, all the nivatakavachas
rushed towards me. With angry yells, those maharathas obstructed the path of my chariot. They surrounded me
from all directions and enveloped me with a shower of arrows. Other immensely valorous ones grasped lances and
spears in their hands. They used lances and catapults on me. A great shower of lances, clubs and javelins was continuously hurled and descended on my chariot. Other nivatakavachas rushed at me in battle. They were armed with
sharp weapons and missiles. They were terrible and skilled in fighting, like death. I sliced them down in battle with
many swift and straight arrows released from Gandiva and pierced each of them with ten[Ten arrows.]. Those arrows used
by me, sharpened on stone, drove all of them back. Those horses were swiftly driven by Matali and as fleet as the
wind, performed many manoeuvres of the chariot. The skilled Matali trampled many of Diti's sons. Hundreds and
hundreds of tawny horses were yoked to that great chariot. But in Matali's hands, there seemed to be only a few.
Through the hooves, the terrible noise of the chariot and my bows, hundreds of asuras were slain. Others, grasping
their bows even when they were dead, and with their charioteers killed, were carried away on horses. Those who
were skilled in fighting covered all the directions. With all these weapons, my mind was distressed.

'"But Matali's valour seemed supremely extraordinary to me. He guided the swift horses lightly. O king! With
light hands, I cut down hundreds and thousands of asuras in that battle, together with their weapons. O slayer of
enemies! The brave Matali, Shakra's charioteer, was pleased when I roamed around in these endeavours. Some
were crushed by the horses, others by the chariot. Some died. Others gave up fighting. In that battle, other nivatakavachas challenged me and attacked me from all sides with great showers of arrows. With light arrows that
had been invoked with the brahmastra weapon, I consumed them in hundreds and thousands. Those angry and gigantic asuras were oppressed by me. They oppressed me with a shower of arrows, spears and swords. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I then picked up the beloved weapon of the king of the gods, named madhava. It possessed supreme energy. Through the energy of that weapon, I sliced into a hundred pieces the swords, tridents and
javelins that they hurled at me in their thousands. Having angrily sliced their weapons, I pierced each of them with
ten arrows. The great arrows that were unleashed from Gandiva in that battle were like swarms of bees and Matali
praised them. They also covered me with many arrows, as innumerable as locusts. But I powerfully repulsed them
with my arrows. Being struck, the nivatakavachas again surrounded me from all directions, with a great shower of
arrows. But I repulsed them with thousands of flaming, supreme and swift arrows that were capable of countering
arrows. Like water draining from the peak of a mountain during the rainy season, blood began to flow from their
mangled bodies. Pierced by the swift and straight-travelling arrows, with an impact like that of Indra's vajra, the
danavas became extremely anxious. Their bodies were cut into a hundred pieces. Their weapons lost their energy.
The nivatakavachas then began to fight me with the powers of maya[Powers of delusion.]."'