Vaishampayana said, 'O king! Frightened by that noise, the rakshasa's relatives and their attendants came out of
their houses. On seeing them terrified and bereft of reason, the powerful Bhima, supreme among those who wield
arms, pacified them and made them promise. "You shall never do violence to humans here. Those who perform violence will quickly die the same way." O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing his words, the rakshasas
gave the desired promise and accepted the terms. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! From that day, the rakshasas there were friendly and behaved peacefully when they were sighted in town by the inhabitants of that town.
Then, unobserved by anyone, Bhima took the dead maneater and placed him at one of the gates. He then went
away.

'After killing him[Baka.], Bhima returned to the Brahmana's house and described in detail to the king[Yudhishthira.] all that had
happened. The next morning, the inhabitants of the town came out and saw the rakshasa lying dead on the ground,
his body wet with blood, horrible and spread out, as huge as the peak of a mountain. They went to Ekachakra and
spread the news throughout the city. O king! In their thousands, the citizens went with their wives, old people and
the young to see Baka. They were astonished at the sight of this superhuman feat. O ruler of the earth! They gave
offerings of gratitude to the gods. Then they began to calculate whose turn it had been the previous day to supply
food. Learning that it was the Brahmana's turn, they went to him and questioned him.

'Thus repeatedly asked, the bull among Brahmanas then protected the Pandavas, but told the citizens everything
else. "When I was ordered to supply the food, I was weeping with my family, when a great-souled Brahmana,
learned in the mantras, saw me. He asked me about the cause and learnt about the calamity that had befallen this
city. That best among Brahmanas then reassured us and smilingly comforted us. He said that he would himself carry the food to the evil-hearted one and that we should not be frightened for his sake. After taking the food, he set
out for the forest where Baka lived. For the welfare of the worlds, he must have been the one who performed this
deed." Thereupon, all the astonished and delighted Brahmanas, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and Shudras had a feast in
honour of the Brahmana. All the inhabitants of the country came to the city to witness this extraordinary miracle.
Pritha's sons went on living there.'
