'Sanjaya said, "O venerable one! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The infinitely energetic Partha created that
extremely terrible battle formation. On seeing that impenetrable and great Krouncha vyuha, your son went to the
preceptor, Kripa, Shalya, Somadatta's son, Vikarna and Ashvatthama, together with Duhshasana and all his brothers and the many brave warriors who were assembled there for the battle. At that time, he spoke these words, delighting all of them. 'All of you are armed with many weapons and are learned in the sacred texts and in arms. You
are maharathas. Alone, each one of you is capable of slaying the sons of Pandu and their soldiers in battle, and you
are united. Our forces are protected by Bhishma and are unlimited. O supreme among kings! Their forces are limited. Let the Samsthanas, Shurasenas, Venikas, Kukkuras, Arevakas, Trigartas and Yavanas remain with Shatrunjaya[One of Karna's sons.], Duhshasana, the brave Vikarna, Nanda, Upanandaka[Vikarna, Nanda and Upanandaka are Duryodhana's brothers.] and Chitrasena[Not to be confused with Chitrasena, the king of the gandharvas.], together with the Panibhadrakas
and with their respective troops at the forefront, protect Bhishma.' O venerable one! Then Drona, Bhishma and
your sons created a giant vyuha to counter that of the Pandus. Like the lord of the gods, Bhishma advanced, leading a large army and surrounded by a large number of soldiers. O lord of the earth! The powerful and great archer,
Bharadvaja's son[Drona.], followed him, with the Kuntalas, Dasharnas, Magadhas, Vidarbhas, Mekalas, Karnas[Not to be confused with Karna.] and
Pravaranas. With all these soldiers, Bhishma was resplendent. The Gandharas, Sindhus, Souviras, Shibis and
Vasatis and Shakuni and his own soldiers, protected Bharadvaja's son. With the Ashvatakas, Vikarnas[Not to be confused with Vikarna.], Sharmilas, Kosalas, Daradas, Chuchupas, Kshudrakas and Malavas, Soubala and his soldiers and with all his brothers,
King Duryodhana cheerfully advanced. O venerable one! Bhurishrava, Shala, Shalya, Bhagadatta and Vinda and
Anuvinda from Avanti guarded the left flank. Somadatta's son, Susharma, Sudakshina from Kamboja, Shatayu and
Shrutayu guarded the right flank. Ashvatthama, Kripa and Satvata Kritavarma guarded the rear, with a large number of soldiers. Their rear was protected by kings from many countries and Ketuman, Vasumana and the powerful
son of the king of Kashi.

'"O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All of your soldiers were delighted at the prospect of battle. They cheerfully blew on their conch shells and roared like lions. On hearing these sounds, the aged grandfather of the Kurus
was delighted. The powerful one roared like a lion and blew on his conch shell. At this, conch shells, kettledrums,
many different kinds of drums and battle-drums began to sound and there was a tumultuous uproar[Bheri, peshi and anaka are the names of different kinds of drums.]. Hrishikesha
and Dhananjaya were stationed on a giant chariot drawn by white horses and respectively blew on the excellent
conch shells Panchajanya and Devadatta, decorated with gold and jewels. Vrikodara, terrible in deeds, blew on the
giant conch shell Poundra. Kunti's son, King Yudhishthira, blew on Anantavijaya. Nakula blew on Sughosa and
Sahadeva on Manipushpaka. The king of Kashi, Shaibya, maharatha Shikhandi, Dhrishtadyumna, Virata, maharatha Satyaki, the great archer from Panchala[Meaning Drupada.] and Droupadi's five sons-all of them blew on giant conch
shells and roared like lions. The extremely loud and tumultuous roar created by those warriors echoed on earth and
in the sky. O great king! Thus did the cheerful Kurus and Pandavas assemble again for battle, with a desire to torment each other in the encounter."'
