'Bhishma said, "O Yudhishthira! In rajadharma, this is like freshly churned butter. The illustrious Brihaspati praises this and no other dharma. The large-eyed and illustrious Kavya, the great ascetic[Shukracharya, the preceptor of the demons.], the thousand-eyed and
great Indra, Manu, the son of Prachetasa, the illustrious Bharadvaja and the sage Gourashira were devoted to Brahma and learned about the brahman. They composed sacred texts about what kings should do. O supreme among
those who uphold dharma! They praised the dharma of protection. O one with eyes like blue lotuses tinged with
coppery red! O Yudhishthira! Listen to the means of accomplishing this-spies, the act of spying, donations, lack
of jealousy, receiving things properly[This can be interpreted as fair taxation.] and not receiving improperly, selecting the virtuous[For administrative duties.], bravery, skill,
truth, the welfare of subjects, using fair and foul means to create discord and enmity within the ranks of the enemy,
not abandoning righteous people, supporting those born in noble lineages, storing things that should be stored,
serving those who are intelligent, finding delight in strength, always glancing towards the welfare of subjects, lack
of lethargy in tasks, extending the treasury, protecting the city, distrust, breaking up quarrels between citizens, paying attention to houses that are decayed or falling down, depending on the context, using both kinds of
punishment[Corporal punishment and monetary fines.], paying attention to friends, foes and neutrals, weaning away servants who are inclined to move
from one's side to that of the enemy, distrust of those on one's own side, assurance towards the enemy, following
the policy of dharma, constant readiness for action, not disregarding the enemy and the abandoning of those who
are wicked.

'"There are shlokas where Brihaspati has spoken about the rise of kings and the roots of rajadharma. Listen to
these. 'Amrita was obtained through enterprise. The asuras were slain through enterprise. It is through enterprise
that the great Indra obtained superiority in heaven. It is because of enterprise that a courageous person is superior
to one who is eloquent. Those who are clever with words gratify and worship the ones who are courageous in enterprise[This can be interpreted as superiority of kshatriyas over brahmanas.]. Even if he has intelligence, if a king lacks enterprise, he is always oppressed by the enemy, like a snake
without any poison.' Even if one is stronger, one must not ignore a weaker enemy. A small fire can also burn. A
little bit of poison can kill. If an enemy is inside a fortification and only possesses horses, he is capable of afflicting, here and there, a king with a prosperous kingdom. The secret words of a king, the amassing of troops for victory, the deceit in his heart, tasks that are done for specific purposes and the crooked acts that he undertakes-must
be sustained by rectitude[The aberrations are justified if there is an overall framework of rectitude.]. Even for the sake of deceiving the people, he must act in accordance with dharma.
Sustaining a kingdom is extremely difficult. A person who has not cleansed his soul cannot bear the burden. One
has to sustain grievous assaults and the mild cannot tolerate this. A kingdom is like a piece of meat. It must always
be supported by rectitude. O Yudhishthira! You must always support it in a mixed way[Part rectitude and part deceit.]. Even if one confronts a
calamity when protecting the subjects, lords of the earth who act in this way accumulate great dharma. I have told
you a little bit about rajadharma. O supreme among eloquent ones! Tell me about the doubts that still remain."'

Vaishampayana said, 'At this, the illustrious Vyasa, Devasthana, Ashma, Vasudeva, Kripa, Satyaki and Sanjaya,
uttered words of praise. They were delighted and their faces were like blooming flowers. They honoured Bhishma,
tiger among men and supreme among those who uphold dharma. With a distressed mind, the supreme among the
Kuru lineage[Yudhishthira.] gently touched Bhishma's feet, his eyes completely overflowing with tears. He said, "O grandfather! I will ask you about my doubts tomorrow. The sun has drunk the juice of the earth and is setting." Keshava,
Kripa, Yudhishthira and the others honoured the brahmanas. Having circumambulated the son of the great river,
they happily ascended their chariots. They were good in their vows and bathed in the Dhrishadvati. Having performed ablutions in the water, they observed the auspicious rites. As was appropriate, those scorchers of enemies
observed the evening rites. They then entered the city of Gajasahvya[Hastinapura.].'