'Sanjaya said, "The battle commenced and it made the body hair stand up. The Kouravas were divided into three
and the Pandavas rushed against them. Bhimasena rushed against the mighty-armed Jalasandha and Yudhishthira
and his soldiers attacked Kritavarma in the battle. O great king! Dhrishtadyumna showered down arrows that were
as dazzling as the rays of the sun and attacked Drona in the battle. A battle commenced between all the spirited
archers, between the Kurus and the Somakas, who were angry with each other. There was the destruction of beings
and it gave rise to great terror. The soldiers were engaged in duels and fought without any fear. The powerful
Drona fought with the powerful son of Panchala. He[Drona.] showered down a torrent of arrows and it was extraordinary. In every direction, they caused destruction, like in a forest of lotuses[The lotuses are being compared to the heads of men.]. Drona and Panchala severed
the heads of many brave men from the arrays and they were strewn around everywhere. There were also garments,
ornaments, arms, standards, armour and weapons. They were golden and colourful and were smeared with blood.
Thus smeared, they looked like masses of clouds, tinged with lightning. The arrows brought down elephants, horses and men in that battle. The maharathas released these from bows that were as long as palm trees. In that clash
between the brave and great-souled ones, swords, shields, bows, heads and armour were strewn around. O great
king! In every direction, in that supreme carnage, many headless torsos were seen to arise. O venerable one! Vultures, herons, wild crows, hawks, crows, jackals and large numbers of many other carnivorous beasts were seen. O
king! They fed on the flesh and drank the blood. They dragged them[The dead bodies.] by the hair and got at the marrow in many
ways. They tugged at the bodies and the severed limbs. Large numbers of heads of men, horses and elephants were
there. The men were skilled in the use of weapons. They were trained in war and were accomplished. They wielded arrows and desired victory in that battle. They fought fiercely there. In that battle, many on your side displayed
many beautiful motions of fighting with swords, scimitars, javelins, spikes, spears, lances and battleaxes. There
were those who raised clubs, maces and other weapons in their arms. Men angrily fought and killed each other
with their bare arms. Rathas fought against rathas, horse-riders against horse-riders, elephants against supreme elephants and infantry against infantry. Some were excited and crazily attacked each other, as if they were roaming
around in an arena[This is clearly a reference to the elephants.]. They shrieked and killed each other in the battle.

'"O lord of the earth! Thus did the battle rage, without any fear. Dhrishtadyumna's horses got mixed up with
those of Drona's. Those horses were beautiful and well trained and possessed the speed of the wind. They possessed the complexion of pigeons and were red like blood[Dhrishtadyumna's horses were white, while Drona's were red.]. O king! Those horses got mixed up in the battle and
were as beautiful as clouds tinged with lightning. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The brave Dhrishtadyumna
saw that Drona was near. He discarded his bow and grasped a sword and a shield. Parshata, the destroyer of enemy
heroes, wished to perform an extremely difficult feat. With great strength, he approached Drona's chariot. He stationed himself on the middle of the yoke and sometimes on the joints of the yoke. He slew half of those horses and
was honoured by the soldiers. With the sword in his hand, he roamed around amidst those red horses. Drona could
not detect a weakness in him and it was extraordinary. He was like a hawk descending in the forest, in search of
some flesh. Thus did he venture forth, wishing to kill Drona. Drona released a hundred arrows to cut off the shield,
which was decorated with the mark of a hundred moons. He then severed the sword of Drupada's son with ten arrows. The powerful one used sixty-four arrows to kill his horses. With two broad-headed arrows, he severed his
standard and his umbrella and killed the charioteers who guarded his flanks[The parshnis.]. He stretched his bow back to his
ears, like the wielder of the vajra releasing the vajra and swiftly affixed a supreme arrow that would have caused
death. However, Satyaki severed that arrow with fourteen arrows. He rescued Dhrishtadyumna, as he was about to
be devoured by the preceptor's mouth. O venerable one! The lion among men had grasped him, like a deer grasped
by a lion. But the bull among the Shini lineage freed Panchala from Drona. On seeing that Satyaki had rescued
Panchala in that great battle, Drona swiftly shot twenty-six arrows at him. While Drona was devouring the Srinjayas, Shini's grandson pierced him back in the chest with twenty-six sharp arrows. All the Panchala rathas were
desirous of victory. They swiftly withdrew Dhristadyumna and resorted to Satvata, as he attacked Drona."'
