Sanjaya said, "When that large army had returned, Shalva, the lord of large numbers of mlecchas, became extremely angry and attacked the large army of the Pandus. He was astride an extremely large elephant. It possessed
shattered temples and was like a mountain. It was as proud as Airavata[Indra's elephant.] and was capable of crushing large numbers of the enemy. It had been born in an extremely noble lineage and had always been worshipped, extremely
well, by Dhritarashtra's son. O king! It was equipped well and had been well trained for fighting, by those who
knew about war. The supreme among kings was resplendent astride it. He was like a rising sun, at the end of summer. O king! On that supreme elephant, he advanced against the sons of Pandu. From every direction, he enveloped them with sharp arrows that were extremely terrible, like the great Indra's vajra. O king! In the great battle, he shot arrows and conveyed warriors to Yama. No one, on his side or that of the enemy, could discern any
weakness in him, like the daityas in ancient times, against the wielder of the vajra. The Pandavas, Somakas and
Srinjayas seemed to see that elephant in every direction, as if the single elephant was roaming around and was actually one thousand. It was like the great Indra's elephant. The enemy's army was driven away. Failing to find protection, they ran away in different directions. They were incapable of remaining in the battle. Severely afflicted by
fear, they crushed each other. That large army of the Pandavas was violently routed by that lord of men. Unable to
withstand the force of that king of elephants, they swiftly fled in the four directions. On seeing that they were powerfully routed, all the warriors and supreme fighters on your side honoured that lord of men. They blew on conch
shells that were as white as the moon. The delighted roars emitted by the Kouravas mingled with the blare of
conch shells. On hearing this, the commander of the Pandavas and the Srinjayas[Dhrishtadyumna.] could not tolerate this and became angry. Desiring to obtain a quick victory, the great-souled one advanced against the elephant. He was like
Jambha advancing against Airavata, the king of elephants and Indra's mount, during the clash with Shakra. O king!
On seeing that the king of Panchala, Drupada's son, was violently attacking, the lion among men goaded the elephant, so as to kill him. The elephant attacked powerfully. He pierced it with three sharp iron arrows that were like
the fire to the touch. They had been washed by artisans and were fierce and powerful. The great-souled one then
used five other sharp and iron arrows to strike it on its frontal lobe. Having been severely pierced in the battle, that
supreme elephant retreated and fled. While that king among elephants was speedily running away, Shalva restrained it. He swiftly used his goad to propel it towards the chariot of the king of Panchala. On seeing that the elephant was violently advancing, the brave Dhrishtadyumna quickly descended from his chariot. He swiftly grasped
a club and stood on the ground, his limbs benumbed with fear. That giant elephant used its trunk to pick up his
gold-decorated chariot, with the horses and the charioteer, and violently crushed it down on the ground. The charioteer of the king of Panchala was thus destroyed by that supreme elephant. On seeing this, Bhima, Shikhandi and
Shini's grandson hastily rushed towards it. While they advanced against the elephant, he[Shalva.] afflicted them with powerful and forceful arrows. In the battle, those rathas restrained the elephant and it began to waver. The king continued to shower down arrows from every direction, like the sun with its net of rays. Struck by those arrows, a large
number of rathas fled in every direction. O king! On beholding Shalva's deed in the battle, loud sounds of lamentation arose among all the Panchalas, Matsyas and Srinjayas. But those best of archers surrounded the elephant from
all sides. The brave king of Panchala spiritedly grasped a club that was like a mountain top. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Without any fear and with great speed, that brave slayer of enemies struck the elephant. The elephant was like a cloud and it was exuding musth. It fell down on the ground. The spirited son of the Panchala king
struck it severely with the club. Its temples were violently shattered and it began to vomit blood from its mouth.
The elephant fell down on the ground, like a mountain dislodged during an earthquake. When that king of elephants fell down, lamentations arose among your son's soldiers. The foremost among the Shini lineage then used a
sharp and broad-headed arrow to sever King Shalva's head. The head was severed by Satvata in the battle and fell
down on the ground, together with the king of elephants. It was as if a giant mountain peak had been shattered by
the vajra, unleashed by the lord of the gods." '
