Shounaka said, 'At the snake-sacrifice of the wise king Janamejaya of the Pandava lineage, who were the supreme
rishis who acted as sacrificial priests? Who were the sadasyas[Superintending or assisting priests; probably means assisting here.] at that terrible snake-sacrifice that brought great
fear and misery to the snakes? O son! You should describe this in detail. O son of a suta! We should know about
those who knew the secrets of the snake-sacrifice.'

Souti said, 'I shall certainly tell you the names of those wise ones who became ritvijas[Officiating priests. Usually, there were four types of ritvijas-hotar (one who recited prayers, identified
with Rig Veda), udgatar (one who chanted or sang prayers, identified with Sama Veda), adhvaryu (one who officiated, identified with Yajur Veda) and brahman (chief priest, identified with Atharva Veda).] and sadasyas for the
king. The hotar was the Brahmana Chandabhargava, who was born in Chyavana's lineage and was famous as one
who was learned in the Vedas. The wise and old Brahmana Koutsarya Jaimini was the udgatar. Sharngarava was
the brahman and Bodhapingala was the adhvaryu. Vyasa was a sadasya, together with his sons and disciples-Uddalaka, Shamathaka, Shvetaketu, Panchama, Asita, Devala, Narada, Parvata, Atreya, Kundajathara, the Brahmana
Kutighata, Vatysa, the old Shrutashrava who was always engaged in austerities and studying, Kahoda, Devasharma, Moudgalya and Samasourabha. These and many other Brahmanas who were rigid in their vows became
sadasyas in Parikshit's son's sacrifice.

'When the officiating priests began to offer oblations into the flames of that great snake-sacrifice, terrible snakes
that struck fear into living creatures began to fall into the fire. The fat and the marrow of the snakes thus burnt in
the sacrificial fire and flowed like rivers, creating an intolerable stench as snakes continuously burnt. The screams
of snakes that fell into the fire and those which were in the sky and were about to fall in and those that burnt were
piteous.

'Meanwhile, as soon as Takshaka, king of snakes, heard that King Janamejaya had been instated in the snake-
sacrifice, he went to Purandara's[Indra.] palace. The supreme snake told Purandara everything and confessing the evil
that he had done, fearfully sought refuge. Indra was very pleased and told him, "O Takshaka! O king of snakes!
You have nothing to fear here from the snake-sacrifice. For your sake, I have already pacified the grandfather[Brahma.].
Therefore, you need not be afraid. Drive this fever away from your mind." Thus being reassured, the supreme
among the snakes happily lived in Shakra's[Indra.] palace.

'But Vasuki became extremely distressed on seeing that many snakes were continuously falling into the fire and
only a few remained in his lineage. Vasuki, supreme among the snakes, was miserable with grief and told his sister
with a grieving heart, "O fortunate one! My limbs are burning. I can no longer see the directions. I am about to fall
because I have lost consciousness. My mind is whirling. My sight is failing. My heart is about to burst. Completely
numbed, I may fall into the blazing fire without resisting. Parikshit's son's sacrifice will go on until he has exterminated our race. It is clear that I must also go to the land of the ancestors. O sister! The time for which I gave you to
Jaratkaru has come. O sister! Save us and our race. O supreme among snakes! Astika will send the sacrifice[Send the sacrifice up to the gods.]
that is being performed. In earlier times, the grandfather himself told me this. O sister! Therefore tell your beloved
son, who is learned in the Vedas and respected even by those who are aged, to save me and those who are dependant on me."'
