Vaishampayana said, 'The king who was the lord of Manipura sat down, resolved to fast to death. O scorcher of
enemies! With his mother, he was overcome with grief on account of his father. At this, Ulupi thought of the
samjivanam jewel[A jewel that revives dead people.]. Devoted to serpents, it presented itself. O Kouravya! The daughter of the king of serpents
grasped it and spoke these words, which delighted the minds of the soldiers. "O son! Arise. Jishnu has not been
slain by you. He is incapable of being defeated by men and not even by the gods, with Vasava. For the sake of
causing pleasure to your illustrious father, Indra among men, I invoked the maya known as Mohini today. O son!
Kourava desired to test your strength. O king! That slayer of enemy heroes came here to fight against you in the
encounter. O son! It is for his sake that I incited you to fight. O son! O lord! You should not entertain the slightest
bit of doubt about your having committed a sin. This man is an immensely energetic rishi. He is eternal and indestructible. O son! Even Shakra is incapable of defeating him in a battle. O lord of the earth! This divine jewel has
been summoned by me. Like amrita, it always revives the Indras among serpents when they die. O lord! Place this
on your father's chest. O son! You will again see that Pandava has come back to life." He had not committed any
sin. Thus addressed, he affectionately placed the jewel on his father's, the infinitely energetic Partha's, chest. When
that jewel was placed, the brave lord Jishnu was revived. Cleansed, the one with the red eyes arose, as if from
sleep. The spirited and great-souled one regained his senses and arose. On seeing that his father was well, Babhruvahana worshipped him. O lord! The tiger among men arose and again regained his handsomeness. Delighted in
his mind, the chastiser of Paka showered down auspicious and divine flowers from above. Without being struck by
anyone, kettledrums were sounded and these made a noise like the thunder of clouds. Great sounds of praise were
heard from the sky. The mighty-armed Dhananjaya was restored and arose. He embraced Babhruvahana and inhaled the fragrance of his head. His mother was not very far away, afflicted by grief, and with Ulupi. On seeing her
there, Dhananjaya asked, "O slayer of enemies! Why is everyone seen to be sorrowful and miserable on the field of
battle? If you know, tell me. Why has your mother come to the battleground? Why has Ulupi, daughter of Indra
among the serpents, come here? I know that you fought with me because of my words. However, I wish to know
the reason why the women have come here." Thus asked, the lord of Manipura bowed his head down and said, "O
learned one! Let Ulupi be asked."'
