Janamejaya asked, 'The illustrious god and lord is the one who receives the shares at sacrifices. He upholds the
sacrifices and knows the Vedas and the Vedangas. He comforts those who are devoted to the illustrious one, established  in  the  dharma  of  nivritti.  Why  has  the  illustrious  one  created  the  dharma  of  pravritti?  Why  has  he
arranged for the gods to share in the dharma of pravritti? Why has he created such ordinances for the intelligent
ones who wish to engage in the dharma of nivritti? O brahmana! We have a doubt about this eternal mystery. Dispel it. You have heard the accounts about Narayana that are consistent with dharma. The worlds, Brahma, the gods,
the asuras and men are always seen to be addicted to rites and engage in them. O brahmana! You have said that
emancipation through moksha is supreme bliss. In this world, those who are freed from good and bad deeds merge
into the auspicious god with the one thousand rays. The eternal dharma of moksha seems to be exceedingly difficult to follow. Therefore, all the gods abandon it and enjoy havya and kavya. Brahma, Rudra, Shakra, the lord who
killed Bala, Surya, the lord of the stars[The moon.], Vayu, Agni, Varuna, the sky, the universe and the remaining residents of
heaven don't seem to know about the knowledge of the atman that ensures destruction[Of the self.]. That is the reason they
do not resort to the certain, indestructible and undecaying path. It has been said that the existence of those who resort to pravritti is circumscribed by time. This is the great taint associated with deeds, being circumscribed by time.
O brahmana! That is the reason I have this doubt in my heart, as if a stake has been impaled there. Dispel it by recounting the histories. My curiousity is great. O brahmana! Why are the gods spoken of as ones who accept shares
in sacrifices? O brahmana! Why are the residents of heaven worshipped through sacrifices? O  supreme among
brahmanas! They receive shares  in sacrifices. Why do  they themselves perform great sacrifices and give away
shares there?'

Vaishampayana replied, 'O lord of men! The question that you have asked me is an extremely great mystery. A
person who has not tormented himself through austerities, a person who does not know the Vedas and a person
who is not acquainted with the Puranas is incapable of explaining this in its entirety. However, I will tell you what
you have asked me. In ancient times, our preceptor was Krishna Dvaipayana Vyasa, the great rishi Vedavyasa.
Sumantu, Jaimini, Paila, extremely firm in his vows, I as the fourth, and Shuka as the fifth are known as his disciples. All five of us were together and these disciples were controlled. We were pure in our conduct. We had conquered anger and had won victory over our senses. On the beautiful slopes of Mount Meru, frequented by the Siddhas and the charanas, we studied the Vedas, and the Mahabharata as the fifth[The other four being the four Vedas.]. There, on one occasion, we had a
doubt about the Vedas. This concerns the question that you have asked and we asked him[Vedavyasa.]. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! I will now tell you what I heard then. Parashara's son was the dispeller of the darkness of ignorance. On hearing the words of his disciples, the prosperous Vyasa spoke these words. "O excellent ones! I have
tormented myself through extremely great and extremely terrible austerities. I thus know the past, the present and
the future. I  tormented  myself  through  austerities  and  restrained  my  senses.  Hence,  because  of  the  favours  of
Narayana, I dwelt on the shores of the ocean of milk. All the knowledge in the three worlds, everything that I desired, manifested itself before me. Based on that knowledge, I will tell you about this great doubt. Listen. Through
the sight of knowledge, I got to know about everything that happened at the beginning of the kalpa. People who
know about sankhya and yoga speak of him as the paramatman. Because of his own deeds, he has obtained the
name of Mahapurusha. From him was generated the unmanifest being, whom the learned know as Pradhana. For
the sake of creating the worlds, the manifest lord was generated from the unmanifest. In the worlds, this is known
as Aniruddha and the great atman. The one who was generated from this manifest is the grandfather. He is spoken
of as consciousness and he is full of every kind of energy. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Earth, wind, space,
water and light as the fifth-these great elements resulted from consciousness. After creating the great elements,
he again created their qualities[Respectively, smell, touch, sound, taste and sight.]. On the basis of the elements, the embodied beings were derived. Listen to them.
Marichi, Angiras, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, the great-souled Vasishtha and Svayambhuva Manu-these should
be known as the eight Prakritis. The worlds are established on them. For the success of the worlds, Brahma, the
grandfather of the worlds, then created the Vedas, the Vedangas, combined with sacrifices and other elements of
sacrifices. The entire universe was generated from the eight Prakritis. Rudra was generated from anger. Having
been  generated,  he  created  ten  others  that  were  like  himself.  These  eleven  Rudras  are  known  as  VikaraPurushas[Vikara means transformation, malady, passion, agitation.]. Having been generated, for the success of the worlds, the Rudras and the prakritis who were the divine rishis approached Brahma. 'We have been created by your illustrious self, through the powers of Vishnu. O
grandfather! What are the rights that will be vested in us? Having thought about the objectives, you must have determined rights for us. What powers will we have to protect and supervise those rights? Having thought about our
rights, you must also instruct us about our strengths.' On being thus addressed, the great god spoke to those gods.

'O gods! O fortunate ones! It is good that you have brought this to my notice. This was also a thought that had
arisen in my mind. How should the worlds be upheld and preserved? How should your strength and mine not be
diminished in the process? Therefore, let us all go and seek the refuge of the witness of the worlds. He is the unmanifest Mahapurusha[Vishnu.]. He will tell us what is beneficial.' With the welfare of the worlds in mind, Brahma, the
rishis and the gods went to the shores of the ocean of milk. They resorted to the austerities that Brahma had laid
down in the Vedas. Those are the extremely terrible austerities that are known by the name of the great niyamas.
They fixed their minds and raised their eyes and arms upwards. They stood on a single foot. They were controlled
and were like pillars of wood. For one thousand celestial years, they tormented themselves through those wonderful austerities. Pleasant words,  ornamented with the Vedas and the Vedangas, were then heard. 'O  Brahma! O
gods! O rishis who are rich in austerities! Welcome. All of you should listen to these excellent words. I know the
reason why you have come, for the great welfare of the worlds. I will increase your strength of life so that you are
engaged in tasks of pravritti. O gods! Desiring to worship me, you have tormented yourselves through excellent
austerities. O great spirits! Now enjoy the excellent fruits of your austerities. This Brahma is the preceptor of the
worlds. He is the grandfather of all the worlds. You are the best among the gods. Worship me with controlled
minds. Always give me a share in the sacrifices that you perform. O lords! I will then ensure your benefit and lay
down rights for you.' Hearing the words of the god of the gods, all the gods, Brahma and the maharshis were increasingly delighted. Following the rites laid down in the Vedas, they performed a sacrifice to Vishnu. Brahma determined the share that he would give to him[Vishnu.]. Similarly, all the gods and the devarshis also thought of the shares
that they would give. They honoured him greatly and following the dharma of krita yuga, offered him a share. He
is the Purusha who has the complexion of the sun and is beyond darkness. He is large and goes everywhere. He is
the god Ishana, the lord who is the granter of boons. The god granted boons to all the immortals who were assembled there. The great lord was invisible, stationed in the sky, and spoke these words. 'The shares that you have given me have reached me. I am pleased with you. However, I will give you fruits that will be characterized by the
cycle of rebirth. O gods! This is the certain fruit that you will obtain through my favours. In every yuga, you will
perform sacrifices for the sake of boons and give away dakshina when the sacrifice is over. You will enjoy the
fruits of those who follow pravritti. O gods! Following the ordinances of the Vedas, men will also perform sacrifices and give you shares at these. In the sutras[Formula, rule.] of the Vedas, I will lay down that whatever share someone has
given me at this great sacrifice will be proportionate to the share that he receives at those sacrifices[The share a god has given to Vishnu at the great sacrifice will be proportional to the share he receives from sacrifices performed by humans.]. Based on
the shares obtained at the sacrifices, you will hold up the worlds. Those are your rights and you will think of the
welfare of the worlds on that basis. You will be greatly honoured and obtain fruits from rites performed from
pravritti. That will give you the strength to hold up the worlds. In the world, men will think of you at all these sacrifices. When you are gratified in this way, you will also gratify me. This is what I have thought of. That is the reason I have created the Vedas, sacrifices and herbs. If these are properly used on earth, the gods will be pleased. O
best among the gods! As long as this kalpa is not destroyed, I have created you with the attributes of pravritti. O
lords! Therefore, based on your rights, think of the welfare of the worlds. Marichi, Angiras, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha,
Kratu and Vasishtha-these seven were created from the powers of the mind. They will be foremost among those
who know the Vedas. They have been thought of as the preceptors of the Vedas. However, because they will give
birth to offspring, they will also follow the dharma of pravritti. This is eternal path of rites for manifest creatures.
Aniruddha is spoken about as the lord who created the worlds. Sana, Sanatsujata, Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanatkumara, Kapila and Sanatana as the seventh-these seven will be spoken of as the rishis who were born through
Brahma's mental powers as his sons. They obtained vijnana on their own and will resort to the dharma of nivritti.
They are foremost among those who know about yoga. They also know about the dharma of sankhya. They are the
teachers of the sacred texts of emancipation. They are the ones who will expound the dharma of moksha. It is from
me that the unmanifest has flowed earlier, as have the three great qualities[Respectively, prakriti and sattva, rajas and tamas.]. The one who is beyond these is
thought of as kshetrajna and I am he. Along the path of rites, it is extremely difficult to obtain the spot from where
there is no return. Different creatures have been created for different tasks. Helplessly, a creature obtains the fruits
of pravritti or nivritti. This Brahma is the preceptor of the worlds. He is the original creator of the worlds. He is the
father and the mother and your grandfather. It is on my instructions that he has become one who grants boons to all
creatures. Rudra is junior to him and was created from his forehead. It is on Brahma's instructions that he became
one who grants boons everywhere. Go and exercise your own rights. Think of the appropriate rights. Without any
delay, let all the rites be observed in all the worlds. O supreme among gods! Depending on the acts undertaken and
conduct followed by creatures, determine their spans of life. This period of krita yuga will be the best. In this yuga,
at sacrifices, no violence will be exhibited towards animals and there will be no violation of this. O gods! Dharma
will possess all its four parts. Thereafer, there will be treta yuga. Animals will be slaughtered then, but only at sacrifices. One part of dharma will no longer exist and only three quarters will remain. After that, there will be the
mixed period known as dvapara. Two parts of dharma will decay in that yuga. When that is over, kali yuga will
present itself and only one quarter of dharma will remain.'

'"The gods asked, 'When only one quarter of dharma remains, where will we go? What will our tasks be then?
O illustrious one! Tell us that.'

'"The illustrious one answered, 'O supreme among gods! You should frequent countries where the Vedas, sacrifices, austerities, truth, self-control, non-violence and the practice of dharma continue to be followed. Adharma
will then not touch you with its feet.'"

'Vyasa continued, "Thus instructed by the illustrious one, the gods and the large numbers of rishis worshipped
the illustrious one and went away to the regions they wished to go to. When the residents of heaven had gone,
Brahma remained there. He remained there, wishing to see the illustrious Aniruddha. The god showed himself in
the form of the great Hayashira. He held a kamandalu and tridanda and chanted the Vedas and the Vedangas. On
seeing the infinitely energetic god, Hayashira, the lord Brahma, the creator of the worlds, desired the welfare of the
worlds and bowed his head down in obeisance. He joined his hands in salutation and stood before the one who was
the granter of boons. The god embraced him and spoke these words. 'Think of appropriate means so that all the
worlds can progress. You are the creator of all beings and you are the lord and preceptor of the universe. I will impose this burden on you and be completely free from all anxiety. However, whenever the tasks of the gods becomes very difficult to undertake, using my knowledge, I will go to that place and manifest myself.' Having said
this, Hayashira disappeared from the spot. Receiving the instructions, Brahma also went to his own world. He[Vishnu.] is
the immensely fortunate one. He is the eternal Padmanabha. He is said to be the first one who receives shares in
sacrifices. He is the one who always upholds sacrifices. He resorts to the dharma of nivritti, the dharma that leads
to an indestructible end. However, for the welfare of the worlds, he has created the colourful dharma of pravritti.
He is the beginning, he is the middle and he is the end of all creatures. He is the creator and he is the object of
meditation. He is the doer and he is the task. At the end of a yuga, he withdraws the worlds and sleeps. At the beginning of another yuga, he awakes and creates the universe. Bow down to that god. He is without qualities, but
has the qualities in his atman. He is without birth. The universe is his form. He is the refuge of all the residents of
heaven. He is the lord of the great elements. He is the lord of the Rudras. He is the lord of the Adityas. He is the
lord of the Vasus. He is the lord of the Ashvins. He is the lord of the Maruts. He is the lord of the Vedas and the
sacrifices. He is the lord of the Vedangas. He always dwells in the ocean. He is Hari. He is Munjakeshi[One whose hair is like munja grass.]. He is
tranquility for all creatures who are in search of the dharma of moksha. He is the lord of austerities, energy and
fame. He  is  always  the  lord  of  speech  and  the  lord  of  the  rivers.  He  is  the  intelligent  Kapardin,  Varaha  and
Ekashringa[Literally, with one horn or peak. Used for a person with singular eminence.]. He is Vivasvat. He is Ashvashira[Same as Hayashira.]. He is the one who always bears the four forms. He is mysterious, but can be seen through knowledge. He is both indestructible and destructible. This is the undecaying god
who pervades everything and goes everywhere. In ancient times, this is the one I beheld with my sight of knowledge. I have told you the truth about everything that you had asked me. O disciples! Act in accordance with my
words and serve the lord Hari. Sing of  him in the words  of  the Vedas and worship  him, following the proper
rites."'

Vaishampayana continued, 'The intelligent Vedavyasa told us this. He told all the disciples, including his son,
Shuka, supremely devoted to dharma. O lord of the earth! We and our preceptor worshipped him, using hymns
from the four Vedas. I have told you everything that you asked me about. O king! This is what my preceptor, Dvaipayana, said in earlier times. If a man is controlled in his mind, says, "I bow down before the illustrious one" and
always listens to this account, or recites it, he is then free of disease, radiant, strong and handsome. An afflicted
person is freed from ill health. A person who has been tied down is freed from his bondage. A person who desires
something obtains the objects that he desires. A long lifespan is obtained. A brahmana gets to know all the Vedas.
A kshatriya becomes victorious. A vaishya obtains great gain. A shudra obtains happiness. A person without a son
obtains a son. A maiden obtains the desired husband. A lagnagarbha is freed[A lagnagarbha is an expectant mother, who, at the time of delivery, faces a difficulty because either the baby or
the placenta adheres to the uterus and does not emerge.]. A woman who is expecting gives
birth to a son. A barren woman gives birth and has many sons and grandsons. A traveller who reads this reaches
his destination without facing any hardships. There is no doubt that everyone obtains the object that he desires.
These are the words of the maharshi, after due deliberation. They speak about the great-souled Purusha and about
the assembly of the rishis and the residents of heaven. Having heard, those devotees obtained great felicity.'
