Yudhishthira asked, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In this world, men are united with their good and bad
deeds, for the sake of reaping the fruits. But is a man actually the doer or not? I have a doubt about this. O
grandfather! I wish to hear the complete truth about this. I wish to hear the truth."

'Bhishma  replied,  "O  Yudhishthira!  In  this  connection,  the  ancient  history  of  a  conversation  between
Prahlada and Indra is recounted. Though he[Prahlada. Prahlada, or Prahrada, was devoted to Vishnu and there are no stories about his being deprived of his
prosperity.] was born in an evil lineage, he was extremely learned and was unattached. His sins had been cleansed and he was bereft of confusion and insolence. He was virtuous and engaged in
the observance of vows. Praise and censure were the same to him and he was self-controlled. It was as if he dwelt
in an empty house. He knew about the creation and destruction of all beings, mobile and immobile. He was not enraged at objects that caused displeasure. Nor did he find delight in objects that caused pleasure. He looked upon
gold and a lump of earth in the same way. He was patient and had resolved to fix his determination on the supreme
knowledge about the atman. He knew everything, superior and inferior, about beings and looked upon them equally. He was in control of his senses. '"Once, when Prahlada was seated alone, Shakra approached him, wishing to
dislodge him from his wisdom, and spoke these words. 'In this world, there are qualities that are revered among
men. All of those qualities are seen to be present in you. Your intelligence is seen to be like that of a child. You
know about the atman. What do you think is the supreme? You are now tied down in bonds. You have been dislodged from your place and have come under the subjugation of your enemies. O Prahlada! You are devoid of
prosperity. Though you should grieve, you are not sorrowing. O son of Diti[The daityas were the sons of Diti, who was married to the sage Kashyapa.]! Is this because of the wisdom that
you have obtained or is it because of your fortitude? O Prahlada! You seem to be well. But behold the state of your
hardship.' The patient one, who knew about what had to be determined, was thus urged. He used gentle words to
describe his own state of wisdom. 'He who does not understand the origin and destruction of all beings is confused
because of that foolishness. But someone who sees this is not confused. Origin and destruction happen because of
nature. In either existence or non-existence, no enterprise can be seen. There is no enterprise in non-existence and
there is nothing that is the doer. Though the person never actually does anything in this world, there is a sense of
vanity. If a person thinks himself to be the doer of good or bad deeds, he does not know his own self and his wisdom is tainted. That is my view. O Shakra! If a person is himself the doer, then it is certain that all the deeds he begins for the sake of his benefit will be successful. There will never be any defeat. It is seen that despite the best of
efforts, there is no cessation of the unpleasant and no existence of the pleasant. Where is the scope for enterprise?
It is seen that though some do not make any efforts, there is nothing unpleasant and they are covered by the pleasant. This must be because of nature. It is seen that some extremely intelligent people confront adversity and have
to seek riches from those who are malformed and limited in intelligence. Indeed, all the qualities, good and bad,
penetrate a person because of nature. Therefore, where is the scope for pride? Everything is because of nature.
That is my determined view. Thus, my wisdom is based on the atman and there is nothing else. In this world, I
think that the fruits of all good and bad deeds become attached. I will now tell you everything about action. Listen.
When a crow eats, the presence of the food is known because of its cawing. In that way, all deeds are the manifestations of nature. A person who knows about the appearances of nature, but does not know about supreme nature,
is confused because of his foolishness. He looks at everything through this foolishness. Everything flows from nature. A person who has comprehended all these manifestations has understood. What will he do with pride and insolence? I know everything about the rites of dharma and that all beings are not permanent. O Shakra! Therefore, I
do not sorrow. I know that everything has an end. I have no sense of ownership. I am without insolence. I do not
belong to this world. I am free of all bonds. I see that all beings have a beginning and an end and I am well. O
Shakra! For a person who is accomplished in his wisdom, self-controlled, without thirst, without hope and without
effort, everything in this world is looked at with the light of that knowledge. These are manifestations of nature
and I do not love them or hate them. I do not see anyone who hates me. Nor do I see anyone who is my own. O
Shakra! I do not desire anything above or below, or in the transverse directions[Above probably means heaven, while below means the nether regions. In that case, transverse may be used in
the sense of the earth.]. There is no delight to be obtained[By the soul.] from knowledge, lack of knowledge, or the object of knowledge.' Shakra asked, 'O Prahlada! I am asking
you. Tell me the means whereby one can obtain this kind of wisdom and this kind of tranquility.' Prahlada said, 'O
Shakra! A man attains greatness through uprightness, lack of distraction, calmness, being immersed in the atman
and serving the elders. One then obtains wisdom from nature and tranquility from nature. Everything that you see
is obtained from nature.' Thus addressed by the lord of the daityas, Shakra was astounded. O king! Delighted, he
then honoured these words. The lord of the three worlds[Indra.] worshipped the Indra among the daityas. Having taken
the permission of the Indra among the asuras, he returned to his own abode."'
