'"Arjuna asked, 'O Janardana! What objective of ours was served and what yoga did you use? How were Jarasandha and the other lords of the earth killed?'

'"Vasudeva replied, 'If Jarasandha, the king of Chedi and the immensely strong Nishadha[Ekalavya. Eklavya is both referred to as Nishadha and the son of a Nishadha. Both are correct.] had not been killed
earlier, they would have become terrible now. There is no doubt that Suyodhana would have chosen those supreme
among rathas[To be on his own side.]. They have always harboured wicked intentions towards us and would have gone to the side of the
Kouravas. All of those great-souled ones were brave, skilled in the use of weapons and firm warriors. They would
have protected the army of the son of Dhritarashtra like the immortals. Resorting to the son of a suta, Jarasandha,
the king of Chedi and the son of Nishadha, Suyodhana would have been able to conquer the entire earth. O
Dhananjaya! They were killed by me through yoga. Listen to it. Without using yoga, they could not have been defeated in a battle, not even by the gods. O Partha! Each of them was separately capable of countering the army of
the gods in a battle, even if it were to be protected by the guardians of the world. Jarasandha was angered, incited
by Rohini's son[Rohini's son is Balarama.]. To kill us, he hurled a club that was red at the tip. It was as resplendent as the fire and it divided
the sky, like a parting[Simanta, the parting on a lady's hair. Hence, a lady is called simantini.]. It was seen to descend, like the vajra released by Shakra. On seeing that the club was descending, Rohini's son wished to counter it and released the weapon known as sthunakarna[A kind of missile that is difficult to pinpoint.]. Countered by the
force of that weapon, the club fell down on the ground. It shattered the goddess earth and made the mountains
tremble. There was a terrible rakshasi[A female rakshasa. The story has been described in Section 21 (Volume 2). Jarasandha's father was Brihadratha
and he obtained a mango from a sage. He divided the mango between his two wives and each wife gave birth to
half a son. In that section, we are only told that after handing over Jarasandha to Brihadratha, Jara vanished.] named Jara and she possessed great valour. O scorcher of enemies! She
united the infant and it came to be known as Jarasandha. Two separate parts were born from the bodies of two separate mothers. Since she united them, he came to be known as Jarasandha. O Partha! That rakshasi was slain by the
club and the weapon known as sthunakarna and entered the earth, together with her son and kin. O Dhananjaya!
Jarasandha was deprived of the club in the great battle and while you watched, was killed by Bhimasena. O
supreme among men! If the powerful Jarasandha had possessed that club in his hand, the gods, together with Indra,
would not have been able to kill him in an encounter. O one for whom truth is valour! It is also for your sake that
Drona adopted the disguise of a preceptor and severed Nishadha's thumb[This incident has been described in Section 7 (Volume 1). Drona wasn't actually Ekalavya's teacher, he had refused to accept him as a student. Consequently, he shouldn't have asked for a preceptor's fee (guru dakshina).
However, Ekalavya had used an image of Drona as preceptor. That explains the reference to the disguise of a
preceptor.]. With his finger guards, the son of the
Nishadha was firm in his valour. He was as resplendent as a second Rama in the forest. O Partha! Had Ekalavya
possessed his thumb, the gods and the danavas, with the rakshasas and the serpents, would never have been able to
defeat him in a battle. His fist was firm and he could continuously shoot, throughout the day and night. How could
a mere human have looked at him? It is for your sake that I killed him in the field of battle. I killed the powerful
king of Chedi in your presence. He was capable of conquering all the gods and the asuras in a battle. O tiger
among men! I have been born to slay him and also all the others who hate the gods, with your help, and desiring
the welfare of the worlds. Hidimba, Baka and Kirmira have been brought down by Bhimasena. They were the
equals of Ravana and destroyed the sacrifices of brahmanas. Similarly, Alayudha, who used maya, was slain by
Hidimba's son. And I thought of means to get Hidimba's son killed by Karna's spear. Had he not been killed by
Karna's spear in the great battle, I would have had to kill Ghatotkacha, Bhimasena's son, in the future. I did not kill
him earlier, because I wanted to ensure your pleasure. This rakshasa hated brahmanas and hated sacrifices. Because he caused the destruction of dharma and because he was evil in his soul, he would have had to be brought
down. O unblemished one! I thought of a means through what had been given by Shakra. O Pandava! Those who
are the destroyers of dharma, deserve to be killed by me. I have taken a pledge that I will establish dharma. I am
always present wherever the brahman, truthfulness, self-control, purity, dharma, humility, prosperity, fortitude and
forgiveness exist. You should not have any anxiety about Karna Vaikartana. I will tell you the means so that you
can destroy him. In the battle, Suyodhana will also be killed by Vrikodara. O Pandava! I will tell you about the
means whereby that death can be ensured. There is a tumultuous uproar that has arisen in the direction of the enemy's army. Your soldiers are fleeing in the ten directions. Having attained their objective, the Kouravas are destroying your army. Drona, supreme among strikers, is scorching our soldiers.'"'
