'Markandeya said, "When Raghava, together with Soumitri, lived under Sugriva's protection on the slopes of
Malyavan, he saw the clear sky. In that clear sky, the destroyer of enemies saw the unblemished moon[The word used is shashalakshana, marked by the sign of the rabbit, that is, the moon.], the
planets, the nakshatras and the stars. The breeze was redolent with the fragrance of water lilies, blue lotuses and
lotuses[Kumuda, utpala and padma respectively.]. The dweller in that cool mountain was suddenly stirred. The one with dharma in his soul was distracted
at the thought of Sita captive in the rakshasa's abode. One morning, he spoke to the brave Lakshmana. 'O Lakshmana! Go to Kishkindha and seek out the lord of monkeys. He is intoxicated and ungrateful, follows the dharma of
the vulgar and is only learned about his own selfish interests. That stupid one, the worst of the lineage, has been
instated by me in the kingdom and all the monkeys, apes[The text uses the word gopuccha, meaning one with a cow's tail. This is a specific type of monkey.] and bears show him homage. O mighty-armed one! O
extender of Raghu's lineage! With your aid, it is for his sake that I slew Vali in the forest of Kishkindha. I think
that worst of monkeys to be the most ungrateful on earth. O Lakshmana! That stupid one ignores me and does not
know me now. I think that, because of his ignorance, he does not know how to honour an agreement. He ignores
me, though I have performed a good deed for him. If he lazily indulges in the happiness of desires, you must send
him along the path followed by Vali, the destination of all beings. O Kakutstha! But if that bull among monkeys
acts to as to serve our purpose, quickly bring him here. Go without any delay.' Lakshmana was always devoted to
the words of his elders. Thus addressed by his brother, he grasped his beautiful bow, arrows and the string of the
bow and departed.

'"On reaching the gates of Kishkindha, he entered, without anyone stopping him. Thinking him to be angry, the
king of the monkeys went out to welcome him. With his wife, and humble in soul, Sugriva, the king of the monkeys, welcomed him and happily offered homage to the one who should be honoured. Without any fear, Soumitri
told him Rama's words. O Indra among kings! On hearing all this, Sugriva, the lord of the monkeys, joined his
hands in salutation. With his servants and wives, he spoke these words to Lakshmana, elephant among men. 'O
Lakshmana! I am not evil in intelligence. Nor am I ungrateful, or one without compassion. Listen to the efforts I
have made to find Sita. Skilled monkeys have been sent by me in all the directions. One month has been decided
for all of them to return. O brave one! The entire earth, with its forests, mountains, villages, towns and mines, girded by the ocean, will be searched by them. That month will be complete in another five nights. Then, together with
Rama, you will learn about the great service I have rendered.' Thus addressed by the wise Indra among monkeys,
Lakshmana happily discarded his anger and returned the homage to Sugriva. Accompanied by Sugriva, he returned
to Rama, who was on the slopes of Malyavan, and told him about what had been done towards their objective. As
had been said, the foremost among monkeys began to return in their thousands, those who had gone in the three
directions, other than towards the south. They told Rama, 'We have searched the entire earth, with the ocean as a
girdle. But we have not been able to see Vaidehi or Ravana.' Though his heart was grief-stricken at this, Kakutstha
was still hopeful and waited for the bulls among the monkeys who had gone in a southern direction.

'"When two months had passed, some monkeys hurriedly approached Sugriva and told him these words. 'O
foremost among monkeys! O king! The great and extensive grove of Madhuvana was always protected by Vali. It
is now being enjoyed by the son of the wind[Hanuman.], Vali's son Angada and other bulls among monkeys whom you
had sent out in a southern direction.' Such acts were only possible by servants who had accomplished their duties.
On hearing of this conduct, he[Sugriva.] thought that they must have been successful. The wise bull among monkeys
went to Rama and told him this. Rama also thought that Maithili must have been seen. When those monkeys, with
Hanuman at the forefront, had rested, they approached the king of the monkeys, who was with Rama and Lakshmana. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On observing Hanuman's gait and the complexion of his face, Rama
was convinced that Sita must have been seen. The monkeys, with Hanuman at the forefront, were successful in
their objective. They prostrated themselves before Rama, Sugriva and Lakshmana.

'"Rama picked up his bow and arrows and spoke to the ones who had arrived. 'Will you give me my life? Have
you been successful? Having killed my enemies in battle and having recovered Janaka's daughter, will I again rule
the kingdom of Ayodhya? I have been robbed of my wife and honour. As long as Vaidehi is not freed and my enemies are not killed in battle, I have no desire to be alive.' When Rama had spoken thus, the son of the wind replied.

'O Rama! My news is pleasant. Janaki has been seen by me. After searching the southern direction, with its mountains, forests and mines, we were exhausted. After some time, we saw a giant cave. We entered it and it was many
yojanas long. It was dark, forested, deep and infested with insects. We traversed a long way through it and then we
saw the splendour of the sun and a celestial palace nearby. O Raghava! That residence belonged to the daitya
Maya. A lady ascetic named Prabhavati was engaged in austerities there. She gave us many objects to eat and
drink. When we had regained our strength after eating, we proceeded along the road that she had pointed out.
Emerging[From the cave.], we saw the salty ocean and near it, the great mountains Sahya, Malaya and Dardura. Ascending
Malaya, we beheld Varuna's abode and were extremely miserable, dejected and tired. We gave up all hope of life.
We thought about this great ocean, which was many hundreds of yojanas wide. It was the abode of whales, crocodiles and large fish and we were extremely distressed. We decided to sit there and fast to death. In the course of our
conversation, we began to talk about the vulture Jatayu. We then saw a terrible and fearsome bird that was as large
as the peak of a mountain. It looked like another son of Vinata[Garuda is Vinata's son.]. Desirous of eating us, it approached us and
asked, "Who is it that is talking about my brother Jatayu? I am his elder brother Sampati and am the king of the
birds. In a contest with each other, we rose up towards the seat of the sun. As a consequence of this, my wings
were burnt, but not those of Jatayu. That was the last time I saw my beloved brother, the king of the vultures. My
wings having been burnt, I fell down on this giant mountain." When he told us this, we told him about his brother
being slain. We briefly told him about the calamity that had befallen you. O king! On hearing this, Sampati was extremely miserable. O destroyer of enemies! In a dejected frame of mind, he again asked us, "Who is Rama? Who is
Sita? How was Jatayu killed? O supreme among monkeys! I wish to hear everything about all this." I then told him
everything about the misfortune that had befallen you and the reason for our deciding to fast to death. But that king
of birds made us arise with his words. "I know Ravana and his great city of Lanka. I have seen it across the ocean,
in a valley of Mount Trikuta. Vaidehi must be there. I have no doubt on this score." Hearing him speak these
words, we swiftly arose. O scorcher of enemies! We consulted about how one might cross the ocean. But no one
had the courage to jump across the ocean. I invoked the energy of my father. With that, I jumped across the great
ocean, a hundred yojanas, after having killed a water-dwelling rakshasi[A female demon named Surasa who tried to obstruct Hanuman's leap.]. I then saw the faithful Sita in Ravana's
inner quarters. Eager to see her husband, she was fasting and engaged in austerities. Her hair was matted and her
body was caked with dirt. She was lean, wretched and an ascetic. Knowing her to be Sita through these various
signs, I approached her and spoke to her in private. "O Sita! I am a monkey who is the son of the wind-god. I am
Rama's messenger. Travelling through the sky, I have come here, hoping to see you. The brothers and princes,
Rama and Lakshmana, are well. They are under the protection of Sugriva, the Indra of all the monkeys. O Sita!
Rama, together with Soumitri, has asked about your welfare. Because of his sentiments of friendship, Sugriva has
also asked about your welfare. Your husband will soon arrive here, with all the monkeys. O goddess! Have trust in
me. I am a monkey and not a rakshasa." Thinking for an instant about what I had said, Sita replied, "From what
Avindhya has said, I know you to be Hanuman. Avindhya is a mighty-armed rakshasa, revered by the elders. He
told me that Sugriva is surrounded by advisers like you. Go now." Having said this, Sita gave me this jewel. The
unblemished Vaidehi has worn it for a long time. Janaki also told me these words, so that you have your trust in
me. O tiger among men! While dwelling on that great mountain of Chitrakuta, you hurled a straw at a crow. From
this, you should believe[Hanuman would not have known about this incident otherwise.]. Hearing this, I myself burnt down that city.' Rama then honoured the one who had
brought such pleasant news."'
