Janamejaya said, 'O illustrious one! I wish to hear about the kings who established dynasties in the lineage of
Puru. Tell me who they were, about their valour, their power and their courage. I have heard that in this lineage
there wasn't a single king who lacked in valour or in good conduct. Nor was there one who lacked in offspring. O
one blessed with the power of austerities! I wish to hear detailed accounts of these kings who were learned and famous, and about their character.'

Vaishampayana said, 'I will tell you what you have asked. The valorous ones of Puru's lineage were like Shakra
in their energy. Through his wife Poushti, Puru had three maharathas as his sons-Pravira, Ishvara and Roudrashva. Pravira was the one who extended the lineage. Through Shuraseni, Pravira had the valorous Manasyu as his
son. This one, with eyes like blue lotuses, became the lord of the earth, right up to the extremities of the four directions. Through Souviri, Manasyu had three sons-Subhru, Samhanana and Vagmi. They were all brave maharathas. Through an apsara, Roudrashva had ten great archers as his sons. They were brave warriors, performed
many sacrifices and were famous and had many offspring. They were all learned in the science of weapons and
were all devoted to dharma. They were Richepu, Kakshepu, the valorous Krikanepu, Sthandilyepu, Vanepu, the
great warrior Sthalepu, the mighty Tejepu, the wise Satyepu, whose valour was like Indra's, Dharmepu and the
tenth was Samtanepu, whose might was like that of a god. O son! These sons were born through Anadhrishti[The apsara's name.].
They performed royal sacrifices and horse sacrifices. O king! Richepu had a wise son named King Matinara. Mati-
nara himself had four sons whose valour was unbounded-Tamsu, Mahana, Atiratha and Druhyu, whose radiance
was unequalled. Among them, it was the greatly valorous Tamsu who extended the Puru lineage. He conquered the
entire earth and obtained great fame and splendour. Tamsu gave birth to a valorous son named Ilina, who was
supreme among conquerors and subjugated the entire earth. O king! Through Rathantari, Ilina gave birth to five
sons who were like the five elements[Earth, water, energy, air and the sky.]-Duhshanta, Shura, Bhima, Pravasu and Vasu.

'O Janamejaya! The eldest Duhshanta became the king. From him, and through Shakuntala, was born a learned
son named Bharata who became the king. It was through him that the greatly famous Bharata dynasty started.
Through his three wives, Bharata had nine sons. But none of them was like him and the king was not satisfied with
any of them. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Bharata then performed a great sacrifice and obtained a son
named Bhumanyu through Bharadvaja. O best of the Bharata lineage! Puru's descendant looked upon this son as
his own[The suggestion is that the son was actually Bharadvaja's.]. Bhumanyu was instated as the heir apparent. The king himself had a son named Vitatha and Vitatha
became known as Bhumanyu's son. Through Pushkarini, Bhumanyu had sons named Suhotra, Suhota, Suhavi, Sujayu and Richika. Suhotra, the eldest among them, became the king of the earth. He performed many royal and
horse sacrifices. Suhotra conquered the entire earth, right up to the boundaries of the ocean, with all its elephants,
cattle, horses and many gems. The earth seemed to be oppressed at the many burdens he placed on her, with masses of elephants, horses, chariots and human beings. Suhotra was a king who ruled over his subjects in accordance
with dharma. The earth was covered with hundreds and thousands of altars and sacrificial stakes. People and crops
were plentiful and the earth was adorned with the presence of the gods. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Suhotra, the lord of the earth, gave birth to three sons through Aikshvaki-Ajamidha, Sumidha and Purumidha.
Ajamidha was the chief among them and he perpetuated the dynasty. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Through his three wives, he had six sons. Riksha was born from Dhumini, Duhshanta and Parameshthi were born
from Nili, and Jahnu, Jana and Rupina were born from Keshini. All the Panchalas were descended from Duhshanta
and Parameshthi. The Kushikas were descended from the infinitely energetic Jahnu. It is said that Riksha was older
than Jana and Rupina and became the king.

'O king! Riksha had a son named Samvarana and he extended your lineage. It has been heard that when Rik-
sha's son Samvarana ruled the earth as king, there was a great disaster that led to the destruction of subjects. The
kingdom was broken up through famine, plague, drought and disease. The armies of their enemies defeated the
Bharatas and sought to conquer the earth with fourfold armies[Fourfold armies include elephants, horses, chariots and infantry.]. The Panchalas soon conquered the entire earth
and defeated them in battle with ten akshouhinis of soldiers. In great fear, King Samvarana fled with his wife, sons,
advisers and friends. He then found shelter in the forests on the banks of the river Sindhu[Indus.], where the river extends up to the mountains. Facing a difficult situation, the Bharatas lived there for many years. They lived there for
1000 years.

'One day, the illustrious rishi Vashishtha went there to the Bharatas and at his approach, they respectfully and
dutifully paid him homage. All the Bharatas then offered the radiant rishi welcoming gifts and honoured him. He
lived there for eight years and the king himself then requested him to be their priest, so that they might regain their
kingdom. Vashishtha agreed to this by saying "Om" to the Bharatas. We have heard that he instated the
Pourava[Samvarana.] as the emperor of all the Kshatriyas, like the tusk[The word used is vishana, which means both horn (as in trumpet) and tusk.] of the entire expansive earth. The descendant of
Bharata was established in his former supreme capital. With his great strength, he conquered the earth once more.
Samvarana, the descendant of Ajamidha, performed many great sacrifices in which a lot of alms were given.
Through Tapati, the daughter of Surya, Samvarana had a son named Kuru. Since Kuru was learned in the way of
dharma, all the subjects instated him as their king. It is after his name that Kurujangala[Jangala is an arid plain.] has become so famous
in the world. The great ascetic made Kurukshetra a sacred place through his austerities there. We have heard that
Ashvavana, Abhishyanta, Chitraratha, Muni and the famous Janamejaya[Different from Janamejaya, Parikshit's son.] were his five sons, through the intelligent Vahini. Abhishyanta begot Parikshit[Not to be confused with Parikshit, Arjuna's grandson.], the powerful Shabalashva, Abhiraja, Viraja, the immensely strong
Shalmali, Uchchaishrava[Not to be confused with the horse.], Bhadrakara and Jitari as the eighth. Seven more immensely strong sons were born in
this lineage-Janamejaya and the others. They were learned and famous for the qualities of their deeds. Parikshit
had sons who were learned in dharma and artha-Kakshasena, Ugrasena, the immensely valorous Chitrasena, Indrasena, Sushena and Bhimasena. Janamejaya's sons were famous on earth because they were very strong-Dhritarashtra who was born first, Pandu, Bahlika, the immensely energetic Nishada, the powerful Jambunada, Kundodara, Padati and Vasati as the eighth. All of them were skilled in dharma and artha and were always engaged in the
welfare of all beings. Dhritarashtra became the king and his sons were Kundika, Hasti, Vitarka, Kratha, Kundala as
the fifth, Havishrava, Indrabha and the invincible Sumanyu. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Pratipa had three
sons-Devapi, Shantanu and the maharatha Bahlika. Urged by a desire for dharma and welfare, Devapi became a
hermit. Shantanu and the maharatha Bahlika obtained the earth. Many other maharathas and supreme and righteous
kings were born in the Bharata lineage, equal to gods and rishis. In this way, many maharathas were born in
Manu's lineage. They were the equals of the gods themselves. Their numbers extended Ila's lineage.'
