Yudhishthira said, "O brahmana! O unblemished one! You have spoken to me about the progress of adharma.
O supreme among eloquent ones! I wish to hear about the progress of dharma. Having performed wicked
deeds, how can one go to the auspicious destination?"

'Brihaspati replied, "Having performed wicked deeds, one comes under the subjugation of adharma. Because
the mind is perverse, one goes to hell. However, having performed adharma out of delusion, a person may be tormented by this. If he turns his mind towards meditation, he does not have to suffer on account of those wicked
deeds. If a man controls his mind and properly follows the dharma that has been spoken about, he is accordingly
freed from his earlier anxieties. This is like a snake casting aside its skin. If one controls oneself, immerses one's
mind in meditation and gives away many kinds of gifts, one attains a desirable end. O Yudhishthira! I will speak
about the objects that should be given. Having performed such tasks, a man becomes united with dharma. Among
all kinds of donations, food is said to be the best. An upright person who desires dharma should first donate food.
Food provides life to men and other creatures are also generated from it. All the worlds are established on food.
That is how food manifests itself. The gods, the rishis, the ancestors and men praise food. It is by giving food that
Koushika went to heaven. Cheerfully, excellent food that has been lawfully obtained must be given to brahmanas
who are devoted to studying. When food is cheerfully given and it is eaten by one thousand brahmanas, the donor
is not born as inferior species. O bull among men! If a man feeds ten thousand brahmanas, he is said to be always
freed from all adharma and sin. If a brahmana follows the Vedas, invites another brahmana who is devoted to
studying and gives him food as alms, he obtains happiness in this world. This is also true of  a kshatriya who
doesn't injure brahmanas, always protects them according to law, and gives them food. O one with dharma in your
soul! O Pandava! If a person is restrained and controlled and gives it to brahmanas who are aged in their knowledge of the Vedas, all his evil deeds are destroyed. If a vaishya gives a one-sixth share of his agricultural produce
to brahmanas, he is purified and freed from his sins. A shudra can obtain food through hard labour, with risk to his
life. If he gives this to brahmanas, he is cleansed and freed from sin. If a person takes food that he has grown, or
has obtained through his own strength, without causing injury or without being deceitful, and gives it to brahmanas, he does not have to face any hardships. If a man is devoid of greed and gives lawfully earned food to brahmanas who are aged in their knowledge of the Vedas, he is freed from sin. Food leads to energy in this world. A
man who donates it becomes energetic. By resorting to this path, followed by the virtuous, one is freed from all
sins. The learned travel this path of making gifts. This is the eternal dharma of giving what is life itself. In every
kind of situation, it is a man's task to always give lawfully earned food to worthy recipients. Food leads to the ultimate destination. If a man donates food, he does not have to face hardships. Therefore, avoiding what is unlawful,
food must be given. A householder must always eat after food has been offered to brahmanas first. If a man does
not donate food on a certain day, that day becomes sterile. O king! If a man feeds one thousand brahmanas who
know about the Vedas and right policy, are learned about dharma and also know about itihasa, then he does not go
to hell, or undergo this terrible cycle of life. After death, he obtains the fruits that lead to the satisfaction of all the
objects of desire. Without anxiety, in this way, he enjoys happiness and delight. He becomes handsome, famous
and prosperous. I have thus told you everything about the great fruits from the donation of food. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! This kind of gift is the foundation of dharma."'
