'Yudhishthira said, "If a person undertakes sacrifices and does not possess riches[Required for performing the sacrifices and rites.], and the thirst for riches overcomes him, what can he possibly do to obtain happiness?"

'Bhishma replied, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A person who looks on everything equally, a person
who doesn't make an effort[For possessions and objects of desire.], a person who is truthful in speech, a person who disregards worldly objects, a person who pursues knowledge-such a man is indeed happy. The ancient ones have said that these five are the steps
towards tranquility. These are heaven. These are dharma. These are happiness. These are supreme virtue. On this,
an ancient history is recounted, about what Manki, who had freed himself from worldly possessions, had sung. O
Yudhishthira! Listen to it.

'"Manki was repeatedly frustrated in his pursuit of riches. Finally, with some riches that were left, he bought
two bulls and a yoke. Once, he bound them to the yoke and took them out, so as to control them[That is, to train them in being controlled.]. A camel was
lying down in the middle and they suddenly rushed towards it. They approached and fell down on the camel's
neck. The enraged camel arose. It ran at great speed, dragging the two bulls with it. Dragged along by the camel,
the two bulls were tormented. On seeing that they were about to die, Manki spoke these words. 'If it has not been
ordained, even an accomplished person is incapable of obtaining wealth, despite his making every effort, faithfully
and well. Earlier, I have tried many ways of obtaining riches. But behold the calamity that destiny has inflicted me
with. My two bulls have been raised up and are being dragged over uneven terrain. They are being raised up and
flung down, as if a crow is tearing at palm fruit or rose apples[This shloka is not very clear and the translation is somewhat contrived. There is a nuance that the translation
doesn't also capture. The text uses the word kakataliya, which means accident, and there is a story around this.
A crow (kaka) sat on a palm-tree and a ripe palm fruit (tala) fell down. The fruit fell down because it was ripe
and had nothing to do with the crow. But this accidental or coincidental fall is mistakenly ascribed to the crow
sitting on the tree.]. My beloved calves are dangling from the camel's
neck, like jewels. This is certainly because of destiny and I know that manliness does not exist. Even if there exists
something by the name of manliness, if one examines this, one will find that this too is based on destiny. Therefore, someone who wishes to advance towards happiness must be indifferent. A person who shuns all hope of obtaining riches sleeps happily. When Shuka freed himself from everything and went to the great forest from his father's residence, he spoke well[The famous Shuka is Vedavyasa's son. The insertion of a quote ascribed to Shuka therefore suggests a later
interpolation.]. "Between a person who satisfies all his desires and a person who only renounces,
the one who renounces is superior to the one who obtains all the objects of desire[The text does not indicate it clearly. But this seems to be the end of the Shuka quote and it is Manki speaking
again.]." There is no end to all desires
and one can never attain a state where they are extinguished. As long as he is alive, a foolish person's thirst increases. Refrain from desire. Let tranquility pervade me. Having been deceived by what should not be pursued, it
should no longer pervade my body. You desire riches[Manki is addressing himself and his soul.]. If I am not going to be destroyed and if you wish to take
delight in me, then do not engage me in this futile path of greed. You have repeatedly accumulated riches and they
have repeatedly been destroyed. O stupid one! O one who is addicted to riches! When will you free yourself from
this desire for wealth? Shame on my folly. This has led me to becoming a puppet in your hands. It is in this way
that men who are born become the slaves of others. No person born earlier has ever obtained an end to desire. Nor
will any person who is born later. Having abandoned all efforts, I now know and am awake. O desire! It is certain
that your heart is as firm as a diamond. That is the reason why, though it is afflicted by one hundred calamities, it
does not shatter into one hundred fragments. O desire! I will abandon you and everything that is agreeable to you.
Severing what you find to be agreeable, I will obtain happiness. O desire! I know your foundation. You certainly
result from resolutions. If I do not have any resolutions, you will not have any foundations. Wealth does not yield
happiness on earth. If obtained, it leads to a lot of anxiety. If it is destroyed after having been obtained, that seems
like death. Nor does one know whether it can be obtained or not. There is nothing that is a greater misery than its
going away after it has been obtained. One is not satisfied when it has been obtained. Instead, one looks for paths
to enhance it. Riches are like the tasty waters of the Ganga, since one keeps hankering for more. This is also the
reason for my lamentation. I now know and will abandon it. It[Desire.] has sought refuge in the natural elements of my
body. As it wishes, let it dwell here, or wherever else it finds happiness[Since Manki has renounced desire, desire can do whatever it wants.]. I have no affection for any of you[Any other sentiments.] who
follow desire and avarice. Therefore, I am abandoning all of you. I will seek refuge with truth alone. My atman
will behold all the elements in the body and my mind. I will base myself in yoga, intelligence, learning and spirit
and uphold the brahman in my mind. I will happily roam the worlds, without any attachment and without any disease, so that you can no longer try to immerse me in misery again[Addressing himself.]. I have been agitated by you and there is no
other path left to me. O desire! Thirst, sorrow and exhaustion have always been manifestations of your powers. I
think that the sorrow which results from the destruction of riches is the greatest of all miseries. Relatives and
friends disrespect the person who has been separated from his wealth. Other than disrespect, in the absence of riches, there are one thousand other taints that are more severe. However, even though riches provide a little bit of happiness, it is mingled with a great deal of unhappiness. In everyone's sight, bandits slay the person who possesses
riches. They torment him with many kinds of punishment and always terrify him. After a long period of time, I
have realized the stupidity and misery that greed leads to. O desire! You make me follow whatever you get addicted to. You do not know the truth. You are foolish. You are difficult to satisfy. You are never satiated. You are like a
fire. You do not consider whether something is easy to obtain, or difficult to obtain. You are as difficult to fill as the
nether regions. You wish to fling me into misery. O desire! From today, I am incapable of dwelling with you again.
I am free from possessions now. As they will, let the objects be destroyed. I have obtained supreme renunciation
now. I no longer think about desire. Because of you, I suffered greatly earlier. I now know myself to be intelligent.
Because of the destruction of the riches, I have been deceived. But I can lie down now, without any fever in any of
my limbs. O desire! I am casting you away and abandoning all my mental inclinations towards you. O desire! You
will not associate with me or find pleasure in me again. I will forgive even those who should not be forgiven. I will
not injure, even though I am injured against. I will speak pleasantly to those who hate me and ignore their disagreeable words. I will be satisfied and my senses will be at ease. I will always sustain myself on what has been
obtained. You are an enemy of my atman and I will not satisfy your wishes. Know that lack of possessions, lack of
desire, satisfaction, tranquility, truth, self-control, forgiveness and compassion towards all beings have now sought
refuge with me. Therefore, desire, avarice, thirst and miserliness have been cast away. I have based myself on my
spirit. I have abandoned desire, avarice, anger and harshness. I will no longer come under the subjugation of greed
and subject myself to misery. Whoever casts aside desire is filled with happiness. Someone who is under the subjugation of desire is always confronted with misery. When a man casts aside the passions that result from desire, he
abandons the rajas quality. Sorrow and other hardships always result from desire and anger. I have now immersed
myself in the brahman, like entering a cool lake during the summer. I have calmed myself. I have withdrawn myself. I only enjoy happiness. The happiness one obtains in the worlds from the satisfaction of desire and the great
happiness one enjoys in heaven are less than one-sixteenth of the happiness one obtains from the extinguishing of
thirst. I have slain supreme enemies of the atman, desire being the seventh[Usually, six enemies are mentioned and kama (desire) is one of the six. Since desire has been mentioned as the
seventh, the other six are probably the five senses and the mind.]. I have attained Brahma's indestructible city. I will be happy there, like a king.' Resorting to his own intelligence, Manki became free from all possessions. He abandoned all desire and obtained great bliss with Brahma. Because the bulls had been destroyed, Manki
obtained immortality. Having severed the foundation of desire, he obtained great happiness.

'"In this connection, an ancient history is recounted. This is a song sung by Janaka, the king of Videha, who obtained tranquility. 'Though I possess nothing, my wealth is infinite. Even if Mithila[Mithila was the capital of Videha. This King Janaka is different from the King Janaka who was Sita's father.] is set ablaze, nothing that belongs to me will be consumed.' In this connection, about lack of possessions, there is also what Bodhya, who attained the supreme objective, said. O Yudhishthira! Listen to this. The self-controlled rishi Bodhya was asked by
King Nahusha. 'You are without possessions. You have obtained tranquility. You are at peace. You are full of wisdom. O immensely wise one! Instruct me about how one can obtain tranquility. What intelligence should one resort
to, so that one can withdraw and roam around in peace?' Bodhya replied, 'I follow the instructions of others, but
never instruct anyone. I will tell you about the signs. You can then yourself reflect on those. My six preceptors are
Pingala, the osprey, the snake, the bee that is searching in the forest, the one who makes arrows and the
maiden[By excising shlokas, the Critical edition leaves this dangling. Pingala was a prostitute who turned to asceticism
after being spurned by her lover. If an osprey desires meat and finds it, other ospreys snatch that piece of meat
away. However, there was an osprey that did not desire any meat and was happy. The preceptor is that osprey. A
snake is happy and worthy of emulation because it does not try to make a house for itself, but lives in someone
else's house instead. The bee searching for honey in the forest does not harm anyone. There is a story about a
person who made arrows. He was so busy in his work that he didn't even notice that the king was passing. There
is a story about a maiden who roamed alone. Since she did not consort with others, there was no scope of a
quarrel.].'"'