Indra said, 'I wish to know about the ends obtained by a person who steals a cow, or one who sells a cow because of the money.'

'"Brahma replied, 'Listen to the fruits obtained by a person who steals a cow to eat it, sell it, or gift it to a brahmana. Without following the restraints, if a man sells, causes injury and eats, or causes it to be slain, he does not
do what is permissible. For as many years as there are hair, the slayer, the eater and the perpetrator of heinous
deeds is submerged[In hell. Hair means hair on the cow's body.]. O lord! The sins from stealing and selling are said to be equal to the sins from destroying the
sacrifices of brahmanas. If a person steals a cow and gives it to a brahmana, there are fruits from the act of donation, but he also has to suffer in hell. O immensely radiant one! When a cow is donated, gold has been said to be
the dakshina. There is no doubt that gold is supreme for purposes of dakshina. By donating a cow, seven of the
preceding and succeeding generations are saved. The gains are said to double if gold is given as dakshina. Gold is
a supreme gift. Gold is a supreme dakshina. O Shakra! Gold purifies. Gold is said to be the supreme purifier. O
Shatakratu! Pure gold is said to purify the lineage. O immensely radiant one! I have briefly told you about dakshina.'"

'Bhishma continued, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! This is what the grandfather[Brahma.] told Indra. Indra told
Dasharatha and Rama learnt it from his father. Raghava told the illustrious Lakshmana, his beloved brother. O
lord! While dwelling in the forest, Lakshmana told the rishis. Progressively, the rishis, rigid in their vows, sustained this, though it was difficult to sustain. And so did the kings who were devoted to dharma. O Yudhishthira!
My preceptor told me about this. A brahmana who recites this at an assembly of brahmanas, or at a place where
sacrifices and donations of cows are both being held, indeed obtains the undecaying worlds and is always with the
gods. This is what the illustrious Brahma, the supreme lord, said."'
