'Shalya said, "Having been thus addressed by Shachi, the illustrious one replied, 'This is not the time for valour.
Nahusha is superior in strength. O beautiful one! The rishis have made his powers increase because of the obla-
tions he has offered to the gods and the ancestors[Havya and kavya respectively. Havya is oblations offered to the gods, while kavya is oblations offered to the
ancestors.]. O goddess! I will indicate a course of action and you should
carry it out. You must carry this task out in secrecy. O beautiful one! You must not talk about it in any way. O slender-waisted one! Go to Nahusha and tell him when you are alone, "O lord of the universe! Come to me in a celestial vehicle that is borne by the rishis. I will then happily come under your control." Tell him this.' Thus addressed
by the king of the gods, his lotus-eyed wife told him that it would be this way. She went to Nahusha. When
Nahusha saw her, he was surprised and spoke these words. 'O one with the beautiful thighs! You are welcome. O
sweet-smiling one! What can I do for you? I am devoted to you. Love me. O fortunate one! O spirited one! What
task do you wish me to perform for you? Do not be shy. O slender-waisted one! You should have trust in me. O
goddess! I truthfully swear that I will do whatever you ask me to.' Indrani replied, 'O lord of the universe! I am
waiting out the time that you have granted to me. O lord of the gods! After that, you will become my husband.
There is a task that I desire in my heart. O king of the gods! Think about it. O king! I will tell you about it, provided that you do what brings me pleasure. Out of love, I am speaking these words to you. If you carry them out, I
will come under your control. As his vehicles, Indra possessed horse, elephants and chariots. O lord of the gods! I
desire a vehicle from you that has not existed earlier, one that Vishnu, Rudra, the asuras or the rakshasas do not
possess. O great king! O lord! Let all the rishis bear you together on a palanquin. O king! That will bring me pleasure. You should not be the equal of the asuras or the gods. With your valour, you should grasp all their energy by
glancing at them. O brave one! No one will be able to stand before you.'

'"Having been thus addressed, Nahusha was extremely delighted. The Indra of the gods spoke these words to
the unblemished one. 'O one whose complexion is beautiful! You have spoken about an extraordinary vehicle. O
goddess! I have taken a strong fancy towards it. O one with the beautiful face! I am under your powers. One who
makes the sages carry his vehicle cannot be weak in strength. I am a powerful ascetic. I am the lord of the past, the
present and the future. When I am angry, the universe ceases to exist. Everything is vested in me-the gods, the
danavas, the gandharvas, the kinnaras, the serpents and the rakshasas. O sweet-smiling one! All the worlds are not
enough to counter my anger. I take the energy from anyone I look at with my eyes. O goddess! There is no doubt
that I will act in accordance with your words. The seven rishis[The list of the seven great rishis (saptarshi) varies. Indeed, the list is believed to change from one era to another.
Identified with the constellation of the Great Bear (Ursa Majoris), the saptarshi list is Kratu, Pulaha, Pulastya, Atri,
Angira, Vasishtha and Bhrigu (alternatively, Marichi). Angira is the same as Angirasa.] will bear me and all the brahmarshis. O beautiful
one! Behold my greatness and my prosperity.' Having spoken thus, he gave the goddess with the beautiful face
permission to leave.

'"He did not possess the qualities of a brahmana. He was powerful and intoxicated. He was insolent because of
the boon. He yoked the rishis, who were established in the rules, to his celestial vehicle. That evil-souled one was
overcome by desire and made the rishis bear him. Having been dismissed by Nahusha, she told Brihaspati, 'Only a
little bit of the time that Nahusha granted me is left. Hunt out Shakra quickly. I love him and show me
compassion.' The illustrious Brihaspati told her, 'It will be this way. O goddess! You have no reason to fear the
evil-minded Nahusha. He will not last for a long time. That worst of men has been destroyed. He is ignorant of
dharma. O beautiful one! He has made the maharshis carry him and has been slain[Meaning, Nahusha has been destroyed.]. I will offer oblations for the
destruction of that evil-minded one. I will go to Shakra. O fortunate one! Do not be afraid.' Having kindled a fire
in accordance with the prescribed rites, the immensely energetic Brihaspati offered oblations to discover where the
king of the gods was. The illustrious god of the fire himself appeared. He adopted the extraordinary form of a
woman and suddenly disappeared. With the speed of the mind, he searched the directions, the sub-directions, the
mountains, the forests, the earth and the sky, and returned within a brief moment to Brihaspati. Agni said, 'O Brihaspati! I cannot see the king of the gods anywhere. Only the waters remain to be searched and I am incapable of
entering the waters. O brahmana! I have no means of going there. What else can I do for you?' Having been thus
addressed, the preceptor of the gods said, 'O greatly resplendent one! Enter.' Agni replied, 'I cannot enter the waters. That will be my destruction. I am seeking refuge with you. O immensely radiant one! Be pacified. The fire
arose from the waters[Agni is often described as being created from the water.], kshatriyas from brahmanas and iron from stone. Their energy goes everywhere, but is
pacified if they return to their wombs.'"'
