Yudhishthira said, "O lord of the earth! I will faithfully do all of this. O bull among kings! But you should instruct me yet again. Bhishma has gone to heaven and Madhusudana has left[For Dvaraka.]. Vidura and Sanjaya will also
go[To the forest, with Dhritarashtra.]. Who else is capable of speaking to me? I will adhere to whatever you instruct me today. O lord of the earth!
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You should not hold yourself back."'

Vaishampayana continued, 'The rajarshi was thus addressed by the intelligent Dharmaraja. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! He took Kounteya's permission and said, "O son! Desist. My strength has been exhausted." Having said this, the king and Gandhari entered their house. The queen Gandhari followed dharma. She knew about
time. Her husband was like Prajapati. When he was seated, at the right time, she said, "You have obtained the permission  of  maharshi  Vyasa  himself.  Having  obtained  Yudhishthira's  permission,  when  will  you  leave  for  the
forest?" Dhritarashtra replied, "O Gandhari! My great-souled father has himself given me permission. After I have
obtained Yudhishthira's permission, I will leave for the forest, without any delay. All my sons engaged in a deceitful act of gambling with the dice. In their names, in the annual funeral ceremony, I wish to give away riches to ordinary people, inviting them to my own house." Having said this, the king told Dharmaraja and, instructed by the
king, he brought everything that was required. All the well-wishers, all the ordinary people, all the inhabitants of
the city and all the inhabitants of the countryside assembled. Brahmanas and kings came from many countries. The
king  emerged  from  his  inner  quarters  and  saw  all  of  them.  The  immensely  energetic  King  Dhritarashtra  said,
"Brahmanas, kshatriyas, vaishyas and shudras who have assembled from Kurujangala. Listen to me attentively.
You and the Kurus have lived together for a long time. You are affectionate towards each other and are engaged in
each other's welfare. The time has presented itself and I am going to speak about it to you now. Without thinking
about it, you should act in accordance with my words. With Gandhari, I have made up my mind to leave for the
forest. I have obtained the permission of Vyasa and the king who is Kunti's son. You should also grant me leave
and not act contrary to this. There has been an eternal fraternal affection between you and us, the king and the subjects. It is my view that this does not exist in any other country. I am exhausted. I am old and have lost my sons.
With the unblemished Gandhari, I have fasted and have become emaciated. I am extremely happy that the kingdom has passed on to Yudhishthira. O excellent ones! I think that joy is greater than what I would have obtained
from Duryodhana's prosperity. I am blind, aged and have lost my sons. O immensely fortunate ones! Other than
the forest, what other refuge can there be for me? You should grant me permission." O bull among the Bharata lineage! On hearing his words, all those from Kurujangala wept, their voices choking with tears. They were overcome with sorrow and grief. The immensely energetic Dhritarashtra spoke to them yet again.'
