Yudhishthira said, "O father[The word used is tata. This means father, but is affectionately used towards anyone who is older or senior.]! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Tell me about the supreme yoga of moksha. O supreme among eloquent ones! I wish to know the truth about this."

'Bhishma replied, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about a conversation on moksha between
a preceptor and a disciple. There was a supreme brahmana rishi who was a preceptor. His disciple was extremely
intelligent and desirous of welfare. While the preceptor was seated, the disciple controlled himself and touched his
feet. With hands joined in salutation, he said, 'O illustrious one! I have a great doubt in my mind. If you are satisfied with my worship, you should explain this. Where have I come from? Where have you come from? What happens thereafter? Tell me accurately. O supreme among brahmanas! If all beings are the same and if their driving
force is the same, why are their origin and destruction so different from each other? There are also detailed words
in the Vedas about different kinds of people[If people are the same, why are there different ordinances for different people?]. You know the truth about this and you should explain all this to me.'

'"The preceptor said, 'O disciple! O immensely wise one! Listen to the supreme mystery about the brahman, described in the sacred texts. This is adhyatma and represents wealth for all beings. Vasudeva is everything in the
universe. He is the mouth of the brahman. He is truthfulness, generosity, sacrifices, renunciation, self-control and
uprightness. He is the eternal Purusha. Those who know the Vedas know him as Vishnu. He is the cause of creation
and destruction. He is the eternal brahman, who is not manifest. That brahman was born in the Vrishni lineage.
Listen to the history. Brahmanas should hear this from brahmanas and kings from kshatriyas. This is about the
greatness of the god of the gods, the infinitely energetic Vishnu. You should hear about the supreme Varshneya,
since that will ensure your welfare. He is the wheel of time. He is without beginning and without end. His signs are
both existence and non-existence. He is the one who makes all beings in the three worlds revolve on the wheel. He
is Akshara[Literally, the syllable or the word. Akshara also means the brahman and is one of Vishnu's names. The word also
means immutable.]. He is Avyakta[Not manifest.]. He is Amrita[Immortal.]. He is the eternal brahman. Keshava is spoken of as a tiger among
men  and  a  bull  among  men.  The  supreme  and  undecaying  one  created  the  ancestors,  the  gods,  the  rishis,  the
yakshas[Yakshas are semi-divine species and companions of Kubera, the god of treasure.], the danavas, the serpents, the asuras and human beings. In that way, the lord created the sacred texts of
the Vedas and the eternal dharma of the worlds. Having destroyed everything, at the beginning of a new yuga, he
creates nature[The text uses the word prakriti, which also has nuances other than nature.]. As seasons with their many different signs and forms progressively come into being, these are also
seen at the end of Brahma's night. Through the progress of time, different yugas come into being. For the advance
of the worlds, different kinds of knowledge are also decreed. At the end of a yuga, the Vedas and the histories also
disappear. However, having obtained Svayambhu's prior permission, the maharshis get them back through their
austerities. The illustrious Brihaspati knew about the Vedas and the Vedangas[The six Vedangas are sbiksba (articulation and pronunciation), cbbanda (prosody), vyakarana (grammar), nirukta
(etymology), jyotisha (astronomy) and kalpa (rituals).]. For the sake of the universe and
for  the  welfare  of  the  universe,  Bhargava  obtained  the  sacred  texts  about  good  policy[Bhargava means Shukra or Shukracharya. We have translated niti as good policy. Shukracharya was descended
from Bhrigu.].  Narada  accepted  the
knowledge about gandharva[Singing, dancing and music.]and Bharadvaja about bows[Archery and the science of fighting.]. Gargya learnt about the conduct of the devarshis and
Krishnatreya about medicine. There were many others who were learned and spoke about nyaya[Logical principles, or the school of philosophy known as Nyaya.], tantra, reasoning and the sacred texts. Let him[Brahma.] be worshipped through good conduct.' '"Neither the gods nor the rishis were
capacble of comprehending the supreme brahman. The illustrious lord, Dhata Narayana, was the only one who
comprehended him. From Narayana, the large numbers of rishis, the foremost among the gods and the asuras and
the ancient rajarshis got to know about the supreme one, who is the medication for all misery. With the appropriate
cause, prakriti always brings forth, urged by the sentiments of purusha, and the entire universe begins to whirl
around[In sankhya philosophy, prakriti is the original source of the material world and is active. Purusha is inert or
inactive.]. This is like thousands of lamps being lit from another lamp. In that way, prakriti creates many other
things, but is not exhausted. Though it is not manifest, it creates intelligence and ego, which lead to acts. Space results from ego and wind results from space. Energy results from wind. Water results from energy and the earth is
created from water. These are the eight foundations of prakriti and the universe is established on these[Intelligence, ego, space, wind, energy, water and earth add up to seven. Prakriti must be added to get eight. More
plausibly, mind has been missed out in the listing.]. The five
senses of knowledge, the five organs of action, the five objects of the senses and the mind, as the sixteenth, result
from transformations of these. The ears, the skin, the eyes, the tongue and the nose are the five senses. The feet, the
anus, the genitals, the mouth and the hands are the five organs of action. Sound, touch, form, taste and smell are
what are to be known and pervade the consciousness, the mind going everywhere. It[The mind.] knows taste through the
tongue and is said to become words. United with the senses, the mind is engaged in everything. In their various
forms, these sixteen should be known as divinities. They bring about knowledge within the body and are worshipped by those who know about worshipping. The tongue represents the qualities of water, smell the qualities of
the earth, hearing the qualities of sound[The Critical edition uses the word shabda (sound). Non-critical versions have nabha (space), which fits better.] and touch the qualities of the wind. This is always known to be the case
with all beings. It is said that the mind is the quality of existence. Existence arises from that which is not manifest.
Those who are intelligent know that it[The brahman.] is there in all beings, as the soul of beings. Its attributes are borne by the
entire universe, by mobile and immobile objects. The blazing radiance of that god is said to be the supreme objective. This sacred city with nine gates[The body. The nine gates of the body are two eyes, two ears, two nostrils, the mouth, the anus and the genital
organ.] possesses all these characteristics. The great atman pervades and lies down
inside and is known as purusha. It is without decay. It is immortal. It knows about what is manifest and also about
what is not manifest. It is pervasive, with qualities, and subtle. It is the refuge of all beings and their qualities. A
lamp shows whether a person is small or large. In that way, in all creatures, one can know the purusha through the
knowledge of the atman. It is the one who knows what is to be known. It is the one who hears and sees. It is the
reason behind this body. It is the doer of all the deeds. There is fire in wood, but it cannot be seen if the wood is
cut. In that way, the atman is inside the body, but it can only be seen through yoga. The river has water and there
are rays attached to the sun. In that way, it[The atman.] goes where the body goes. Where there is the body, the soul is there.
When a person dreams, the atman and the five senses leave the body. Like that, when the body is cast aside[Because of death.], the
atman departs and obtains another. It is bound down by its earlier acts and obtains the consequences of those acts.
The powerful force of its own deeds conveys it elsewhere. Having left one body, it obtains another body and another one after that. I will now tell you about how beings naturally follow their own acts."'
