'Lomasha said, "O king! On seeing the horse, they shivered with delight. Driven by destiny, they showed no respect for the great-souled Kapila. O great king! Desirous of grabbing the horse, they dashed towards it in anger.
Kapila, supreme among sages, was angered at this. Kapila, supreme among sages, was known as Vasudeva. He
opened his eyes wide and created energy from them. That immensely energetic one burnt down the sons of Sagara.

'"Having seen them burnt to ashes, the great ascetic Narada went to Sagara and told him. On hearing these terrible words from the mouth of the sage, the king was distracted for a moment. But then he thought of the words of
Sthanu[Mahadeva.]. He thought about the horse. Then he reassured himself and summoned his son's son, Anshuman, the
son of Asamanja[Asamanja was Shaibya's son.]. O tiger among the Bharata lineage! He spoke these words to his grandson. 'My sixty thousand sons are boundlessly energetic. But on my account, they have been killed through Kapila's energy. O son[Anshuman is actually a grandson. But the word tata (son) is not only used for a son, but is affectionately
used for anyone who is an inferior or subordinate.]!
O unblemished one! Your father has also been abandoned by me, for the sake of protecting dharma and for the
welfare of the citizens.'"'

'Yudhishthira asked, "O one rich in austerities! Why did Sagara, tiger among kings abandon his own valorous
son, one who is difficult to abandon? Tell me."

'Lomasha replied, "Sagara had a son famous by the name of Asamanja. He was born through Shaibya. He used
to grasp the weak and crying infants of the citizens by the hooves[There is a clear error in the text of the critical edition. The word used is khura. Khura has several meanings,
hoof, razor, perfume, the foot of a bedstead-but none of them make any sense. Some other versions say gala
(neck or throat) and that would be fine, since the children could be grabbed by the neck.] and throw them into the river. Overcome by
fear and grief, the citizens assembled together and with hands joined in salutation, all of them went and prayed to
Sagara. 'O great king! You are our protector from fears like the wheels of the enemy. You should therefore protect
us from the terrible fear due to Asamanja.' Having heard those terrible words of the citizens, the supreme of kings
was distracted for an instant. Then he told his advisers, 'Let my son Asamanja be expelled immediately from the
city. If you wish to do that which brings me pleasure, perform this act swiftly.' O lord of men! Having been thus
addressed by that Indra of men, the advisers swiftly did what the king had asked them to. This is the entire account
of how the great-souled Sagara banished his son for the welfare of the citizens. I will now recount to you everything about what Sagara told the great archer Anshuman. Listen to me.

'"Sagara said, 'O son! I am aggrieved that I abandoned your father, at the death of my sons and I am also tormented because I have not been able to obtain the horse. O grandson! Therefore, I am tormented by misery and am
deluded because of impediment to the sacrifice. You must bring back the horse from hell[The word used is naraka (hell) and this is not quite the same as the nether regions.].'"
'Lomasha said, "Having been thus addressed by the great-souled Sagara, Anshuman sadly went to the place
where the earth had been torn apart. Through that path, he entered the ocean and saw the great-souled Kapila and
the horse. On seeing that ancient and supreme of rishis, he bowed down his head on the ground and informed him
about the task for which he had come. O great king! Kapila was pleased with Anshuman. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! The one with dharma in his soul told him to ask for a boon. First, he[Anshuman.] asked for the horse needed for the sacrifice. Second, he asked for water to purify his fathers[Literally fathers, but meaning uncles.]. The immensely energetic Kapila, bull
among sages, told him, 'O fortunate one! O unblemished one! I will give you the boons you have asked for. Forgiveness, dharma and truth are established in you. Sagara will become successful through you. Your father has truly got a son. Through your powers, the sons of Sagara will go to heaven. Your grandson will bring down the three-
coursed one from heaven[The three-coursed one is Ganga, because the Ganga flows in heaven, on earth and in the nether regions.]. He will satisfy Maheshvara[Shiva.] and purify the sons of Sagara. O bull among men!
Be fortunate and take back the sacrificial horse. O son! Complete the sacrifice of the great-souled Sagara. Having
been thus addressed by the great-souled Kapila, Anshuman took the horse and returned to the sacrificial ground of
the great-souled one[Sagara.]. There he bowed at the feet of the great-souled Sagara and told him everything and he inhaled the fragrance of his[Anshuman's.] head. He told him everything that he had heard and seen and about the destruction of
the sons of Sagara. He told him that the horse had been brought to the sacrificial ground. On hearing this, King
Sagara stopped grieving for his sons. He honoured Anshuman and completed the sacrifice.

'"When the sacrifice was completed, Sagara was honoured by all the gods. He thought of the ocean, Varuna's
abode, as his son[The ocean is called sagara, meaning Sagara's son.]. After ruling over the kingdom for a long time, the lotus-eyed one handed over the burden to
his grandson and went to heaven. O great king! Anshuman, with dharma in his soul, ruled over the earth, up to the
frontiers of the ocean, as his grandfather had. His son was Dilipa, devoted to dharma. Having handed over the
kingdom to him, Anshuman left. But Dilipa had heard about the great destruction of his fathers[Ancestors.]. Overwhelmed
with grief, he thought about their end. The king made great efforts to bring down the Ganga. But though he tried
with all his strength, he could not ensure the descent. He had a handsome son, devoted to dharma. He was known
as Bhagiratha. He was truthful and no one spoke ill of him. Instating him in the kingdom, Dilipa resorted to the
forest. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! After obtaining success in austerities, in due course of time, that king went to the forest and then to heaven."'
