Vaishampayana said, 'On the third day, the five Pandava brothers bathed themselves and donned white garments,
having completed the pledge that they had made[Of living in concealment for the thirteenth year.]. Adorning themselves in ornaments, and with Yudhishthira at
the forefront, the maharathas were as resplendent as elephants marked with the signs of the lotus[An auspicious sign.]. They went to
Virata's assembly hall and seated themselves on thrones meant for lords of the earth. They were as radiant as fires
on sacrificial altars. While they were seated there, Virata, lord of the earth, arrived at the assembly hall to perform
all his royal duties. On seeing the handsome Pandavas, blazing like fires, with Kanka seated there in the form of a
god, like the lord of the thirty gods attended by the Maruts, Matsya told him, "I put you in charge of the dice and
appointed you the official gamester. Why are you ornamented and why are you seated on the royal throne?"

'O king! On hearing Virata's words, Arjuna laughed and spoke the following words. "O king! This one deserves
to be seated on Indra's throne. He has the qualities of a brahmana. He is learned in the sacred texts. He is generous.
He is the performer of sacrifices. He is rigid in his vows. He is a bull among the Kurus. He is Kunti's son, Yudhishthira. His deeds are established on this earth, like the rays of the rising sun. O king! When he dwelt in the land
of the Kurus, ten thousand powerful elephants used to follow him at the back. Thirty thousand chariots and well-
trained and handsome horses, with golden harnesses, always used to follow him from behind. There were eight
hundred bards, with earrings studded with polished gems, together with minstrels chanting his praises, like rishis
praising Shakra earlier. O king! Like the immortals wait on the lord of riches[Kubera is the lord of riches.], the Kurus, and all the kings, waited
on him, like servants. O great king! All the lords of the earth offered him tribute then, like ordinary vaishyas. The
king was excellent in his vows and eighty-eight thousand great-souled snatakas[A snataka is a brahmana who has completed his period of celibate student life and is about to step into the
householder stage.] earned their living off him. O
lord! In accordance with dharma, he protected his subjects like sons, the aged, the unprotected, the disabled and
the crippled. Such was his dharma, his self-control over anger and his carefulness in observing vows. He was extremely generous. He had the qualities of a brahmana. The lord of the earth was always truthful. The lord Suyodhana was tormented because of his prosperity and his power, together with his followers, Karna, Soubala and the
others. O lord of men! It is impossible to recount all his qualities. These are vested in the great king Pandava, bull
among the lords of the earth. Does such a king not deserve a seat that is meant for a lord of the earth?"'
