Shounaka said, 'O son of a suta! I wish to hear the names of all the snakes that fell into the fire at the time of the
snake-sacrifice.'

Souti said, 'O you who are learned in the Vedas! There were many thousands, millions and tens of millions.
There were so many that I am unable to count them all. As far as I can remember, hear the names of the chief
snakes that fell into the sacrificial fire. First, hear the names of the chief ones in Vasuki's family. They had the
colours blue, red and white and were of terrible form, with gigantic bodies and virulent poison-Kotika, Manasa,
Purna, Saha, Paila, Halisaka, Picchila, Konapa, Chakra, Konavega, Prakalana, Hiranyavaha, Sharana, Kakshaka
and Kaladantaka. These are the snakes from Vasuki's lineage that entered the sacrificial fire.

'Now hear the names of those of Takshaka's lineage as I mention them-Pucchandaka, Mandalaka, Pindabhetta,
Rabhenaka, Ucchikha, Surasa, Dranga, Balaheda, Virohana, Shili, Shalakara, Muka, Sukumara, Pravepana,
Mudgara, Shasharoma, Sumana and Vegavahana. These were the snakes from Takshaka's lineage that entered the
sacrificial fire.

'Paravata, Pariyatra, Pandara, Harina, Krisha, Vihanga, Sharabha, Moda, Pramoda and Samhatangada-these
are the ones from Airavata's lineage that entered the sacrificial fire.

'O best of Brahmanas! Now hear the names of the snakes born into the Kouravya lineage as I recount them-
Aindila, Kundala, Mundo, Veni, Skandha, Kumaraka, Bahuka, Shringavega, Dhurtaka, Pata and Patara.

'O Brahmana! Now hear the names of the snakes born into the Dhritarashtra lineage as I mention them. They
were all extremely powerful and swift as the wind, with virulent poison-Shankukarna, Pingalaka, Kutharamukha,
Mechaka, Purnangada, Purnamukha, Prahasa, Shakuni, Hari, Amahatha, Komathaka, Shvasana, Manava, Vata,
Bhairava, Mundavedanga, Pishanga, Udraparaga, Rishabha, Vegavana, Pindaraka, Mahahanu, Raktanga, Sarvasaranga, Samriddha, Pata, Rakshasa, Varahaka, Varanaka, Sumitra, Chitravedika, Parashara, Tarunaka, Maniskandha and Aruni.

'O Brahmana! I have thus recited the names of only the chief snakes, all famous for their great deeds. I have not
been able to mention all, because there are too many to enumerate. Countless are the numbers of their sons, grandsons and other progeny who fell into the blazing fire. I am unable to mention them. Some had seven heads, some
two and some five. They were terrible of form and their poison was like the fire at the time of destruction. They
were sacrificed in hundreds and thousands. They had gigantic bodies, great might and were as large as peaks of
mountains. Some of them were as extensive as a yojana, others two yojanas long. They were capable of assuming
any form at will and of going anywhere at will. Their poison was as virulent as the blazing fire. They were all
burnt there at the great sacrifice, oppressed by the Brahmana's curse.'
