'"Bhrigu said, 'Those who are in vanaprastha follow the dharma of rishis. They go to sacred tirthas, rivers and
streams and deserted and desolate forests frequented by deer, buffaloes, boars, srimaras[A variety of young deer.] and elephants. They
practise austerities. They abandon ordinary garments and objects of food. They are controlled, limited and wonderful in their diet and subsist on wild herbs, roots, fruits and leaves. They sit and lie down on the bare ground, rocks,
gravel, pebbles, sand and ashes. They cover their limbs with kasha, kusha[Both kasha and kusha are kinds of grass.], hides and bark. They do not cut their
hair, beards or nails. They perform their ablutions at the right time. They offer food, oblations and sacrifices at the
right time. They do not rest until they have collected the required kusha, flowers and other ingredients required for
oblations to the fire. Their skin is cracked everywhere, because of the cold, the heat, the wind and the rain. They
observe different kinds of vows and yoga recommended by dharma. Because of these observances, they are nothing but flesh, blood, skin and bones. They are full of fortitude and spirited in their yoga. They bear their bodies in
this way. If a person observes these rituals and conduct, recommended by the brahmana rishis, his sins are burnt, as
if by a fire. He conquers worlds that are difficult to win. The conduct of a mendicant[Parivrajaka.] is the following. He frees
himself from attachment to the fire, riches, wives and family. He casts aside the bond of affection and wanders
around. Stone, iron and gold are the same to him. He is not interested in pursuing the three objectives. His intelligence frees him from these attachments. Towards enemies, friends and neutrals, his conduct is the same. In words,
deeds and thoughts, he does not injure immobile objects, those born from wombs, those born from eggs, those
born from sweat and beings that are in the nature of herbs and plants. He has no abode. He roams around mountains, islands, the roots of trees and temples. He may go to a city or a village for residence. But he will not dwell in
a city for more than five nights and in a village for more than one night. For the sake of sustaining life[Alms.], he will
only present himself at the houses of brahmanas who are generous in their deeds. He should not ask for alms that
are more than what has been placed in his vessel. He will restrain anger, insolence, delusion, avarice, miserliness,
pride, slander, vanity and violence. In this connection, there is a shloka. "If a sage roams around, without causing
fear to any being, he never faces fear from any being." He performs the agnihotra sacrifice with his own body. The
body is the fire that offers oblations into his mouth. That fire is fed oblations that are obtained through begging.
Because of this fire, he transcends the world. As stated, he observes the ashrama of moksha. His resolution and intelligence are properly turned towards purification. He is as tranquil as a blazing body that has no kindling. Such a
brahmana obtains Brahma's world.'

'"Bharadvaja said, 'There is a world beyond this world. I have heard about it, but have not seen it. I wish to
know about it. You should tell me.'

'"Bhrigu replied, 'There is a sacred spot towards the north, on the slopes of the Himalayas. It has all the qualities. It is said that this is a supreme world-sacred, tranquil and desirable. The men there have abandoned greed
and delusion and do not suffer from any difficulties. They do not perform wicked deeds. They are pure and extremely clean. It is said that this region has such auspicious qualities that it is like heaven. Death comes at the right
time and disease does not touch them. Men are devoted to their own wives and do not desire the wives of others. It
is amazing that they do not kill each other and do not desire each other's possessions. Since dharma is clearly followed, there is no scope for any doubt. The fruits of all acts are directly obtained there. They possess beds, vehicles, seats, palaces and mansions that have all the objects of desire. Some are adorned in golden ornaments. However, there are also some who only eat enough to remain alive. So as to remain alive, some perform great exertions.
In this world, some men are devoted to dharma, while others practise deceit. Some are happy, while others are unhappy. Some are poor, while others are rich. In this world, exertion, fear, delusion and hunger are fierce. There is
greed for riches among men and this confuses even those who are learned. There are many kinds of thoughts in
this world, about deeds of dharma and adharma. A wise person knows the difference between the two and sin does
not touch him. There is fraud, deceit, theft, slander, jealousy, injury towards others, violence, verbal abuse and
falsehood. If someone practises these, then his austerities are diminished. However, if a person knows this and acts
righteously, his austerities are enhanced. This world is the arena for action. In this world, auspicious and inauspicious deeds can be performed. Good deeds lead to good gains. If one performs inauspicious deeds, the opposite occurs. In ancient times, in this world, Prajapati[Brahma performed austerities in Pushkara, in Rajasthan.] and the gods, along with masses of rishis, performed sacrifices
and austerities, thus attaining Brahma's world. The northern part of the earth is the most sacred and auspicious.
People who perform auspicious deeds in this world are born there. There are others who perform wicked deeds and
are born as inferior species. There are others who have short lifespans and are destroyed on the surface of the
earth. They are addicted to devouring each other and are full of avarice and confusion. They circle around here and
do not go to the northern direction. If a person serves his preceptor, is controlled and follows brahmacharya, the
learned know that he follows the path indicated for all the worlds. I have briefly told you about the dharma that has
been ordained by Brahma. A person who knows about dharma and adharma in this world is intelligent.'"

'Bhishma said, "O king! Thus did Bhrigu speak to the powerful Bharadvaja. The one with supreme dharma in
his soul[Bharadvaja.] was astounded and worshipped Bhrigu back. O king! Thus, everything about the creation of the universe has been recounted to you. O immensely wise one! What do you wish to hear again?"'
