'Yudhishthira said, "O grandfather! A man should think about adhyatma[The spiritual, concerning the supreme spirit.]. Tell me about adhyatma."

'Bhishma replied, "O Partha! You have asked me about adhyatma. O son! It is supremely beneficial and brings
happiness and I will tell you about it. Knowing this, men in this world have obtained affection, happiness, immediate fruits and gains and even the welfare of all beings. Earth, air, space, water, and fire as the fifth-these are the
great elements and the origins of creation and destruction of all beings. They originate with him[The brahman.] and it is to him
that these great elements in the beings repeatedly return, like the waves in an ocean. It is like a tortoise extending
its limbs and retracting them again. In that way, the creator of beings creates beings and withdraws them again. To
create beings, he places the five great elements in all beings, changing the proportions. But the being does not see
this. Sound, hearing and the holes[In the body.]-these three originate in space. Skin, touch, exertion and speech-these four
have to do with the wind. Form, eye and digestion-these three are said to be of the fire. Taste, liquid secretions
and tongue-these three are said to be the qualities of water. Scent, nose and body-these three are the qualities of
the earth. There are five great elements and the mind[Mana.] is said to be the sixth. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The senses and the mind are the source of discernment. Intelligence[Buddhi.] is said to be the seventh and the
kshetrajna is the eighth. The eyes and the others are for seeing. But the mind doubts. Exerting intelligence, the
kshetrajna is stationed like a witness. Everything that is above the feet, to the rear and to the front, is seen by it.
Know that it[The soul.] pervades everything, without there being a gap anywhere. Men must know this and all the senses.
Know that the qualities of tamas, rajas and sattva depend on them. A man must use his intelligence to know the
coming and going of all beings. If he looks at it in this way, he will obtain tranquility and supreme benefit. The
qualities[Sattva, rajas and tamas.] influence intelligence and intelligence influences the senses. The mind is the sixth in all this intelligence. Where will the qualities come from[The qualities are confounded by the senses, the intelligence and the mind.]? Everything, mobile and immobile, is pervaded by this. It has been
instructed that all destruction and creation results from this. That which sees is the eye. That which hears is said to
be the ear. The one which is used to smell is the nose. The tongue tastes. The skin touches and these influence and
distort intelligence. If there is a resolution to accomplish something, that is done by the mind. For different objectives, intelligence is established in five separate things. These are said to be the five senses and the invisible
entity[Intelligence.] rests on them. Depending on intelligence, a man can have three kinds of sentiments[Sattva, rajas and tamas.]. Sometimes he is
delighted, and sometimes he grieves. Sometimes, there is neither happiness, nor unhappiness. In this way, there are
three kinds of sentiments in the minds of men. However, sometimes, one can surpass these three kinds of sentiments, like the ocean, the lord of the rivers, uses its waves to cross the great shoreline. That pure kind of intelligence only exists in the mind[Not influenced by the senses.]. But sometimes, following the rajas quality, it is impelled to act. All the senses
then manifest themselves. There is joy in sattva. There is sorrow in rajas. There is confusion in tamas. These are
the three. All the sentiments one sees in the world are based on these three. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I
have thus told you everything about the nature of intelligence. An intelligent person must conquer all the senses.
Sattva, rajas and tamas always attach themselves to living beings. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! That is the
reason three different kinds of pain, sattva, rajas and tamas, are seen in all living beings. A touch of happiness is
the quality of sattva. A touch of sorrow is the quality of rajas. When these are combined with the quality of tamas,
confusion is the result. If there is anything joyous in the body or in the mind, that is seen to be the consequence of
the sattva quality. Unhappiness is not desired by anyone. This is due to the rajas quality and one should not think
about this with fear[Instead, one should try to conquer it.]. There is a state where one is confused and does not know what should be known and what
should be done. This is the outcome of tamas. Delight, satisfaction, bliss, happiness, tranquility in thought-when
these are seen, that is the quality of sattva. Dissatisfaction, repentance, sorrow, greed, lack of forgiveness-when
these signs are seen, those are ascribed to rajas. Insolence, confusion, distraction, excessive sleep, lack of care-
when many such traits are evident, that is the quality of tamas.

'"A person may be doubtful about what he has obtained. He will be able to go far, in many different directions.
If he is able to control his mind, he will obtain happiness, in this world and in the next. Notice the subtle difference
inside between intelligence and the kshetrajna. One of these[Intelligence.] creates many qualities. The other one[The soul.] creates no
qualities at all. It is like a mosquito and a fig being united to each other. They are with each other, but they are also
separated from each other. Although they are naturally separate, they are always united. This is like a fish and water being united. The atman possesses no qualities. It only perceives all the qualities. It looks at all the qualities and
thinks that it has created them. The senses are inactive and do not know. It[The atman.] uses the seventh, intelligence, to light
up the paramatman, like a lamp. The kshetrajna sees the qualities that are created by the intelligence. This is certainly the connection between the intelligence and the kshetrajna. There is never any refuge for the intelligence or
the kshetrajna. The mind creates intelligence, but never its qualities. When the mind controls the reins[Of the senses.] well, then
the atman becomes visible, like a lamp concealed inside a pot. If a sage discards ordinary acts and always controls
his atman, then he may be able to see himself in all beings and attain the supreme objective. A bird roaming in the
waters is touched, but is yet not touched. That is the way a person who has obtained wisdom wanders around beings. Using his intelligence, a man must naturally roam around in this way. He should neither grieve, nor be delighted. He should roam around, without any malice. If he is naturally successful in this way, he is always successful in creating the qualities. With that knowledge, he creates the qualities, like a spider creating strands. Some say
the qualities[Of such men. The qualities mean sattva, rajas and tamas.] are destroyed. Others say that they are destroyed and become invisible. Whether they are manifest,
or not manifest, cannot be established on the basis of guesses. Some, basing themselves on their studies, say they
remain. Others say that they are destroyed. Considering both views, one must use one's intelligence to decide. One
must use one's intelligence to firmly sever these strands in the heart. Having freed oneself, there is no doubt that
one will obtain happiness and not sorrow. By bathing in a full river, men cleanse themselves. Know that in this
way, filthy people can also purify themselves in knowledge and become extremely learned. A person who is accomplished is not tormented on seeing the further shore of a great river. In that way, a person who knows about adhyatma is only driven by supreme knowledge. A man who has comprehended the ultimate end and origin of all beings looks at it in this way and slowly obtains supreme, using his intelligence. If a person knows about the three
objectives, he is freed from what stands before the light. He searches with his mind. He is not interested in anything other than seeing the truth. Because of the different senses, one is incapable of seeing the atman. They distract in different directions and are difficult for someone who has not controlled his soul to restrain. A person who
knows this is intelligent. What else can be the characteristics of a learned person? Obtaining this knowledge,
learned people regard themselves as having become successful. Things which cause great fear to those who are not
learned do not cause any fear to those who are learned. There is no other end that is greater than this. But the
learned say that the qualities attained are not comparable[Everyone does not progress to the same extent.]. If a person acts without attachment, he destroys the
effects of his earlier deeds. There is nothing that is disagreeable. If someone tries for the agreeable, his birth on
earth will always happen. In this world, people censure those who are afflicted[By the senses.]. Behold. They sorrow in many
ways. Also, behold. Those who are accomplished do not sorrow. A person who knows about both[Instant moksha and incremental advancements towards moksha.] always accomplishes the objective."'
