Yudhishthira asked, "O grandfather! There may be a person who does not know the truth about the sacred
texts. He may always have doubts in his mind. He may not be accomplished in his conduct. What is best for
him? Tell me."

'Bhishma replied, "The worship of seniors, serving the aged and listening to the learned and the superior-these
are said to be the best. In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about a conversion between Galava and
devarshi Narada. That brahmana was free from confusion and fatigue. He was content in his knowledge and had
conquered his senses. Having conquered his atman, but desiring to know what was best for himself, Galava spoke
to Narada. 'There are qualities that are revered among men. I can see all those qualities, in undecaying form, in
you. There are several doubts in those like us. Therefore, you should sever them. We are foolish and will always
remain stupid. We do not know the truth about the worlds. Should there be an inclination towards knowledge and
the renunciation of acts? How does one know which acts to undertake? What are the tasks one should not undertake? You should speak about these to us. O illustrious one! All the ashramas indicate different kinds of conduct.
Some say, this is superior. Others say, that is superior. We are driven in different directions. Therefore, it is seen
that even those who resort to the sacred texts do not take delight in all the sacred texts. They are satisfied with their
own sacred texts and do not necessarily realize what is superior. Had all the sacred texts been unified, the best
would have manifested itself. But because there are many kinds of sacred texts, what is best is immersed in a mystery. That is the reason why the superior appears to me in a confused form. O illustrious one! I have resorted to
you. You should instruct me.'

'"Narada replied, 'O son[The word used is tata.]! There are four ashramas and they were thought of in separate ways[It is by no means obvious that this refers to the ashramas of brahmacharya, garhasthya, vanaprastha and sannyasa. It might also refer to different kinds of religious belief.]. O Galava!
Examine all of them and then choose the one you wish to resort to. Those ashramas differ from each other. They
speak of many different kinds of qualities and instructions. These are not only distinct, they are also contradictory.
But if one considers them, free from doubt, one sees that all of them convey to what is appropriate. Behold. All the
ashramas lead straight to the appropriate and supreme objective. There can be no doubt in one's mind about what
is appropriate and beneficial-favour to friends, suppression of enemies and accumulation for pursuing the three
objectives[Dharma, artha and kama.]. The learned ones have said that these are beneficial. One must always abstain from wicked deeds and
be auspicious in conduct. One must exhibit good conduct towards those who are virtuous. There is no doubt that
these are beneficial. Mildness towards all beings, uprightness in conduct and pleasantness in speech-there is no
doubt that these have been said to be beneficial. Giving the appropriate shares to gods, ancestors, guests and not
depriving servants-there is no doubt that these are beneficial. Truthfulness in speech is beneficial. But ascertaining true knowledge is extremely difficult. I am telling you the truth when I say that one must ensure welfare towards all beings. The renouncing of pride, the suppression of attachment, contentment and following one's own
conduct-the wise say that these are beneficial. Following dharma and studying the Vedas and the Vedangas and
inquisitiveness for the sake of knowledge-there is no doubt that these are beneficial. O scorcher of enemies! A
person who seeks excellence must not enjoy sound, form, taste, touch and scent for their sake alone, without some
other objective in mind. A person who seeks excellence must give up roaming around in the night, sleep during the
day, idleness, calumny, pride, excessive indulgence and complete abstinence[Indulgence and abstinence refer to the objects of the senses.]. One must not seek to establish that
one's own deeds and path are superior by deprecating others. Through one's own qualities, one will be able to establish that the path followed is superior and different from that followed by other people. There are many men
who are devoid of qualities, but are full of self-pride. They find faults in those who possess qualities. They inflict
their own undecaying qualities on others. When they are not restrained, they think of themselves as great people.
Thinking their own qualities to be superior, they are full of insolence and pride. They are learned people who possess qualities and they obtain great fame, but without speaking censorious words about others, or describing the
honour that is due to their own selves. Pure ones with excellent minds are like fragrant flowers. They do not have
to speak about their own selves. The sparkling sun, with dispersing rays in the sky, is also like that. In this way,
there are others who renounce, using their intelligence. Nevertheless, their fame blazes in the world and is not reduced. A foolish person cannot blaze in the world through his self-praise alone. However, a person who is accomplished in his learning manifests himself, even if he is hidden in a hole. Wicked words, even if spoken loudly, are
soon pacified. But excellent words, even if spoken gently, illuminate the worlds. Foolish ones, who are full of their
own insolence, speak many futile words. However, the sun in heaven displays its own inner self. That is the reason
one searches for different kinds of wisdom. It seems to me that the obtaining of wisdom is the supreme objective
for creatures. One should not speak until one is asked. Nor should one speak if asked improperly. In this world, a
person who is learned and intelligent behaves like one who is dumb. One must scrutinize and dwell with virtuous
people who are always devoted to dharma. They are generous men who are devoted to their own dharma. A person
who desires benefit must never dwell with the four varnas when they act contrary to the dharma. In this world, one
should abstain from embarking on any action, but should subsist on whatever has been obtained. Dwelling among
the meritorious, one will obtain sparkling merits. But dwelling among the wicked, one will obtain sin. One can
comprehend the touch of the water, the fire, or the rays of the moon. In that way, one can discern the touch of both
the wicked and the virtuous. There may be those who do not look towards enjoying material objects and eat only
leftovers. However, if a person is still concerned with the flavours of the food, know that he is still bound by material objects and deeds. A brahmana may be asked and may discourse about dharma, when asked. But if he has not
been asked reverentially, one must abandon that spot. Instead, there may be a spot where there is a controlled discourse, following the sacred texts, between disciples and a preceptor. Who will abandon that spot? Without any
foundation, there may be ignorant people who wish to earn respect for themselves, who speak about taints, though
none exists. Which learned person will dwell there? There may often be greedy people, who try to agitate the
boundaries of dharma, like setting fire at the extremities of a mountain. Who will not abandon such a spot? One
should dwell and roam among virtuous people who are auspicious in their conduct. Dharma is followed there,
without any doubt and without any malice. One should not dwell in places where men pursue dharma only for the
sake of artha. Those are people who are wicked in their conduct. One must swiftly flee from places where wicked
deeds are performed with a desire to ensuring sustenance, as if from a room where there is a snake. Right from the
beginning, one must act with a desire to realize one's own atman. One must not engage in tasks that make one
stretch out on a bed[There is an image that requires interpretation. That image is one of deeds tying one down to the consequences,
leading to death and rebirth, as if one is stretched out on a bed of thorns.]. Where the king, royal officers and those who are in charge of the frontier regions eat before
their relatives, a person who is in control of his atman must abandon that kingdom. One must dwell in a kingdom
where learned brahmanas, who are always devoted to eternal dharma and are engaged in performing sacrifices and
studying, are fed first. Without any reflection, one must dwell in a place where svaha, svadha and vashatkara are
properly uttered numerous times. Where brahmanas are seen to be engaged in inauspicious acts, one must swiftly
abandon that kingdom, as if it is a piece of poisoned meat. Where men cheerfully give before they have been
asked, a person who has accomplished his tasks and is based on his own atman, must dwell there. One must roam
and dwell among virtuous people, those who are righteous in their conduct, where there is punishment for those
who are wicked and reverence for those who are cleansed in their souls. In those places, those who are not generous, those who are wicked and evil in conduct and those who are unruly and greedy are afflicted with extremely
severe chastisement. Those are places where the king and the kingdom always serve dharma, desiring purity and
without falling prey to desire. Without any reflection, those are places one should dwell in. When the king displays
such conduct, everyone enjoys prosperity. Benefit is swiftly obtained and welfare presents itself. O son! You asked
me and I have thus told you about what is beneficial. But I am incapable of enumerating what is most important,
what brings benefit to the atman. There is conduct that has been ordained for the benefit of the atman. It is evident
that there are many kinds of austerities that will bring about that benefit.'"'
