Vaishampayana said, 'King Yudhishthira was praised by the gods, the rishis and the Maruts and went to where
the bulls among the Kurus were. He saw Govinda, in his form of the brahman. This had not been seen earlier
and nothing like this had been recognized before. He  blazed in his own  form and celestial weapons  presented
themselves, in personified forms. There was the celestial chakra and other terrible weapons, all in embodied forms.
He was being worshipped by the brave Phalguna, also in an extremely radiant form. Karna, supreme among the
wielders of weapons, was in a different spot. The descendant of the Kuru lineage saw him with the twelve Adityas.
In yet another place, the lord saw Bhima with a handsome body, surrounded by a large number of Maruts. The descendant of the Kuru lineage saw Nakula and Sahadeva in the region of the Ashvins, blazing in their own energy.
He saw Panchali, garlanded in lotuses and lilies. She had reached heaven and was there, as radiant as the rays of
the sun. Suddenly, King Yudhishthira wished to question her. But the illustrious Indra, the king of the gods, spoke
to him. "Shri assumed the form of Droupadi and was born as a human. O Yudhishthira! She was not born from
anyone's womb[Droupadi was born from the sacrificial fire.]. She was loved by the worlds and her body had an auspicious fragrance. She was born in Drupada's lineage and served all of you. The wielder of the trident[Shiva.] created her for your pleasure. These five immensely
fortunate gandharvas are like the fire in their radiance. O king! These infinitely energetic ones were the sons that
you and Droupadi had. Behold the king of the gandharvas. He was the learned Dhritarashtra. Know that he was
your father's elder brother. This is Kounteya, your elder brother, and like the fire in radiance. He was the son of the
sun. He was the first and the foremost and was famous as Radheya. O bull among men! Behold. He moves around
with Aditya. O Indra among kings! Behold the large numbers of Sadhyas, gods, Vasus and Maruts. The maharatha
Vrishnis and Andhakas are in their midst. Satyaki was the foremost among the brave Bhoja maharathas. Behold
Subhadra's unvanquished son with the moon. Abhimanyu, the great archer, possesses the radiance of the moon.
Pandu, the great archer, is now with Kunti and Madri. On a celestial vehicle, your father often comes to see me.
Behold. King Bhishma, Shantanu's son, is with the Vasus. Listen. Your preceptor, Drona, is next to Brihaspati. O
Pandava! There were other kings and warriors on your side. They are now with the gandharvas, yakshas and other
auspicious people. Some of the best kings have obtained the status of guhyakas. Sacred in their speech, intelligence and deeds, they have given up their bodies and conquered heaven."'
