Yudhishthira said, "All the people speak of ourselves as being blessed. However, there is no man who is more
miserable than we are. O supreme among the Kurus! O grandfather! We have been born as men, but have
been born from the gods. The worlds honour us, but we have obtained misery. When will we resort to sannyasa
and destroy this sorrow? O supreme among the Kuru lineage! Taking life in these bodies is a matter of sorrow. We
will free ourselves of the seventeen attributes[The five senses, the five organs of action, the five kinds of breaths of life, mind and intelligence.] and merge with the five elements. O great grandfather! We will
also free ourselves from the eight objects of the senses and the qualities[The five objects of the senses and the qualities of sattva, rajas and tamas.]. The sages, who are firm in their vows,
are not born again. O scorcher of enemies! When will we be in a position to abandon the kingdom?"

'Bhishma replied, "O great king! Everything can be counted and everything has an end. The number of rebirths
can also be counted[There is an end to the cycle of rebirth.]. Nothing in this world is fixed. O king! In connection with what we are talking about, no sin
has been associated with you. O one who knows about dharma! Endeavour and in the course of time, you will follow that path. O king! In this body, the atman is the lord of good and bad deeds. But the rising darkness obstructs
the vision. The wind has no dust or colour in it. But when it is tinged with a pigment, that colour penetrates it and
this is also seen to colour the directions. In that way, because of the fruits of deeds, the atman is tinged and enveloped in darkness. It fades, adopts that colour and circles around amidst bodies. In any creature, knowledge destroys the ignorance that causes darkness. When that is dispelled, the eternal brahman manifests itself. The sages
say that this cannot be accomplished through acts. Those who have been liberated should be worshipped, even by
the worlds of the immortals. The large numbers of maharshis are also not content[Without having attained the brahman.]. In this connection, there is an
ancient song. O king! Listen to it attentively. The daitya Vritra was dislodged from his prosperity and sung this. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! He was vanquished and was without aides. His kingdom was lost. However, despite being in the midst of enemies, he resorted to his intelligence alone and did not grieve. In those ancient times,
Vritra  lost  his  riches  and  Ushanas[Shukracharya, the preceptor of the demons.]  spoke  to  him.  'O  danava!  Now  that  you  have  been  defeated,  are  you
distressed?'

'"Vritra said, 'Because of truth and austerities, I know about destruction. I do not sorrow or rejoice at the creation and destruction of beings. Goaded by time, beings are subjugated and submerged in hell. Some say that all
the learned ones go to heaven. Goaded by time, they spend the computed durations of time there. However, when
that duration is over, they are born again and again. They are born as thousands of inferior species and go to hell.
Bound by the nooses of time, beings are helpless and go there. I have seen that creatures circle around in this way.
The sacred texts have said that gains are commensurate with deeds. Creatures are born as inferior species, men and
gods and go to hell. After that unhappiness and happiness and misery and joy is over, they return to their earlier
conduct[The cycle of death and rebirth.]. All the worlds are bound down by the injunctions of Yama. All beings are travellers along a path that
has been travelled before.'"

'Bhishma said, "He knew about time and its enumeration, about what cannot be enumerated and about creation
and stability. When he spoke in this way, the illustrious Ushanas replied, 'O son[The word used is tata.]! Why are you speaking these
terrible, wicked and insane words?'

'"Vritra said, 'You and the other learned ones have directly seen the great austerities I tormented myself with in
earlier times and the sacrifices that I performed out of greed. I brought fragrances, beings and diverse kinds of
scents. I grew in my energy and transcended the three worlds. I roamed around with my companions, showering
garlands of rays. I could not be defeated by any being and I was never frightened of anyone. However, the prosperity that I earned through my austerities was destroyed through my own deeds. O illustrious one! But resorting to
my fortitude, I am not sorrowing over that. In earlier times, when I was fighting with the great-souled and great Indra, I saw the illustrious lord, Hari Narayana. He is Vaikuntha, Purusha, Vishnu, Shukla, Ananta, Sanatana, Munjakesha, Harishmashru and the grandfather of all beings[All of these are Vishnu's names, Vaikuntha being his abode, as well as his name. Shukla means pure or white.
Ananta means infinite, Sanatana means eternal. Munjakesha is one with yellow hair, while Harishmashru is one
with a tawny beard.]. There is no doubt that a little bit of those austerities are
still left for me[The original austerities, as well as the rewards from seeing Hari. Since some of those fruits are still left, Vritra is
entitled to ask Shukracharya about auspicious things.]. Therefore, I wish to ask you about the fruits of deeds. For which varna has Brahma decreed the
greatest prosperity? Why is that supreme prosperity lost? How are beings created? How do they live? Who makes
them act? What are the supreme fruits obtained by living for an eternal period? What can be achieved through
deeds and what can be achieved through knowledge? What fruits are obtained? O brahmana rishi! You should explain this to me.'"

'Bhishma said, "O lion among kings! Having been thus addressed, the sage replied. O bull among men! Together with your brothers, listen attentively to what he said.'"
