Souti said, 'O one blessed with the power of austerities! As soon as her husband left, Jaratkaru went to her brother
and told him what had happened. The best of the snakes heard this unpleasant news and told his sister, who was
more miserable than he was, "O fortunate one! You know what had to be done and why you were given. A son was
supposed to be born for the welfare of the snakes. That valorous one was supposed to have saved us from the
snake-sacrifice. In ancient times, this is what the grandfather and the gods told me. O fortunate one! Have you conceived through that best of sages? It is my wish that the wise man's marriage should not be fruitless. Without a
doubt, it is not appropriate that I should ask you a question on such a subject. But the subject is too serious for me
not to ask you. I know that your husband is always engaged in austerities and is prone to anger. I shall not follow
him, because he might curse me. O fortunate one! Tell me what your husband has done and thereby pull out the
terrible stake that has been implanted for a long time in my heart." Being thus asked, Jaratkaru consoled the tormented Vasuki, king of snakes, and said, "I asked the great-souled and great ascetic about our offspring. He said it
is there and left. I do not recollect his ever having spoken a lie, even in jest. O king! Why should he then utter a lie
on such a serious subject? He said, 'O snake woman! Do not sorrow over the fruit of your action. A son, resplendent as the fire and the sun, will be born to you.' O brother! Having said this, my husband went away to his hermitage. Let the great distress that preys on your mind be removed." On hearing this, Vasuki, the king of snakes,
was delighted and accepted his sister's words.

'The best of the snakes worshipped his sister with kindness, appropriate praise, gifts and homage. O best of the
Brahmanas! The immensely radiant embryo grew in her womb like the luminescent sun, like the moon waxing in
the sky during shuklapaksha. O Brahmana! At the appropriate time, the snake's sister gave birth to a son who was
like a divine child, the destroyer of the fears of his father and mother. He grew up in the house of the king of
snakes and studied the Vedas and the Vedangas from the sage Chyavana, the son of Bhrigu. Even as a child, he was
strict in adherence to his vows and gifted with intelligence, spirituality and qualities. He became famous in the
worlds by the name of Astika. He was known as Astika, because while he was still in his mother's womb, his father went away to the forest, saying "asti[Asti can be translated as 'it is there'. Jaratkaru meant that an embryo was there in the womb.]". Even as a child, he was extremely intelligent. He was carefully
watched over in the house of the king of snakes. He was like the golden and illustrious Lord Shulapani[Shiva, the one with a trident in his hand.], the
lord of the gods. To the great delight of all the snakes, he grew up.'
