Bhishma said, "O Yudhishthira! Those who donate cows and subsist on leftovers after oblations have been rendered into the fire are always regarded as having performed all the sacrifices. No sacrifice can be performed
without curds and ghee. It is seen that these are the essence of a sacrifice and the foundation for a sacrifice. Among
all kinds of gifts, the donation of cows is praised. Cows are best and sacred. They are the supreme purifiers. They
must be served for the sake of sustenance and for the sake of peace. Their milk, curds and ghee can cleanse all
sins. It is said that the energy of cows is supreme, in this world and in the next world. O bull among men! There is
nothing that is superior to, and more sacred than, cattle.

'"O Yudhishthira! In this connection, an ancient history is recounted, about a conversation between the grandfather and Indra. When Shakra defeated the daityas and became the lord of the three worlds, all the subjects were delighted  and  became  devoted  to  true  dharma.  O  Kouravya!  On  one  occasion,  the  rishis,  the  gandharvas,  the
kinnaras, the rakshasas, the gods, the asuras, the birds and the Prajapatis arrived before the grandfather and worshipped him. Narada and Parvata were there. Vishvavasu, Haha and Huhu worshipped the lord by singing divine
hymns. The wind bore the scent of celestial flowers. The seasons assembled, conveying their separate fragrances.
All the creatures gathered together in that assembly of gods. Celestial musical instruments were sounded. The
place was surrounded by celestial women and charanas. Indra, lord of the gods, bowed down before the lord of all
the worlds. He asked, 'O illustrious god! O grandfather! I wish to know why cattle are supreme in the worlds. O
great lord! What are the austerities and brahmacharya that cattle have performed? Why do they happily reside in a
region that is above that of the gods?' At this, Brahma replied to Shakra, the slayer of Bala. 'O slayer of Bala! You
have always shown cattle disrespect. That is the reason you do not know about their greatness. O lord! Listen. O
bull among gods! Hear about the supreme greatness and power of cattle. O Vasava! Cows are said to constitute the
limbs of a sacrifice. They represent fame. Without resorting to them, sacrifices can never be undertaken. They sustain subjects through their milk and ghee. That apart, their male offspring are yoked for agriculture. That is the way
grain and many other kinds of seeds are generated. All the havya and kavya used in sacrifices flow from them. O
lord of the gods! Milk, curd and ghee are pure. Even when they are hungry, thirsty and afflicted, they bear many
kinds of burdens. Through their deeds, they sustain sages and subjects. O Vasava! They do not show any deceit in
bearing the burdens. They are the performers of good deeds. That is the reason they always reside above us. O
Shakra! O Shatakratu! I have now explained to you the reason why cattle have obtained an abode that is above that
of the gods. O Vasava! They are the ones who grant boons. They are the granters of boons. Surabhis are the performers of auspicious deeds. They have sacred marks and are purifiers. O supreme among the gods! Listen to the
reason why the descendants of Surabhi, the cows, have come down[To earth.]. O slayer of Bala! I will tell you the entire
reason. Listen. O son[The word used is tata.]! In ancient times, in the yuga of the gods, there was a great-souled Indra among the daityas
who subjugated the three worlds. O best among the immortals! To obtain a son through Vishnu, Aditi[The mother of the gods.] performed
extremely difficult and terrible austerities. She always stood only on one leg. Daksha had a daughter, the goddess
named Surabhi. On seeing that the great goddess[Aditi.] was tormenting herself through great austerities, she too cheerfully decided to torment herself through terrible austerities. Devoted to dharma, she did this on the beautiful summit of Kailasa, frequented by the gods and the gandharvas. She stood on one leg and resorted to supreme yoga. She
spent eleven thousand years in this way. The gods, the rishis and the great serpents were scorched through her austerities. With me, they went there and worshipped the auspicious one. O Purandara! I spoke to the goddess who
was engaged in austerities. "O goddess! O unblemished one! Why are you tormenting yourself through these terrible austerities? O immensely fortunate one! O beautiful one! I am pleased at your austerities.
O goddess! Ask for a boon and I will grant it to you." Surabhi replied, "O illustrious one! O grandfather of the
worlds! I do not desire any boons. O unblemished one! Since you are pleased with me, I have already got the boon
I want." O lord of the thirty gods! This is what the goddess Surabhi told me. O Indra of the gods! O Shachi's consort! Hear what I told her in reply. "O goddess! I am pleased at your lack of desire and auspicious austerities. Since
I am pleased with you, I am granting you the boon of immortality. Your abode will always be above the three
worlds. Through my favours, this will be famous as Goloka. Your sons will dwell among men and will always perform tasks for the subjects. O immensely fortunate one! Your daughters will also reside there. All the divine and
human objects of pleasure you think of will be yours. O goddess! O fortunate one! Divine happiness will also be
yours." O one with the thousand eyes! Her world has all the objects of desire. Death, old age and fire does not
cause any suffering there. O Vasava! There is nothing miserable or inauspicious there. There are divine forests and
celestial residences there. O Vasava! There are celestial vehicles that can go wherever they wish. O lotus-eyed one!
Through  observing  many  kinds  of  auspicious  vows,  through  frequenting  tirthas,  through  great  austerities  and
through good deeds, one is capable of going to Goloka. O Shakra! I have thus told you everything that you asked
me about. O slayer of enemies! You should never show disrespect to cattle.' O Yudhishthira! Hearing these words,
the one with the thousand eyes always worshipped cows and always showed them a great deal of respect.

'"O immensely radiant one! I have thus told you everything about their purifying nature. Cows are sacred and
supreme. They possess excellent greatness. O tiger among men! They destroy all sins and I have told you about
this. If a person controls himself and always recounts this to brahmanas on occasions where havya and kavya are
offered, sacrifices performed and rites observed for the ancestors, he establishes his ancestors in a place that is inexhaustible, one that satisfies all the objects of desire. A man who is devoted to cows obtains everything that he
wishes for. Women who are devoted to cows also obtain everything that they desire. One who desires a son obtains
a son. A maiden obtains a husband. One who desires riches obtains wealth. One who desires dharma obtains dharma. One who desires learning obtains learning. One who desires happiness obtains happiness. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! For someone who is devoted to cows, there is nothing that is difficult to obtain."'
