'Karna said, "Among all women in humankind, renowned for their beauty, we have not seen, nor heard, of the accomplishment of such a deed. When the sons of Pritha and the sons of Dhritarashtra were raging in anger, Krishna
Droupadi brought solace. The sons of Pandu were immersed and drowning in an ocean without a boat. Panchali
became their boat and brought them safely ashore."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having heard the words that a woman had become the salvation for the sons of Pandu,
Bhimasena was extremely hurt. In the midst of the Kurus, he said unhappily, "Devala[An ancient sage.] has said that there are
three stars[In the sense of objectives or directions.] for a man-offspring, deeds and learning, since these are the source of creation. When the body has
lost life and is hollow and impure, discarded by relatives, these are the three that survive. But our light has become
dark, because our wife has been humiliated. O Dhananjaya! How can offspring from a defiled one serve any purpose?" Arjuna replied, "The Bharatas do not talk about words from inferior men, uttered or not uttered. They only
converse about those from superior men. They remember good deeds and not enmity that has been shown. They
know only the good because they have confidence in their own selves." Bhima said, "Right now, I will kill all the
enemies who have assembled here. O Indra among kings[Bhima is now speaking to Yudhishthira.]! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Shall I tear
them up by their roots? O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Where is the need to debate this or suffer? Here and
now, I am going to kill all of them and you can rule the earth without a rival." Having said this, Bhimasena, surrounded by his younger brothers, glanced at his club, like a lion in the midst of deer. Partha[Arjuna.], whose deeds are
unblemished, pacified him and cooled him. But the mighty-armed and valorous one streamed with anger. O lord of
men! He was so angry that smoke, sparks and flaming fire issued from his ears and other openings in his body. His
brows were furrowed and his face was terrible to behold, like Yama's form when destruction at the end of a yuga is
near. 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Yudhishthira restrained the mighty-armed one with his arms. He told
him not to act in this way and to be quiet. Having restrained the mighty-armed one, whose eyes were red with
anger, Yudhishthira approached his father Dhritarashtra, his hands joined in salutation.'
