'Jaya[The word !'jaya' means victory and was also the title of an original and shorter version of the Mahabharata.
So this invocation, which is not part of the main text, can be interpreted in two different ways-a literal uttering of
the word 'victory' or a recital of the Mahabharata.]' must be recited after having bowed in obeisance before Narayana and also Nara[Nara and Narayana were ancient sages, invariably referred to together. But Narayana eventually came to be
identified with Vishnu (hence Krishna) and Nara with Arjuna.], the supreme human being, and also the goddess Sarasvati.
The great sages, performers of difficult austerities, were present at the twelve-year sacrifice of Kulapati[Head or chief. But in this context, a sage who feeds and teaches 10,000 students.]
Shounaka and were comfortably seated in Naimisharanya[A sacred forest.]. Ugrashrava, the son of Lomaharshana and the son of a
suta[A suta was the son of a Kshatriya father and a Brahmana mother and by profession sutas were charioteers. But
they were also bards and raconteurs.], learned in the Puranas[The Puranas are sacred texts, composed by the sage Vyasadeva. There are eighteen major Puranas.], and also known as Souti, once approached them, bowing in humility.
When he reached the hermitage of Naimisharanya, the hermits who were the inhabitants, surrounded him, wishing to hear his wonderful stories.
Having been respectfully welcomed by those sages, he folded his palms before all those sages and asked them
how their ascetic pursuits were progressing.
When all the sages had taken their seats again, Lomaharshana's son respectfully took the seat earmarked for
him.
On seeing that he was comfortably seated and noticing that he was rested from his fatigue, one of the sages began the conversation and said: 'O lotus-eyed! O Souti! I am asking you. Tell me the details of where you have
come from. Also, where have you spent the time?'

Souti said: 'The great-souled royal sage and lord of earth, Janamejaya, the son of Parikshit[Arjuna's grandson and Abhimanyu's son.], organized a snake-
sacrifice. There, in his presence, Vaishampayana recited properly the wonderful and sacred stories composed by
Krishna Dvaipayana[Vedavyasa or Vyasadeva, thus named because he classified the Vedas. Vedavyasa or Vyasadeva is a title and
there has been more than one sage with such a title. This particular Vedavyasa's name was Krishna Dvaipayana:
Krishna because he was dark in complexion and Dvaipayana because he was born on an island (dvipa).]. After listening to those diverse stories of the Mahabharata, I wandered among several
places of pilgrimage and sacred waters. I finally came to the sacred place known as Samantapanchaka, venerated
by the twice-born. This is the land where, a long time ago, a war was fought between the Kurus and the Pandavas,
and also all the kings of the earth. After that, anxious to see you, I have come before you. O revered sages! You
shine like the fire of the sun in this sacred place of sacrifice. In my view, you are like Brahma to me, you who are
pure through having performed sacred rites and meditation and you who maintain the fire of sacrifice. O you who
are twice-born! 9 You are beyond all cares. What shall I say? Shall I state the sacred stories of the Puranas, the
source of dharma and artha? Shall I speak of the history of kings among men and sages and great souls?'

The sages replied: 'Tell us that ancient story that was told by the supreme sage Dvaipayana, that which was worshipped by the gods and the brahmarshis[Sages with knowledge of the supreme being (brahman).] when they heard it-and that which is full of wonderful words and divisions and is the supreme of narratives, with subtle meanings and logic, adorned with the essence of the Vedas[Sacred texts, four in number: Rig Veda, Sama Veda, Yajur Veda and Atharva Veda.].
That sacred history of the Bharatas is beautiful in language and meaning, and includes all other works. All the
shastras[Sacred texts.] add to it and that sacred composition of great Vyasa has been added to the four Vedas. We wish to hear
that holy collection, that drives away fear of sin, just as it was recited at King Janamejaya's sacrifice by
Vaishampayana.'

Souti said: 'I bow to the original being Ishana[Ruler, master, lord. Ishana is a name for Shiva, Vishnu, even the sun. But here, the general meaning is
intended.], adored by all and to whom all offerings are made. He is truth
and without decay, the manifested and un-manifested brahman, eternal. He is both existing and non-existing. He is
the existing universe, but is distinct from the existing and the non-existing. I bow before Hari, the lord of all that
moves and does not move, the lord of the senses. I bow before the pure and sinless Vishnu, worthy of worship, and
he who is good and goodness.

'I will describe to you the holy thoughts of that great sage who is venerated in the entire world, Vyasa, the performer of wonderful deeds. Some poets have already sung this story before. Other poets are teaching this history
now. In the future, still others will certainly do this on earth. Throughout the three worlds, this is a great storehouse
of knowledge. Those who are twice-born, possess it in its details and compound forms. It is embellished with elegant words and usage human and divine. It is adorned with myriad metres and loved by the learned.

'When this universe was without brightness and without light and everything was enveloped in darkness on all
sides, the great egg came into being. This was the inexhaustible seed of all creatures and was created at the beginning of all the eras. It is said that in this divine cause existed the eternal brahman[The word brahman or paramatman refers to the supreme spirit and should not be confused with Brahmana,
though they have the same etymological root.], true and resplendent-wonderful and beyond imagination and perfectly balanced everywhere. This was the subtle un-manifested cause. It was
that which exists and that which does not. From this was born the one and only Lord Prajapati, known as Brahma,
the preceptor of the gods. He is also known as Sthanu, Manu, Ka and Parameshthin. From him was born Daksha,
the son of Prachetas, and Daksha's seven sons, and the twenty-one prajapatis. Him whom all the sages know as the
being who cannot be fathomed was also born, as were the vishvadevas, the adityas, the vasus and the ashvins. Yak-
shas, saddhyas[Class of gods.], pishachas, guhyakas and the pitris were born and after that were born the learned, holy and superior brahmarshis. Then were born many rajarshis[Royal sages. Brahmarshis were of the Brahmana caste. Rajarshis were Kshatriyas, but obtained the status of
being a sage (rishi) through their learning.], endowed with every noble quality. The water, heaven,
earth, wind, sky and the directions, the years, seasons, months, fortnight, day and night, followed in succession.
The world witnessed everything else that came forth. When the world is immersed in the decay of the era, everything that can be seen, movable and immovable, is again brought together. As the season changes, signs of the season can be seen. Like that, at the beginning of another era, everything is produced again. Without beginning and
without end, the wheel of existence rolls on eternally in this world, causing creation and destruction, without beginning and without end.

'To give a brief example of creation, there are 33,333 gods. The sons of the divine Vivasvat were Brihadbhanu,
Chakshus, Atma, Vibhavasu, Savita, Richika, Arka, Bhanu, Ashavaha and Ravi. Of these sons, Mahya was the
youngest and his son was Devabhrata, also known as Subhraja. Subhraja had three famous sons, named Dashajyoti, Shatajyoti and Sahasrajyoti, and each of them gave birth to many offspring. The great Dashajyoti had ten thousand sons. The self-possessed Shatajyoti had ten times that number and Sahasrajyoti had ten times the number of
offspring Shatajyoti had. From them were descended the line of the Kurus, the Yadus and the Bharatas, the lines of
Yayati, Ikshvaku and all the rajarshis. Many other lineages and diverse living beings were created and their various
places of residence.

'The three mysteries of knowledge-the Vedas, yoga[Union between the human soul and the supreme being.] and vijnana[Knowledge obtained through self-realization.]-were created, as were dharma, artha
and kama. The sage saw the various shastras, interspersed with dharma, artha and kama, and the rules of conduct
for the world. He saw the ancient histories and all their commentaries and the shruti[Sacred texts in the category of revelation.] texts too. This book has the
signs of all those, everything is here. Having distilled this great knowledge, the sage made a summary of all that, in
both abridged and detailed forms, as a storehouse of knowledge for the retention of the wise of this world. Some
read Bharata from the story of Manu, others from the story of Astika, still others from the story of Uparichara.
Some Brahmanas read the entire text. Learned men display their knowledge of the samhitas[Collections of sacred texts, particularly in verse form, specifically the Vedas.] by commenting on
this collection. Some are skilled in explaining it, others in remembering it.

'After penance and austerities, after having classified the eternal Vedas, Satyavati's son composed this holy history. This learned brahmarshi, the son of Parashara, followed pure vows. Requested by his mother and at the request of the wise son of Ganga[Bhishma.], Krishna Dvaipayana lawfully became the father of three sons in Vichitravirya's
field[That is, impregnated Vichitravirya's wife.]. These three Kouravas were like three fires. After thus giving birth to Dhritarashtra, Pandu and Vidura, he
returned to his hermitage to pursue the wise path of austerities. Until these sons were born, grew up and passed on
to the supreme journey[Death.], the great sage did not reveal Bharata to the world of men. When he was requested by
Janamejaya and thousands of Brahmanas, he taught it to his disciple Vaishampayana, seated in his presence. Seated
with his compatriots, it was he (Vaishampayana) who recited Bharata at intervals during the sacrifice, being repeatedly asked to continue when he stopped. Vyasa has described in detail the great lineage of the Kurus, the virtues of
Gandhari, the wisdom of Vidura and the constancy of Kunti. The blessed sage has also described the greatness of
Vasudeva[Krishna's name, as the son of Vasudeva.], the truthfulness of the Pandavas and the evil conduct of the sons of Dhritarashtra. Without minor narratives, Vyasa originally composed Bharata in 24,000 twenty verses. The learned know this as the real Bharata.
Later, he composed a summary in 150 verses, with an index of the chapters, contents and events. Dvaipayana first
taught this index to his son Shuka and then to other disciples who had the same qualities. Narada recited it to the
gods, Asita-Devala[These are two (Asita and Devala) ancient sages, whose names always occur together.] to the ancestors and Shuka to the gandharvas[A semi-divine species, singers and musicians of the gods.], yakshas and rakshasas.

'Duryodhana is a great tree created out of passion, Karna is its trunk, Shakuni is its branches, Duhshashana is
the plentiful fruit and flowers and the mindless Dhritarashtra is its root. Yudhishthira is a great tree created out of
righteousness, Arjuna is its trunk, Bhima is its branches, the two sons of Madri[Nakula and Sahadeva.] are its plentiful fruit and flowers,
and Krishna, Brahma and the Brahmanas are the root.

'After having conquered many countries with war and valour, Pandu retired to the forest with the sages, because
he was fond of hunting. When out hunting, he brought great misfortune on himself by killing a stag when it was
with its mate. Since their birth, Pritha's[Kunti.] sons spent their lives there, according to the prescribed norms. In accordance with what is laid down in law, their two mothers[Kunti and Madri.] conceived sons from Dharma, Vayu, Shakra[Indra.] and the
two gods, the Ashvins. They grew up under the care of their two mothers and in the society of holy sages, in sacred
groves and forests. Then, on their own, the sages took them to the presence of Dhritarashtra and his sons. They
were dressed as brahmacharis[Those in the celibate stage of life.] and students, with sacred tufts in their hair. The sages said, "These students of
ours are the sons of Pandu, your sons, brothers and friends." Saying this, the sages left. On seeing the sons of Pandu who had thus been left with them, the Kouravas, the learned among the castes and the townspeople exclaimed
loudly with joy. However, some said they were not the sons of Pandu. Others said they were. Others wondered
how they could be the sons of Pandu when Pandu had died long ago. However, voices were heard from all directions saying that they were welcome nonetheless. Through great fortune, Pandu's offspring could now be seen.
They must be welcomed. Such voices were heard everywhere. When the tumult of the people had died down, an
enormous outcry was heard from invisible beings and all the directions echoed with the sound. As Partha[Arjuna.] and
the others entered, there was a shower of fragrant flowers and the sound of conch shells and kettledrums. It was a
great wonder. Delighted because of their love for them, the townspeople's loud cries rose up to heaven and increased the Pandavas' fame.

'Without threats from anywhere, the Pandavas lived there, studying the Vedas and various other shastras. They
were respected by all the people. The townspeople were delighted with the purity of Yudhishthira, the strength of
Bhima, the valour of Arjuna, the humility of the twins and the submissiveness of Kunti to her elders. The entire
world was content with their quality of valour.

'After a few years, in an assembly of kings where the maiden Krishna[Droupadi.] was to choose her own bridegroom, Arjuna performed a difficult task and won her hand. From that day, he was respected by everyone in the world as a
great archer. He became like a sun in the battlefield, difficult to behold. He defeated all the kings and all the main
tribes. Thus, the king[Yudhishthira.] could now perform the rajasuya[A great sacrifice, at the time of coronation, when other kings and princes pay tribute and accept the superiority of the crowned universal monarch.] sacrifice. Through the wise counsel of Krishna and the
prowess of Bhima and Arjuna, Yudhishthira killed Jarasandha and the swollen-head king of Chedi[Shishupala.] and thus obtained the right to perform the rajasuya, rich in provisions and sacrificial offerings and full of merit. Duryodhana
came to this sacrifice and saw on all sides the great wealth of the Pandavas-the offerings, precious stones, gold,
jewels, cattle, horses, elephants and treasure. On seeing this, his envy made him angry. He fumed when he saw the
hall of assembly, like a celestial chariot, built by Maya. Before Vasudeva, he was mocked by Bhima, who said he
was of common birth, when he got confused at the architectural deceptions.

'It was reported to Dhritarashtra that while he was enjoying himself with various objects and valuable things, his
son had turned pale, yellow and thin. Out of affection for his son, the blind king gave him permission to play the
game of dice. When Vasudeva heard this, he became very angry. Though he wasn't pleased, he did nothing to stop
the dispute and overlooked the fatal game and other unjust acts, as they increased in importance. In spite of Vidura,
Bhishma, Drona and Kripa, the son of Sharadvata, he made the Kshatriyas kill each other in the great war that
followed.

'On hearing the news of the Pandava victory and knowing the vows taken by Duryodhana, Karna and Shakuni,
Dhritarashtra thought for a while and then told Sanjaya: "O Sanjaya! Listen to all that I am about to say. You will
then find that I am not worthy of contempt. You are learned in the sacred texts, intelligent, wise and respected for
being wise. My inclinations were not for war, nor do I find pleasure in the destruction of my lineage. I have no special affinity towards my sons compared to the sons of Pandu. My own sons, following the wrong path, were upset
with me because I was old and blind. I bore all that, because of my weak state and because of my love for my sons.
I was deluded and silly and Duryodhana's folly thrived on that. He saw the wealth and power of the sons of Pandu
at the rajasuya sacrifice and was mocked at his awkwardness when he ascended the hall. He couldn't bear this, but
was incapable of defeating the Pandavas in the field of battle. Unlike a Kshatriya and incapable of energetically
pursuing wealth, with the help of the king of Gandhara, he planned an unjust game of dice. O Souti! Listen to my
words and learn all that happened later and all that I came to know. When you hear what I say and learn, you will
know that my wise eyes have the gift of foresight.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that, in the presence of all the kings, Krishna[Droupadi.] was taken,
when the wonderful bow was drawn and pierced, the target fell to the ground.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Subhadra of the Madhu lineage was forcibly carried
away by Arjuna and married in Dvaraka and when the two heroes[Krishna and Balarama.] of the Vrishni lineage set out for Indraprastha.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Arjuna had satisfied Agni by giving him the Khandava
forest and when he used his divine arrows to check the downpour brought down by the king of the gods.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Yudhishthira had been defeated in the game of dice by
Soubala[Shakuni.] and deprived of his kingdom, though his powerful brothers were still in attendance.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Droupadi, with protectors but as if no protectors existed, was dragged to court at the time of her period, with a single garment on and with tears in her throat.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that the grieving and righteous Pandava brothers left for the
forest, suffering out of love for the eldest.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that thousands of snatakas[A Brahmana who has finished his period of study and celibacy (brahmacharya) and is about to enter (or just
entered) the householder stage (garhasthya) is known as a snataka.] and great Brahmanas who
lived on alms followed Dharmaraja[Yudhishthira.] to the forest.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Arjuna had pacified in combat the god of the gods, Shiva, who appeared before him in the disguise of a hunter, and obtained from him the great weapon Pashupata.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Arjuna, bound by his promise, had gone to heaven and
learnt properly from Indra the use of celestial weapons.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Bhima and the other sons of Kunti, accompanied by
Vaishravana[Kubera.], had gone to the land that is inaccessible to humans.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that my sons, spurred by Karna's advice, had gone on a cattle-related expedition and been captured by the gandharvas, and then freed by Arjuna.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Dharma had appeared before Dharmaraja[Yudhishthira.] in the disguise of a yaksha and posed him questions that were correctly answered.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that when the great-spirited Arjuna lived in the kingdom of
Virata, my best had been destroyed by Arjuna on a single chariot.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that the king of Matsya[Virata.] had with great honour bestowed
his daughter Uttara on Arjuna and he had accepted her for his son.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Yudhishthira, defeated, wealth-less, exiled, separated
from friends and relatives, had been able to raise seven akshouhinis[A large army with 21,870 chariots, 21,870 elephants, 65,610 horses and 109,350 foot soldiers.].

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard Narada declare that Krishna and Arjuna were Nara and
Narayana and that he had truly seen them thus in the world of Brahma.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Krishna of the Madhu lineage, who had covered the
world with one foot[This is a reference to the fifth incarnation of Vishnu, when in the form of a vamana (dwarf), he had humbled
the demon king Bali.], had been engaged on the side of the Pandavas.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Karna and Duryodhana had plotted to revile
Keshava[Krishna.], but he had shown himself in many forms.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Pritha[Kunti.] had been consoled by Keshava, when she had
stood in front of his chariot, weeping in sorrow at his departure.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Vasudeva had become their advisor and Shantanu's son
Bhishma and Bharadvaja[Dronacharya.] had pronounced blessings on them.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Karna had told Bhishma that he wouldn't fight if Bhishma fought, and saying this, had gone away.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Vasudeva, Arjuna and the immeasurable Gandiva bow
had come together, a threesome of fearful energy.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Arjuna, overcome by lassitude, had sunk down on his
chariot, and Krishna had shown him all the worlds within his own body.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Bhishma, the great destroyer of enemies, was killing
tens of thousands[Instead of tens of thousands, this can also be translated as many.] of charioteers every day, but had not killed a single warrior of note.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Arjuna, having placed Shikhandi in front of him, had
vanquished the infinitely courageous Bhishma, unconquered in many battles.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that the old warrior Bhishma, after killing the somaka[Warriors from the Panchala region.]
warriors until only a few remained, was lying on a bed of arrows, wounded by an arrow with a multicoloured
feathered tip.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Shantanu's son Bhishma was lying there and was thirsty
and Arjuna pierced the ground to slake his thirst.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Shukra[Venus, also a sage.] and Surya[The sun.] united to bring victory to the
sons of Kunti and fierce beasts of prey were always around us.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Drona displayed the paths of many weapons in the
course of battle, but failed to kill a single one of the chief Pandavas.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that the great warriors[There was a hierarchy of warriors. Maharatha can loosely be translated as great warrior. However, more
specifically, a maharatha was a warrior who could take on ten thousand warriors single-handed.], the sanshaptakas[Warriors who had taken an oath never to withdraw from the field of battle.], who had been
placed so as to kill Arjuna, were all killed by him.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Subhadra's brave son[Abhimanyu.] had single-handedly penetrated
our secret battle formation, impenetrable to others and guarded by the well-armed son of Bharadvaja[Drona.] himself.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that all our great warriors, unable to defeat Arjuna, combined to surround and kill the boy Abhimanyu and then rejoiced.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that the mindless warriors of Dhritarashtra cheered with delight at killing Abhimanyu and the furious Arjuna took his vow about the king of Sindhu[Jayadratha.].

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Arjuna had taken a vow to kill the king of Sindhu and
kept his vow in the midst of all his enemies.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that on finding the horses of Dhananjaya[Arjuna.] exhausted, Vasudeva unyoked them in the field of battle, gave them water to drink and then re-yoking them, drove on.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Arjuna, on his chariot, fended off all warriors with his
Gandiva bow, when the horses that drew his chariot were indisposed.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Yuyudhana[Satyaki.] of the Vrishni race threw Drona's army
into disorder with the strength of his unassailable elephant and returned to where Krishna and Partha[Arjuna.] were.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Karna, with Bhima in his power, spared his life with
some abusive words and dragged the warrior with the tip of his bow.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Drona, Kritavarma, Kripacharya, Karna, Drona's son[Ashvatthama.]
and the brave king of Madra[Shalya.] allowed the king of Sindhu[Jayadratha.] to be killed in their presence.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that the celestial spear, given by the king of the gods[Indra was the king of the gods. The celestial spear (shakti) was given by Indra to Karna, though Karna is not
mentioned by name in this shloka. The next shloka is explicit.], was
diverted by Madhava[Krishna.], to the demon Ghatotkacha, of terrible form.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that in the fight between Karna and Ghatotkacha, the spear
that would have killed Savyasachi[Arjuna.] in battle, was unleashed by the son of the charioteer[Karna.].

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Dhrishtadyumna, violating all norms of what was right,
killed Drona, while he was alone on his chariot, insensate and bent on dying.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Nakula, the son of Madri, engaged the son of Drona[Ashvatthama.]
in a chariot duel before all the people and proved himself to be equal in war.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that after Drona's death, Drona's son misused the celestial
weapon narayana, but failed to kill the Pandavas.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that the exceedingly brave Karna, unconquerable in war,
was killed by Arjuna in a fraternal war that was beyond comprehension even to the gods.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that the son of Drona[Ashvatthama.], the brave warrior Duhshasana and
the fearsome Kritavarma failed to defeat Dharmaraja Yudhishthira.

'"O Sanjaya! O Bard! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Yudhishthira killed the king of Madra[Shalya.], who
always taunted Krishna in battle.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that evil Soubala[Shakuni.], the cause of the game of dice and the
quarrel, though armed by magic, was killed in battle by the Pandava Sahadeva.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that Duryodhana, weakened in strength, without a chariot,
fatigued, and with his pride broken, went to a pond and lay down in its waters.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that the Pandavas, accompanied by Vasudeva, stood at that
pond of the Ganga and addressed my quarrelsome son with contempt.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that, in the battle of the clubs, despite displaying various
marvellous circuits[That is, circuits of the club.], he was unjustly killed through the advice of Vasudeva.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that the son of Drona[Ashvatthama.] and others committed a horrible and
infamous act by killing the Panchalas[Droupadi was Drupada's daughter and Drupada was the king of Panchala.] and the sons of Droupadi while they slept.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that, pursued by Bhimasena and angered, Ashvatthama discharged the greatest of weapons named aishika, which killed the unborn in the womb.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that the weapon brahmashira, was discharged by Ashvatthama and repelled with another weapon by Arjuna, which he then pacified, but Ashvatthama had to surrender
the jewel on his head.

'"O Sanjaya! I had no hope of victory when I heard that the son of Drona[Ashvatthama.] killed the unborn in the womb of
the daughter of Virata[Uttara.] through a great weapon, and that the son of Drona was cursed jointly by Dvaipayana and
Keshava.

'"Alas! Woe to Gandhari who has lost her sons, grandsons, friends, fathers, brothers and relatives. The Pandavas
have accomplished a difficult feat. They have again gained a kingdom without a rival.

'"Alas! I have heard that only ten people have survived this difficult war, three on our side and seven on the side
of the Pandavas. In that fearful war of Kshatriyas, eighteen armies[Akshouhinis.] have been slain. I see extended and extreme
darkness all around me. Delusion overcomes me. O Suta! Consciousness is leaving me, my mind is delirious."'

Souti said, 'Having uttered these words in greatest sorrow and lamented his fate, Dhritarashtra became unconscious. On recovering, he addressed Sanjaya in these words.

'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! Since this has happened, I wish to give up my life immediately. I see not consolation nor profit in being alive any longer."'

Souti said, 'Then the wise son of Gavalgana[Sanjaya.] addressed these words full of meaning to that wretched and
lamenting king of the earth.

'Sanjaya said, "From wise Narada and Dvaipayana you have heard of many kings, those who had great enterprise and great strength. They were born in great royal dynasties and possessed great virtues. They knew the use of
celestial weapons and were equal to Shakra[Indra.] in energy. Having conquered the earth with righteous conduct and
performed sacrifices with appropriate offerings, they obtained fame in this world and then succumbed to the forces
of time. Such men were the great warrior Vainya, the brave Srinjaya who won through blessings, Suhotra, Rantideva, Kakshivanta, Oushija, Balhika, Damana, Shaivya, Sharyati, Ajita, Jita, Vishvamitra, the slayer of enemies and
Ambarisha, of great strength, Marutta, Manu, Ikshvaku, Gaya, Bharata, Rama, the son of Dasharatha,
Shashabindu, Bhagiratha and Yayati of good deeds, to whom the gods themselves sacrificed and who has left the
habitable and inhabitable regions of the earth adorned with sacrificial sheds and stakes. In ancient times, when
Shaivya was afflicted with the loss of his son, these were the twenty-four kings whose acts were cited by the royal
sage Narada. But there were other kings who came and went before, with more power, great warriors, great souls
and blessed with all the good qualities. They were Puru, Kuru, Yadu, Shura, Vishvagashva of great endurance,
Anena, Yuvanashva, Kakutstha, the brave Raghu, the invincible Vitihotra, Bhava, Shveta, Brihadguru, Ushinara,
Shataratha, Kanka, Duliduha, Druma, Dambhodbhava, Para, Vena, Sagara, Sankriti, Nimi, Ajeya, Parashu, Pundra,
Shambhu, the pure Devavridha, Devahavya, Supratima, Supratika, Brihadratha, Mahotsaha, Vinitatma, Nala of the
nishadas[Nishada means hunter.], Satyavrata, Shantabhaya, Sumitra, the lord Subala, Janujangha, Anaranya, Arka, Priyabhritya, Shubhavrata, Balabandu, Niramarda, Ketushringa, Brihadbala, Dhrishtaketu, Brihatketu, Diptaketu, Niramaya, Avikshita, Prabala, Dhurta, Kritabandhu, Dridheshudhi, Mahapurana, Sambhavya, Pratyanga, Parahan and Shruti. These
kings and hundreds of others, as many as lotuses, have been heard of. Giving up immense wealth and pleasure,
these great, powerful and wise kings attained death, as did your sons. Even those, performers of celestial deeds,
great souls who had valour, generosity, truth, purity, pity, magnanimity, faith and simplicity and whose abundance
of good qualities and riches have been described for the world in the Puranas by superior poets of great learning,
they too went to their death. Your sons were wicked, envious, greedy, driven by passion and evil. Do not mourn for
them. O Dhritarashtra! You are knowledgeable in the shastras and characterized by intelligence and wisdom. Those
whose understanding follows the norms of the shastras do not succumb to delusion. O king of men! You know the
good fortune and misfortune of fate. You know the extreme sentiments you succumbed to in protecting your sons.
You should not sorrow for that which was bound to happen. Those who are wise do not feel sorry over fate. Even
with the greatest wisdom, that which is ordained will happen. No one can transgress the path that has been laid
down. Time brings existence and non-existence, pleasure and pain. Time creates all elements and time destroys all
beings. Time burns all subjects and it is time that extinguishes the fire. Time alone is awake when everything is
asleep. Time cannot be conquered. Time walks in all elements, pervasive and impartial. Knowing that everything,
past, present and future, is created by time, it is not appropriate that you should be consumed by grief."'

Souti said, 'Krishna Dvaipayana has composed a holy Upanishad. The study of Bharata is such a holy act that
even if one reads only one line of a shloka, all the reader's sins are destroyed. Here are lauded the performers of
pure deeds, the gods, the devarshis, the immaculate brahmarshis, the yakshas and the great nagas. The eternal Lord
Vasudeva has been lauded here. It is he who is truth, immortality, purity and holy. In it is described the eternal
supreme brahman, who is the constant everlasting light and whose divine action is described by the learned. He is
the source of the existing and the non-existing, the principle of extension and withdrawal. In it has been described
the supreme spirit who assumes the attributes of the five elements[Earth, water, energy, wind and sky.] and three qualities[Sattva, rajas and tamas.] and to whom words like
un-manifest cannot be applied. And also those who are free, through the powers of meditation and yoga, perceive
established in themselves like reflections in a mirror. He who is always faithful and always follows the path of
righteousness, such a man is freed from all sin on reading this chapter. The believer who always hears this introductory chapter of Bharata from the beginning never suffers from difficulties. He who repeatedly utters any part of
the introductory chapter in the morning or evening is freed from all sins accumulated during the day or night. In
the body of Bharata, this chapter is like truth and ambrosia-like butter among curds and Brahmanas among
bipeds, like the ocean is the best of the lakes and the cow is the best of the quadrupeds. Just as these are the best,
so it is said is Bharata. He who makes a Brahmana listen to one verse of a shloka at a funeral ceremony, his offerings of food and drink to his ancestors become inexhaustible. The Vedas should be supported with itihasa[Literally, history. More specifically, the two epics.] and
the Puranas. But the Vedas are afraid of those with little learning[Though sacred texts, the Vedas have been personified here.], lest that knowledge be hurt. However, if a
learned man recites this Veda of Krishna's[Reference here is to Krishna Dvaipayana (Vedavyasa).], he will gain. Without a doubt, the sin of killing an embryo is also destroyed. I think that a pure man who has read this chapter reverently at every change of the moon has read the entire Bharata. The man who reverently listens every day to these sacred verses, it is said he attains a long life, fame
and goes to heaven. In ancient times, the gods and the sages came together and on one side of a scale, they placed
the four Vedas, with Bharata on the other side. In greatness and in weight, Bharata was heavier. Because of its superiority in substance and content, it came to be known as Mahabharata and he who knows this true meaning is
freed from all sins. Asceticism is not a sin, studying is not a sin, the natural rules of the Vedas are not sins and exertion to acquire wealth is not a sin. These become sins when they are abused.'
