'Arjuna said, "How did the hostility between Vashishtha and Vishvamitra, both of whom lived in divine hermitages, arise? Tell us in detail."

'The gandharva said, "O Partha! Vashishtha's account is known as a purana in all the worlds. Listen to me as I
recount it in its entirety. O bull of the Bharata lineage! There was a great king in Kanyakubja. He was known in the
world as Gadhi and he was devoted to true dharma. His virtuous son, a conqueror of enemies, was known by the
name of Vishvamitra and he had many armies and mounts. With his ministers, he used to wander in deep forests
and beautiful wildernesses, to hunt deer and boar. Once, tired and exhausted from pursuit of a deer, that best of
men came to Vashishtha's hermitage. On seeing him come, the fortunate and illustrious rishi, Vashishtha, offered
homage to Vishvamitra, the best of men. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He welcomed him and offered him
water to wash his feet and face and gave him offerings of forest fare.

'"The great-souled Vashishtha possessed a kamadhenu. When she was asked to give, she produced whatever
was desired. O Arjuna! She yielded products of villages and forests, herbs, milk, juices with six different
flavours[The six different tastes are katu (pungent), amla (sour), madhur (sweet), lavana (salty), tikta (bitter) and
kashaya (astringent).] that tasted like ambrosia itself, and different types of food that could be chewed, drunk, eaten, licked
and sucked, all tasting like ambrosia. The king was honoured with everything that he desired, in abundant measure.
He, his ministers and his entourage were greatly satisfied. With great surprise, he[Vishvamitra.] saw Vashishtha's beautiful and
unblemished cow, named Nandini[In this shloka, the cow's name is given as Nandi. However, Nandini is more common and subsequent shlokas
say Nandini.]-six measures long, three measures wide and five measures around, with
beautiful flanks and thighs, with eyes prominent like those of frogs, with a beautiful carriage, large udders, beautiful tail, uplifted and straight ears, handsome horns and a well-developed head and neck. O king! Gadhi's son was
gratified with what he saw and saluted the cow. The king[Vishvamitra.] then spoke to the rishi[Vashishtha.], 'O Brahmana! O great sage!
Give me Nandini in exchange for my kingdom or for 10,000 cows. Enjoy the kingdom.' Vashishtha said, 'O unblemished king! I keep this milk-yielding cow for the sake of the gods, ancestors, guests and sacrificial offerings.
Nandini cannot be given away, even in exchange for your kingdom.' Vishvamitra said, 'I am a Kshatriya and you
are only a Brahmana devoted to studies and austerities. How can there be strength in Brahmanas who are peaceful
and control themselves? If you don't give me what I want in exchange for 10,000 cows, I will not give up my own
dharma. I will take the cow away by force.' Vashishtha said, 'You are a powerful king with an army with you. You
are a Kshatriya with valour in your arms. Do what you wish quickly, and without thinking over it.' O Partha! Thus,
addressed, Vishamitra seized the cow Nandini, as translucent as a swan or the moon.

'"He dragged her here and there and beat her with a stick. The blessed Nandini bellowed piteously and came to
Vashishtha. O Partha! She stood near the illustrious sage and raised her head up at him. Though she had been beaten a lot, she did not leave the hermitage. Vashishtha said, 'O fortunate Nandini! I hear your repeated cries. But you
are being taken away by force. What can a forgiving Brahmana do?' O bull among the Bharata lineage! Frightened
by the force of Vishvamitra's army and frightened by Vishvamitra himself, she came closer to Vashishtha. Nandini
said, 'O illustrious one! Why do you overlook it when I am beaten by the sticks and lashes of Vishamitra's fearful
army? Why do you orphan me when I am crying?' O Partha! The great sage did not lose his patience. Nor did he
deviate from his rigid vows[The vow of being forgiving.] on hearing her cries of suffering. Vashishtha said, 'A Kshatriya's strength is his energy. A Brahmana's strength is his forbearance. I cannot give up forbearance. If you wish, go.' Nandini said, 'O
illustrious one! O Brahmana! Are you forsaking me in this way? If you do not forsake me, I cannot be taken away
by force.' Vashishtha said, 'O blessed one! I am not forsaking you. Stay, if you can. Tethered with a strong rope,
your calf is now being taken away by force.' Hearing him say 'stay', Vashishtha's cow raised up her head and neck
and became fearful to look at.

'"Eyes red with anger and with thunderous bellows, she attacked Vishvamitra's army from all sides. Stung with
their sticks and lashes and being dragged here and there, her anger increased and her eyes became red with rage. A
shower of burning embers was unleashed from her tail. She blazed with anger like the midday sun. She created an
army of pahlavas[Often used as a term for the Persians.] from her tail, an army of shabaras[Mountain-dwelling barbarians.] and shakas[Often identified with Scythians.] from her dung and an army of yavanas[Often identified with Greeks.]
from her urine. She swooned with anger. From her froth, she produced pundras, kiratas[Mountainous tribes who lived through hunting.], dramidas[Inhabitants from the south.],
Simhalas[Identified with the inhabitants of Sri Lanka.], barbaras[Barbarians.], daradas[Inhabitants of a country to the north.] and mlecchas[Barbarians, non-Aryans, those who did not speak Sanskrit.]. When she had produced these many armies of mlecchas, clad
in different types of armour and armed with different types of weapons, before Vishvamitra's own eyes, she scattered with her ferocious troops his large army. Every single one of his soldiers was surrounded by five or seven of
hers and with a shower of weapons was dispersed and fled in all directions in panic. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Though greatly enraged, not a single one of Vishvamitra's soldiers was separated from his life by a single
one of Vashishtha's. Vishvamitra's army was driven 3 yojanas away and though it cried out in panic, there was no
saviour to be found.

'"On seeing this amazing sight born out of a Brahmana's powers, Vishvamitra was disgusted with his Kshatriya
powers and said, 'A curse on my Kshatriya powers! The true power is that of a Brahmana. In judging weakness
and strength, I see that true strength arises from the power of austerities.' He gave up his prosperous kingdom and
his radiant regal fortune. Turning his back on all pleasures, he decided to devote himself to austerities. Through his
power of austerities, he became successful and filled the worlds with his radiance. Through all his radiant energy,
he became a Brahmana and Kushika's son[Vishvamitra.] eventually drank the soma[Nectar, ambrosia, the beverage of the gods.] juice with Indra himself."'
