Vaishampayana said, 'Then Pandu's sons told the great-souled Markandeya, "Tell us about the greatness of the
foremost of brahmanas. We wish to hear about this."

'Thus addressed, the illustrious Markandeya, the great ascetic, extremely energetic and knowledgeable in all the
sacred texts, replied, "There was once a handsome prince who was the king of the Haihayas. He was the pride of
his lineage and the destroyer of enemy cities. He was powerful and handsome and he went out to hunt. When he
was roaming around in that forest, overgrown with grass and bushes, he saw a sage who was clad in a black antelope skin as his upper garment. He mistook him to be a deer and killed him in the forest. He was pained and sorrowful at his deed and lost his senses. O lord of the earth! The lotus-eyed prince went to the kings of the Haihayas,
great in their souls, and told them exactly what had happened. O son[The word used is tata, affectionately used for anyone who is younger or junior.]! On hearing about the violence done to a
sage who lived on roots and fruits, and on seeing it[That is, seeing the dead body.], they were distressed in their minds. They asked everywhere
about whose son he was, and followed a road to the hermitage of Tarkshya Arishtanemi[Tarkshya is a name for both Garuda, and Garuda's father too. But here, Tarkshya means the sage who was
descended from Kashyapa. Arishtanemi was one of Tarkshya's names.]. They bowed down before the great-souled sage, whose vows were unwavering. They stood there, while the sage honoured them in return. Then they told the great-souled sage, 'We are not deserving of these honours. Through our evil deeds, we
have killed a brahmana.' The brahmana rishi replied, 'How have you killed a brahmana? Where is he? Tell me and
behold the strength of my austerities.' All of them then told him everything, exactly as it had happened. But when
they returned, they could not see the dead body of the rishi there. They searched everywhere and were ashamed.
They felt as if their senses had been in the midst of a dream. The sage Tarkshya then told them, 'O destroyers of
the cities of enemies! Is this the brahmana who had been killed by you? O kings! This is my son. He possesses the
power of austerities.' O lord of the earth! On seeing that rishi[Tarkshya's son.], they were struck with great wonder and exclaimed, 'This is extremely wonderful. We have seen him dead. How can a dead person be restored to life? It is
through the power of austerities that he has become alive again? O brahmana rishi! We are desirous of hearing this,
if indeed it can be heard.' He[Tarkshya.] replied, 'O kings! Death cannot exhibit its powers before us. I will briefly tell you
about the reason for this. We know nothing but the truth. We do not even think of that which is false. Since we are
always established in our own dharma, death holds no fear for us. We always speak about the welfare of brahmanas, and never about their evil deeds. Therefore, we have no fear of death. We serve our guests with food and
drink. We always feed our servants. We live in a region inhabited by energetic ones. Therefore, we have no fear of
death. I have only told you a very little bit. Now all of you return, without any envy. Do not be frightened that you
have sinned.' O bull among the Bharata lineage! Then they agreed that it would be that way, and worshipped the
great sage. The kings happily returned to their own kingdom."'
