Sanjaya said, "Having heard the angry words spoken about Adhiratha's great-souled
son by the king who followed dharma, the unassailable Jishnu, whose valour was infinite and whose spirit was never depressed, spoke these words to Yudhishthira. 'O
king! When I fought with the samshaptakas today, Drona's son suddenly stationed
himself in front of me and at the forefront of the Kuru soldiers. He released arrows
that were like venomous serpents. On seeing my chariot, which was like a cloud, the
soldiers from Ambashtha were ready to die. O foremost among kings! I killed five
hundred of those and advanced against Drona's son. He stretched his bow back all the
way up to his ears and aimed many arrows. He possessed the strength of learning and
weapons and showered down, like a dark cloud. In the battle, I could not distinguish
between his affixing an arrow and releasing it. Drona's son circled around in that battle, sometimes to the left and sometimes to the right. Drona's son pierced me with five
sharp arrows and Vasudeva with another five. In an instant, and without any gap, I
struck him with thirty arrows that were like the vajra. Blood began to flow from all
over his body. Those soldiers had been overcome by me and their bodies were overflowing with blood. On seeing this, he[Ashvatthama.] entered the array of chariots that belonged
to the son of a suta. The warriors were overcome and the soldiers were devastated.
Warriors, horses and elephants were running away. On seeing this, Karna swiftly dispatched fifty supreme rathas against me. After having killed them and avoided Karna,
I have quickly come here to see you. On seeing Karna, all the Panchalas are filled with
fright and are like cattle driven away by a lion. The Prabhadrakas are being driven
away by Karna, as if they have entered the mouth of a large fish. O king! Having
clashed against Karna, the Prabhadrakas are like those who have entered Death's gaping mouth. Come and see me and the son of a suta fight, striving for victory. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Desiring heaven and the worlds[The worlds hereafter.], six thousand princes
and rathas have immersed themselves. O foremost among kings! I will engage with the
son of a suta in battle, like the wielder of the vajra against Vritra. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! If you wish to see it, there will be a fierce battle today between me
and the son of a suta. O king! I will engage in a battle with Karna and kill him today,
together with his relatives. O lion among men! There are ends meant for those who
make a pledge and do not keep it. If I fail, let that end be mine. I am inviting you. Tell
me that victory in the battle will be mine. In front of us, the sons of Dhritarashtra are
about to devour Bhima. O lion among kings! I will slay the son of a suta today, together with all the large numbers of enemy soldiers.'" '
