'Yudhishthira asked, "O one who knows about conduct! What kind of conduct must a lord of the
earth follow? In this life and in the hereafter, how can he easily obtain objects that give rise to
happiness?"

'Bhishma replied, "There are thirty-six qualities, united with another thirty-six qualities. If he
possesses qualities and acts according to those qualities, then he will obtain excellence. (1)[There is no numbering in the text. We have used it for ease of understanding. The listing adds up to thirty-seven and not thirty-six. That must
be because two of these attributes are being clubbed together, though it is
not obvious which.] He
must follow dharma without any acerbity. (2) He must shower affection. (3) He must not be a
non-believer[Nastika.]. (4) He must pursue riches, but without violence. (5) He must pursue kama, but
must not be bound down by it. (6) Without any hesitation, he must speak pleasantly. (7) He must
be brave, but should not boast about it. (8) He must be generous, but should not give to those
who are undeserving. (9) He must be bold, but must not be cruel. (10) He must not have alliances
with ignoble people. (11) He must not wage war against his relatives. (12) He must not employ
spies who are inappropriate. (13) He must not undertake tasks because he has been forced. (14)
Before the wicked, he must not speak about his objectives. (15) He must not speak about his own
qualities. (16) He must not take away from those who are virtuous. (17) He must not trust those
who are wicked. (18) He must not inflict punishment without examination. (19) He must not disclose his counsel. (20) He must not give to those who are covetous. (21) He must not trust those
who have caused injury. (22) He must protect his wife, but without jealousy. (23) The king must
be pure, but not compulsively so. (24) He must not be excessively addicted to women. (25) He
must not eat sweets that are not healthy. (26) He must humbly honour those who deserve respect.
(27) He must be sincere in serving his seniors. (28) Without any pride, he must worship the gods.
(29) He must desire prosperity, but not in ways that give rise to censure. (30) He must serve,
even if he does not feel affection. (31) He must be accomplished, but must also know the proper
time. (32) He must comfort, but not because he wants to use people. (33) He must not show
favours and then fling a person away. (34) He must not strike ignorantly. (35) He must slay all
the enemies that remain. (36) He must not display sudden anger. (37) He must be mild with those
who cause him injury. If you desire welfare, this is the way you should govern the kingdom. The
lord of the earth who acts contrary to this confronts supreme hardship. I have stated all the qualities to you. Whoever follows these obtains great fortune in this life and greatness in heaven after
death."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Hearing these words of Shantanu's son, King Yudhishthira, surrounded
by the foremost among the Pandavas, honoured the grandfather. The intelligent one acted in accordance with what he had been told.'
