'Markandeya said, "Then Prahasta suddenly rushed at Vibhishana. He was harsh in battle and struck him with a
mace. Though struck by the mace with a terrible force, the intelligent and mighty-armed one did not stagger and
stood firm like the Himalayas. Then Vibhishana grasped a gigantic and large spear that had a hundred bells attached to it. Invoking it with a mantra, he flung it at the other one's head. With the speed of the vajra, it descended
with great force and sliced off the rakshasa's head. He was seen to fall down, like a tree struck by the wind. On
seeing Prahasta, stalker of the night, killed in battle, Dhumraksha rushed at the monkeys with great speed. On seeing his terrible army, which was like a cloud, the bulls among the monkeys suddenly lost their heart in battle. On
seeing the bulls among the monkeys suddenly lose their heart, Hanuman, tiger among monkeys and son of the
wind-god, rallied them. O king! On seeing that the son of the wind was firmly established in battle, all the monkeys swiftly returned. There arose a great and tumultuous roar that made the body hair stand up. The soldiers of
Rama and Ravana rushed at each other. In that terrible battle, which made the ground muddy with blood, Dhumraksha used his arrows to make the army of monkeys flee. But Hanuman, son of the wind-god and victorious over
his enemies, swiftly grasped that mighty rakshasa. An awesome duel raged between the monkey and the brave rakshasa as they tried to kill each other, like that between Indra and Prahlada. The rakshasa struck the monkey with
clubs and maces. The monkey struck the rakshasa with trees, complete with trunks and branches. Then the gigantic
and intelligent Hanuman, son of the wind-god, killed Dhumraksha, with his horses, chariot and charioteer. On seeing the supreme rakshasa Dhumraksha killed, reassurance returned to the monkeys and they attacked and killed the
soldiers. Thus slaughtered by the powerful and victorious monkeys, the rakshasas lost their resolution and fled towards Lanka in fear. The shattered remnants of the stalkers of the night retreated and returned to the city. On returning, they told King Ravana everything that had transpired.

'"On hearing that Prahasta and the mighty archer Dhumraksha, together with their soldiers, had been killed in
battle by the bulls among monkeys, Ravana sighed deeply and arose from his excellent seat. He said, 'The time has
come for Kumbhakarna to act.' Saying this, he used many musical instruments, loud in their sounds, to awaken
Kumbhakarna from his deep and prolonged sleep. He awoke him with a great deal of effort. When Kumbhakarna
was no longer asleep and was comfortably seated, Dashagriva, the lord of the rakshasas, spoke these words to him.

'O Kumbhakarna! You are fortunate that you can sleep in this way. You do not know of the terrible and great fear
that has arisen. Rama, with his monkeys, has crossed the ocean over a bridge. Ignoring all of us, he is engaged in a
great slaughter. I have abducted his wife, Sita Janaki. So as to recover her, he had a bridge constructed over the
great ocean. He has killed Prahasta and many of our relatives. O destroyer of enemies! No one other than you is
capable of killing him. O supreme among strong ones! March out now. O tormentor of enemies! Kill Rama and all
the others in battle. Accompanied by a large army, Dushana's younger brothers, Vajravega and Pramathi, will follow you.' Having thus spoken to the mighty Kumbhakarna, the lord of the rakshasas gave instructions to Vajravega
and Pramathi about what they should do. Those two brave ones, Dushana's younger brothers, agreed to Ravana's
instructions. With Kumbhakarna at the forefront, they marched out from the city."'
