Sanjaya said, "O great king! Duryodhana and Parshata Dhrishtadyumna fought a great battle, with innumerable
arrows and javelins. O great king! They shot thousands of torrents of arrows. It was like rain pouring down from
clouds during the monsoon. The king pierced Parshata with five arrows that were made out of iron. He then again
pierced the fierce one who had killed Drona with seven arrows. In the encounter, Dhrishtadyumna was powerful
and firm in his valour. He struck Duryodhana with seventy arrows. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On seeing
that the king was afflicted, his brothers surrounded Parshata with a large army. O king! Severely surrounded by
those brave atirathas from all sides, he roamed around in the battle, exhibiting the dexterity of his hands. Shikhandi, supported by the Prabhadrakas, fought with the maharatha archers, Kritavarma and Goutama. O lord of the
earth! There was a great battle there, fierce in form. They were ready to give up their lives in the battle and offered
their lives as stakes in the gambling match.

' "Shalya showered down arrows in every direction. He afflicted the Pandavas, including Satyaki and Vrikodara.
O Indra among kings! Using his valour and strength, he also fought in that encounter with the twins, who were like
Yama in their prowess. When the Pandavas were afflicted by Shalya's arrows in the great battle, those maharathas
could not find a protector. On seeing that Dharmaraja was oppressed, the brave Nakula, Madri's son, powerfully
attacked his maternal uncle. Nakula, the destroyer of enemy heroes, enveloped Shalya in that battle. He smiled and
struck him between the breasts with ten arrows. These arrows were completely made out of iron and had been polished by artisans. They were gold-tufted and sharpened on stone. They were propelled from the implement of the
bow. Shalya was struck by his sister's great-souled son and pierced Nakula with straight-flying arrows. At this,
King Yudhishthira, Bhimasena, Satyaki and Madri's son, Sahadeva, attacked the king of Madra. They descended
swiftly and the directions and the sub-directions resounded with the roar of their chariots. The earth trembled. The
conqueror of enemies, the commander, received them in the battle. He pierced Yudhishthira with three arrows,
Bhimasena with seven, Satyaki with one hundred and Sahadeva with three arrows. O venerable one! The lord of
Madra used a kshurapra arrow to slice down the great-souled Nakula's bow, with an arrow affixed to it. When his
bow was shattered and destroyed by Shalya's arrows, Madri's maharatha son quickly picked up another bow and
covered the king of Madra's chariot with arrows. O venerable one! Both Yudhishthira and Sahadeva pierced the
lord of Madra in the chest with ten arrows each. Bhimasena attacked the king of Madra and struck him with sixty
arrows shafted with the feathers of herons. Satyaki did the same with nine arrows. The king of Madra angrily
struck Satyaki with nine arrows and pierced him again with seventy arrows with drooping tufts. O venerable one!
He struck down the bow in his[Satyaki's.] hand, with an arrow affixed to it and, in the battle, dispatched his four horses to
the land of the dead. Satyaki was deprived of his chariot by the immensely strong king of Madra, who struck him
with one hundred arrows from every direction. O Kouravya! He then pierced Madri's angry sons, Pandava Bhimasena and Yudhishthira with ten arrows each. We witnessed the king of Madra's extraordinary manliness. Even
though they were together, the Parthas could not counter him in the battle.

' "Satyaki, for whom truth was his valour, climbed onto another chariot. He saw that the Pandavas were afflicted
and had come under the king of Madra's subjugation. The powerful one attacked the lord of Madra with force. On
seeing that he was descending on his chariot, Shalya, the ornament of an assembly, countered him on his chariot,
like a crazy elephant against another crazy elephant. The clash that ensued was tumultuous and wonderful to behold. The brave Satyaki and the lord of Madra fought, like the ancient battle between Shambara and the kind of the
immortals. On seeing that the king of Madra was stationed in the battle, Satyaki asked him to wait and pierced him
with ten arrows. The king of Madra was grievously pierced by the great-souled one. He pierced Satyaki back with
sharp arrows that were colourfully tufted. The Parthas, great archers, saw that the king was assailed by Satvata.
Wishing to kill their maternal uncle, they quickly attacked him on their chariots. In that supreme and tumultuous
encounter, blood flowed like water. The brave ones fought and roared like lions. O great king! They mangled each
other. In the encounter, they shot arrows and roared like lions. The earth was covered with thousands of torrents of
arrows. The firmament was also suddenly covered with arrows. In every direction, those arrows created a great
darkness. The arrows shot by the great-souled ones created a shadow, like that of clouds. O king! The arrows released there were like snakes that had cast off their skins. They were gold-tufted and made the directions blaze.
Shalya, the destroyer of enemies, was supreme and wonderful. In the battle, he single-handedly fought against
many brave ones. Arrows, shafted with the feathers of herons and peacocks, were released from the king of
Madra's arms. That terrible torrent of arrows descended and covered the earth. O king! Shalya's chariot roamed
around in the great battle there. We saw him, like Shakra in earlier times, when the asuras were being destroyed." '
