'Bhishma said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! This is the first element of conduct. Listen to the second.
The king must always protect the man who extends prosperity. O Yudhishthira! Whether a person is paid or is not
paid, if he comes and tells you that the royal treasury is being destroyed and depleted by a minister, you must hear
him in secret and protect him from ministers. Ministers tend to kill such informants. All those who destroy the
treasury work collectively against the one who protects the treasury and unless protected, he will be destroyed. On
this, an ancient history is recounted, about what the sage Kalakavrikshiya told the lord of Kosala. We have heard
that the sage Kalakavrikshiya went to Kshemadarshina after he had become the lord of Kosala. Wishing to ascertain what was happening in Kshemadarshina's kingdom, he repeatedly travelled around, with a crow tied in a cage.

'I study the knowledge of crows. Crows tell me what has happened, what will happen, and what is going on right
now.' Saying this, with a large number of men, he began to observe the wicked deeds of all those employed by the
king, throughout the kingdom. He knew about everything that was going on in the kingdom. He knew everything
about the wicked deeds of those employed by the king, here and there. With the crow, the one who was rigid in his
vows went to see the king and said, 'I know everything.' He went up to an ornamented adviser of the king of Kos-
ala and, on the basis of what the crow said, told him these words. 'I know what you did on such-and-such an occasion. I know that you stole from the royal treasury. This is what the crow has told me. Swiftly admit or contradict
it.' In this way, he spoke to others who had also stolen from the royal treasury. No one heard him speak of anything
that was not actually true. O extender of the Kuru lineage! When he was sleeping in the night, all those accused
royal employees killed the crow in the night.

'"Next morning, on seeing the crow pierced with an arrow inside the cage, the brahmana went to Kshemadarshina and spoke these words. 'O king! O lord! You are the lord of lives and riches and I seek sanctuary with you.
With your permission, I will tell you something that is for the welfare of your city. I have come to you with wholehearted devotion, tormented on account of a friend[Referring to the king as a friend.]. Because of the injury caused, I have spoken about your
riches being robbed. Like a charioteer with a well-trained horse, I am trying to awake a friend. Because I am intent
on ensuring your welfare, I am overcome by great rage. A person who knows and wishes to ensure his own prosperity should always tolerate such advances on the part of a well-wisher.' The king replied to him and said, 'I always desire my own prosperity. Therefore, why will I not forgive what you tell me? O brahmana! If you so wish,
tell me what you know. O brahmana! I will act in accordance with the words you tell me.'

'"The sage said, 'I have come to you out of my devotion, to report to you what I know about your policies, your
dangers and the threats you are facing from your servants. Learned ones who were preceptors and served kings declared this a long time ago. Only those who have no other means of sustenance should serve the king. Association
with kings is like virulent poison. Kings have many friends and also have many enemies. It has been said that
those who serve kings face dangers from all of these. O king! Therefore, all the time, they have to be scared of all
these. One is incapable of not being single-minded and being distracted when serving a lord of the earth. One who
desires prosperity should never be careless. Such carelessness can lead to a king stumbling and if there is such a
stumbling, there is no prospect of remaining alive. A learned person must approach the king as if he is a blazing
fire. He is the lord of lives and riches and if he is angry, that lord is like virulent poison. While always making the
best of efforts, the man must think, "I am already dead." He must be scared of having said something wrong, having done something wrong, having stood in the wrong way, having sat in the wrong way and having walked in the
wrong way. He must watch out for such signs and indications. If the king is pleased, like a god, he can grant every
object of desire. However, if he is wrathful, like the fire, he can burn down, from the roots. O king! This is what
Maya[The architect of the gods.] had said and that is the way it is. I will now repeatedly act so as to extend your prosperity. At times of
hardship, an aide like me helps with his intelligence. O king! My crow has been slain, but I am not reprimanding
you on account of this. They[The ones who killed the crow.] wish you injury. You should use your intelligence to test for those who wish you
well and those who wish you injury. Do not reveal your thoughts. There are those who dwell in your own residence, they do not wish the prosperity of the subjects. It is the likes of those who are hostile towards me. After you
have been destroyed, they desire your kingdom. O king! However, they will only succeed if they ally with those
who are close to you, not otherwise. O king! Because of fear from them, I will depart and go to a hermitage. O
lord! It is they who allied and brought my crow down with an arrow. They sent my crow to Yama's abode as a signal to me. O king! I have seen this through sight gained by a long period of austerities. I used the crow as a hook
and crossed this river that is infested with many crocodiles, fish, alligators and a large number of whales[The text uses the word timingila, which is actually an aquatic creature
that eats whales.]. Your
kingdom was full of stumps of trees, rocks and thorny scrubs, and infested by tigers, lions and elephants. It was
difficult to access and difficult to penetrate, like a cave in the Himalayas. The learned say that a fire should be used
to cross a place that is difficult to cross because it is dark, a boat should be used to cross the water. However, the
learned also say that there is no means to cross the difficult terrain a king faces. Your kingdom is impenetrable and
is enveloped in darkness. Even you are incapable of finding comfort here. How can I? This is not an auspicious
place to live in, since the virtuous and the wicked are equal here. There is no doubt that one will be killed here,
whether one is good or wicked. One is slain for performing good deeds and one who performs wicked deeds is not
slain. One should not remain here for a long time. The learned should depart swiftly. O king! There is a river
named Sita, where even boats sink. I think that this trap, which kills everyone, is like that. You are like the fall that
confronts those who collect honey, or like a meal laced with poison. Your sentiments are like those of the wicked
and you do not follow the conduct of the virtuous. O king! You are like a well that is surrounded by poisonous
snakes. You are like a passage to a large river that has sweet water to drink. However, the banks are covered with
kariras[Capparis aphylla.] and reeds and it is difficult to reach. O king! You are like that. O king! You are like a swan amidst dogs,
vultures and jackals. A creeper attaches itself to a giant tree and, winding around the trunk, increases its abundant
growth. It envelopes and surpasses the tree's growth. When there is a terrible conflagration, it burns down both the
tree and the creeper. O king! Your advisers fit that image. Cleanse them. O king! You are the one who has nurtured
and protected them. Ignoring you, they are seeking to kill someone who loves you. I have dwelt here in fear and
have been protected only because they have been careless. It was like living in a house with a snake inside it, or
dwelling in a house with a hero's wife[Scared of the brave husband.]. I wished to test the conduct of the king, who was like a fellow resident.
Has the king controlled his senses? Has he conquered his inner impulses? Do the subjects love the king and does
the king love them? O supreme among kings! Asking these questions, I came to you. O king! I find delight in you,
like a hungry person before food. I do not like your ministers. They are like water before someone who is not
thirsty. Because I wish to ensure your prosperity, they have found fault with me. There is no doubt that there is no
other reason. I do not harbour any enmity towards them. I only wish to point out their faults. However, like a snake
that has only wounded its back, one must always be careful about a wicked enemy.'

'"The king replied, 'I will honour you with a lot of expensive objects. I will show you a lot of reverence. O foremost among brahmanas! I will worship you a lot. Reside in my house for a long time. O brahmana! Those who do
not like you will no longer reside in my house. But you should tell me about what should be done next. Ensure that
the rod is wielded against those who are wicked and the ones who are virtuous are treated well. O illustrious one!
Look towards that and guide me about what is beneficial.'

'"The sage said, 'Ignore this sin[Of killing the crow.] and weaken them, one by one. Ascertaining their motives, slay one man after
another man. When many are guilty of the same crime, they can unite and blunt a thorn. O king! I am telling you
this, because of my fear that your secret counsel might be disclosed. We are brahmanas. Our punishments are mild
and we are prone to compassion. I desire your welfare, that of your enemies and of my own self. O king! Because I
desire your welfare, I am declaring myself to be like your relative. I am the sage Kalakavrikshiya. I am devoted to
the truth. Know from the signs that your father revered me as his friend. O king! The kingdom that you obtained
from your father confronts a hardship now. At that time, I gave up all objects of desire and tormented myself
through austerities. I am telling you this out of affection, so that you do not remain confused any longer. O king!
Having obtained the kingdom, depending on your wishes, you can glance both towards its happiness and its misery. O king! How can you be so careless as to have such advisers in the kingdom?'"

'Bhishma said, "At this, great delight was again generated in the royal lineage. The bull among the brahmana
lineage was consecrated as the royal priest. The illustrious lord of Kosala brought the earth under a single umbrella[He became universal emperor, the umbrella being a sign of kingship.]. The sage Kalakavrikshiya offered oblations at the best of sacrifices. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Having heard his beneficial words, the king of Kosala governed the kingdom in accordance with those auspicious
words."'
