The brahmana said, 'There are said to be three enemies and nine qualities in the world. Delight, stupefaction
and pride-these are the qualities of sattva. Sorrow, anger and extreme intolerance-these are said to be the
qualities of rajas. Sleep, lassitude and confusion-these are the qualities of tamas. An intelligent person does not
waver and cuts these off with large numbers of arrows. He is tranquil in his soul and conquers his senses. He is interested in vanquishing the enemy[The senses.]. Those who know about the ancient accounts recite a chant in this connection.
When he ruled the kingdom, this was sung by King Ambarisha. It has been heard that Ambarisha swiftly seized the
kingdom, after using virtue to slay the rising tide of vices. He subdued the great vices and honoured the virtuous.
He obtained great success and chanted this song. "I have conquered many vices. I have slain all the enemies. However, there is one vice that should have been killed. I have not been able to slay it. As long as a creature is afflicted
by this, it does not obtain freedom from desire. Driven by desire, one dashes downwards and does not understand.
Because a man is addicted to this, he commits acts that should not be undertaken. Greed must be severed with an
extremely sharp sword. It should be sliced off. Desire results from greed and that gives rise to anxiety. A person
who desires obtains many qualities that are associated with rajas. Because of these qualities, he is tied down to the
bondage of the body. He is repeatedly born, to perform deeds in this world. When life is over and the body is mangled and scattered, he again confronts death because of the act of being reborn. Therefore, one must look towards
greed properly. If one desires true sovereignty, one must restrain it with the fortitude of the atman. This is the true
kingdom. A king should know that this alone is what needs to be conquered." The illustrious King Ambarisha sung
this chant. Having severed greed, he placed this sovereignty at the forefront.'"'
