Sanjaya said, "O lord of the earth! Having been thus addressed by the illustrious Goutama, the king let out deep
and warm sighs and was silent. Dhritarashtra's great-minded son thought for an instant. The scorcher of enemies
then spoke these words to Kripa Sharadvata. 'You have spoken like a well-wisher and I have heard all those words.
In the course of fighting, you were ready to give up your life and did everything. You have immersed yourself in
the immensely energetic array of Pandava maharathas and fought with them. The worlds have seen this. Like a
well-wisher, you have made me listen to your words. But they do not appeal to me, like medicine to a person who
is about to die. Those supreme words are beneficial and full of reason. O mighty-armed one! O foremost among
brahmanas! However, they do not appeal to me. Having been deprived of his kingdom earlier, why will he[Yudhishthira.] trust
us now? The king was defeated by us in the great contest of gambling with the dice earlier. Why will he repose any
trust in my words now? Engaged in the welfare of the Parthas, Krishna arrived as a messenger[Described in Section 54 (Volume 4).]. Because of our
greed, we acted contrary to Hrishikesha's intent. O brahmana! Why will he pay heed to my words now? When
Krishna[Krishnaa, Droupadi.] was summoned to the assembly hall, she lamented. Krishna will not forgive that, or the deprivation of
the kingdom. O lord! We had earlier heard that the two Krishnas were united with each other and we have also
seen it now. On hearing of the death of his sister's son[Abhimanyu.], Keshava slept in sorrow. We have injured him. Why will
he forgive us now? When Abhimanyu died, Arjuna could obtain no peace. Even if he is requested, why will he endeavour for my good? The immensely strong Bhimasena, the second Pandava, is fierce. He has taken a terrible
pledge. He will break, rather than bow down. The brave twins are like Yama. They have girded their swords and
are clad in armour. They are firm in their enmity. Dhrishtadyumna and Shikhandi are firm in their enmity towards
me. O supreme among brahmanas! Why will they endeavour for my good? Krishna[Krishnaa, Droupadi.] was in her season and was
clad in a single garment. While all the worlds looked on, she was oppressed by Duhshasana in the midst of the assembly hall. The Pandavas remember the distress of the naked one. No one is capable of restraining those
scorchers of enemies from fighting. To accomplish the objective of her husbands and ensure my destruction, the
miserable Droupadi Krishna has tormented herself through severe austerities. Until the hostilities are over, Krishna
always sleeps on the bare ground. Vasudeva's sister has cast aside her pride and her honour and always serves
Krishna[Vasudeva's sister is Subhadra and she serves Krishnaa, Droupadi. The
reference to pride and honour is because Droupadi and Subhadra were
Arjuna's co-wives.]. Thus, everything has flared up and can never be quenched. Because of Abhimanyu's death, how can
there be peace with me? I have enjoyed the earth, right up to the frontiers on the ocean. How can I be satisfied with
the pleasures of a small kingdom, obtained through the favours of the Pandavas? Like a sun, I have blazed above
all the kings. How can I follow Yudhishthira, like a servant? I have myself enjoyed all the pleasures and have donated generously. How can I lead a miserable life, together with other miserable people? The words that you have
spoken are gentle and beneficial and I do not hate them. But I do not think that the time has arrived for peace. O
scorcher of enemies! I see good policy as one that involves fighting well. This is not the time to be a eunuch. This
is the time to fight. I have performed many rites and sacrifices. I have given a lot of donations to brahmanas. In due
order, I have listened to all the Vedas. I have placed myself on the heads of my enemies. O father[The word used is tata. It means father, but is used for anyone senior or
older.]! I have nurtured my servants well and also distressed ones who have resorted to me. I have gone to the kingdoms of enemies.
I have ruled my own kingdom. I have enjoyed many kinds of objects of pleasure. Large numbers of women have
served me. I have paid my debts to my ancestors and to the dharma of kshatriyas. It is certain that there is no happiness on earth. What is the kingdom? What is fame? Fame can only be obtained through battle and there is no
other way. If a kshatriya dies at home, that is reprehensible. Death in one's home is great adharma. If a man gives
up his body in a forest, or in a battle, he performs a great sacrifice and attains great glory. There are those who
lament in distress and misery, overcome by age. They die among their weeping relatives and are not men. I will
abandon various objects of pleasure and attain the supreme objective. I will engage in a good battle and go to the
worlds of the virtuous. Brave ones, noble in conduct, do not retreat from the field of battle. They are wise and unwavering in their aim. All of them perform sacrifices that involve rites with weapons. It is certain that they reside
in heaven. It is certain that large numbers of pure apsaras glance delightedly at them. It is certain that the ancestors
see them honoured in Shakra's assembly. They find joy in heaven, surrounded by apsaras. That is the path followed
by the immortals and by brave ones who do not retreat. We will now ascend along that virtuous path, followed by
the aged grandfather, the intelligent preceptor, Jayadratha, Karna and Duhshasana. There are brave kings who
strove for my sake and have been killed. They were mangled by arrows and lay down on the ground, their limbs
covered with blood. They were brave and supreme in the knowledge of weapons. They performed the decreed sacrifices. They gave up their lives for another and now reside in Indra's home. They have constructed the path. It will
be difficult to travel along, because there are large numbers who are travelling along it with great speed, advancing
towards the virtuous end. I remember the brave ones who have been killed in my cause. I wish to repay my debt to
them. I am not interested in the kingdom. When my friends, brothers and grandfathers have been brought down, it
is certain that the worlds will censure me if I protect my life. In the absence of my relatives, friends and well-wishers, and bowing down to Pandava, what kind of a kingdom will I have? Someone like me has brought the entire
earth under his subjugation. I will now attain heaven through a good fight. There is no other way.' When Duryodhana spoke in this way, everyone applauded these words. The kshatriyas praised the king.

' "They ceased to grieve over their defeat and set their minds on bravery. All of them made up their minds to
place fighting at the forefront of their hearts. All of them were delighted at the prospect of battle and comforted
their mounts. The Kouravas went to a spot that was two yojanas away. This was a sacred and auspicious spot on
the slopes of the Himalayas, without any trees. The waters of the Sarasvati were red there and they bathed in it and
drank it. Inspired by your son, they rallied. O king! Having again reassured themselves and each other, all the
kshatriyas were driven by destiny and waited." '
