Vaishampayana said, 'In accordance with the sacred texts, they collected everything that was required for a consecration. In accordance with the decreed rites, Brihaspati kindled a fire and offered oblations. The Himalayas
provided a celestial, golden and supreme seat, decorated with the best of jewels and divine gems. All the auspicious objects were brought by the masses of gods, objects required for the consecration. The required mantras were
chanted. The immensely valorous Indra, Vishnu, the sun god, the moon god, Dhata, Vidhata, the wind god, the fire
god, Pusha, Bhaga, Aryama, Amsha, Vivasvat[The sun god.], the immensely wise Rudra, Mitra, Varuna, the Rudras, the Va-
sus and the Adityas surrounded the handsome lord. With the ancestors, there were the Vishvadevas, the Maruts and
the Sadhyas. There were gandharvas, apsaras, yakshas, rakshasas, serpents and large numbers of devarshis and
brahmarshis. There were Vaikhanasas[Hermits.], Valakhilyas, those that lived on air and those that lived on the rays of
the sun. There were great-souled sages descended from Bhrigu and Angiras. There were all the Vidyadharas[Semi-divine species.],
surrounded by Siddhas with sacred powers of yoga. O lord of the earth! The grandfather was there and Pulastya,
the immensely ascetic Pulaha, Angiras, Kashyapa, Atri, Marichi, Bhrigu, Kratu, Hara, Prachetas, Manu, Daksha,
the seasons, the planets and the stellar bodies. O lord of men! In personified form, the rivers were there and the
eternal Vedas, the oceans, the lakes, the many kinds of tirthas, the earth, the firmament, the directions and all the
trees. Aditi, the mother of the gods, Hri, Shri, Svaha, Sarasvati, Uma, Shachi, Sinivali, Anumati, Kuhu, Raka,
Dhishana and all the wives of the residents of heaven were there[Hri is modesty personified. Shri can be interpreted as prosperity personified, or Lakshmi. Sinivali is the first day of the new moon, when the crescent is barely visible.
Anumati is the fifteenth day of the moon. Kuhu is the day of the new moon. Raka is the
day of the full moon. Dhishana is intellect personified.]. The Himalayas, the Vindhyas, Meru and
many other mountains were there. O king! Airavata and his followers were there and Kala, Kashtha[Kala and Kashtha are small measures of time.], the fortnights, the months, the seasons, night and day. Ucchaihshrava, best among horses, was there and Vamana, king
among elephants. They were with Aruna, Garuda, the trees and the herbs. The illustrious god Dharma came there,
with Destiny, Yama, Death and Yama's followers. There were many others from the large numbers of gods that I
have not named. They arrived there, for the purpose of Kumara's consecration. O king! All the residents of heaven
came there. They carried many auspicious vessels for the consecration. O king! There were golden pots filled with
divine objects. They came to the divine and sacred waters of the Sarasvati. The residents of heaven were delighted
that the great-souled Kumara, a terror to the asuras, would be consecrated as the general. O great king! In that ancient age, the illustrious Brahma, the grandfather of the worlds, consecrated him by pouring Varuna, the lord of the
waters, over him. So did the immensely ascetic Kashyapa and the others who have been named.

'The lord Brahma was delighted and gave him great companions who were powerful and as swift as the wind.
They were successful and possessed valour that could be increased at will. They were Nandisena, Lohitaksha and
Ghantakarna. The fourth companion was known by the name of Kumudamali. Sthanu gave him a great companion
by the name of Kratu. He was immensely forceful and could summon a hundred different kinds of maya at will.
He possessed valour and strength that could be increased at will. O Indra among kings! He was the destroyer of the
enemies of the gods and he gave him to Skanda. In the battle between the gods and the asuras, he[Kratu.] angrily killed
fourteen million terrible daityas with his bare hands alone. The god also gave him soldiers that were full of
demons[Nairritas.]. They destroyed and defeated the enemies of the gods and possessed all kinds of earthy forms. With
Vasava, all the gods uttered roars of victory. So did the gandharvas, the yakshas, the rakshasas, the sages and the
ancestors. Yama gave him two companions who were like Death and Destiny. They were Unmatha and Pramatha.
They were immensely valorous and greatly radiant. Surya cheerfully gave the powerful Kartikeya two companions
who were Surya's followers. They were Subhraja and Bhaskara. Soma gave him companions named Mani and
Sumani. They were like peaks of Kailasa. They wore white garlands and were smeared with white unguents.
Hutashana[Agni.] gave him two brave companions named Jvalajihva and Jyoti. They were ones who crushed enemy
soldiers. Amsha gave the intelligent Skanda five companions-Parigha, Vata, the immensely strong Bhima, Dahati
and Dahana. They were fearsome and full of valour. Vasava, the destroyer of enemy heroes, gave Agni's son two
companions named Utkrosha and Pankaja. They were armed with the vajra and a staff. In battle, they had killed
many enemies of the great Indra. The immensely famous Vishnu gave Skanda three companions named Chakra,
Vikrama and Samkrama. They were immensely strong. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The Ashvins cheerfully
gave Skanda companions named Vardhana and Nandana. They were skilled in all the arts. The immensely illustrious Dhata gave the great-souled one companions named Kundana, Kusuma, Kumuda, Dambara and Adambara.
Tvastha gave Skanda supreme companions named Vakra and Anuvakra. They were strong, proud of their valour
and had mouths like those of sheep. They had great powers of maya. The lord Mitra gave the great-souled Kumara
two great-souled companions, Suvrata and Satyasandha. They possessed austerities and learning. Vidhata gave
Kartikeya two handsome companions who were famous in the three worlds. They were Suprabha and the great-
souled Shubhakarma. They were the granters of boons and the performers of auspicious deeds. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Pusha gave Kartikeya two companions, Palitaka and Kalika. They possessed great powers of
maya. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! Vayu gave Kartikeya Bala and Atibala. They were immensely powerful and possessed large mouths. Varuna, devoted to the truth, gave Kartikeya Ghasa and Atighasa. They had
faces like whales and were immensely strong. O king! The Himalayas gave Hutashana's son the great-souled Suvarchasa and Ativarchasa. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Meru gave Agni's son two companions-the
great-souled Kanchana and Meghamali. Meru also gave Agni's great-souled son two others-Sthira and Atisthira.
They were immensely strong and powerful. The Vindhyas gave Agni's son two companions named Ucchrita and
Atishringa. They fought with large boulders. The ocean gave Agni's son two great companions, Samgraha and Vi-
graha. They were the wielders of clubs. The beautiful Parvati gave Agni's son Unmada, Pushpadanta and
Shankukarna. O tiger among men! Vasuki, the lord of serpents, gave the son of the fire two serpents named Jaya
and Mahajaya.

'In that way, the Sadhyas, the Rudras, the Vasus, the ancestors, the oceans, the rivers and the immensely strong
mountains gave him the leaders of soldiers, armed with spears and battleaxes. They wielded divine weapons and
were attired in many kinds of garments. Listen to the names of the other soldiers that Skanda obtained. They were
armed with many kinds of weapons and attired in colourful ornaments and armour. O king! O Indra among kings!
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They were[Some names are repeated more than once.] Shankukarna, Nikumbha, Padma, Kumuda, Ananta,
Dvadashabhuja, Krishna, Upakrishna, Dronashrava, Kapskandha, Kanchanaksha, Jalamdhama, Akshasamtarjana,
Kunadika, Tamobhrakrit, Ekaksha, Dvadashaksha, the lord Ekajata, Sahasrabahu, Vikata, Vyaghraksha, Kshitikampana, Punyanama, Sunama, Suvaktra, Priyadarshana, Parishruta, Kokanada, Priyamalyanulepana, Ajodira, Gajashira, Skandhaksha, Shatalochana, Jvalajihva, Karala, Sitakesha, Jati, Hari, Chaturdamshtra, Ashtajihva,
Meghanada, Prithushrava, Vidyutaksha, Dhanurvaktra, Jathara, Marutashana, Udaraksha, Jhashaksha, Vajranama,
Vasuprabha, Samudravega, Shailakampi, Putramesha, Pravaha, Nanda, Upanandaka, Dhumra, Shveta, Kalinga,
Siddhartha, Varada, Priyaka, Nanda, the powerful Gonanda, Ananda, Pramoda, Svastika, Dhruvaka, Kshemavapa,
Sujata, Siddha, Govraja, Kanakapida, the lord of great companions, Gayana, Hasana, Bana, the valiant Khadga,
Vaitali, Atitali, Katika, Vatika, Hamsaja, Pankadigdhanga, Samudronmada, Ranotkata, Prahasa, Shvetashirsha,
Nandaka, Kalakantha, Prabhasa, Kumbhabhandaka, Kalakaksha, Sita, Bhutalonmatha, Yajnavaha, Pravaha, Devayaji, Somapa, Sajala, Mahateja, Krathakratha, Tuhana, Tuhana[Tuhana and Tuhaana.], the valiant Chitradeva, Madhura, Suprasada,
the immensely strong Kiriti, Vasana, Madhuvarna, Kalashodara, Ghamanta, Manmathakara, the valiant Suchivakrta, Shvetavaktra, Suvaktra, Charuvaktra, Pandura, Dandabahu, Subahu, Raja, Kokila, Achala, Kanakaksha, the lord
Balanamayika, Samcharaka, Kokanada, Gridhravaktra, Jambuka, Lohashvavaktra, Jathara, Kumbhavaktra, Kunda-
ka, Madgugriva, Krishnouja, Hamsavaktra, Chandrabha, Panikurma, Shambuka, Shakavaktra and Kundaka. There
were other great-souled ones who possessed powers of yoga and were always devoted to brahmanas. O Janamejaya! These great companions were given to him by the great-souled grandfather and they were children, youths
and the aged. Thousands of companions presented themselves before Kumara.

'O Janamejaya! They had many different kinds of faces. Listen to this. Some had faces like tortoises and cocks,
others mouths like hares and owls. Some had faces like asses and camels, others faces like boars. Some had
mouths like men and sheep, others faces like jackals. Some had terrible faces like makaras, others mouths like alligators[Shishumara, alternatively, dolphins or porpoises.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Some had faces like cats and rabbits, others had long faces. Some
had faces like mongooses and owls, others faces like dogs. Some had mouths like rats, others faces like peacocks.
Others had faces like fish and sheep, while still others had faces like goats and buffaloes. Some had faces like bears
and tigers, others faces like leopards and tigers. Some had terrible faces like elephants, others mouths like crocodiles. Some had faces like Garuda, others mouths like rhinoceros, wolves and crows. Others had mouths like cows
and mules, still others mouths like cats[Vrishadamsha again.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Some had large stomachs and
feet, with eyes like stars. Others had mouths like pigeons, and still others mouths like bulls. There were those with
faces like cuckoos and others with faces like hawks and partridges. Some had mouths like partridges[Tittira and krikala are mentioned. Both are types of partridges.], others
were dressed in white garments. Some had faces like serpents, others mouths like porcupines. Some had terrible
mouths, others one hundred faces. Some were attired in snakeskin. Others wore snakes as garments. There were
large stomachs and thin bodies, as there were thin stomachs and large bodies. There were short necks and large
ears, dressed in many kinds of snakeskin. Some wore garments made out of elephant skin, others were attired in
black deerskin. O great king! Some had mouths on their shoulders, others had mouths on their stomachs. Some had
mouths on their backs. Some had mouths on their cheeks. Some had mouths on their thighs. Many had faces on
their flanks and others had mouths all over the body. There were other lords of ganas[Followers of Shiva.] who looked like worms
and insects. There were those with mouths like carnivorous beasts. They had many arms and many heads. Some
had arms like trees. Others had heads around their waists. Some had faces like the bodies of snakes, others dwelt
on many creepers. Some covered their bodies with deerskin, others attired themselves in bark. There were many
different kinds of garments, including those made of hides. There were headdresses and crowns. They had necks
like conch shells and were extremely radiant. Some were diademed. Some had five tufts of hair on their heads.
Some had stiff hair. There were those with three, two or seven tufts of hair on their heads. Some had tufts, others
wore crowns. Some were shaved, others had matted hair. Some were adorned in colourful garments. Some others
had hair on their faces. Some donned divine garlands and garments and always loved the prospect of fighting.
Some were dark, with no flesh on their faces. Some had long backs, without stomachs. Some had long backs, others had short backs. Some had elongated stomachs. Some were long-armed, others were short-armed. Some were
short in stature and were dwarfs. Some were hunchbacked. There were those with long thighs and ears and heads
like those of elephants. There were noses like elephants and noses like tortoises. Others had noses like wolves.
Some had long lips and long tongues. Others had terrible visages and their faces looked downwards. There were
long teeth and short teeth. Some only had four teeth. O king! There were thousands who were as terrible as the
kings of elephants. Some had proportionate bodies that blazed and were ornamented. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! There were those with tawny eyes, with conical ears and bent noses. There were broad teeth, large teeth,
stout lips and tawny hair. There were many kinds of feet, lips and teeth. There were many kinds of hands and
heads. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were many kinds of armour and many kinds of speech. Those
lords were skilled in the languages of different countries and spoke to each other. Those great companions were
seen to cheerfully descend there. They were long in the neck, long in the nails and long in the feet, heads and arms.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They were tawny-eyed, blue in the throat and long in the ear. Some had
stomachs like wolves. Others were like masses of collyrium. Others had white limbs, red necks and tawny eyes. O
king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Many were dappled in colourful hues. There were ornaments that were
like whisks, white, red and silver. These were of many different colours. Some were golden, or had the complexion
of peacocks.

'Let me recount the weapons that were grasped and wielded by the companions who came last. Listen. Some
wielded nooses in their hands. Others had faces like asses, with gaping mouths. Some had large eyes, blue throats
and arms like clubs. They had shataghnis and chakras in their hands. Others had clubs in their hands. There were
bludgeons and catapults in their hands. Some had spears in their hands. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
While some had spears and swords in their hands, others held staffs in their hands. Those great-souled ones possessed many kinds of terrible weapons. They were swift in speed. They were immensely strong and immensely
forceful. Such were the great companions who were seen at Kumara's consecration. They were cheerful and loved
to fight. Nets of bells were fastened to their bodies and they were immensely energetic. O king! There were many
other great companions like these. They presented themselves before the great-souled and illustrious Kartikeya.
They were from heaven, the firmament and earth and some were like the wind. Instructed by the gods, those brave
ones became the companions of Skanda. There were many others like them, in thousands, millions and tens of millions. They surrounded the great-souled one at his consecration.'
