Nara and Narayana said, "You are blessed, since you have seen and have been favoured by the lord himself.
The one who has been born from the lotus[Brahma.] has himself been unable to see him. The illustrious Purushottama has an unmanifest origin and is extremely difficult to see. O Narada! The words we are speaking to you are entirely true. O best among the brahmanas! There is no one in the worlds that he loves as much as a devotee. That is
the  reason  he  has  shown  himself  to  you.  The  paramatman  torments  himself  through  austerities  in  a  region.  O
supreme among brahmanas! With our exception, no one is capable of going there. Because of his radiance, that
place seems to be illuminated by one thousand suns together. That place shines through his own resplendence. O
brahmana! He is the lord behind the creation of the universe. The quality of forgiveness, and the best among those
who forgive, the earth, arose from him. For the welfare of all creatures, the quality of taste also arose from that god
and the attribute of fluidity that is associated with the water. It is from that god that light, and the quality of form
with which it is associated, arose. United with this, the sun radiates the worlds. It is from the supreme god Purushottama that touch has arisen. United with the wind, this makes the worlds feel. Sound arose from the god who
is the lord of the universe. This is attached to space, which extends unconstrained in all the directions. Mind arose
from that god and is inside all beings. This becomes attached to the moon and assumes the quality of showing
things. That place, associated with the Vedas, is known as the region where the six elements arose[The five elements and mind.]. The illustrious one, the devourer of havya and kavya, resides there, accompanied by knowledge. O supreme among brahmanas! There are people who have been cleansed from sin and are disassociated from good and bad deeds. They
are capable of going to that sacred region. That is a region which frees the worlds from delusion and Aditya is said
to be the door to that. On entering Aditya, the bodies of such people are consumed. Others are rendered invisible.
Becoming  like  atoms[Paramanu.],  such  people  merge  into  the  god.  They  are  thus  emancipated  and  are  established  in
Aniruddha. After that, they only retain the attributes of the mind and merge into Pradyumna. Freed from Pradyumna, the being next enters Samkarshana. The best among brahmanas, those who know about sankhya and are devoted, merge there. O best among brahmanas! When the three qualities[Sattva, rajas and tamas.] are completely extinguished, they merge
into the paramatman, the kshetrajna who is devoid of qualities. Truly know that Vasudeva, the refuge of everything, is kshetrajna. There are those who have controlled their minds, are restrained and have checked their senses.
Single-minded in devotion, they enter into Vasudeva. O supreme among brahmanas! We have been born in Dharma's house. Dwelling in this beautiful spot, we have practised fierce austerities. O brahmana! We have done this
for the welfare of the three worlds, so that the supreme one, beloved by the gods, can manifest himself. O supreme
among brahmanas! We have observed rites that have not been witnessed earlier. We have properly observed all the
wonderful vows of hardship. O store of austerities! In Shvetadvipa, you saw us too. Having met the illustrious one,
you formed a resolution and we know about it. We know everything in the three worlds of mobile and immobile
objects, everything that has happened, is happening and will happen, good or bad."'

Vaishampayana said, 'They were engaged in fierce austerities. Having heard their words, Narada, devoted to
Narayana, joined his hands in salutation. He meditated on many kinds of mantras, all of which had originated with
Narayana. He spent one thousand divine years in the hermitage of Nara and Narayana. The immensely energetic
and illustrious rishi, Narada, dwelt there. He worshipped the gods, Nara and Narayana.'
