'Dhritarashtra said, "O immensely intelligent one! Yet again, tell me words that are full of dharma and artha. I am
not satisfied from listening to your varied words."

'Vidura replied, "It is probably the case that bathing in all the tirthas and kindness towards all beings are equal.
But perhaps kindness is superior. O lord! Always be kind towards your sons. You will obtain supreme fame here
and in heaven after your death. O tiger among men! As long as a man's pure deeds are recounted in this world, he
obtains greatness in the world of heaven. On this, the ancient history of the conversation between Virochana and
Sudhanva, over Keshini, is cited.

'"Keshini asked[The critical edition excises some shlokas, leading to abruptness. A svayamvara was arranged for Keshini and
Virochana, a descendant of Diti or a daitya, arrived there. Diti was married to Prajapati Kashyapa. Sudhanva, a
brahmana, was a competing suitor. Virochana was Prahlada's son.], 'O Virochana! Are brahmanas or the sons of Diti superior? With whom should Sudhanva not
be seated on the couch?'

'"Virochana replied, 'O Keshini! We are the descendants of Prajapati and are the supreme among beings. This
entire world belongs to us. Who are the gods and who are the brahmanas?'

'"Keshini said, 'O Virochana! Be seated here and we will await Sudhanva's arrival in the morning. I will see
both of you together in this pavilion.'

'"Virochana replied, 'O fortunate one! O timid one! I will do as you say. In the morning, you will see me and
Sudhanva together.'

'"Sudhanva said[After Sudhanva arrived in the morning, Virochana invited him to share his seat.], 'O son of Prahlada! I cannot touch that golden seat occupied by you. I will then descend to
the same level as you and I cannot be seated with you.'

'"Virochana replied, 'O Sudhanva! You deserve a wooden plank, a handful of kusha grass or a cushion made of
grass. You do not deserve to sit on the same seat as I.'

'"Sudhanva said, 'Even your father honours me and sits below me when we are seated together. You are a child
reared in happiness at home and do not know anything.'

'"Virochana replied, 'O Sudhanva! I am offering gold, cows, horses and all the other riches that we asuras possess, as a stake. Let us put the question to those who know.'

'"Sudhanva said, 'O Virochana! Forget your gold, cows and horses. Let us stake our lives and put the question
to those who know.'

'"Virochana replied, 'Having staked our lives, where will we go? I will not stand before the gods, nor before
men.'

'"Sudhanva said, 'After having staked our lives, we will go to your father. Prahlada will not utter a falsehood,
even for the sake of his son.'

'"Prahlada said, 'These two have never been together before and have now appeared together. They are arriving
by the same road, like two angry serpents. You have never travelled together before. O Virochana! How is it that
you are travelling together now? I am asking you about your friendship with Sudhanva.'

'"Virochana replied, 'There is no friendship between me and Sudhanva. We have staked our lives. O Prahlada! I
am asking you a question. Please do not utter a falsehood.'

'"Prahlada said, 'Let water and madhuparka[A respectful offering made to guests or bridegrooms, consisting of honey and curds.] be brought for Sudhanva. O brahmana! You deserve to be honoured by me. A fat and white cow has been prepared for you.'

'"Sudhanva replied, 'Water and madhuparka have been offered to me on the way. O Prahlada! Answer the question that we are asking you.'

'"Prahlada said, 'O brahmana! You are like another son who is standing before me as a witness. When the two
of you are debating a question, who am I to say anything about it? O Sudhanva! I am asking you a question. Where
does the false witness, who neither speaks the truth nor lies, spend the night?'

'"Sudhanva replied, 'A false witness spends the night like a woman ignored[When the husband is with another woman.], like one who has been defeated
in gambling, or like one whose limbs are exhausted from carrying a load. A false witness spends the night like
someone who is debarred from the city and remains hungry outside the gates, where he always sees many enemies.
A lie for the sake of an animal implies that five are killed[The sense is that five ancestors are destroyed in heaven, or five descendants barred from heaven, and so on.]. A lie for the sake of a cow implies that ten are killed.
A lie for the sake of a horse implies that one hundred are killed. A lie for the sake of a man implies that one thousand are killed. A lie for the sake of gold implies that those who have been born, and those who are yet to be born,
are killed. A lie for the sake of land implies that everything is killed. Therefore, do not lie for the sake of land.'

'"Prahlada said, 'O Virochana! Angiras is superior to me and Sudhanva is superior to you. His mother is superior to your mother. Therefore, you have been won by him. O Virochana! This Sudhanva now owns your life. O
Sudhanva! I desire that you should give it[Virochana's life.] back to Virochana.'

'"Sudhanva replied, 'O Prahlada! Since you have adhered to dharma and have not uttered a falsehood out of affection, I will give you this rare present of a son. O Prahlada! Virochana, this son of yours, has been given by me
to you. He should wash my feet before the maiden.'"

'Vidura said, "O Indra among kings! Therefore, you should not utter a falsehood for the sake of land. By deviating for the sake of your son, do not head towards destruction with your sons and your advisers. The gods do not
protect with a staff, like herdsmen looking after animals. They give wisdom to those they wish to protect. There is
no doubt that a man obtains success to the extent that he sets his mind on doing that which is good. Hymns do not
save from calamities one who resorts to illusion and deceit. When the time for destruction arrives, hymns desert
him, like birds who have grown wings leaving a nest. It is said that one should discard intoxicating liquor, quarrels
that are extensive and with many, discord between the husband and the wife, dissension among relatives, hatred
towards the king, disputes between women and men and a road that is wrong. There are seven who should not be
summoned as witnesses-a palmist[The word used is samudrika. This means a palmist, as well as someone who tells fortune by considering the
signs on the body.], a trader who has been a thief earlier, a skilled fowler, a physician, an enemy,
a friend and an actor[Alternatively, a dancer.]. An agnihotra performed out of pride, silence that is based on pride, studying that is done
out of pride and sacrifices performed out of pride-these are four things that are not fearful. But they become fearful when they are performed inappropriately. An arsonist, a poisoner, a pimp[Alternatively, a bastard.], a seller of soma, one who makes
arrows, a soothsayer, one who injures friends, one who consorts with another's wife, an abortionist, one who violates his preceptor's bed, a brahmana who drinks liquor, one who is unnecessarily harsh in use of words, a base
person, an atheist, one who criticizes the Vedas, a bribe-taker, an outcast, one who is niggardly despite possessing
riches and one who injures when asked for protection-these are the equals of those of who kill brahmanas. Gold
is tested in a fire made of straw, one who is noble through the yoke that he bears, a virtuous man through his conduct, a brave one at the time of fear, a patient one when confronted with calamity and well-wishers and enemies in
times of great hardship. Old age destroys beauty, hope destroys steadfastness, death destroys life, jealousy destroys
dharma, anger destroys prosperity, association with the ignoble destroys conduct, lust destroys modesty and vanity
destroys everything. Prosperity arises from auspicious roots. It increases because of strong action. Its roots are
based on skill. It is based on self-control.

'"There are eight qualities that illuminate a man-wisdom, noble birth, self-control, learning, valour, restraint in
speech, generosity according to capacity and gratitude. O father[The word used is tata.]! These are great qualities, but there is one quality that gathers them together. When a king honours a man, that quality shines over all the other qualities. O king!
In the world of men, these eight are regarded as the signs of attainment of heaven. Of these, four are innate qualities of the virtuous and the other four are qualities pursued by the virtuous. Sacrifices, generosity with gifts, studying and austerities are innate qualities of the virtuous. Self-control, truthfulness, uprightness and non-violence are
the four qualities pursued by the virtuous. There is no assembly where there are no elders. They are not elders if
they do not speak about dharma. There is no dharma where there is no truth. There is no truth when there is immersion in falsehood. Truth, beauty, learning, knowledge, noble birth, good conduct, strength, riches, valour and
eloquence of speech-these ten ensure good social relationships. An evil man performs evil action and reaps evil
fruits. A good man performs good action and reaps good fruits. Evil acts, when performed again and again, destroy
wisdom. A man whose wisdom has been destroyed, always performs evil deeds. The wisdom of a man, who repeatedly performs good deeds, prospers. When wisdom prospers, a man always performs good deeds. A man who
is envious, a man who is malicious, a man who is cruel and a man who always makes enemies out of others, will
quickly confront great hardships, as they follow their evil ways. A man who is without envy, a man who is accomplished in wisdom and a man who always follows good conduct, never confronts great hardships and is lustrous
everywhere. He who learns wisdom from a wise one is learned. He obtains dharma and artha through his wisdom
and can strive towards happiness. During the day, he should act so that he can sleep happily at night. He should act
during the eight months so that he can live during the monsoons happily[The sense being that one cannot work during the four months of the monsoon.]. During the young years, one should act
so that one can live happily in old age. Throughout one's life, one should act so that one can live happily in the afterlife. People speak well of food that has been digested, a wife whose youth has passed, a warrior who is beyond
battles and an ascetic who has crossed over to the other side[Passing beyond this life.]. If one tries to cover up a hole with riches that have
been obtained through adharma, it will remain uncovered and another will surface elsewhere. The preceptor controls those who control their souls. The king controls evil-souled ones. Vaivasvata Yama controls those who sin secretly. The powers of rishis, rivers, those born in noble lineages and great-souled ones cannot be recovered[Once they are lost.], nor
those of women and those who are evil in conduct. O king! One who worships brahmanas, one who is generous,
one who is liberal towards his relatives and a kshatriya who looks towards heaven, rule the earth for a long time.
The brave, the learned and those who know how to serve-these are the three kinds of men who pluck golden
flowers from the earth. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Deeds performed through intelligence are the best,
those performed with the arms are medium, and those performed by bearing loads with the thighs are the worst.

'"Duryodhana and Shakuni are stupid, and Duhshasana is also like that. So is Karna. Having entrusted your
riches to them, how can you hope to thrive? O bull among the Bharata lineage! The Pandavas possess all the qualities. They look upon you as a father. Treat them like sons."'
