'Markandeya said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On one occasion, Narada visited the king of Madra and
was seated in the midst of the assembly hall, conversing with him. At that time, after visiting all the tirthas and all
the hermitages, Savitri, together with the ministers, returned to her father's abode. On seeing her father seated with
Narada, the beautiful one lowered her head at their feet.

'"Narada asked, 'O king! Where did your daughter go and where has she returned from? Why do you not give
this maiden away to a husband?'

'"Ashvapati replied, 'I sent her out on that task and she has returned now. O devarshi! Now hear from her whom
she has chosen as a husband.'"

'Markandeya said, "The beautiful one was instructed by her father to recount everything in detail. She obeyed,
and driven by destiny, spoke these words. 'There is a kshatriya king in the land of Shalva and he has dharma in his
soul. He is famous by the name of Dyumatsena. Later, he became blind. The intelligent one lost his eyesight and
his son was still young. Because of old enmity, a neighbour spotted the weakness and seized the kingdom. With his
young son and wife, he left for the forest. Having left for the great forest, great in his vows, he performed austerities there. His son was born in the city, but grew up in the hermitage. His name is Satyavan and in my mind, I have
accepted him as my husband.' Narada replied, 'O king! In her ignorance, Savitri has committed a grave error, by
choosing the virtuous Satyavan. His father speaks the truth. His mother speaks the truth. Therefore, brahmanas
gave him the name of Satyavan[Satya means truth. Satyavan means someone who follows the truth.]. When he was young, he loved horses and fashioned them out of clay, painting
them. He was therefore known as Chitrashva[Chitra means painting and ashva means horse.].' The king asked, 'Is the king's son energetic and intelligent? Is
he forgiving and brave? Is he truthful and devoted to his father?' Narada replied, 'He is as energetic as the sun-god
and as intelligent as Brihaspati. He is as brave as the great Indra and as forgiving as the earth.' Ashvapati asked, 'Is
the king's son, Satyavan, generous towards brahmanas? Is he handsome and large-hearted? Is his appearance
pleasant?' Narada replied, 'According to his own ability, in generosity, he is the equal of Rantideva, the son of
Samkriti[Rantideva was a king of the lunar dynasty, known for his generosity.]. In devotion to brahmanas and truthfulness, he is like Shibi, the son of Ushinara[This story has been told in Section 33.]. He is like Yayati
in his generosity[Yayati figures in several sections, such as Section 33.]. He is as pleasant to behold as the moon. Dyumatsena's powerful son is as handsome as one
of the Ashvins. He is self-controlled, mild, brave, truthful and in control of his senses. He is friendly, without malice, modest and forbearing. To state it briefly, those who have grown old in austerities and conduct always say that
he is established in uprightness and righteousness.' Ashvapati asked, 'O illustrious one! You have spoken to me
about all his qualities. Now tell me about his faults, if he has any.' Narada replied, 'He has only one blemish. His
life is short. One year from now, Satyavan will give up his body.'

'"The king said, 'O Savitri! O beautiful one! Go and choose another one as your husband. This is a great blemish that overshadows all his qualities. The illustrious Narada is worshipped by the gods and he has told me that his
life is short. He will give up his body within a year.'

'"Savitri said, 'The die is cast only once. The daughter is given away only once. "I give her away," is pronounced only once. All these three occur only once. Whether his life is long or short, whether he possesses qualities or is without qualities, I have chosen him as my husband once and will not choose a second one. Having made
up my mind, I have voiced it in words. The act occurs thereafter. My mind has been made up.'

'"Narada said, 'O best of men! Your daughter Savitri's mind is firmly made up. It is impossible to dislodge her
from the way of dharma. The qualities that Satyavan possesses do not exist in any other man. Therefore, it seems
to me that your daughter should be given to him.'

'"The king said, 'O illustrious one! The words that you have spoken are true and should not be disregarded. O
illustrious one! Since you are my preceptor, I will do as you say.'

'"Narada said, 'May your daughter Savitri be given away without any impediments. I will have to go away now.
May all of you be fortunate.'"

'Markandeya said, "Having said this, Narada soared up into the sky and went to the region of the thirty gods.
The king began to make arrangements for his daughter's marriage."'
