Yudhishthira said, "O grandfather! You have already told me about lack of injury and renunciation among beings, those that have the six characteristics[This is probably a reference to the six signs of completeness-lack of sorrow, lack of ownership, tranquility,
cheerfulness, immersion in the atman and lack of desire for riches.]. Tell me about the two kinds of dharma now, the dharma of the
householder and the dharma of a person who renounces. O grandfather! For those who wish to travel a long distance, which of these two is superior?"

'Bhishma replied, "Both kinds of dharma lead to great fortune and both are extremely difficult to follow. O son!
Both lead to great fruits and both are followed by the virtuous. I will tell you about the proofs that have been cited
for both. O Partha! Listen single-mindedly, so that your doubts about dharma can be severed. O Yudhishthira! In
this connection, the ancient history of a conversation between Kapila and a cow is recounted. Listen to it. We have
heard that when Tvashtri[Tvashtri has different meanings, such as the creator. Here, it is being used for Kapila.] came to visit Nahusha in earlier times, he saw that he[Nahusha.] was following the certain and
ancient practice of the sacred texts and was about to kill a cow. Kapila was cheerful in spirit and was engaged in
the pledges of truth. He was learned and restrained in diet. He possessed the supreme intelligence of faith. When
he saw this, he said, 'I remember the truth of the Vedas, which have become lax now.' At that time, a rishi and
mendicant named Syumarashmi penetrated the cow's body and said, 'What is this? If it is the view that the Vedas
constitute dharma, how can there be a different kind of view[If the Vedas sanction animal slaughter, why should one hold a contrary-view?]? Patient ascetics use the knowledge of the sacred
texts to obtain insight. All of them know about the atman and are regarded as rishis. They are devoid of thirst and
without anxiety. They desire nothing. All of them have no resolutions. This is what the Vedas have proclaimed.'

'"Kapila replied, 'I am not censuring the Vedas, or saying anything against them. We have heard that for the
same objective different kinds of duties have been laid down for different ashramas. The renouncer[The sannyasi.] goes there.
The one who is in vanaprastha goes there. The ones who are in garhasthya or brahmacharya also go there. It has
been the eternal view that all the four modes represent paths followed by the gods. Their superiority and inferiority, strength and weakness, have been spoken about in terms of the fruits obtained. Knowing this, the Vedas have
advocated tasks to accomplish all the objectives. But elsewhere, we have faithfully heard the sacred texts to state
that there need be no tasks at all. There seem to be taints with beginning tasks. But there also seem to be great
taints with not beginning tasks. This being the state of the sacred texts, it is difficult to comprehend strengths and
weaknesses. With the exception of these sacred texts, if you see any view that holds something to be superior to
non-violence, tell me about it. What do you see?'

'"Syumarashmi said, 'We have always heard the sacred texts say that sacrifices must be performed for the sake
of heaven. One first thinks of the fruits and then embarks on a sacrifice. The sacred texts have said that goats, horses, sheep, cows, different kinds of birds, wild and domesticated, and herbs are meant for sustaining life[They are eaten by other living beings.]. Every
day, food must be eaten in the morning and in the evening. The sacred texts have said that animals and grain are
the limbs of a sacrifice. Prajapati created them and sacrifices together. The lord Prajapati made the gods and others
perform sacrifices with their help. All animals have been divided into seven categories each and a succeeding one
is inferior to a preceding one[This is very terse. Seven kinds of domestic animals and seven kinds of wild animals have been recommended as
fit for sacrificing. The seven wild ones are lions, tigers, boars, buffaloes, elephants, bears and monkeys, lions being the best and monkeys being the worst. The seven domestic ones are cows, goats, men, horses, sheep, mules
and donkeys.]. The entire universe has been spoken of as a supreme sacrificial altar. From earlier
times, this is what has progressively been followed. According to his strength, which learned man doesn't choose a
living form for a sacrifice? Animals, humans, trees and herbs also desire to go to heaven and with the exception of
sacrifices, there is no means of reaching heaven. Oblations like herbs, animals, trees, creepers, clarified butter,
milk, curds, the earth[The sacrificial ground.], the directions, faith and the time-these are the twelve components[Of a sacrifice.]. When the hymns
of the Rig, Yajur and Sama Veda and the person performing the sacrifice are added, there is a total of sixteen. The
fire that burns in the household is said to be the seventeenth. These are said to be the limbs of a sacrifice and the
foundations of the sacrifice. Clarified butter, milk, curds mixed with sugar, skin, hair[Hair in the tail.], horns and hooves-a cow
can provide everything for a sacrifice. Each of these is a recommended object. With officiating priests and dakshina, they can sustain sacrifices. People collect all of these and perform sacrifices. It has been heard in the sacred
texts that they[Cows.] have been created for sacrifices. Since ancient times, this is how men have progressively conducted themselves. However, there are some who do not wish to cause any injury or lead to any violence. They perform sacrifices because of conviction and not because they desire the fruits of sacrifices. There is no doubt that
what have been stated constitute the limbs of a sacrifice. Following the ordinances, they must be appropriately
used  and support  each other. I  see  the  sacred  texts  of  the  rishis  and  the  Vedas  are  established  in  them.  Those
learned ones see the instructions that have been laid down by the Brahmanas[The Brahmana texts.]. Sacrifices have been created by the
Brahmanas and they are based on the Brahmanas. The entire universe is based on sacrifices and sacrifices are
based on the universe. The learned say that if a person has sacrificed to the best of his capacity and has uttered the
words "Om", the womb of the brahman, "Namah", "Svaha", "Svadha" and "Vashat", he has nothing to fear in the
three worlds and in the world hereafter. The Vedas, the Siddhas and the supreme rishis say this. A person in whom
all the hymns of the Rig, the Yajur and the Sama are vested, invoked in the proper way, is truly a brahmana. O
brahmana! You know the results of an agnihotra and soma sacrifice. O illustrious one! You also know the consequences of the other great sacrifices. O brahmana! Therefore, you should not think at all about sacrifices or about
officiating at them. Sacrifices performed properly lead to heaven and after death, lead to great fruits in heaven. It is
certain that those who do not perform sacrifices do not obtain any worlds here, or in the hereafter. Those who
know about the words of the Vedas know that there are proofs about both[Performing acts and abstaining from action.].'"'