Vaishampayana said, 'O Janamejaya! Kunti summoned the undecaying Dharma for conception, after Gandhari had
been with child for a year. The queen swiftly made offerings to Dharma and followed the rites that had earlier been
given to her by Durvasa. Through his powers of yoga, Dharma assumed form and she united with him. Consequently, the one with the beautiful hips obtained a son who was the best of all living beings. This was a sacred
tithi[Lunar day.], widely worshipped. It was the eighth hour of the day and the sun was in the middle of the sky. It was the
auspicious moment known as aindra, when the moon was in conjunction with Abhijit[A nakshatra.]. When it was time, Kunti
gave birth to a famous son. As soon as he was born, an invisible voice was heard. "There is no doubt that he will
be supreme among those who uphold dharma. Pandu's first-born son will be famous by the name of Yudhishthira.
He will also be a famous king, renowned in the three worlds-endowed with fame, radiance and adherence to
vows." Having obtained this virtuous son, Pandu again said, "It is said that the best thing for Kshatriyas is strength.
Therefore, ask for a son who has great strength." Having been thus addressed by her husband, she invoked
Vayu[The wind-god.] for a son. Through him, she obtained the mighty-armed Bhima, whose strength was terrifying. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As soon as this immensely strong one was born, an invisible voice was heard. "This
son will be the strongest among all those who are strong." An extraordinary event occurred as soon as
Vrikodara[Bhima.] was born. Falling down from his mother's lap, he shattered a mountain into fragments with his body.
Kunti was asleep and suddenly awoke, frightened by a tiger and forgetting that Vrikodara was asleep in her lap.
The son, whose body was as hard as vajra, fell on the mountain. As he fell, he shattered the mountain into a hundred pieces with his body. On witnessing the mountain break in this way, Pandu was astounded. O supreme among
those of the Bharata lineage! O lord of the earth! Duryodhana was born on the very same day that Bhima was born.

'When Vrikodara was born, Pandu again began to think. "How can I obtain a supreme son who will be the best
in all the worlds? This world depends on destiny and on human action. But as decreed, destiny is only obtained
over a period of time. We have heard that Indra is the king and the best of the gods. He has immeasurable strength
and endeavour and he is valorous and unlimited in radiance. By pleasing him with austerities, I can obtain a son
who is immensely strong. The son that he will give me will be the best. I shall therefore perform the greatest of
austerities in mind, deeds and speech." Thereupon, after consulting with maharshis, the immensely energetic Pandu of the Kuru lineage instructed Kunti to observe a sacred vow for one year. The mighty-armed himself stood on
one leg for a year, performing severe austerities and immersed in supreme meditation. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! Wishing to propitiate the god who is the lord of the thirty gods, the one with dharma in his heart worshipped the sun. Indra responded after a long time. "I will give you a son who will be famous in the three worlds.
He will ensure the welfare of gods, Brahmanas and relatives. I will give you a son who will destroy all his enemies." After the great-souled Vasava[Indra.] had spoken to the king of the Kuru lineage, the one with dharma in his
heart spoke to Kunti, remembering the words of the king of the gods. "O one with the beautiful hips! O sweet-
smiling one! Devoted to morality, great-souled, radiant as the sun, invincible, action-oriented, extremely wonderful
to look at and endowed with Kshatriya energy-this is the son we will receive through the grace of the king of the
gods. Summon him." At these words, the famous one summoned Shakra[Indra.].

'The lord of the gods arrived and Arjuna was born from him. As soon as the son was born, an invisible voice
was heard in the sky, with a thundering and deep roar. "O Kunti! He will be like Kartavirya and Shibi in prowess,
invincible like Indra. He will spread your fame everywhere. As Vishnu increased Aditi's happiness, like Vishnu,
Arjuna will increase your happiness. He will bring under his sway the countries of Madra, Kuru, Kekaya, Chedi,
Kashi and Karusha and establish the prosperity of the Kurus. Through the valour of his arms, Havyavahana[Agni, or fire. Specifically havya is sacrificial offerings and vahana is the one who bears. Havyavahana is
therefore the sacrificial fire into which offerings are placed.]
will be supremely satisfied with the fat of all beings in Khandava. With his brothers, this immensely strong warrior
will vanquish all small chiefs and perform three sacrifices. O Kunti! In valour, he will be the equal of Vishnu and
Jamadagni's son Rama[Parashurama.]. He will be the greatest among those endowed with valour and he will be invincible. He
will acquire all kinds of divine weapons. He will be a bull among men and he will regain the lost fortune." When
Kunti was in her delivery room, these were the wonderful words that were heard from the sky and Kunti heard
them. The ascetics who lived on Shatashringa also heard these loud words and were supremely delighted. The devarshis, Indra and the other gods and the sound of drums being played raised an enormous clamour in the sky.
Amidst this thunderous roar, the entire place was covered with a shower of flowers.

'All the classes of gods assembled to pay their respects to Partha[Pritha's son, Arjuna.]-the offspring of Kadru and Vinata, the
gandharvas, the apsaras, the lords of all beings and all the seven maharshis, Bharadvaja, Kashyapa, Goutama,
Vishvamitra, Jamadagni, Vashishtha and the illustrious Atri, who arose when the sun was destroyed. Marichi, An-
gira, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Prajapati and all the gandharvas and apsaras also came. Wearing divine garlands and
garments, adorned in every ornament, the apsaras danced and sang Bibhatsu's[Bibhatsu is one of Arjuna's names and means the terrible one.] praise. With the handsome Tum-
buru, the other gandharvas began to sing-Bhimasena, Ugrasena, Urnayu, Anagha, Gopati, Dhritarashtra,
Suryavarcha, Yugapa, Trinapa, Karshni, Nandi, Chitraratha, Shalishira, Parjanya, Kali and Narada, the sixteenth
one; and Sat, Brihat, Brihaka, the immensely famous Karala, Brahmachari, Bahuguna, the famous Suparna, Vishvavasu, Bhumanyu, Suchandra the tenth and the famous Haha and Huhu, whose songs are sweet. O bull among
men! These were the divine gandharvas who sang. The apsaras were delighted and were adorned in every ornament. Those illustrious long-eyed ones danced-Anuna, Anavadya, Priyamukhya, Gunavara, Adrika, Shachi,
Mishrakeshi, Alambusha, Marichi, Shuchika, Lakshana, Kshema, Devi, Rambha, Manorama, Asita, Subahu,
Supriya, Suvapu, Pundarika, Sugandha, Suratha, Pramathini, Kamya and Sharadvati. All of them danced in groups.
Menaka, Sahajanya, Parnika, Punjikasthala, Kratusthala, Ghritachi, Vishvachi, Purvachitti, the one who is famous
as Umlocha and Pramlocha-these ten and Urvashi as the eleventh were long-eyed apsaras who sang. The adityas,
radiant like the flames of fire, were assembled in the sky to increase the glory of the great Pandava-Dhata, Arya-
ma, Mitra, Varuna, Amsha, Bhaga, Indra, Vivasvat, Pusha, Tvashta, Parjanya and Vishnu. O lord of the earth. The
illustrious rudras were there-Mrigavyadha, Sharva, the immensely famous Nirriti, Aja Ekapada, Ahirbudhnya,
Pinaki the destroyer of enemies, Dahana, Ishvara, Kapali, Sthanu and the illustrious Bhaga. The Ashvins, the eight
vasus, the immensely powerful maruts, the vishvadevas and the saddhyas were also assembled there. The serpents
Karkotaka, Shesha and Vasuki, Kacchapa, Apakunda and the mighty serpent Takshaka were there, with great energy, great anger and great strength. Many other serpents also assembled there. There were also Vinata's sons-Tarkshya, Arishtanemi, Garuda, Asitadhvaja, Aruna and Aruni. When they saw this great wonder, the supreme hermits
were astounded. Their affection towards Pandu's sons increased even more.

'But the immensely famous Pandu was again greedy for more sons. He summoned the beautiful Kunti yet again.
However, she said, "A fourth son has not been heard of, even in times of calamity. After that, a woman is called
promiscuous. After the fifth, she is called a courtesan. You are learned in the ways of dharma. You are wise. Because of the desire for offspring, why are you transgressing the law and speaking as if you have lost your reason?"'
