Vaishampayana said, 'The perpetrator of wicked deeds acted accordingly and released it. On discerning this,
Hrishikesha cheerfully spoke these words to Drona's son. "In earlier times, Virata's daughter, the daughter-in-law
of the wielder of Gandiva[The daughter is Uttara, married to Abhimanyu.], had gone to Upaplavya. A brahmana who followed vows had seen her there and had
said, 'When the Kurus are destroyed, a son will be born to you. That is the reason the one in your womb will be
known by the name of Parikshit[This is derived from the word parikshina, which means something that
has been destroyed or lost.].' The words of that virtuous one will be true. When everyone is destroyed, there
will again be a victorious son." On hearing the words of Govinda, supreme among the Satvata lineage, Drona's son
became greatly angry and replied in these words. "O Keshava! You are saying this because of your partiality and
this shall not be true. O Pundarikaksha! My words will never be false. O Krishna! The weapon that has been invoked by me will descend on the womb of Virata's daughter, the one that you wish to protect."

'Vasudeva replied, "This supreme weapon is invincible and will indeed descend. The foetus will be born dead.
However, it will revive and live till a long age. All the learned ones know that you are wicked and a coward. You
have always been engaged in evil and wicked deeds. You survive by killing those who are children. That is the reason you will reap the fruits of your wicked deeds. You will roam around the earth for three thousand years. You
will never have a companion and will never be able to converse with anyone. You will be alone and have no aides.
You will roam through diverse countries. O wicked one! You will never find a station amidst men. You will have
the stench of pus and blood. You will dwell in desolate regions and in wildernesses. O evil one! You will roam
around, ridden with every kind of disease. Parikshit will come of age and obtain the Vedas and the vows. The
brave one will obtain knowledge of all the weapons from Kripa Sharadvata. He will know about all the supreme
weapons and base himself on the dharma of kshatriyas. He will have dharma in his soul and protect the earth for
sixty years. On top of this, the mighty-armed one will be the king of the Kurus. O extremely evil-minded one! That
king will be known by the name of Parikshit. O worst of men! You will look on. Behold the power of my austerities, energy and truth."

'Vyasa said, "You disregarded us and perpetrated this terrible deed. This has been your conduct, though you
were a virtuous brahmana[That is, born as one.]. That is the reason there is no doubt that the excellent words spoken by Devaki's son
will come true. You have resorted to the path of inferior deeds."

'Ashvatthama replied, "O brahmana! Together with you, I will dwell among men[Vedavyasa was immortal and so was Ashvatthama.]. O illustrious one! Let Purushottama's[Purushottama is Krishna's name.] words come true."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Drona's son gave the gem to the great-souled Pandavas. While all of them looked on, with
an unhappy state of mind, he left for the forest. Having destroyed their enemies, the Pandavas placed Govinda,
Krishna Dvaipayana and the great sage, Narada, ahead of them. Obtaining the natural gem that Drona's son possessed, they swiftly rushed towards Droupadi, the spirited one having made up her mind on praya. Those tigers
among men used well-trained horses that were as fleet as the wind. With Dasharha, they again returned to their
camp. The maharathas quickly descended from their chariots. They saw Krishna[Krishnaa.] Droupadi, afflicted by great
misery. She was overcome by sorrow and grief and was cheerless. With Keshava, the Pandavas approached her
and stood around her. Having been instructed by the king, the immensely strong Bhimasena gave her the celestial
gem and spoke these words. "O fortunate one! This is your gem. The slayer of your sons has been vanquished.
Arise. Give up this sorrow and remember the dharma of kshatriyas. O dark-eyed one! O timid one! When Vasudeva left on his mission of peace and had yoked his mounts[Described in Section 54 (Volume 4).], you had spoken these words to Madhu's slayer[Vishnu killed a demon named Madhu.]. 'I do
not have husbands. I do not have sons. I do not have brothers. O Govinda! You are also not there. The king wishes
for peace.' Those were the firm words you spoke to Purushottama. You should now remember those words, which
were in accordance with the dharma of kshatriyas. The wicked Duryodhana, who stood in the way of the kingdom,
has been slain. I have drunk the blood of the trembling Duhshasana. We have repaid our debts to the enemy. There
is no one to wound us with words. We have defeated and released Drona's son, so as to honour brahmanas. O
queen! His fame has been destroyed. Only his body remains. He has been separated from his gem. He no longer
possesses any weapons on earth."

'Droupadi replied, "I only wished to repay my debts. The son of the preceptor is my senior too. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Let the king fasten the gem on his head."'

Vaishampayana said, 'The king acted accordingly and followed Droupadi's words. He received it and fastened it
on his head, regarding it as something that had been left for him by his preceptor. The lord bore that divine and
supreme gem on his head. The great king was radiant, like a mountain, with the moon on top. The spirited
Krishna[Krishnaa.], afflicted by sorrow on account of her sons, arose. Dharmaraja asked the mighty-armed Krishna.'
