'Sanjaya said, "The Pandus returned and we were immersed in great terror. Drona was enveloped, like the sun by
the clouds. They raised a terrible cloud of dust and covered your army. On seeing this and on our sight having been
obstructed, we thought that Drona had been slain. Those brave and great archers desired to commit a cruel deed[The deed was cruel because Drona was a brahmana and killing a brahmana was cruel.].
On seeing this, Duryodhana quickly urged all his soldiers. 'O lords of men! Use the utmost of your strengths, the
utmost of your enterprise, the utmost of your spirits. Engage yourselves according to your tasks and restrain the
Pandava formations.' Your son, Durmarshana, saw that Bhima was advancing. Wishing to save Drona's life, he
covered him with a shower of arrows. Like death in that battle, he angrily assailed him with arrows. Bhima also
attacked him with arrows and a great and fierce battle raged between them. Wise, brave and armed warriors were
instructed by their lords. Outwardly giving up all fear of death, they attacked the enemy. O lord of the earth! Wishing to save Drona, Kritavarma, the ornament of any assembly, repulsed Shini's brave son[Meaning Satyaki.]. As Shini's descendant
angrily advanced, he wrathfully showered him with arrows. Kritavarma acted against Shini's descendant, like a
mad elephant against another crazy one. Saindhava, fierce with the bow and a great archer, used a shower of arrows to fall upon Kshatradharma, when he endeavoured to attack Drona. Kshatradharma severed the standard and
bow of the lord of Sindhu. He angrily used many iron arrows to pierce him in all his inner organs. Saindhava displayed the dexterity of his hands and grasped another bow. In that battle, he pierced Kshatradharma with arrows
that were made completely out of iron. For the sake of the Pandavas, the brave maharatha Yuyutsu sought to attack
Drona, but was countered by his brother, Subahu. Yuyutsu used two sharp and yellow arrows that were as sharp as
razors to slice off the arms of his younger brother, Subahu. Those arms were like clubs and held a bow and
arrows[This is inconsistent. All of Duryodhana's brothers were killed by Bhima. And Subahu has already been killed by
Bhima in Section 64.]. King Yudhishthira was the best of the Pandavas and had dharma in his soul. The king of Madra countered him, like the shoreline against a turbulent ocean. Dharmaraja pierced him with many arrows that could penetrate the inner organs and the lord of Madra severely wounded him with sixty-four arrows and roared. But while he
was still roaring, the best of the Pandavas sliced down his standard and bow with two razor-sharp arrows and all
the people shouted in applause. King Bahlika, with his army, used arrows to counter King Drupada, with his army.
Together with their soldiers, these two aged ones fought a terrible battle. This was like that between two gigantic
leaders of herds of elephants, with shattered temples. Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti countered Virata of Mat-
sya, with his soldiers and his army, like Agni against Bali in ancient times[The demon Bali was eventually vanquished by Vishnu in his dwarf (vamana) incarnation. Prior to that, Bali defeated the gods. However, there is no particular story connecting Agni with Bali.]. That disorderly encounter between
the Matsyas and the Kekayas was like that between the gods and the asuras. Horses, charioteers and elephants
fought fearlessly.

'"In that battle, Bhutakarma, the lord of assemblies, used a net of arrows to prevent Nakula's son, Shatanika,
from advancing against Drona. Nakula's heir used three extremely sharp and broad-headed arrows and in that battle, deprived Bhutakarma of his two arms and his head. The valiant Sutasoma was advancing towards Drona. But
the brave Vivimshati repulsed him with a shower of arrows. However, Sutasoma was enraged and armoured. He
pierced Vivimshati, his own paternal uncle, with straight-tufted arrows. Bhimaratha used six swift arrows that were
completely made out of iron and dispatched Shalva, together with his horses and charioteer, to Yama's abode[There is a problem with this. Bhimaratha is Duryodhana's brother and was killed by Bhima in Section 64. Shal-
va was killed much later, by Satyaki. Chitrasena is also Duryodhana's brother.]. O
great king! As your grandson, Shrutakarma, advanced on horses that looked like peacocks, Chitrasena's son countered him. Those two grandsons of yours were invincible and wished to kill each other to accomplish the objectives of their respective fathers and fought a supreme battle. On seeing that Prativindhya was stationed at the forefront of that battle, Drona's son desired to show honour to his father and obstructed him with arrows. Prativindhya
was enraged at this and pierced the one who was stationed so as to protect his father, and bore the signs of a lion's
tail on his standard[References to Ashvatthama.], with sharp arrows. O bull among men! Droupadi's son covered Drona's son with a shower
of arrows, like seeds being scattered at the time of sowing. O king! Both the armies regarded the slayer of the Patacharas as the best among brave ones and Lakshmana restrained him. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! But
that radiant one blazed forth, showering a net of arrows on Lakshmana. Taking aim, he severed Lakshmana's bow
and arrow. As Shikhandi, Yajnasena's youthful son, advanced into battle, the young and immensely wise Vikarna
countered him. Yajnasena's son enveloped him with a net of arrows. But your powerful son repulsed that net of arrows and looked resplendent. In that battle, as the brave Uttamouja advanced in Drona's direction, Angada countered him with vatsadanta arrows. The encounter between those two lions among men was wonderful and it increased the delight of all the soldiers. As the brave Purujit Kuntibhoja advanced against Drona, the powerful and
great archer Durmukha countered him. He struck Durmukha in the midst of his eyebrows with an iron arrow and
his[Durmukha's.] face looked as beautiful as a lotus with a stalk.

'"The five brothers from Kekaya possessed red standards. As they advanced towards Drona, Karna countered
them with showers of arrows. Countered by that storm of arrows, they became extremely enraged and enveloped
him with arrows, becoming repeatedly shrouded by nets of arrows in return. Enveloped by those arrows, Karna
and the five brothers could not be seen. The respective arrows covered their horses, charioteers, standards and
chariots. Your sons, Durjaya, Jaya and Vijaya, countered Nila, Kashi and Jaya. Three were against three. The terrible encounter between them gladdened the spectators, like that between a lion, tiger and wolf on one side and a
buffalo and a bull on the other. As the warrior Satvata[Meaning Satyaki.] advanced against Drona, the brothers Kshemadhurti and
Brihanta countered him and wounded him with their sharp arrows. The battle between them was extraordinary, like
that between a lion and a foremost elephant, with shattered temples, in the forest. King Ambashtha found delight in
battle. As he advanced singly against Drona, the king of Chedi angrily restrained him with arrows. Ambashtha
pierced him with a stake that penetrated right up to the bones and he[The king of Chedi.] gave up his bow and arrows and fell down
from his chariot onto the ground. Sharadvata Kripa repulsed Varshneya Vardhakshemi with kshudraka arrows, as
he angrily attacked Drona with arrows. Those who saw Kripa and Varshneya fight in that wonderful fashion became so engrossed in that encounter that they forgot about doing anything else. Somadatta's son wished to increase
Drona's glory. As King Manimana vigilantly advanced, he countered him. Somadatta's son swiftly sliced down the
string of his bow, the standard, the pennant, the charioteer and umbrella and made him fall down from his chariot.
The one with the sacrificial stake on his standard, the destroyer of enemies[Descriptions of Somadatta's son, Bhurishrava.], then quickly descended from his
chariot. He grasped a supreme sword and cut him down, together with his horses, charioteer, standard and
chariot[However, Manimana will later be killed by Drona.]. O king! He then climbed onto his own chariot again and grasping another bow and steering his horses
himself[The implication is that Bhurishrava's charioteer was also slain.], began to slaughter the Pandava soldiers. Ghatotkacha wished to get at Drona and created terror among
the soldiers. He used clubs, maces, chakras, catapults, battleaxes, dust, wind, fire, water, ashes, stones, grass and
trees to strike and fight, showering these down and causing a rout. However, the rakshasa Alambusa became enraged and countered the other rakshasa with many different kinds of weapons and many diverse implements of
war. The battle between the two foremost among the rakshasas was like that in ancient times, between Shambara
and the king of the immortals[There were several demons named Shambara. One of them was killed by Indra.]. O fortunate one! In this fashion, in that melee, there were hundreds of duels between rathas, elephants, horses and infantry, between those on your side and those of the enemy. A battle like this
has not been witnessed earlier, nor heard of, like that between those who wished to assault Drona and those who
sought to protect him. O lord! In different parts of the field, many such encounters were seen-terrible, wonderful
and fierce."'
