Souti said, 'At about this time, the great ascetic Jaratkaru roamed the entire earth, having adopted the vow of
sleeping at night wherever he happened to find himself in the evening. The immensely energetic hermit roamed
around, bathing in the waters of many tirthas, practising vows that those who lack in resolution find impossible to
accomplish, abstaining from food and living on air, thus drying up his body from one day to another.

'He saw his ancestors suspended head downwards in a cave, hanging on to a single strand of grass. Even that
single strand was being eaten away by a rat that lived in the cave. Without food, they were lean and in a wretched
state, eagerly awaiting their deliverance. Himself in a wretched state, he went to these wretched ones and asked,
"Who are you, hanging from this single strand of grass, which becomes weaker as the rat that lives in the cave
gnaws at the roots? The rat is slowly biting away the root of the strand still left with its sharp teeth and soon the
little that is left of the strand will break. There is no doubt that you will then fall, head downwards, into the cave.
Seeing you hang upside down and in this miserable state, I am extremely distressed. How can I help? Quickly tell
me if I can prevent this calamity by giving you a quarter, a third or even half of my austerities[That is, the merit obtained through these austerities.]. Or if you can
save yourselves with all my austerities, I am willing to do that. What is best?"

'The ancestors replied, "O Brahmana! You are old and celibate[A brahmachari, usually translated as celibate. However, a brahmachari is strictly someone who treads the
path of the brahman.] and you wish to deliver us. O best of Brahmanas! You cannot save us with your austerities. O son! O supreme among eloquent speakers! Our state is the outcome of austerities. We are descending into this hell because of lack of offspring. O son! Hanging in this cave, our
knowledge has become dim. Therefore, though you are famous in the worlds because of your manliness, we do not
know you. You are old, you have great good fortune and you sorrowfully grieve for us. O Brahmana! Learn who
we are and the reason behind the grief. We are rishis named yayavaras, rigid in their vows. We have been cast off
from the holy regions because of lack of offspring. Our sacred austerities have not all been destroyed yet and we
have a single strand left. We have a single strand left, but it matters little whether it exists or not. We have bad fortune, or little fortune. We have a single strand in our lineage. He is known as Jaratkaru and he is learned in the
Vedas and the Vedangas. He is great-souled, rigid in his vows, a great ascetic and is in control of his senses. But in
his greed for austerities, he has reduced us to this state. He has no wife, no son and no relatives. Having lost our
senses, that is the reason we are hanging in this cave, like those without protectors. If you meet him, out of kindness for us, tell him that his wretched ancestors are hanging head downwards from a cave. Tell that holy one that
he should have a wife and offspring. O Brahmana! O one blessed with the power of austerities! This single strand
of grass that you see, the one from which we are hanging, is the strand of our family lineage. O Brahmana! The
strands that you see being eaten up, are being eaten up by time. O Brahmana! The half-eaten root from which we
are all hanging is the last of our lineage, practising austerities. O Brahmana! The rat that you see is time, immensely powerful. He[Time.] is slowly killing the misguided Jaratkaru, engaged in austerities, who is greedy for austerities,
but has lost his mind and senses. O supreme one! His austerities cannot deliver us. Our roots have been destroyed,
we have fallen and our senses have been confounded by time. Look at us descend downwards into hell like sinners.
We are descending, with all our earlier ancestors. Severed by time, he too will descend into hell. O son! Austerities, sacrifices and other sacred and great acts are inferior to obtaining offspring. That is the view of the learned.
When you see him, tell all this to the ascetic Jaratkaru. O Brahmana! If you wish to be our protector, describe in
detail what you have witnessed to him and deliver our message that he should have a wife and offspring."'
