'"The hunter said, 'O supreme among foremost of brahmanas! When I had thus been cursed by the rishi, I spoke to
the one who was eloquent with words. "O rishi! Please show me your favours. O sage! I performed this act out of
ignorance today. O illustrious one! Please pardon me. Please show me your favours." The rishi replied, "There is
no doubt that the curse that I have pronounced cannot be negated. But because of my mildness, I will now show
you a favour. Even when you are born in the womb of a shudra, you will be learned about dharma. There is no
doubt that you will serve your mother and your father. Through serving them, you will achieve great success. You
will remember your earlier birth and you will go to heaven. When the curse has run its course, you will again become a brahmana." In this way, I was cursed by that terribly ascetic rishi in earlier times. O supreme among men!
But he showed me his favours too. O supreme among brahmanas! I took the arrow out of his body. I carried him to
the hermitage and he did not lose his life. These are the details of everything that befell me earlier. O supreme
among brahmanas! I will go to heaven in the hereafter.'

'"The brahmana replied, 'O greatly intelligent one! All men are subject to unhappiness and happiness in this
way. You should therefore not grieve over this. O son[The word used is tata.]! You have performed a difficult task, you have learnt
about your earlier life. O learned one! The taint of your evil deeds is because of the lineage you have been born
into. After some time has passed, you will become a brahmana again. There is no doubt that I think you to be a
brahmana even now. A brahmana who performs evil deeds is certain to meet with downfall. One who is vain and
the performer of evil deeds is almost equal to a shudra. A shudra who is controlled, truthful and devoted to dharma, always rises. I think him to be a brahmana who becomes a brahmana because of his conduct. Through the
taints of evil karma, one attains a terrible end. O supreme among men! I think that all of your sins have been destroyed. You should not be anxious on this account. You should not sorrow and you should not hesitate. You know
about the ways of conduct in the world. You are always devoted to dharma.'

'"The hunter said, 'Like physical pain is destroyed with medicines, mental pain is destroyed with wisdom. This
capacity for knowledge does not come equally to those who are fools. Men of limited intelligence are overcome by
mental distress when they are confronted with calamities and are separated from that which is pleasant. All beings
have some good qualities and some bad ones. Everyone is subject to this and there is no reason for grief. When one
sees something unpleasant, one should swiftly withdraw. One should take countermeasures if one sees it coming.
Nothing happens to the one who sorrows. He can only lament. Men who give up both happiness and unhappiness
are learned ones who are satisfied with knowledge. They are really happy. The ignorant are always dissatisfied.
The learned are always satisfied. There is no end to dissatisfaction. Satisfaction is supreme happiness. Those who
do not sorrow have gone along that path. They can see the supreme objective. One should not immerse one's mind
in grief. Grief is a terrible poison. Like an angry serpent, it kills those who are foolish and have not attained wisdom. One who is overcome by sorrow when difficulties surface, his energy is destroyed and he has no manliness.
There is no doubt that the fruits of our deeds can be seen. One who falls prey to despair does not obtain that which
is good. Instead, one should look for means to free oneself from misery. One should not sorrow, but be united with
the good. If one thinks about the nature of all beings, one obtains supreme intelligence. One should not sorrow.
One should obtain wisdom. One should look towards the supreme objective. O learned one! I do not sorrow. I am
waiting for the time to pass. O brahmana! O excellent one! It is for this reason that I am not constrained.'

'"The brahmana replied, 'You have attained wisdom. You are learned. You have great intelligence. You are content in knowledge. You are devoted to dharma. You have nothing that I can sorrow about. I wish to take my leave.
May you be in peace. May dharma protect you. O supreme among those who uphold dharma! May you not deviate
in your duty towards dharma.'"

'Markandeya said, "Joining his hands in salutation, the hunter granted leave. The supreme among brahmanas
circumambulated him and departed. When he returned, the brahmana began to always assiduously serve his mother, his father and the elders, in accordance with the prescribed rules. O Yudhishthira! O son[The word used is tata.]! O foremost among
those who uphold dharma! I have thus told you everything that you asked me about-the greatness of a faithful
wife, the excellence of brahmanas and servitude towards the mother and the father by the hunter, recounted as
dharma."

'Yudhishthira replied, "O brahmana! This supreme account of dharma is extraordinary. O supreme among those
who know all forms of dharma! O supreme sage! Your account is the best. O learned one! Listening to you, to
these pleasant accounts, it seemed to be but an instant. O illustrious one! But I am still not satisfied about listening
to supreme dharma."'
