Brahma said, "I will tell you the entire truth about comprehending the beginning, the middle and the end
and about the names and signs that are associated with this. It has been said that day was the first. Night
came after that. Within months, shuklapaksha comes first. Among nakshatras, Shravishtha is the first[The text uses the word riksha, which means the same thing as nakshatra. There is no nakshatra named Shravishtha. Instead, there are Shravana and Dhanishtha. Either Shravishtha is to be taken as Shravana, or is shorthand for Shravana and Dhanishtha taken together. In the standard listing of nakshatras, Shravana is twenty-third
and Dhanishtha is twenty-fourth. Therefore, the 'first' should be interpreted in some other sense. Alternatively,
this is a reflection of precession of the equinoxes.]. Among
seasons, winter is the first. Earth is the source of all smells and water of all tastes. Light is the source of all forms
and the wind of all sensations of touch. Space is the source of all sound. These are qualities created by the elements. After this, I will tell you about what is supreme and first among all creatures. Aditya is the first among all
luminous bodies and Agni is the first among all elements. Savitri[The savitri mantra. However, here it is being used in a general sense of all mantras.] is the first among all kinds of knowledge and
Prajapati among all gods. Omkara[Om.] is the first among all the Vedas and prana among all kinds of speech. Everything that restrains this world is known as Savitri. Gayatri is the first among all Sama metres and the goat among
all animals[That is, sacrificial animals.]. The cow is the first among all quadrupeds and brahmanas among all men. The hawk is the first
among all birds. Among all sacrifices, the pouring of oblations is supreme. O best among brahmanas! Among all
the things that creep along the ground, the snake is the foremost. There is no doubt that among all the yugas, krita
is the first. Gold is the first among all jewels and barley among all plants. Food is said to be supreme among all
things that are eaten or swallowed. Water is supreme among all the objects that are drunk. Without any exception,
among  all  the  immobile  regions,  Plaksha  is  always  said  to  be  the  first.  This  is  the  sacred  region  of
Brahmakshetra[This could mean Plakshadvipa out of the seven dvipas. However, Brahmakshetra often means Kurukshetra. This
might simply mean that plaksha (the fig tree) grew in Kurukshetra.]. There is no doubt that I am the first among all Prajapatis. Vishnu, whose soul is incomprehensible, is superior to me. He is known as Svayambhu. The great Meru is said to the first among all mountains. Among
the directions and the sub-directions, the northern direction is the one that was born first. Ganga, with its three
flows, is said to be the first among rivers. The ocean is the first among all lakes and waterbodies. Ishvara is the lord
of all gods, danavas, bhutas, pishachas, serpents, rakshasas, men, kinnaras and yakshas. The great Vishnu, immersed in the brahman, is the origin of the world and the universe. In the three worlds, there is no entity which is
superior to him. There is no doubt that garhasthya is foremost among ashramas. The unmanifest is the origin of all
the worlds and is also their end. Day ends when the sun sets. Night ends when the sun rises. Happiness always
ends with unhappiness. Unhappiness always ends with happiness. All accumulations have an end. All ascent ends
in descent. Association ends in disassociation. Life ends in death. All action is destroyed. Everything that is born is
certain to die. Everything in this world, mobile and immobile, is temporary. Sacrifices, donations, austerities, studies, vows and rituals-all these are destroyed. However, knowledge has no destruction. Therefore, if a person has
knowledge, is pure, tranquil in his soul, restrained, without a sense of ownership and devoid of a sense of ego, he
is freed from all his sins."'"'
