Vaishampayana said, 'They reached the auspicious Ganga, desired by pious people. It had large lakes and beautiful
banks, with large wetlands and large forests. They took off their ornaments and upper garments and offered obla-
tions to fathers, grandsons, brothers and relatives. The noble women of the Kuru lineage offered water to their sons
and all the others. They wept in great sorrow. Those who knew about dharma performed the rite of offering water
for their well-wishers. The wives of heroes offered water for heroes. The Ganga had excellent passages to the water and seemed to extend out even more. The banks of the Ganga were beautiful, full of these wives of heroes. It
was like a giant expanse of water. But it was not at all pleasant.

'O great king! Kunti was suddenly overcome by grief. She wept. In a soft voice, she spoke these words to her
sons. "There was a brave and great archer. He was a leader of leaders of rathas. He was marked with the auspicious
signs of a hero and was killed by Arjuna in the battle. O Pandavas! You thought of him as the son of a suta and as
Radheya[The son of Radha.]. In the midst of the formations, the lord was as radiant as the sun. Staying at the front, he fought against
all of you and your followers. He roamed around, gathering all of Duryodhana's troops behind him. There was no
one on earth who was his equal in valour. He was devoted to the truth. He was brave. He did not retreat from a battle. The one with unblemished deeds was your brother. Perform the water-rites for him. He was your eldest brother,
born from the sun god. He possessed earrings and armour[The natural earrings and armour Karna was born with.]. He was brave. He was like the sun in his radiance." All
the Pandavas heard these unpleasant words spoken by their mother. They sorrowed over Karna and became even
more distressed.

'Sighing like a serpent, the brave Yudhishthira, Kunti's son, spoke to his mother. "No one but Dhananjaya could
withstand his shower of arrows. How did he earlier become your son, born from a god? All of us were tormented
by the strength of his arms. He was like a fire inside a garment. How did you hide him? The strength of his arms
was fierce and the sons of Dhritarashtra worshipped him. No one but Kunti's son, ratha among rathas[Meaning Arjuna.], could have
taken that away from Karna. He was supreme among all the wielders of weapons. He was our eldest brother! How
did you, earlier, give birth to someone with such extraordinary valour? Alas! By keeping this a secret, you have
killed us now. We had been afflicted on account of our relatives and Karna's death has added to that. Abhimanyu
was destroyed. Droupadi's sons were killed. The Panchalas were destroyed and the Kurus were brought down. But
this sorrow, that touches us now, is a hundred times greater than that. Sorrowing over Karna, it is as if I am being
consumed by a fire. There is nothing that we could not have obtained, not even something that is in heaven. This
fierce destruction that has enveloped the Kurus would not have occurred." In this way, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira
lamented a lot. O king! Having lamented, loudly and softly, the lord performed the water-rites. All the men and
women there, on both his sides, cried violently as he performed the water-rites. Out of affection for his brother,
Yudhishthira, the wise lord of the Kurus, had Karna's wives, attired in their garments, brought there. Then, with
them, the one with dharma in his soul performed the funeral rites. Having done this, with his senses in a whirl, he
emerged from the waters of the Ganga.'

This ends Stri Parva.