Janamejaya said, 'O illustrious one! I wish to hear in detail how Partha, the one whose deeds are unsullied, obtained the weapons. What did the long-armed Dhananjaya, tiger among men, do? O one who knows about the
brahman! What did he do while he lived there? How did he satisfy the illustrious Sthanu, lord of the gods? O
supreme among brahmanas! Through your grace, I wish to hear all this. You are omniscient. You know everything,
divine and human. O immensely wise one! The ancient battle between Arjuna, supreme among warriors and unvanquished in battle, and Bhava[Shiva.] was unparalleled and extraordinary and made one's hair stand up. On hearing
about it, the hearts of the brave Parthas[The Pandavas, that is, the other four Pandavas.], lions among men, also trembled in despondency, delight and great surprise. Tell me everything about Partha's[Arjuna's.] deeds. I do not see the slightest thing to censure in Jishnu. Recount to
me everything about the character of that brave one.'

Vaishampayana said, 'O son! O tiger among the Kouravas! I will recount for you the divine, great and extraordinary story of that great-souled one. O unblemished one! Hear in detail the account of Partha's meeting with
Tryambaka[Shiva's name. Literally, the one with three eyes.], god of the gods, where there was physical contact. On Yudhishthira's instructions, the infinitely
valorous one set out to see Shakra, lord of the gods, and Shankara[Shiva.], god of the gods. To ensure that his task met
with success, the immensely strong and mighty-armed Arjuna, bull among men, took his divine bow and sword.'

'O king! With a steadfast mind, Kouravya, Indra's son[Arjuna was Indra's son.], maharatha in all the worlds, set out in a northward
direction for the peak of the Himalayas. His mind was fixed on austerities. He swiftly entered a terrible forest that
was full of thorns. It was full of many flowers and fruit and was populated by many birds. It was full of many types
of animals and was frequented by siddhas and charanas. When Kounteya entered the forest that was bereft of men,
the sounds of conch shells and drums could be heard from heaven. A great shower of flowers fell down on the
ground. A net of clouds covered everything with shade. Passing through the forest that was difficult of access, he
approached the great mountain. In all his splendour, Arjuna then lived on the peak of the Himalayas. He saw many
flowering trees there, resounding with the sweet sounds of birds. There were rivers with many currents, tinged like
blue lapis lazuli[Vaidurya.], echoing with the sounds of swans and ducks, the cries of cranes and resounding with the notes
of male cuckoos, herons and peacocks. On seeing the beautiful woods and the pure, cool and clear water, the great
warrior Arjuna was delighted. The great-souled Arjuna then engaged in terrible austerities in a beautiful region of
that beautiful forest. He clad himself in darbha grass, bark and deerskin and carried a staff. In the first month, he
ate fruits once every period of three nights was over. In the second month, it was for double the period[That is, he ate after a period of six nights was over.]. In the
third month, he ate once every fortnight, surviving on decayed leaves that fell down on the ground. When the
fourth moon arrived and the moon was full, the mighty-armed son[The word used is nandana, meaning beloved as well as son.] of Pandu survived only on air. He raised his
arms up, and without anything for support, stood on the tips of his toes. Because of the frequent baths he took, the
matted hair of that great-souled one whose energy was infinite, became as lustrous as lightning and the lotus.

'Then all the maharshis went to Pinaki[A pinaka is both a trident and a bow. In particular, pinaka means Shiva's bow. Shiva is known as Pinaki. He
wields both a bow and a trident.]. They prostrated themselves before the immensely illustrious one
with the dark throat[Shiva's throat is dark because he consumed the poison thrown up during the churning of the ocean.] and sought his favours. They told him about Phalguna's deeds, "This immensely energetic
Partha has established himself on the peak of the Himalayas. He is engaged in difficult and terrible austerities and
smoke is emerging in all the directions. O lord of the gods! None of us knows what he wishes for. He is tormenting
us. It would be better if he were to be restrained." Maheshvara replied, "In a happy frame of mind and without fatigue, swiftly return to wherever you have come from. I know the resolution that is fixed in his mind. He does not
wish for heaven, or riches, or a long life. I will accomplish today everything that he wishes for." Having heard
Sharva's[Sharva is one of Shiva's names.] words, all the truthful rishis returned to their hermitages in happy frames of mind.'
