Sanjaya said, "In the battle, Drona's son pierced Arjuna with many iron arrows and so did his followers, the brave
maharathas from Trigarta. In the encounter, he pierced Drona's son with three arrows sharpened on stone. Dhananjaya pierced the other great archers with two arrows each. The mighty-armed one showered down arrows again. O
bull among the Bharata lineage! Those on your side were impaled with arrows, like thorns. But though they were
slaughtered by those sharp arrows, they did not abandon Partha in that battle. With Drona's son at the forefront, in
the battle, the maharathas surrounded Arjuna with an array of chariots and fought against him. O king! They shot
arrows decorated with gold. They swiftly covered the seat of Arjuna's chariot. The two Krishnas were bulls among
all archers. They were great archers. On seeing that their limbs were covered with arrows, the ones who found delight in battle rejoiced[That is, the Kourava warriors rejoiced.]. O lord! The pole, wheels, staff, harnesses and yoke of the chariot were completely covered with arrows and looked beautiful. O king! The likes of what those on your side did to Partha had not been
seen earlier, nor heard of. Covered by those sharp arrows with colourful tufts, the chariot was dazzling. It was as if
a celestial vehicle had come down on earth and was blazing because of a hundred torches. O great king! Arjuna
used arrows with straight tufts to repel those soldiers, like a cloud pouring down rain on a mountain. In the battle,
they were slaughtered by Partha's arrows, which were marked with his name. They thought that the entire field
was full of many Parthas. Partha was like a fire. The arrows were flames. The great twang of the bow was the wind
that fanned it. The soldiers on your side were the kindling. It was extraordinary. Wheels and yokes fell down on
the ground, together with quivers, flags, standards and chariots. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were
arrows, housings, trivenus, wheels, yokes and goads in every direction. Heads fell down, wearing earrings and
headdresses. O great king! Arms and shoulders were strewn around everywhere. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Along the path of Partha's chariot, umbrellas, whisks, crowns and reins could be seen. Because of the mire
created by flesh and blood, the earth became impassable. O best of the Bharata lineage! It looked like Rudra's
sporting ground. This generated fear among cowards and increased the delight of brave ones. O scorcher of enemies! Partha destroyed two thousand chariots in that encounter, together with their bumpers. He was like a flame
without smoke. O king! Maharatha Partha was seen there, like the smokeless and illustrious Agni, consuming all
mobile and immobile objects.

' "On witnessing Pandava's valour in the battle, Drona's son countered Pandava, on a chariot with many flags.
Those two tigers among men were the best of archers and were borne on white horses. They swiftly clashed
against each other, wishing to kill each other. O great king! O bull among the Bharata lineage! The extremely terrible shower of arrows was like rain pouring down from clouds. They rivalled each other with their straight-tufted
arrows. Like two bulls with horns, they mangled each other in that encounter. O great king! The battle between
them lasted for a long time. There was a great and terrible clash of weapons there. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Drona's son pierced Arjuna with twelve gold-tufted arrows that were extremely energetic and Vasudeva with
ten. In the great battle, Bibhatsu showed respect towards his preceptor's son for a short while. Then he laughed and
stretched his Gandiva bow. Maharatha Savyasachi deprived him of his horses, charioteer and chariot and gently
pierced him with three arrows. Though his horses had been slain, Drona's son remained stationed on that chariot.
He smiled and hurled a club that was like a bludgeon towards Pandu's son. It was bound in golden cloth and descended with great violence. But the brave Partha, the destroyer of enemies, shattered it into seven fragments. On
seeing that the club had been shattered, Drona's son became supremely angry. He picked up a terrible bludgeon
that was like the summit of a king of mountains. Drona's son was skilled in fighting and hurled this towards
Partha. Pandava saw that the bludgeon had been angrily flung towards him. Arjuna used five supreme arrows to
swiftly slice it down. In the great battle, shattered by Partha's arrows, it fell down on the ground. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! That sound shattered the minds of the kings. Pandava then pierced Drona's son with three
supreme weapons. The extremely strong one was severely and powerfully struck by Partha. However, Drona's son
resorted to his manliness and wasn't frightened.

' "O king! While all the kshatriyas looked on, Bharadvaja's maharatha son covered Sudharma with a storm of
arrows. At this, the Panchala maharatha Suratha attacked Drona's son on his chariot, making a sound like the roaring of clouds. He brandished his supreme bow, which was firm and was capable of bearing all loads. He shot flaming arrows that were like venomous serpents. In the battle, when maharatha Suratha angrily descended, Drona's
son became wrathful, like a snake that has been struck with a staff. His brows furrowed into three lines and he
licked the corners of his mouth. He glanced at Suratha in rage and rubbed his bowstring. He shot a sharp iron arrow that was like Yama's staff. It powerfully pierced and shattered his heart and then penetrated the ground, like
Shakra's unleashed vajra. Slain by the iron arrow, he fell down on the ground. It was as if an extremely large
mountain top had been shattered by thunder. When that brave one was killed, Drona's powerful son, supreme
among rathas, swiftly climbed onto his chariot[Ashvatthama climbed onto Suratha's chariot.]. O great king! Drona's son was invincible in battle. Equipped and
supported by the samshaptakas in the encounter, he fought with Arjuna. There was a great battle between Arjuna
and the enemy. It extended Yama's kingdom. The sun reached midday. The valour that they exhibited was wonderful to see. Arjuna single-handedly fought with many enemies at the same time. The great clash between Arjuna
and the enemy was like that in earlier times, between Shatakratu and the daitya soldiers." '
