'"'Ourva said, "O ancestors! In anger, I took a vow that all the worlds would be destroyed and that cannot go in
vain. Because I cannot be one whose anger and vows come to nothing. Without a doubt, my anger will consume
me, the way fire consumes dry kindling[That is, unless something is done about the anger.]. When anger arises from a reason that is just, a man who suppresses it
cannot properly safeguard the three goals[Of dharma, artha and kama.]. Anger has the purpose of restraining the evil and protecting the
good. Kings who wish to conquer heaven use their anger for a just cause. I was lying unborn inside my mother's
thigh; I heard cries when my mothers of the Bhrigu lineage were slaughtered by the Kshatriyas. O ancestors! When
those worst of the Kshatriyas slaughtered the Bhrigus, including those in wombs and the worlds ignored this, anger
entered my heart. My mothers, heavy in their wombs, and my fathers were frightened, but did not find a protector
in all the worlds. When the women of the Bhrigu lineage did not find a single protector, my fortunate mother hid
me in one of her thighs. If there is one who punishes crimes in the worlds, no one in the worlds will dare to commit a crime. But if a crime doesn't find a punisher, many in the worlds will commit crimes. A man who has the
power to punish a crime and doesn't do so, despite knowing that a crime has been committed, is himself tainted by
the deed, even if he is the lord. The kings and others were capable of protecting my fathers, but failed to do so.
Giving themselves up to the pleasures of life, they neglected their duties. Therefore, I have justifiable reason to be
angry with the worlds and am now their lord. Yet, I am not capable of disobeying your instructions, even though I
am capable of punishing a crime. By refraining from doing so, I will once again encourage the spread of evil in the
worlds. The anger of my rage wishes to consume the worlds. If I suppress it with my own powers, it will consume
me with its energy. O lords! I know that you always strive for the welfare of the worlds. Therefore, instruct me on
what is best for the worlds and for me."

'"'The ancestors said, "This fire that is born from your anger wishes to consume the worlds. Cast it into the waters and be fortunate, because the worlds are established on water. Every juice consists of water. Indeed, the entire
universe is made out of water. O best of the twice-born! Therefore, release your anger into the water. O Brahmana!
If you so desire, let the anger of your fire be in the great ocean. Let it consume the water, because we have heard
that the worlds are made out of water. O unblemished one! In this way, your vow will remain true and the worlds,
with their gods, will not be destroyed."'

'"Vashishtha said, 'Thereupon, Ourva hurled the fire of his anger into Varuna's territory and the fire consumes
the waters of the great ocean. Those who are learned in the Vedas know that it has assumed the form of a large
horse's head[A horse is vadava and a horse's head is called vadavamukha, mukha meaning face. This submarine fire is
thus called vadavamukha. Since anala means fire, it is also called vadavanala.], which spouts fire from the mouth and consumes the waters of the great ocean. O Parashara! You
are the foremost among those who are wise. You are familiar with the higher dharma. Be blessed and refrain from
destroying the worlds.'"'
