'Markandeya said, "O best of Kouravas! Having been thus addressed by Utanka, the unvanquished rajarshi joined
his hands in salutation and said, 'O brahmana! Your arrival will not be in vain. O illustrious one! I have a son,
known by the name of Kuvalashva. He is intelligent and swift to act. His valour is unmatched on earth. There is no
doubt that he will accomplish that which is pleasant for you. He is surrounded by his brave sons, all of whom have
arms like clubs. O brahmana! Please give me permission to leave, since I have discarded all weapons.' Having
been thus addressed, the infinitely energetic sage agreed. The rajarshi directed his son to the great-souled Utanka.
Having done this, he went to an excellent forest."

'Yudhishthira asked, "O illustrious one! O one rich in austerities! Who was this immensely valorous daitya?
Whose son was he and whose grandson? I wish to know all this. O one rich in austerities! I have not heard of this
immensely strong daitya. O illustrious one! O immensely wise one! O one rich in austerities! I wish to know
everything in detail, the way it occurred."

'Markandeya said, "O king! O lord of men! Listen to it, exactly the way it happened. O bull among the Bharata
lineage! When the world became one terrible ocean and all mobile and immobile objects and all beings had been
destroyed, the illustrious Vishnu, the eternal and undecaying being, the source of everything in the world, slept
alone on the ocean. He was stretched out on the great serpent Shesha, whose energy is limitless. O illustrious one!
The immensely fortunate Hari, the undecaying one and the creator of the world, slept in the coils of that great serpent, which encircled the expanse of the earth. While the god was thus asleep, a lotus sprouted from his navel and
it was the equal of the sun in its radiance. From that lotus, which was like the sun and the moon in its splendour,
emerged grandfather Brahma himself, the preceptor of the worlds. He is the four Vedas, with four forms and four
faces. He is extremely strong and valorous and is unassailable because of his powers.

'"Once upon a time, the supremely brave danavas, Madhu and Kaitabha, saw the immensely radiant lord Hari,
asleep on his celestial bed in the coils of the serpent, which was many yojanas long and many yojanas wide. He
wore a diadem and the Koustubha gem[Vishnu's jewel that emerged from the churning of the ocean.]. He was attired in a yellow garment made of silk. O king! He blazed in
his radiance, energy and beauty, equal to the extraordinary sight of a thousand suns. Madhu and Kaitabha were extremely surprised to see the lotus-eyed grandfather on the lotus. They tried to terrify the infinitely energetic Brahma. Repeatedly terrified by those two, the immensely famous Brahma shook the stalk of the lotus and Keshava
woke up. Govinda saw those powerful danavas. On seeing them, the god said, 'O immensely strong ones! You are
welcome. I am pleased with you. Ask for the best of boons.' O great king! Those two great asuras were extremely
brave and began to laugh at Hrishikesha. They replied to Madhusudana, 'O supreme among gods! O god! We are
the ones who grant boons. Ask for a boon from us. Without hesitation, ask for a boon and we will grant it to you.'

The lord said, 'O brave ones! I will accept a boon from you. Grant me the boon that I desire. Both of you are endowed with great valour and there is no man who is your equal. O ones for whom truth is valour! I wish to kill you
for the welfare of the world. Grant me the boon that this desire to kill you is satisfied.' Madhu and Kaitabha
replied, 'O supreme among beings! We have never uttered a falsehood before, not even in jest. We have always
been steadfast in our devotion to dharma and truth. There is no one who is our equal in strength, beauty, valour,
tranquility, dharma, austerities, generosity, conduct, power and self-control. O Keshava! A great calamity confronts us. But do what you have said. It is impossible to overcome destiny. O god! O lord! O supreme among the
best of the gods! But there is one thing that we wish you to do. You must kill us in a spot that is completely uncovered[That is, uncovered by the water.]. O one with the beautiful eyes! We will become your sons. O god! O supreme among gods! Know that this
is the boon that we ask for.' The illustrious one replied, 'It shall be that way. Everything will happen the way you
have stated.' Then Govinda thought, but he could not see any spot that was uncovered. When Madhusudana could
not find such a spot in heaven and earth, the supreme god glanced at his own uncovered thighs. O king! Madhusudana then sliced off the heads of Madhu and Kaitabha, with the end of his sharp and terrible chakra[Having placed the demons on his thigh.]."'