Vaishampayana said,  'The  supreme  among  the  Bharata  lineage  instructed  the  soldiers.  Those men were like
guardians of the worlds and protected everyone, with Arjuna at the front. In delight, a loud roar arose, "Yoke
the vehicles. Get ready." The riders shouted, "Yoke the mounts." Some men advanced on vehicles, others on horses as swift as thought. There were chariots that were like cities, blazing like the fire. O lord of men! Others were on
Indras  among  elephants  or  camels.  Some  advanced  on  foot.  There  were  warriors  who  fought  with  nails  and
spikes[This is a bad translation. What it really means is that there were warriors who fought with weapons made out of
iron, shaped like the talons of tigers. These were worn on the hands.]. The residents of the city and the countryside were there, in many kinds of vehicles. Wishing to see Dhritarashtra, they followed the king of the Kurus. On the king's instructions, the preceptor, Goutama Kripa, assembled
all the soldiers and the commanders and advanced towards the hermitage. Yudhishthira, the prosperous king of the
Kurus, was surrounded by brahmanas. He was praised by many bards, raconteurs and minstrels. A white umbrella
was held aloft his head. The descendant of the Kuru lineage advanced with a large number of chariots. Vrikodara,
the performer of terrible deeds, was on an elephant that was as large as a mountain. The son of the wind god advanced, equipped with machines and implements of war. Madri's sons were astride well-prepared horses. They
were cheerful at the prospect of seeing their mother. They were clad in armour and had standards. The immensely
energetic Arjuna was on a chariot that was as radiant as the sun. This was yoked to divine and white horses and he
followed the king on this. For the large number of women who were on palanquins, Droupadi led the way. The superintendents of the women advanced, showering around large quantities of riches. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The Pandava soldiers were beautiful, with many men and elephants, accompanied by the sounds of flutes and
veenas. O lord of the earth! As they advanced, the bulls among the Kurus progressively dwelt along the banks of
rivers and beautiful lakes. On  Yudhishthira's  instructions, the immensely energetic Yuyutsu and Dhoumya, the
priest, were left with the task of protecting the city. Progressively, King Yudhishthira reached Kurukshetra. He
crossed the extremely sacred river, Yamuna. From a distance, the intelligent rajarshi saw the hermitage of Shatayupa and Kouravya Dhritarashtra. All the people were delighted and entered the forest. O bull among the Bharata lineage! They filled everything with a loud uproar.'
