Vayu said, 'O king! In ancient times, there was a king named Anga. He wished to give away this entire earth
as dakshina to brahmanas. The earth began to think. "I am Brahma's daughter and I properly sustain all the
creatures. The king has obtained me as a boon. Why does he desire to give me away to brahmanas? I will abandon
my  essence  in  the  ground  and  repair  before  Brahma's  feet.  Let  this  kingdom  and  its  king  face  destruction."

Kashyapa saw the earth wandering around. He controlled himself, freed himself from his body and entered the
ground. Thus penetrated, it became full of grass and herbs in every way. O king! All fear was removed from the
ground and it was pervaded by supreme dharma. O king! Kashyapa, great and attentive in his vows, remained inside the ground for thirty thousand divine years. O great king! After this, the earth arrived and bowed down before
Kashyapa. She became the daughter of the great-souled Kashyapa. O king! This was the nature of the brahmana
Kashyapa. Tell me about another one, or a kshatriya, who is superior to Kashyapa.'"

'Bhishma continued, "The king was silent and Pavana[Vayu.] spoke again. 'O king! Hear about Utathya, born in the
lineage of Angiras. Soma had a daughter named Bhadra and she was held to be supremely beautiful. Soma saw
that Utathya would be an unmatched husband for her. For this purpose, the immensely fortunate and illustrious
lady tormented herself through extremely fierce austerities. She wished to obtain the immensely fortunate Utathya
as a husband. He[Soma.] invited Utathya and gave away the illustrious one as a wife and he received her in the proper
way, with a lot of dakshina. The handsome Varuna had desired her earlier. He arrived in the forest and when she
was bathing in the Yamuna, stole her. Abducting her, the lord of the waters took her away to his own city, which
was extremely wonderful and had six hundred thousand lakes. There was nothing that was more beautiful or better
than that city. There were palaces with divine apsaras and all the beautiful objects of pleasure. O king! The god,
the lord of the waters, sported with her there. Utathya got to know about the way his wife was being oppressed. He
heard everything from Narada. Utathya spoke to Narada. "Go and speak harsh words to Varuna. Report my words
that he should release my wife. Why has he abducted her? He is a protector of the worlds and their people. He is
not a destroyer of the worlds. Soma gave me this wife and he has abducted her." Addressed in these words, Narada
went to the lord of the waters and told him, "Release Utathya's wife. That is what Utathya has asked me to tell
you." However, Varuna told him, "I love this wife a great deal and I am unwilling to let her go." Thus addressed by
Varuna, Narada returned to the sage alone. Distressed, he spoke these words to Utathya. "O great sage! Varuna
seized me by the throat and threw me out. He did not give me your wife. Do what you must." Hearing Narada's
words, the one from the Angiras lineage blazed in rage. Using his energy, the extremely great ascetic stupefied the
waters and drunk them up. When all the waters were drunk up, the lord of the waters and his well-wishers began to
be destroyed. But he still did not release her. Enraged, Utathya, supreme among brahmanas, spoke to the earth. "O
fortunate one! There are six hundred thousand lakes. Instead, show me land there." At this, the ocean retreated and
a creek[Alternatively, salty and barren land.] was created there. The supreme among brahmanas told the rivers that flowed through the region, "O
Sarasvati! O timid one! Become invisible here. Instead, go towards the desert. O beautiful one! Abandon this region and make it inauspicious from now on." When the region was thus destroyed, the lord of the waters took the
fortunate lady and returned the wife to the one born in the Angiras lineage. Having obtained his wife back, Utathya
was happy. O Haihaya! He released Varuna from his miserable plight. After having got his wife back, the one who
knew about dharma, Utathya, the extremely energetic one, spoke to Varuna. O lord of men! Listen to what he said.

"O lord of the waters! You suffered these hardships because of my austerities." Having said this, he took his wife
and returned to his own house. O king! Utathya, bull among brahmanas, was like this. I have told you about him.
Tell me about a kshatriya who is superior to Utathya.'"'
