'Yudhishthira asked, "O bull among men! What are the acclaimed signs that signify the army's victory? I wish to
know about this."

'Bhishma replied, "O bull among men! I will tell you everything about the acclaimed signs that signify the
army's victory. Destiny determines this in advance and men are goaded by time. Those who are far-sighted because of their wisdom can see and understand this. Those who are learned about the means of atonement perform
meditation and offer oblations. They observe auspicious acts to pacify the ill portents. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! If the warriors and mounts are uplifted in their spirits, it is said that it is certain that the army will obtain
victory. Winds blow from the rear and there are rainbows. Clouds shower from the rear and so do the sun's rays.
All the jackals, wild crows and vultures become favourably disposed towards it. When they act towards the army
in this way, it obtains supreme success. The flames of the fire[The sacrificial fire.] are clear and the rays rise straight up. There is no
smoke and the flames bend towards the south. The oblations emit an auspicious scent. It is said that this is an indication that there will be victory. When conch shells and drums make a loud noise that is deep in tone and those
who wish to fight are inspired, it is said that this is an indication that there will be victory. When animals are to the
rear or the left of those who are marching or are about to march, that is auspicious. When they are about to kill, if
they are to the right, that is said to signify success. However, if they are in front, that is an obstruction. When birds
call out in auspicious tones, swans, curlews, woodpeckers and blue jays, the warriors become cheerful and spirited
and it is said that this is an indication that there will be victory. When the weapons, shafts, armour and flags are extremely radiant, and so is the sheen and complexion on the faces of the warriors, they become impossible to look at
and the army will overcome the enemy. When the warriors are obedient and not insolent, bearing fraternal feelings
towards each other, and are always based on purity, it is said that this is an indication that there will be victory.
When sounds, touch and the scent that wafts around brings pleasure to the mind and the warriors are full of fortitude, this is the face of victory. For someone who has already penetrated, the left side is auspicious. However, for
someone who is about to penetrate, it is the right. Things at the rear facilitate success and those in front constrain
it.

'"O Yudhishthira! After collecting a large army with the four limbs[Chariots, cavalry, elephants and infantry.], you must first try for conciliation. You
should endeavour to fight only after that. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A victory that is obtained through
war is to be abhorred. If one thinks about it, victory in a battle depends on the wishes of destiny. Like a great flood
of water or a herd of deer that has been terrified, if a large army has been routed, it is extremely difficult to reverse
the flight. They begin to flee and even the learned do not know the reason for this[A reference to the herd mentality.]. Even if the hearts are firm, a
large army is like a mass of ruru deer. If they depend on each other, if they are cheerful and ready to give up their
lives and if they are extremely firm in their determination, even fifty brave ones can drive away the enemy's army.
Or even five, six and seven noble and revered ones, fighting together, and firm in their deterimination, can completely defeat the enemy. You should never advance towards a clash, if it can be prevented. It is said that war
should be adopted only after conciliation, dissension and gifts have been tried out. Those who are cowards are
scared of soldiers[Enemy soldiers.] creeping up to attack, looking on it like a bolt of lightning and unsure about where it will descend next. When a body of soldiers gets to know about the intended attack and advances, the bodies of the warriors tremble, and so does the kingdom. O king! The entire kingdom, with its mobile and immobile objects, trembles. Tormented by the heat of the weapons, the marrow in the bodies begins to melt. Therefore, together with
severity, conciliation must repeatedly be tried. If the enemy is oppressed too much, it will always attack. One
should employ spies to seed internal dissension within the enemy. If the enemy king is superior, a truce is recommended. This is because one will not be able to combine with his foes and act so as to counter him from every
side. Forgiveness is the maya of the virtuous. Those who are virtuous are always forgiving. O Partha! Depending
on the need, know how to use forgiveness and also when not to forgive. If a king conquers through forgiveness, his
fame increases. Even enemies who have committed great crimes begin to trust him. Shambara said, 'Once one has
subjugated, one should think about forgiving. However, a piece of wood that has not been completely burnt returns
again to its natural state.' But preceptors do not praise this as a virtuous practice. Control must be effortless and
without destruction, the way one treats one's own sons. O Yudhishthira! A king who is fierce is hated by the people. However, they also disregard him if he is mild. Therefore, both must be practised. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! Even if one has to strike, one should speak pleasant words before striking. After striking, one should show
compassion and sorrow and weep a little. In front of them, one should say, 'I am not pleased that he[The one who has been killed. The king is speaking to the ones who are
around.] has been
killed. I repeatedly told him that he had not acted in accordance with my words. Alas! I wished that he had remained alive. He did not deserve to be slain in this way. Such excellent men who do not run away from the field of
battle are extremely difficult to get. Whoever has killed him in the battle has performed a task that is not agreeable
to me.' Having spoken words like this before the ones who survive on the side of the one who has been slain and
seizing their hands so as to bring them over to his own side, he must secretly honour the ones who have committed
the crime[The ones on his side who have done the killing.]. In this way, in every situation, he must act in accordance with conciliation. An intrepid king who acts
in this way knows about dharma and is loved by the people. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He obtains the
trust of all the people. With that trust, as desire presents itself, he will be capable of enjoyment. Therefore, the king
must obtain the trust of all people, without resorting to deceit. He who wishes to enjoy the earth should protect it in
every way."'
