'Bhishma said, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about when
Pratardana[The king of Kashi.] and the king of Mithila fought a battle. O Yudhishthira! Listen to this. Janaka
of Mithila was invested with the sacred thread of performing a sacrifice through a battle
and delighted his warriors. King Janaka of Mithila was great in his soul and knew the truth
about everything. He portrayed both heaven and hell before his warriors. 'Behold those radiant worlds, meant for people who are not frightened. They are eternal, full of gandharva
maidens, and yield every object of desire. Hell presents itself to those who run away. They
immediately descend there and obtain eternal ill fame. Having seen those, having made up
your minds to give yourselves up, be victorious. Do not be subjugated in a hell that has no
foundation. For brave people, giving themselves up is the foundation for the supreme gate
of heaven.' O conqueror of enemy cities! This is what the king told his warriors. They defeated the enemy in the battle and brought delight to that lord of men. Therefore, he[The king.]
must always establish himself in the forefront of the battle. Chariots must be in the middle
of the elephants. Horse riders must be to the rear of the chariots. Armoured foot soldiers
must be beyond the horse riders. The king who arranges a vyuha in this way is always victorious over the enemy. O Yudhishthira! It has been decreed that it must always be this
way. All those who wish to act well and desire to fight well must agitate the army, like
makaras in an ocean. They must stand next to each other, delighting those who are distressed. He[The king.] must protect the land that has been won and not unduly pursue those who
have been routed. O king! Those who have given up hope of remaining alive and return to
fight again represent a force that is not easy to counter. Therefore, one should not pursue
too much. Nor should brave ones wish to strike those who are afraid and are running away.
Because they are running away, one should not pursue them. The immobile are devoured
by the mobile. Those without teeth are devoured by the ones with teeth. Those without
hands are devoured by those with hands. Cowards are devoured by the brave. Though their
backs, stomachs, hands and feet are equal, cowards follow the brave. Those who are distressed and scared repeatedly seek refuge with the ones who are brave, joining their hands
in supplication. This world hangs from the hands of brave ones, like a young son. That is
the reason a brave person deserves respect in every possible situation. There is nothing in
the three worlds that is superior to bravery. The brave person protects everything. Everything is established in the brave person."'
