Vaishampayana said, 'The intelligent maiden spoke many sweet words and entreated the one with the thousand
rays, but did not succeed. O king! When the maiden could not dissuade the dispeller of darkness, she was afraid of
the curse and thought for a long period of time. "My father is innocent. How can I prevent the angry Vibhavasu
from cursing him and that brahmana because of what I have done? Though energy and austerities destroy sin,
those who are young can be deluded and should not draw near them. Because of my folly, I am now extremely terrified and have been grasped by the arm. How can I perform the task of giving myself up on my own?" Terrified of
the curse, she thought about this in many ways. Though she kept smiling repeatedly, her limbs were suffering from
delusion. O supreme among kings! She was frightened of the curse and for her relatives. O lord of the earth! Confounded by shame, she spoke these words to the god. Kunti said, "O god! My father is alive, and so are my mother
and other relatives. Since they are alive, this violation of the rules should not happen. O god! If I unite with you,
disregarding the rules, because of my deeds, the fame of this lineage will be destroyed in this world. O foremost
among those who provide heat! But if you think that this is in accordance with dharma, I will comply with your
desire, without being given away by my relatives. O irresistible one! I will remain virtuous even after giving myself to you. Dharma, fame, deeds and the lives of beings are manifest in you."

'Surya said, "O one with the beautiful smiles! O one with the beautiful hips! O fortunate one! Your father, your
mother and your elders are not capable of bestowing you. Listen to my words. O beautiful one! O one with the
beautiful complexion! O one with the beautiful buttocks! A completely free girl is known as kanya in this world,
from the root kan, because she can desire everyone[The root kan means satisfied or pleased. While kanya can rightly be translated as maiden or young girl, it
specifically also means a virgin or a girl who is ten years old.]. O beautiful one! You will not commit any adharma. How
can I, with the welfare of the world in mind, commit adharma? O one with the beautiful complexion! It is natural
in this world that all women and men should be without restraints[In the sense of being free to unite.]. Anything that is against this is a distortion.
Having united with me, you will again become a virgin. You will have a mighty-armed and immensely famous
son."

'Kunti said, "O dispeller of everything that is dark! If I obtain a son through you, may he have earrings and armour. May he be mighty-armed, brave and immensely strong."

'Surya replied, "He will be mighty-armed and possess earrings. O fortunate one! He will be clad in divine armour and both[Earrings and armour.] of these will originate in amrita."

'Kunti said, "If my son's earrings and the excellent armour are created out of amrita, as you have said, you may
beget him on me. O god! O illustrious one! Then I will unite with you. May he have valour, beauty and energy and
be united with dharma, like you."

'Surya replied, "O queen! O one who has been excited! O timid one! Aditi[Kashyapa's wife, the mother of the gods, who are therefore known as Adityas.] herself gave me these earrings. I
will give them to him, together with this excellent armour."

'Pritha said, "O illustrious god! O god! O lord of the cows! If my son is going to be as you have said, I will happily unite with you."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having told Kunti that it would be this way, the traveller in the sky and the enemy of
Svarbhanu, used the self he had created through yoga to enter her and touched her on the navel[The word used is nabhi, which translates as navel. However, nabhi also means the central point.]. The maiden was
overwhelmed with Surya's energy. The goddess fell down on her bed, bereft of her senses. Surya said, "O one with
the beautiful buttocks! I have now finished. You will give birth to a son who will be the foremost among all wielders of weapons, but you will become a virgin." O Indra among kings! Overcome with shame, the maiden requested
Surya that it might be this way and the one who was rich in resplendence disappeared. Thus the daughter of the
king of Kunti[Meaning Kuntibhoja.] was promised and bashfully asked for the sun-god. She fell down on that auspicious bed, overcome with confusion, like a broken creeper. Having confounded her with his fierce rays and having inserted himself in her through yoga, Bhanu did not taint her. The young maiden again recovered her senses.'
