'Dhritarashtra asked, "Having been enraged, how did Pandava act against Bhagadatta? What did Pragjyotisha do to
Partha? Tell me everything as it happened."

'Sanjaya replied, "When Dasharha and Pandava were thus engaged with Pragjyotisha, all the beings thought that
they had reached the jaws of death. O lord! Stationed on the neck of the elephant, Bhagadatta incessantly showered
down arrows on the two Krishnas[Krishna is one of Arjuna's names.], as they were stationed on the chariot. He stretched his bow back to its full extent and pierced Devaki's son with black arrows that were completely made out of iron, gold-tufted and sharpened
on stone. Released by Bhagadatta, they were sharp and their touch was like that of the fire. Those arrows pierced
Devaki's son and penetrated the ground. At this, Partha severed his bow and his quiver and began to fight with
King Bhagadatta, as if he was sporting with him. He[Bhagadatta.] hurled fourteen javelins at Savyasachi. They were sharp
and were as bright as the rays of the sun. But he sliced each of them down into three fragments. Then the son of
Paka's destroyer[Indra is Paka's destroyer and Arjuna was Indra's son.] penetrated the elephant's armour with his net of arrows and it looked like a king of mountains,
covered with clouds. Pragjyotisha hurled a javelin towards Vasudeva. It had a golden handle and was made completely out of iron. Arjuna severed it into two fragments. Arjuna used his arrows to slice down the king's umbrella
and standard. He then smiled and swiftly pierced the lord of the mountains with ten arrows. He was thus pierced
by Arjuna's arrows, which had excellent tufts and the feathers of herons. Bhagadatta became angry at the great-
souled Pandava. He hurled javelins towards his head and roared. In that battle, these dislodged Arjuna's diadem.
Phalguna adjusted the diadem back and spoke these words to the king. 'Look upon this world with delight[Implying that Bhagadatta would not look upon the world for long.].'
Having been thus addressed, he grasped a radiant bow and angrily showered down arrows on Pandava and Govinda. Partha severed his bow and destroyed his quiver and quickly struck him with seventy-two arrows that afflicted
all his inner organs.

'"Having been thus pierced and pained, he angrily resorted to the vaishnava weapon. He invoked the mantra on
his goad and hurled it towards Pandava's chest[Any divine weapon possessed the characteristic that with the appropriate mantra, any object could be invested
with the power of the weapon. Thus, the vaishnava weapon was invoked on the goad.]. That weapon was capable of slaying everything and was released by Bhagadatta. Covering Partha, Keshava received it on his own chest. On Keshava's chest, that weapon
became the vaijayanti garland[While vaijayanti literally means a garland that portends of victory, it is also the name of Vishnu's garland or
necklace.]. Distressed in his mind, Arjuna spoke to Keshava. 'O Janardana! You are not
supposed to fight. You are only supposed to steer my horses. O Pundarikaksha! This is what you said. But you did
not keep your promise. If I am in distress, or if I am incapable of countering, it is only then that you should act in
this way. You should not act in this way if I am standing. With my arrows and with my bow, I am capable of conquering all the worlds, with the gods, the asuras and humans. This is known to you.' Having been thus addressed
by Arjuna, Vasudeva replied in these words. 'O Partha! O unblemished one! Listen to this ancient and secret account. I am engaged in saving the worlds and have four forms. For the sake of the welfare of the worlds, I divide
myself into different parts. One of my forms is based on earth and is engaged in austerities. Another form beholds
the virtuous and evil deeds in the universe. Another form resorts to the world of men and performs deeds. The
fourth and final form lies down and sleeps for a thousand years. This form of mine awakes at the end of a thousand
years and at that time, grants the best of boons to those who are deserving of boons. On one such occasion, the
earth got to know and, for the sake of Naraka[The demon Naraka was the earth's son.], asked a boon from me. Listen to this. "Having obtained the
vaishnava weapon, let it be such that my son cannot be killed by gods and asuras. Grant me this boon." In ancient
times, having heard of this boon, I gave the invincible vaishnava weapon to the earth's son and said, "O earth! Let
this weapon be infallible in protecting Naraka. No one will be able to kill him. Protected by this weapon, your son
will be able to crush the armies of all enemies. He will always be invincible in all the worlds." Having been thus
addressed, the intelligent goddess departed, her wishes having been fulfilled. That is how Naraka, the scorcher of
enemies, became invincible. O Partha! It was from him that Pragjyotisha obtained this weapon of mine[Naraka was killed by Krishna, when he began to oppress women. Naraka ruled in Pragjyotisha and Bhagadatta
was Naraka's son.]. O venerable one! There is no one in the worlds, not even Indra and Rudra, who cannot be killed by it. It is for your sake
that I repulsed the weapon and violated my pledge. O Partha! The great asura has now lost his supreme weapon.
Kill him, as I killed Naraka earlier, for the sake of welfare. The invincible Bhagadatta is your enemy in battle. He
is an enemy of the gods[Bhagadatta was actually Indra's friend.].' Thus addressed by the great-souled Keshava, Partha suddenly shrouded Bhagadatta
with sharp arrows. Without any fear, the mighty-armed and high-minded Partha struck the elephant between its
frontal lobes with an iron arrow. That arrow struck the elephant, like the vajra against a mountain. It penetrated
right up to its tufts, like a snake entering a termite hill. With its limbs paralysed, it fell down and struck the ground
with its tusks. The giant elephant roared in woe and gave up its life. Partha then used an arrow with a drooping
tuft, with a head that was in the shape of the half-moon, and pierced King Bhagadatta in the heart with this. With
his heart thus pierced by Kiriti, King Bhagadatta let go of his bow and arrows and lost his life. His head fell down
and so did the beautiful goad, like a petal falling off a lotus, when the stalk of the lotus has been destroyed. Garlanded in gold, he fell down from the golden housing on the elephant that was like a mountain. He was like a blossoming karnikara[The Indian laburnum.], dislodged from the summit of a mountain by the violent force of the wind. The king was like
Indra in his valour. He was Indra's friend and was killed by Indra's son in the battle. Desiring victory, the men then
began to shatter the ones on your side, like the strength of the wind unleashed on trees."'
