'Lomasha said, "O Yudhishthira! Now listen to what Dhananjaya has said. 'O one rich in austerities[Arjuna is addressing Lomasha.]! Make my
brother Yudhishthira devote himself to the prosperity dharma brings. You know about the supreme dharma and
about austerities. You also know about the eternal dharma that brings prosperity to kings. You also know about
other supreme things through which men are purified. Therefore, bestow on the Pandava the merits that come
through tirthas. Act with your entire mind in a way such that the king visits tirthas and gives away cattle there.'

This is what Vijaya[Arjuna's name.] told me. 'Protected by you, let him go to all the tirthas. You should protect him from rakshasas in difficult and uneven terrain. O supreme among brahmanas! Just as Dadhicha protected Indra of the gods
and Angiras the sun[Dadhicha (or Dadhichi) donated his bones so that the vajra could be constructed, used by Indra to kill Vri-
tra. Angiras rescued the sun when it was hidden by the Panis in their cave.], protect the Kounteyas from rakshasas. There are many evil rakshasas who are the equal of
mountains. If you protect the Kounteyas, they will not be able to attack them.' On Indra's word and appointed by
Arjuna, I will travel with you and protect you from fear. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! I have visited the
tirthas twice earlier. With you, I will visit them for the third time. O Yudhishthira! O great king! Manu and other
rajarshis, the performers of good deeds, have visited the tirthas, the dispellers of all fear. O Kouravya! Liars, those
whose souls are not controlled, ignorant ones and the performers of evil acts do not bathe in tirthas, nor do men
whose minds are crooked. But your mind has always been devoted to dharma. You are always learned in dharma,
you are devoted to the truth. There is no doubt that you will be freed from all that is evil. O Kounteya! O Pandava!
You will become like King Bhagiratha, like King Gaya and like Yayati."

'Yudhishthira replied, "I am so overcome with delight that I cannot find words to answer. There is no one greater
than one whom the king of gods remembers. Who can be greater than one who has your company, whose brother
is Dhananjaya and who is remembered by Vasava? O lord! You have spoken to me about visiting the tirthas. I had
already made up my mind, after Dhoumya's words. O brahmana! Whenever you make up your mind about visiting
the tirthas, it is my certain resolution that I will also go to the tirthas."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Lomasha then spoke to the Pandava, who had already made up his mind. "O great king!
Travel light. If you travel light, it will be easier to go."

'Yudhishthira replied, "Let the brahmanas and ascetics who live on alms return, and the citizens who have followed me out of loyalty for their king. Let them go to the great king Dhritarashtra. In due time, he will give them
their due allowances, those that they have been used to. If that lord of men does not give it, out of affection for us
and to ensure our welfare, Panchala[The king of Panchala, Drupada.] will give it."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Burdened with great grief, the citizens left for the city of the elephant[Hastinapura.], as did the brahmanas and the ascetics. Out of love for Dharmaraja, the king who was Ambika's son[Dhritarashtra's mother was Ambika.] received them and gave
them riches in the prescribed way. The king who was Kunti's son lived happily in Kamyaka for three nights, with
Lomasha and a few brahmanas.'
