Janamejaya asked, 'O brahmana! In the battle, Karna was brought down by Savyasachi. What did the few Kurus
who were left do then? The army of the Pandavas was swelling. On seeing this, what did Kourava, King Duryodhana, do? O supreme among brahmanas! I wish to hear all this in detail. I am not satisfied with listening to the
great deeds of my ancestors.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'O king! When Karna was slain, Dhritarashtra's son, Suyodhana, was immersed in an
ocean of great grief. In every possible way, he lost all hope. He repeatedly grieved, "Alas! Karna! Alas! Karna!"

With a great deal of difficulty, he went to his own camp, together with the remaining kings. Remembering the
death of the son of a suta, the king could find no peace of mind and was comforted by them, with citations from
reasons given in the sacred texts. The king eventually decided that destiny was supremely powerful. He made up
his mind to fight and again emerged for the battle. The bull among kings made Shalya the commander, in accordance with the decreed rites. With the kings who had not been slain, the king emerged to do battle. An extremely
tumultuous battle commenced between the soldiers of the Kurus and the Pandavas. O best of the Bharata lineage!
It was like that between the gods and the asuras. O great king! In the battle, Shalya created carnage among the Pandu soldiers and was slain by Dharmaraja at midday. In the field of battle, all of King Duryodhana's relatives were
slain. Terrified of his enemies, he fled and entered into a terrible lake. During the later part of the afternoon, he was
surrounded by maharathas. He was summoned from the lake and brought down by Bhimasena, who used yoga.
When that great archer was killed, three rathas remained alive[Ashvatthama, Kripa and Kritavarma.]. O Indra among kings! Overcome by rage, they
slaughtered the Panchala soldiers in the night. Next morning, Sanjaya left the camp and entered the city[Hastinapura.], distressed and overcome with grief. He swiftly entered the city, raising his hands in sorrow. Trembling, he entered the
king's abode. O tiger among men! In sorrow, he wept and said, "O king! Alas! The great-souled one has been
killed and all of us are agitated. Although it was not yet time, the extremely powerful one has attained the supreme
objective. All the kings on our side were like Shakra in strength and they have been killed." O king! On seeing
Sanjaya in the city, all the people were extremely anxious and wept in loud voices, saying, "O king! Alas!" O tiger
among men! On hearing that the king had been killed, even the children surrounded the city from all sides and
lamented loudly. We saw three bulls among men running around there[The 'three' is a typo, probably because Ashvatthama, Kripa and Kritavarma have been mentioned earlier. It should read stri (women) and not tri
(three). That is, men and women were running around, not three men.]. They were deprived of their senses. They
were mad with grief. They were severely afflicted.

'Entering, the distracted suta saw the king, who was without decay. He saw the lord, best among kings, who had
wisdom as his sight[Dhritarashtra was blind.]. He saw that the unblemished one, foremost among the Bharata lineage, was seated, surrounded by his daughters-in-law, Gandhari, Vidura and other well-wishers, relatives and friends. He was thinking
about Karna's death. O Janamejaya! In a voice that was choking with tears, and distressed in his mind, the suta
spoke these words to the king, weeping amidst the words. "O tiger among men! O bull among the Bharata lineage!
I am Sanjaya. Shalya, the lord of Madra, and Shakuni Soubala have been slain. O tiger among men! So has Uluka,
firm in his valour and the son of the one who played with dice[Uluka was Shakuni's son.]. All the samshaptakas have been slain, together
with the Kambojas and the Shakas. The mlecchas, the ones from the mountainous regions and the Yavanas have
been brought down. O great king! All those from the east and the south have been slain. O lord of men! All those
from the north and the west have been killed. O king! All the kings and the princes have been killed. O king! Pan-
dava has killed Duryodhana, as he had said he would. O great king! With his thigh broken, he is lying down in the
dust, covered with blood. O king! Dhrishtadyumna has been killed and also the unvanquished Shikhandi, Uttamouja and Yudhamanyu. O king! The Prabhadrakas, the Panchalas and the Chedis, tigers among men, are dead. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Your sons, all of Droupadi's sons, have been slain. The immensely strong and
brave Vrishasena, Karna's son, has been killed. All the men have been killed and the elephants have been brought
down. O tiger among men! Rathas and horses have been slain in the battle. O lord! There are only a few who remain in your camp. Those brave ones and the Pandavas clashed against each other. They were confounded by destiny and only women are left in this world. There are seven left on the side of the Pandavas and three on the side of
the sons of Dhritarashtra. There are the five brothers and Vasudeva and Satyaki. And there are Kripa, Kritavarma
and Drona's son, supreme among victorious ones. O great king! O supreme among kings! Those are the only
rathas who are left. O lord of men! O great king! Out of the akshouhinis that assembled, these are the only ones
who are left. Everyone else has been killed. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The entire world has been slain by
destiny. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! With Duryodhana at the forefront, this was the result of the enmity."

'O great king! Having heard these cruel words, Dhritarashtra, the lord of men, lost his senses and fell down on
the ground. O great king! When he fell down on the ground, the immensely illustrious Vidura was touched by the
king's grief and also fell down. O best of kings! On hearing those cruel words, Gandhari and all the Kuru women
also suddenly fell down on the ground. All the servant-maids in the king's circle also lost their senses and fell
down on the ground. They were overcome by a great delirium, as if they were figures on a painting. King Dhritarashtra, lord of the earth, was overcome by a great hardship. He was afflicted by hardship on account of his sons
and slowly regained his senses. Having regained his senses, the king trembled in great grief. He glanced in all the
directions and spoke these words to Kshatta[Vidura.]. "O learned Kshatta! O immensely wise one! O bull among the
Bharata lineage[Vidura was also born in the same lineage, though through a servant-maid.]! You are the refuge. I am in a grievous state, without a protector. I am without all my sons." Having said this, he lost his senses again and fell down. On seeing him fall down in this way, his relatives sprinkled
cold water on him. They fanned him with fans. After a long time, the lord of the earth was comforted. Oppressed
by grief on account of his sons, the lord of the earth remained silent. O lord of the earth! He sighed, like a snake
that has been flung into a pot. On seeing that the king was so distressed, Sanjaya also wept. For a long time, so did
all the women and the illustrious Gandhari. After repeatedly losing his senses, Dhritarashtra, tiger among men,
spoke these words to Vidura. "Let all the women, and the illustrious Gandhari, depart, and all these well-wishers.
My mind is greatly distracted." O bull among the Bharata lineage! Having heard these words, Vidura trembled repeatedly and gently asked the women to leave. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On seeing that the king was distressed, all the women and all the well-wishers departed. O scorcher of enemies! The king regained his senses and
wept in great grief. The distressed Sanjaya looked at him. The lord of men was sighing repeatedly. Kshatta joined
his hands in salutation and comforted him with gentle words.'
