Vaishampayana said, 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Bhima said that he would do it before all the Pandavas
returned there after collecting their alms[The other Pandavas had gone out, in search of alms. From the subsequent conversation, Yudhishthira had not
gone out either. It was only Arjuna, Nakula and Sahadeva who were absent.]. Looking at his[Bhima's.] appearance, Pandu's son Yudhishthira guessed and
sitting down with his mother, alone and privately, asked her, "What is the exploit that the immensely powerful Bhi-
ma wishes to undertake? Is it something he wishes to do on his own or is it something you have commanded?"

Kunti replied, "On my instructions, the scorcher of enemies[Bhima.] will perform this great task, for the sake of the
Brahmana and in order to save this town."

'Yudhishthira said, "What have you done in your extreme rashness? This is a difficult task. The learned have
certainly never praised the sacrifice of one's own son. Why do you wish to sacrifice your own son for the sake of
someone else's? You have performed an act of abandoning your son. This is not approved by the worlds and by the
Vedas. Through the strength of his arms all of us sleep in peace and hope to recover the kingdom that the evil ones
have deprived us of. It is because of his infinite powers that Duryodhana, Shakuni and all the others spend sleepless nights of worry. Through his valour we escaped from the burning of the house of lac and other dangers when
Purochana was killed. It is through dependence on his valour that we believe that we have already acquired this
earth and its riches and have killed Dhritarashtra's sons. What came to your mind that you deliberately decided to
sacrifice him? Have you lost your senses and your intelligence because of the miseries?"

'Kunti said, "O Yudhishthira! You need not lament over Vrikodara[Bhima.]. I did not take my decision because of the
weakness of my intelligence. O son! We have lived happily in the house of this Brahmana. O son! I wish to regard
this as our compensation. A man is true to the extent he recognizes a good deed. Having witnessed Bhima's valour
in the house of lac and in the killing of Hidimba, I have great confidence in Vrikodara. The strength in Bhima's
arms is as much as that in 10,00020 elephants. It is because of this that he was able to carry us, as heavy as elephants, from Varanavata. There has been no one, nor will there be any one, as strong as Vrikodara. In battle, he is
the equal of the best, the wielder of the vajra[Indra's weapon.] himself. Earlier, as soon as he was born, he fell from my lap on a
mountain. Through the hardness of his body, he shattered the rock into pieces. O Pandava! From that day, I have
known Bhima's strength and, remembering it, I wished to repay the Brahmana. I have not done this from folly,
delusion or desire for gain. I have consciously desired to perform this act because it is what dharma requires. O
Yudhishthira! Two objectives will be attained in this way. We will repay the Brahmana for his lodging us and we
will obtain great religious merit. I have heard that a Kshatriya who helps a Brahmana in any way obtains the fortunate worlds after death. A Kshatriya who saves the life of another Kshatriya obtains great fame in this world and
the next. A Kshatriya who helps a Vaishya on this earth is certainly loved by the subjects in all the worlds. A king
who frees a Shudra who comes to him for protection is reborn in a wealthy family in his next life and is revered by
other kings. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Earlier, the illustrious and extremely wise Lord Vyasa told me this.
That is why I want to act in this way."

'Yudhisthira said, "O mother! What you have intelligently decided to do, driven by compassion for the poor
Brahmana, is indeed right. It is certain that Bhima will kill that maneater and return alive. But the Brahmana must
carefully be told that he must restrain himself, so that the inhabitants of this town do not find out."'
