'Dhritarashtra asked, "O immensely wise one! Because of what you have spoken
well, my sorrow has been dispelled. But I again wish to hear the true purport of
your words. How do learned ones free themselves from their mental grief, when
they come in contact with something that is injurious, or when they are separated
from something that is good?"

'Vidura replied, "Whenever the mind is free from unhappiness and happiness-
that is when a learned one obtains peace and attains a good objective. O bull
among men! Whatever we think of is not permanent. The world is like a plantain
tree. It has no essence[Because there is no wood in a plantain tree.]. Learned ones say that the bodies of mortal beings are
like houses. They are destroyed by time. But the single being that is inside[The atman.] is
beautiful. Men cast aside clothes, whether they are old or new, and wear other
clothes that they like. Bodies occupied by souls are like that. O Vichitravirya's
son! Beings obtain a life of unhappiness or one of happiness, depending on the
deeds they have themselves undertaken. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Depending on their deeds, they obtain heaven, happiness and unhappiness. Whether
he can control it or not, he bears his own load. An earthen pot may be shattered
once it has mounted on the wheel[The potter's wheel.], once some work has been done on it, once
work on it has been completed, once it has been taken down but is still wet, once
it is dry, once it has been fired, or once it has been taken down and is being used.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The bodies of souls are used like that. Some
are destroyed in the womb, some after being born, some when they are a day old,
some when they are half a month old, some when they are a month old, some
when they are a year old, some when they are two years old, some in youth, some
in middle age and some in old age. Depending on their earlier deeds, beings come
into being and cease to be. This is the way of the world. What is the reason to sorrow? O king! O lord of men! It is like beings sporting in the water. Some leap up
and others are submerged. In that way, in this unfathomable earth, some leap up
and others are submerged. One is tied down and has to enjoy the fruits of one's
deeds. Only those of limited intelligence suffer on this account. Those who are
wise remain established in the truth and search for what comes at the end of this
life. They understand why beings come together and attain the supreme
objective."'
