Yudhishthira asked, "What is the most sacred among all the sacred things in the world? What is best? What is
supremely purifying? O grandfather! Tell me that."

'Bhishma replied, "Cows are extremely valuable and sacred and they save men. They sustain subjects through
their milk and ghee. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! There is nothing that is more sacred than cattle. They
are the most sacred among all the sacred and excellent objects in the three worlds. Cows dwell in a region that is
superior to that of the gods. O lord of men! Learned donors[Of cows.] go to heaven. Yuvanashva's son, Mandhata, Yayati
and Nahusha always respectfully gave away hundreds of thousands of cattle. They went to the supreme destination, one that is extremely difficult for even the gods to obtain. O unblemished one! There is an ancient story about
this and I will recount it. Shuka was an excellent and intelligent rishi. Having controlled his mind, he purified himself through his morning ablutions and worshipping his father, Krishna Dvaipayana, who possessed insight about
the supreme worlds, questioned him. 'What do you think is the best sacrifice among all sacrifices? What do learned
ones do to obtain supreme heaven? O lord! Through what act of purification do gods obtain heaven? What makes a
sacrifice a sacrifice? What are sacrifices established on? What is a supreme gift? What is a supreme sacrifice? O
unblemished one! Also tell me what is most sacred among all the objects that are sacred.' O bull among the Bharata lineage! Hearing these words, Vyasa, supreme in his knowledge of dharma, told his son everything.

'"Vyasa said, 'Creatures are established on cattle and cows constitute the refuge. Cows are sacred and purify.
They are the dharma that sanctifies. We have heard that, earlier, cows did not have horns. Indeed, for the sake of
horns, they worshipped the undecaying lord. Brahma saw that cows were engaged in praya[Act of giving up one's life by fasting to death.] near him. The lord
gave each of those cows what they desired. Horns were created and they obtained horns. O son! With horns of
many colours, they were beautiful. Having obtained boons from Brahma, they became the auspicious providers of
havya and kavya. They are sacred, pure and extremely fortunate. They possess the signs of divine residence. The
energy of cows is immensely divine. The gift of cows is praised. Virtuous people who, without malice, donate
them, are spoken of as the doers of virtuous deeds, as if they have given all kinds of gifts. O unblemished one!
They obtain the sacred Goloka. The trees produce sweet fruits there. The trees yield divine flowers and fruit. O
supreme among brahmanas! The flowers possess excellent and celestial fragrances. The ground is covered with
jewels everywhere. The sand is made out of fine gold. Everything is pleasant to the touch. There is no dust. It is
auspicious and sparkling. There are groves of red lotuses and their stalks are made out of gems and gold. The waterbodies there are as radiant as the morning sun. There are lakes with many lotuses, mixed with blue lotuses.
Their petals are made out of extremely expensive gems. Their filaments have a golden complexion. There are
forests of blossoming red oleander, surrounded by thousands of creepers. There are also forests with trees adorned
with blooming santanakas[Flower of the kalpavriksha, one of the five trees in Indra's garden.]. There are sparkling and extremely expensive rivers, with pearls and jewels along the
colourful banks, decorated with gold. There are excellent and colourful trees, covered with gems everywhere. They
are ornamented with gold and have the complexion of the fire. There are golden mountains and hills made out of
gems and jewels. Because of the jewels everywhere, they exude radiance from their beautiful summits. The trees
are covered with leaves and always yield flowers and fruit. O bull among the Bharata lineage[There are inconsistencies here, and in what follows. Vyasa is actually speaking to Shuka, though it is being reported by Bhishma to Yudhishthira.]! The flowers and
fruits possess divine tastes and fragrances. O Yudhishthira! The performers of auspicious deeds always find bliss
there. They are devoid of sorrow and anger and are prosperous, with every object of desire satisfied. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! The illustrious performers of auspicious deeds find pleasure and delight in wonderful and
beautiful celestial vehicles there. O king! They sport  with large numbers of  beautiful apsaras. O  Yudhishthira!
These are the worlds obtained by those who donate cows. Pushan and the Maruts, strongest of the strong, are the
lords there. In prosperity, they become like King Varuna. Firm in vows, one must always recite the words spoken
by Brahma Prajapati-"May Yugandhara, Surupa, Bahurupa, Vishvarupa and Matara save me[Tthese are names for cows. Yugandhara is the bearer of a plough, Surupa is beautiful in form, Bahurupa is with
many forms, Vishvarupa is with the universe as a form and Matara is mother.]." If a person respectfully serves cattle, they are satisfied and grant him boons that are extremely difficult to obtain. One must never injure cows, not even in one's mind. They are the ones who provide happiness. One must always bow down before them and worship and honour them. If a self-restrained person always does this cheerfully, he obtains the benefits associated with cattle. There is a sacred object that the gods eat and it is supreme in the worlds. This is ghee
and it is the most sacred among all the items that are sacred. This must be carried on the head. Ghee is offered as
oblation into the fire. Benedictions are pronounced with ghee. When ghee is consumed and ghee is donated, one
obtains the benefits that are associated with cattle. For three days, one must drink warm cow's urine. For  three
days, one must drink warm milk. After having drunk warm milk, for three days, one must drink warm ghee. Having drunk warm ghee for three days, for three days, one must subsist on air. For one month, if one subsists on
grains of barley that have been searched out from cow dung, one is cleansed from all sins, including that of killing
a brahmana. When they were defeated by the daityas, the gods purified themselves in this way. The extremely
powerful ones thus became successful and obtained divinity. Cows are sacred and auspicious. They are the great
and supreme purifiers. Having donated them to brahmanas, a man obtains heaven. One must purify oneself by residing amidst cattle. In one's mind, one must meditate amidst cattle[The text uses the word gomati, which means a place that has a lot of cattle. But the text also seems to use the
word in the sense of a specific mantra. As a mantra, it probably means a cluster of mantras from the samhita section of the Vedas.]. One must do this after having purified oneself through ablutions first. One will then become pure and clean. A brahmana who is the performer of auspicious
deeds and is learned in the Vedas and follows vows, must bathe and recite it[The gomati mantra.] in the presence of the sacred fire,
amidst cattle and in an assembly of brahmanas. Teaching the gomati to disciples is as revered as performing a sacrifice. If a person fasts for three nights and hears the gomati, he obtains a boon. A person who desires a son obtains
a son. Others obtain riches. One who desires a husband obtains a husband. Men obtain all their objects of desire.
There is no doubt that when cattle are served and are satisfied, they grant all this. In this way, these immensely fortunate ones provide all the objects of desire sought through sacrifices. Know that rohinis are like this and there is
nothing superior to them.'"

'Bhishma continued, "The immensely energetic Shuka was addressed by his great-souled father in this way. He
always worshipped cattle. Therefore, you should also worship them."'
