'Narada said, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! Having thus obtained weapons from the descendant of the Bhargava lineage, together with Duryodhana, Karna amused himself. On one
occasion, many kings assembled at a svayamvara ceremony organized by Chitrangada, the
king of Kalinga. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There was a prosperous city named Rajapura there. For the sake of the maiden, hundreds of kings assembled there. On hearing that
all the kings had gathered there, Duryodhana also went there on his golden chariot, accompanied by Karna. At that svayamvara, a great festival was organized. O supreme among kings!
Many kings came there for the sake of the maiden. O great king! Shishupala, Jarasandha,
Bhishmaka, Vakra, Kapotaroma, Nila, Rukmi, firm in his valour, Srigala, who ruled over a
kingdom of women, Ashoka, Shatadhanva and the valiant Bhoja were among them. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were many others who resided in the southern directions,
preceptors from among the mlecchas[Barbarians, those who do not speak Sanskrit.] and kings from the east and the north. All of them
were adorned in golden armlets and were decorated in garlands made out of molten gold. All
of them possessed radiant bodies and were crazy in their pride, like tigers. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! When all those kings had seated themselves, the maiden entered the arena
with her nurse, guarded by eunuchs. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! While the names of
the kings were being recounted, the beautiful maiden passed by the son of Dhritarashtra[In a svayamvara, the princess passed by all the kings, choosing the one
she wanted. By going past Duryodhana, she rejected him.].
Kouravya Duryodhana could not tolerate that he had been passed by. Ignoring all the kings, he
asked the maiden to stop. Protected by Bhishma and Drona, he was intoxicated by his valour.
He lifted the maiden up onto his chariot and challenged the kings. O bull among men! Karna
wielded a sword and had donned arm-guards and finger-guards. Riding on a chariot, the best
among all wielders of weapons guarded him[Duryodhana.] from the rear. O Yudhishthira. There was a tumult and a loud sound arose among the kings, as body armour was donned, chariots were
yoked and they angrily attacked Karna and Duryodhana. They released showers of arrows,
like clouds on a mountain. With razor-sharp arrows, Karna brought each of their bows, with
arrows affixed to them, down on the ground. Deprived of their bows, some advanced, raising
other bows. Some attacked with arrows. Others grasped javelins and clubs. Karna was
supreme among strikers and oppressed them with his dexterity. He slew many charioteers and
defeated the kings. At this, they themselves picked up the reins of their mounts and said, 'Go
away.' Devastated in their hearts, the kings abandoned the battle. Protected by Karna, Duryodhana was assured. Bringing the maiden with them, they cheerfully returned to the city of Nagasahvya."'
