Vasishtha said, 'The cattle that were originally created tormented themselves with extremely difficult austerities for hundreds of thousands of years, so that they might obtain superiority. O scorcher of enemies! They
said, "Among all kinds of dakshina, we will become the best. The slightest bit of taint will never attach to us. Our
dung will always be used for purifying gods and humans. Those who smear themselves with it will never be deprived of their senses. O one who grants honours[The next sentence clarifies that these prayers are being addressed to Brahma.]! Among all the mobile and immobile objects that are given,
those who gift us will go to Goloka." At the end of those austerities, the lord Brahma himself gave them that boon.
The lord agreed and said that they would save the worlds. Having become successful in the attainment of their
wishes, the mothers of the past and the future arose. O great king! At the end of those austerities, people became
devoted to cattle. Therefore, the immensely fortunate cattle are said to be supremely sacred. It is for this reason
that cows stand ahead of all creatures. If a person covers a well-behaved and milk-yielding kapila cow with a piece
of cloth and gives it away, with her calf, he obtains greatness in Brahma's world. If a person covers a well-behaved
and milk-yielding rohini cow with a piece of cloth and gives it away, with her calf, he obtains greatness in Surya's
world. If a person covers a well-behaved and milk-yielding dappled cow with a piece of cloth and gives it away,
with her calf, he obtains greatness in Soma's world. If a person covers a well-behaved and milk-yielding white
cow with a piece of cloth and gives it away, with her calf, he obtains greatness in Indra's world. If a person covers
a well-behaved and milk-yielding black cow with a piece of cloth and gives it away, with her calf, he obtains greatness in Agni's world. If a person covers a well-behaved and milk-yielding smoky-complexioned cow with a piece
of cloth and gives it away, with her calf, he obtains greatness in Yama's world. If a person covers a cow that has
the complexion of foam on water with a piece of cloth and gives it away, with her calf and a brass vessel for milking, he obtains Varuna's world. If a person covers a cow that has the complexion of the dust in the wind with a
piece of cloth and gives it away, with her calf and a brass vessel for milking, he obtains greatness in Vayu's world.
If a person covers a cow that has the complexion of gold, with reddish-brown eyes, with a piece of cloth and gives
it away, with her calf and a brass vessel for milking, he obtains Kubera's world. If a person covers a cow that has
the complexion of smoky straw with a piece of cloth and gives it away, with her calf and a brass vessel for milking, he obtains greatness in the world of the ancestors. If a person gives away a fat cow with a white and ornamented throat, he easily obtains the best status with the Vishvadevas. If a person covers a well-behaved, milk-yielding
and fair cow with a piece of cloth and gives it away, with her calf, he obtains the world of the Vasus. If a person
covers a cow that has the complexion of a white blanket with a piece of cloth and gives it away, with her calf and a
brass vessel for milking, he obtains the world of the Sadhyas. If a person decorates a bull with a large hump with
all the jewels and gives it away, he doesn't suffer from old age and goes to the world of the Maruts. If a man decorates a blue-limbed bull that is no longer a calf with all the jewels and gives it away, he obtains the world of the
gandharvas and the apsaras. If a person decorates a handsome bull with a white throat with all the jewels and gives
it away, he obtains Prajapati's world and suffers from no sorrow. O king! A person who is devoted to gifting cows
shatters the clouds on a celestial vehicle that has the complexion of the sun and becomes radiant in heaven. A man
who gifts cows is best among men. He finds delight, served by thousands of excellent women, dressed in beautiful
garments and with attractive hips. He awakes and sleeps to the sounds of the laughter of those deer-eyed ones and
the sounds of veenas, lutes and anklets. He obtains greatness for as many years as there is hair on the cow donated.
When he is dislodged from heaven and comes to the world of men, he is born in a family that owns cattle.'"'
