Sanjaya said, "Karna saw the unmatched vyuha of the enemy Parthas, protected by Dhrishtadyumna. It was capable of resisting the arrays of foes. He advanced, roaring like a lion and making his chariot clatter. The earth trembled from the sound of musical instruments. That scorcher of enemies, irresistible in battle, seemed to be trembling
in rage. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The immensely energetic one constructed a counter vyuha. He began to
kill the Pandava soldiers, like Maghavan against the asuras. Placing Yudhishthira on his right, he advanced towards
him."

'Dhritarashtra asked, "O Sanjaya! How did Radheya construct a counter vyuha against the Pandavas? The brave
Dhrishtadyumna was at the forefront and they were protected by Bhimasena. O Sanjaya! Who were stationed at
the flanks and the extreme flanks of my army? How were the others divided and where were they stationed? How
did the sons of Pandu construct a counter vyuha against us? How did that extremely extensive and extremely terrible battle commence? When Karna advanced against Yudhishthira, where was Bibhatsu then? In Arjuna's presence, who is capable of attacking Yudhishthira? In earlier times, he single-handedly vanquished all the beings in
Khandava. Wishing to remain alive, who other than Radheya is capable of fighting with him?"

'Sanjaya replied, "Listen to the construction of the vyuha and how Arjuna arrived there. The kings on both sides
arrayed themselves and fought the battle there. O king! Sharadvata Kripa, the spirited Magadhas and Satvata Kritavarma were stationed on the right flank. On their extreme flank were Shakuni and maharatha Uluka. Those soldiers were protected by fearless horse riders from Gandhara, armed with sparkling lances, and invincible ones
from the mountainous regions. They were like a storm of locusts and as fierce-looking as pishachas. There were
thirty-four thousand samshaptaka rathas who did not retreat. They were fierce in battle and protected the left flank.
Your sons assembled together, wishing to kill Krishna and Arjuna. The Kambojas, Shakas and Yavanas were on
their extreme flank. On the instructions of the son of the suta, they were there, with their chariots, horses and infantry, and challenged Arjuna and the immensely strong Keshava. Karna armoured and stationed himself at the
head of the vanguard. His armour and armlets were colourful. He was garlanded and protected the front of the
army. He was protected by his extremely wrathful sons, supreme among all the wielders of weapons. As he drew
his bow at the head of the army, the brave one[Karna.] was resplendent. Ready to fight, the mighty-armed Duhshasana
was surrounded by soldiers and stationed himself at the rear of the vyuha. He was as resplendent as the sun and the
fire. He was handsome and his eyes were tawny. He was astride a mighty elephant. O great king! King Duryodhana was himself behind him. He was protected by his brothers, Chitrashva and Chitrasena[As has been mentioned before, there is a consistency problem with the
names of Duryodhana's minor brothers. Chitrasena has already been
killed in Section 69 (Volume 6).]. He was also protected by the immensely valorous Madras and Kekayas. O great king! He was as resplendent as Shatakratu, with
the gods. Ashvatthama, the foremost maharathas among the Kurus, elephants that were always crazy and brave
mlecchas stationed themselves behind that army of chariots and followed it. They looked like clouds that poured.
There were standards that signified victory and supreme and blazing weapons. Stationed on horses, the riders were
as beautiful as mountains covered with trees. Thousands of foot soldiers guarded the feet of the elephants. Those
brave ones were armed with lances and swords and did not retreat. There were ornamented riders, chariots and elephants. That vyuha was as resplendent as one of the gods or the asuras. The learned leader arrayed it well, according to the norms of Brihaspati. That mighty vyuha seemed to dance, causing fear in the hearts of the enemy. Wishing to fight, foot soldiers, horses, chariots and elephants issued forth from the flanks and extreme flanks, like
clouds during the monsoon.

' "On seeing Karna stationed at the forefront of the army, King Yudhishthira spoke to Dhananjaya, the single
brave one who was capable of killing all enemies. 'O Arjuna! Behold the mighty vyuha that Karna has constructed
for this battle. The arrays of soldiers are blazing along its flanks and extreme flanks. On seeing this large army of
the enemy, adopt such measures as are decreed by policy, so that we are not overcome.' O king! Thus addressed by
the king, Arjuna joined his hands in salutation and replied, 'Everything will be done as you wish. It shall not be
otherwise. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I will act so that they can be killed. I will act so as to destroy and
kill the foremost among them.'

' "Yudhishthira said, 'With that objective, you advance against Radheya, Bhimsena against Suyodhana, Nakula
against Vrishasena, Sahadeva against Soubala, Shatanika against Duhshasana, the bull among the Shini lineage
against Hardikya[Satyaki and Kritavarma respectively.], Dhrishtadyumna against Drona's son and I myself against Kripa. Let Droupadi's sons[However, Shatanika, Nakula's son, has already been mentioned.]
and Shikhandi advance against the remaining sons of Dhritarashtra. Let the others on our side kill the enemy.'"

'Sanjaya said, "Thus addressed by Dharmaraja, Dhananjaya agreed. He instructed his own soldiers and himself
advanced to the front of the army. As that chariot advanced, it was extremely wonderful to behold. Yet again,
Shalya spoke to Adhiratha's son, invincible in battle. 'The chariot with the white horses is advancing, with Krishna
as the charioteer. Kounteya is advancing, slaying the enemy. He is the one about whom you had asked. The great
and tumultuous sound of the axles of the chariot can be heard. A dust is arising and has covered the sky. O Karna!
The earth is trembling because of the axles of the chariot. A large and violent wind seems to be blowing on both
sides of your army. Predatory beasts are howling and small animals are emitting a terrible sound. O Karna! Behold.
This is extremely horrible and gives rise to fear. The body hair stands up. A headless torso that is like a cloud has
enveloped the sun. Behold. Herds of many different kinds of animals are howling in all the directions. Powerful
and proud tigers are glancing in the direction of the sun. Behold. Thousands of herons and vultures have assembled
together. They are seated, fiercely facing each other, as if they are engaged in a conversation. O Karna! The white
horses yoked to your giant chariot have turned pale. The arrows are blazing and the standard is trembling. Behold.
The horses are extremely large and possess great speed. But they are quivering, though they are as handsome as
flowing Garudas in the sky. From these portents, it is evident that the earth will be covered with kings. O Karna!
They will be slain and will lie down, in hundreds and thousands. The tumultuous sound of conch shells can be
heard and it makes the body hair stand up. O Radheya! There are sounds of drums and double-drums in every direction. There are the whizzing sounds of many kinds of arrows and the roars of men, horses and chariots. O Karna! Listen to the sound produced from the bowstrings and palms of those great-souled ones. O Karna! Behold Arjuna's chariot. It has been constructed by an aristan and is decorated with golden flags that have many hues. As
they are stirred by the wind, they are resplendent. The flags are decorated with golden moons, stars and suns and
are adorned with bells. They are like flashes of lightning in a cloud. There are other golden penants that are being
stirred by the wind. Those flags are on the chariots of the great-souled Panchalas. They are slaying elephants, horses, rathas, infantry and warriors on your side. The tips of their standards can be seen. The twang of their bowstrings can be heard. Today, you will see the brave one with the white horses, with Krishna as his charioteer. He
will slay the enemy in the battle. He is the one about whom you had asked. O Karna! Today, you will see Vasudeva
and Arjuna stationed on a single chariot. Those two tigers among men are red-eyed and are the scorchers of foes.
Varshneya is his charioteer and Gandiva is his bow. O Radheya! If you are successful in killing him, you will be
our king. He has been challenged by the samshaptakas and has departed in their direction. In the battle, that powerful one is creating a great carnage among the enemy.' When Karna was thus addressed by the lord of Madra, he
became extremely angry and said, 'Look. The angry samshaptakas have attacked him from every direction. Partha
cannot be seen and is shrouded, like the sun by the clouds. O Shalya! Immersed in that ocean of grief, Arjuna will
perish.'

' "Shalya replied, 'Who can slay Varuna with water or the fire with kindling? Who can grasp the wind, or drink
up the great ocean? I think that causing hardship to Partha in a battle is equally tough. No one is capable of vanquishing Arjuna, not even Indra, with the gods and the asuras. Be satisified with your words and be cheerful in
your mind. No matter what your wishes are, you cannot be victorious in this encounter. There may be someone
who can raise the earth with his two arms, or consume all the beings with his anger. That person may bring down
the gods from heaven. No one other than him can defeat Arjuna in a battle. Behold Kunti's brave son. Bhima is unsullied in his deeds. The mighty-armed one is radiant and is stationed like Mount Meru. He is perpetually angry,
remembering the enmity that has endured for a long time. The valiant Bhima is stationed in the battle, desiring victory. Dharmaraja Yudhishthira is foremost among those who uphold dharma. The conqueror of enemy cities, the
performer of good deeds, is stationed against the enemy in the battle. Nakula and Sahadeva, the brothers who are
tigers among men, have been born from the Ashvins. They are stationed in the battle and are extremely difficult to
defeat. Behold the five sons of Krishna[Krishnaa, Droupadi.], who are like five mountains. They are stationed, wishing to fight and
all of them are Arjuna's equal in a battle. These are the sons of Drupada, with Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront.
Those brave ones are stationed and are supremely energetic. Satyajit is the youngest among them[There is a problem with translating this. The text uses the word hina,
which should be translated as vile, inferior, or left out. Since there is no
reason for Satyajit to be so described, we have translated this as
youngest.].'
' "While those two lions among men were conversing in this way, the armies clashed against each other, like the
fierce waters of the Ganga and the Yamuna." '444