'Brihadashva said, "When the serpent disappeared, Nishadha Nala left for Rituparna's city and entered there on the
tenth day. He went before the king and spoke these words, 'I am Bahuka. I am skilled in driving horses and there is
no one on earth who is my equal. I am skilled and can be asked about all difficulties connected with artha. I also
know the art of cooking and especially on this, there is no one better than I am. If there is anything in this world
connected with artisanship or any other difficult matter, I will seek to accomplish them all. O Rituparna! Therefore,
maintain me.' Rituparna replied, 'O Bahuka! O blessed one! Reside with me. You will do all this. My mind has always been particularly attracted to the question of speed. Devise some means of yoking so that my horses travel
fast. Be the superintendent of my stables and your salary will be a hundred thousand. Varshneya and Jivala[Rituparna's charioteers. Varshneya is Nala's old charioteer, who has found employment with Rituparna.] will
always follow your instructions. O Bahuka! Spend your days happily with them and reside with me.' Having been
thus addressed and honoured, Nala lived there in Rituparna's city, in the company of Varshneya and Jivala.

'"While living there, the king continued to think about the daughter of Vidarbha. Every evening, he recited a
shloka which said, 'O ascetic! Hungry, thirsty, fatigued and miserable, where are you? Do you keep thinking about
that unfortunate one? Whom are you attached to now?' Having heard the king recite this in the night, Jivala said,
'O Bahuka! I wish to hear about the one over whom you always sorrow.' Thus addressed, King Nala replied,
'There was one who lost his senses. There was a lady he thought much of and she was firmer towards him. Because of a certain reason, that unfortunate one was separated from her. Separated from her, that evil-minded one
roams around, oppressed by unhappiness. Day and night, he is tormented by sorrow and cannot sleep. Remembering her at night, he recites this shloka. Having wandered around the entire earth and having obtained some things
somewhere, he has now settled down, though he doesn't deserve to. Remembering her, he always sorrows. That
woman even followed the man into the difficulties of the forest. But the one with limited virtue abandoned her and
it is difficult for her to be still alive. She is alone, young, inexperienced about the roads and unaccustomed to difficulties. She is hungry and thirsty and it is difficult for her to be still alive. Predators always roam in that great and
terrible forest. O respected one! She was abandoned by the one with limited virtue, the evil-minded one.' Thus did
the king of Nishadha remember Damayanti, while he lived a life of disguise in the king's house."'
