'Markandeya said, "Then all the brahmarshis, siddhas and devarshis, with Agni leading them, went and sought
refuge with Brahma. Agni said, 'O lord! Vishrava's son, Dashagriva, is immensely strong and cannot be killed, because you have earlier granted him a boon. The immensely strong one is oppressing all beings with injurious acts.
O lord! Save us from him. There is no one else who can save us.' Brahma replied, 'O Vibhavasu[Agni's name.]! The gods and
the asuras cannot defeat him in battle. What must be done to subdue him has already been ordained. For that purpose, at my request, the four-armed Vishnu, foremost among brave ones, has already descended on earth. He will
accomplish this task.' The grandfather addressed these words to them. 'With the masses of gods, all of you take
births on earth. To aid Vishnu, all of you beget brave sons on monkeys and bears, strong and capable of assuming
any form at will.' At this, all the gods, the gandharvas and serpents happily descended on earth, with respective
parts from their own bodies. In their presence, the god who is the granter of boons[Brahma.], instructed a gandharva lady
named Dundubhi so that the task of the gods might be accomplished. On hearing the grandfather's words, the
gandharvi Dundubhi took the form of Manthara in the world of men. She was hunchbacked. All the foremost
among the gods, with Shakra at the forefront, begot sons on the chief women among monkeys and bears. All of
them were like their fathers, in fame and strength. They could shatter the peaks of mountains. Their weapons were
shala and tala, trees and rocks. All their bodies were capable of withstanding the vajra. They were endowed with
great strength. They could assume strength and valour at will. They were skilled in fighting. Each possessed the
strength of ten thousand elephants. They had the speed of the wind. Some of them lived where they wished. Others
lived in the forest. Having thus decreed everything, the illustrious one, the creator of the worlds, instructed Man-
thara about what she should do and how she should go about it. On hearing his words, she carried them out with
the speed of the mind. She went here and there, bent on creating enmity."'
