Yudhishthira said, "The grandfather has spoken about the rules the great-souled ones have laid down for sacrifices. You have also spoken their true qualities, in this world and in the world hereafter. O grandfather! However, those who are poor cannot perform sacrifices. Sacrifices require many objects and an extensive list of articles.
O grandfather! Only princes and kings are capable of undertaking these. Those without riches, alone and without
help, are deprived of sacrifices. What are the rules that the poor can always follow to obtain these qualities, which
are equal to the fruits of sacrifices? O grandfather! Tell me this."

'Bhishma replied, "For this, the fruits of fasting were spoken about by Angiras. O Yudhishthira! Those ordinances are equal to the fruits of sacrifices. Listen. There may be a person who is always devoted to non-violence,
offering oblations to the fire and only eating in the morning and in the evening, not taking food or water during the
intervening period. If he does this for six years, there is no doubt that he will be successful. Such a man obtains a
celestial vehicle that is like molten gold in complexion. He resides amidst celestial women, with the sounds of
singing and dancing. With a complexion like that of the fire, he dwells in Prajapati's abode for a padma number of
years[A padma is a very large number.]. If a person continuously eats one meal a day for three years and is always devoted to his lawful wife, he
obtains the fruits of an agnishtoma sacrifice. If a person eats only one meal a day, that too only on the second day,
if he always offers oblations to the fire, if he performs sacrifices at which he gives away a lot of gold and if he does
this for one year, he is loved by Vasava. If such a person is truthful in speech, good in conduct, does not hate brahmanas, if he is self-restrained, forgiving and has conquered his anger, he attains the supreme destination. He  is
astride a sparkling white celestial vehicle, yoked to swans. He dwells with apsaras for two padma years. If a person
eats only one meal a day, that too on every third day, if he always offers oblations to the fire, and if he does this for
one year, then he obtains the supreme fruits of an atiratra sacrifice. Such a man obtains a celestial vehicle that is
yoked to peacocks and swans. He always dwells in the world of the saptarshis, with the apsaras. The learned know
that this residence is for three padma years. If a person eats only one meal a day, that too on every fourth day, if he
always offers oblations to the fire, and if he does this for one year, then he obtains the supreme fruits of a vajapeya
sacrifice. Such a man is astride a celestial vehicle, together with Indra's daughters. In Vasava's world, which extends up to the ocean, he always witnesses the king of the gods sporting. If a person eats only one meal a day, that
too on every fifth day, if he always offers oblations to the fire, if he does this for one year, if he is not greedy, truthful in speech and does not injure brahmanas and if he is without jealousy and without sin, then he obtains the fruits
of a dvadashaha sacrifice[A sacrifice that lasts for twelve days.]. He is on a divine and celestial vehicle made out of molten gold, yoked to swans,
which has the complexion of a garland of suns collected together. He resides in a white palace. He happily dwells
there for fifty-one padma years[This requires explanation. The text says 16 + measure of sharagni. The god of love has five arrows (shara) and
there are seven fires. Hence, sharagni is 5 x 7=35. This added to 16 gives 51.]. If a sage only eats a meal on every sixth day, if he always offers oblations into
the fire, if he does this for one year, if he performs ablutions three times a day and if he is without malice and observes brahmacharya, then he obtains the supreme fruits of a gavamaya sacrifice[Sacrifice at which cows are slaughtered.]. He is on a supreme vehicle
meant for virtuous people. It is as radiant as a blazing fire and is drawn by swans and peacocks, decorated with
pure gold. He sleeps and awakes on the laps of apsaras, to the sound of nupuras and girdles. He resides there for
one thousand and three hundred crore, eighteen padma and two pataka years[Pataka is an unspecified large number.]. He obtains greatness in Brahma's
world for as many years as there is hair on the skins of fifty thousand bears. If a person eats only one meal a day,
that too on every seventh day, if he always offers oblations into the fire for an entire year, if he protects his speech
and practises brahmacharya and if he avoids agreeable pigments, liquor and meat, such a man goes to the world of
the Maruts and to Indra's world. He is successful in all his objectives and is served by the daughters of the gods.
Such a man obtains the fruits of sacrifices at which a lot of gold is given. He enjoys happiness in those worlds for
an extremely large number of years. If a man is forgiving for an entire year, if he only eats on every eighth day, if
he is always devoted to the tasks of the gods and if he offers oblations into the fire, he obtains the supreme fruits of
a poundarika sacrifice. He ascends on a celestial vehicle that has the complexion of lotuses. There is no doubt that
he obtains dark, golden, fair and dark women, who are young and beautiful. For an entire year, if a person only
eats on every ninth day and if he always offers oblations into the fire for an entire year, then that man obtains the
fruits of a horse sacrifice. Such a man obtains a celestial vehicle that has the complexion of a lotus flower. It blazes
like the sun and the fire and is full of energy, like a divine garland. He is conveyed to the eternal firmament by
Rudra's daughters. He obtains delight in those worlds for eighteen thousand years and another one crore, one thousand and one hundred years. For an entire year, if a person only eats on every ninth day and if he always offers
oblations into the fire for an entire year, he obtains the supreme fruits of one thousand horse sacrifices. He dwells
with Brahma's daughter in a region that is agreeable to the hearts of all beings. That man always finds delight with
beautiful women. Some of them have the complexions of red lotuses. Others have the complexion of blue lotuses.
He is in a supreme celestial vehicle meant for the virtuous. It has the complexion of the waves of the ocean. It goes
around in circles, forwards and backwards, in movements that can't be detected. It resounds with the noise of
colourful garlands made out of jewels and conch shells. It is decorated with lotuses, crystals and diamonds and
there are well-constructed pillars and altars. He ascends this great vehicle, drawn by swans and cranes. If a person
only eats ghee on every eleventh day, if he always offers oblations into the fire for an entire year, if he does not desire the wives of others, in thoughts and in deeds and if he does not utter a lie, even for the sake of his mother and
his father, then a celestial vehicle presents itself before him. Astride that, he sees Svayambhu and the immensely
strong Mahadeva on their celestial vehicles. He is conveyed there by beautiful maidens who are golden in complexion. He resides in that divine and beautiful world of heaven that belongs to Rudra. He dwells there for as many
years as it takes for the yuga to be over, one hundred thousand crores and another hundreds of crores. Rudra is always worshipped by the gods and the danavas, who bow their heads down before him. Every day, he gets to see
Rudra. If a person only eats ghee on every twelfth day and if he does this for an entire year, he obtains the fruits of
all the sacrifices. He is on a celestial vehicle that has the radiance of the twelve Adityas. It is extremely expensive
in form, with jewels, pearls and coral. Beautiful peacocks and ruddy geese sing melodiously there. O king! Surrounded by women, he always resides in an expensive palace that is in Brahma's world. The immensely fortunate
rishi, Angiras, who knew about dharma, spoke about this. If a person only eats ghee on every thirteenth day and if
he continuously does this for a year, he obtains the fruits of a sacrifice performed by the gods. That man is successful in obtaining a celestial vehicle that is named after the red lotus. It is adorned with pure gold and heaped high
with gems. There are divine women there, adorned in celestial ornaments. The wind bears along beautiful, auspicious and divine fragrances. He dwells there for shanku, pataka, padma, samudra[A11 of these signify very large numbers of years.] and tens and tens of thousands
of number of years, until the end of the yuga. He is always delighted with sounds from the singing of the gandharvas and the playing of drums and kettledrums. Celestial maidens give him pleasure. If a person only eats ghee on
every fourteenth day and if he continuously does this for an entire year, he obtains the fruits of a great sacrifice[Interpreted as a human sacrifice.].
There are ornamented celestial maidens, whose beauty cannot be described and whose ages cannot be discerned.
They wear armlets made out of polished and molten gold. They follow him on celestial vehicles. He wakes to the
excellent sounds of swans and the jingle of nupuras and kanchis. That man resides in the abode of the celestial
maidens. That man resides there for as many years as there are grains of sand in the Jahnavi. If a person eats only
one meal a day, and that too at the end of a fortnight, if he conquers his senses and if he continuously offers obla-
tions into the fire for an entire year, then he obtains the supreme fruits of one thousand royal sacrifices. He always
ascends on a vehicle that is drawn by swans and peacocks. It is decorated with pure gold and is colourful with circles of jewels. There are beautiful and supreme women, adorned in divine ornaments. He ascends on that divine
and celestial vehicle, with celestial qualities. It has one column, four gates and seven floors and is extremely auspicious. It is beautiful because of the sounds of singing and thousands of flags signifying victory. It is decorated with
jewels, pearls and coral that have the tinge of lightning. With rhinoceroses and elephants as mounts, he resides
there for thousands of years. If a person only eats ghee, and that too on every sixteenth day, and if he does this continuously for an entire year, he obtains the fruits of a sacrifice at which soma is offered. He always resides in the
abode of Soma's daughters. He is worshipped astride a beautiful celestial vehicle that has all the objects of pleasure. It has sweet and pleasant fragrances and can go everywhere at will. He enjoys these fruits for fifty padmas
and over and above that, another ten great kalpas[A kalpa is one of Brahma's days.]. Such a man dwells there for four sagaras[A sagara is a very high number.]. If a person only
eats ghee, and that too on every seventeenth day, if he offers oblations into the fire for an entire year, he goes to the
abodes of Varuna, Indra, Rudra, the Maruts and Ushanas, and to Brahma's world. He is on a supreme seat and is
served by the daughters of the gods. He comprehends the form of the universe and gets to see the divine rishis
known as the Bhurbhuvas. The daughters of the god of the gods offer him pleasure there. They are sweet and ornamented and can adopt thirty-two different types of forms. O lord! The brave one resides there for as long as the
moon and the sun travel in the sky, subsisting on sudha and amrita. If a person eats one meal a day, that too on
every eighteenth day, and if he does this for an entire year, he gets to see all the seven worlds. Chariots that thunder
follow him at the rear. Beautiful and ornamented celestial maidens accompany him. He obtains great happiness
astride a divine and excellent celestial vehicle that is yoked to tigers and lions and thunders like the clouds. With
those maidens, he enjoys delight for one thousand kalpas. He subsists on the juice of sudha, which is like amrita. If
a person eats only one meal a day on every nineteenth day and if he does this for an entire year, he gets to see all
the seven worlds. He obtains an excellent region that is served by large numbers of apsaras, with the melodious
songs of the gandharvas. He is on a celestial vehicle that is as radiant as the sun. Without any anxiety, he finds delight there, with those excellent women. He is handsome and wears divine garments. He is there for tens of thousands of years. If a person eats only one meal a day, that too on every twentieth day, if he does this for an entire
year, if he is truthful in speech and firm in his vows, if he is a brahmachari and does not eat flesh and if he is engaged in the welfare of all beings, he obtains the extensive and divine worlds of the Adityas. Gandharvas and apsaras, wearing divine garlands and fragrances, follow him on golden celestial vehicles. If a person eats only one
meal a day, that too on every twenty-first day and if he offers oblations into the fire for an entire year, he goes to
the divine world of Ushanas, Shakra's world and those of the Ashvins and the Maruts. He always finds happiness
there and experiences no misery there. He is astride a supreme celestial vehicle, served by the best of women. The
lord sports with them. If a person eats only one meal a day, that too on every twenty-second day, if he offers obla-
tions into the fire for an entire year, if he has fortitude and is always devoted to non-violence and if he is truthful in
speech and without malice, he obtains the world of the Vasus, which are as radiant as the sun. He is astride a
supreme celestial vehicle. He subsists on sudha and can go anywhere at will. Adorned with divine ornaments, he
finds pleasure with the maidens of the gods. If a person eats only one meal a day, that too on every twenty-third
day, if he does this for a year and if he is restrained in diet and has conquered his senses, he goes to the worlds of
Vayu, Ushanas and Rudra. He can go wherever he wants. He can travel wherever he wants. He is worshipped by
large numbers of apsaras. He is astride a supreme celestial vehicle and obtains many qualities. Adorned with divine ornaments, he finds pleasure with the maidens of the gods. If a person eats only one meal a day, that too on
every twenty-fourth day and if he offers oblations into the fire for an entire year, he obtains delight for a long period of time in the world named after the Adityas. He wears divine garlands and garments and is smeared with celestial fragrances. He is on a beautiful and golden celestial vehicle that is drawn by swans. He finds delight with the
daughters of the gods for crores of years. If a man eats only one meal a day, that too on every twenty-fifth day and
if he does this for an entire year, he is astride a magnificient vehicle that is yoked to lions and tigers and which
thunders like the clouds. Celestial maidens follow him at the rear on chariots that are silvery, sparkling and auspicious. He is astride that extremely beautiful and celestial vehicle. Surrounded by hundreds of women, he resides
there for one thousand kalpas. He subsists on the juice of sudha, which is like excellent amrita. If a man eats only
one meal a day, that too on every twenty-sixth day, if he is controlled and restrained in diet for an entire year, if he
has conquered his senses and is devoid of attachment and if he offers oblations into the fire, that immensely fortunate one obtains a region where he is worshipped by a large number of apsaras. He obtains the seven worlds of the
Vasus and the Maruts. He is astride a celestial vehicle that is made out of crystal, ornamented with all the jewels.
He finds delight, worshipped by the gandharvas and the apsaras. With celestial energy, he dwells there for two
thousand divine yugas. If a person eats only one meal a day, that too on every twenty-seventh day and if he offers
oblations into the fire for an entire year, he obtains great fruits and is worshipped in the world of the gods. He resides there, subsisting on amrita. He finds happiness and all his thirst is extinguished. O king! He conducts himself
like the divine rishis and the rajarshis. He resides there, astride a supreme celestial vehicle, divine in his soul. He
obtains pleasure and pride, served by  beautiful women. He  dwells  happily  there  for  three  thousand  yugas  and
kalpas. If a person eats only one meal a day, that too on every twenty-eighth day, if he does this for an entire year
and if he conquers his soul and conquers his senses, he obtains the pervasive fruits that lead to a conduct like that
of the divine rishis. He obtains all the objects of pleasure. His sparkling energy is like that of the one with the one
thousand rays[The sun.]. The extremely radiant one finds delight with delicate women. Their breasts are large and their
thighs are plump. They are adorned in celestial ornaments. He is astride a celestial vehicle that is as radiant as the
sun and those beautiful women please him there. That celestial vehicle can go anywhere it wills. He resides there
for one hundred thousand kalpas. If a person eats only one meal a day, that too on every twenty-ninth day and if he
devotes himself to a vow of truth for an entire year, he obtains divine and auspicious worlds where he is worshipped by divine rishis and rajarshis. He travels on a celestial vehicle that has the complexion of the sun and the
moon. It is made out of pure gold and is decorated with every kind of jewel. It is full of large numbers of apsaras
and there are sounds of gandharvas singing. There are beautiful women who wear divine ornaments. They are
sweet and bring delight to the mind. Proud and energetic, he finds pleasure with them. He obtains all the objects of
pleasure and is full of energy. He is like the fire in his radiance. He is divine, with a celestial form, and his radiance
is like that of the immortals. He goes to the worlds of the Vasus, the Maruts, the Sadhyas, the Ashvins and the
Rudras, and to Brahma's world. If a person controls himself and eats only one meal a day, that too on every thirtieth day and if he does this for an entire year, he obtains Brahma's world. He subsists on the juice of sudha. He is
handsome and agreeable to everyone. The energy and prosperity of his form are as radiant as that of the one with
the rays[The sun.]. He is adorned in divine garlands and garments and is smeared with celestial fragrances. He is immersed
in yoga. He enjoys happiness and does not know any misery. He obtains greatness astride his celestial vehicle and
shines with his own radiance. The daughters of the Rudras and the divine rishis always worship him. They are capable of assuming many kinds of beautiful forms. They exhibit many different kinds of love. They speak in many
kinds of sweet voices. They can cause pleasure in many different kinds of ways. He is astride a celestial vehicle
that is like a city. It is like the sun and has the complexion of the sun. The chariots that follow him are like the
moon. Those that are ahead of him are like the clouds. Those to his right are red. Those below him form a blue circle. Those above him are colourful. He resides there and is worshipped. That intelligent one is said to reside in
Brahma's world for as many years as is the number of raindrops that shower down on Jambudvipa in the course of
one thousand years. As many drops descend from the sky during the monsoon, for that number of years he resides
there, with the radiance of an immortal. If a person fasts for an entire month and does this for ten years, he obtains
the supreme state of heaven in his own body and gets the status of a maharshi. Such a sage is self-controlled and
has always conquered his anger. He has also triumphed over his penis and his stomach. He is restrained and offers
oblations into the fire. He follows the rites during the two sandhyas. If a man follows these diverse rituals and eats
at the end of a month, because of his good conduct, he is said to dwell in a place that is as stainless as the clouds. O
king! Like the immortals, he goes to heaven in his own body. Following the ordinances, he obtains heaven and all
that is auspicious. He enjoys every object of desire. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! These are the rituals
for supreme sacrifices. I have progressively explained them to you and also the fruits obtained from fasting. O
Partha! Poor men can thus obtain the fruits of sacrifices. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! Having fasted, and
devoted to worshipping gods and the brahmanas, they can go to the supreme destination. I have described in detail
the rituals associated with fasting. Without distraction, the great-souled ones follow these rituals and purify themselves. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They turn their intelligence towards restraining insolence and hatred.
They are steady and do not deviate. You should not have any doubt about this."'
