'Kotikashya said, "O beautiful one! Who are you, standing alone in this hermitage and holding onto the lowered
branch of a kadamba tree? O one with the beautiful brows! You are as radiant as the flames of a fire in the night,
fanned by the wind. You are endowed with supreme beauty. Are you not scared of this forest? Are you a goddess, a
yakshi or a danavi? Are you a beautiful apsara or a beautiful lady from the daitya lineage? Is your beautiful form
that of a serpent princess? Are you a demoness who walks the forests at night? Are you the wife of King Varuna,
or Yama, or Soma, or the lord of riches? Have you come from the abodes of Dhata, Vidhata, Savita, Vibhu or
Shakra[Dhata and Vidhata are different manifestations of the creator. Vibhu means Brahma, Vishnu or Shiva. Savita is
the sun-god.]? You have not asked us who we are, nor do we know who your protector is. O fortunate one! Increasing
your respect, we are asking you who your powerful lord is. Tell us the names of your relatives, husband and lineage, and also the details of what you are doing here. I am the son of King Suratha and men know me as
Kotikashya. The one who is seated on that golden chariot, like oblations being poured into the fire in an altar, is the
king of Trigarta. His eyes are as long as a lotus and that brave one has the name of Kshemankara. The foremost
son of the king of Kuninda is behind him, holding a giant bow in his hand. He is wide in the shoulders and is gazing at you in wonder. He always dwells in the mountains. A dark and handsome youth is standing near the pond.
He is the son of Subala, king of the Ikshvakus. O one with the beautiful body! He is one who slays his enemies.
There is one who is followed by twelve princes from Souvira, waving flags[Jayadratha is described as the king of Sindhu, Souvira and Shibi. Souvira and Shibi were kingdoms adjacent to
Sindhu and had probably been conquered by Jayadratha.]. All their chariots are yoked to red
horses, like blazing fires at sites of sacrifices. Their names are Angaraka, Kunjara, Guptaka, Shatrunjaya, Sanjaya,
Supravriddha, Prabhankara, Bhramara, Ravi, Shura, Pratapa and Kuhara. He[Jayadratha.] is followed by six thousand on chariots and elephants, horses and infantry. O fortunate one! If you have heard of the name of Jayadratha, the king of
Souvira, that one is he. After him, there are his undaunted brothers, Balahaka, Anika and Vidarana, and all the other brave and young ones from Souvira. But they are all inferior to the king in strength. The king is travelling with
these companions, like Indra protected by the Maruts. O one with the beautiful hair! Now tell us what we do not
know. Whose wife are you? Whose daughter are you?"'
