Yudhishthira said, "You have said several times that non-violence is supreme dharma. However, you have also
said that in funeral ceremonies, the ancestors desire meat. Earlier, you have spoken about funeral rites where
many different kinds of meat are offered. Without causing injury or killing, how can meat be obtained? In giving
up meat, there is thus a doubt that is created about dharma. What are the sins from eating meat and what are the
qualities associated with not eating it? What if one eats something that has been seized or killed by another person?
What if a man buys and eats meat from an animal that has been killed by some other person? I wish to determine
the nature of eternal dharma. How does one obtain a long lifespan? How does one become spirited? How does one
obtain faultless limbs? How is prosperity obtained?"

'Bhishma replied, "O king! O bull among the Kuru lineage! There is adharma attached to eating meat. Listen to
the truth about the excellent ordinances that have been stated on this. It has been said that those who desire beauty,
unblemished limbs, long lives, intelligence, spirit and strength and wish to cleanse their souls should abandon violence. O bull among the Kuru lineage! There have been many conversations between the rishis on this. O Yudhishthira! Listen to their views. O Yudhishthira! Every month, if a person is careful in his vows and avoids liquor
and meat, he does what is equal to performing a horse sacrifice. O king! The learned ones,  the saptarshis, the
Valakhilyas and the rishis who subsist on air praise absention from eating meat. If a person does not eat meat, if he
does not kill animals and does not cause others to kill him, he is a friend to all creatures. Svayambhuva Manu said
this. Such a person is not oppressed by any creature and all beings trust him. A person who abandons meat is always revered by the virtuous. Narada, the one with dharma in his soul, has said that a person who desires to enhance his own flesh on the basis of the flesh of others, always faces hardships. Brihaspati has said that a person
who abstains from liquor and meat is like an ascetic who donates and performs sacrifices. It is my view that two
kinds of people are equal-those who perform a horse sacrifice every month for one hundred years and those who
do not eat meat. A person who abandons liquor and meat is like one who always performs sacrifices, always gives
donations and is a perennial ascetic. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If a person eats meat, but subsequently
gives it up, he is like one who performs all the sacrifices indicated in all the Vedas. After one has savoured its taste,
it is extremely difficult to give up meat. This act of granting life and freedom from fear to all beings is superior to
performing all the vows indicated in the four[The four Vedas.]. There is no doubt that a learned person who grants the dakshina of
freedom from fear to all beings is a donor who grants life in this world. This is the supreme dharma praised by the
learned. Those who desire their benefit see that the lives of all other beings are like their own lives. An intelligent,
virtuous and great-souled person who desires his own prosperity must look upon all others as one's own self. Even
the learned are scared of death. Why should one forcibly slay those who are trying to save their own lives? They
are without disease and without sin. In trying to remain alive, why should one be wicked and subsist on their flesh?
O great king! That is the reason meat must be avoided. This is the supreme aspect of dharma, heaven and joy. Nonviolence is supreme dharma. Non-violence is the greatest austerity. Non-violence is supreme truth. Dharma flows
from this. Meat cannot be obtained from grass, wood or stone. Meat is obtained by slaying animals. That is the sin
attached to eating it. The gods love truth and uprightness and subsist on svaha, svadha and amrita. Know  that
predatory beasts and rakshasas are devoted to deceit and falsehood. O king! A person who does not eat meat does
not face any fear in terrible and desolate spots, in deserted regions that are difficult of access, at crossroads and in
assembly halls, during night and day and during the two sandhyas. If one is not an eater, then one is not a slayer
either. A man becomes a slayer and slays because of food. Therefore, if one does not eat, one withdraws from violence too. It is because of food that there is violence towards deer and other animals. O immensely radiant one!
This violence goes on because of devouring. Therefore, a person who desires his own prosperity must abstain from
meat. Terrible people who cause violence to creatures will never find protectors. They will always be oppressed by
creatures, like deer by beasts of prey. Men are attached to adharma because of greed, confusion of the intelligence,
in search of strength and vigour and because of association with the wicked. If a person seeks to enhance his own
flesh by eating the flesh of others, he always dwells in anxiety and is reborn as inferior species. The supreme rishis
have always said that abstention from eating meat leads to prosperity, fame, long lives, heaven and great benedictions. O Kounteya! I heard everything about this earlier. Markandeya spoke about the sins associated with eating
meat. If a person eats the flesh of animals that seek to remain alive, whether he slays them or whether they are already dead[Having been killed by someone else.], it is as if he himself is the slayer. There are three kinds of slaughter-killing by using wealth to purchase, killing by eating and directly killing by binding and slaying. Because of sinful sentiments, men eat food that
is not sanctioned. Even if one sanctions slaughter, one is tainted with that sin. If one does not eat meat and is compassionate towards all creatures, one is not oppressed by any being. One obtains a long life. One is without disease
and happy. The sacred texts have said that not eating meat is superior dharma to donating gold, donating cattle and
donating land.

'"One should never eat futile meat that has not been offered in sacrifices, without following the rites. There is no
doubt that a man who eats this will go to hell. Know that if one eats meat that has been offered at sacrifices or has
been killed for the sake of brahmanas, there is a little bit of sin. However, by acting in a contrary way, one is
touched by sin. A person who kills animals for someone else to eat is the worst among men. But the greater sin is
attached to the eater, not to the killer. If an ignorant person wishes to follow the path of the rites and sacrifices laid
down in the sacred texts, but nevertheless kills animals in a desire for their flesh, such a man goes to hell. If a man
eats meat but subsequently refrains from it, he withdraws from sin and pursues extremely great dharma. One who
brings the meat, one who sanctions it, one who actually kills, one who buys and sells, one who cooks and one who
eats-all of these are killers. I will now tell you about the proofs that have been laid down by the ordainer himself.
The ancient rishis indicated their nature in the Vedas. O tiger among kings! It has been said that the dharma that is
in the nature of pravritti, with a desire for obtaining the fruits, is not for those who are in pursuit of moksha. An
oblation that has been sanctified with the mantras, even if it is in the form of meat that has been slaughtered, is
pure. This is in accordance with the proofs cited in the Vedas and is used in rites for the ancestors. Manu has said
that anything else is futile meat and must not be eaten. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O king! Anything else is
the behaviour like that of a rakshasa. It does not lead to heaven or fame. A man must not eat meat that has not been
sanctioned by those earlier ordinances. If a man desires to save himself from all kinds of extreme hardships, he
must avoid the flesh of creatures in every form. It has been heard that in an earlier kalpa, men obtained the auspicious worlds by performing sacrifices with grain, regarding this as equivalent to animals. In ancient times, the
rishis had a doubt and went and asked Vasu, the king of the Chedis. O lord! Though he knew that meat should not
be eaten, he said that it could be eaten. Because of this, that king fell down from the sky onto the ground. When he
again repeated his view, he penetrated into the nether regions of the earth. For the welfare of the subjects, the
great-souled Agastya used the power of his austerities to dedicate deer and other wild animals to all the gods.
Therefore, the rites do not suffer if these are not offered to the ancestors and the gods. The ancestors are delighted,
even if their satisfaction is not through meat. O Indra among kings! O unblemished one! Listen to what I am recounting. O lord of men! There are all kinds of happiness associated with not eating meat. It is my view that if a
person torments himself through extremely difficult austerities for  one hundred years and if a person  gives up
meat, both of them are equal. O lord of men! Especially during shuklapaksha in the month of Koumudi[Kartika.],  one
must avoid all kinds of meat. That is ordained by dharma. Meat must also be avoided during the four months of the
monsoon. A person will then obtain four kinds of fortune-deeds, a long life, fame and strength. If, in addition, a
person does not eat any kind of meat for several months, he overcomes all types of misery. He is happy and possesses good health. If a person abstains from meat for several months or pakshas at a stretch, thus refraining from
violence, Brahma's world is ordained for him. O Partha! Kings who regarded all beings as their own selves and
knew about the supremely desired objective, avoided meat during the month of Koumudi and the paksha mentioned. O Indra among kings! These were Nabhaga, Ambarisha, the great-souled Gaya, Ayu, Anaranya, Dilipa,
Raghu, Puru, Kartavirya, Aniruddha, Nahusha, Yayati, Nriga, Vishvagshvena, Shashabindu, Yuvanashva, Shibi,
the  son  of  Ushinara,  Shvyenachitra,  Somaka,  Vrika,  Raivata,  Rantideva,  Vasu,  Srinjaya,  Dushsanta,  Karusha,
Rama, Alarka, Nala, Virupashva, Nimi, the intelligent Janaka, Sila, Prithu, Virasena, Ikshvaku, Shambhu, Shveta,
Sagara and many others. O Indra among kings! In earlier times, they did not eat meat during the bright part of the
month of Koumudi and went to heaven[The text uses the word sharada. This is naturally translated as autumn, but that doesn't fit. Though slightly
forced, we have taken this as the bright half of the month.]. Blazing in their prosperity, they remained in Brahma's world. They
were worshipped and revered by gandharvas and thousands of women. Thus, non-violence is supreme dharma and
is associated with all the auspicious signs. Great-souled ones who act accordingly reside in the vault of heaven.
There are those who are devoted to dharma and always avoid liquor and meat. Since birth, they avoid all kinds of
liquor and they are said to be sages. There is no doubt that they become superior to all their kin. They are freed
from all kinds of calamities that present themselves. They are freed when they are bound down. They are freed
from affliction and disease. They are freed from misery and grief. Such a man is always handsome and does not
have to be born as inferior species. O best among the Kuru lineage! He is intelligent and obtains great fame. O
king! I have thus spoken to you about the avoidance of meat and also about the ordinances of pravritti and nivritti
laid down by the rishis."'
