'Shakuni said, "Challenge the enemy to a game of dice. I will rob Pandu's son Yudhishthira of the prosperity that
you have seen, which has been burning you. Be clear that I will not fight in front of armies. Through the throw of
dice, a skilful one can vanquish one that is not skilful. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Know that the bow
and arrows are my dice. The heart of the dice is the string of my bow. Know that the carpet[On which the game is played.] is my chariot."

'Duryodhana said, "O king! This one, who is skilled in dice, is ready to win over the prosperity of Pandu's son
with dice. O father! You should find that pleasing."

'Dhritarashtra replied, "I always listen to the counsel of my brother, the great-souled Vidura. I will decide on the
course of action after meeting with him."

'Duryodhana said, "O Kourava! There is no doubt that Vidura will make you refrain from the resolution. He is
engaged in the welfare of the Pandavas and not mine. O descendant of the Kuru lineage[The word used is nandana.]! No man should engage in his task with another's counsel, because two minds seldom agree on a course of action. Like a straw
mat[The word used for a straw-mat is a kata and there is probably an unintended pun, since kata is also a particular throw of the dice.] during the rainy season, a fool that abhors fear stands and destroys himself. Neither disease nor Yama wait
for prosperity to come. Therefore, let us act for the good while there is time."

'Dhritarashtra replied, "O son! I never like a fight with those who are stronger. Enmity creates distortion, and
that itself is a weapon, though it is not made of iron. O prince! You think that disaster will bring welfare, this terrible collection of quarrels. Once it starts, in one way or another, it will release bows, swords and arrows."

'Duryodhana said, "The ancient ones created the rules of dice. It leads to neither evil, nor blows. Today, you
should approve of Shakuni's words. Let your instructions be issued for the swift construction of a sabha[Assembly hall where the game will be played.]. Because the doors of heaven will become closer, it is appropriate for us to be engaged in this. Approve of this act
with the Pandavas and we will then stand equal to them."

'Dhritarashtra replied, "O Indra among men! I do not like the words that you utter. But do what brings you pleasure. Later, you will remember your words and suffer, because such words cannot bring prosperity to those who
abide by dharma. A long time in the past, Vidura, who follows wisdom and learning, had foretold all this. The
great calamity that will destroy the seed of the kshatriyas has now arrived and we are powerless."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having uttered these words, the wise Dhritarashtra decided that destiny alone was
supreme. Fate robbed the king of his senses and he instructed his men[The servants.] to obey his son's words. "Carefully build
one thousand pillars adorned with gold and lapis lazuli. Let there be a hundred gates with arches made of crystal.
Let the beautiful sabha be swiftly built, one krosha[A measure of distance equal to one-fourth of a yojana.] long and one krosha wide." On hearing these words, without hesitation, thousands of wise and skilled artisans swiftly built the sabha and stocked it with every kind of object. Then, in a short space of time, they informed the king that the beautiful assembly hall was ready and that it
had been adorned with multicoloured gems and beautiful golden seats. Then Dhritarashtra, lord of men, spoke to
the learned Vidura, foremost among his advisers, "Go to Prince Yudhishthira and swiftly bring him here at my
command. Say that he and his brothers should come here and see this beautiful sabha that I have built, with many
gems and decorated with expensive beds and seats. We will then have a game of dice among well-wishers." Knowing his son's mind and that fate could not be avoided, King Dhritarashtra, lord of men, acted thus. Vidura, supreme
among learned ones, did not approve of his brother's words and thought them to be unjust. He spoke to him, "O
king! I do not approve of this errand. Do not do this. I fear the destruction of our lineage. O Indra among men!
When the sons are disunited, a quarrel is certain and I am concerned about this game of dice." Dhritarashtra
replied, "O Kshatta! Unless destiny turns adverse, I am not worried about a quarrel. The universe is under the control of the creator. The entire world does not run independently. O Vidura! Therefore, today, go to the king[Yudhishthira.] at
my command and quickly bring Kunti's invincible son, Yudhishthira, here."'
