Janamejaya asked, 'The great-souled Bhishma and Drona, King Dhritarashtra, Virata, Drupada, Shankha, Uttara,
Dhrishtaketu,  Jayatsena,  King  Satyajit,  Duryodhana's  sons,  Shakuni  Soubala,  Karna's  brave  sons,  King
Jayadratha, Ghatotkacha and the others whom you have not mentioned, other kings who were blazing in their
forms and whom you have named-how long did they dwell in heaven? Tell me about that. O supreme among
brahmanas! Was their stay there for an eternal period? When the fruits of their deeds were extinguished, what ends
were obtained by those bulls among men? O brahmana! I wish to hear about this. You should tell me about it.'

'Suta said, "Thus addressed, the brahmana rishi took the permission of the great-souled Vyasa[This is the narration within narration structure. The story was told by Vaishampayana to Janamejaya and was retold by Suta to the sages in Naimisha forest.]. He sought to explain to the king."'

Vaishampayana said, 'O lord of men! When the fruits of deeds are extinguished, everyone has to leave. O king!
O bull among the Bharata lineage! Listen to a divine mystery. He[Vyasa.] was powerful, possessed great energy and had
divine insight. O Kouravya! The sage who was Parashara's son was ancient and was great in his vows. He was
fathomless in his intelligence and knew everything. He knew the end of all kinds of deeds. The greatly energetic
and immensely radiant Bhishma became a Vasu. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The eight Vasus can now be
seen[The suggestion is that while Bhishma was on earth, only seven Vasus could be seen.]. Drona, supreme among the Angiras lineage, entered Brihaspati. Hardikya Kritavarma entered the Maruts.
Pradyumna entered Sanatkumara, which is where he had come from. Dhritarashtra obtained the world of the lord
of riches, which is so difficult to obtain. The illustrious Gandhari went with Dhritarashtra. With his wives, Pandu
went to the great Indra's abode. Virata, Drupada, King Dhrishtaketu, Nishatha[Balarama's son.], Akrura, Bhanu, Kampa, Vidu-
ratha, Bhurishrava, Shala, King Bhuri, Ugrasena, Kamsa, the valiant Vasudeva[Krishna's father.], Uttara, his brother Shankha, bull
among men-all these supreme men entered specific divinities. Soma[The moon god.] had a powerful and immensely energetic
son named Varcha. He was born as Phalguna's son, Abhimanyu, lion among men. He followed the dharma of
kshatriyas and fought the way no man ever has. On the completion of his deeds, the maharatha, with dharma in his
soul, entered Soma. O bull among men! Karna entered his father, the sun. Shakuni entered dvapara[Understood as dvapara yuga, this makes no sense. However, dvapara also means dice, more specifically, the side
of a die marked with two spots. Thus, Shakuni entered dice.] and Dhrishtadyumna the fire. All of Dhritarashtra's sons became yatudhanas[Demons or spirits.], intoxicated with their valour. They were powerful and great-souled. Purified by weapons, they went to heaven. Kshatta[Vidura.] and King Yudhishthira entered Dharma. Ananta, the illustrious god[Who was born as Balarama. Ananta-Shesha holds up the earth, instructed by his grandfather, Brahma. Ananta-
Shesha was the sage Kashyapa's son.], entered the nether regions. Instructed by his grandfather, he holds up the entire
earth  through  his  yoga.  O  Janamejaya!  When  the  time  came,  Vasudeva's[Krishna's.]  sixteen  thousand  wives  submerged
themselves in the Sarasvati. They were then transformed into apsaras and presented themselves before Vasudeva.
There were other brave maharathas, Ghatotkacha and the others, who were slain in the great war. All of them became gods and yakshas. Duryodhana's aides have been spoken of as rakshasas. O king! In due course, they obtained all the supreme worlds. Those bulls among men went to the regions of the great Indra, the intelligent Kubera
or Varuna. O immensely radiant one! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I have recounted all this in detail, including the entire character of the Kurus and the Pandavas.'

'Suta said, "O best among brahmanas! At appropriate gaps during the sacrificial ceremony, King Janamejaya
heard all this and was filled with wonder. The officiating priests completed all the tasks that remained to be done.
Astika was delighted at the serpents having been saved[The story began with Janamejaya's snake sacrifice.]. The king honoured all the brahmanas and gratified them
with dakshina. They returned to wherever they had come from. Having taken his leave from the brahmanas, King
Janamejaya left Takshashila and returned to Gajasahvya[The snake sacrifice happened in Takshashila, now in Pakistan.
]. On Vyasa's command, Vaishampayana recounted all
this at the king's snake sacrifice and I have told you everything about it. This is known as a sacred history. It is
supreme and auspicious. It has been composed by the brahmana sage, Krishna, truthful in speech. He knew everything.  He  knew  all  the  rites.  He  was  virtuous  and  possessed  knowledge  about  dharma.  His  senses  were  extraordinary and pure. He cleansed his soul with austerities. He possessed the powers associated with those who
know sankhya and yoga. He saw all this with his divine sight and used his intelligence to compose it in a single
strand. He wished to spread the deeds of the great-souled Pandavas in the world and also those of the other kshatriyas, who were rich in their great energy. If a learned person hears this on auspicious and festive occasions, his
soul is cleansed. He conquers heaven and advances to the brahman. If a person seats himself at the feet of brahmanas and hears this at a funeral ceremony, his ancestors always obtain infinite amounts of food and drink. During
the day, one may commit sins with one's senses and with one's mind. However, subsequently, if one listens to the
Mahabharata in the evening, one is freed from one's sins. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Everything about
dharma, artha, kama and moksha can be found here. What is here can be found elsewhere. But what is not here
cannot be found elsewhere. Those who desire prosperity should hear the history known as Jaya, irrespective of
whether they are kings, the sons of kings, or pregnant women. A person who desires heaven obtains heaven. A person who desires victory obtains victory. An expectant woman obtains a son. A maiden becomes extremely fortunate. For the sake of ensuring dharma, the lord Krishna Dvaipayana, who will not return, composed a summary
known as Bharata and it took him three years. Narada recited it to the gods, Asita-Devala to the ancestors, Shuka
to rakshasas and yakshas and Vaishampayana to mortals. This history is sacred. It is deep in meaning and is as
revered as the Vedas. With brahmanas as the foremost, it should be heard by the three varnas. O Shounaka! A man
who does this is freed from sin and obtains fame. There is no doubt that he advances towards supreme success. If
one faithfully studies the sacred Mahabharata, or even if one studies one quarter of it, one is purified and all one's
sins are destroyed. In ancient times, the illustrious maharshi, Vyasa, composed this. The illustrious one made his
son, Shuka, study it, with these four shlokas. 'Thousands of mothers and fathers and hundreds of sons and wives
arrive in this world and then depart elsewhere. There are thousands of reasons for joy and hundreds of reasons for
fear. From one day to another, they afflict those who are stupid, but not those who are learned. I am without pleasure and have raised my arms, but no one is listening to me. If dharma and kama result from artha, why should one
not pursue artha? For the sake of kama, fear or avarice, and even for the sake of preserving one's life, one should
not give up dharma. Dharma is eternal. Happiness and unhappiness are transient. The atman is eternal, but other
reasons are transient.' If a person awakes in the morning and reads Bharata, which is like the savitri, he obtains the
fruits of reading the Bharata and obtains the supreme brahman. The illustrious ocean and the Himalaya mountain
are stores of riches. The famous Bharata is said to be like that. If a person controls himself and reads the account of
the Mahabharata, there is no doubt that he advances towards supreme success. This is immeasurable and emerged
from the lips of Dvaipayana. It is auspicious and sacred. It is pure and removes all sin. If a person controls himself
and listens to Bharata being recited, there is no need for him to sprinkle himself with water from Pushkara."'

This ends Svargarohana Parva and also ends the Mahabharata.