Yudhishthira said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I wish to know the truth about the great fruits obtained  from  donations  and  sacrificial  rites.  Where  are  those  fruits  obtained,  in  this  world  or  in  the  next?
Which is superior and what is the nature of the fruits? You are learned and I am asking you. Tell me about dana
dharma. O father[The word used is tata.]! Tell me which is better, that which is done from inside the sacrificial altar, or that which is
done with faith and non-violence[This seems to be the choice between slaughter of animals at sacrifices and donations.]. O grandfather! Tell me."

'Bhishma replied, "O son! A kshatriya is always engaged in terrible deeds. For him, sacrifices are the duty and
donations purify him. But virtuous people do not receive from kings who perform wicked deeds. That is the reason
kings perform sacrifices with a lot of dakshina. Gifts are received from a king who donates with devotion and this
is supreme and a great cleanser. One must therefore be devoted to the vows of sacrifices and give objects to brahmanas who are friendly, virtuous, knowledgable about the Vedas and possessing good conduct and austerities. The
outcome is dependent on the way one acts. Perform sacrifices and give tasty food and dakshina to virtuous people.
When you give, think that in that task of giving, you are performing a sacrifice. If you honour officiating priests,
you will also obtain a share in their merits. You must sustain brahmanas who bear the burden of many offspring.
You will then obtain as many offspring as the creator[Meaning Prajapati.]. Those who are virtuous in pursuit of dharma always nurture those who are righteous. In every way, you must support men who suffer from many burdens. O Yudhishthira!
You are prosperous. Therefore, you must give brahmanas cattle, bulls, food, umbrellas, garments and footwear. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! Give clarified butter to those who perform sacrifices and also horses, vehicles,
houses and beds. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! These are easy to do and bring prosperity to the giver. One
must search out brahmanas who are not liked and whose means of subsistence has suffered[They are not liked. Hence they don't have clients.]. Directly or indirectly,
their livelihood must be ensured. For kshatriyas, this is superior to performing royal sacrifices and horse sacrifices.
In this way, you will be cleansed of sin and purified, and you will obtain heaven. You will be able to replenish your
treasury again and rule the kingdom. You will obtain a great deal of riches and become a brahmana[In the next life.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Protect your own means of subsistence and that of other people. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Always support brahmanas in their yoga and kshema[Yoga means getting what has not been obtained. Kshema means protecting what has been obtained.]. If they are not protected and are killed,
then this will lead to the destruction of all pleasure. The king will suffer decay. All the subjects will be killed and
destroyed. A king who says that he is the protector, but does not protect, should be collectively killed, like a dog
that is diseased and mad. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When a king does not protect and the subjects commit wicked deeds, one-fourth of those sins are vested in the king. Some have said that they vest in him in entirety.
Others have determined it as half. However, we have heard Manu's instructions and hold it to be one-fourth. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When a king protects the subjects properly, one-fourth of all the good and auspicious deeds that they do vests in the king. O Yudhishthira! As long as you live, make the lives of all the subjects
depend on you. Be like Parjanya to beings and like a giant tree to birds. Be like Kubera to the rakshasas and like
Shatakratu to the immortals. O scorcher of enemies! Let the lives of kin and well-wishers depend on you."'
