Vyasa said, "O fortunate one! O Gandhari! You will see your sons, brothers, friends and the husbands of these
daughters-in-law. They will seem to have woken up from sleep. Kunti will see Karna and Yadavi will see
Subhadra's son. Droupadi will see her five sons and her father and brothers. In my heart, I had thought of this
means,  even  before  you,  the  king  and  Pritha  urged  me.  You  should  not  grieve  for  all  those  great-souled  bulls
among men. They were virtuous and resorted to the dharma of kshatriyas. That is how they were slain. O unblemished one! This was certainly destiny, to accomplish the tasks of the gods. All of them were born on earth as incarnations, as parts of the gods. There were also gandharvas, apsaras, pishachas, guhyakas, rakshasas and other sacred
ones, the siddhas and the devarshis. There were also gods, danavas and unblemished brahmana rishis. In the forefront of the battle, those were the ones who were slain in Kurukshetra. It has been heard that Dhritarashtra was an
intelligent king of the gandharvas. He was born in the world of humans as Dhritarashtra, your husband. Know that
the undecaying Pandu was a superior one from the large number of Maruts. Kshatta and King Yudhishthira were
born as parts of Dharma. Know Duryodhana to be Kali and Shakuni to be Dvapara. O one who is beautiful to see!
Know that Duhshasana and the others were rakshasas. Know that Bhimasena, the powerful scorcher of enemies,
came from the Maruts and Partha Dhananjaya was the rishi Nara. Hrishikesha was Narayana and the twins are the
Ashvins. O beautiful one! Know that Aditya, supreme among those who heat, divided himself into two parts, one
for heating the worlds and the other as Karna. Since the objective was to foster enmity, he was generated through
this friction. Subhadra's son was the heir of the Pandavas. He was slain by the six maharathas. He was born from
the god Soma, who used yoga to divide himself into two. With Droupadi, Dhrishtadyumna was born from the fire,
as parts of the auspicious fire god. Know that Shikhandi was a rakshasa. Know that Drona was a part of Brihaspati
and Drona's son of Rudra. Know that Gangeya Bhishma was a Vasu born as a human. O immensely wise one! In
this way, the gods were born as humans. O beautiful one! Having accomplished their tasks, they have returned to
heaven again. All of you have borne sorrow in your hearts for a long time, resulting from a fear about what has
happened in the world hereafter. I will dispel that now. All of you should proceed towards the river Bhagirathi.
There, you will see all those who have been slain in the field of battle."'

Vaishampayana continued, 'Hearing Vyasa's words, all the people roared loudly, like lions, and proceeded towards  the Ganga. Dhritarashtra  and  his  advisers  proceeded  with  the  Pandavas,  together  with  the  tigers  among
sages and gandharvas who had assembled. That ocean of people gradually reached the Ganga. Cheerfully, as they
wished, all of them began to dwell there. The intelligent Pandava resided in a spot there, with his followers, with
the women from the inner quarters and the aged. They spent that day, as if it was one hundred years. They waited
for the night, desiring to see the slain kings. The sun set over the sacred Asta mountain[Asta is the mountain over which the sun sets.]. They bathed and completed the evening rites.'
