Yudhishthira said, "O immensely wise one! I have a doubt that is as large as the great ocean. Listen. O mighty-
armed one! Having heard, you should explain this to me. O lord! I have a great curiosity about Jamadagni's
son, Rama, foremost among the upholders of dharma. You should explain this to me. How was Rama, with truth as
his valour, born? Despite being born in a lineage of brahmana rishis, how did he come to practise the dharma of
kshatriyas? O king! The entire world also recounts the story of Koushika. Despite being born in a lineage of kshatriyas, how did he become a brahmana? O tiger among men! The power of those two extremely great-souled ones,
Rama and Vishvamitra, was exceedingly great. What sins skipped their sons and afflicted their grandsons? How
did that happen? You should explain this to me."

'Bhishma replied, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In this connection, the ancient history of a conversation
between Chyavana and Kushika is recounted. Bhargava Chyavana, immensely intelligent and a bull among sages,
foresaw in advance a sin that would descend on his own lineage. He mentally thought about all its good and bad
aspects, its strength and weaknesses. The store of austerities desired to burn down the entire Kushika lineage[As will be told, the Kushika lineage would be responsible for the sin.].
Chyavana went to Kushika and spoke these words to him. 'O unblemished one! I desire to dwell with you for some
time.'

'"Kushika said, 'O illustrious one! The learned ones have held that the act of dwelling together is a dharma that
should be practised only when a daughter has been given away in marriage. That is what learned people have always said. O store of austerities! Otherwise, the door to dharma will be barred. However, with your permission, I
should do what you have asked me to.'"

'Bhishma continued, "Kushika instructed that a seat should be offered to the great sage, Chyavana. With his
wife, he went and stood before the sage. The king took a vessel and offered him water to wash his feet. The great-
souled one ensured that all the rites were observed. Following the prescribed rites, the king offered Chyavana madhuparka. He anxiously waited for the great-souled one, rigid in his vows, to accept this. Having shown the brahmana honour in this way, he spoke these words. 'O illustrious one! We are waiting for your instructions. What
should we do for you? O one who is rigid in vows! Is it the kingdom, riches, cattle or objects given in sacrifices?
Tell us. I will give you everything. This house, this kingdom and this seat of dharma are yours. You are the king of
everything,  with  the  servants.  Rule  everything.  I  am  also  dependent  on  you.'  Having  been  thus  addressed  by
Kushika in these words, Bhargava Chyavana was filled with great joy. He replied, 'O king! I do not desire the
kingdom, riches, women, cattle, the country, or objects offered at sacrifices. If it pleases both of you, I desire to observe a vow. While I am observing it, you should tend to me, without any doubts.' Thus addressed, the couple was
delighted. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They told the rishi that it would be that way. Cheerfully, the king
led him to an excellent part of the palace, to a beautiful apartment and showed it to him. 'O illustrious one! This is
your bed. Live here, as you please. O store of austerities! We should do our best to please you.' While they were
conversing in this way, the sun set and the rishi instructed that food and drink should be brought. King Kushika
bowed down and asked, 'What kind of food do you desire? What will I present before you?' O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Filled with great delight, he told the king, 'Offer me appropriate food that is ready.' Hearing these
words, the king honoured him and agreed. The lord of men offered him appropriate food. Having eaten, the illustrious one, knowledgable about dharma, told the couple, 'O lord! I wish to sleep now. Sleep is getting in the way.'

The illustrious one, supreme among rishis, went to his bedchamber. The king and the queen also entered and waited. Bhargava said, 'Do not wake me up while I am asleep. Remain awake and press my feet throughout the night.'

Kushika knew about dharma. Without doubting this, he agreed. Without waking him, they waited for night to be
over. As they had been instructed by the maharshi, they tended to him in an excellent way. O great king! The couple tried its best to do this. As he had told the king, the illustrious brahmana slept. He did not turn in his sleep and
slept for twenty-one days. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! The king and his wife remained without food. They
cheerfully remained engaged in tending to him and serving him. Eventually, Bhargava, the store of austerities,
himself awoke. Without saying anything to them, the great ascetic left the house. The two of them were hungry
and overcome with exhaustion. Husband and wife followed him. But the best among sages did not even glance at
them. While they looked on, the extender of the Bhargava lineage vanished. O Indra among kings! At this, the king
fell down on the ground. However, the immensely radiant one arose in a short while. With his queen, he made
great efforts to again search for him everywhere."'
