Yudhishthira asked, "Who thought of funeral rites and when? What is its essence? During the age of the Bhrigus and the Angirases, which sage thought of them? Which acts should be avoided at funeral ceremonies?
What about roots and fruits? What kinds of paddy should not be used? O grandfather! Tell me this."

'Bhishma replied, "O lord of men! I will tell you about how funeral rites were started, when, by whom, and
about their essence. Listen. O Kouravya! From Svayambhu was born the powerful and supreme rishi Atri. O great
king! In his lineage was born the one known as Dattatreya. Dattatreya had a son named Nimi and he was rich in
austerities. Nimi had a son named Shrimat and he was extremely handsome. He performed extremely difficult austerities for a full one thousand years. When this was completed, he succumbed to the dharma of time and died.
Nimi performed the instructed rites of purification. However, overwhelmed by sorrow on account of his son, he
suffered from severe torment. On the fourteenth lunar tithi, the immensely intelligent one brought together various
ingredients. He was full of grief and slept during the night. With his mind still overcome with grief, he arose in the
morning. He focused his mind and controlled his intelligence from wandering away. Having controlled himself, he
conceived of funeral rites. He was rich in austerities. He mentally thought of food, roots and fruits and all the other
objects that would bring benefit. On the day of the new moon, the immensely wise one invited some revered brahmanas. He himself made all of them sit down on mats of kusha grass and circumambulated them. He brought together seven such brahmanas and gave them food. The lord offered them shyamaka rice[This could also be millet.], cooked without salt.
Mats of darbha grass were spread out near the feet of the brahmanas, once they were seated, with the tips of the
blades pointing to the south. They ate off these. Controlling himself, he spread out the darbha grass, with the tips
of the blades pointing to the south. He then offered the funeral cakes to Shrimat, citing his name and gotra. Having
done this, the best among sages confronted a conflict of dharma in his mind[Because, under the prevailing ordinances, funeral ceremonies were performed by sons for fathers, not by fathers
for sons.]. As he thought about it, he was tormented  by  repentance.  'What  have  I  done?  This  has  not  been  done  by  sages  earlier.  How  can  I  avoid  being
scorched by the curses of brahmanas?' He thought about the original creator of his lineage. As soon as he thought
of him, Atri, rich in austerities, arrived there.

'"On seeing that he was severely afflicted by grief on account of his son, the undecaying and eloquent Atri reassured him. 'O Nimi! O one who is rich in austerities! The sacrifice you have thought of is for the ancestors. Do not
be anxious about this. Earlier, Brahma himself instructed that this is dharma. What you have thought of has been
ordained by Svayambhu to be dharma. Who but Svayambhu could have laid down the ordinances for a funeral ceremony? I will again tell you about the supreme rites for a funeral ceremony. O son! These have been ordained by
Svayambhu. Act in accordance with those. Listen to me. O one rich in austerities! First, chant mantras and follow
the rites for igniting the fire. Then always offer oblations to Aryama, Soma, Varuna, the Vishvadevas, the ancestors
and all their respective domains. These shares have been thought of by Svayambhu himself. The earth is the one
who  sustains  the  oblations.  Therefore,  she  must  be  praised  as  Vaishnavi,  Kashyapi  and  the  indestructible  one.
When water is brought, the lord Varuna must be praised. O unblemished one! After this, Agni and Soma must be
invoked. The divinities known as the ancestors were created by Svayambhu. He also thought of shares for the extremely fortunate ones known as the Ushmapas[Divinities who subsist on the heat of the fire.]. If one worships them at funeral ceremonies, one is freed from
sins. Earlier,  Svayambhu instructed that there are seven generations of  ancestors. I  have  enumerated  the  Vishvadevas earlier and they have Agni as their mouth. I will now recount the names of the great-souled ones who deserve to be given shares-Saha, Kriti, Vipapma, Punyakrit, Pavana, Gramni, Kshema, Samuha, Divyasanu, Vivas-
vat, Viryavat, Hrimat, Kirtimat, Krita, Vipurva, Somapurva, the one named Suryashri, Somapa, Suryasavitra, Dattatman, Pushkariyaka, Ushninabha, Nabhoda, Vishvayu, Dipti, Chamuhara, Suvesha, Vyomari, Shankara, Bhava,
Isha, Kartri, Kritidaksha, Bhuvana, Divyakarmakrit, Ganita, Panchavirya, Aditya, Rashmimat, Saptakrit, Somavarcha, Vishvakri, Kavi, Anugopta, Sugopta, Napta, Ishvara, Jitatman, Munivirya, Diptalobha, Bhayamkara, Atikarma, Pratita, Pradata, Amshumat, Shailabha, Paramakrodhi, Dhiroshni, Bhupati, Sraji, Vraji, Vari and the eternal
Vishvadevas. These immensely fortunate ones, who know about the progress and dominion of time, have been
enumerated. The paddy known as kodrava and pulaka[Both are of inferior varieties.], asafoetida mixed with the vegetables, onions and garlic
should not be offered at funeral ceremonies. Nor should one use onions[Onions are mentioned twice.], drumsticks, grinjana[A small variety of onion or garlic. Alternatively, a turnip.], all varieties of
pumpkins and bottle gourds, black salt, meat of domesticated pigs, the flesh of animals not killed at sacrifices, fennel, rock salt and shitapaki[A kind of pot-herb.]. All objects that sprout and shringatakas[Pastries made of minced meat.] should be avoided. All kinds of salt and
the jamun fruit must be avoided. Items on which tears and spit have fallen must not be offered at funeral ceremonies. Something that a dog has looked at must not be offered as havya and kavya. The ancestors and the gods
are not pleased at such oblations. Some people should be barred from places where oblations are being offered-
chandalas, shvapakas, those attired in yellowish-red garments, those with leprosy, those who are outcasts, those
who have killed a brahmana, a brahmana born from an inferior lineage[Implying mixed birth.] and those who are the relatives of those
who are outcasts. The learned shun their presence at funeral ceremonies.' In ancient times, having said this to the
rishi who has descended from his own lineage, Atri, rich in austerities, left for the grandfather's divine assembly
hall."'
