Vaishampayana said, 'Rama then went to the supreme tirtha of Badarapachana. Many ascetics and Siddhas
roamed around there. Bharadvaja's daughter was unmatched on earth in beauty. The maiden was firm in her
vows. O lord! Her name was Sruchavati and the maiden observed brahmacharya. O king! She performed severe
austerities and observed many rules. The beautiful one had made up her mind to obtain the king of the gods as her
husband. O extender of the Kuru lineage! A long period of time passed. She continued to observe those terrible rituals, which are extremely difficult for women to observe. O lord of the earth! The illustrious chastiser of Paka was
supremely delighted because of her conduct, austerities and devotion. The lord, the king of the thirty gods, arrived
at the hermitage, assuming the form of the great-souled brahmana rishi, Vasishtha. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! On seeing Vasishtha, supreme among ascetics and the performer of fierce austerities, she worshipped him.
The fortunate one, knowledgeable about rules and sweet in speech said, "O illustrious one! O tiger among sages! O
lord! What is your command? O one who is excellent in vows! I will give you everything, in accordance with my
capacity. However, because I am devoted to Shakra, I will not be able to give you my hand. O one who is rich in
austerities! My vows, rules and austerities are an attempt to satisfy Shakra, the lord of the three worlds." Having
been thus addressed, the illustrious god smiled and glanced at her. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He assured
the one who knew about rules and said, "O one good in vows! I know that you are performing fierce austerities. O
fortunate one! O one with a beautiful face! All the objectives that you have in your heart will be obtained. Everything can be obtained through austerities. Everything is established in austerities. O one with an auspicious face!
All the celestial states of the gods can be obtained through austerities. Austerities are the source of great happiness.
Those men, who perform great austerities and cast aside their bodies on earth, obtain the status of gods. O fortunate one! Listen to these words of mine! O immensely fortunate one! O one who is auspicious in vows. Cook these
berries[A berry or jujube is badara and pachana is to cook, in this case, boil.
Hence the name Badarapachana.]." Having asked her to boil them, the illustrious slayer of Bala went away. Having asked the fortunate
one, he went to an excellent spot that was not far from that hermitage, so as to chant and meditate there. O great
king! This is famous in the three worlds as Indratirtha.

'The illustrious chastiser of Paka wished to test her. Hence, the lord of the gods asked her to boil those berries.
O king! Cleansed of sin, the humble one tried to do this. She purified herself and offered kindling into a fire. O
tiger among kings! The one who was great in her vows began to boil those berries. O bull among men! As she
boiled them, a long period of time passed. The berries were not boiled and the day was over. The wood that she
had stored was consumed by the fire. On seeing that the fire no longer had any wood, she began to burn her body.
At first, the beautiful one thrust her feet into the fire. As her feet were repeatedly burnt, the unblemished one paid
no attention to this. The unblemished one did not think about her feet being burnt. So as to please the maharshi, the
lotus-eyed one bore this misery. Her face was cheerful. On witnessing her deed, the lord of the three worlds was
pleased. He displayed his own self to the maiden. The best of the gods spoke these words to the maiden, who was
extremely firm in her vows. "O fortunate one! I am pleased with your devotion, austerities and rituals. O beautiful
one! Everything that you wish for will be obtained. O immensely fortunate one! You will cast aside this body and
live with me in heaven. This supreme tirtha will be established in this world. O one with the beautiful brows! It
will clean all sins and be known by the name of Badarapachana. It will be famous in the three worlds and will be
praised by brahmarshis. O immensely fortunate one! O beautiful one! In ancient times, in this supreme tirtha, the
saptarshis had left Arundhati[Vasishtha's wife.] and gone to the Himalayas. Those immensely fortunate ones, rigid in their vows,
went there to collect fruits and roots for their sustenance. For the sake of their sustenance, they dwelt in the forests
of the Himalayas and there was a drought that lasted for twelve years. Having constructed a hermitage for themselves, the ascetics dwelt there. The fortunate Arundhati always performed austerities. On seeing that Arundhati
was observing fierce rituals, the three-eyed one, the granter of boons, the immensely illustrious Mahadeva, was extremely pleased. Assuming the form of a brahmana, he arrived there. The god approached her and said, 'O fortunate one! I am looking for alms.' The beautiful one replied to the brahmana, 'O brahmana! Our store of food has
been exhausted. Eat these berries.' Mahadeva said, 'O one who is good in vows! Cook these berries.' Having been
thus addressed, wishing to please the brahmana, she began to cook those berries. The illustrious one offered kindling in the fire and placed the berries on that. She listened to divine, beautiful and sacred accounts[Shiva told her these, while the berries were being cooked.]. Those
twelve years of terrible drought passed. She was without food and was cooking, listening to those auspicious accounts. That extremely terrible period passed, as if it was a single day. Having obtained fruits, the sages returned
from the mountain. The illustrious one[Shiva.] was pleased with Arundhati and spoke to her. 'O one who knows about
dharma! Approach the rishis, as you used to do earlier. O one who knows about dharma! I am pleased with your
austerities and your rituals.' The illustrious Hara then showed himself in his own form. He spoke to them[The rishis.] about
the greatness of her conduct. 'You have earned merit from the austerities you have performed on the slopes of the
Himalayas. O brahmanas! But it is my view that what she has earned through her austerities is equal to that. This
ascetic has tormented herself through extremely difficult austerities. While fasting, she has spent twelve years in
cooking.' The illustrious one then spoke to Arundhati again. 'O fortunate one! Ask for the boon that is in your
heart.' In the presence of the saptarshis, the one with the large and coppery eyes addressed the god. 'O illustrious
one! If you are pleased with me, let this spot become an excellent tirtha. Let it be loved by the siddhas and the devarshis and let it be known by the name of Badarapachana. O god! O lord of the gods! If a person purifies
himself[The text is gender neutral. But that is difficult to render in English.] and fasts here for three days, let him obtain the fruits that are obtained from fasting for twelve years.'

Hara agreed to this and returned to heaven. On seeing this, and on seeing the virtuous Arundhati, who was capable
of withstanding hunger and thirst and was yet not exhausted or pale, the rishis were astounded. Thus did the pure
Arundhati attain supreme success. O immensely fortunate one! O one who is good in vows! You have done the
same for my sake. O fortunate one! Your vows have been dedicated to me. Therefore, pleased with your observance of rules, I will grant you this special boon today. O fortunate one! Ask for a special and supreme boon,
which is superior to the boon granted to Arundhati by the great-souled one. Through his favours and because of
your energy, in accordance with the prescribed rites, I will grant you another boon. Whoever controls himself[Gender neutral again.]
and spends a night in this tirtha and bathes here, will, after casting aside his body, obtain worlds that are extremely
difficult to get." Having spoken to Sruchavati, the thousand-eyed god, the illustrious and powerful one, returned
again to heaven. O king! O foremost among the Bharata lienage! When the wielder of the vajra had left, celestial
flowers, with divine fragrances, showered down there. In every direction, drums sounded with a loud roar. O lord
of the earth! A breeze, laced with auspicious scents, began to blow. Having cast aside her body, the sacred one became Indra's wife. She obtained him through her fierce austerities and pleasured with the undecaying one.'

Janamejaya asked, 'Who was the illustrious mother of that beautiful one? How was she reared? O brahmana! I
wish to hear this. My curiousity is supreme.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'On seeing the large-eyed apsara Gritachi, the seed of the great-souled brahmana rishi,
Bharadvaja, fell. The one who was supreme among those who meditate, picked that seed up in his hand. It was
kept in a cup made of leaves and the beautiful one was born from this[The word srijana means something that is shed, explaining the name
Sruchavati.]. All her birth rites were performed by the
one who was rich in austerities. The great sage, Bharadvaja, also named her. In the presence of a large number of
rishis, the great-souled one gave her the name of Sruchavati. Leaving her in that hermitage, he returned to the
slopes of the Himalayas. The immensely generous one[Balarama.] bathed there and gave away riches to the great brahmanas. Extremely controlled in his soul, the foremost of the Vrishni lineage then went to Shakra's tritha.'
