'Sanjaya said, "O great king! Then King Duryodhana, Shakuni Soubala, your son Duhshasana and the invincible
son of the suta assembled and consulted each other. How could the sons of Pandu, together with their followers, be
vanquished in battle? King Duryodhana spoke to all his advisers, addressing particularly the son of the suta and the
immensely strong Soubala. 'I do not know the reason why Drona, Bhishma, Kripa, Shalya and Somadatta's son are
unable to resist the Parthas in this battle. They are not being killed, but are demolishing my army. O Karna! In this
battle, my army is becoming weaker and my weapons are being exhausted. I have been deceived by the Pandavas.
They cannot be slain, even by the gods. I am full of doubt as to what I should do in this battle.' O great king! The
son of the suta then spoke to the king. 'O best of the Bharata lineage! Do not grieve. I will do what is agreeable to
you. Let Bhishma, Shantanu's son, withdraw from this great battle. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When
Gangeya has withdrawn from the battle and has cast aside his weapons, I will kill the Parthas, together with all the
Somakas, while Bhishma witnesses the battle. O king! This is the pledge I truthfully take. O king! Bhishma has
always acted kindly towards the Pandavas. Bhishma is incapable of vanquishing those maharathas in battle. Bhishma is proud of his prowess in battle and always loves an encounter. O father[The word used is tata, used not just for father, but anyone who is senior. In this context, 'father' is singularly
inappropriate. But we have stuck to it for the sake of consistency.]! How can he defeat the Pandavas
when he encounters them in battle[The implicit sense seems to be that if Bhishma defeats the Pandavas, the encounter will be over. Hence, Bhishma is unnecessarily prolonging it.]? Therefore, you should quickly go to Bhishma's camp. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! You should request Bhishma to cast aside his weapons in battle. When Bhishma casts aside his
weapons, you will see the Pandavas killed. O king! I will alone accomplish this in the battle, together with their
well-wishers and their relatives.' Having been thus addressed by Karna, your son, Duryodhana, spoke these words
to his brother, Duhshasana. 'O Duhshasana! Let all those, who will come with me, be appropriately dressed.
Quickly make all the arrangements.' O king! Having thus spoken, the lord of men then addressed Karna. 'O
supreme among men! O scorcher of enemies! Having requested Bhishma to withdraw from the battle, I will swiftly return and come before you. O tiger among men! You will then act in this battle.' O lord of the earth! Without
any delay, your son departed.

'"He left with his brothers, like Shatakratu with all the gods. His brother, Duhshasana, quickly made his brother,
who was a tiger among kings and with the valour of a tiger, ascend a horse. The king was adorned with armlets and
bracelets and wore a crown on his head. O great king! Dhritarashtra's son was as resplendent as the great Indra. He
was smeared with fragrant sandalwood paste. He looked like a bhandi flower[Rubia manjith, the Indian madder.] and had a golden complexion. He
was clad in garments that had no dirt on them. The king proceeded with the sporting gait of a lion. He was as beautiful as an autumn sun with unblemished rays. That tiger among men departed for Bhishma's camp. He was followed by great archers, who were famous in all the worlds as archers. His brothers, great archers, also followed
him, like the thirty gods with Vasava. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were others astride horses, and
still others astride elephants. Others on chariots, the foremost of men, surrounded him in every direction. His well-
wishers had taken up arms for the sake of protecting the lord of the earth. They were with him, like the immortals
with Shakra in heaven. The maharatha among the Kouravas was worshipped by the Kurus. O king! He went towards the illustrious Gangeya's abode. The king was followed and surrounded by his brothers in every direction.
Occasionally, he raised his right arm. It was as muscular as the trunk of an elephant and was capable of destroying
all enemies. He raised that arm and accepted the worship of the kings, who were in every direction, hands joined in
salutation. He heard sweet words from the residents of many countries. The immensely illustrious one was praised
by bards and minstrels. The lord of all the lords of the worlds honoured all of them in return. Great-souled ones
surrounded him in every direction with golden lamps, with fragrant oil as fuel. The king was surrounded by these
auspicious and golden lamps. He was as beautiful as the moon, surrounded by the resplendent large planets. There
were attendants with golden headdresses, and with drums and sticks in their hands. They gently asked the people
in every direction to make way. Having reached Bhishma's beautiful abode, the lord of men got down from his
horse and approached Bhishma. He paid his respects to Bhishma and sat down on an excellent and golden seat. It
was beautiful everywhere and was covered with a wonderful carpet.

'"He joined his hands in salutation and spoke to Bhishma, his voice choking and his eyes full of tears. 'O destroyer of enemies! We sought your protection and resorted to this war. In the battle, we thought we possessed the
enterprise to defeat the gods and the asuras combined, together with Indra, not to speak of the brave sons of Pandu,
with their well-wishers and their relatives. O lord! O Gangeya! Therefore, you should show your compassion towards me. Slay the brave sons of Pandu, like the great Indra against the danavas. O mighty-armed one! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You earlier said that you would kill the Somakas and the Panchalas, together with the
Pandavas. Act accordingly and make your words come true. Kill the assembled Parthas and the great archers, the
Somakas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Make those words come true. O lord! O king! If you protect the
Pandavas because of compassion, because of your hatred of me, or because of my misfortune, then I seek your permission to allow Karna, the ornament of any battle, to fight. He will defeat the Parthas, with their well-wishers and
their relatives, in battle.' Having said this, the king, your son Duryodhana, did not say anything more to Bhishma,
whose valour was terrible."'
