Vaishampayana said, 'Then Karna heard a voice that issued from the sun. It was spoken affectionately like a father
and came from the sun god himself. "O Karna! Pritha has spoken the truth. Act in accordance with your mother's
words. O tiger among men! You will obtain the greatest benefit, if you act entirely in accordance with her words."

Thus addressed by his mother, and by his father, the sun god himself, Karna's resolution did not falter, because he
was always established in the truth.

'Karna said, "O kshatriya lady! It is not that I disbelieve the words spoken by you, or contradict that acting in
accordance with your words is the gate to dharma. But your action towards me was extremely evil. By casting me
out, you have destroyed the fame and renown that I could have possessed. I have been born a kshatriya, but I did
not obtain the rites that were due to a kshatriya. All this was because of you. What wicked enemy could have done
anything worse? You showed me no compassion at the time when it was required. You deprived me of my rites.
But you are now asking me to act. Earlier, you have never sought my welfare as a mother. However, desiring your
own welfare alone, you have now come to me and are addressing me. Who does not suffer when Dhananjaya is
aided by Krishna? If I now go over to the Parthas, who will not think that I am frightened? I have not been known
as their brother before. This has been revealed at the time of the battle. If I go to the Pandavas, who will speak of
me as a kshatriya? The sons of Dhritarashtra have given me a share in every object of desire. They have honoured
me and given me every kind of happiness. How can I act counter to that now? They have always served me and
have always bowed down before me, like the Vasus before Vasava. They now confront a feud with an enemy. They
think that with my life, they can withstand the enemies. How can I act against the desire that is there in their
minds? Using me as a boat, they wish to cross over to the other shore of this shoreless and impassable war. How
can I abandon them? For those who have earned a living from the sons of Dhritarashtra, the time has arrived. I
must devote myself to that task, even if there is a risk to my life. There are those who are satiated and treated well.
But when the time arrives for a task, these wicked ones are ungrateful and act counter to what should be done.
They are faithless towards the king. They are servants who steal the ancestral offerings of their master. These evil-
acting ones do not obtain this world, or the next. In the cause of Dhritarashtra's son, I will fight with your sons. I
will use all my strength and my power. I will not lie to you. I will seek to abide by the conduct of a non-violent and
truthful person. But even if they are beneficial, I will not act in accordance with your words now. However, your
appeal to me will not be fruitless. Though I can counter and kill them, I will not kill all of your sons in battle-
Yudhishthira, Bhima and the twins, everyone other than Arjuna. In Yudhishthira's army, I will fight with Arjuna.
Having killed Arjuna in battle, I will obtain fruits. Or I will be killed by Savyasachi and attain fame. O illustrious
one! The number of your sons will not be less than five. You will either be without Arjuna and with Karna, or if I
am killed, you will be with Arjuna."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having heard Karna's words, Kunti trembled with grief. She embraced her son Karna,
who was firm because of his fortitude, and said, "It must be this way then. O Karna! The Kouravas will go to their
destruction, as you have said. Destiny is extremely powerful. O destroyer of enemies! But you must promise me
about the safety of four of your brothers. You have given me that pledge and you must discharge that promise.
May you be safe and in good health." Pritha spoke these words to Karna. Delighted, Karna honoured her. Then,
both of them left in different directions.'
