Yudhishthira said, "O king! I am not pleased at your leaving the kingdom in such grief. Shame on me. I am extremely evil-minded. I have been addicted to the kingdom and have been careless. O king! I did not know
that you were afflicted by grief and have become thin because of fasting. With my brothers, I did not know that
you were not eating and were lying down on the ground. I am foolish and have been deceived by your deep intelligence. Before this, though you were afflicted by sorrow, you assured me. What will I do with this kingdom or with
these objects of pleasure? What will I do with sacrifices and happiness? My king has suffered from a great deal of
misery. I now know that my kingdom is diseased and so am I. O lord of men! But what is the point in speaking
these words of sorrow to you? You are our father. You are our mother. You are our supreme preceptor. Separated
from you, how will we remain alive? O supreme among kings! Yuyutsu is a son who has been born from your own
loins. O great king! Let him be the king, or whoever else you think fit. I will go to the forest. You rule the kingdom. I am being burnt through ill fame. Do not burn me again. I am not the king. You are the king. I am dependent
on you. You know about dharma. How can I grant permission to someone who is a senior? O unblemished one!
Because of what Duryodhana did, I bear no rancour in my heart. Know it to be destiny and we were all confounded
by it. We are your sons, just like Duryodhana and the others. It is my view that there is no difference between
Gandhari and Kunti. O Indra among kings! If you abandon us and leave, I will follow you at the rear. I will take a
pledge on that. This earth, up to the girdle of the ocean, is full of riches. Without you, this will no longer be agreeable to me. All of this belongs to you. To gratify you, I bow down my head. O Indra among kings! All of us are under your subjugation. Please dispel this mental fever. O lord of men! I think it is destiny which has come over you.
It is through good fortune that we are able to serve you. Free us from this mental fever."

'Dhritarashtra replied, "O son! O descendant of the Kuru lineage! My mind has turned towards austerities. O
lord! Going to the forest is appropriate for our lineage. O son! You have honoured me for a long time. You have
served me for a long time. O lord of men! Since I am aged, you should grant me permission."'

Vaishampayana said, 'King Dhritarashtra, Ambika's son, spoke these words to Dharmaraja and joining his hands
in salutation, trembled. He told Sanjaya, the great adviser, and maharatha Kripa, "I wish to entreat the king through
you. My mind and heart are distressed. My mouth is dry. I am aged and speech leads to exertion." The aged king,
the extender of the Kuru lineage and with dharma in his soul, spoke in this way. The intelligent one leaned on
Gandhari  and  seemed  to  be  lifeless.  The  king  of  the  Kurus  was  seated  there,  immobile.  On  seeing  him,  King
Kounteya, the slayer of enemy heroes, was suddenly filled with great depression.

'Yudhishthira said, "His strength was equal to that of ten thousand elephants. That king is lying down now, leaning on a woman and seems to be lifeless. In earlier times, he used his strength to crush Bhimasena's iron image
into fragments[Described in Section 81 (Volume 8).]. For the sake of strength, he now has to hold on to a woman. Shame on me. I do not know about
dharma. Shame on my intelligence. Shame on my learning. The lord of the earth is now lying down in a way that
does not befit him. I will also fast, like my preceptor, if the king and the illustrious Gandhari do not eat."'

Vaishampayana continued, 'Pandava rubbed the king's hands with cold water. Knowledgable about dharma, he
also gently rubbed his chest and face. The water was auspicious and fragrant, mixed with jewels. At the touch of
the king's hand, the king regained his senses.'
