Vyasa said, 'All beings on earth, mobile and immobile, are first destroyed and then merge into the earth.
Everything, mobile and immobile, thus disappears. The ground is then seen to be without wood and without grass, like the back of a tortoise. Water then accepts the quality of the earth, that is, scent. Having been bereft
of  scent, the earth can then be thought of  as  having been destroyed. Water is then established, in the form of
mighty waves that make giant roars. It pervades everything, staying still and moving around. O son! Light then accepts the quality of water. Having lost its own quality, water seeks refuge in light. The sun is stationed in the middle of the firmament. But crests of flames hide it. Everything is covered by those rays and the entire sky seems to
be blazing. However, the wind then accepts the quality of light. Though light is pacified, a gigantic wind is whirled
around. The wind creates itself, using its own foundation[Sound.]. It moves upwards, downwards and diagonally, agitating the ten directions. Space then devours the wind's quality of touch. The wind is pacified. But basing itself in the
sky, it continues to roar. The quality of space, sound, is then accepted by Mana, the soul of everything that is manifest. Whatever is made manifest by Mana, is withdrawn by the unmanifest Brahma. With its qualities, Mana is then
submerged into Chandrama[In a straightforward translation, Chandrama is the moon. However, the word has special meanings in yoga.]. Mana is immersed in adhyatma and bases itself in Chandrama. After a long period
of time, Sankalpa[Resolution, but being used as a synonym for Chandrama.] is brought under subjugation. Chitta[Consciousness.] devours Sankalpa and this is the supreme knowledge.
Time devours knowledge and the sacred texts say that time is devoured by Bala[Strength.]. But Bala is devoured by Time
and is in turn brought under subjugation by Vidya[Knowledge.]. The unmanifest and supreme Brahma then roars in the sky
and brings Vidya into his soul. He is eternal and the greatest. In this fashion, all the beings are drawn into Brahma.
This has certainly been spoken about properly. This is what should be known. This is knowledge. This has been
seen by yogis who are supreme in their souls. Thus, the unmanifest Brahma repeatedly extends and withdraws.
Thus do Brahma's night and day last for 1,000 yugas.'"'
