Bhishma said, "For the sake of determining supreme dharma, Janaka, the lord of Mithila, again asked the great-
souled Parashara. 'O brahmana! What is the supreme objective? Which deeds are never destroyed? Which is
the spot, from which, one does not have to return? O great sage! Tell me that.'

'"Parashara replied, 'Detachment is the best foundation of knowledge. Knowledge represents the best path. Austerities are never destroyed. Seeds sown in a field are not destroyed. If a person severs the noose of adharma and
takes pleasure in dharma, if he grants the gift of fearlessness, then he obtains success. A person who gives away
thousands of cattle and hundreds of horses and grants fearlessness to all beings, he is the one who truly gives. One
may dwell in the midst of material objects. However, if one is intelligent, one does not really dwell amidst them. It
is only the evil-minded person who dwells amidst trifling material objects. Like water on the leaf of a lotus, a wise
person is not stained by adharma. Sin attaches more to an ignorant person, just as lac and wood attach to each other. Adharma can only be extinguished after the fruits have been felt and do not let go of the doer. At the right time,
the doer will have to endure all of these. But they do not afflict those who have clean souls and have seen the atman. An ignorant person is distracted by his intelligence and the organs of action. Attached to good and bad deeds,
he suffers from great fear. Even when he is in the midst of objects, a person who is devoid of attachment and has
properly conquered his anger, is never united with sin. When there is a dam, the store of water swells up. In that
way, someone with the dam of dharma does not suffer. The gem purifies itself by attracting the rays of the sun[This is the suryakanta jewel, the sun-stone.]. O
tiger among kings! A person who practices yoga receives in that way. When sesamum seeds are separately mingled with flowers, they imbibe those pleasant qualities. By resorting to the quality of sattva, men on earth can improve themselves by associating with those who have clean souls. When a man makes up his mind about heaven,
he abandons his wife, his riches, his excellent horses, his vehicles and all kinds of rites. His intelligence is then
delinked from material objects. If a man's intelligence is addicted to material objects, he can never comprehend
what brings welfare to his atman. O king! His consciousness is attracted by all these sentiments, like fish after a
bait of meat. All mortal beings in this world encounter each other and depend on each other. But like a plantain
tree, this lacks essence. They sink like a boat in the ocean. No time has been designated for a man to follow dharma. Death does not wait for any man. It is appropriate that one should always practise the rites of dharma, since a
man is always headed towards the jaws of death. Through practice, a blind man can roam around in his own house.
In that way, by concentrating the mind, a wise person can follow the desired path. It has been said that everything
that is born must die. Birth is associated with death. A person who is ignorant about the dharma of emancipation is
bound and is whirled around in that cycle. The stalk of a lotus can swiftly free itself from the mire. In that way, a
man's atman can free itself of the mind. It is the mind that initially brings the atman to yoga. Engaged in one's own
acts, one tends to ignore the supreme objective. By being addicted to the objects of the senses, one falls away from
one's true acts. Though heaven is the supreme objective, one obtains birth as inferior species. Through his own
deeds, a wise person's atman obtains the supreme benefit. When an earthen vessel has been baked, the liquid kept
there does not escape and diminish. Even if one is in the midst of material objects, it is the same with a person who
has tormented his body through austerities. There is no doubt that a person who discards material objects can obtain emancipation, delinking his atman from objects of pleasure. But there are others who base themselves on objects of pleasure. A person attached to his penis and stomach is shrouded in mist. His soul is enveloped, like a person who has been born blind and does not understand. Merchants who go out to sea obtain riches that are proportionate to the capital invested. Know that in the world of mortals, creatures obtain ends that are proportionate to
their deeds. In this world, made up of days and nights, death roams around in the form of old age and devours creatures, like a snake devouring the air. A creature obtains a birth that is determined by the deeds that he has himself
performed. There is nothing, pleasant or unpleasant, that is obtained but is not dependent on earlier acts. Whether
he is lying down, moving around or is seated, or is in the midst of material objects, a man always obtains the fruits
of good and bad deeds. But it is seen that someone who has obtained the furthest shore[Has been emancipated.], which is so difficult to
reach in this great ocean, does not return again. When a burden is to be carried, boats are lowered into the great
ocean through ropes[If boats are not being used, they are not left in the water, for fear of damage. When they are needed, ropes are
used to lower them into the water.]. That is the way the mind uses yoga to uplift the body. Rivers head towards the ocean and
unite with it. In that way, yoga always makes one unite with prakriti. The minds of men are attached to many kinds
of bonds of affection. Their nature is destroyed, like houses of sand by the water. The being must realize that the
body is like a house and that it has to be purified through sacred waters. If one advances along the path of intelligence, one obtains happiness in this world and in the next. There are many things that lead to hardship, but there
are only a few that bring happiness. The learned say that among the many things that lead to benefit in the hereafter, renunciation is the best. There are large numbers of friends who have their own intentions. There are relatives who follow their own reasons. There are wives, servants and sons. All of them wish to enjoy one's riches for
their own reasons. A mother or a father cannot bring about anything in the hereafter. Donations are the medication
and a creature reaps the fruits of his own deeds. Mothers, sons, fathers, brothers, wives and friends are only like
etchings of gold against the real stuff[The text uses the word ashtapada, which is a measure of gold. Relatives are like etchings, they aren't the real
gold.]. All the deeds that have been done earlier, good and bad, follow a creature's atman. Knowing that the fruits of deeds present themselves, one should turn one's intelligence towards the
inner atman. One should resort to one's conduct, using others as aides. One who has begun his acts in this way,
never suffers. One must have no doubt in one's mind. One must be brave, patient and learned. Prosperity will never abandon such a person, just as the rays don't leave the sun. If a person believes and uses means to engage in
such conduct, without any wonder and without any doubt, and if he controls himself, then his atman does not suffer and he does not deviate from the objective. All the deeds that a creature himself performed, good and bad, control him from the moment he obtains a womb. Both types of earlier deeds restrain him. Death cannot be countered
and time severs everything, like a saw scattering dust from wood. In the end, the fruits of deeds are obtained.
Through the acts that he has himself performed earlier, good and bad, a man obtains everything-his appearance,
birth, material objects, prosperity and other stores.'"

'Bhishma said, "O king! The learned one thus spoke about the truth to Janaka. Having heard, the best among
those who were knowledgable about dharma, obtained great delight."'
