'Vaishravana said, "O Yudhishthira! Perseverance, steadfastness, place, time and valour-these are the five principles that determine results in this world. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In krita yuga, men persevered and
were skilled in their respective tasks and were well versed in the principles of valour. O best of kshatriyas! A kshatriya who has perseverance, knows the place and the time and the principle of all dharma, rules the earth. O Partha!
O brave one! A man who acts in this fashion in all his deeds, obtains fame in this world and a good end after death.
Shakra, the destroyer of Vritra, together with the Vasus, exhibited his valour at the right place and time and obtained the kingdom of heaven. The one who is evil in his soul and evil in his intelligence pursues evil alone. Not
knowing the results of his actions, he is destroyed now, and after death. The stupid one who does not know the
time and the difference between different types of deeds, is destroyed now, and after death, and his efforts are in
vain. Violent, deceitful and evil-minded ones decide to commit sin, covetous of obtaining everything. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! This Bhimasena is fearless. He does not know dharma. He is prone to violence. He is
childish in intelligence. He is intolerant. Therefore, instruct him.

'"When you have returned to rajarshi Arshtishena's hermitage, for the first lunar fortnight[The dark lunar fortnight (Krishna paksha) is referred to as the first lunar fortnight.], dwell there without any fear. O Indra among men! O mighty-armed one! The gandharvas, the yakshas, the rakshasas, the inhabitants of Alaka[This means the yakshas. Alaka is Kubera's capital.] and all the denizens of the mountain will protect you, and the supreme among brahmanas, on my
orders. O king! O supreme among those who uphold dharma! This Vrikodara has been committing violent acts on
this mountain. Restrain him. O Indra among kings! From now on, all the inhabitants of the forest will look after
you, serve you and always protect you. O bull among men! My attendants will serve you with a lot of tasty food
and drink. O son[The word used is tata.]! O Yudhishthira! Just as Jishnu is under Mahendra's protection, Vrikodara under Vayu's, you
under Dharma's, since you are his own son obtained through yoga, and the twins under the Ashvins, each son being respectively protected, from now on, you will be under my protection too. Phalguna, knowledgeable in all aspects of artha and well versed in all aspects of dharma, immediately younger to Bhimasena, has become skilled in
heaven. O son! Right from his birth, every superior trait, perceived to lead to the attainment of the supreme of
worlds, has been vested in Dhananjaya. Self-control, generosity, strength, intelligence, humility, perseverance and
supreme energy-all of these are present in the great-spirited one, whose energy is infinite. O Pandava! Jishnu
never commits a reprehensible act. Nor do men recount any falsehoods having been uttered by Partha. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! That extender of deeds of the Kuru lineage has been learning the art of weapons in
Shakra's abode, honoured by the gods, the ancestors and the gandharvas. O Partha! The immensely energetic
Shantanu, your father's grandfather, who brought all the lords of the earth under his suzerainty through dharma, is
pleased in heaven with Partha Gandivadhanva[Gandivadhanva means the wielder of the Gandiva and is one of Arjuna's name. Jishnu, Gudakesha and
Dhananjaya are also Arjuna's names. In this passage, the word Partha is being used for both Yudhishthira and Arjuna, since both are Pritha's (Kunti's) sons.]. That immensely valorous and greatly famous king, the upholder
of his lineage, always honoured the ancestors, the gods, the rishis and the brahmanas and performed seven major
sacrifices on the banks of the Yamuna. O king! That lord of kings, your great grandfather Shantanu, has attained
heaven and now resides in Shakra's world. He has asked about your welfare."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Vrikodara, bull among the Bharata lineage, then laid down his spear, his club, his sword
and his bow. He bowed down in obeisance before Kubera. The lord of riches, refuge of those who seek sanctuary,
then told the one who had sought shelter, "May you be the one who destroys the pride of your enemies and increases the joy of your well-wishers. O scorcher of enemies! O bulls among the Bharata lineage! Dwell in these
beautiful residences. The yakshas will procure for you everything that you desire. Having obtained the weapons
and having obtained leave from Maghavan himself, Gudakesha Dhananjaya, bull among men, will return soon."

Having thus instructed Yudhishthira, whose deeds were virtuous, the lord of the guhyakas, returned to his home in
the supreme of mountains. Thousands of rakshasas and yakshas followed him in their vehicles, covered with decorated cushions and adorned with many different kinds of gems. Those supreme horses neighed as they proceeded
like birds towards Kubera's abode, following Airavata's path[Airavata is Indra's elephant.]. The steeds of the lord of riches travelled as if
they were splitting the sky, trailing clouds and feeding on the wind. On the instructions of the lord of riches, the
dead bodies of the rakshasas were removed from the summit of the mountain. The wise Agastya had determined
this at the time for the curse. And therefore they, together with Maniman, had been slain in battle. The great-souled
Pandavas happily spent the night in those residences. They were free from anxiety and were honoured by all the
rakshasas.'
