Vaishampayana said, 'Those youthful kings were adorned with earrings. Each regarded himself as the most skilled
in the use of weapons. All of them stood up and brandished their weapons. They boasted at one another, insolent
with beauty, valour, lineage, virtue, riches and youth. They were like kings of elephants from the Himalayas, drunk
in the season of rut. They stared at each other in insolence. Mentally struck with desire, they suddenly stood up
from their royal seats and exclaimed, "Krishna will be mine." Assembled in that arena and eager to win Drupada's
daughter, they looked like gods who stood around Uma, the daughter of the king of the mountains. Their bodies
were pierced with the arrows of the god of love[Kandarpa, one of the names of the god of love.]. They completely lost their hearts to Krishna[Droupadi.]. They descended
into the arena, feeling hatred for their own relatives for Droupadi's sake.

'The gods came in their heavenly chariots-the rudras, the adityas, the vasus, the twin Ashvins, all the sadhyas
and all the maruts, with Yama and the god of wealth[Kubera.] at the forefront. There also came the daityas, the suparnas[The giant birds in general.],
the great uragas[The nagas.], the devarshis, the guhyakas[Semi-divine species.], the charanas[Celestial singers.], Vishvavasu, Narada, Parvata, the chief gandharvas with the apsaras, Halayudha[Halayudha is one of Balarama's names. Hala means plough, ayudha means weapon. Halayudha is one with
the plough as one's weapon.], Janardana[Krishna.] and the chiefs among the Vrishnis and the Andhakas. The chiefs
among the Yadus, always devoted to Krishna, were also there, witnessing it. On seeing the five Pandavas, like elephants in rut that had come to a lake full of lotuses, like a fire covered with ashes, the chief of the Yadus[Krishna.] began
to wonder. He told Rama[Balarama.], "That is Yudhishthira. That is Bhima and that is Jishnu[Another name of Arjuna's.] and those are the valorous
twins." Glancing at them leisurely, Rama cast a pleased glance at Janardana.

'Biting their lower lips in anger, those other warriors, the sons and grandsons of kings, had set their eyes, hearts
and natures on Krishna. Biting their lips and with faces that were like copper in colour, they only looked at her[Therefore, they did not notice the Pandavas.].
On seeing Droupadi, Pritha's mighty-armed sons and the brave and great-natured twins were struck with the arrows of the god of love[Pritha is Kunti's name and only Yudhishthira, Bhima and Arjuna were Kunti's sons. Nakula and Sahadeva
were Madri's sons.]. The place was full of gods, rishis, gandharvas, suparnas, nagas, asuras and siddhas, pervaded with divine fragrances and covered with divine garlands. A great roar arose from the drums[Dundubhi.], and the
sounds of the flute, the veena and cymbals echoed. The celestial routes were crowded with the heavenly chariots of
the gods.

'Then, one after another, those kings exhibited their valour for Krishna. But the bow was so strong that with all
their strength, they could not string it. The firm wood of the bow recoiled and flung those brave rulers of men on
the ground. They failed in their desire and could be seen on the ground, miserable and broken in spirit. That firm
bow caused them pain and shattered their bracelets and earrings. Having lost hopes of obtaining Krishna, that assembly of kings was crestfallen. In that assembly, those kings who boasted of noble birth then became objects of
derision. Kunti's brave son Jishnu then arose, wishing to string the bow and place an arrow on it.'
