Yudhishthira asked, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! Whom should men worship? Who should they bow
down to? Tell me this in detail. I am not satisfied with what you have told me."

'Bhishma replied, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about a conversation between Narada and
Vasudeva. On seeing that Narada had joined his hands in salutation and was worshipping bulls among the brahmanas, Keshava asked, 'O illustrious one! Whom are you bowing down to? Whom among these are you revering
so much and bowing down to? O supreme among those who know dharma! If possible, I wish to hear this. Tell
me.'

'"Narada replied, 'O Govinda! O scorcher of enemies! Listen to whom I am worshipping. Truly, with your exception, which other man in the world is capable of hearing this? O lord! I always worship and bow down before
Varuna, Vayu, Aditya, Parjanya, Jataveda[Agni.],  Sthanu, Skanda, Lakshmi, Vishnu, brahmanas, Vachaspati[The lord of speech.],  the
moon, the water, the earth and Sarasvati. O one who should be revered! O tiger among the Vrishni lineage! I always worship those who are stores of austerities, those who know the Vedas and those who are always devoted to
the Vedas. O lord! I bow down before those who perform the tasks of the gods without eating and without boasting
about it and those who are content and full of forgiveness. O Yadava! I bow down before those who perform sacrifices well, those who are forgiving, self-controlled and in control of their senses and those who give away grain,
riches, land and cattle. O Yadava! I bow down before those who perform austerities in the forest, surviving on
roots and fruits, those who do not store anything and those who observe rites. O Yadava! I bow down before those
who are fond of maintaining their servants, those who always love the act of tending to guests and those who only
eat leftovers, after the gods have eaten. I always worship those who have become unassailable after learning the
Vedas, eloquent ones who are knowledgable about the brahman and those who are always engaged in officiating at
sacrifices and teaching. I  worship  those whose  hearts are always pleasant towards  all creatures and those who
study until their backs are heated[They study despite their backs being heated by the sun.]. O Yadava! I bow down before those who study by satisfying their preceptors,
those who endeavour to be firm in their vows, those who serve and those are without malice. O Yadava! I bow
down before sages who are excellent in their vows, brahmanas who are devoted to the truth and offer havya and
kavya. O Yadava! I bow down before those who are devoted to subsistence through begging, those who are emaciated, those who live in the houses of their preceptors, those who do not pursue happiness and those who are without riches. There are men without a sense of ownership, without enemies, without shame[Without a false sense of shame.], without requirements
and without violence, devoted to the truth, self-controlled and devoted to tranquility. O Keshava! I bow down before them. There are those who are householders, devoted to worshipping gods and guests and following the conduct of pigeons[Pigeons pick up grain from the ground. Like that, these people do not accumulate and survive on whatever is
available.]. O Yadava! I always bow down before them. There are those who pursue the three objectives[Dharma, artha and kama.]
without deviating from them and are addicted to good  conduct. I  always bow  down  before them. In  the  three
worlds, there are brahmanas who pursue the three objectives, without greed, and are devoted to auspicious conduct. O Keshava! I bow down before them. There are those who always subsist on water, air and milk, engaged in
many kinds of vows. O Madhava! I bow down before them. I bow down before brahmanas who are celibate, those
who aren't celibate but tend to the sacrificial fire, those who are the source of the brahman and those who are the
refuge of all creatures. O Krishna! I always bow down before rishis who have created the worlds. They are the eldest in the worlds. Like the sun, they are the dispellers of the darkness of ignorance in the worlds. O Varshneya!
Therefore, I always worship those brahmanas. O unblemished one! They confer happiness and deserve to be worshipped. You should also worship them. In this world and in the next, these people are the ones who grant happiness. If you revere them, they will also confer bliss on you. There are those who are always hospitable towards
guests and tend to cattle and brahmanas. They are always devoted to the truth and succeed in crossing things that
are difficult to traverse. They are always devoted to peace and are without malice. They are always devoted to
studying and succeed in crossing things that are difficult to traverse. Those who bow down before all the gods,
those who resort to even a single god and those who are faithful and controlled succeed in crossing things that are
difficult to traverse. Those who bow down before the foremost of brahmanas, are careful in their vows and are addicted to giving succeed in crossing things that are difficult to traverse. Those who follow the rituals, kindle and
maintain the sacrificial fire and offer oblations of soma into it succeed in crossing things that are difficult to traverse. O tiger among the Vrishni lineage! A person who is like you and always tends to his mother, his father and
his preceptor properly, is always united with bliss. O Kounteya! Therefore, you should also properly tend to ancestors, gods and guests and worship them. You will then obtain a beneficial end.'"'
