'Sanjaya said, "O king! When Saindhava was killed, your son, Suyodhana, was distressed and lost all hope about
defeating the enemy. His face was miserable and covered with tears. He thought that a warrior like Arjuna did not
exist on earth. O venerable one! When he was enraged, Drona, Radheya, Ashvatthama and Kripa were incapable
of standing before him. 'Partha has vanquished all my maharathas in battle. He has killed Saindhava in the encounter and no one could counter him. This large army of the Kouravas has been completely destroyed by him. I
do not see any protector, not even Purandara himself. In this battle, I depended on Karna. He raised his weapons in
the encounter, but was defeated. Jayadratha has been slain. In the midst of the assembly hall, he spoke harsh words
to the Pandavas. That Karna has been defeated in the battle and Saindhava has been brought down. I depended on
his valour and regarding Achyuta as straw, refused him when he solicited peace. That Karna has been vanquished
in the battle.' O king! He was thus distressed in his mind and in search of recourse, glanced towards Drona. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! Your son, who had caused injury to all the worlds, went to him. He told him everything, about the great slaughter of the Kurus, about the victory of the enemy and about the straits the sons of Dhritarashtra were immersed in.

'"Duryodhana said, 'O preceptor! Behold the great destruction of those whose heads have been sprinkled[As a preparatory rite for the war.]. I
placed my grandfather, the brave Bhishma, at the forefront of the battle. Having slain him, the avaricious Shikhandi satisfied his old desire. With all the Panchalas, he is now afflicting the vanguard of the army. There is the other
invincible one, your disciple Savyasachi. He has destroyed seven akshouhinis and has killed King Jayadratha.
These well-wishers have sought to do what is agreeable to us and desiring our victory, have gone to Yama's abode.
How will I repay that debt? For my sake, those lords of the earth are lying down on the ground. They have given
up all the prosperity of the earth and are lying down on the ground. Having caused such a slaughter of my friends,
I am a coward. I do not think that even one thousand horse sacrifices will purify me. I am avaricious and wicked. I
have acted against dharma. They have made efforts to be victorious and have obtained Vaivasvata's[Yama's.] eternal
abode. I am inferior in conduct and have been an enemy to my well-wishers. In the midst of these kings, why
doesn't the earth provide me a hole[Through which, Duryodhana can sink.]? In the midst of those kings, what will the grandfather tell me, his limbs
covered with blood? With Bhishma killed in the battle, I do not have a protector and cannot sleep. What will he tell
an ignoble man like me when he meets me? I am one who does not follow dharma and have caused strife among
relatives. He has conquered the afterworld. Behold the great archer Jalasandha, killed by Satyaki. The brave maharatha raised his weapons for my sake and gave up his life. On seeing that Kamboja has been killed[In Section 69, Arjuna killed Sudakshina, the king of Kamboja.], and Alam-
busa, and many other well-wishers, what is the point of my remaining alive now? Those brave ones strove and
were killed for my sake. They did not retreat. For the sake of my welfare, they used the utmost of their capacity to
obtain victory. O scorcher of enemies! Today, I will use my strength to repay my debt to those departed ones. With
the waters of the Yamuna, I will then offer oblations to them. O supreme among wielders of all weapons! Know
this to be the truth. I swear this on my good deeds, my valour and my sons. I will kill all the Panchalas and Pandavas in the battle and obtain peace. Or, in the battle, I will go to the world where they have gone[The well-wishers who have died.]. On seeing
that they are not protected well by us, our allies do not wish to support us and think that the Pandus are superior. O
mighty-armed one! O one whose aim is unflinching! You have yourself determined our death in the battle. You
have always been partial towards your excellent disciple, Dhananjaya. Thus, all those who desired our victory have
been killed. I see Karna as the only one who is assured about our victory and desires it. One with evil intelligence
does not examine the truth and doesn't know the nature of friendship. To accomplish an objective, such a person
engages someone as a friend. O my well-wisher on this earth! I have performed an extremely terrible deed. I have
been confused, avaricious and wicked. I have always been led by the tongue[These shlokas are somewhat confusing, but the sense is clear. Duryodhana has made a mistake by depending on
Drona. Instead, he should have depended on Karna.]. Jayadratha has been slain and so
has Somadatta's valiant son, as have the Abhishahas, Shurasenas, Shibis and Vasatis. I will today go where those
bulls among men have gone. For my sake, they have killed in the battle by the fighting Kiriti. O bull among men!
O preceptor of the sons of Pandu! There is truly no purpose in my remaining alive. Grant me leave.'"'
