'Bhishma said, "There are virtuous ones who are constrained by a sense of shame. They are full of truthfulness and
uprightness. They are capable of saying what is proper. Such people should be members of the assembly[Sabhasada. This is more than courtier, since there is also a sense of legislative and judicial function.]. O
Kounteya! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! For all tasks, choose as aides those who are extremely wealthy,
extremely brave, extremely learned brahmanas, those who are extremely satisfied with you and capable of great
enterprise. In every difficulty, you should try for people like these. Those who are born in noble lineages and are
honoured will never hide their capabilities. Such a person will never abandon you, whether you are happy or troubled, whether you are afflicted or well, and you must sustain such an individual. Your retinue must consist of those
born in noble lineages, born within the kingdom, wise, handsome, extremely learned and those who are bold, but
are devoted to you. O son! Those born in inferior lineages, avaricious, violent and shameless will serve you as long
as their hands are wet[As long as there are bribes and inducements.]. There are those who are loved and share in your prosperity, who are rewarded with superior and inferior objects, those who seek your prosperity and participate in your happiness, those who are learned
and whose conduct does not vary, those who are virtuous and follow vows, those who always wish that you are
wealthy, are not inferior and speak the truth. Engage them. However, there are ignoble and evil-minded ones who
do not know about agreements. Knowing that they deviate from pledges, you must be careful about them. When
there are many to choose from, one should not choose one, ignoring the many. However, if one is superior to the
many, the many can be ignored, depending on one's inclination. These are the signs one sees in the superior person
-valour, emphasis on deeds, adherence to agreements, honour shown to capable people, no attempts to rival those
who are not rivals, lack of deviation from dharma on account of desire, fear, anger and avarice, lack of arrogance,
capability to speak the truth, control over the self and respect for the worthy. Having been examined in every way,
such a person should be the adviser in any counsel. He should be born in a noble family, truthful, patient, accomplished, in control over the soul, brave, grateful and upright. O Partha! These are the marks of an excellent person.
When these are present, one gets to know such a man. His enemies are disarmed and become his friends. A king
who controls his soul, is accomplished in wisdom and desires his own prosperity, should examine the good and
bad qualities of his senior ministers and combine men who are wise, born in noble families and born within the
country, who are faithful and incapable of being corrupted, and who have been extremely well tested in every possible way. There should be warriors, those who are learned, those whose ancestors have served and others who are
not that superior. These men must be adorned with a sense of duty and a desire for prosperity. They must possess
morality, natural intelligence, energy, patience, forgiveness, purity, loyalty, firmness and fortitude. After testing
their qualities, a king who desires his prosperity must appoint senior advisers who are capable of bearing a heavy
load. They must have passed the five tests[There were tests of loyalty on grounds of dharma, artha, kama, fear and
an overall aggregate one.]. He must appoint those who are adequate in speech, brave, skilled in
raising resources, born in noble lineages, truthful, knowledgeable about the interpretation of signs and free from
cruelty. They must know about the requirements of time and place and seek to ensure the tasks of the master. For
the sake of prosperity, these are the kinds of ministers the king must always have.

'"One who is weak in energy and enterprise will never be decisive. He will certainly generate uncertainty in all
tasks. A minister who is not learned, even if he is born in a good family and knows about dharma, artha and kama,
is not capable of examining a policy. In that way, one who is not born in a good family, even if he is as learned as
one desires, is like a blind man without a leader and is confused in all tasks requiring intelligence. Even if a man is
intelligent and knows about the means of implementation, if his resolution wavers, he cannot persevere with the
task for a long time. A man who is evil in his intelligence and lacks learning may again simply be engaged in carrying out a task, but is incapable of any special kind of reflection. One should never trust a minister who is not devoted. One should never reveal one's counsel to someone who is not devoted. A fraudulent one will conspire with
other ministers and cause hardship to the king, like a fire penetrates a tree through holes created by the battering of
the wind. The lord may sometimes be enraged and dislodge someone from his position. He may fling words of
anger towards him and later reinstate him. No one except a person who is devoted is capable of tolerating this.
Ministers can also be enraged, like lightning mixed with thunder. Wishing for the welfare of the lord, if a person
restrains this, considering happiness and unhappiness equally, that is the man who should be sought for the sake of
prosperity. If a man is not upright, even if he is devoted, wise and possesses all the superior qualities, he should not
learn about the king's plans. When a person allies with enemies and pays no regard to the many citizens, that kind
of well-wisher should not learn about the king's plans. If a person is not learned, is impure, stubborn and boastful,
serves the enemy and is angry and avaricious, that kind of well-wisher should not learn about the king's plans. If a
person is a stranger, even if he is devoted and is as learned as one wants, even if he is honoured and given a share,
that person should not learn about the king's plans. If a person has been accused of even a small crime, even if he
is honoured well and is appointed again because of his good qualities, that person should not hear about the king's
plans.

'"A person who is accomplished in wisdom, intelligent, learned, born within the country, pure and upright in all
his deeds, that person deserves to hear the plans. If a person possesses external and internal knowledge[Jnana and vijnana respectively, the former learnt from teachers, the latter from one's own self.] and
knows his own nature and the souls of others, he is like the king's well-wisher and deserves to hear the plans. If a
person is truthful in speech, possesses good conduct, is grave, modest and mild, if he is a father and a grandfather,
he deserves to hear the plans. If a person is content, revered, truthful and liberal, if he hates evildoers, if he is brave
and understands what needs to be done at different time, he deserves to hear the plans. If a person is capable of
looking at all the people equally and can bring them under subjugation through conciliation, then a king who
wields the rod should tell him about his plans. A warrior who is learned in policy, whom the citizens and the residents of the countryside trust because he follows dharma, deserves to hear the plans. Therefore, those who possess
all the qualities should be honoured well. There should be at least three ministers who know about nature and who
aspire for greatness. They should be employed in detecting one's natural weaknesses and that of the enemy. When
the foundation is the advice of these ministers, the king and the kingdom prosper. The enemy should not be able to
detect one's weaknesses, but one should discern the weaknesses of the enemy. Like a turtle draws in its limbs, one
must protect one's own weaknesses. Learned ministers provide policy for the kingdom. The king implements the
policy. Other people are like the limbs of that policy. It is said that the essence and root of a kingdom's policy is
based on spying.

'"Ministers seek a living on this earth and follow their lord. Having controlled restraints, arrogance, anger, pride
and jealousy, the king must always consult ministers who have passed the five kinds of tests. The king must focus
his mind and understand the different kinds of advice those three[The three ministers.] have. After the period of consultation is over,
he must tell them his own views and the ultimate decision. If there is a serious matter, he must ask a supreme brahmana who knows about the purport of dharma, artha and kama. He must approach him with devotion and affectionately follow the path indicated by him. Those who know about the process of consultation have always determined and said that this is the process that should be followed in seeking advice. Therfore, counsel should always
be implemented in this way and this is capable of ensuring the support of the subjects. There must not be dwarves,
hunchbacks, weak people, lame ones, blind people, idiots, women and eunuchs there[At the place where the king holds his consultations.]. No one should move
there, in front, at the rear, above, below and diagonally[There should not be distractions from people moving around.]. One should climb up onto a deserted balcony, where the
ground can be clearly seen and there is no grass or reeds nearby. Avoiding all the errors associated with speech and
gestures, the consultations must be held with the ministers at the right time."'
