Shuka asked, 'O illustrious one! Tell me about supreme dharma, to which nothing is superior. What is that
special dharma?' '"Vyasa replied, 'I will tell you about the dharma that was praised by the ancient rishis.
This is special among all kinds of dharma. Listen single-mindedly to this. The senses cause agitation. One must
carefully use one's intelligence to restrain them. This is like a father controlling his foolish and wayward sons. The
concentration of the mind and the senses is the greatest austerity. Since all dharmas flow from this, this is regarded
as supreme dharma. The intelligence must be used to restrain all of them, with the mind as the sixth. Thinking a lot
about what it is difficult to think about, one must be satisfied in the atman. Just as cows return from pasture and return to their houses, when one is immersed in the atman, one can see the supreme and the eternal. Like a flame that
is without smoke, great-souled and learned brahmanas can see the great atman[The paramatman.]in all atmans. A giant tree with
many branches and full of flowers and fruit does not itself know which are its flowers and which are its fruit. In
that way, the atman does not know where it has come from and where it is going[Referrring to birth and death.]. However, there is an inner atman that sees everything[The inner atman is obviously the jivatman, whereas the earlier reference to the atman is of the atman confounded by the ignorance of the mind, intelligence, consciousness and the senses.]. With the blazing lamp of knowledge, see the atman inside your own self. Having seen
the atman inside your own self, know everything and know that you are not the body. Be cleansed from all sin, like
a snake that has cast off its skin. With that supreme intelligence, be free of sin and free from anxiety. This terrible
river[The river of life.] has currents that flow in every direction in this world. The five senses are crocodiles and the mind and resolution are embankments. It is strewn  with the grass  of  greed and confusion. Desire and anger are the reptiles.
While truth constitutes the tirthas, falsehood constitutes the waves. Wrath is the mud in that supreme river. It arises
from the unmanifest and flows swiftly. A person who has not cleansed his soul is incapable of crossing it. It is full
of desire in the form of crocodiles. Use your intelligence to cross it. It flows towards the ocean of life and its womb
is in the nether regions. It is difficult to cross. O son! It flows from one's birth and in this world, its eddies are impossible to cross. Learned and persevering people, accomplished in wisdom, can cross it. Having crossed, you will
be freed from everything. You will be pure and your soul will be cleansed. Having resorted to that superior intelligence, you will attain the brahman. After crossing, you will be free from all hardships. Your soul will be cheerful
and devoid of sin. You will calmly look down on beings on this earth, as if from the top of a mountain. You will
not be enraged. You will not be delighted. You will not possess any violent designs. You will behold the creation
and destruction of all beings. The learned think that this is the best among all kinds of dharma. Sages who know
about the truth and are the best among the upholders of dharma, say that this is dharma. This knowledge about the
atman should be made known and instructed to one's son. It should be spoken about to someone who is self-controlled and devoted and has welfare in mind. This knowledge about the atman is a mystery. It is the greatest among
all mysterious things. O son! The omnipresent atman is itself a witness to what I have spoken about. The brahman
is not female, male or neuter. It doesn't experience misery and joy. It is the past, the present and the future. If one
knows this, irrespective of whether one is male or female, one does not have to be born again. This has been ordained for obtaining freedom from birth. O son! Just as I have spoken about this to you, there are many other
views and perceptions. But I have expounded what is proper. You are my son. You are a virtuous son, with qualities. Therefore, I have affectionately told you this excellent account. You asked me about it and for the sake of
your welfare, I have lovingly told you. O son! I have told you what you asked me about.'"'
