Kunti said, "O mighty-armed one! O Pandava! It is exactly as you have described it. O king! Earlier, when you
were suffering from lassitude, I reprimanded you. Your kingdom was lost in the gambling match. You were
dislodged from happiness. You were defeated by your relatives and I reprimanded you. How could Pandu's sons,
bulls among men, be destroyed? How could their fame be destroyed? That is the reason I goaded you into action.
All of you are Indra's equal. You are the equal of the gods in valour. You should not have to depend on others. That
is the reason I acted in that way. You are best among those who uphold dharma. You are a king who is Vasava's
equal. You should not have returned to the forest and undergone hardships there. That is the reason I goaded you.
Bhima is known for his great valour and manliness, equal to that of ten thousand elephants. I goaded you so that he
did not face a decline. Vijaya[Arjuna.] is Vasava's equal and is younger to Bhimasena. I goaded you so that he did not suffer from lassitude. Nakula and Sahadeva always follow their seniors. I goaded you so that they did not suffer from
hunger and lassitude. This buxom and dark one is beautiful, with large eyes. She was unnecessarily oppressed in
the assembly hall. Then, while all of you looked on, she trembled like a plantain tree. The one with the unblemished limbs was in her season then and was won over in the gambling match. I goaded you so that she didn't have
to go through with these difficulties again. The foolish Duhshasana dragged her along, like a servant girl. I knew
all this, about the defeat of our lineage. The Kurus, my father-in-law and the others, were distressed then. She desired a protector, but was like a she-osprey in the grasp of a predator. The wicked one, whose intelligence had been
destroyed, seized her by the hair. O king! When Duhshasana did that, I lost my senses. To increase your energy, I
goaded you then. O sons! I recounted the words of Vidula. How could a royal lineage that included my sons be destroyed? O sons! You were born from Pandu and me. That is the reason I goaded you then. If a king destroys his
own lineage, how can his sons and grandsons obtain the worlds that are meant for the performers of good deeds? O
son! Earlier, thanks to my husband, I had enjoyed the great fruits of the kingdom. I had given away large quantities
of gifts. Following the rites, I had drunk soma. I didn't urge Vasudeva to obtain any fruits for my own self. It was
for your sakes that I flooded you with Vidula's words. O sons! I did not desire the fruits of the kingdom, conquered
by my sons. O lords! Through austerities, I desire the sacred worlds obtained by my husband. I will serve my father-in-law and mother-in-law, who will dwell in the forest. O Yudhishthira! I will dry myself up through austerities. O best among the Kurus! With Bhimasena and the others, return. Turn your intelligence towards dharma and
may your mind be great."'
