'Yudhishthira asked, "O grandfather! Relatives, deeds, riches and wisdom-which of these actually establishes a
man? I am asking you. Tell me."

'Bhishma replied, "Wisdom is the foundation for beings. It is held that wisdom is the greatest of gains. Wisdom
is the most beneficial in the world. The virtuous are of the view that wisdom leads to the attainment of heaven.
When their riches were destroyed, it is through wisdom that Bali, Prahrada, Namuchi and Manki attained their objectives. What can be greater than that? On this, an ancient history is recounted about a conversation between Indra
and Kashyapa. O Yudhishthira! Listen to this.

'"O son! There was a rishi named Kashyapa who was rigid in his vows. There was a prosperous vaishya. Because of his insolence, he brought the ascetic down through his chariot. He fell down and was distressed and was
about to give up his life. He angrily said, 'I will die. There is no point to a person without riches remaining alive.'

He was seated thus, about to die, and lamented, bereft of his senses. His thoughts were enraged. At that time, Indra
appeared before him in the form of a jackal and said, 'All the beings always desire to be born as humans. Among
all humans, the status of a brahmana is always praised. O Kashyapa! You are a human and a learned brahmana.
This is extremely difficult to obtain. You should not commit this sin[Of giving up your life.]. The learned texts have truthfully said that
all acquisitions give rise to insolence. You are the form of contentment. But what you are thinking of is full of
greed. The virtuous ones who possess hands accomplish their objectives. We desire hands, just as you desire riches. There is no gain that is superior to the obtaining of hands. O brahmana! Without hands, I cannot take out the
thorn that is paining my body. For those who possess hands, the gods have given them ten fingers. They can use
these to uproot the insects that are biting their limbs. They can act so as to save themselves from the cold, the rains
and the heat[By constructing shelters.]. They can cheerfully obtain food and enjoy these in beds that are safe from the wind. In this world,
they enjoy cattle and employ them to carry burdens. They employ many other means to bring them under their
subjugation. Those without hands and those who cannot grind with their tongues[Lacking in teeth.] do not live for a long time.
They have to tolerate many hardships. O sage! It is good fortune that you are not like them. It is good fortune that
you are not a jackal, a worm, a rat, a snake, a frog, or some other being born in an inferior species. O Kashyapa!
You should be content with this gain. Then again, among all living beings, you are a supreme brahmana. These
worms are biting me. Look at my state. Because I lack hands, I am incapable of saving myself from them. Despite
being unsuccessful in this, I do not wish to give up my life. If I performed this wicked deed, I would descend into
an even more inferior species[After rebirth.]. I am in the state of a jackal and this is about medium among those of wicked
species. There are many others who belong to even more wicked species and are greater in evil. Through birth,
some are happy and virtuous and others are extremely miserable. However, I do not see anyone who is entirely
happy. Having gained prosperity, humans next want a kingdom. Having obtained kingdoms, they wish to become
gods. Having become gods, they desire to become Indra. Even if you obtain riches, you will never become a king
or a god[Since a brahmana cannot become a king and the status of a brahmana is
superior to that of a god.]. Even if you become a god, you will not be satisfied without becoming Indra. You will not be content
after obtaining what you desire. The thirst will not be slaked. This is like a fire that is again ignited through the offering of kindling. There is sorrow in you. But there is also delight in you. Since there is both sorrow and joy, why
should you grieve? Like birds imprisoned in a cage, restrain the foundations of your senses and confine all your
desires and your deeds. If a person does not experience something, there can be no desire on account of that, since
it[Desire.] is generated from touch, sight and hearing. You do not remember varuni or the bird known as latvaka[The liquor and the flesh of the bird respectively. The brahmana has not
tasted these.]. There
is no food or drink that is superior to these two. O Kashyapa! There are many other distant objects of food and
drink. Since you have not experienced these earlier, you do not remember them. Not to eat, not to touch, not to see
-I think that this is certainly the supreme rule for a man. There is no doubt that those with hands obtain riches and
are powerful. Men use these to reduce other men to a state of servitude. They repeatedly use these to torment, slay,
bind and afflict others. They take pleasure in deceit, sport and are happy. Accomplished in their learning, those
spirited ones control others through the strength of their arms. They adopt reprehensible and extremely miserable
conduct and follow wicked means of subsistence. They become interested in influencing the conduct followed by
others. They are bound by their own deeds and this is the working of destiny. Even pulkasas and chandalas do not
wish to give up their own lives[These terms are often used as synonyms. Pedantically, a chandala is the
son of a brahmana mother and a shudra father. A pulkasa (equivalently
pukkasa) is the son of a nishada father and a shudra mother.]. Behold the maya and consider others, since you are dissatisfied with your own
birth. Look towards the men who have withered arms. There are those who are not healthy. O Kashyapa! Looking
towards the others, since you are complete in your limbs, you should think that you have gained. O brahmana! You
are well and without fear in this body. You possess all your limbs and are not shamed amongst people. O brahmana
rishi! Even if you were to be censured because of a true reason and even if you deviated from dharma, you should
not give up your own life. O brahmana! If you listen to my words and act accordingly, you will obtain the best of
fruits, as stated in the dharma laid down in the Vedas. Study and, without any distractions, maintain the sacrificial
fire. Follow truth, self-control and generosity. Never seek to rival another. Those who study, sacrifice and perform
sacrifices for others, how can there be any sorrow in them? They are ornaments among officiating priests. They
roam around as they please and obtain great happiness. They are born under auspicious nakshatras, on auspicious
lunar days and at extremely energetic muhurtas. But there are also those who are born under extremely inauspicious nakshatras, bad lunar days and extremely weak muhurtas. They descend into the wombs of asuras and their
birth deprives them of sacrifices. I used to be learned[In an earlier life.]. I sought reasons and criticized the Vedas. My inclinations
were argumentative and I was addicted to pointless debating. I was an exponent of arguments and reasons and
spoke about subtle differences. I spoke disparagingly about the sacrifices of brahmanas and brahmanas. I was a
non-believer and was suspicious of everything. I was foolish and insolent about my learning. O brahmana! Because of that, I have reaped the fruits of being born as a jackal. I have been born as a jackal and after hundreds of
days and nights, may again be born as a human. I will then be satisfied and without being distracted, will perform
sacrifices and give donations. I will then know what should be known. I will then cast away what should be cast
away.' He spoke in this way and the sage Kashyapa arose and said, 'O son! You are accomplished in your intelligence and I marvel at this.' Because of his knowledge, the brahmana was far-sighted. He looked and realized that
it was actually Indra of the gods, the god who was Shachi's consort. At this, Kashyapa worshipped the one with the
tawny horses[Indra.]. He took his permission and went to his own hermitage."'
