Vasishtha said, 'Cows yield milk and ghee. They originate in ghee and provide ghee. They are rivers of ghee.
They are whirlpools of ghee. Let them always remain in my house. Ghee is always in my heart. Ghee is always established in my navel. Ghee is in all my limbs. Ghee is established in my mind. Cows are always in front
of me. Cows are also behind me. Cows are on all my sides. I dwell in the midst of cattle.' Having performed the
ablutions, a man must always recite this, morning and evening. He will then be cleansed of all the sins he has committed during the day. They who donate one thousand[Cows.] go to places with golden palaces, with gandharvas and apsaras and a river of riches. They who donate one thousand go to places where rivers of milk flow, with butter as the
mud and curds as the lichen. A person who follows the rituals and gives hundreds of thousands of cattle obtains
supreme prosperity and greatness in Goloka. After death, he saves ten generations of his ancestors, both on his
mother's side and on his father's side and gives them the worlds meant for the performers of good deeds. Such a
man purifies his lineage. Among all objects that are the best, cattle are the foremost. If a person gives cows a trifle
of food and water to drink, he does not suffer any misery in Yama's world. They are the foremost among all that is
sacred. The universe is based on them. They are immeasurable and are the mothers of the residents of heaven.
When one walks, one must keep them on one's right. Ascertaining the right time, one must give them to a worthy
recipient. If a man gives away a kapila with large horns, along with her calf, a brass vessel for milking and an upper garment, even when he is submerged in Yama's assembly hall, which is so very difficult to tolerate, he will be
free from fear. One must always recite, "Cows are beautiful in form. Cows have many forms. Cows are like mothers of the universe. Let cows approach me." There is no gift more sacred than that of a cow. There are no fruits that
are more auspicious. There has been nothing that is superior to a cow, nor will there ever be. The cow bears the
burden of the sacrifice through the skin, the hair, the horns, hair on the tail, the milk and the fat. What can be better? I bow down my head and worship the cow. She is the mother of the past and the future. All the mobile and immobile objects of the universe are pervaded by her. O best among men! I have only recounted some of the qualities
of the cow. There is no gift that is superior to donating a cow. There is no other refuge that is superior.'"

'Bhishma continued, "The great-souled lord of the earth[Soudasa.] thought about the superiority that the supreme rishi
had spoken about in his words. Controlled in his soul, he gave brahmanas a large number of cows and obtained the
worlds."'
