'The gandharva said, "On seeing that his hermitage was bereft of his sons, the grief-stricken sage left it again. O
Partha! He saw a river swollen with the new water of the rainy season. It was sweeping away many trees that grew
along the banks. O descendant of Puru! On seeing this, the miserable one again began to think that he would certainly be killed in this water. Thereupon, the great sage bound himself with strong ropes and, struck with great
grief, flung himself into the waters of that great river. O chastiser of enemy armies! But the river tore those ropes
away and, unfettered, washed the rishi up onto the bank. Freed from the bindings, the great rishi arose and gave the
river the name of Vipasha[Pasha means noose or bond and Vipasha is something that frees one from a bond. Vipasha is identified with
the river Beas.].

'"However, his mind was obsessed with grief and he did not stay in any one place. He went to mountains, rivers
and lakes. Seeing once more the terrible river Himavati[Himavati can be the specific name for a river. Alternatively, it can also be a general term for any river descending from the Himalayas.], terrible of appearance and full of fierce animals, he
once more flung himself into its waters. That best of rivers, thinking that the Brahmana was fire, immediately fled
in a hundred directions and thereafter came to be known as Shatadru[Shatadru is a river with a hundred streams and is identified as the river Sutlej.]. Finding that he was once again on dry
land, he exclaimed that he was unable to die at his own hands and returned to his hermitage.

'"When he was returning to his hermitage, his daughter-in-law Adrishyanti followed him. As she came near, he
heard the sound of Vedic incantations, embellished with the fullness of meaning of the six branches[This is a reference to the six Vedangas.]. 'Who is
following me?' he asked. 'I am Adrishyanti, Shakti's wife,' his daughter-in-law answered. 'O illustrious one! I am
austere, engaged in austerities.' Vashishtha said, 'O daughter! Who is reciting the Vedas and their angas that I
hear? It is just as I have heard it from Shakti earlier.' Adrishyanti said, 'In my womb, there is a son begotten by
Shakti. He has been there for twelve years. O sage! You have heard his recitations.' Having been thus addressed by
her, Vashishtha, the best of rishis, was greatly delighted. O Partha! Exclaiming that there was a son, he refrained
from death.

'"The unblemished one returned[To his hermitage. The unblemished one is Vashishtha.], accompanied by his daughter-in-law. He found Kalmashapada seated in the
deserted forest. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing him[Vashishtha.], possessed by the rakshasa, the king arose
in anger and sought to devour him. But seeing the king of evil deeds, Adrishyanti spoke to Vashishtha in fear and
alarm, 'O illustrious one! This terrible rakshasa looks like death himself, as he advances towards us with a fearful
wooden club in his hand. O best among those who are learned in all the Vedas! Except you, no one on earth has the
power to ward him off. O illustrious one! Save me from this evil one, whose form is terrible. Without a doubt, the
rakshasa is advancing towards us to devour us.'"'
