Yudhishthira asked, "There may be two[Brahmanas.] who are equal in conduct, purity, learning and birth. Between donating to either, which is superior, giving to the one who asks or giving to the one who does not ask?"

'Bhishma replied, "O Partha! It has been said that giving to the person who does not ask is superior. In a miserable state, one who has fortitude deserves greater worship than one who does not have fortitude. A kshatriya's fortitude is in protection. A brahmana's fortitude is in not asking for riches. A brahmana who has fortitude, learning
and contentment pleases the gods. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! An effort made to solicit has been said to
show lack of control. A person who solicits always acts like a bandit towards beings. A person who solicits confronts death, though a person who gives does not confront death. O Yudhishthira! Through the act of giving, a
donor revives and also revives his own self. Compassion is supreme dharma and one should give to those who
seek. However, for those who are suffering and do not solicit, one should respectfully use every possible means to
make them accept. If such supreme among brahmanas reside in your kingdom, they must be regarded as fire covered with ashes and efforts must be made to treat them accordingly. They can even consume the earth through the
fire of their austerities. Possessing jnana, vijnana, austerities and yoga, they should be worshipped. O scorcher of
enemies! Such brahmanas deserve to be worshipped in every way. They must be given many kinds of gifts, even if
they do not ask and do not solicit. There are fruits that are obtained from properly offering oblations into the agnihotra fire in the morning and the evening. It is said that the fruits obtained from giving to brahmanas who are
learned in the Vedas and follow the vows are equal. There are brahmanas who are learned in the Vedas and have
bathed themselves in the vows. They do not depend on anyone else for a living. They are rigid in their vows, study
privately and observe austerities. O Kounteya! Such brahmanas must be invited and be given excellent houses with
servants and garments and all the other objects of desire. O Yudhishthira! They know about dharma and are subtle
in their insight. They will think that it is their duty to receive such gifts that have been purified with devotion.
There may be brahmanas who are away from home, with their wives waiting for their return, like farmers waiting
for the rain. The wives must be fed and food given for the other dependents at home. O son! If a brahmana brahmachari with self-control takes food at your house in the morning, it is as if he satisfies the three sacrificial fires. O
son! If the act of feeding takes place at midday, donate cattle, gold and garments and Indra will be pleased with
you because of this. O Yudhishthira! This is the third sacrifice, in which, gifts are given to the gods, the ancestors
and brahmanas and is for the Vishvadevas[This is not quite accurately worded. The first two sacrifices are to the gods and the ancestors, the third one is for
the Vishvadevas.]. Non-violence towards all creatures, giving everyone a proper share,
self-control, renunciation, fortitude and truthfulness are like the bath at the end of a sacrifice. This is the way this
sacrifice is conducted, purified by devotion and with dakshina. O son! It is superior to all sacrifices and should always be performed."'
