'Bhishma said, "When night was over, that supreme among brahmanas departed. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Goutama also left and headed in the direction of the ocean. Along the road, he saw some traders advancing
towards the ocean. In the company of their caravan, he went towards the ocean. O great king! However, in a mountainous cavern, that caravan was attacked by a crazy elephant and most of them were killed. In some way, the brahmana managed to escape. Not knowing the directions but wishing to save his life, he fled in the northern direction.
He lost everything-the caravan, the directions, the riches. He fled alone through the forest, like a kimpurusha. He
eventually managed to reach a road that led in the direction of the ocean and then reached a beautiful forest that
was full of large blossoming trees. There were beautiful and flowering mango trees in every direction. That spot
was like Nandana[Indra's pleasure garden.] and was inhabited by yakshas and kinnaras. There were groves of shala, tala, dhava, ashvattha and sandalwood trees. The best among trees were full of flowers. The beautiful valley in the mountains was
extremely fragrant with auspicious scents. Excellent birds warbled and chirped in every direction. There were the
famous bharunda birds[The bharunda bird is a mythical predatory bird with two heads.], with faces like that of men. In every direction, there were bhulingas[A bird that lives off carrion. It picks out bits of meat from the mouths of
predators.] and other birds
that frequented the ocean. Listening to the extremely melodious and pleasant sounds of the birds, the brahmana,
Goutama, moved along.

'"He then saw a lovely region that was spread with golden sand. It was wonderful and the region had a complexion like that of heaven. There was a giant and handsome banyan tree and it was rounded. It was adorned with beautiful branches and was like an umbrella. Its root was sprinkled extremely well with water mixed with the best of
sandalwood. Covered with divine flowers, it was as handsome as the grandfather's[Brahma's.] throne. It was supreme and
loved by the sages. On seeing it, Goutama was delighted. Surrounded by flowering trees, it looked like the house
of a god. He joyfully approached it and seated himself under its branches. O Kouravya! As Goutama was seated
there, a pleasant and auspicious breeze began to blow. O king! That sacred breeze touched all the flowers and removed all the exhaustion from Goutama's heart and limbs. The brahmana was touched by the auspicious breeze.
He slept happily and the sun set. When the sun set, twilight manifested. The king of cranes was known by the
name of Nadijangha. He was supreme among birds and was Brahma's beloved friend. The immensely wise one
was descended from Kashyapa. He returned to his abode. Unsurpassed on earth, he was also known by the name of
Rajadharma. He was the son of a celestial maiden. He was handsome and learned and was like the lord of the gods
in his complexion. He was covered in golden plumage and his ornaments were like the sun. Blazing in prosperity,
he was adorned all over his body. He was descended from the gods. On seeing the bird arrive, Goutama was astounded. He was overcome by hunger and thirst and glanced at it, desirous of causing injury[He wished to kill the bird for food.].

'"Rajadharma said, 'O brahmana! Welcome. It is through good fortune that you have come to my house. The
sun has set and twilight has presented itself. You have come to my residence as a beloved and unblemished guest.
In accordance with the prescribed rites, you will be worshipped. Leave in the morning.'"'
