'Lomasha said, "On seeing Mada, terrible of face and with a gaping mouth like that of death himself, approach
with the intention of devouring him, the god Shatakratu licked the corners of his mouth in fear. His arm was paralysed. Oppressed by fear, the king of the gods told Chyavana, 'O Bhargava! From today, the Ashvins will be deserving of soma. O brahmana! I truthfully give you my word. You do not undertake an endeavour that is unsuccessful. Your words are the supreme law. O brahmarshi! I know that you never act out of falsehood. You have decided today that these Ashvins are deserving of soma offerings. O Bhargava! I engineered this to ensure that the
power of your valour might spread once more and so that the fame of Sukanya and her father might spread in the
world. Therefore, show your favours to me. Let it be as you wish.' At these words of Shakra, the great-souled
Bhargava's wrath was swiftly appeased and he set Purandara free.

'"The valorous one divided Mada and distributed him in drinks, women, gambling and hunting, in which, it had
earlier been created again and again. Having thus thrown Mada away, he satisfied Indra with soma and also the
Ashvins, together with the other gods. Having performed the sacrifice for the king, the supreme among eloquent
ones became famous in the worlds because of his valour and sported with his beloved Sukanya in the forest.

'"O king! His lake shines there, noisy with birds. Together with your brothers, you must offer oblations to the
ancestors and the gods there. O protector of the earth! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having seen this and
Sikataksha, you should go to the Saindhava forest and see the streams there. O great king! You should touch the
water at all the pushkaras[Pushkara is a specific tirtha and is a proper name. But it also means a body of water in general.]. There is Mount Archika, inhabited by the learned. It is always full of fruit and always has flowing streams. The winds make it the supreme of regions. O Yudhishthira! There are many hundreds of
sanctuaries constructed by the thirty gods there. This is the moon's tirtha, worshipped by the rishis, the vaikhanasa
rishis and the valakhilyas. There are three sacred peaks and three springs. You can circumambulate them one by
one and perform your ablutions, as you desire. O Kounteya! O lord of men! Shantanu, Shunaka and both Nara and
Narayana obtained the eternal regions here. O Yudhishthira! The gods and the ancestors always sleep with the maharshis on Mount Archika and perform austerities there. Worship them. O lord of the earth! The rishis prepared the
charu there. There is also Yamuna with the eternal currents, where Krishna engaged in austerities. O destroyer of
enemies. The twins, Bhimasena, Krishna and we-all of us will go there together, lean and extremely ascetic. O
lord of men! This is Indra's sacred stream. Dhata, Vidhata and Varuna ascended upwards there[That is, attained salvation. Dhata and Vidhata are both words for the creator. Dhata has the nuance of someone who preserves, while Vidhata has the nuance of someone who arranges.]. O king! They
dwelt here, forgiving and engaging in supreme dharma. This pure mountain is appropriate for those who are
friendly and of upright minds. O king! Here is the Yamuna, frequented by masses of rajarshis. O king! Many sacrifices have been performed here. It is holy and banishes fear of sin. O Kounteya! The great archer, King Mandhata,
himself performed a sacrifice here and so did Somaka Sahadeva, supreme among those who gave."'
