Dhritarashtra asked, "O Sanjaya! When the soldiers were shattered by Bhimasena in the battle, what did Duryodhana and Soubala say? What about Karna, foremost among victorious warriors, Kripa, Kritavarma, Drona's son,
Duhshasana and other warriors on my side? I think that Pandaveya's valour was extremely wonderful. Did Rad-
heya Karna, the destroyer of enemies, act towards all the Kuru warriors in accordance with his vow? O Sanjaya!
On seeing that the army had been routed by the infinitely energetic Kounteya, Radheya, Adhiratha's son, remained
the prosperity, the armour, the base and the hope of remaining alive. What did the warrior Karna do? What about
my sons and the invincible maharatha kings? O Sanjaya! You are skilled in narrating. Tell me everything about all
this."

'Sanjaya replied, "O great king! In the afternoon, while Bhimasena looked on, the powerful son of a suta began
to strike all the Somakas. The extremely strong Bhima also began to uproot all the soldiers of the sons of Dhritarashtra. On seeing that the intelligent Bhimasena was driving away the army, Karna asked his charioteer to drive
him towards the Panchalas. The immensely strong king of Madra, Shalya, drove the white horses, which were extremely swift, towards the Chedis, the Panchalas and the Karushas. Shalya, the destroyer of enemy troops, penetrated those soldiers. He cheerfully drove the horses to the spot where that foremost one[Karna.] wanted him to go. The
chariot was like a cloud and was covered in tiger skins. O lord of the earth! On seeing it, the Pandus and the Panchalas were terrified. The loud roar of the chariot could be heard in the great battle. Its roar was like that of a
cloud, or of a mountain being shattered.

' "Karna drew his bow all the way back to his ear and slew hundreds and thousands of Pandava soldiers with
hundreds of sharp arrows. While he was performing that superhuman deed in the encounter, the great archers, the
Pandava maharathas, surrounded him. Shikhandi, Bhima, Parshata Dhrishtadyumna, Nakula, Sahadeva, Droupadi's sons and Satyaki surrounded him and showered down arrows, wishing to kill Radheya. In the battle, the brave
Satyaki, supreme among men, pierced Karna with twenty sharp arrows in his shoulder joints. Shikhandi pierced
Karna with twenty-five arrows, Dhrishtadyumna with five, Droupadi's sons with sixty-four, Sahadeva with seven
and Nakula with one hundred. In that encounter, the immensely strong and angry Bhimasena pierced him in the
shoulder joints with ninety arrows with drooping tufts. Adhiratha's immensely strong son laughed. He drew back
his supreme bow and released sharp arrows, afflicting them. Radheya pierced each of them back with five arrows
each. The bull among men severed Satyaki's bow and standard and struck him between the breasts with nine arrows. The scorcher of enemies wrathfully pierced Bhimasena with thirty arrows and struck his charioteer with
three arrows. In the twinkling of an eye, the bull among men deprived Droupadi's sons of their chariots and it was
extraordinary. With straight-tufted arrows, he made all of them retreat. He killed the brave maharathas from Pan-
chala and Chedi. O lord of the earth! In that battle, the Chedis and the Matysas were slaughtered. They rushed
against Karna, who was single-handed, and struck him with torrents of arrows. The maharatha son of a suta struck
those down with his sharp arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I witnessed this extraordinary deed performed by Karna. In the battle, the brave and powerful son of a suta was single-handed. O great king! However,
despite those enemy warriors striving to their utmost in the encounter, he restrained the Pandaveyas with his arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the gods, siddhas and supreme rishis were satisfied at the dexterity
shown by the great-souled Karna. The great archers, the sons of Dhritarashtra, applauded that best of men. Karna
was best among supreme rathas. He was foremost among all archers. O great king! Karna consumed the army of
the enemy, just as a large and flaming fire burns down dead wood during the summer. Thus slaughtered by Karna
and witnessing Karna's great strength, the Pandaveyas were terrified in the battle and fled here and there. In the
great encounter, loud lamentations arose among the Panchalas, since they were slaughtered by the sharp arrows
that were released from Karna's bow. The large army of the Pandavas was frightened at the sound. In the battle
there, the enemies thought that Karna was the only warrior. Thus Radheya, the afflicter of enemies, accomplished
that supremely wonderful deed. He single-handedly countered all the Pandavas and no one was capable of glancing towards him. They were like a large mass of water that dashes against a supreme mountain and is driven back.
In that way, the Pandava soldiers clashed against Karna and were shattered. O king! In the battle, Karna blazed like
a fire without smoke. The mighty-armed one burnt down the large army of the Pandavas. O great king! With great
agility and his light arrows, the brave Karna severed the heads, with earrings, and the arms of the valiant ones.
There were swords with handles of ivory. There were standards, javelins, horses and elephants. There were the
parts of chariots and many kinds of flags and whisks. There were axles, yokes, harnesses and many kinds of
wheels. Karna observed his vow of a warrior and shattered these into hundreds of fragments. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Elephants and horses were slain by Karna. Because of the flesh, blood and mire, the earth assumed an impassable form. With destroyed horses, foot soldiers, chariots and elephants, one could no longer distinguish uneven terrain from plain ground. Nor could the warriors distinguish those on their own side from that of
the enemy. The arrows generated from Karna's weapon created a terrible darkness. The arrows released from Rad-
heya's bow were decorated in gold. O great king! In the battle, the Pandaveya maharathas repeatedly endeavoured,
but were shrouded by Karna. O great king! The maharathas endeavoured and were submerged. They were like a
herd of deer, driven away by an angry lion in the forest. The warriors who fought against Karna in the battle were
greatly illustrious. But those soldiers were slaughtered, like a large number of smaller animals by a wolf.

' "Seeing that the Pandava soldiers were retreating, the great archers, the sons of Dhritarashtra, pursued them,
emitting fierce roars. O Indra among kings! Duryodhana was filled with great delight. He joyfully instructed that
many musical instruments should be sounded in every direction. The great archers among the Panchalas, supreme
among men, were shattered. But though shattered, those brave ones returned, preferring death over retreat. O great
king! The brave Radheya, scorcher of enemies and bull among men, countered and repelled them in many different
kinds of ways. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Twenty rathas among the Panchalas were slain there by Karna
and so were one hundred angry enemy riders from among the Chedis. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He
emptied the seats of chariots and the backs of horses. He brought down men from the necks of elephants. He drove
away the infantry. The scorcher of enemies was like the sun at midday and was impossible to look at. The son of a
suta assumed as cruel a form as Yama and roamed around. O great king! In this fashion, the great archer Karna, the
destroyer of large numbers of the enemy, killed men, horses, rathas and elephants and was stationed there. The immensely strong one was stationed there like the Destroyer after slaying large numbers of beings. The single-handed
maharatha was stationed there, after having slain the Somakas. However, we beheld the wonderful valour of the
Panchalas. Though they were slaughtered by Karna, they did not forsake the field of battle. The king[Duryodhana.],
Duhshasana, Sharadvata Kripa, Ashvatthama, Kritavarma and Shakuni Soubala slew the Pandava soldiers in hundreds and thousands. O Indra among kings! The brothers who were Karna's sons were also true in their valour.
Those powerful ones easily fought with the Panchalas, here and there. They created a cruel and great destruction
among the horses there. Despite this, the brave Pandavas, Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi and Droupadi's sons were
enraged and attacked those on your side. In this fashion, there was destruction among the Pandavas there and also
amongst those on your side, when they clashed against the immensely strong Bhima in the battle." '
