'Markandeya said, "Kashyapa, Vasishtha, Prana's son Prana, Agni Angiras and Chyavana Trishuvarchaka performed terrible austerities for many years, so as to obtain a son. 'May we obtain a famous son who follows dharma. May he be Brahma's equal.' They uttered the five great vyahritis[Vyahritis are sacred and mystical words. They are usually mentioned as three-bhuh, bhuvah and svah. Ma-
hah is added as the fourth, the fifth varying according to context.]. Then an immensely energetic and powerful fire with five colours was created. His head consisted of the fire made out of kindling. His arms were like the
sun. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! His complexion was golden and his feet were black. Through their great
austerities, these five gave him those five colours. The Vedas therefore know him as Panchajanya and he became
the origin of the five lineages[Panchajanya is the name of Krishna's conch shell. But here, it means 'five people'.]. He performed great austerities for ten thousand years. He created beings and he
created the terrible fire of the ancestors. He created brihat and rathantara, those stealers of vigour, from his head
and his mouth[Brihat and rathantara are tones or melodies for chanting Sama Veda hymns. It is not obvious why these
should be described as stealers of energy or vigour.]. He created Shiva from his navel, Indra from his strength, Vayu and Agni from his breath of life,
the two accents[Udatta is a high-pitched accent and anudatta is a low-pitched one.] from his two arms, the universe and all the beings. Having created these, he created the five
sons of the ancestors-Pranidhi, the son of Brihadurjas; Brihattara, the son of Kashyapa; Bhanu, the brave son of
Angiras; Soubhara, the son of Varcha; and Anudatta, the son of Prana. These are known as those who created five
lineages. Austerities created the fifteen gods who are the obstructers of sacrifices-the sacrifice, the dawn, Abhi-
ma, Atibhima and Bhimabalabala. Austerities created the five gods for sacrifices-Sumitra, Mitravat, Mitrajna,
Mitravardhana and Mitradharma. Austerities also produced these five gods-Surapravira, Vira, Sukesha, Suvarcha
and Surahanta. These three classes of five each are separately established. Placed here on earth, they obstruct those
who wish to perform sacrifices in heaven. They cause obstructions and steal large quantities of oblations. They insolently create obstructions and steal, though oblations are carried by the fire. But if the fire has been skilfully
placed, they cannot approach the oblations on the sacrificial altar. They cannot go near the fire. On both sides, the
fire then carries the sacrificial offerings. If pacified through mantras, they do not steal the sacrificial offerings. Brihaduktha, another son of austerities, lives on earth. He is worshipped on earth by those who observe agnihotra
properly. Rathantara is another fire that is the son of austerities. Learned adhvaryus know that his offerings are
meant for Mitravinda[There are four types of officiating priests-hotar (one who recites from the Rig Veda), udgatar (one who recites from the Sama Veda), adhvaryu (one who recites from the Yajur Veda) and brahman (one who recites from
the Atharva Veda).]. He[Panchajanya.] was thus extremely satisfied with his immensely famous sons."'
