Vaishampayana said, 'Dhritarashtra had a friend and he was a suta named Adhiratha. At that time, he went to the
Jahnavi[Another name for the river Ganga.], together with his wife. O king! His wife was unrivalled on earth in her beauty. The immensely fortunate
one was named Radha and she had no son, though she had undertaken special efforts to obtain offspring. She saw
the basket floating along, as it willed. It was protected well and was beautiful with ribbons and a handle. The
waves of the Jahnavi carried it near her. Driven by curiosity, the beautiful one grasped it. Then she told suta Adhi-
ratha about this. He took the basket out of the water and used instruments to pry it open. Then he saw the boy
there. With golden armour, he was as radiant as the morning sun. He had a beautiful face, adorned with radiant earrings. The suta, together with his wife, gazed, their eyes wide with wonder. He then took the boy onto his lap and
spoke these words to his wife. "O timid one! O beautiful one! Since I have been born, I have not witnessed such a
wonder. I think that a son of the gods has come to us. Since I have no offspring, I am certain that the gods have
given me a son." O lord of the earth! Speaking thus, he handed over the son to Radha. Radha then accepted that
divine-looking son in accordance with the prescribed rites. This son of a god was beautiful and as splendid as the
cup of a lotus.

'She reared him appropriately and he grew up. He was brave. Since that time, she also gave birth to other sons.
The boy was clad in expensive armour and wore golden earrings. On seeing this, the brahmanas gave him the
name of Vasushena[Vasu means wealth or riches, as well as gold.]. Thus the infinitely valorous one came to be the son of a suta and was known by the name of
Vasushena. The lord was also known as Vrisha. The suta's eldest son grew up to be powerful in his limbs. Through
a spy, Pritha got to know that he was clad in celestial armour. In due course, when suta Adhiratha saw that his son
had grown up, he sent him to the city of Varanasahrya[Varana means elephant and Varanasahrya is another name for Hastinapura.]. There, he went to Drona to learn about weapons. The
brave one became Duryodhana's friend. Having obtained the four kinds of weapons from Drona, Kripa and Rama,
he became famous in the world as a great archer[Rama is Parashurama. Five types of weapons are mukta (those that are released from the hand, like a chakra),
amukta (those that are never released, like a sword), muktamukta (those that can be released or not released, like a
spear), yantramukta (those that are released from an implement, like an arrow) and mantramukta (magical weapons
unleashed with incantations). Of these, the text is referring to the first four.]. Having allied himself with Dhritarashtra's son, he was engaged
in enmity towards the Parthas. He always desired to fight with the great-souled Phalguna[Arjuna.]. O lord of the earth!
Ever since they first saw each other, he competed with Arjuna and Arjuna competed with Karna. On seeing that he
possessed earrings and was clad in armour, Yudhishthira thought that he was invincible in battle and was miserable. O Indra among kings! At noon, Karna used to worship the radiant sun, standing in the water and with his
hands joined in salutation. Brahmanas who desired riches approached him then. At that time, there was nothing
that he would refuse to brahmanas. Indra assumed the form of a brahmana and approached, saying, "Give me."

"You are welcome," replied Radheya.'
