Vaishampayana said, 'Kuntibhoja's daughter was beautiful and possessed all the qualities. She was always devoted
to dharma and great vows. Her father arranged for a svayamvara. She found the handsome Pandu among thousands
of powerful kings who had teeth like lions, shoulders like elephants and eyes like bulls. Blessed with unlimited
good fortune, Kuru's descendant and Kuntibhoja's daughter were married, like Maghavan with Poulomi[Indra is Maghavan. His wife is Shachi. Since Shachi was Puloma's daughter, she is Poulomi.].

'Thereafter, with Devavrata Bhishma, he[Pandu.] went to the capital city of the Madra kingdom. Madri, the daughter
of the king of Madra, lived there. She was famous in the three worlds and among all the kings for her beauty,
which was unmatched on earth. For Pandu's sake, he bought her with a great deal of riches. Bhishma got the great-
souled Pandu married off. O, tiger among men! The people of the world were astonished to see the intelligent Pandu, with a chest like a lion, shoulders like an elephant and eyes like a bull. Pandu had strength, courage and enterprise. After marrying, he decided to conquer the earth and vanquish many enemies.

'Pandu, lion among men, went to the east and defeated the Dasharnas in battle, thereby spreading the fame of
the Kouravas. Then with his army, which had many flags flying and many elephants, horses, chariots and infantry,
he attacked Darva, the king of the Magadha kingdom, who was proud of his valour and had made enemies out of
all the kings. He was killed in Rajagriha and his treasury, transport and armies seized. Then Pandu went to Mithila
and conquered Videha in battle. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Then the fame of the Kurus spread to Kashi,
Suhma and Pundra. Through the strength of his own arms. Pandu, the scorcher of foes, burnt kings with the great
net of his flaming arrows and his dazzling weapons. He was like a great fire and defeated with his army the kings
and their armies. After conquering them, Pandu engaged them in the work of the Kurus. Having been thus vanquished by him, all the kings of the earth recognized him to be the only warrior on earth, like Purandara among the
gods. All the lords of the earth came and worshipped him with joined hands. They brought him gems and riches of
various kinds-precious stones, pearls, coral, a lot of gold and silver, the best cows, the best horses, the best chariots, elephants, donkeys, camels, buffaloes and some goats and sheep. The king of Nagapura[Hastinapura. Nagapura is another name for Hastinapura, the city of the elephant. The word naga means
elephant.] accepted them all.

'Then, to the delight of his own kingdom and city, Pandu returned to Gajasahrya[Another name for Hastinapura.] with his vehicles. "The
fame of Shantanu, lion among kings, and of the intelligent Bharata had been destroyed. But those cries and deeds
have now been revived by Pandu. Those who had earlier robbed the land of the Kurus and the riches of the Kurus
have now been forced to pay tribute by Pandu, the lion of Nagapura." With happiness and confidence in their
hearts, these were the words of the kings, the advisers to the kings and the citizens of the town and the country.
With Bhishma at their head, they went out to receive him when he returned. Before they had gone very far, the residents of Nagapura delightedly saw the world full of many captives, myriad gems piled on many vehicles, elephants, horses, chariots, cows, camels and sheep. Following Bhishma, the Kouravas saw all this and could find no
end to it. The one who had increased Kousalya's[There are two Kousalyas, Ambika and Ambalika. This one is Ambalika.] joy paid homage at his father's[In this case, father means Bhishma.] feet. He showed his respects to the citizens of the town and countryside. Bhishma shed tears of joy, now that he was reunited with his
son, who had successfully returned after subjugating other kingdoms. There was the great roar of hundreds of
trumpets and drums. As he entered Gajasahrya, he made the citizens everywhere very happy.'
