'Sanjaya said, "O king! While Krishna and Daruka were conversing in this way, the night ended. The king[Yudhishthira.]
arose. Panisvanikas, magadhas, madhuparkikas, vaitalikas and sutas chanted and satisfied that bull among men[Panisvanikas are those who clap their hands together and make a noise, Magadhas are balladeers. Madhuparkikas are those who make offerings of honey. Vaitalikas are bards or panegyrists. Sutas are raconteurs.].
Dancers danced. Singers with sweet voices sang praises in honour of the Kuru lineage. There were the loud sounds
of mridangas, jharjharas, bheris, panavas, anakas, gomukhas, adamvaras, shankhas and dundubhis[Mridanga is a drum, jharjhara is also a kind of drum, bheri is a kettledrum, panava is a small drum or cymbal,
anaka is a double drum, gomukha is a musical instrument, adambara is a kind of drum, shankha is a conch shell
and dundubhi is a large kettledrum.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were many other musical instruments. Skilled and well-trained ones happily
played on them. That loud noise, like the roar of the clouds, seemed to touch the sky and awoke the sleeping Yudhishthira, supreme among kings. He had slept on an extremely expensive and supreme bed and now arose. Having
awoken, he went to the bathroom to perform the required acts. There were a hundred and eight young servants,
dressed in white. They had themselves bathed and approached, with golden pots that were full. Wearing light garments, he seated himself on his splendid seat[Bhadrasana, which can also be translated as throne.]. He was bathed in water in which sandalwood had been mixed and
over which mantras had been recited. Well-trained ones rubbed his body with astringent and strong water[Because medicinal herbs had been mixed in the water.]. He
was washed with fragrant and perfumed water. The mighty armed one smeared his body with yellow sandalwood
paste. He wore garlands and dressed himself in clean garments. He faced the east and seated himself, hands joined
in salutation. Following the path of the virtuous, Kounteya meditated and chanted. He humbly entered the room
where a blazing fire was kept[The room in which the household fire was maintained.]. He offered sacred kindling and oblations, over which mantras had been recited,
into the fire. He then emerged from his house.

'"The king, tiger among men, entered a second room and saw bulls among brahmanas there. Those brahmanas
were learned in the Vedas. They were self-controlled and devoted to the Vedas. They had bathed and performed
ablutions after the rites. There were one thousand who worshipped the sun and another eight thousand too. The
mighty-armed one made them recite pleasant benedictions over him. He offered them the best kind of honey mixed
with clarified butter and auspicious fruit. Pandava gave each of those brahmanas a golden nishka[A golden coin.], one hundred
ornamented horses, expensive garments, desired dakshina and cows that yielded milk whenever they were touched.
Pandu's son also gave them calves with horns decorated in gold and hooves decorated in silver. He then circumambulated them, the svastikas that increased fortune, the golden nandyavartas[Like the svastika, the nandyavarta is an auspicious diagram.], the garlands, the pots full of gold
and the flaming fire. There were also vessels full of parched rice, beautiful ruchakas[Objects that bring good fortune.], pure and ornamented
maidens, curds, clarified butter, honey, water, auspicious birds and many other sacred objects. Having seen and
touched them, Kounteya went to the outer chamber.

'"O mighty-armed one! The servants were waiting there. They brought an excellent seat that was completely
made out of gold and was decorated with pearls and lapis lazuli. It was covered with a supreme carpet, over which
an excellent cover had been spread. This supreme and divine seat had been constructed by Vishvakarma himself.
When the great-minded Kounteya had seated himself, the servants brought him all his expensive and bright ornaments. O great king! His beauty was such that it increased the sorrow of his enemies. White whisks that possessed
the radiance of the moon and had golden handles were used to fan him. He was as radiant as clouds tinged with
lightning. He was praised by bards and eulogized by panegyrists. Gandharvas began to honour the descendant of
the Kuru lineage. In an instant, the loud noise made by the panegyrists arose. The clatter of chariot wheels and the
hooves of horses were heard. This mingled with the sounds of bells on elephants and the blare of conch shells. The
earth trembled because of the footsteps of men. At that instant, one of those in charge of the gates entered. He was
young and armoured. He wore earrings and his sword was girded. He knelt down on the ground and lowered his
head in salutation to the one who had dharma in his soul. He told the great-minded one that Hrishikesha had arrived. The tiger among men replied, 'Let Madhava be welcome. Let a supreme arghya[A gift for a guest.] and seat be kept ready for
him.' Varshneya entered and seated himself on that supreme seat. Yudhishthira asked him about his welfare and
honoured him with worship."'
