'Sanjaya said, "O Kouravya! O great king! I will tell you about what is heard about the dvipa to the north. Listen
to me. There is an ocean there, with waters made out of clarified butter[Ghrita.]. Beyond that, there is an ocean with waters made of curd[Dadhi.]. Next is an ocean with waters made out of liquor[Sura.]. And there is another ocean with water
made out of sweat[Gharma. Alternatively, where the waters are heated.]. O lord of men! Each of these dvipas is double the size of the one that has preceded it. O
great king! They are surrounded by mountains on all sides. In the dvipa that is in the centre, there is a great mountain named Goura, made out of red arsenic. O king! To the west is a mountain named Krishna, which resembles
Narayana. Keshava himself protects the divine jewels there. Prajapati is seated there and bestows happiness on beings. Other than the countries, kusha grass grows in the midst of Kushadvipa. O king! The shalmali[The silk-cotton tree.] tree is worshipped in Shalmalidvipa. There is the mountain of Mahakrouncha in Krounchadvipa. It is a store of gems. O great
king! It is always worshipped by the four varnas. O king! There is the extremely large mountain of Gomanta,
which is a store of every kind of mineral. The handsome and lotus-eyed lord, Narayana Hari, always resides there,
praised by those who have obtained salvation. O Indra among kings! There is another mountain in Kushadvipa and
it is marked with coral. There is a second golden and inaccessible mountain named Sudhama. O Kouravya! There
is the third radiant mountain, Kumuda. The fourth has the name of Pushpavan and the fifth is Kushoshaya. The
sixth has the name of Harigiri and these six are the foremost among mountains. As one progresses, the space between two mountains is double that between the preceding two.

'"The first varsha is Oudbhida and the second is Venumandala. The third is Rathakara and the fourth is known
as Palana. The fifth varsha is Dhritimat and the sixth varsha is Prabhakara. The seventh varsha is Kampila and this
is the collection of seven varshas. O lord of the universe. Gods, gandharvas and other beings roam and sport there.
People do not die there. O king! There are no bandits there and no mleccha tribes. O king! Everyone there is usually fair and delicate. O lord of men! I will tell you about the remaining varshas, as it has been heard. O great king!
Listen with an attentive mind. In Krounchadvipa, there is a large mountain named Krouncha. Beyond Krouncha is
Vamanaka and after Vamanaka is Andhakaraka. O king! Beyond Andhakara[Andhakara is the same as Andhakaraka.] is Mainaka, supreme among mountains. O king! Beyond Mainaka is Govinda, best among mountains. O king! Beyond Govinda is the mountain
named Nibida. O extender of the lineage! The range between successive mountains is double[Progressively, the distance between the second and the third is double that between the first and the second and
so on.]. Listen. I will tell
you about the countries that are located there. The country near Krouncha is Kushala, while that near Vamana[Vamana is the same as Vamanaka.] is
Manonuga. O extender of the Kuru lineage! The country beyond Manonuga is Ushna. Pravaraka is beyond Ushna,
Andhakaraka beyond Pravara[Pravara is the same as Pravaraka.]. The country beyond Andhakaraka is said to be Munidesha. Dundubhisvana is
said to be beyond Munidesha. O lord of men! This is frequented by siddhas and charanas and people are generally
fair. O great king! These countries are frequented by gods and gandharvas. There is a mountain named Pushkara in
Pushkara and it is full of gems and jewels. The god Prajapati himself, always resides there. O lord of men! All the
gods, accompanied by the maharshis, always worship him with eloquent words and reverent homage. Different
kinds of jewels from Jambudvipa are used in this. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! In all these dvipas, people
and brahmanas observe brahmacharya[Usually the stage of celibacy, when one is studying. However, brahmacharya also means worship of the brahman or following the path of the brahman.] and self-control and are truthful. Health and life expectancy progressively becomes double[It is left implicit that this occurs as one progressively moves northwards, from one varsha to the next.]. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The land in each of these dvipas constitutes a
single country. In each of these countries, only a single dharma is seen. The lord Prajapati himself raises his staff
of chastisement there. O great king! He always resides in those dvipas and protects them. O king! He is the king.
He is the one who provides bliss[The word used is shiva, which means the benign one who ensures bliss.]. He is the father. He is the grandfather. O foremost among men! He protects all
the mobile and immobile beings. O Kouravya! O great king! Cooked food manifests itself before the beings there
and they always eat it. Beyond this is seen the world named Sama. O great king! This has four corners and thirty-
three circles. O Kouravya! O foremost among the Bharata lineage! The four elephants, revered by the worlds, reside there[There are four elephants that dwell in the four directions. These are known as diggaja, the elephant (gaja) for a
direction (dik).]. O king! They are Vamana, Airavata, Supratika who has rent temples and mouth, and another one[The temples and mouth are rent because of rutting when an elephant is in musth. The name of the fourth elephant is not mentioned. Sometimes, eight or ten elephants are said to dwell in the respective eight or ten
directions.]. I
cannot enumerate the dimensions of these elephants. That has always remained unknown-upwards, downwards
and diagonally. O great king! The wind freely blows there from all the directions and the elephants seize it with
trunks that are extremely radiant, designed to draw up, and with tips like lotuses. As soon as the elephants have
seized the wind, they release it with their breath. O great king! It arrives here and sustains all beings."

'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! You have told me in detail about the first[The first subject, the geography. However, Dhritarashtra had also asked about Rahu and about the sun and the
moon.]. You have also described the
dvipas. O Sanjaya! Now tell me what is left."

'Sanjaya said, "O great king! O foremost among the Kouravas! I have spoken about the dvipas. Now listen as I
exactly tell you about the planets and Svarbhanu[Another name for Rahu.] and about their dimensions. O great king! It has been heard that
the planet Svarbhanu is spherical. Its diameter is twelve thousand yojanas. O unblemished one! Because it is large,
its circumference is forty-two thousand yojanas[This gives a value of Pi of 3.5.]. That is what the ancient and learned ones have said. O king!
The diameter of the moon is said to be eleven thousand yojanas. O foremost among the Kuru lineage! The circumference of this great-souled one, who provides cool rays, is thirty-eight thousand and nine hundred yojanas[This gives a value of Pi of 3.45.]. O
descendant of the Kuru lineage! O king! The diameter of the sun is ten thousand yojanas and its circumference is
thirty-five thousand and eight hundred. O unblemished one! This is because it is so large. Thus it has been heard
about the extremely benevolent and fast-moving giver of light. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! These are the
dimensions indicated for the sun. O great king! Because of its large size, at the appropriate time, Rahu envelopes
both the moon and the sun. I have briefly recounted this to you. O great king! With the sight of the sacred texts, I
have told you everything that you had asked, exactly. Be at peace. As instructed there[In the sacred texts.], I have told you about the
creation of the universe. O Kouravya! Therefore, pacify your son Duryodhana[The connection between a geographical description and Duryodhana's pacification is not obvious.]. O foremost among the Bharata
lineage! Having heard the delightful account of Bhumi Parva, a king obtains prosperity and success and is honoured by virtuous ones. The life expectancy, strength, deeds and energy of such a lord of the earth increase, if he
follows the vows and listens to it on the day of the new moon or the full moon. His ancestors and grandfathers are
gratified. You have now heard everything about the merits that have earlier flowed from Bharata Varsha, where we
now are."'
