Vaishampayana said, 'King Duryodhana resided in that forest and eventually reaching the ghoshas, began to live
there. His attendants constructed his house in a lovely spot that had water and large trees, with all the qualities.
Nearby, they also constructed many houses for Karna, Shakuni and all his brothers. The king saw his cows, in hundreds and thousands. He inspected them and had them all marked with numbers and brands. He had the calves
marked and learnt which cows had given birth and which calves were young, so that the time for their weaning had
not arrived. After having completed the task of counting and branding all calves that were three years old, the descendant of the Kuru lineage was surrounded by the cowherds and pleasured himself. As it pleased them, like the
immortals, the citizens and soldiers in thousands sported in that forest. The cowherds were skilled in singing and
knew the art of dancing and music. With their daughters, adorned in ornaments, they served Dhritarashtra's son.
Surrounded by masses of women, the king was delighted and donated riches, food and many kinds of drink to
them, according to what each one was worth. With all of them, he killed hyenas, buffaloes, deer, oxen[Gavaya.], bear and
boar in every direction. With his arrows, he pierced elephants in that great forest. He captured deer in that beautiful
region. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He drank milk and enjoyed succulent fruit. He saw beautiful forests
in bloom. They swarmed with intoxicated bees and noisy peacocks.

'In due course, he went to sacred Lake Dvaitavana. He went there with supreme prosperity, like the great Indra,
the wielder of the vajra. O lord of the earth! It so happened that on the same day, Dharma's son, Yudhishthira, performed the sadyaska sacrifice[Sadyaska is a kind of sacrifice, meaning either a new sacrifice, or a sacrifice that is completed in a single day.] undertaken by rajarshis. The supreme among the Kurus observed the divine rite
and tendered offerings from the forest. Having observed it, the wise Kourava, lord of men, went with Droupadi, his
wife according to dharma, to the lake.

'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Together with his younger brothers, Duryodhana instructed his servants to
quickly construct pleasure houses. They said that they would act as Kouravya had asked them to. They went towards Lake Dvaitavana to build the pleasure houses. Having reached Lake Dvaitavana, the vanguard of the army
of Dhritrarashtra's son was about to enter the forest, but was restrained at the gate by the gandharvas. O lord of the
earth! O king! Surrounded by his masses, the king of the gandharvas had already arrived there from Kubera's
abode. He was in the habit of sporting with masses of apsaras and the sons of the thirty gods and had therefore
barred entry to the lake. O king! When the king's servants found that the lake had been barred, they returned to
King Duryodhana. On hearing their words, Kouravya dispatched his war-crazy soldiers to evict the others. On
hearing the words of the king, the soldiers in the vanguard went to Lake Dvaitavana and spoke to the gandharvas.

"King Duryodhana, Dhritarashtra's strong son, has come here to sport. Leave this place." O lord of the earth! Having been thus addressed, the gandharvas laughed. They replied to those men in harsh words. "Your king Suyodhana is evil in his intelligence. How can he command us, as if we are his servants? We are inhabitants of heaven.
There is no doubt that you are evil in wisdom, since you are heading towards death. You have lost your senses if
you repeat his orders to us. All of you should swiftly go back to the Kourava king. If you do not do that, you will
depart today for Yama's abode." Having been thus addressed, the vanguard of the king's army rushed back to
where the king, Dhritarashtra's son, was.'
