'Sanjaya said, "On seeing that the army was routed by Subhadra's infinitely energetic son, Duryodhana was angered and himself advanced against Subhadra's son. On seeing that the king had returned and was advancing in the
battle against Subhadra's son, Drona spoke to all the warriors. 'Protect the king. While we look on, the valiant Abhimanyu is killing everything that he is targeting. Do not be afraid. Swiftly attack and protect Kourava[Duryodhana.].' He[Duryodhana.]
possessed powerful and grateful well-wishers, desiring victory. Though they were terrified, those brave ones surrounded your son-Drona, Drona's son, Kripa, Karna, Kritavarma, Soubala[Shakuni.], Brihadbala, the king of Madra,
Bhuri, Bhurishrava, Shala, Pourava and Vrishasena[Karna's eldest son.]. They released sharp arrows and countered Subhadra's son
with that great shower of arrows. They confounded him and freed Duryodhana. But Arjuna's son could not tolerate
that something he had grasped should be taken away. With a great shower of arrows, he enveloped the horses and
the charioteers of those maharathas. Having repulsed them, Subhadra's son roared like a lion. On hearing his roar,
which was like that of a lion in search of flesh, the rathas, with Drona at the forefront, were extremely enraged.
They could not tolerate it. O venerable one! They encircled him from all sides with a mass of chariots. They released a mass of many different kinds of arrows at him. But your grandson used sharp arrows to sever them in the
sky and then pierced them back in turn. It was extraordinary. They were enraged by those arrows, which were like
the virulent poison of snakes. Wishing to kill him, they surrounded Subhadra's son, who refused to run away. That
ocean of your soldiers was like a sea. But Abhimanyu held it back, like the shoreline against the abode of
makaras[A makara is a mythical aquatic animal, which can be loosely translated as shark or crocodile.]. Those brave ones fought, wishing to kill each other. There was Abhimanyu on one side and the enemy
on the other and no one wished to retreat. A terrible and fearful combat raged.

'"Duhsaha pierced Abhimanyu with nine arrows, Duhshasana with twelve, Sharadvata Kripa with three and
Drona with seventeen arrows, each of which was like a venomous serpent. Vivimshati pierced him with twenty,
Kritavarma with seven, Brihadbala with eight, Ashvatthama with seven, Bhurishrava with three arrows and the
king of Madra with six arrows. Shakuni pierced him with two arrows and King Duryodhana with three. In turn, he
pierced each of them back with three arrows. O great king! With the bow in his hand, the powerful Abhimanyu
seemed to dance around. He was enraged because he was oppressed by your sons. He exhibited the great strength
he had acquired through learning and practice. He was borne on well-trained horses, with speeds like those of
Garuda or the wind. They bore him swiftly and he countered the heir of Ashmaka[The name of Ashmaka's son is not given. The Ashmakas are mentioned as having fought both on the Pandava
and the Kourava sides.]. Asking him to wait, Abhimanyu used ten arrows to cut down his charioteer, his horses, his standard, his arms, his bow and his head. Having
brought these down, he smiled. When the brave lord of Ashmaka was thus slain by Subhadra's son, all his soldiers
wavered and began to run away. Karna, Kripa, Drona, Drona's son, the king of Gandhara, Shala, Shalya, Bhurishrava, Kratha, Somadatta, Vivimshati, Vrishasena, Sushena, Kundabhedi, Pratardana, Vrindaraka, Lalittha,
Prabahu, Dirghalochana and the enraged Duryodhana showered down arrows on him. Those great archers pierced
him with their arrows and Abhimanyu became angry. He shot arrows at Karna that were capable of penetrating the
body. O king! They pierced his armour and his body and penetrated the earth, like a snake entering a termite hill.
Having been thus wounded by him, Karna was pained and swooned. In that battle, he was like a mountain trembling because of an earthquake. With three other sharp arrows, the angry and powerful one slew Sushena,
Dirghalochana and Kundabhedi. Having recovered, Karna pierced him with twenty-five iron arrows, Ashvatthama
with twenty and Kritavarma with seven. With arrows piercing all his limbs, the son of Shakra's son[Shakra is Indra. Arjuna is Indra's son and Abhimanyu is Arjuna's son.] was seen to
angrily roam around amidst the soldiers, like Yama with a noose in his hand. Shalya was near him and he repulsed
him with a shower of arrows. The mighty-armed one roared and terrified your soldiers. O king! Pierced in his inner
organs by the one who was skilled in the use of weapons, Shalya lost his senses and sat down on the floor of his
chariot. While Bharadvaja's son looked on, on seeing that he had been thus pierced by Subhadra's illustrious son,
all the soldiers began to run away. They saw that the mighty-armed one[Shalya.] was covered with gold-tufted arrows.
Those on your side began to flee, like deer oppressed by a lion. He[Abhimanyu.] was thus praised for his fighting and his fame
by the ancestors, the gods, the charanas[Celestial singers.], the siddhas[A siddha is someone who has attained success and siddhas are semi-divine species who have attained perfection.] and the masses of yakshas and also by the large number
of beings who were on earth. He was as resplendent as a fire into which oblations had been poured."'
