Vaishampayana said, 'At that time, the great-souled King Bhishmaka Hiranyalomna, who was a friend of Indra
himself, arrived. He was the immensely famous lord of the Bhojas and Ahritis and was the lord of the southern region[Bhishmaka was the king of Vidarbha and was the father of Rukmi and Rukmini. Bhishmaka wished to marry
Rukmini to Shishupala. But Krishna abducted her and married her.]. His son was famous in the world as Rukmi. The lion of the kimpurushas lived on Gandhamadana and he
became his student and learnt the entire science of war, with its four branches, from him[This king of the kimpurushas was named Drona or Druma and Rukmi learnt the art of war (dhanurveda) from
him. The four parts of dhanurveda can mean four types of weapons, as well as the four techniques of releasing
weapons. The import of this chapter is that Vidarbha remained neutral in the war.]. The mighty-armed one
obtained the great Indra's bow, which was divine and indestructible, and equal to Gandiva and Sharnga[Krishna's bow.] in energy. Those who reside in heaven possess three divine bows-Varuna's Gandiva, the great Indra's bow Vijaya and
Vishnu's Sharnga, which is said to be a celestial bow that is full of energy. Krishna wields it and strikes terror in
the soldiers of enemies. The son of the chastiser of Paka[The chastiser of Paka is Indra and Arjuna is his son.] obtained Gandiva from the fire god in Khandava. The
immensely energetic Rukmi obtained Vijaya from Druma. Hrishikesha obtained the supreme bow Sharnga after
destroying the nooses of Mura, killing the energetic Mura, killing Naraka, the son of the earth, and obtaining sixteen thousand women and many jewels[Narakasura was the son of the earth goddess (Bhumi) and ruled in Pragjyotisha. He abducted sixteen thousand
women and stole Aditi's earrings. His general was Mura or Muru. Krishna defeated and slew them.].

'Rukmi obtained the bow Vijaya, which roared like a cloud and was capable of terrifying the universe. He came
to the Pandavas. The brave one was insolent of the strength of his arms and had not forgiven the earlier instance of
Rukmini being abducted by the intelligent Vasudeva. He had taken an oath that he would not return without killing
Janardana. He had collected a giant army with four branches[Elephants, cavalry, infantry and chariots.], capable of attacking at a great distance. With this,
he had pursued Varshneya, supreme among those who wield all weapons, wishing to kill him. It possessed many
weapons and armour and was like the overflowing Ganga. He attacked Varshneya, the lord and master of all yoga.
O king! But he was repulsed and ashamed. He did not return to Kundina[The capital of Vidarbha, identified with Kaundinyapura in Amravati division.]. At the spot where the destroyer of enemy heroes was vanquished by Krishna in battle, he constructed a supreme city by the name of Bhojakata[Located to the west of Kundina.]. It had a
large army and many horses and elephants. O king! This city is still famous on earth by the name of Bhojakata.
Surrounded by a large army, the immensely valorous king of Bhoja came to the Pandavas with an akshouhini. He
possessed armour, a sword, arrows, a bow, guards for his palms, a chariot and a flag that had the complexion of the
sun. He entered that large camp of soldiers. When the Pandavyas got to know, to bring pleasure to Vasudeva, King
Yudhishthira arose and honoured him. On being shown respect by the sons of Pandu and having received the appropriate homage, he saluted all of them in return. After he had rested with his soldiers, in the midst of those brave
ones, he spoke to Kunti's son, Dhananjaya, "O Pandava! If you are afraid, I will stand as your aide on the field of
battle. In the course of the war, I will help you so that your enemies will not be able to bear it. There is no man on
this earth who is equal to me in valour. O Phalguna! When I have killed your enemies in battle, I will hand them
over to you." Having been thus addressed in the presence of Dharmaraja and Keshava, in the hearing of all the
kings of the earth and the others, the intelligent Kounteya glanced towards Vasudeva and Pandava Dharmaraja. He
laughed and spoke in a tone of friendliness. "O brave one! At the time of the expedition with the cattle, I fought
with the immensely powerful gandharvas. Who was my aide then and who was my friend then? I fought in the terrible battle of Khandava, infested by gods and danavas. Who was my aide then? I fought in a battle with the Nivatakavachas and the Kalakeya danavas. Who was my aide then? O son[The word used is tata.]! I fought with many Kurus in the city of
Virata. Who was my aide then? In battle, I am indebted to Rudra, Shakra, Vaishravana[Kubera.], Yama, Varuna, the fire
god, Kripa, Drona and Madhava. I firmly wield the divine bow Gandiva, full of energy. I possess inexhaustible
quivers. I am sustained by divine weapons. I have been born in the lineage of the Kouravas. In particular, I am
Pandu's son. I call myself Drona's student. Vasudeva is my aide. How can I cause ill fame to myself by saying that
I am afraid? O tiger among men! I cannot speak such words to the wielder of the vajra himself. O mighty-armed
one! I am not frightened. I do not need your help. Go wherever you wish to. Or remain here, if it so pleases you."

Rukmi then returned with that army, which was like an ocean. O bull among the Bharata lineage! In a similar fashion, he approached Duryodhana. Arriving there, that lord of the earth spoke in the same way. But since he prided
himself on his valour, he was rebuffed there too[That is, proud of his bravery, Duryodhana refused Rukmi's help.].

'O great king! Thus, two of them withdrew from the war-the Varshneya who was Rohini's son and Rukmi, the
lord of the earth. Rama went on a visit to the tirthas and after Bhishmaka's son had also departed, the Pandavas
again seated themselves in consultations. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Frequented by all the kings, Dharmaraja's assembly looked like the firmament glittering with stars, with the moon lording over it.'
