'"The sage said, 'O kshatriya! If instead, you see that there is some manliness left in you, I will tell you about a
policy whereby you can get your kingdom back. If you can undertake this, you will perform an everlasting deed. I
will tell you everything. Listen to it in detail. If you act in accordance with this, you will obtain great prosperity,
the kingdom, control over the kingdom and get the greatness of Shri back again. O king! If this appeals to you, tell
me. I will tell you what must be done.'

'"The king replied, 'O illustrious one! O lord! I have sought refuge with you. Tell me about the policy. Now that
I have met you, this meeting cannot but be successful.'

'"The sage said, 'Renounce arrogance, pride, anger, joy and fear. Join your hands in salutation, bow down before the enemy and serve him[The enemy means King Janaka of Videha.]. The lord of Videha is devoted to the truth. Because of your supreme purity, deeds
and appeasement, he is certain to grant you a means of subsistence. You will obtain his favours and become preeminent among all the people. You will also obtain aides who are enterprising, without vices and pure. If a person
is engaged in his own tasks, restrains his soul and conquers his senses, he uplifts himself and pleases people. He is
intelligent and prosperous and will honour you. Having obtained great favours from him, you will become preeminent among all people. You will obtain well-wishers and ministers who will give you good advice. Then create internal dissension, like smashing a bilva fruit[The fruit of the wood-apple tree.] with another bilva fruit. Conclude agreements with his enemies and
destroy his forces. Make his mind turn to objects that are not easily attainable-women, garments, beds, seats, vehicles, extremely expensive houses, birds, different kinds of animals, juices, perfumes and fruit. Becoming addicted to these, he will then ruin himself. If you are countered, you should not ignore that. However, if you wish to
control the enemy, you should not do anything openly. The wise ones say that one should dwell with one's
supreme enemy in his kingdom and by getting him addicted to unusual objects, ensuring the enemy's hardship.
One must get him to work on tasks that are great and extremely difficult, such as constructing dams on rivers. Ensure that powerful ones counter him. Let the treasury be frittered away on extremely expensive gardens, beds, seats
and other objects of pleasure and happiness. Praise sacrifices and gifts and describe these in the presence of brahmanas, so that they are kind towards you and pursue him like wolves. "There is no doubt that one who is pure in
his conduct attains the supreme objective. Such a king obtains the most sacred of spots in heaven[These are examples of the kinds of things that should be said.]." O one from
Kosala! When his treasury is destroyed, he will come under the subjugation of the enemy. Whether he is addicted
to dharma or adharma[The vices are adharma and the sacrifices are dharma, but both deplete
the treasury.], his enemies will take delight in whatever severs the root of his strength and riches. When
a man confronts disaster, he blames destiny. When he is swiftly destroyed, there is no doubt that he will think that
destiny is supreme. Make him perform the vishvajita sacrifice[A sacrifice that conquers the universe. It is a sacrifice in which one gives
away all one's possessions.], so that he is deprived of all his possessions.
When his objectives are not accomplished and when he is afflicted, he will want to go to an eminent person. Suggest someone from an inferior varna, someone with a shaved head, knowledgeable in the dharma of renunciation.
Desiring his own welfare, perhaps he will then resort to renunciation. Employ drugs that are known to have efficacy and are capable of destroying all enemies. Use these vile concoctions to destroy his elephants, horses and men.
There are these and many other techniques of deceit that have been determined. O son of a king! If one is not a eunuch, one is capable of using these to conquer.'"'
