Bhishma said, "O extender of the Kuru lineage! In this connection, there is the recital of the extremely difficult
hardship Nriga had to face when he took away the possession of a virtuous brahmana. O Partha! On an earlier
occasion, it has been heard that some people entered the city of Dvaravati and saw a giant well that was covered
with grass and creepers. They made efforts, seeking to obtain water from the well. Since the water was extensively
covered, they had to struggle a lot. After clearing this, they saw a giant lizard there. They made thousands of attempts to remove it from that place. It was as large as a mountain and they used ropes made of leather to bind and
drag it away. However, not succeeding in these attempts, they went to Janardana. 'There is a giant lizard that has
completely covered the mouth of the well. We have been unable to remove it.' They reported this to Krishna.

'"Vasudeva removed it from there and wished to know who it actually was. Thus asked, it reported itself to be
King Nriga, who, in earlier times, had performed one thousand sacrifices. When it answered in this way, Madhava
said, 'You performed auspicious deeds, not wicked ones. Why did you then face this hardship? O Indra among
kings! Tell me. How did you attain this state? We have heard that in ancient times, you repeatedly gave brahmanas
hundreds of thousands of cows one hundred times. Then you again gave hundred and eight thousand of cows a
hundred thousand times. Why did this happen to you?' Nriga told Krishna, 'There was a brahmana who practised
agnihotra. While he was away, it was led astray and mixed with my herd of cows. That animal got included in
thousands of cattle I possessed. Desiring prosperity after death, I gave it away to a brahmana. The brahmana returned and saw that his wayward cow was in another brahmana's house. He said, "This belongs to me." They disputed the matter and, extremely anxious, appeared before me. Both of them spoke to me. One said, "You gave me
this." The other said, "You stole this from me." I told the one I had given the cow to, "In exchange for this cow,
accept these hundreds and hundreds of cows." However, he replied, "The one I got is appropriate for the time and
the place. She yields a lot of milk. She is quiet and affectionate. Her milk is sweet. She has always been praised in
my house. I have a weak son who has just been weaned and this cow has nourished him. I am incapable of giving
her away." Having said this, he left. So I spoke to the other brahmana and proposed an exchange. "Instead of this
cow, accept these hundred thousand other cows." But the brahmana replied, "I am established on my own path and
am incapable of accepting gifts from kings. Therefore, swiftly return the cow that is mine." O Madhusudana! I offered him gold, horses, silver and chariots. However, the bull among brahmanas did not accept these. Meanwhile,
urged by the dharma of time, I obtained the world of the ancestors[Nriga died.] and was brought before Dharmaraja. Yama
worshipped me and spoke these words. "O king! There is no end to the number of auspicious deeds you have performed. But there is a sin, even if you committed it inadvertently. Do you wish to suffer for the sin earlier or later?
It shall be as you wish. You promised that you would protect. You took a false pledge. You seized the possession
of a brahmana. These are the three aspects to the sin you committed." I replied, "O lord! I shall suffer from the sin
first. Let the auspicious benefits come later." As soon as I said this to Dharmaraja, I fell down on the surface of the
earth and could hear the words that Yama spoke to me. O Janardana! He said, "Vasudeva will save you. When one
thousand years are over, the fruits of your evil deed will wear thin. Because of the other deeds that you have yourself performed, you will then conquer and obtain the eternal worlds." I fell down, head downwards, and found myself inside this well. Though I was born as an inferior species, my memory did not desert me. You have saved me
today. This can be nothing other than the strength of your austerities. O Krishna! Grant me permission. I wish to go
to heaven now.' O scorcher of enemies! He took Krishna's permission. He bowed down to Janardana and ascending a celestial vehicle, went to heaven. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! O descendant of the Kuru lineage!
After Nriga reached heaven, Vasudeva recited this shloka. 'No man should willingly seize something that belongs
to a brahmana. If seized, a brahmana's property causes destruction, just as the brahmana's cow destroyed Nriga.' O
Partha! A meeting with the virtuous is never fruitless. Behold Nriga's encounter with a virtuous person. He was
freed from hell. There are fruits from donations. There are also evil fruits from violence. O Yudhishthira! Therefore, you should avoid acts of injury towards cows."'
