Vaishampayana said, 'O great king! The infinitely energetic and great-souled Pandavas had adopted disguises and
dwelt in Virata's excellent city. While they lived there, the promised period elapsed. They performed tasks for Vi-
rata, lord of the earth. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! After the end of the thirteenth year, Susharma swiftly
robbed a large number of cattle. A herdsman then arrived at the city with great speed and descended from his chariot. He saw the king of Matsya seated, wearing earrings and bracelets. He was surrounded by brave warriors, all
adorned with earrings and armlets. He was surrounded by his advisers, together with the Pandavas, bulls among
men. The great king, the extender of the kingdom, was seated in his assembly hall. He approached Virata, bowed
in worship, and said, "The Trigartas have vanquished us, together with our relatives, in battle. They are taking
away hundreds and thousands of cattle. O Indra among men! Rescue your animals quickly, or they will be lost."

When he heard this, the king of Matsya assembled his army.

'There were a large number of chariots, elephants and horses. There were flags and infantry. The kings and the
princes donned their armour, bright and colourful and prepared well. Virata's beloved brother, Shatanika, donned
armour made out of molten gold and made firm with an underlay of iron. Madirashva, younger to Shatanika, wore
invincible and firm armour that was constructed well. The king of Matsya wore impenetrable armour, adorned with
a hundred suns, a hundred circles, a hundred dots and a hundred eyes. There were one hundred lotuses and
sougandhikas[Fragrant flowers.] embossed on Suryadatta's armour, plated with gold and as bright as the sun. Virata's eldest son,
the brave maharatha Shankha, wore shining armour made out of iron, with one hundred eyes embossed on it. There
were hundreds of maharathas armoured in this way. Armed and ready to fight, they looked like gods. Their chariots
were bright and large and had been prepared well. Each of the maharathas yoked horses with golden harnesses to
their respective chariots. Matysa's glorious standard was raised on his golden and divine chariot, resplendent like
the sun and the moon. There were many other pennants of different types, adorned in gold. The brave kshatriyas
affixed them to their respective chariots.

'Then the king of Matsya spoke to his younger brother Shatanika. "In my view, there is no doubt that Kanka,
Ballava, the one in charge of the cows[Sahadeva, as Tantipala.], and the brave Damagranthi will fight. Give them chariots with flags and
pennants. They should have colourful armour, both firm and malleable. Let them wear these on their bodies and
give them weapons. Those men have the bodies of brave ones, like the trunks of kings of elephants. It is my view
that they have never refused to fight." Having heard the king's words, Shatanika, whose understanding was swift,
followed the king's instructions and gave chariots to the Parthas-Sahadeva, the king[Yudhishthira.], Bhima and Nakula. Those
charioteers placed devotion to the king in the forefront and happily yoked the chariots that had been given by the
lord of men. Their deeds were unsullied and they donned the colourful armour, both firm and malleable, that had
been given by Virata. Those scorchers of enemies donned them on their bodies and were armed. All of them were
skilled in fighting and swift, but were still in disguise. Those bulls among the Kurus followed Virata-the four
brave Pandava brothers, with truth as their valour. There were terrible mad elephants, musth strewing down their
temples. They were sixty years old, with well-formed tusks, and were like monsoon clouds. They had skilled riders
as mounts, trained in elephants, and these followed the king, like moving mountains. The foremost and skilled
among the followers of Matsya were obedient and happy. They had eight thousand chariots, one thousand elephants and sixty thousand horses, and advanced. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O great king! As it emerged,
Virata's beautiful army was resplendent and followed the footprints of the cattle. Virata's army were splendid.
There were firmly armed infantry and a large number of elephants, horses and chariots.'
