'Shalya said, "When the intelligent king of the gods was thinking about a means for killing Nahusha, together with
the guardians of the world[There are different lists of guardians of the world (lokapalas), but the common list has Indra, Yama, Kubera
and Varuna.], the illustrious ascetic Agastya appeared. He showed homage to Indra of the gods and
said, 'It is fortunate that you have gained in strength. Vishvarupa[Trishira.] has been destroyed and the asura Vritra has
been slain. O Purandara! It is through good fortune too that Nahusha has been dislodged from the kingdom of the
gods. O destroyer of Bala! It is through good fortune that I look upon you now.' Indra replied, 'O maharshi! Welcome. I am happy to see you. Please accept from me water for washing the feet, water for washing the mouth, the
cow and the arghya[A guest is given padya (water for washing the feet), achamaniya (water for washing the mouth), arghya (a gift)
and a cow.].' Having been thus honoured, that supreme of sages, bull among brahmanas, seated himself
and the lord of the gods happily asked him, 'O illustrious one! O supreme among brahmanas! I wish to hear from
you how Nahusha, whose mind was set on evil, has been dislodged from heaven.'

'"Agastya said, 'O Shakra! Listen to the pleasant news of how the evil-souled and evil-acting King Nahusha,
insolent because of his strength, has been dislodged from heaven. The immensely fortunate devarshis and the unblemished brahmarshis were exhausted at having to bear the evil-acting Nahusha. O god! O supreme among victorious ones! They posed a question to Nahusha. "Brahma has chanted mantras that should be used when cows are
sprinkled[The meaning is unclear. However, animals were sprinkled with water before they were sacrificed.]. Are these accurate?" O Vasava! This is the question they asked. Nahusha's senses were confounded
because of darkness and he replied in the negative. The rishis said, "You are engaged in adharma. You do not know
dharma. For us, they are accurate, because the maharshis have uttered them earlier." O Vasava! While he was arguing with the sages, oppressed by adharma, this man touched my head with his foot[Agastya was also among the sages who were bearing Nahusha.]. O consort of Shachi! Because of this, he lost his energy and his prosperity. I told the anxious one who was oppressed by fear, "This was
undertaken by Brahma earlier and was observed by the brahmarshis[The mantras and the related ritual.]. They should not be censured and you have
censured them. You have touched my head with your foot. O stupid one! The rishis are like Brahma and are unassailable. You have made them carry around your vehicle. Therefore, you will lose your brilliance and will be dislodged from heaven. O evil one! With all your merits exhausted, you will be dislodged and will descend on earth.
You will roam for ten thousand years in the form of a giant serpent. After this period is over, you will return again
to heaven." O destroyer of enemies! Thus, the evil-souled one was dislodged from the kingdom of heaven. O
Shakra! It is through good fortune that the thorn of brahmanas has been uprooted and we are flourishing. O consort
of Shachi! Return to heaven and protect the worlds. Conquer your senses and conquer your enemies. Be praised by
the maharshis.'"

'Shalya said, "The gods, surrounded by the masses of maharshis, were extremely satisfied. So were the ancestors, the yakshas, the serpents, the rakshasas, the gandharvas, the maidens of the gods and all the masses of apsaras. O lord of the earth! All the lakes, rivers, mountains and oceans approached and said, 'O destroyer of enemies[This is being addressed to Indra.]! It is through good fortune that you are flourishing. It is through good fortune that the evil Nahusha has
been dislodged by the wise Agastya. It is through good fortune that the one who was evil in his conduct has become a snake on the face of the earth.'"'
