Narada said, 'The large-eyed lady controlled her grief. She bent like a creeper, joined her hands in salutation
and said, "O supreme among those who grant boons! I have been created by you. How can you engage a
lady like me in such a terrible deed, one that is fearful to all living beings? I am terrified that I will act in accordance with adharma. Instruct me about a task of dharma. O lord of everything auspicious! You can see with your
eyes that I am terrified. There are living beings who are children, young and aged, who have done me no injury.
How will I take them away? O lord of living beings! I am bowing down before you. Show me your favours. There
will be beloved sons, friends, brothers, mothers and fathers. O god! If I make them die, I am terrified that I will
commit a crime. The tearful sorrow and compassion of the survivors will burn me for an eternal period. I  am
frightened of their power. That is the reason I seek refuge with you. O god! The performers of wicked deeds will
go to Yama's abode. O granter of boons! O lord! Be pacified and show me your favours. O grandfather of the
worlds! This is the desire that I wish you to satisfy. O lord of the gods! Through your favours, it is my wish that I
should perform austerities."'

'"The grandfather replied, 'O Death! I have thought of you for the sake of destroying subjects. Do not think
about this. Go and destroy all the subjects. This will certainly happen. It cannot be otherwise. O one with the unblemished limbs! O unblemished one! Act in accordance with my words.'

'"Narada said, 'O mighty-armed one! O vanquisher of enemy cities! Having been thus addressed, she did not
reply. She stood there, raising her eyes up at the illustrious one. Though he repeatedly spoke to her, the beautiful
one seemed to be bereft of her senses. The god of the gods, the lord of the lords[Brahma.], was himself silent. Brahma then
resorted within himself and became pacified. The lord of the worlds smiled and looked at all the worlds. The illustrious and unvanquished one controlled his rage. We have heard that the lady then departed. Having promised to
destroy subjects, she withdrew. O Indra among kings! Mrityu[Death.] swiftly went to the spot known as Dhenuka. The
goddess performed supreme austerities there, ones that are very difficult to accomplish. Standing on one foot, she
performed austerities for fifteen billion years[Padma. A padma is an unspecified large number, but is sometimes taken as equal to one billion.]. There, she performed austerities that are extremely difficult to accomplish. After this, the immensely energetic Brahma again spoke these words to her. "O Death! Swiftly act in accordance with my instructions." But she ignored this. O son[The word used is tata.]! O one who grants honours! She again performed
austerities for eighteen billion years. O son! She roamed with the deer and again performed austerities for ten thousand billion years. O king! She went again and observed an extraordinary vow of silence. O king! During this, she
immersed herself in water for eight thousand years. O bull among the Bharata lineage[Since Narada is speaking to Avikampaka, this is a clear inconsistency.]! The maiden then went to
the river Koushiki. Subsisting on water and air, she practised the vows again. The immensely fortunate one then
went to Ganga and Mount Meru. Desiring the welfare of living beings, she stood immobile there. She went to the
summit of the Himalayas, where the gods had assembled. O Indra among kings! She stood on her toes for a billion
years. She made careful efforts to pacify the grandfather. The creator of the worlds went and spoke to her there. "O
daughter! Why are you acting in this way? Act in accordance with my words." Death then again spoke to the illustrious grandfather. "O god! I cannot take away the subjects. I am again seeking your favours." She was terrified
because of the fear of adharma and again beseeched him. However, the god of the gods ignored her words and
spoke to her. "O Death! There will be no adharma for you. O fortunate one! It is desirable that you should control
the subjects. O fortunate one! The words that I have spoken can never be falsified. Eternal dharma will now penetrate you. I and all the gods will always be engaged in ensuring your welfare. I will also grant you the other wish
you desire. Subjects will be afflicted by disease and no sin will accrue to you. You will be a man among men, a
woman among women and the third sex among eunuchs." O great king! Having been thus addressed, she joined
her hands in salutation and again spoke to the great-souled and undecaying one, to the effect that she could not do
this. But the lord of the gods told the goddess, "O Death! Destroy men. O auspicious one! I am decreeing that no
adharma will attach to you. In front of me, I can see that tears are dropping from your eyes and that you are holding them in your hands. These will become diseases among men, terrible in form. O Death! At the appropriate
time, they will afflict them. When their end comes, all living beings will be united with desire and anger. Since you
will not discriminate in your conduct, you will follow dharma and no adharma will be attached to you. Protect the
dharma that I have spoken about. You will not immerse yourself in adharma. Therefore, you should find this desire
agreeable. Engage yourself in destroying living beings." At this, Mrityu was frightened of his curse and agreed to
follow the instructions. When the time of living beings was over, she started to dispatch desire and anger, so as to
confound and destroy them. The  tears  that  Mrityu  had  shed  became  diseases  that  afflicted  the  bodies  of  men.
Therefore, one should not sorrow when the lives of living beings are extinguished. Instead, one should use one's
intelligence to understand this. When their lives are over, all gods among beings depart and return again[Are born again.]. O lion
among kings! In that way, when their lives are over, all men go away, like the gods. The wind is terrible and immensely energetic. It emits a mighty roar and is the breath of life in all living beings, following different courses in
the bodies, until they are separated from their bodies. That is the reason the wind is special and is known as the
god of the gods. All the gods are characterized by traits of mortality. There are traits of divinity in all mortals. O
lion among kings! Therefore, do not sorrow over your son. Your son has obtained heaven and delight there. This is
the way Mrityu was created by the god, so that she could appropriately destroy beings when the time arrives. The
diseases are the tears that she shed. At the right time, they destroy living beings.'"'
