Vaishampayana said, 'Krishna thus withdrew the power of brahmastra and that room was illuminated through
your father's energy. All the rakshasas were rebuffed and forced to leave that house. An invisible voice was
heard to speak in the firmament, "O Keshava! Excellent." The blazing weapon returned to the grandfather. O lord
of men! Your father again got back his life. Appropriate to its capacity and its strength, the child began to move. O
king! At this, the Bharata women were delighted. On Govinda's instructions, the brahmanas pronounced benedictions. Everyone was delighted and praised Janardana. The wives of the lions among the Bharatas were like those
who acquire a boat and reach the shore. Kunti, Drupada's daughter, Subhadra and Uttara and the wives of the other
lions among men were cheerful in their minds. Wrestlers, actors, fighters, narrators, soukhashayikas[This is impossible to translate. These are officials who ask royalty if they have slept well.] and large
numbers of bards and minstrels praised Janardana. O bull among the Bharata lineage! They pronounced praises
and benedictions for the Kuru lineage. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! At the right time, Uttara was raised
and she and her son cheerfully greeted the descendant of the Yadu lineage. Delighted, the lord who was a tiger
among the Vrishni lineage gave away many gems and so did the others. Janardana, devoted to the truth, named
your  father.  He  said,  "Since  Abhimanyu's  son  was  born  when  the  lineage  had  decayed,  his  name  will  be
Parikshit[The word parikshina means decay or destruction.]." O lord of men! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In course of time, your father grew up and gladdened the minds of all the people. O brave one! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When your father was a
month old, the Pandavas returned, having collected a great deal of riches[They had gone to collect King Marutta's riches for the horse sacrifice.]. On hearing that they were approaching, the bulls among the Vrishni lineage went out. The men decorated Nagasahvya with large numbers of garlands.
There were colourful flags and diverse kinds of standards. O lord of men! The citizens decorated their houses. On
Vidura's instructions and to bring pleasure to the sons of Pandu, many kinds of worship were performed in the
temples. The royal roads were ornamented in beautiful ways. The beautiful city resounded with a noise that was
like the roar of the ocean. There were the sounds of dancers dancing and singers singing. The city seemed to be
like Vaishravana's[Kubera's.] abode. O king! There were bards and thousands of curious women in every direction. Stirred
by the wind, the flags fluttered, as if pointing out the southern and the northern directions to the Kurus. The royal
officers announced that it was a time for festivities. Since the riches had been obtained, the festivities would last
throughout the night.'
