Yudhishthira said, "The grandfather talked about the ordinances connected with gold and you have told me
these. You have explained in detail the qualities and signs associated with donating it, as described in the sacred texts. You have also recounted the reason behind the origin of gold. But tell me how that Taraka met with his
destruction. O king! You have said that he was unslayable, so far as the gods were concerned. However, you have
not yet told me the details about his death. O extender of the Kuru lineage! I wish to hear the truth about that. Tell
me everything about the slaying of Taraka. My curiosity is great."

'Bhishma replied, "O Indra among kings! The gods and the rishis thus faced distress. They urged the Krittikas to
rear that divine offspring. Among the gods, there was no one who would have been able to rear Agni's embryo
alone. It was too full of energy. However, Pavaka was pleased that each of the six had agreed to nurture the embryo. He released his own energy and the supreme seed. Each of the six Krittikas nurtured a part of Agni's embryo.
O lord! Agni's energy was divided into six parts and all of them carried it together. The great-souled Kumara began to grow in this way. However, their limbs were overwhelmed with his energy and they could not find any
peace. While their limbs were overwhelmed with this energy, the time for delivery arrived. O bull among men! All
the Krittikas delivered at the same time. Though the six parts of the embryo had been delivered separately, they
came together and united. The earth received him and placed him in a beautiful spot. The child was divine in form
and blazed with the complexion of the fire. Having been placed in a divine clump of reeds, the one who was handsome in appearance began to grow. The Krittikas saw the child, who possessed the resplendence of the fire. Their
affection and love was stirred and they nurtured him with milk from their breasts. That is the reason why, among
the mobile and immobile objects of the three worlds, he came to be known as Kartikeya. Because the seed trickled
down, he was known as Skanda. Because he was reared in secrecy, he was known as Guha. The thirty-three gods,
the lords of the directions, Rudra, Dhatri, Vishnu, Yajna[This is probably a typo in the Critical Edition. It should read Yama.], Pushan, Aryama, Bhaga, Amsha, Mitra, the Sadhyas,
the Vasus, Vasava, the Ashvins, the water, the wind, the sky, the moon, the nakshatra, the planets, the sun and all
the separate objects that are offered to the gods[In their personified forms.] went there to see Kumara, Agni's son. The rishis chanted words
of praise and the gandharvas sang. Kumara possessed six faces and twelve eyes and loved brahmanas. His chest
was broad and he possessed twelve arms. His radiance was like that of the fire and the sun. The gods and the rishis
saw him, as he lay down on that clump of reeds. They were extremely delighted, thinking that the asura had already been killed. The gods brought everything that would bring him pleasure. Since he was still engaged in playing, they gave him dolls and a large number of birds. Suparna[Garuda.] gave him a feathered peacock with colourful
plumage. The rakshasas gave him a boar and a buffalo. Varuna himself gave him a cock that was like the fire in
complexion. The moon gave him a sheep and the sun gave him dazzling rays. The goddess who is the mother of
cows[Surabhi.] gave him hundreds and thousands of cattle. Agni gave him a goat that possessed many qualities and Ila
gave him many flowers and fruit[The text has Ila in the feminine. While Ila has several usages, here it probably means Budha's wife.]. Sudhanva[Vishnu.] gave him a cart and a chariot with a large frame. Varuna gave him
many of Varuna's celestial objects and some sacred serpents. Indra of the gods gave him lions, tigers, leopards,
many other carnivorous, predatory and terrible beasts and diverse umbrellas. Large numbers of rakshasas and asuras began to follow the lord.

'"On seeing the lord grow up, Taraka tried many kinds of methods to try and kill him. But he wasn't successful.
The gods honoured the one who had been reared secretly and made him their general. They also informed him
about the depredations that had been caused by Taraka. The immensely valorous one, the general of the gods, grew
up. With an invincible spear, Guha slew the danava Taraka. As he killed the asura, it was as if Kumara was playing. The lord again established Indra of the gods in the kingdom of the gods and he made the powerful Skanda the
general. The lord[Skanda.] protected the gods and did what would bring Shankara pleasure. The illustrious Pavaki[Pavaka's son, Skanda.] is
golden in form. Kumara has always remained the general of the gods. It is held that gold is Agni's supreme energy,
born with Kartikeya. That is the reason it is auspicious and is a supreme and indestructible jewel. O Kouravya!
This is what Vasishtha told Rama in ancient times. O lord of men! Therefore, you should make efforts to donate
gold. Having gifted gold, Rama was freed from all his sins. He obtained a great spot in heaven, which is extremely
difficult for a man to obtain."'
