Vasudeva said, "Touching his feet, he[Kashyapa.] asked some questions that were extremely difficult to answer. "I am
asking you about all of those. O supreme among the upholders of dharma!" Tell me that.

'"Kashyapa asked, 'How does the body go away and how does one get another again? How is one freed from
the hardships of this cycle of life? Having freed oneself from the body, how is one united with the atman? Having
been freed from this body, how does one obtain another end? How does a man enjoy the fruits of the good and bad
deeds done by him? If one is freed from the body, what kind of acts can be undertaken?'

'"The brahmana[This is the brahmana who is speaking to Krishna.] said, 'Thus asked, the siddha replied to the questions, one after another. O Varshneya! Listen
to my words.

'"'The siddha replied, "A body is adopted to perform acts that increase the lifespan and bring fame. However,
all of these eventually decay. When there is little of lifespan left, the jivatman begins to act in a contrary way.
When destruction presents itself, his[The text is gender neutral.] intelligence turns perverse. The jivatman knows his spirit, strength and the
time. Yet, though it acts against the jivatman, he eats excessively and out of season[To state the obvious, food has to be appropriate for age and season.]. He serves everything that
causes greater difficulties for him. He eats too much, or does not eat at all. He tastes rotten food and tainted food
and other kinds that are perverse. He eats more food than he should. Or he eats before the earlier food has been digested. He indulges in excessive exercise or sexual intercourse. Though his natural speed has diminished, overcome by greed, he always engages in tasks. He eats food that is too juicy. Or he sleeps during the day. Even when
the time has not come, these taints cause agitation that are brought on by the person himself[Improper diet leads to imbalance in wind, bile and phlegm and premature death.]. There is disease because of these taints and death comes as the end. Sometimes, one resorts to hanging and other methods[Of unnatural death.]. Else,
though alive, the physical body of a creature decays because of such things. I am telling you what should be understood. When the wind in the body is fierce and begins to blow violently, heat is generated. This reaches all parts of
the body and constrains the breath of life. Know that when the heat in the body becomes excessive, strong and violent, it injures the inner organs and the place where the breath of life resides. In great pain, the physical body of the
jivatman melts away. The inner organs are pierced and the creature gives up the physical body. O supreme among
brahmanas! Know that the jivatman suffers great pain. All creatures are always extremely anxious about birth and
death. O bull among brahmanas! They are seen to abandon the physical bodies. Human beings experience a similar
kind of pain when they enter a womb or emerge from the inner organs[Respectively, birth and death.]. A man's joints are shattered and he suffers in the moistness. When the wind in the body is fierce and begins to blow violently, cold is also generated.
Then, the body seeks refuge in the five elements. The five  elements are established in prana  and apana.  This
breath of life ascends upwards and causing hardship, frees itself from the body. When it leaves the body, there is
no longer any life to be seen. There is no heat. There is no breath. There is no beauty and the senses have left.
When the brahman[The jivatman.] abandons the body, a man is said to be dead. There are ducts through which a person with a
body perceives the objects of the senses. However, the breath of life, which is sustained through food, can no
longer see them. The eternal jivatman makes those ducts in the body work. These are sometimes combined together and sometimes they collapse. Know that the sacred texts have stated these to be the inner organs. When those
inner organs are shattered, the jivatman rises up and enters the heart, thereby swiftly curtailing all spirit. In such a
situation,  despite  being  conscious,  a  creature  cannot  discern  anything.  The  inner  organs  are  overwhelmed  and
knowledge is enveloped in darkness. The jivatman no longer has a place to reside and is agitated by the wind. At
such a time, the being breathes deeply and breathes extremely painfully. The jivatman emerges swiftly, causing
trembling. The body is bereft of sensation. The jivatman discards the body, but is still enveloped by its own deeds.
It is marked by all its sacred and auspicious acts and also by all its wicked deeds. There are brahmanas who are accomplished in knowledge and also possess the determinations of the sacred texts. Through the signs, they can discern whether good or bad deeds have been committed. Even when it is dark, those with eyes can see fireflies appear and disappear. In that way, those who possess the sight of knowledge can see. Similarly, successful ones with
divine sight can see the act of a creature abandoning the body and being born again, as it enters a womb. According to the sacred texts, a creature is seen to occupy three spots. There is karmabhumi, the arena of action. All creatures reap the fruits of their good and bad deeds there. Depending on the good deeds they have themselves performed in this world, they reap the fruits. Those with wicked deeds in this world go to hell, because of those deeds.
A wicked man cannot speak and is severely cooked in hell. Since it is extremely difficult for the atman to be freed
from such a state, one must do one's utmost to protect oneself against this. There are states obtained by creatures
that ascend upwards. I will recount the truth about these. Listen to me. Having heard, you will obtain faith and intelligence. Using that intelligence, you will be able to determine the course of action. There are many like stars in
the lunar disc and the solar disc. Through their own radiance, they shine in those worlds. Know that these, and others, are meant for men who are the performers of auspicious deeds. However, when these deeds are exhausted,
they are repeatedly dislodged from there. Heaven is superior to these. But even there, the superior, the medium and
the inferior exist. There is discontent there[In heaven.], whenever one sees prosperity that is more blazing than one's own.
These are all the separate destinations that have been recounted. I will now tell you about the origin in the womb.
O brahmana! When I recount the truth about this, listen attentively."'"'
