'Sanjaya said, "O lord of the earth! With Virata of Matysa, Shikhandi swiftly attacked Bhishma, the mighty archer
who was extremely difficult to vanquish. O bull on the earth! In that battle, Dhananjaya advanced against Drona,
Kripa, Vikarna and many other brave kings who were great archers and extremely powerful, and also against the
great archer Saindhava, together with his advisers and relatives and the kings from the west and the south. In that
encounter, Bhimasena attacked your intolerant son Duryodhana, the great archer, together with Duhsaha. Sahadeva
advanced against Shakuni and maharatha Uluka, the father and son who were great archers and were extremely
difficult to vanquish in battle[Uluka was Shakuni's son.]. O great king! Maharatha Yudhishthira had been deceived by your sons. In that
battle, he attacked the army of elephants[Of the Kouravas.]. Pandava Nakula was a brave warrior who could make enemies cry in
battle. He attacked the excellent chariots of the Trigartas. Satyaki, Chekitana and Subhadra's maharatha son were
invincible in battle and advanced against Shalva and the Kekayas. Dhrishtaketu and rakshasa Ghatotkacha were
extremely difficult to defeat. In that encounter, they attacked the army of chariots that belonged to your sons. General Dhrishtadyumna was immensely strong and immeasurable in his soul. O king! In that battle, he attacked
Drona, whose deeds were extremely wonderful. Thus the great archers on your side fought with the Pandavas.
Having encountered each other in battle, the brave ones proceeded to strike each other down. When it was midday
and the sun had reached the midpoint of the sky, burning down with its fierce rays, the Kurus and the Pandavas began to kill each other. Chariots roamed around on the field of battle. They had standards decorated with gold and
pennants. They were covered with tiger skins and were beautiful. As they encountered each other in that battle,
wishing to kill each other and roaring like lions, a tumultuous sound arose. In that battle, the brave Srinjayas and
Kurus performed extremely terrible deeds and struck each other and it was an extraordinary sight. O king! O tormentor of enemies! We could not see the sky, the directions, or the sun, or the sub-directions. Arrows were released in every direction. There were lances with polished tips, iron spears and yellow swords. These possessed
radiance like that of blue lotuses. There were colourful armour and the brilliance of ornaments. The radiance from
these made the sky, the directions and the sub-directions blaze. O king! The field of battle was resplendent. There
were lions among rathas and tigers among men and they confronted each other in battle. O king! They blazed in
that battle, like planets in the sky.

'"While all the soldiers looked on, Bhishma, foremost among charioteers, angrily repulsed the immensely strong
Bhimasena. In that encounter, the arrows used by Bhishma were gold-tufted and sharpened on stone. They were
extremely forceful and washed in oil and they wounded Bhima. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The immensely powerful Bhimasena was enraged. He hurled an extremely powerful javelin that was like a venomous serpent. As that gold-shafted and invincible lance suddenly descended in that encounter, Bhishma sliced it down with
straight-tufted arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! After this, using a broad-headed, yellow and sharp arrow, he sliced Bhimasena's bow into two. At this, Satyaki quickly attacked Bhishma in that battle. O lord of men!
He shot many arrows at your father. Bhishma then affixed an extremely terrible and sharp arrow and brought down
Varshneya's[Satyaki is being referred to as Varshneya.] charioteer from his chariot. O king! When the charioteer of the chariot was slain, the horses fled.
They ran hither and thither, with the speed of the mind and the wind. At this, a tumultuous uproar arose from all
the soldiers. There were lamentations of woe from those who were on the side of the great-souled Pandavas. 'Run',
'grab the horses', 'advance swiftly'-such loud noises followed Yuyudhana's chariot[Yuyudhana is Satyaki's name.]. While this was going on,
Bhishma, Shantanu's son, began to kill the Pandava soldiers, like the slayer of Vritra against the asuras. When the
Panchalas and Somakas were being killed by Bhishma, the noble ones[The word used is aryas.] resolved to fight and attacked Bhishma.
With a desire to kill those in the army of your sons, the Parthas, with Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, rushed
against Shantanu's son in that encounter. O king! Your soldiers, with Bhishma and Drona at the forefront, advanced forcefully against the enemy and another battle commenced."'
