Vaishampayana said, 'When Duhshanta left, after making his promise to Shakuntala, the one with the beautiful
thighs gave birth to a son who had immense energy. She bore him for three years. He had the splendour of a blazing fire. O Janamejaya! Duhshanta's son had great beauty, generosity and all the qualities. Kanva, supreme among
holy ones, performed all the stipulated rites, including those of birth, and the wise one began to grow. The boy had
sharp and white teeth and the young one was strong enough to kill lions. He was handsome and immensely strong,
with a broad head. On his palm, he had the sign of a chakra[A wheel, the sign of a king.]. He quickly grew up, like a son of the gods. When
he was only six years old, he was so strong that he tied up lions, tigers, boars, buffaloes and elephants to trees near
Kanva's hermitage. He rode them, tamed them, played with them and chased them. The inhabitants of Kanva's
hermitage gave him a name. "Since he has subjugated everything, let him be called Sarvadamana[Sarva is everything and damana is to subjugate.]". Thus the
boy came to be known as Sarvadamana. He had great strength, valour and energy.

'On seeing the boy's superhuman exploits, the sage told Shakuntala that the time had come for him to be instated as the heir apparent[The word used is yuvaraja, which can be translated as prince or young king. However, this appellation also
signifies the person becoming an heir apparent.]. On seeing his great strength, Kanva told his disciples, "Quickly take Shakuntala and
her son away from this hermitage and to her husband. She is blessed with all the auspicious marks. It is not fit that
women should live forever with their relatives[That is, paternal relatives.]. Such acts destroy fame, character and virtue. Take her away
without delay." The greatly energetic disciples all agreed and left for Gajasahrya[Literally, the city of the elephant and another name for Hastinapura, Duhshanta's capital.] with Shakuntala and her son.
Taking her lotus-eyed son, who was like a divine child, the one with the beautiful brows left the forest where she
had first got to know Duhshanta.

'She went to the king, with her son with the brilliance of the morning sun, and entered. Having paid homage,
Shakuntala said, "O king! This is your son. Let him be instated as the heir apparent. O king! This god-like son was
begotten by you on me. O best of men! Now fulfil the promise you made to me. O immensely fortunate one! Remember the promise you made to me in Kanva's hermitage, when we united long ago." Having heard her words,
the king remembered everything. But he said, "O evil ascetic! I remember nothing. Who do you belong to? I do
not remember having had any relation with you for dharma, artha or kama. Go or stay, as you wish. Do what you
want." Being thus addressed, the ascetic with the beautiful hips was ashamed. In her grief, she lost her senses and
stood immobile like a pillar.

'Soon, her eyes turned as red as copper in anger. Her lips began to quiver. Through the sides of her eyes, she
cast glances at the king that seemed to burn him. Though driven by wrath, she calmed her demeanour and the energy accumulated through her austerities. In grief and anger, she stood for a moment, collecting her thoughts. Then
she looked straight at her husband and said, "O great king! Knowing everything very well, how can you unconcernedly say that you know nothing, lying like a common person? Your heart knows the truth or falsity of my
words. You yourself are the witness. Do what is good and do not degrade yourself. He who knows one thing in his
mind, but represents it in another way, is a thief and robs his own self. What sin is he not capable of committing?
You think that you are alone with your own self. But don't you know the ancient and omniscient one who dwells in
your heart? He knows all your acts and all your evil deeds. It is in his presence that you lie. When sinning, a man
thinks that no one sees him. But he is seen by the gods and by the being who dwells in every heart. The sun, moon,
wind, fire, sky, earth, water, his heart, Yama, day, night, the two twilights and Dharma know man's every act. If the
god in the heart, who is a witness to all acts, is pleased, Vaivasvata Yama ignores the evil a man has done. But
when the great being is not pleased, Yama punishes the sinner for his evil deeds. He who degrades his own self and
represents falsely cannot find refuge with the gods. He is not blessed by his own soul. I am a faithful wife to my
husband. Do not disrespect me because I have come on my own. I am your wife and deserve to be treated with honour. In this assembly, why do you treat me as if I am a commoner? I am certainly not crying in the wilderness.
Why do you not hear me? O Duhshanta! If you do not do what I am asking you to do, your head will today be
splintered into a hundred pieces. The wise ones of ancient times knew that the husband himself entered the womb
of his wife and emerged as a son. That is the reason a wife is known as jaya[From the word for 'being born'.]. A son born to a learned man saves
with his lineage the deceased ancestors. Since the son saves his ancestors from the hell known as put, the self-created one[Brahma.] has said that a son is known as putra. She is a true wife who looks after the house. She is a true wife
who bears children. She is a true wife whose life is devoted to her husband. She is a true wife who is faithful to her
husband. A wife is half the man. A wife is the best of friends. A wife is the source of the three objectives[Dharma, artha and kama.]. A
wife is a friend at the very end. Those who have wives can perform rites. Those who have wives can be householders. Those who have wives are happy. Those who have wives have good fortune. Sweet-spoken wives are friends
in solitude, fathers in religious acts and mothers in suffering. Even in the wilderness, a wife refreshes the wandering husband. A man who has a wife is trusted. Therefore, a wife is the best means of salvation. When a husband
goes to the land of the dead and is transiting, it is the faithful wife alone who accompanies him there, for he is always her husband, in all adversities. If the wife goes before, she stays and waits for the spirit of her husband. If the
husband dies before, the devoted wife soon follows. O king! It is for these reasons that man seeks marriage. The
husband obtains a wife, in this life and the next. The wise have said that a man is himself born as his son. Therefore, a man should regard the mother of his son as his own mother. Looking at the face of a son born from a wife, a
man sees his own face, as in a mirror, and is as delighted as a virtuous man on attaining heaven. Burnt through
mental grief or afflicted with disease, men rejoice in their wives, like perspiring ones do in water. Even in anger, a
man should not utter unpleasant words to his beloved wife, because love, joy, virtue and everything are in her. The
wife is the sacred ground in which the husband is born again. Even sages are unable to have offspring without
wives. A son embraces his father, his limbs covered with dirt. Is there greater happiness to a father than that? Why
do you frown and reject your son, who has come to you on his own and is glancing fondly at you? Even ants carry
their eggs and do not break them. You are learned in the ways of dharma. Will you not support your own son? The
touch of fragrances, women and water is not as pleasing as the embrace of one's own infant son. The Brahmana is
the best among bipeds. The cow is the best among quadrupeds. The preceptor is the best among all superiors. The
son is the best among all objects one touches. Let this handsome son touch you in embrace. There is no feeling
more pleasant in the worlds than the touch of a son. O chastiser of enemies! O lord of kings! I bore this son, the
dispeller of your grief, for three years. O descendant of the Puru lineage! When I was giving birth, a voice was
heard from the sky, 'He will perform one hundred horse sacrifices.' Men who have gone to another village lovingly take up the sons of other men on their laps and feel great happiness on smelling their heads. At the time of the
birth ceremony of a son, you know that Brahmanas utter the following mantra from the Vedas: 'You are born from
my limbs. You are born from my heart. You are me in the form of a son. May you live for a hundred autumns. My
life depends on you and my eternal lineage. Therefore, my son, live in happiness for a hundred autumns.' He has
been born from your limbs, one man from another. Look on your son as your second self, like a reflection in a clear
pond. Like the ahavaniya fire is kindled from the garhapatya fire[There are three kinds of sacrificial fires-ahavaniya, garhapatya and dakshina. The garhapatya fire burns in
the household, the ahavaniya fire is the one into which sacrificial offerings are placed and the dakshina fire is the
one that faces the south.], this one has been born from you. Though
you are one, you have been divided into two. O king! In earlier times, you were on a hunting expedition and had
been led away by a deer. I was a virgin in my father's hermitage and was approached by you. The six supreme apsaras are Urvashi, Purvachitti, Sahajanya, Menaka, Vishvachi and Ghritachi. Among them again, Menaka, the apsara born from Brahma, is the foremost. Descending from heaven to earth, she gave birth to me through her union
with Vishvamitra. The apsara Menaka gave birth to me in a plain in the Himalayas. Without any feelings, she
abandoned me there, as if I was someone else's child. Earlier, what sins did I commit in another life that I was
abandoned by my relatives in my childhood and by you now? Forsaken by you, I am ready to go back to my hermitage. But do not forsake this child who is your own son."

'Duhshanta said, "O Shakuntala! I do not know that this son born from you is mine. Women are liars. Who will
believe your words? Your mother Menaka was a courtesan. She was merciless and abandoned you on the plains of
the Himalayas, like a faded garland. Your father Vishvamitra was also merciless and was born in the Kshatriya lineage. But driven by desire, and lustful, he became a Brahmana. If Menaka is the best of the apsaras and your father
is the best of the maharshis, how can you speak like a harlot and be their daughter? Are you not ashamed to utter
these disrespectful words, especially in my presence? O wicked ascetic! Go away. Where is that best of maharshis?
Where is Menaka, the best of apsaras? And where are you, who are wretched, clad in an ascetic's garb? Your son is
gigantic. And he is strong, even though a child. How has he, in such a short span, grown up like the trunk of a shala tree? You were born in a lowly lineage and you speak like a harlot. It seems that Menaka gave birth to you from
lust alone. O ascetic! Everything that you say is unknown to me. I do not know you. Go away, as you please."'
