'Yudhishthira said, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! O immensely wise one! Tell me accurately about
the origin of anger, desire, sorrow, confusion, scepticism, lassitude, intoxication, avarice, jealousy, contempt, slander, intolerance and pity. Tell me about all these."

'Bhishma replied, "Amongst beings, these thirteen are said to be extremely strong enemies. O great
king! In this world, all of them unite and serve a man. They distract a man and distracted, he takes delight.
They jump like wolves, when they see other men approach[When other men approach, wolves jump upon a man, tear him to pieces,
and run away.]. Misery flows from these. Sin flows from
these. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Mortal men must always realize this. O supreme among men! I
will indeed tell you about the origin, status and destruction of these. Listen attentively. Anger results from
greed and is stimulated by the sins of others. O king! It remains dormant through forgiveness. A prosperous person must refrain from it[Anger.]. Desire flows from resolution and grows when one serves it. When a
wise person uses his knowledge to discern its true nature, it can no longer be seen and withers away. Scepticism is against the sacred texts and is seen to originate among those who are limited in intelligence. If
one possesses true knowledge, it withdraws. Among beings, sorrow results from affection and
separation[Separation from the object of affection.]. If one knows that this is futile, it is immediately destroyed. Lassitude results from the practice of anger and avarice. Indifference and kindness towards all beings makes it withdraw. Dispirited people serve malice and that which is injurious. O son! If virtuous people are served, these are destroyed.
There are beings who are proud of their lineage, their knowledge and their prosperity. When they discern
the reason behind this pride, it is immediately destroyed. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Envy flows
from desire and rivalry. Among those who are mortals, wisdom destroys these. O king! Slander is generated from spiteful words of misguided people, those who are not on one's side. The act of ignoring pacifies
this. There may be a powerful person who causes injury and one may be incapable of countering him.
Fierce resentment is generated. But compassion makes it withdraw. It is seen that pity[This pity is being used in a negative sense, pity towards one's own state.] always generates
pity. If one knows about being devoted to dharma, that pity is pacified. These are said to be the ways
whereby these thirteen can be conquered and pacified. All these thirteen sins were there among the sons of
Dhritarashtra. You always conquered them in your soul. That is the reason you triumphed over them[You conquered the sins. Hence, you triumphed over the sons of
Dhritarashtra.]."'