Souti said, 'Assuming the form of a golden body as bright as the rays of the sun, Garuda entered with great force,
like a river entering the ocean. He saw a wheel near the amrita, with keen edges and sharp blades, revolving continuously and murderously around it, blazing like the fire and the sun, a fearful instrument skilfully created by the
gods to slice down those who wished to steal the soma. The bird saw an entry through this. He made his body very
small and in an instant passed through the spokes in the wheel.

'Behind the wheel, he saw two large snakes, standing guard over the amrita. They blazed like flaming fire and
their tongues were like lightning. Their power was immense and their faces and their eyes were fiery. They were
terrible, angry and always mobile and their eyes had venom in them. Their eyes did not blink and displayed rage.
Anyone who was even seen by those two was instantly burnt to ashes. The one with the beautiful feathers[Suparna, another name for Garuda.] instantly flung dust into their eyes and thus making them sightless he attacked them from all directions. Vinata's son,
the traveller in the skies, attacked their bodies and at will tore them into shreds. Without any delay, he then went to
where the soma was.

'Vinata's powerful son picked up the amrita from where it was. The valorous one flew up into the sky, in the
process shattering the instrument into pieces. The bird soon emerged, grasping the amrita, but without drinking it.
He proceeded on his way, not tired at all, making the sun's radiance seem dark.

'Then Vinata's son encountered Vishnu in the sky. Narayana was pleased with him at his act of self-denial and
told the bird, "I am the god who grants boons that don't decay." The bird said, "I always wish to remain above
you." He again told Narayana, "I wish to be immortal, free from the decay of age, without the amrita." Having received these boons, Vinata's son told Vishnu, "O illustrious one! I wish to grant you a boon too." Krishna[That is, Vishnu.]
asked for the boon that the powerful one should always be his vehicle[Vahana or mount.]. The illustrious god Narayana placed the
bird on his flagstaff and said, "Thus you will always be above me." The bird agreed.

'As the bird, the enemy of the gods, flew on with the amrita, Indra powerfully struck him with his vajra. Struck
by the vajra, Garuda, supreme among those who fly, tauntingly told Indra in a pleasant voice, "I shall respect the
rishi from whose bones the vajra has been constructed. O Shatakratu! I shall respect the vajra and you too. I will
cast off one of my feathers and you will never be able to find its ends. I have not felt the slightest pain at being
struck by your vajra." On seeing that beautiful feather, all the beings were amazed and exclaimed, "Let this bird be
called Suparna[The one with beautiful feathers.]." On seeing this marvellous act, the thousand-eyed Purandara was surprised and concluded that
the bird must be a great being. He said, "O supreme among birds! I wish to know the extreme limits of your incomparable strength. I wish to be your eternal friend."'
