Vaishampayana said, 'After having established an agreement in this way, the Pandavas lived there. With the
strength of their weapons, they brought under their sovereignty many kings. Krishna followed the wishes of all the
five sons of Pritha, who were lions among men and immeasurable in their energy. She was extremely happy with
the five valourous ones as her husbands, like Sarasvati[The goddess of learning, also a river.] with her elephants[Sarasvati is often depicted with elephants anointing her.], and they were also delighted with
her. Since the great-souled Pandavas abided by dharma, all the Kurus[The Pandavas were also descended from Kuru.] increased in prosperity, were bereft of sin
and were happy.

'O, lord of the earth! O, supreme among kings! After a long time had passed, thieves robbed a brahmana's cattle. When his wealth was thus stolen, the brahmana lost his senses in anger. He went to Khandavaprastha and angrily reproved the Pandavas. "O Pandavas! Mean, cruel and mindless thieves are forcibly robbing me of my wealth
of cattle in your kingdom. Pursue them. The sacrificial offerings of a peaceful brahmana are being carried away by
crows. The inferior jackal has invaded the deserted cave of a tiger. A brahmana's riches are being taken away by
thieves. Dharma and artha[The four pursuits in life are dharma (righteous conduct), artha (riches), kama (desire) and moksha (salvation).] will be destroyed. I am crying for help. Take up your arms." As the miserable brahmana cried out to the Pandavas, Kunti's son Dhananjaya[Arjuna's name.] heard his words.

'On hearing the words, the mighty-armed one told the brahmana not to fear. But Dharmaraja Yudhishthira was
then lying with Krishna in the room where the great-souled Pandavas kept their weapons. The Pandava[Arjuna.] was unable to enter the room. But he was also unable to go away as the wailing brahmana repeatedly urged him with his
words. Kunti's son reflected in sorrow, "This ascetic brahmana's riches are being robbed. It is certainly my duty to
dry his tears. If I do not protect someone who is weeping at our door, the great adharma of negligence will taint
the king[Yudhishthira.]. If I fail to protect, the adharma of our failing to protect will certainly be established in all the worlds.
But it is also certain that if I enter the room without the permission of King Ajatashatru[One without enemies, Yudhishthira's name.], I will do him a great injury and I must be banished to the forest. There will either be great adharma or death in the forest. But dharma
must be upheld, even if there is destruction of the body." O lord of the earth! Having thus resolved, Kunti's son
Dhananjaya entered the room and took the king's permission.

'Grasping his bow, he happily told the brahmana, "O brahmana! Let us go quickly, so that those mean thieves do
not go too far away and I can return your riches to you, from the hands of the robbers." The mighty-armed one,
with bow and armour and riding a chariot with flags, pierced the thieves with arrows and recovered the riches.
Thus helping the brahmana and returning his riches of cattle to him, the Pandava obtained fame. The valorous
Savyasachi[Arjuna's name. Savyasachi means someone who is left-handed.], scorcher of enemies, returned to the city. He paid his homage to all his superiors and was in turn
praised by them. He then told Dharmaraja, "O, lord! Grant me permission to observe my vow. On seeing you, I
have violated the rule and I must go and dwell in the forest, because that is the rule we made." On suddenly hearing these unpleasant words, Dharmaraja was afflicted by grief and in a sorrowful voice, asked, "Why?" Yudhisthira
told his brother Gudakesha[Arjuna's name.], a brother who never suffered from decay, "O unblemised one! If I am one with authority, listen to my words. O brave one! I know all the reasons why you entered the room and caused me displeasure and I have not felt any injury. There is no sin if a younger brother enters where the elder brother is lying with
his wife. However, if an elder brother enters a room where the younger brother is lying with his wife, that is improper. O mighty-armed one! Refrain, listen to my words and do as I say. Your dharma has not suffered and no injury has been done to me." Arjuna replied, "I have also heard from you that dharma must not be observed through
pretences. I will not waver from the truth. The truth is my weapon." With the king's permission, he was consecrated in the rites of brahmacharya and went away to live in the forest for twelve years.'
