The brahmana said, 'O beautiful one! In this connection, there is an ancient history about the ordinances for
the seven officiating priests. The nose, the eyes, the tongue, the skin, the ears as the fifth, the mind and intelligence-these are the seven separate officiating priests. These exist in the subtle intervening space and do not
perceive each other. O beautiful one! Given this, know the natures of the seven officiating priests.'

'"The brahmani asked, 'When they exist in the subtle intervening space, why can't they see each other? O illustrious one! O lord! What is their nature? Tell me.'

'"The brahmana replied, 'Not knowing about the qualities is ignorance. Knowing about the qualities is said to be
knowledge. They can never know each other's qualities. The tongue, the eyes, the ears, touch and intelligence do
not experience smell. It is the nose alone that can experience it. The nose, the eyes, the ears, the skin and intelligence do not experience taste. It is the tongue alone that can experience it. The nose, the tongue, the ears, the skin
and intelligence cannot experience form. It is the eyes alone that can experience it. The nose, the tongue, the eyes,
the ears, the intelligence and the mind cannot experience touch. It is the skin alone that can experience it. The
nose, the tongue, the ears, the touch and intelligence cannot experience sound. It is the ears alone that can experience it. The nose, the tongue, the eyes, the skin and the ears cannot experience doubt. It is the mind alone that can
experience it. The nose, the tongue, the eyes, the skin, the ears and the mind cannot experience devotion. It is intelligence alone that can experience it. O beautiful one! In this connection, there is an ancient history about a conversation between the senses and the mind.

'"'The mind said, "Without me, the nose cannot smell and the tongue does not experience taste. The eyes cannot
grasp  form  and  the  skin  doesn't  experience  touch.  Without  me,  the  ears  can  never  comprehend  sound.  I  am
supreme and eternal among all the elements. Without me, the senses are never radiant. They are like an empty
house where the flames of the sacrificial fire have been doused. Without me, all the creatures cannot understand the
purport of the qualities. Even when they try, the senses are like fuelwood that is wet and is not dry."

'"'The senses responded, "What you think is false. Without us, or the objects of the senses, you cannot enjoy
any objects of pleasure. You think that when we are destroyed, you will be content, able to sustain life, able to enjoy objects of pleasure and able to taste. You think that when we are destroyed, your resolution alone will enable
you to remain in those objects and enjoy the objects of pleasure, as they should be enjoyed. You think that you will
be  successful  in  enjoying  the  objects  of  the  senses  as  you  always  have,  perhaps  form  through  the  nose,  taste
through the eyes, smell through the ears, faith through the tongue, sound through the skin and touch through intelligence. Those who are strong do not follow any rules. Rules are for the weak. Do not experience what you have
enjoyed earlier. Experience what you have not enjoyed earlier[Since you are strong, break the rules and experience touch through intelligence and so on.]. To understand the sacred texts, a disciple goes to
an instructor. Even after having obtained the sacred texts, he serves the teacher to understand the meaning of the
sacred texts. You think that we haven't shown you what exists in the objects, whether it is in sleep or when in a
state of waking, whether it is in the past or in the future. There are creatures who are limited in intelligence and
who, therefore, seem to have lost their minds. However, it is seen that for sustaining their lives, it is we who discharge their tasks for them. There are many kinds of resolutions that are formed in dreams. However, when afflicted by hunger, one runs after material objects[Resolutions and dreams fail to satisfy the craving. That requires the senses.]. If one avoids material objects and seeks to enjoy resolutions alone,
that is like entering a house without any doors. In that case, one always obtains the peace that comes from the extinguishment of life, like a blazing fire when all the wood has been exhausted. We desire to be attached to our own
qualities. We do not desire to be attached to the qualities of another sense. But nothing is experienced without us.
Without us, you will not experience any delight."'"'
