Vaishampayana said, 'Having spoken these words, the foremost of warriors, the one who delighted all
the Yadavas, mounted his giant chariot, which was stocked with every kind of weapon. It was yoked to
two excellent horses from Kamboja and they had golden harnesses. The shaft of that excellent chariot
had the complexion of the rising sun. Sainya was yoked on the right and Sugriva was yoked on the left.
Meghapushpa and Balahaka were yoked on the flanks[These are the names of Krishna's horses. Sainya and Sugriva, the two
main horses, were on the inside. Meghapushpa and Balahaka were on the
extreme left and extreme right.]. This divine chariot had been constructed by
Vishvakarma[The architect of the gods.] and was decorated with many jewels. A flagpole with powers of maya was raised up
and Vinata's son[Garuda. Garuda sits astride Vishnu's standard.] was resplendently stationed there, like rays radiating from the solar disc. The enemy
of the snakes was seen on that flag, like truth personified. Hrishikesha, with a standard that was the best
among those of all archers, ascended the chariot and so did Arjuna, the performer of truthful deeds, and
the Kuru king, Yudhishthira[Arjuna and Yudhishthira ascended the same chariot.]. On either side of Dasharha, those great-souled ones dazzled. The wielder of the Sharnga[The name of Vishnu/Krishna's bow, literally meaning a bow made out of
horn.] bow was like Vasava on that chariot, with the two Ashvins on either side. Having
ascended the chariot that was honoured by the worlds, Dasharha goaded those excellent horses to pick
up speed. Urged by the bull among the Yadus, and with the two Pandaveyas on it, those horses swiftly
bore that excellent chariot along. The horses of the one who wielded the Sharnga bow were extremely
fast. As they sped, there was a great sound, like that of birds descending in the sky.

'Bhimasena, the great archer, was travelling fast. O bull among the Bharata lineage! However, in a
short while, those tigers among men caught up with him. Kounteya[Bhima.] blazed in anger and he rushed towards the enemy. Though those maharathas caught up with him, they could not restrain him. While
those handsome and firm archers looked on, using his extremely fast and tawny steeds, he headed towards the banks of the Bhagirathi[Ganga.]. He had heard that Drona's great-souled son, the slayer of his sons,
would be there. He saw the cheerful, illustrious and great-souled Krishna Dvaipayana Vyasa there,
seated with rishis. He also saw Drona's son seated near them, with dust covering the tips of his hair.
The perpetrator of evil deeds was covered in clarified butter and was dressed in a garment made of
kusha grass. Kounteya grasped his bow and an arrow and rushed towards him. The mighty-armed Bhimasena exclaimed, "Wait. Wait." Drona's son saw the one with the terrible bow dashing towards him,
with a bow and an arrow. He saw his two brothers and Janardana stationed behind him. He was distressed and thought that he had met his end. However, since his soul was never distressed, he thought
of the divine and supreme weapon. Drona's son grasped a reed in his left hand and invoked that celestial weapon on it[Divine weapons could be invoked on any object with the use of mantras.]. In the presence of those brave ones, who also possessed divine weapons, the intolerant one released it, uttering the terrible words, "To bring an end to the Pandavas". O tiger among
kings! For the sake of confounding all the worlds, Drona's powerful son spoke these words and released that weapon. A fire was generated in that reed and it seemed to consume the three worlds, like
Yama at the end of time.'
