Souti said, 'As soon as the tree's branch was touched by the immensely powerful Garuda with his feet, it snapped.
He[Garuda.] held onto it as it was about to fall. As he wonderingly gazed at that large branch that had been broken, he
saw the valakhilyas[Rishis who number 60,000 and were generated from the creator's body. They are the size of a thumb and precede the sun's chariot.] hanging from it, their heads facing downwards. The lord of birds was scared of killing them
and carefully held the branch in his beak and ascended again. Shaking the mountains, the bird slowly circled the
sky and while doing this, passed many countries, with the elephant and the tortoise. In his compassion for the
valakhilyas, he could find no place to alight on. At last he went to the best of mountains, the indestructible
Gandhamadana.

'There he saw his father Kashyapa engaged in austerities. His father also saw the bird of divine form, with energy, valour and strength, swift as the wind and the mind, large as a mountain, like the raised staff of a Brahmana,
inconceivable, incapable of description, terrible to all beings, the possessor of the valour of delusion[Maya.], as radiant
as Agni himself, incapable of being vanquished by devas, danavas and rakshasas, capable of splintering mountain
peaks, drying up the water of rivers and whirling the worlds, as terrible as Yama himself.

'On seeing him approach and knowing his wishes, the illustrious Kashyapa told him, "O son! Do not commit a
rash act, because that can bring sudden pain. The valakhilyas sustain themselves on the sun's rays. If angry, they
can scorch you." Therefore, for his son's sake, Kashyapa propitiated the valakhilyas, accomplished performers of
austerities. He explained the reason and said, "O performers of austerities! Garuda's endeavour is for the welfare
of all creatures. He is trying to perform a great act. Therefore, please give him permission." Having been thus addressed by the illustrious Kashyapa, the valakhilyas gave up the branch and went off to the sacred Himalayas, in
search of more austerities.

'When they went away, Vinata's son[Garuda.], the branch still extending his beak, asked his father Kashyapa, "O lord!
Where will I discard this branch of the tree? O lord! Tell me of a land where there are no Brahmanas." Kashyapa
told him of a mountain that was uninhabited by men, inaccessible and incapable of being penetrated by others even
in their thoughts, covered with snow and full of caves. The great bird, Tarkshya[Garuda's epithet.], carried the branch, the elephant
and the tortoise and swiftly, with the power of his mind, entered the mountain's wide base. A thin leather strap cut
out of a hundred skins wouldn't have been long enough to encircle that giant branch the giant bird carried in his
flight. Garuda, the lord of all the birds, flew over 100,000 yojanas in the briefest possible time. As if in a moment,
he reached the mountain his father had described and released the branch, which fell down with a great roar. On
being struck by the wind unleashed by the bird's wings, the king of mountains trembled. As the trees collapsed,
they showered down flowers. The peaks of that great mountain, adorned with gold and gems, were shattered on all
sides. The falling branch struck many trees with golden flowers and they looked like clouds charged with lightning. Bright as gold, those falling trees mixed with the mountain's minerals and glowed, as if reflecting the red
rays of the sun. The best of birds sat down on the peak of the mountain and ate both the elephant and the tortoise.

'With the speed of the mind, he[Garuda.] then arose from the mountain peak. Ominous and fearful portents appeared
before the gods. Indra's vajra blazed forth in great pain. Meteors that trailed flames and smoke were loosened from
the sky and descended. The weapons of vasus, rudras, adityas, saddhyas, maruts and other classes of gods began to
fight among themselves. Such things had never occurred earlier, not even during the war between devas and asuras. Meteors showered down in all directions, tumultuous winds thundered and the cloudless sky made a tremendous roar. Even the God of the gods rained showers of blood. Garlands on the necks of the gods faded and the
sky's energy withered. Fearful masses of clouds rained down thick showers of blood. The swirling dust darkened
the splendour of crowns worn by the gods. Then Shatakratu[The performer of a hundred sacrifices, Indra.], with the other gods, was greatly alarmed and frightened. Bewildered at these terrible portents, he asked Brihaspati[Great sage and preceptor of the gods.], "O illustrious one! Why have these terrible portents suddenly arisen? I do not see any enemy who can withstand us in battle." Brihaspati replied, "O Shatakratu!
O king of the gods! It is because of your own fault and negligence. Through the power of their austerities, the
valakhilyas have created a wonderful being-the bird who is the son of the sage Kashyapa and Vinata. He is powerful and capable of assuming any form at will and is coming to take away the soma. The bird is supreme among
the strong and is capable of taking away the soma. He is capable of achieving the impossible." Hearing this,
Shakra[Indra.] spoke to the guardians of the amrita, "An immensely valorous and strong bird has decided to take the
soma away. I am warning you in advance, so that he doesn't succeed in taking it away by force. Brihaspati has told
me that his strength is unparalleled." When they heard these words, the gods were amazed.

'Carefully, they took up positions around the amrita. Shatakratu Indra also stood there, vajra in hand. They wisely clad themselves in wonderful golden armour, expensively adorned with lapis lazuli. They brandished diverse
terrible weapons in their thousands, emitting flames, sparks and smoke, the edges and points sharpened-chakras,
iron clubs, tridents, battle axes, many sharp spears, spotless swords, maces of terrible forms, weapons most appropriate for their respective bodies. Armed with these radiant weapons and decorated with divine ornaments, the
army of gods stood there, their fears pacified. With unparalleled strength, energy and radiance, capable of razing
the cities of the asuras and displaying themselves in forms as radiant as the blazing fire, the gods stood there, their
minds set upon protecting the amrita. Thus, that supreme battlefield, with the gods and with hundreds and thousands of clubs, looked like another firmament, lit up by the radiant rays of the sun.'
