'Yudhishthira asked, "Why did that great-souled one give up a measure of rice? O illustrious one! Whom did he
give it to and in what fashion? Please tell me. I think that a person who follows dharma has had a successful birth
if he has been able to please the illustrious one[It is not obvious who is meant.] who has made his dharma manifest."

'Vyasa said, "O king! Mudgala used to live in Kurukshetra. He was good in his conduct and had dharma in his
soul. He was rigid in his vows. He was truthful and without envy. He survived by gathering grains of rice[Collecting grains of rice that would be left around markets.].
Though he drew his sustenance like a pigeon, he served the guests and performed rites. The great ascetic observed
the sacrifice known as ishtikrita[Literally, a sacrifice that satisfies one's wishes.]. Together with his wife and son, the sage ate for a fortnight. For the next fortnight, he lived like a pigeon, collecting one drona of vrihi. Without any distortions, he observed the new moon and
full moon sacrifices. He sustained his body on the food left after gods and guests had eaten. O great king! Indra
himself, the lord of the three worlds, would arrive there with the other gods on auspicious lunar days, to partake of
their shares. At such auspicious times, the one who lived like a sage, happily entertained the guests with food.
When that great-souled one gave rice from his measure without any envy, whatever remained always increased
when another guest arrived. Because of the pure way the sage gave away rice, it increased so that hundreds of
learned brahmanas enjoyed it.

'"O king! On hearing about the virtuous Mudgala, rigid in his vows, Durvasa, clad in nothing but air, went to
him. O Pandava! The sage was in the form of a dishevelled lunatic. His head was shaven and he spoke harsh
words. Having arrived, the supreme of sages spoke to the brahmana. 'O supreme among brahmanas! Know that I
have come here desirous of food.' Mudgala told the sage that he was welcome. He offered him water to wash the
feet and the mouth and devoted to his guests, gave the hungry one the supreme food he had obtained with great
difficulties, though he seemed to be mad. Rigid in his vows, he was devoted. But the mad one was hungry and ate
up all the tasty food that had been offered and Mudgala gave him more. When he had eaten all the food, he[Durvasa.]
smeared his body with the left overs and went away, the way he had come[Because there were no leftovers, the food could not increase.]. When the learned one[Mudgala.] observed the
next auspicious lunar day, he[Durvasa.] came again and ate up all the rice that the one who lived on collections possessed.
Thereupon, the sage[Mudgala.] had to go without food and had to go out again to gather. But that hunger was incapable of
upsetting Mudgala's temperament. There was no anger, jealousy, disrespect or agitation in the mind of that
supreme of brahmanas, or in those of his sons and wife. In this way, firm in his resolution, Durvasa, supreme
among sages, arrived at the right time on six occasions, to the one whose dharma was collection. But the sage
could not see any distortions in his mind. He saw that the mind of that pure-hearted one was always pure and
clean. Extremely delighted, the sage spoke to Mudgala. 'In this world, there is no one who is your equal, with your
generosity and lack of envy. Hunger drives away all sense of dharma and removes self-possession. The tongue follows the senses and is attracted towards the succulent. Life is sustained through food. The mind is fickle and it is
difficult to control it. The control of the mind and the senses is certain asceticism. It is difficult to give up with a
pure mind that which has been earned through labour and misery. O virtuous one! But all this has been exactly
achieved by you. We are delighted and favoured to have met you. Control of the senses, fortitude, generosity, selfcontrol, serenity, compassion, truthfulness and dharma are all established in you. You have conquered the worlds
through your deeds. You have obtained the supreme objective. Even the residents of heaven proclaim your great
deeds of giving. O one who is extremely good in his vows! You will go to heaven in your own body.' While the
sage Durvasa was still speaking in this way, a messenger of the gods arrived before Mudgala in a celestial chariot
that was yoked to swans and cranes and had networks of bells. It was coloured, divinely scented and could travel
wherever it wished. He[The messenger of the gods.] told the brahmana rishi, 'O sage! Ascend this chariot. Through your deeds, you have obtained the supreme objective.' The rishi told the messenger of the gods, 'O messenger of the gods! I wish that you
should describe to me the qualities of those who reside in heaven. What are the attributes of those who live there?
What are their austerities and their resolutions? What is the divine happiness in heaven and what are its shortcomings? Learned ones, who know about family customs, say that seven steps together is all that is required for friendship with the righteous[Since Mudgala has walked seven steps with the messenger of the gods, he can presume the messenger to be a
friend.]. O illustrious one! On the basis of that friendship, I am now asking you. Without any
hesitation, tell me the facts and what is prescribed. On hearing your words, I will act in accordance with them.'"'
