'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! As you have described them, I have heard about the many wonderful duels that
took place between those on the side of the sons of Pandu and those on my side. O Sanjaya! But you have never
spoken about those on my side being happy. You have always described the sons of Pandu as happy and as those
who are never routed. O suta! You have spoken about those on my side being distressed and deprived of energy in
the battle. There is no doubt that this is because of destiny."

'Sanjaya replied, "O bull among men! Those on your side are striving to do battle, to the best of their capacity
and the best of their enterprise. They are displaying supreme manliness, to the best of their capability. The water of
Ganga, the river of the gods, is sweet. But when it merges into the great ocean, it attains the quality of salinity. O
king! The manliness of the great-souled ones on your side is like that. When they confront the brave sons of Pandu
in battle, they obtain no success. They are trying to the best of their strength and are performing extremely difficult
tasks. O foremost among the Kurus! You should not censure them because they have merged with the Kouravas. O
lord of the earth! This great and terrible destruction of the earth, and the extension of Yama's kingdom, has come
about because of your crimes and those of your sons. O king! Since it is because of your own sins, you should not
grieve over this. The lords of the earth desire the worlds that can be obtained by performing good deeds in battle.
Striving for heaven, they are fighting and penetrating the army formations. O great king! On the forenoon of that
day, there was a great destruction of people, like that in the battle between the gods and the asuras. Listen with single-minded attention.

'"The two great-souled and great archers from Avanti, immensely strong, saw Iravat in that battle and encountered him with ferocity. The battle that took place between them was tumultuous and made the body hair stand up.
Iravat was extremely enraged. He quickly pierced those brothers, who were like gods, with sharp and straight-tufted arrows. In that encounter, those wonderful warriors pierced him back. O king! They fought on and there was
nothing to differentiate the two parties. They sought to kill the enemy and neutralized each other's endeavours. O
king! Iravat used four arrows to despatch his four horses to Yama's abode[Succeeding sentences show that this means Anuvinda's horses.]. O venerable one! With two extremely sharp and broad-headed arrows, he sliced off his bow and standard. O king! In that encounter, this was extraordinary. At this, Anuvinda discarded his chariot and climbed onto Vinda's chariot. He grasped a supreme and
new bow that was capable of bearing a great burden. In that battle, those two brave ones from Avanti, supreme
among rathas, were stationed on the same chariot. They swiftly showered arrows on the great-souled Iravat. They
released extremely swift arrows, decorated with gold. They covered the sky and reached the path of the sun. Iravat
became extremely angry in that battle and showered down arrows on those maharatha brothers. He brought down
their charioteer. Having lost his life, the charioteer fell down on the ground. The horses were no longer controlled
and dragged the chariot off in various directions. O great king! The son of the naga king's daughter triumphed in
this way. He quickly displayed his manliness and began to slaughter your soldiers. Thus killed in battle, the great
army of the sons of Dhritarashtra reeled around in many directions, like a man who has drunk poison.

'"Hidimba's son, Indra among the rakshasas, advanced against Bhagadatta. The immensely strong one was on a
chariot that had the complexion of the sun and possessed a standard. The king of Pragjyotisha was seated on a king
of elephants, like the wielder of the vajra in ancient times, in the tarakamaya battle[Famous battle that took place between the gods and the demons. This is sometimes described to have been over
Tara (Brihaspati's wife) and sometimes described to have been over Taraka (a demon).]. The gods, together with
the gandharvas, and the rishis assembled and were unable to differentiate between Hidimba's son and Bhagadatta.
Just as Shakra, the lord of the gods, had driven the danavas away with weapons, in that encounter, the king[Bhagadatta.]
drove the Pandavas away in all directions. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The Pandavas were driven away in
all the directions and within their own ranks, could not find a single one who could protect them. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! But we saw Bhimasena's son stationed on his chariot there, though the other maharathas had
fled with dispirited hearts. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When the soldiers of the Pandus returned again, in
that encounter, your soldiers let out a terrible roar. O king! In that great battle, Ghatotkacha enveloped Bhagadatta
with arrows, like clouds raining down on Mount Meru. The king repulsed the arrows released from the rakshasa's
bow and in that battle, quickly pierced Bhimasena's son in all his inner organs. He oppressed him with many
straight-tufted arrows. But the Indra among rakshasas was not distressed and was like an immobile mountain. At
this, Pragjyotisha became angry. In that encounter, he hurled fourteen javelins. However, the rakshasa sliced them
down. Having sliced the javelins down with his sharp arrows, the mighty-armed one pierced Bhagadatta with seventy gold-tufted arrows. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! But Pragjyotisha only laughed. In that battle, he used arrows to bring down his four horses. Though the horses were slain, the powerful Indra among rakshasas remained stationed on his chariot. He powerfully hurled a javelin towards Pragjyotisha's elephant. This possessed a golden shaft and was extremely swift. As it suddenly descended, the king cut it down into three and shattered, it fell down on the ground. On seeing that the javelin had been destroyed, Hidimba's son fled and left the
field of battle, like in ancient times, Namuchi, supreme among daityas, had fled from Indra[Namuchi was a demon killed by Indra.]. The brave and
valiant one[Bhagadatta.], famous for his manliness, won that battle. O king! He was invincible in battle, like Yama and
Varuna. O king! In that battle, he began to crush the Pandava soldiers with his elephant, like a wild elephant destroying the stalks of lotuses.

'"In that battle, the lord of Madra fought with the twins, the sons of his sister. He enveloped the sons of Pandu
with a cloud of arrows. Finding himself engaged in battle with his maternal uncle, Sahadeva repulsed him with a
shower of arrows, like clouds shrouding the sun. Covered by that shower of arrows, he seemed to be happy[He was proud, because they were his sister's sons.]. On
account of their mother, the twins were also extremely delighted. O king! In that battle, smilingly, the
maharatha[Shalya.] used four supreme arrows to despatch Nakula's four horses to Yama's abode. With the horses slain,
the maharatha[Nakula.] quickly descended from his chariot and ascended onto his illustrious brother's vehicle. In that
battle, the brave ones stretched their bows while stationed on the same chariot. In a short while, they angrily covered the chariot of the king of Madra with arrows. He was shrouded with many straight-tufted arrows released by
his sister's sons. But the tiger among men did not waver and was like a mountain. As if laughing, he destroyed that
shower of arrows. Sahadeva became angry. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The valiant one picked up an arrow and released it in the direction of the king of Madra. That arrow released by him was as forceful as Garuda. It
pierced the king of Madra and fell down on the ground. Having been severely wounded and pained, the maharatha
sat down on the floor of his chariot. O great king! He lost his consciousness. On seeing that he had fallen down and
had lost his senses in that encounter and had been oppressed by the twins, his charioteer drove his chariot away.
On seeing that the chariot of the lord of Madra had retreated, the sons of Dhritarashtra lost heart. All of them were
distressed and thought that he was no longer alive. Having vanquished their maternal uncle in battle, Madri's maharatha sons were delighted. They blew their conch shells and roared like lions. O lord of the earth! O king! Filled
with joy, they attacked your soldiers, like the immortal Indra and Upendra[Indra's younger brother, Vishnu.] attacking the army of the daityas."'
