'Sanjaya said, "As those kings clashed, that field of battle became cruel. It was as if an enraged Rudra was killing
animals. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Arms, heads, bows, shattered bows and whisks were strewn around
in the battle. There were shattered wheels and chariots. Giant standards were brought down. Brave riders were
killed and scattered around on the ground. O supreme among the Kuru lineage! Warriors were mangled by descending arrows. In that great battle, they were seen to make many different kinds of attempts to move. The terrible battle that raged was like that between the gods and the asuras. Dharmaraja Yudhishthira spoke to the kshatriyas there. 'O maharathas! Control yourselves and attack the one who was born in a pot. The brave Parshata has
engaged with Bharadvaja's son. To the best of his strength, he is trying to kill Bharadvaja's son. From what we can
see of his form in the great battle today, in this encounter, the angry Parshata will bring down Drona. Unite and
protect him from the one who was born in a pot.' Thus commanded by Yudhishthira, the maharatha Srinjayas
wished to kill Bharadvaja's son and attacked in unison. On seeing that all of them were descending, the maharatha
who was Bharadvaja's son powerfully attacked them, knowing that he was mortal. As he advanced, unwavering in
his aim, the earth trembled. Turbulent winds began to blow, inspiring fear in the soldiers. Giant meteors seemed to
issue from the sun and fell down. They were blazing in their heat and seemed to indicate great fear. O venerable
one! The weapons of Bharadvaja's son blazed. Chariots rattled loudly. Horses shed tears. The maharatha who was
Bharadvaja's son seemed to have been robbed of his energy. The rishis, knowledgeable about the brahman, had
spoken to him about ascending to heaven. He decided to give up his life by fighting a fair battle. Drupada's soldiers surrounded him from all four directions. But Drona roamed around in that battle, consuming the kshatriyas.
The scorcher of enemies killed twenty thousand kshatriyas. With his sharp, pointed and fierce arrows, he killed another one hundred thousand. He was stationed in that battle, like a fire without smoke. To destroy the kshatriyas, he
based himself on his brahmana qualities.

'"Bhima saw that Panchala was without a chariot. He was without his weapons and powerless. The great-souled
one was distressed. Therefore, the scorcher of enemies swiftly advanced and took Panchala up on his own chariot.
Glancing towards Drona, he said, 'With your exception, there is no other man who can venture to fight with the
preceptor. Kill him quickly. The burden of his death has been placed on you.' Thus addressed, the mighty-armed
one swiftly picked up a new, firm and supreme weapon[That is, a bow.] that was capable of bearing all loads. In that encounter,
he angrily shot arrows towards the irresistible Drona. Wishing to counter the preceptor, he enveloped him with a
shower of arrows. Those angry and foremost ones, ornaments of a battle, countered each other. They released brahmastras and many other divine weapons. O great king! Parshata covered Drona with great weapons in that battle
and destroyed all the weapons of Bharadvaja's son. The undecaying one began to kill the Vasatis, Shibis, Bahlikas
and Kouravas, who were protecting Drona in the battle. O king! At that time, Dhrishtadyumna covered all the directions with his nets of arrows. He was as resplendent as the sun in the sky, with all its rays. Drona severed his
bow and pierced him with arrows sharpened on stone. Pierced severely in his inner organs, he felt supreme pain.

'"O Indra among kings! In great anger, Bhima grasped Drona's chariot and slowly spoke these words to him.
'There are those who are brahmanas only in name[The word used is brahmabandhava, meaning someone who is only nominally a brahmana.]. They are not satisfied with their own indicated duties. They
are skilled. But had they not fought, this destruction of kshatriyas would not have occurred. It is known that nonviolence towards all beings is supreme dharma. Brahmanas are the source of this. You are supreme among all those
who know about the brahman. However, you have killed large numbers of shvapakas[Shvapaka means dog-eater or someone who cooks food for dogs. This is usually equated with chandala or
outcaste.], mlecchas and many others. O brahmana! You are ignorant and stupid. You have done this for your son and your wife and because you desire riches. For the sake of a single person, you have killed many. Though you know about dharma, you have done
this for your son. They have been engaged in their own indicated duties. But you have acted against your own indicated duties. Why are you not ashamed? He[Ashvatthama.] has been brought down and is lying down, behind your back, and
you do not know. Dharmaraja told you about this and you should not doubt his words.' Having been thus addressed by Bhimasena, Drona cast aside his bow. Wishing to cast aside all his weapons, the one with dharma in his
soul loudly said, 'O Karna! O Karna! O great archer! O Kripa! O Duryodhana! Make careful efforts in this battle. I
am saying this repeatedly. May you be safe from the Pandavas. I am going to cast aside my weapons.' O great
king! Having said this, he loudly began to call out to Drona's son. In that battle, he abandoned his weapons and
sank down on the floor of his chariot. He gave assurance to all beings and resorted to yoga.

'"On detecting that opportunity, Dhrishtadyumna arose. He leapt down from his chariot, grasped a sword and
violently attacked Drona. A great lamentation arose among all beings, humans and inferior species, when they saw
that Drona had come under Dhrishtadyumna's control. They loudly lamented and also uttered words of shame.
Having abandoned his weapons, Drona was established in supreme tranquility. Having spoken those words, the
immensely ascetic one resorted to yoga and was a mass of brightness. The preceptor ascended to heaven, which is
so difficult for even virtuous ones to attain. As he ascended, it seemed to us that there were two suns in the sky.
The entire sky seemed to be full of one mass of brightness and it seemed to be night when Bharadvaja's son disappeared. In an instant, that mass of energy vanished. Confused sounds of delight were heard from the residents of
heaven. Drona ascended to Brahma's world and Dhrishtadyumna was confused[Because he did not know what had happened.]. There were only five of us,
born in the wombs of humans, who saw the great-souled one, united with yoga, attain that supreme objective. They
were I, Partha Dhananjaya, the brahmana Kripa Sharadvata, Varshneya Vasudeva and Dharmaraja Pandava. O
great king! None of the others could see Bharadvaja's intelligent son. They did not know that the great one had departed, united with yoga. All the other men did not know that he had attained the supreme objective. None of them
saw that he had left, in the company of the bulls among the rishis. The preceptor, the scorcher of enemies, resorted
to yoga and went to Brahma's world.

'"His limbs were mangled with hundreds of arrows and he had cast aside his weapons. All the beings were
supremely pained and censured Parshata. Though they spoke to him in this way, he grasped the body, which was
bereft of life, by the hair and dragged it. With the sword, he severed the head from the body. Since Bharadvaja's
son had been brought down, he was filled with great delight. In that battle, he roared like a lion and whirled his
sword. His[Drona's.] grey hair hung down, up to his ears. He was dark. He was eighty-five years in age. But he had
roamed around on the field of battle like one who was sixteen years old. The mighty-armed Dhananjaya, Kunti's
son, said, 'O Drupada's son! Let the preceptor remain alive. Do not kill him. He should not be killed[This was said before Dhrishtadyumna severed Drona's head.].' The soldiers had also said that he should not be killed. Arjuna, overcome with compassion, had said this repeatedly. Arjuna was overcome with compassion and so were all the kings. But disregarding them, Dhrishtadyumna killed
Drona, bull among men, on the floor of his chariot. Covered with blood, that scorcher of enemies then jumped
down from the chariot. His limbs were red, he was as difficult to look at as the sun, and the soldiers and others saw
that he had been killed in the battle[The limbs being red might also be a description of Dhrishtadyumna, rather than of Drona.]. O king! Before those on your side, Dhrishtadyumna, the great archer, flung
down Bharadvaja's son's large head. O king! On seeing the head of Bharadvaja's son, those on your side lost all
enterprise. Making up their minds to run away, they fled in all the directions. Drona followed the path of the stars
and ascended to heaven. O king! I witnessed the nature of Drona's death, because of the favours of the rishi
Krishna, Satyavati's son[Satyavati's son is Krishna Dvaipayana Vedavyasa, who gave Sanjaya the boon of divine sight. Because of this
divine sight, Sanjaya could see much more than what was evident to the others about the truth of Drona's death
and about his ascent to heaven.]. He ascended like a flaming and smokeless meteor. I saw the immensely radiant one
ascend to heaven.

'"When Drona was killed, the Kurus, the Pandavas and the Srinjayas were distressed. They ran away at great
speed and the soldiers were dispersed. In that battle, many horses were killed with sharp arrows. When Drona was
killed, those on your side lost their spirits. They were defeated and suffered from great fear about what would happen next. They lost control over their selves and thought that they had lost both[This is a reference to the Kourava soldiers. The sense is that they had lost both this world and the next. They
lost this world because they were defeated. They lost the next world because they fled.]. The kings searched for the
severed body of Bharadvaja's son. O king! But because the field was covered with headless torsos, they could not
find it. Having obtained victory, the Pandavas thought about the great fame that would follow. They made loud
sounds with their arrows and roared like lions. O king! In the midst of the soldiers, Bhimasena and Parshata
Dhrishtadyumna were seen to embrace each other. Bhima spoke to Parshata, the scorcher of enemies. 'O Parshata!
I will embrace you again, as the victorious one, when the wicked son of a suta and Dhritarashtra's evil son have
been killed in the battle.' Having said this, Bhima was filled with great joy. Pandava made the earth tremble with
the slapping of his arms. Terrified by that sound, those on your side fled from the battle. They abandoned the dharma of kshatriyas and devoted themselves to running away. O lord of the earth! Having obtained victory, the Pandavas were delighted. Because their enemies were destroyed in the battle, they were overjoyed. O king! When
Drona was killed, the Kurus were afflicted with arrows. With their leader slain, they were shattered. They were
overcome with supreme sorrow. They lost their senses and lost their enterprise. With their energy destroyed, they
were full of lassitude.

'"They lamented loudly and surrounded your son. They were covered with dust. They trembled and glanced in
the ten directions. Their voices were choked with tears, like the daityas after Hiranyaksha's city was destroyed[Hiranyaksha was an asura who was killed by Vishnu in his varaha (boar) incarnation.].
They surrounded the king, like small animals that were terrified. Your son was unable to remain amidst them and
moved away. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Your warriors were overcome by hunger and thirst and were
exhausted. They were severely scorched by the sun and were cheerless in their hearts. They were enraged on seeing the fall of Bharadvaja's son, which was like the sun falling down or the ocean drying up, or Meru moving or
Vasava being defeated. O king! The Kouravas were frightened and began to run away. On seeing that the one on
the golden chariot had been killed, Shakuni, the king of Gandhara, fled with the other frightened rathas, but faster
than the others. The son of a suta also fled with his large army and the army ran away with great force, with its
standards. Shalya, the lord of Madra, glanced here and there and fled out of fear, with an army that had chariots,
elephants and horses stationed in front. While many of the foremost ones had been slain, Sharadvata fled with the
many elephants and foot soldiers that remained, saying that this was a great calamity. O king! Kritavarma fled on
swift horses, surrounded by the remnants from the divisions of the Bhojas, the Kalingas, the Arattas and the
Bahlikas. O king! On seeing that Drona had been brought down, Uluka was terrified and fled with large numbers
of frightened infantry. Duhshasana was handsome and young. He possessed valour and all the good signs. However, he was also extremely anxious and fled, surrounded by elephants. O great king! Maharatha Duryodhana fled,
surrounded by elephants, horses, chariots and infantry. The remnants of the army were routed and ran away, astride
elephants, chariots and dark horses. The men lost their enterprise and their energy and thought that the army had
been destroyed. O lord! Abandoning their armour, those on your side ran away. O bull among the Bharata lineage!
The soldiers loudly called out to each other, 'Stay. Remain.' But they themselves did not remain there. They abandoned their chariots and their ornamented charioteers. Other warriors climbed onto their horses, or swiftly fled on
foot. The soldiers were frightened and lost all their energy. They were terrified.

'"Drona's son was the only one who advanced against the enemy, like a crocodile against a current. Indomitable
in battle, he killed many kinds of Pandu soldiers. He was like a crazy elephant in his valour and freed himself from
many difficult situations. When he saw that the soldiers were running away, having made up their minds to flee,
Drona's son approached Duryodhana and spoke to him. 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Why are the soldiers
running away and why are they frightened? O Indra among kings! They are running away in the battle. Why are
you not restraining them? O lord of men! You do not seem to be your natural self either. Karna and the other kings
are also not stationed here. In no other encounter have the soldiers run away in this fashion. O mighty-armed one!
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Why have your soldiers been reduced to this state? O king! Has a lion among
rathas in your army been killed? O Kourava! Tell me everything about why this state has come to pass.' Having
heard what Drona's son said, Duryodhana, the bull among kings, was incapable of telling him the terrible and unpleasant news. Your son was immersed in an ocean of grief, like a shattered boat. On seeing Drona's son stationed
on his chariot, his voice choked with tears. The king shame-facedly told Sharadvata, 'O fortunate one! Before all
the others, you explain why all the soldiers are running away.' The king went to Sharadvata and repeatedly entreated him that he should tell Drona's son about how Drona had been brought down.

'"Kripa said, 'We placed Drona, supreme among rathas on earth, ahead of us and began to fight with only the
Panchalas. A battle with a melee of the Kurus and the Somakas then commenced. They roared at each other and
brought down weapons on each other's bodies. Drona, bull among men, released the brahmastra and killed hundreds and thousands of enemies with his broad-headed arrows. In particular, goaded by destiny, Pandavas,
Kekayas, Matsyas and Panchalas approached Drona's chariot in that battle and were destroyed. With his brahmas-
tra, Drona consumed and sent one thousand lions among rathas and two thousand elephants to the land of the dead.
His grey hair hung down up to his ears. He was dark. He was eighty-five years old. However, in that encounter, the
aged Drona roamed around like one who was sixteen years old. He destroyed the soldiers and killed the kings.
Though the Panchalas were angered, they were made to retreat. Part of the forces was shattered and retreated. The
conqueror of enemies[Drona.] invoked a divine weapon that was as resplendent as a sun that has arisen. The powerful
one reached amidst the Pandus, with his arrows as rays. Your father was like the midday sun and was difficult to
look at. They were scorched by Drona, as if by the blazing sun. Their valour was scorched. They lost their enterprise. They were bereft of their senses. On seeing that they were afflicted by Drona's arrows, Madhusudana, who
wished for the victory of the sons of Pandu, spoke these words. "He is supreme among the wielders of weapons.
He is like the leader of a herd of leaders. He is incapable of being vanquished by the enemy in battle, even if it
were to be the slayer of Vritra himself. O Pandavas! Therefore, abandon dharma and seek to ensure victory. Otherwise, the one on the golden chariot will kill all of you in the battle. It is my view that he will not fight if Ashvatthama has been killed. Therefore, let someone utter a falsehood and tell him that he[Ashvatthama.] has been killed in the
battle." Dhananjaya, Kunti's son, did not approve of these words. But all the others approved, Yudhishthira with
great difficulty. Bhimasena shame-facedly told your father that Ashvatthama had been killed, but your father did
not believe him. Suspecting that this was a lie, your father, who was devoted to his son, asked Dharmaraja whether
you had actually been killed or not. Yudhishthira was scared of speaking a lie, but was addicted to the prospect of
victory. He said that Ashvatthama had been killed and indistinctly added that it was an elephant. This belonged to
Indravarma from Malava and was as large as a mountain. It was killed by Bhima. He[Yudhishthira.] approached Drona and
spoke these words. "You are wielding weapons for Ashvatthama's sake. You live for the sake of beholding him. He
has always been your beloved son. But he has been brought down." On hearing this extremely unpleasant news,
the preceptor was distressed. He gave up his divine weapons and no longer fought, as he had earlier. He was extremely anxious and his senses were numb with grief. On seeing this, the son of the king of Panchala, the performer of cruel deeds, attacked. The one who knew about the nature of the worlds[Drona.] saw the one who was destined to be the cause of his death. In the battle, he abandoned his divine weapons and decided to die[The translation doesn't capture the nuance. The practice in question is prayopavesa. While this does mean voluntary fasting to death, it is adopted by someone who has no worldly desires left.]. Parshata
grasped his hair with his left hand. Ignoring the loud words spoken by the brave ones, he severed his head. Everyone said, "Do not kill the one who should not be killed." Arjuna jumped down from his chariot and quickly ran,
with his arms raised. He repeatedly exclaimed, "O one who knows about dharma! Let the preceptor remain alive.
Do not kill him." O bull among men! But though he was restrained by the Kouravas and by Arjuna, he cruelly
killed your father. That is the reason all the soldiers are running away, afflicted by fear. O unblemished one! With
your father slain, we have also lost all initiative.'"

'Sanjaya said, "On hearing of his father's death in the battle, Drona's son was overcome by fierce rage, like a
snake that has been stepped on, by the foot."'
