Vaishampayana said, 'Rama spent a night there and was worshipped by the residents of the hermitage. The pious one, with the plough as his weapon, showed his affection for Manakanka. He gave gifts to the brahmanas
and spent a night there. The one with the plough was worshipped by a large number of sages and arose in the
morning. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He touched the waters and took his leave of all the sages. For the
sake of tirthas, the immensely strong Rama departed quickly. The one with the plough as his weapon went to the
tirtha known as Oushanasa. O king! This is also known as Kapalamochana, where the great sage, Mahodara, was
freed from the large head that stuck to his thigh. O great king! In earlier times, Rama hurled a rakshasa's head a
great distance. Before this, the extremely great-souled Kavya[Shukra, the preceptor of the demons. The wise Shukra laid down many
kinds of policy (niti).] had tormented himself through austerities there. It
was there that the great-souled one thought about all kinds of policies. It was there that he thought about the conflict of the daityas and the danavas[Not a conflict between the daityas and the danavas, but their conflict
with the gods.]. O king! Bala reached that supreme of tirthas. In due form, he donated riches
to the great-souled brahmanas.'

Janamejaya asked, 'O brahmana! Why is it known as Kapalamochana? How was the great sage freed from the
head? Why did it stick to him?'

Vaishampayana replied, 'O tiger among kings! Earlier, the great-souled Raghava dwelt in Dandakaranya, to
bring an end to the rakshasas who lived there. In Janasthana, with a razor-sharp arrow that was sharp at the edges,
he severed the head of an evil-souled rakshasa. This fell down in a great forest. O king! Mahodara was roaming
around in the forest at will. It fell down, pierced his bones and stuck to his thigh. Because it was stuck to his thigh,
the immensely wise brahmana could not go to any of the other tirthas. The great sage was in pain and pus exuded
from the wound. It has been heard that he went to all the tirthas on earth. The immensely ascetic one went to all the
rivers and the oceans. He spoke to all the rishis who had cleansed their souls. He bathed in all the tirthas, but was
not freed. The Indra among brahmanas then heard the great words of the sages about the famous and supreme
tirtha on the Sarasvati. It could free from all sins and was the supreme spot for obtaining success. The brahmana
went to that tirtha of Oushanasa. He touched the waters of Oushanasa tirtha. The head was freed from his leg and
fell down into the water there. O king! The one with the pure soul was freed from the taint. Having been successful, Mahodara delightedly went to his hermitage. The great ascetic brahmana became pure and was freed from his
exhaustion. He told all the rishis, who had cleansed their souls, about this. O one who grants honours! On hearing
his words, all the assembled ones named that tirtha Kapalamochana[Kapala means a skull and mochana means release. Thus, release from a
skull.]. Madhava honoured the brahmanas there
and gave them many gifts.

'The foremost among the Vrishni lineage then went to the hermitage of Rishangu. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! Arshtishena had tormented himself through terrible austerities there. The great sage Vishvamitra was able
to become a brahmana there[Vishvamitra was born as a kshatriya and wanted to become a brahmana.]. O Indra among kings! The handsome wielder of the plough was surrounded by
brahmanas there and departed from the spot known as Rishangu. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Rishangu
was an aged brahmana who was always engaged in austerities. Having made up his mind to cast aside his body, he
thought a lot. Rishangu summoned all his immensely ascetic sons and told them to take him to a spot where there
was a lot of water. Knowing about Rishangu's age, those great ascetics took that store of austerities to a tirtha on
the Sarasvati. Those intelligent sons took him to the Sarasvati, where there were hundreds of tirthas, frequented by
large numbers of brahmanas. O king! The immensely ascetic one bathed there, in accordance with the prescribed
rites. O tiger among men! The supreme among rishis knew about the qualities of tirthas and delightedly told all his
sons, who were worshipping him, "The northern bank of the Sarasvati has a lot of water. He who makes up his
mind to cast aside his body there and engages in meditation and austerities, will never suffer from death." The one
with the plough as his weapon, with dharma in his soul, touched the water there and bathed. He was devoted to
brahmanas and gave a lot of gifts to brahmanas.

'O Kouravya! He then went to Lokaloka, created by the illustrious grandfather. Arshtishena, rigid in his vows
and supreme among rishis, had performed great austerities there and become a brahmana. O king! Rajarshi Sindhudvipa, the great ascetic Devapi and the great sage Vishvamitra had also become brahmanas there. They were illustrious and great ascetics. They were fierce in their energy and great in their austerities. The strong and powerful
Balabhadra[Another name for Balarama.] went there.'
