Yudhishthira asked, "O father! There has always been a curiosity in my heart. O grandfather of the Kuru lineage! I wish to hear the truth about this from you. Devarshi Ushanas[Shukracharya, the preceptor of the demons. Kavya was his name, meaning the wise one.] was always engaged in what was
agreeable to the asuras and unpleasant for the gods. Why was he then called the immensely intelligent Kavya?
Why did the infinitely energetic one always increase their energy[Of the demons.]? Why were the danavas always engaged in enmity with the supreme among the gods? How did Ushanas, as radiant as an immortal, become Shukra? How did he
obtain prosperity? Tell me everything about this. Though he possesses energy, why can he never go to the middle
of the sky[Shukra is the planet Venus and this is a reference to that.]? O grandfather! I wish to know everything about this."

'Bhishma replied, "O king! With undivided attention, listen to what exactly transpired. O unblemished one! I
will tell you what I have heard earlier, as I have understood it. This sage, heir of the Bhargava lineage[Shukra was descended from Bhrigu.], was truthful and firm in his vows. Because of the compassion in his soul, he became engaged in ensuring what was pleasant
for the asuras. The lord of riches[Kubera.], the king of the yakshas and the rakshasas, was entrused with superintendence
of the treasure house of Indra, the lord of the universe. The great sage[Ushanas. Ushanas penetrated Kubera.] was accomplished in yoga. He used yoga
to enter the lord of riches and bind up that god. He robbed him of his riches. On seeing that his riches had been
seized, the lord of riches could find no peace. Anxious and filled with rage, he approached the infinitely energetic
Shiva, supreme among the gods, and told him everything. This was the foremost among the gods, who possessed
many forms, terrible and amiable. Kubera said, 'Using his yoga, Ushanas bound me and stole my riches. The immensely ascetic one entered my body through yoga and has thereafter left.' On hearing this, the great yogi, Maheshvara,  became  angry.  O  king!  His  eyes  were  red  and  he  stood  there,  with  his  spear.  Having  grasped  that
supreme weapon, he asked, 'Where is he? Where is he?' However, from a distance, Ushanas got to know what
he[Shiva.] desired. The great-souled one got to know about the great yogi's rage. The lord did not know whether he
should run away, advance[Towards Shiva.], or stay in the same spot. He used his fierce austerities to think about the great-souled
Maheshvara. Ushanas was accomplished in the use of yoga. He next used this to place himself at the tip of the
spear. The archer[Shiva.] comprehended that the one who had obtained success in austerities had assumed that form.
The lord of the gods therefore bent the bow with his hand. The infinitely energetic lord used his hand to bend the
spear down and the terrible weapon that was the spear came to be known as Pinaka[Since Ushanas was on the tip, the spear could not be hurled. Pinaka is the name of both Shiva's bow and trident
and the two are being equated here, with the spear bent into the form of a bow. The etymology of Pinaka is
based on its being bent with the hand (pant).]. Thus, Uma's consort saw
that Bhargava had now been brought into the palm of his hand. Kakudi[Shiva's name, literally meaning the bull.] opened his mouth and used his hand to
swiftly fling him inside. The  lord  Ushanas  entered  Maheshvara's  stomach.  The  great-souled  descendant  of  the
Bhrigu lineage began to wander around there."

'Yudhishthira asked, "O king! How could the intelligent Ushanas roam around inside the stomach of the god of
the gods? What did the immensely resplendent rishi do there?"

'Bhishma replied, "O king! In that ancient time, the one who was great in his vows[Shiva.] entered the water and remained there, immobile like a pillar, for a million years. He performed extremely difficult austerities in that great
lake and then arose. Brahma, the first god among the gods, approached and asked him whether he was hale and
well and whether his austerities had prospered. The one with the bull on the banner[Shiva.] replied that the austerities
had proceeded well. Shankara was immensely intelligent and is impossible to fathom. He is always devoted to the
dharma of truth. Through yoga, he saw the growth inside[Ushanas was growing inside the stomach.]. The great yogi[Ushanas.] was prosperous because of austerities and riches. O great king! The one who was valiant in the three worlds was roaming around inside. At this, the
wielder of Pinaka, with yoga in his atman, entered the yoga of meditation. The extremely anxious Ushanas continued to wander around inside the stomach. But though located there, the great yogi[Ushanas.] tried to please the god from
there. He desired to emerge and craved that the energy might be withdrawn. From inside the stomach, the great
sage, Ushanas, said, 'Show me your favours.' O scorcher of enemies! He said this repeatedly. Mahadeva replied,
'Go. Free yourself through my penis.' Earlier, the bull among the thirty gods had closed all the other outlets. On
seeing that the doors had been closed on every side, the sage roamed around here and there, being burnt by the energy. He finally emerged through the penis and came to be known as Shukra[Shukra means semen.]. That is the reason he is never able
to go to the middle of the firmament. On seeing him emerge, flaming in energy, Bhava was filled with rage and
stood  there,  with  the  spear  in  his  hand.  However,  the  goddess  restrained  her  angry  husband,  Pashupati.  When
Shankara was restrained by the goddess in this way, he came to be regarded as her son[Ushanas came to be regarded as Parvati's son.].

'"The goddess said, 'You should not cause any injury to him. He has become your son and my son. O god!
Someone who has emerged from your stomach does not deserve to be destroyed.'"

'Bhishma said, "Bhava was pleased by these words of the goddess. O king! He smiled and repeatedly spoke
these words. 'Let him go wherever he wishes.' He bowed down before the god who is the granter of boons and
also the goddess Uma. The intelligent and great sage, Ushanas, went to his desired destination. O son! O  best
among the Bharata lineage! I have thus spoken to you about the great-souled Bhargava and his conduct. That is
what you had asked me about."'
