'Sanjaya said, "He was the one who brought delight to Vishnu's sister[Subhadra was Krishna's sister.]. He was adorned with Vishnu's
weapon[The chariot wheel is being compared to Vishnu's chakra.]. In the battle, the atiratha[Great warrior, greater than a maharatha.] looked as beautiful as Janardana. The tips of his hair waved around in the
wind. His supreme weapons were upraised. The lords of the earth looked at his body, though even the gods found
it difficult to glance at it. They were extremely anxious because of the chariot wheel he held and sliced it down
into many fragments. Krishna's maharatha son then grasped a gigantic club. His enemies had deprived him of his
bow and chariot, his sword and the chariot wheel. But with the club in his hand, Abhimanyu rushed against Ashvatthama. The upraised club was like a blazing thunderbolt. On beholding it, that bull among men[Ashvatthama.] alighted
from his chariot and took three steps backwards. Subhadra's son used the club to slay his horses and the two charioteers who guarded his flanks[Parshnis.]. With arrows on all his limbs, he looked like a porcupine. He[Abhimanyu.] then brought
down Kalakeya, Subala's son, and killed seventy-seven of his followers from the land of Gandhara. He again
killed ten rathas from the Brahma-Vasatiyas, seven rathas from the Kekayas and ten elephants.

'"He then advanced against the chariot of Duhshasana's son and used the club to slay his horses. O venerable
one! At this, Duhshasana's son was enraged and raised his club. Asking Subhadra's son to wait, he attacked him.
Those two brave brothers wished to kill each other and raised their clubs against each other. They struck, like the
destroyer Tryambaka[Shiva's name.] in earlier times. Having struck each other with the ends of their clubs, they both fell
down on the ground. In the midst of that battle, those two scorchers of enemies were like Indra's standards that had
been uprooted. The ratha who was Duhshasana's son, the extender of the deeds of the Kuru lineage, arose first and
struck Subhadra's son on the head with the club, as he was about to get up. Because of exhaustion and because of
the great force of the club, Subhadra's son, the destroyer of enemy heroes, lost his senses and fell down on the
ground, unconscious.

'"O king! Thus, in that battle, a single one was slain by many. He had agitated all the soldiers, like an elephant
among lotuses. The brave one was as resplendent as a wild elephant killed by hunters. The brave one fell down and
was surrounded by all those on your side. He looked like a fire during the summer, pacified by the onset of winter,
or like a storm that has subsided after destroying the tops of trees. After scorching the army of the Bharatas, he was
like a sun that has set, like the eclipsed moon, or the ocean with all its water dried up. His face was like the full
moon. His eyelashes were as dark as the wings of crows. On seeing him lying down on the ground, all the maharathas on your side were supremely delighted. They roared repeatedly, like lions. O lord of the earth! Those on
your side were overcome with great delight. But tears flowed down from the eyes of those on the other side. O lord
of the earth! On seeing the brave one fallen down, like the moon dislodged from the firmament, beings were heard
to speak in the firmament. 'With Drona and Karna at the forefront, this single one has been slain by six maharathas
from the side of the sons of Dhritarashtra. It is our view that this is not dharma.' When that brave one was killed,
the earth looked extremely beautiful, like the full moon in the sky, with a garland of nakshatras[Nakshatras are stars or constellations and there are twenty-seven (sometimes twenty-eight) of these.]. It was strewn
with gold-tufted arrows and covered with blood. There were the beautiful heads of brave ones, adorned with earrings. It was strewn with cushions, flags, whisks, carpets, expensive and excellent garments, extremely dazzling
ornaments on chariots, horses, men and elephants, sharp and yellow swords that looked like serpents, bows, shattered arrows, lances, scimitars, javelins, kampanas and many other kinds of weapons. Strewn with these, it looked
extremely beautiful. There were dead and dying horses and their riders, covered with blood. They had been
brought down by Subhadra's son and the earth was impassable. There were goads and the drivers of elephants,
with armour, weapons and standards. The elephants had been mangled and pierced by arrows and looked like
mountains. The earth was covered with these and horses, without their charioteers and warriors. Crushed by slain
elephants, the best of chariots looked like lakes. There were large numbers of slain infantry, adorned with weapons
and ornaments. The earth assumed a terrible form and generated terror among cowards. He was as resplendent as
the sun and the moon. On seeing him fallen down on the ground, those on your side were supremely delighted. The
Pandus were distressed. O king! Abhimanyu was still a child and had not yet attained youth. But he was killed.

'"While Dharmaraja looked on, all the soldiers fled[That is, the Pandava soldiers.]. When Subhadra's son was brought down, Ajatashatru
saw that his army had been shattered and spoke these words to the brave ones on his side. 'The brave one did not
retreat and has gone to heaven. Do not be frightened and remain here. We will yet vanquish the enemy in battle.' In
distress, the extremely energetic and extremely radiant one spoke these words. Dharmaraja was the foremost
among warriors and spoke thus, to alleviate their misery. 'He killed many enemy princes in this battle, those who
were like venomous serpents. It was only after killing them in battle first that Arjuna's son gave up his life. He
killed ten thousand and the maharatha from Kosala[Brihadbala.]. Krishna's son was like Krishna and Arjuna and has certainly gone to Shakra's abode. He killed thousands of rathas, horses, men and elephants. But he was still not content with what he had accomplished in battle. He is the performer of auspicious deeds. We should not grieve.'

'"Having killed the best of their warriors and afflicted by arrows, we returned to your camp in the evening, covered with blood. We glanced at the enemy warriors as we slowly departed. O great king! We were overcome with
exhaustion and had lost our senses. That inauspicious time between day and night arrived. The inauspicious howls
of jackals could be heard. The sun was pale red, like the filaments of lotuses. It stretched itself on the mountain behind which it sets[The sun is believed to set behind a mountain known as asta.]. It took away the radiance from our supreme swords, lances, scimitars, bumpers of chariots,
shields and ornaments. The earth and the sky could not be differentiated. The sun assumed its beloved form of the
fire[The night is characterized by fire.]. There were many giant and immobile carcasses of elephants, like the summits of mountains that had been
shattered by the thunderbolt. Their standards and goads were strewn around and riders brought down, like cattle
without a cowherd. There were slain horses and shattered seats. Horses and charioteers were slain and flags and
pennants brought down. O lord of men! The maharathas looked beautiful, deprived of their lives by the enemy.
There were masses of chariots and horses, with their slain riders, killed together and separately. Vessels and ornaments were strewn around. Tongues lolled out. Teeth jutted out. Entrails and eyes bulged out. The earth seemed to
be extremely terrible. There were men with expensive armour and ornaments and the best of weapons. They were
destroyed, together with their elephants, horses and chariots. Though they always deserved expensive beds and
covers, they were slain and lay down helpless on the ground. Dogs, jackals, crows, wild crows, birds[Obviously meaning carnivorous birds. The word used in the text is suparna. While suparna means any bird, it
specifically also means predatory birds, like vultures and eagles.], wolves,
hyenas, ravens, others who feed on blood, masses of rakshasas and large numbers of pishachas[Malevolent beings, demons, ghosts.] were extremely
delighted in that terrible field of battle. They penetrated the skin and fed on the fat, blood and marrow, also eating
the flesh. As they tore at the bodies and dragged them away in large numbers, they laughed and sang. A terrible
river of blood was created by the best of warriors. It was extremely fearful, like Vaitarani[River which flows in the nether world.], and was difficult to
traverse. The currents were blood that flowed from the bodies. The chariots were like rafts and the elephants were
like rocks. The heads of men were the stones and the flesh was the mud. It flowed along, carrying many weapons
like garlands. That terrible river flowed in the midst of that field of battle, bearing those from the world of the living to the world of the dead. Large numbers of pishachas, horrible to look at, roared in terrible tones as they drank
and ate there. They roared loudly, causing terror among those who were still alive. Dogs, jackals and birds also fed
there. As night set in, the warriors glanced at that terrible sight, which was like the kingdom of the lord of the ancestors[Meaning Yama, the god of death.]. The men glanced at that which arose with its terrible banks, and then slowly walked away. The maharatha, who was like Shakra himself, was brought down. He lay there, adorned in extremely expensive ornaments. The men saw that Abhimanyu had been killed in the battle, like a sacrificial fire on an altar, into which
oblations were no longer being offered."'
