Yudhishthira asked, "O grandfather! What is the supreme task that has been recommended for a king? For both t
worlds[This world and the next.], what are the tasks a king should undertake?"

'Bhishma replied, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When a king has been instated, if he desires great happiness, he should worship brahmanas. Learned and aged brahmanas must always be worshipped. There will be extremely learned brahmanas who dwell in the city and in the countryside. They must be comforted, given their
shares, revered and worshipped. A king must always look towards this as his supreme task. He must protect them,
just as he protects his own self or his sons. When they honour him, he must firmly honour them back. When they
are at peace, the kingdom is radiant in every possible way. They must he honoured, revered and protected, like a
father. The progress of the worlds depends on this, just as creatures depend on Vasava. They can burn everything
down, without leaving any remnants, through their mantras and their energy. Their valour is based on truth and if
enraged, they can perform fierce deeds. I do not see anything that can pacify them. When they are enraged, their
sight can envelop the directions, like the flames of a forest conflagration. They are learned and courageous and
possess excellent qualities. They are like the clear sky, or like pits hidden by grass[There qualities cannot be immediately discerned.]. Some are fierce, while others are as mild as cotton. Some are extremely cunning, but others are extreme ascetics. While some are engaged in
agriculture and animal husbandry, others earn a living through begging. Some may be thieves and resort to falsehood. Others may be actors and dancers. They are seen to be engaged in all kinds of tasks, superior and inferior. O
bull among the Bharata lineage! Brahmanas follow many diverse kinds of conduct. They are engaged in many
kinds of tasks. They earn a living through diverse kinds of occupations. Some among them are virtuous and knowledgable about dharma and are always praised. O lord of men! Such immensely fortunate brahmanas officiate as
priests for the ancestors, gods, men, serpents and rakshasas. Gods, ancestors, gandharvas, rakshasas, asuras and
pishachas are incapable of vanquishing these brahmanas. They can grant divinity to someone who is not divine.
They can take away divinity from someone who is divine. If they wish, they can make someone a king. If they dislike someone, they can destroy him. They are skilled in understanding praise and censure and can cause fame and
ill repute to people. O king! If inadvertently, a person slanders brahmanas, brahmanas always become enraged with
someone who hates them. If brahmanas praise a person, he prospers. If brahmanas censure a person, he is instantly
defeated. It is because there are no brahmanas among them that Shakas, Yavanas, Kambojas and other similar
kshatriya tribes are regarded as the equals of vrishalas. It is because there are no brahmanas among them that
Dramilas, Kalingas, Pulindas, Ushinaras, Kolas, Sarpas, Mahishakas and other similar kshatriya tribes are regarded
as the equals of vrishalas. O supreme among victorious ones! It is better to be defeated by them than to defeat
them. There is no sin as serious as that of killing a brahmana. The supreme rishis have said that killing a brahmana
is a great sin. One must never hear slander about brahmanas. When such words are spoken, one must be silent,
with a downcast face. Alternatively, one must arise and walk away. On this earth, there is no one who has been
born, or will be born, who can spend a life of happiness after opposing brahmanas. It is impossible to grasp the
wind with one's hands. It is impossible to touch the moon with one's hands. It is impossible to hold up the earth on
one's head. In this world, it is impossible to vanquish brahmanas."'
