'Gandhari said, "O Madhava! This son of mine, Vikarna, was revered as being wise. He was slain and is lying
down on the ground. Bhima did this one hundred times. O Madhusudana! Vikarna is lying down in the midst of
some elephants. He looks like the sun in the autumn sky, surrounded by dark-blue clouds. His hands bore the
marks from wielding a giant bow and are encased in finger-guards. Why are they being mangled by vultures now?
O Madhava! His ascetic wife is trying to ward off the vultures that are after meat. But though she is continually
trying, the child is incapable of warding them off. O bull among men! Vikarna was brave and young and a leader
of troops. He was used to happiness. He deserved happiness. O Madhava! He is lying down in the dust. In the encounter, his inner organs have been mangled by barbed arrows, hollow arrows and iron arrows. However, Lakshmi
has still not abandoned this best of the Bharata lineage. Durmukha did not retreat and is lying down slain, after
killing large numbers of the enemy in the battle. He has been killed by the brave one[Bhima.] in the encounter, by one
who accomplished his pledge. O Krishna! Half of his face has been eaten up by carnivorous beasts. O son! But you
are shining more brightly, like the moon on the seventh lunar day. O Krishna! With a face like this, how could this
brave one be brought down in the battle? How could my son be slain by the enemy and made to bite the dust? O
amiable one! No one was capable of standing before Durmukha. He had conquered the world of the gods. How
could he have been slain by the enemy? O Madhusudana! Chitrasena has been slain and is lying down on the
ground. Look at this son of Dhritarashtra's. He was the best of archers. He is still adorned in colourful garlands and
ornaments. Grief-stricken young women are weeping and are seated around him, together with large numbers of
predatory beasts. The sound of the weeping of women mixes with the roars of carnivorous beasts. O Krishna! This
seems to be an extraordinary and wonderful sight to me. The young Vivimshati was a leader of troops and was always served by the best of women. O Madhava! He is lying down in the mud and the dust now. The brave one was
slaughtered in the encounter and his armour was shattered by arrows. More than twenty vultures have surrounded
Vivimshati now. In the encounter, the brave one penetrated the Pandava formation. Having penetrated, he is now
lying down, like a virtuous man. O Krishna! Look at Vivimshati. His face has a smile. He possesses an excellent
nose and excellent eyebrows. He is like the lord of the stars[The moon.]. Vasava's women have surrounded that prosperous
one[In heaven.]. He seems to be sporting with gandharvas and thousands of celestial maidens. Duhsaha was brave and the
ornament of assemblies. He was the one who slew brave soldiers. He was the one who destroyed the enemy. What
about him? Duhsaha's body is completely covered by arrows. He looks like the slope of a mountain, covered by
blossoming karnikara trees. His radiant garlands are golden. His armour is blazing. Though he is dead, Duhsaha
looks like Mount Shveta, when it is ablaze."'
