'Yudhishthira asked, "There is dandaniti and there is the king. O grandfather! Tell me. Are these two equal? And
whose success is it going to be?"

'Bhishma replied, "O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Listen to me and I will tell you exactly, with
words and reasons, about the great fortune that the success of dandaniti brings. Dandaniti binds down the four varnas to their own dharma. When applied by the lord, it ensures that they do not proceed towards adharma. When the
four varnas respect their own dharma and there is no mixing, because of the use of dandaniti, there is peace and the
subjects are free from fear. In the proper way, the three varnas will make efforts to perform soma rites. Know that
the happiness of gods and men is accumulated from these. You should not entertain any doubt about whether the
age results in the king, or the king results in the age. The king causes the age. When the king implements all of
dandaniti properly, the best of ages, known as krita yuga, ensues. When it is krita yuga, dharma prevails. There
never is any adharma. None of the varnas finds any delight in adharma. There is no doubt that subjects obtain what
they wish and preserve what they have[Yoga and kshema respectively.]. The rites of the Vedas are performed, without any reduction in qualities.
All the seasons bring happiness and are free from disease. Sounds, colours and thoughts please men. There are no
diseases then and men with short lifespans are not seen. There are no widows and cruel people are not born. The
earth yields crops without being ploughed and the herbs are also like that. There is vigour in barks, leaves, fruits
and roots. There is no adharma there. There is only dharma. O Yudhishthira! Know these to be the qualities of krita
yuga.

'"When the king abandons one-fourth of dandaniti and follows only three-fourths, treta yuga results. The three-
fourths are followed by one-fourth that is inauspicious. The earth yields crops only when ploughed and the herbs
are also like that. When the king abandons half of policy and dharma, the age known as dvapara is the result. Half
that is inauspicious follows half that is good. The earth yields crops when ploughed, but only a little. When the
lord of the earth abandons dandaniti entirely and oppresses his subjects in various ways, then kali enters. Adharma
is generally prevalent in kali, but dharma is sometimes seen. The minds of all the varnas turn away from their own
dharma. Shudras earn a living through mendicancy and brahmanas through servitude. Yoga and kshema are destroyed and there is a mixing of varnas. The rites of the Vedas are without any qualities. All the seasons are devoid
of happiness and are full of ill health. Sounds, colour and thoughts of people decay. There are diseases then and
one dies before one's span of life is over. There are widows and cruel people are born. It only rains sometimes and
crops also grow sometimes. When the lord of the earth no longer wishes to protect the subjects, using dandaniti
properly and well, all the juices head towards destruction. The king is the creator of krita yuga, treta and dvapara.
The king is the reason behind the fourth yuga too. For creating krita, the king obtains endless heaven. For creating
treta, the king obtains heaven, but it is not endless. For giving rise to dvapara, the king obtains the portion that is
his share. However, for giving rise to kali, the king obtains eternal evil. Such an evil-acting person dwells in hell
for an eternal period. Having submerged himself in the sins of his subjects, he reaps the sin of bad deeds.

'"A kshatriya must always know and place dandaniti at the forefront, so that he can obtain what he desires and
protect what he possesses. Dandaniti, when administered well, sets boundaries for people and is like a mother or a
father, demarcating honour for the welfare of the world. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Know that beings
thrive on this. This is supreme dharma and the king must follow dandaniti. O Kouravya! Therefore, protect the
subjects in accordance with dharma and policy. Having acted in this way and having protected the subjects, you
will conquer the heaven that is extremely difficult to vanquish."'
