'Lomasha said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If mortals perform austerities here, they go to heaven. O
king! Men who desire to die, come here by the thousands. In ancient times, a benediction was pronounced by Dak-
sha when he sacrificed here. 'The men who die here will have conquered heaven.' This is the sacred, divine and
flowing river Sarasvati. O lord of the earth! This is Sarasvati's Vinashana. This is the gate to the land of the
nishadas. O brave one! It is out of hatred for them that the Sarasvati enters the earth, so that the nishadas may not
know her. This is Chamasodbheda[Having disappeared into the desert, the Sarasvati reappears in three places further downstream-Chamasodbheda, Shirobheda and Nagobheda.], where the Sarasvati can be seen. All the sacred and divine rivers that go towards the ocean merge into her here. O destroyer of enemies! This is the great tirtha known as Sindhu, where
Lopamudra went to Agastya and accepted him for her husband. O one who shines like the sun! This is the dazzling
tirtha of Prabhasa. This is sacred and holy, the cleanser of sin, and is favoured by Indra. The supreme tirtha by the
name of Vishnupada can be seen there. Here is the extremely sacred and beautiful river Vipasha[The Beas.]. Because of
sorrow for his sons, the illustrious rishi Vasishtha tied himself up and threw himself down, arising again, freed of
his bonds[The story has been recounted in Section 11 (Volume 1).].

'"O destroyer of enemies! Behold, with your brothers, the region of Kashmira[Kashmir, but written as Kashmira because of the style we have followed.], sacred in every way and frequented by maharshis. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It is here that a conversation took place between all
the rishis from the northern region, Nahusha[Meaning Yayati, Nahusha's son.], Agni and Kashyapa. O great king! The gate to Manasa[The Lake Manas or Manasa Sarovar. Mount Kailasha is next to Manasa Sarovar and the reference to
Parashurama concerns Kailasha.] is evident here. In the midst of this mountain, the illustrious Rama[Parashurama.] created a region for the rainwater to flow. This is
the renowned Vatikashanda, where valour comes from truth. It is to the north of Videha and its gate cannot be
breached. This is the auspicious place named Ujjanaka, where sacrifices of barley were made and where the illustrious rishi Vasishtha lived with Arundhati. This is the lake named Kushavan, where there are one trillion[Padma.] beds
of kusha grass. Rukimini's[Rukmini is Krishna's wife.] hermitage is here and she conquered her anger and found peace here. O Pandava! O
great king! You have heard of the great mountain Bhrigutunga, where meditations assemble. You will see it and the
rivers Jala and Upajala, near the Yamuna. Performing a sacrifice there, Ushinara surpassed Vasava. O lord of the
earth! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! To know whether the king was an equal of the gods, Vasava and Agni
came there. To test the great-souled Ushinara and desirous of granting him a boon, Indra became a hawk and Agni
became a dove and came to his sacrifice. As a result of fear from the hawk, the dove alighted on the king's thigh,
seeking refuge there. O king! Oppressed by fear, it nestled there."'
