'Vidura said, "O king! You are extremely revered by the three worlds. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You
are loved by the world and respected by us. Having reached an age that leans towards the west[With the image of the sun setting.], whatever you say
should not be against the sacred texts or reasoning. You are well established because you are old. O great king!
The subjects know that dharma is established in you, like lines in rocks, rays in the sun and waves in the ocean. O
lord of the earth! You are always honoured by the world because of your qualities. Together with your relatives,
you must always seek to protect these qualities. Resort to honesty. Out of childishness, do not destroy your kingdom, your sons, your grandsons, your well-wishers and those you love. O king! What you wish to give Krishna, as
a guest, is a lot. But Dasharha deserves all this and more, even the entire earth. But I truthfully say that you are not
giving this to Krishna because of dharma or to show him affection, but because of your own self. It is because of
deception and falsehood that you are giving him all these gifts. O king! Despite your external deeds, I know your
inner secrets. O king! The five Pandavas only desire five villages. If you do not wish to give them that, how can
there be peace? You wish to win over the mighty-armed Varshneya through riches and use this means to create a
rift between him and the Pandavas. But I tell you truthfully that he cannot be separated from Dhananjaya through
riches, effort or maligning[Of the Pandavas.]. I know Krishna's greatness. I know that his devotion is firm. I know that he will not
give up Dhananjaya, who is as dear as his life itself. Janardana will look at nothing other than a pot full of water,
enough to wash his feet, and nothing other than inquiries about his health. Therefore, show the great-souled and
venerable one the hospitality that he desires. O king! Act accordingly, because Janardana is deserving of honour.
Keshava has arrived, hoping for the welfare of the Kurus. O king! Give him that through which the objective may
be attained. Dasharha desires peace between you and Duryodhana, and the Pandavas. O Indra among kings! Therefore, do what he says. O king! You are the father and they are your sons. You are aged and the others are children.
Therefore, act like a father towards them, because they act like sons towards you."'
