'Sanjaya said, "The bull among the Bharata lineage[Arjuna.] listened to Duryodhana's words. His eyes were extremely
red and he glanced at the son of the gambler. The immensely famous Gudakesha glanced towards Keshava. He
grasped his large arms and spoke to the son of the gambler. 'He who relies on his own valour and challenges the
enemy is said to be a man. He is not frightened and acts in accordance with his complete strength. But he who
challenges enemies on the basis of the valour of others is the weakest among kshatriyas. In this world, he is among
the worst of men. You[Arjuna is addressing Duryodhana, using Uluka as a messenger.] resort to the valour of others and think yourself to be brave. O foolish one! You are yourself a coward and you desire that others should be slain. You have consecrated the eldest among all the kings and
are boastful[Bhishma.]. His intelligence is directed towards welfare and he is in control of his senses. He is immensely wise
and his death is certain. O evil-minded one! We know of your intentions. You are the defiler of your lineage. You
think that out of kindness, the Pandavas will not slay Gangeya. O son of Dhritarashtra! You are boasting because
of his valour. But while all the archers look on, I will kill Bhishma first. You son of a gambler[Arjuna is now addressing Uluka.]! Go to the
Bharatas. Go and tell Dhritarashtra's son, Duryodhana. Tell him that Savyasachi Arjuna has said that it will be this
way. There will be slaughter when the night has passed. His[Bhishma's.] spirit is never dejected. He is true to his word. He
delighted the Kurus and in their midst said, "I will kill the Pandava soldiers and the Shalveyas. That will be my
burden. I can kill everyone in the world, with the exception of Drona. You need not have any fear on account of the
Pandavyas." Therefore, you regard this kingdom as already having been obtained and think that the Pandavas have
lost. Filled with insolence, you do not see the disaster that confronts you. Therefore, in the first encounter, I will
kill the eldest among the Kurus[Bhishma.] in everyone's presence. When the sun has arisen, protect the one who speaks the
truth with banners and chariots. Bhishma is your refuge. But while you look on, I will use my arrows to make him
fall down from his chariot. Tomorrow, Suyodhana will know what it means to be boastful. He will see the grandfather pierced through my shower of arrows. In rage, in the midst of the assembly hall, Bhimasena spoke to the
short-sighted man who is your brother, Duhshasana. He does not know about dharma. He is always full of enmity.
He is evil in his intelligence. He is violent. O Suyodhana! He[Bhima.] took an oath and you will see it come true. O Suyo-
dhana! You will soon witness the terrible fruits of pride, insolence, anger, harshness, abrasiveness, cruelty, bitter
words, hatred of dharma, resort to adharma, transgression of the elders, partiality of vision and all evil deeds. O
lord of men! With Vasudeva as my second, I will be enraged. O foolish one! How can you hope to remain alive or
aspire to the kingdom? Bhishma and Drona will be pacified. The son of the suta will be brought down. You will
then lose all hope of remaining alive, your kingdom and your sons. O Suyodhana! You will see that your brothers
and your sons have been killed. When they are killed by Bhimasena, you will remember all your evil deeds. Keshava has no need to make a promise for a second time. I am telling you the truth. All of this will come true.' O
king! The son of the gambler heard and remembered all these words. On obtaining leave, he left the way that he
had come.

'"On returning from the Pandavas, the son of the gambler went to Dhritarashtra's son. In the assembly of the
Kurus, he went and repeated everything that had been spoken. After listening to Arjuna and Keshava's words, the
bull among the Bharata lineage spoke to Duhshasana, Karna and Shakuni. He ordered the king's army and the
forces of the allies to be readied. Before sunrise, all the soldiers were yoked and arranged in battle formations. On
Karna's instructions, messengers were sent out on chariots, camels and mares. Others went out on well-trained and
extremely fast horses. On Karna's instructions, they surveyed the entire army. All the kings were instructed that
everything should be yoked before sunrise."'
