'"Arjuna said, 'O Krishna! You are asking me to give up all action and you are also asking me to practise yoga.
217 Between these two, tell me decidedly which one is better.' 218
'"The lord said, 'Renunciation and action both lead to liberation. But of these two, karma yoga is superior to renunciation of action. O mighty-armed one! He who does not desire and he who does not hate, know him to be a
perpetual sannyasi. 219 Freed from opposites, 220 he is happily freed from bondage. The ignorant, 221 not the
wise, speak of renunciation and action as distinct. 222 If one of these is followed properly, the fruits of both result.
Whatever place is attained by the followers of knowledge is also attained by those who practise action. He truly
sees, who sees renunciation and action as identical. O mighty-armed one! Without action, renunciation is only the
cause of unhappiness. 223 The sage who uses yoga attains the brahman quickly. He who practises yoga, he who is
pure of heart, he who has controlled his body, he who has controlled his senses, he who sees his own atman in the
atman of all beings, he is not tied down, even if he performs action. The wise who follow yoga know that they are
not doing anything even when they see, hear, touch, smell, eat, go, dream 224 or breathe, speak, discard, accept,
open and close. 225 They think of the senses circulating among the senses. 226 He who establishes himself in the
brahman 227 and giving up attachment, performs action, is not touched by sin, like water on the leaf of a lotus. To
purify their hearts, yogis give up attachment 228 and perform action only with their bodies, minds, intellect and
senses. Attached to yoga and discarding attachment to fruits of action, they attain perpetual peace. 229 Those who
do not follow yoga and are attached to fruits because of desire remain in bondage. Discarding all action through
his mind, 230 the person who controls his body, the city with the nine gates, 231 remains in happiness. He doesn't
do anything himself. Nor does he cause anyone to do anything. The atman 232 doesn't create ownership in the
body, nor action. Nor does it create a relation with the fruits of action. Nature 233 acts. The omnipresent lord
doesn't accept the sins or the good deeds of anybody. Knowledge is shrouded in ignorance. That is why beings are
deluded. But in those in whom that ignorance has been destroyed by the knowledge of the atman, in them that
knowledge expresses the great truth, 234 like the sun. Those whose intellect is focused on that, 235 egos are focused on that, devotion is focused on that and adherence is focused on that, those in whom sins have been destroyed through knowledge, those beings are not reborn. 236 The wise look equally upon a brahmana who is
learned and humble, a cow, an elephant, a dog and an outcaste. 237 Those whose minds are established in equality
overcome the earth in this world. 238 Because the brahman is equal and without fault, therefore, they 239 remain
established in the brahman. Established in the brahman, such a person learned in the brahman, is poised in intellect
and without delusion, not delighted at receiving something pleasant, or agitated at receiving something unpleasant.
Unattached to external objects, his mind focused on the brahman, he obtains the happiness that vests in the atman.
He enjoys eternal bliss. Pleasures from touch 240 have a beginning and an end and are the reason for unhappiness.
O Kounteya! The wise person does not obtain pleasure from these. In this, 241 before giving up the body, he who
can tolerate the forces of desire and anger is a yogi and such a man is happy. He whose happiness is inside, 242 he
whose pleasure is inside and he whose light is inside, that yogi alone has realized the brahman and obtains liberation in the brahman. Those who are without sin, without doubt, controlled in mind and engaged in the welfare of
all beings, such rishis attain liberation in the brahman. Freed from desire and anger, controlled in mind and knowing the atman, such sages attain liberation in the brahman all around them. 243 Banishing external objects of touch
from the mind, focusing the eyes between the two eyebrows, controlling the prana and the apana breath equally
within the nose, 244 poised in the senses, mind and intellect, beyond desire, fear and anger, wishing liberation,
such a sage is always free. Knowing 245 me to be the enjoyer of all yajnas and penance, the lord of all the worlds
and the well-wisher of all beings, attains peace.'"'
