Yudhishthira said, "In this world, men are extremely desirous of flesh and give up many other kinds of food
instead. They behave like many rakshasas. There are many kinds of cakes and different forms of vegetables,
full of juices and succulent. But they do not desire them as much as they crave for meat. My mind is confused because of this. I think that the taste associated with meat must be superior. O bull among men! I wish to hear about
the qualities that are associated with not eating meat and about the sins associated with eating it. O one who knows
about dharma! You  know  the truth about everything. Tell  me  about  what  is  in  conformity  with  dharma.  What
should be eaten? What should not be eaten? Tell me everything."

'Bhishma replied, "O mighty-armed one! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It is exactly as you have said.
There is nothing on earth that is superior to meat in taste. There is nothing superior to meat for those who are
wounded, weak, afflicted, exhausted from travels and those who are addicted to sexual desire. It instantly enhances
the life force and provides the best means of sustenance. O scorcher of enemies! There is no food that is superior
to meat. O descendant of the Kourava lineage! However, there are many qualities associated with giving it up and
they manifest themselves in men. Listen to this attentively. If there is a man who desires to enhance his own flesh
by resorting to the flesh of others, there is no one who is inferior or more cruel than him. In this world, there is
nothing as loved as one's own life. Therefore, a man must act towards others, as he would towards his own self. O
son! There is no doubt that flesh originates in semen. That is the reason it is said that there are great sins in eating
and killing it. Learned ones who know about the Vedas have said that non-violence is a characteristic of dharma.
Therefore, one should resort to non-violence. A man must act towards others as he would towards his own self. It
has been said that slaughtered animals are oblations offered to the ancestors and the gods in sacrifices. If this is in
accordance with the injunctions of the Vedas, then there can be no sin attached to eating it. It has been heard in the
sacred texts that animals were created for the purpose of sacrifices. Those who do not follow these ordinances are
said to be rakshasas. Listen to the ordinances that have been laid down for kshatriyas. If they eat meat that has
been obtained through their own valour, they do not incur any sin. All deer and wild animals are said to have been
dedicated to all the gods. O king! This was done by Agastya in ancient times and that is the reason hunting is
praised. There can be no hunting without being prepared to give up one's own life. O king! There is thus no difference in form between the one who is killing and the one who is being killed. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
That is the reason all the rajarshis went on hunts. The learned say that this does not lead to their being tainted by
any sin. O descendant of the Kourava lineage! In this world and in the next world, there is nothing superior to
compassion towards all creatures. A man who is compassionate does not suffer from any fear. In this world and in
the next world, those who are compassionate are ascetics. Those who are compassionate grant all creatures freedom from fear. We have heard that no being causes them fear either. Whether he is wounded, fallen down, prostrate, afflicted or hurt, whether it is plain or uneven terrain, all creatures protect him. Snakes, animals, pishachas
and rakshasas do not strike him. Even if there is an occasion for fear, he is freed and he frees others too. There has
not been, nor will there be, any donation that is superior to the granting of life. It is certain that there is nothing
more loved than one's own life. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Causing injury to any being is thus nothing
but another name for death. When the time for death arrives, all creatures tremble. In this ocean of life, creatures
are whirled around and agitated through conception, birth, old age, misery and death. While dwelling in the womb,
they are cooked in juices that are astringent, acidic and bitter, with the extremely terrible touch of urine, phlegm
and excrement. In that stage of an embryo, they are helpless and are repeatedly struck. Because they desire flesh, in
that helpless state, they are seen to be brought down. Having been born as different kinds of species, they are
cooked in the hell known as Kumbhipaka[While this is the name of a hell, it also means being cooked in a vessel.]. Being born and killed, a creature is repeatedly whirled around. When
one arrives on earth, there is nothing as loved as one's own life. Therefore, one should be compassionate towards
all beings and look upon them as one's own self. O king! If a person does not eat any kind of flesh from the moment of his birth, there is no doubt that he obtains an extensive spot in heaven. In a desire to remain alive, if a person eats the flesh of other creatures, there is no doubt that those other creatures will devour him. 'Whomever I eat,
that creature will eat me[The word for meat is mamsa. This explanation is based on mam (me) and sa (he). He will eat me.].' O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Know that it is my view that this is how the
word for meat has evolved. A slayer is always killed. A person who binds is bound. O king! A person who injures
is injured. One who hates faces hatred. Whatever deeds are performed in whatever kind of body, in exactly that
kind of body are the fruits enjoyed[One undertakes acts as some species. One is reborn as that species to face the consequences of those acts.]. Non-violence is supreme dharma. Non-violence is supreme self-control.
Non-violence is supreme donation. Non-violence is supreme austerity. Non-violence is supreme sacrifice. Non-violence is supreme strength. Non-violence is supreme friendship. Non-violence is supreme happiness. Non-violence
is supreme truth. Non-violence is supreme learning. Among donations made at all the sacrifices, bathing at all the
tirthas and the fruits of all kinds of donations, there is nothing that is equal to non-violence. The austerities of a
person who is non-violent are inexhaustible. A non-violent person is like one who always performs sacrifices. A
person who is non-violent towards all beings is like their mother and their father. O bull among the Kuru lineage!
These are the many fruits of non-violence. I am incapable of speaking about all its qualities, even if I were to speak
for one hundred years."'
