'Markandeya said, "Brihaspati's wife was the famous Chandramasi. She gave birth to six sacred fires and a daughter. The fire at which oblations of clarified butter are offered is named Shamyu, Brihaspati's immensely radiant
son. Oblations are first offered to him at chaturmasya and the foremost animal at horse sacrifices. This energetic
fire is one that is characterized by many-hued flames. Shamyu's unmatched wife was Satya. Satya was born from
Dharma. He[Shamyu.] had the blazing Agni as his son, and three daughters who were good in their vows. The fire that is
worshipped with the first share of offerings is Bharadvaja, said to be Agni's first son. The fire that is Shamyu's second son is known by the name of Bharata. At the time of full moon sacrifices, all the oblations are offered to it
with ladles. There were three daughters who had Bharata as a husband. He had a son named Bharata and a daughter named Bhavati[Bharata had a son named Bharata.]. The fire named Bharata was the son of the fire named Prajapati Bharata. O foremost among
the Bharata lineage! He was greatly honoured and his appellation was 'Great'. Bharadvaja's wife was Vira and she
gave birth to Vira[To avoid confusion, Viraa and Vira respectively.]. It is said by the brahmanas that he is slowly offered the same oblations as Soma. There is a
fire that is offered the second round of oblations with Soma and this is known as Rathaprabhu, Rathadhvana and
Kumbhareta. On his wife Sarayu, he begot Siddhi and surpassed the sun in his splendour. He is the one who
brought agneya[In this context, a hymn to the fire.] and he is always mentioned in invocations. The fire Nishchyavana always praises the earth. It
never declines[Nishchyavana literally means something that does not fall.] in fame, energy or prosperity. The fire Vipapa is his son. He is without sin[Vipapa literally means free from sin.] and without taint
and has pure and blazing flames. He is truthful and is the one who ensures deeds on time. The fire named
Nishkriti[Nishkriti literally means freedom.] frees beings from lamentations. When worshipped well, he brings good fortune. His son is the fire
named Svana, the creator of suffering. He inflicts severe suffering on people and makes them lament. Those who
know about the soul, address a fire by the name of Vishvajit. He strides through the intelligence of all beings in the
universe. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There is a fire that is known as the internal fire. It digests food inside the bodies of all beings and is known by the name of Vishvabhuj. He is a brahmachari and self-controlled. He
is always extensive in his vows. The brahmanas worship this fire with oblations of cooked food. He is famous as
Gopati and a river was his beloved. Those who observe rites use this fire in all their rites. There is an extremely
terrible fire by the name of Vadava. He drinks up water and has a tendency to rise. He has the name of
Urdhvabhaj[Literally, something that goes up.] and the wise know that he is established in prana. There is a fire to whom oblations are always offered in a household in a northward direction. This supreme one is known by the name of Svishtakrit. His daughter
is named Manyati and she is the fire of anger that is incited in calm beings. She is the essence of anger and is thus
named[Manyu means wrath or resentment.]. This terrible and cruel one is established in all beings by the name of Svaha. There is a fire that has
been named Kama by the gods. There is no one among the thirty gods with his beauty and because his form is unequalled, he is so named[Kama has several meanings and one of these is an object of desire. Kama is the fire of passion or desire.]. The fire named Amogha destroys enemies in battle[Amogha means productive, infallible.]. He wields a bow and is seated erect on a chariot, adorned with garlands. He restrains his anger. O immensely fortunate one! There is another
known as Uktha, praised by the three ukthas. He is the creator of great speech and is therefore known as Sakamashva[Uktha is a laudatory hymn, usually used for the Sama Veda. The ukthas were divided into three categories.
Sakamashva is a specific hymn from the Sama Veda. It has its roots in sakam (together with) and ashva (horse),
since one went to heaven together with the horse.]."'