Yudhishthira said, "You have spoken about many kinds of gifts, tranquility, truth, non-violence, satisfaction
with one's own wife and the fruits of donations. O grandfather! It is known that there is nothing other than
the strength of austerities. You should now explain about supreme austerities."

'Bhishma replied, "O Yudhishthira! There are said to be worlds associated with austerities. O Kounteya! It is my
view that there is no austerity that is superior to fasting. In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about a
conversation between Bhagiratha and the great-souled Brahma. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! We have
heard that Bhagiratha went beyond the world of the gods, Goloka and the world of the rishis. On seeing this, Brahma spoke these words to King Bhagiratha. 'This region is extremely difficult to reach. How have you come here?
O Bhagiratha! The gods, the gandharvas and men cannot come here, without tormenting themselves through austerities. How have you come here?'

'"Bhagiratha replied, 'Without any doubt, I always gave to brahmanas. I always gave them hundreds and thousands[Of coins.]. Know that I always practised brahmacharya. It is because of those fruits that I have come here. I  performed  the  ekaratra  sacrifice  and  the  pancharatra  sacrifice  ten  times  each  and  the  ekadasha  sacrifice  eleven
times[Respectively, sacrifices that last for one night, five nights and eleven nights.]. I performed one hundred jyotishtoma sacrifices. But it is not because of those fruits that I have come here.
For one hundred years, I always resided on the banks of the Jahnavi, tormenting myself through austerities. I gave
away thousands of she-mules and women there. But I have not come to this city because of that. In Pushkara, I
gave brahmanas one hundred thousand horses and again two hundred thousand horses. I gave them thousands of
cows. I gave excellent and garlanded maidens, ornamented with golden moons[Chains made out of gold and in the shape of the moon, worn on the head or around the waist.]. There were another sixty thousand who wore ornaments made out of pure gold. O protector of the worlds! In the sacrifice of gosava[Sacrifice where cows are slaughtered.] I gave
away one hundred million cows. I gave each of them[Each brahmana.] ten cows ready for milking, accompanied by their calves
and gold and brass vessels for milking. Once they had accepted these, controlling myself, I gave each of them ten
more cows that had only had one calf each. These were those that yielded milk and were rohinis. I gave them ten
million more cows and all of these yielded milk. I gave them ten times that number. O Brahma! But I have not
come here because of that. I gave away one hundred thousand horses of the bahlika variety. They were white and
had golden harnesses. But that is not the reason I have come here. O Brahma! I gave away eight crore of gold
coins and another ten crore at each sacrifice that I performed. But it is not because of those fruits that I have come
here. O grandfather! I gave away seventeen crore horses. They were pale yellow in complexion and possessed
black  ears.  They  were  adorned  with  golden  harnesses.  O  Brahma!  I  gave  away  seventeen  thousand  she-
elephants[There is a typo in the Critical Edition. It says patnimata, which makes no sense, patni meaning wife. It should
probably read padmini, she-elephant.]. They were gigantic in size and their tusks were as large as ploughs. They were adorned in golden garlands. O lord of the gods! I gave away ten thousand chariots that were made out of gold throughout. They were ornamented with celestial decorations made out of gold. There were seven thousand more that were yoked to horses
that were ornamented with gold. I gave these away in the form of dakshina at ten horse sacrifices that I performed,
following what has been recommended in the Vedas. I was Shakra's equal in my power and in the valour of my
sacrifices. O grandfather! At eight royal sacrifices that I performed, I vanquished all the kings and gave them away
as dakshina, with thousands of gold coins strung around their necks. But that is not the reason I have come here,
because of those sacrifices. O lord of the universe! The dakshina given there flowed over everything, like the Ganga's current. Following my inclinations, to each[Each brahmana.]. I gave two thousand elephants and two thousand horses that
were ornamented in gold and one hundred of the best villages. I did this three times. I was an ascetic and controlled my diet. I restrained my speech. For a long period of time, I resided in the Himalayas, along the Ganga,
whose flow is irresistible. Her flow was held by Mahadeva on his head. O grandfather! But I have not come here
because of those fruits. I hurled the shami stick[A sacrifice was performed. Then a piece of shami wood was hurled, thus measuring out the distance for performing the next sacrifice.] and performed tens of thousands of sacrifices for the gods. Some
lasted for thirteen days, others for twelve days. Some were pundarika sacrifices. But I am not here because of
those fruits. I gave eight thousand humped bulls to brahmanas. Each of them was white and the horns were encrusted with gold. I gave them beautiful wives with golden necklaces. I gave piles of gold and gems. There were
mountains of jewels. There were hundreds of thousands of villages, prosperous with wealth and grain. At the many
great sacrifices I performed, I attentively gave each brahmana one hundred thousand cows that had only had a single calf each. But I am not here because of that. With dakshina, I performed sacrifices that lasted for eleven days.
O god! There were horse sacrifices that lasted for twenty four days. O Brahma! Yet again, I performed such rites
sixteen times. But I haven't come here because of those fruits. I also gave each of them a grove with kanchana
trees. Each grove extended for a yojana on every side and was full of gems. But I am not here because of those
fruits. Without any anger, for thirty years, I practised the excellent turayana vow[Literally, the path followed by Tura. It is a vow that is a modification of the full moon sacrifice.] During this period, every day, I
cheerfully gave brahmanas eighty thousand cows. They yielded milk and were rohinis. O protector of the universe!
O lord of the gods! I always gave to brahmanas. But I have not come here because of those fruits. O Brahma! I always performed sacrifices with thirty fires. I performed eight sarvamedha and seven naramedha sacrifices. I also
performed one hundred and twenty eight vishvajit sacrifices[Sacrifice for the conquest of the earth.]. O lord of the gods! But I have not come here because of those fruits. On the banks of Sarayu, Bahuda and Ganga, and in Naimisha, I gave away one million cows.
It is not because of that either. Indra knew about the truth and kept it a secret. However, through his austerities,
Bhargava[Shukracharya.] got to know. O one who should be worshipped! Blazing in his energy, Ushanas revealed that means of
success and I have followed it. I have satisfied brahmanas and obtained success through those deeds. O lord! Thousands of rishis and others assembled and told me, "Go to Brahma's world." O lord! Thousands of brahmanas were
pleased with me and also told me this. That is the reason I have obtained this world and there is nothing more to
think about. This is the method that the ordainer has ordained. Asked by you, I have described it accurately to you.
It is my view that there is no austerity that is greater than fasting. O supreme among gods! I bow down before you.
Be pleased.'"

'Bhishma continued, "King Bhagiratha told Brahma this. Following the indicated rites, he worshipped the one
who deserves to be worshipped."'
