'Yudhishthira said, "Discontent, confusion, intoxication, passion, agitation, strength, delusion, pride and anxiety-
you are overcome by all these sins and desire the kingdom. Do not be addicted. Be free, calm and extremely happy. The king who rules over this entire earth alone possesses only one stomach. Why are you then praising this
course[Of asking for more.]? O bull among men! Desire cannot be satisfied in a day or a month. A desire incapable of being satisfied
cannot be gratified in a lifespan. When it is fed, a fire blazes and when there is no kindling, it is pacified. Pacify the
fire that has arisen in your stomach with a little bit of food. Conquer your stomach. This vanquished earth will then
be conquered for the greater good. You have praised human desire, pleasures and prosperity. But those who do not
enjoy objects of pleasure and are weak attain the supreme state. The kingdom's acquisition and preservation, and
both dharma and adharma, are based on you. Free yourself from that great burden and resort to renunciation. The
tiger, for the sake of a single stomach, creates a great carnage. Other slow-moving animals sustain themselves on
that[Sustain themselves on the tiger's prey.]. An ascetic withdraws from material objects and resorts to sannyasa. However, a king is never satisfied. Behold the difference in their intelligence. Those who subsist on leaves, ashmakuttas[Those who survive on grain ground with stones.], dantolukhalas[Those who survive on grain ground with their teeth. Literally, those who
use their teeth as mortars.], those who
subsist on water and those who subsist on air are capable of conquering hell. Between a king who rules over every
part of this entire earth and one who regards stone and gold as equal, the latter is the successful one, not the king.
Do not act because of any intentions. Do not cherish hopes. Do not have a sense of ownership. Resort to the state
that is without sorrow in this world and without decay in the next. Those who have no desire do not sorrow. Why
are you grieving over desire? If you give up all desire, you will also be freed from these futile words[The idea that one can be free from desire, amidst wealth and prosperity.]. The paths
of pitriyana and devayana[Respectively, the paths followed by the ancestors and by the gods.
Pitriyana involves sacrifices and rites. Devayana abandons sacrifices and
rites, in favour of inner contemplation.] are renowned. Those who sacrifice follow pitriyana, those who wish to be freed follow devayana. Through austerities, brahmacharya and studying, those purified ones are radiant after they free
themselves from their bodies and go beyond the grasp of death. Worldly desire is a bond. Freed from the bonds of
both desire and action, one attains the supreme objective. It is said that there is a chant sung by Janaka[This Janaka is not to be confused with King Janaka who was the father
of Sita. Mithila was the capital of both Janakas.]. He was
beyond opposite sentiments. He was free and could perceive complete liberation. 'Though I possess nothing, my
riches are infinite. If Mithila blazes up, nothing that is mine will be burnt.' Just as a person who ascends a palace
on a mountain looks down at the people on the world below, the wise person looks down at evil-minded ones who
sorrow about what one should not grieve about. The intelligent person who looks and sees what should be seen,
has sight. The person who knows what is not normally known is said to be intelligent. There are those who have
cleansed their souls, are learned and have attained the brahman. A person who understands their words is greatly
revered. When one sees all the different beings to be one and realizes that they are the extension of the brahman,
one attains that exalted state, not those who are ignorant, of limited intelligence, without understanding and without austerities. Everything is based on understanding."'
