Vaishampayana said, 'O, descendant of the Bharata lineage! The son of the wielder of the vajra[The vajra is Indra's weapon and Arjuna was Indra's son.] told the brahmanas everything and left for the slopes of the Himalayas. He first went to Agastya's banyan tree and then to Vasishtha's mountain. Kounteya performed his ablutions on Bhrigu's peak. He donated a thousand cows at sacred
places of pilgrimage. That supreme among Kurus gave houses to brahmanas. That supreme among men then
bathed at the place of pilgrimage known as Hiranyabindu and saw the best of mountains and sacred places. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! That best of men then descended, accompanied by brahmanas. That bull of the
Bharata lineage then left for the eastern direction. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! One after another, the best
of the Kurus saw many places of pilgrimage and the beautiful river Utpalini in the Naimisha forest-and the famous rivers Nanda, Upananda and Koushiki, the great rivers Gaya and Ganga. Having seen all these places of pilgrimage and having purified himself, he donated riches to the brahmanas. He went to every sacred place of pilgrimage in Anga, Vanga and Kalinga. Having seen them in the proper fashion, he gave away riches. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! When he approached the gates of the kingdom of Kalinga, the brahmanas who had followed the Pandava took their leave and departed. But with their permission, Kunti's son, the valorous Dhananjaya,
went on as far as the ocean, with only a few companions with him.

'Passing beyond Kalinga, the lord saw many beautiful countries, and followers of dharma. He went and saw
Mahendra Mountain, adorned with ascetics. Travelling slowly along the shores of the ocean, he arrived in Manalura. Having seen all the sacred places of pilgrimage there, the mighty-armed one went to visit the king who was the
lord of Manalura-King Chitravahana, who was devoted to dharma. He had a beautiful daughter named Chitrangada. When he saw Chitravahana's daughter of the beautiful hips, roaming around in the city at will, he was struck
by desire. He went to the king and told him what he wished. The king then spoke to him in a placatory voice, "A
king named Prabhamkara was once born in our lineage. He had no sons and performed supreme austerities for the
sake of offspring. On witnessing his terrible austerities and homage, the god Mahadeva Umapati[Mahadeva is Uma's consort.] Shankara was
satisfied. The great lord granted him the boon that only a single offspring would be born in every generation of this
lineage. Since then, in succession, only a single offspring has been born in our lineage. All my ancestors before me
had sons. But a daughter was born to me and it is certain that she will have to carry forward my lineage. O
supreme among men! I have always thought of her as my son. O bull among the Bharata lineage! In accordance
with what is prescribed, I have therefore made her my putrika[A putrika is a daughter who is regarded as a son. After marriage, she lives in her father's household. Her son
is regarded as her father's son and becomes the heir.]. The son, the perpetuator of this lineage, will be
the bride price. O Pandava! You can take her, as long as you agree to this condition." Agreeing to this condition, he
accepted the daughter and Kounteya lived in that city for three winters.'
