'Sanjaya said, "The world, covered in dust and darkness, was thus illuminated. Wishing to kill each other, the
brave ones attacked. O king! They clashed in that battle, with weapons, lances and swords in their hands. Overcome with rage, they glanced at each other. There were thousands of blazing lamps in every direction. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The ground was beautiful, like the firmament decorated with planets. The field of battle was dazzling, as if with hundreds of flaming torches. The earth looked as if the worlds were about to be consumed[With an image of the time of destruction.]. All the directions were illuminated with lamps in every direction. They were as beautiful as trees with
fireflies during a monsoon evening. Brave ones separately clashed against brave ones, elephants clashed with elephants, horses with horses and chariots clashed against chariots. At the commencement of the night, on the instructions of your son, they were all cheerful. O great king! Arjuna started to swiftly destroy the Kourava soldiers and
weaken all the kings."

'Dhritarashtra asked, "When the invincible and intolerant one angrily penetrated into the army of my son, what
was the state of your minds then? When that scorcher of enemies penetrated, what did the soldiers think? Given
the occasion, what did Duryodhana think should be done? In that battle, who were the scorchers of enemies who
advanced against that brave one? Who protected Drona's right wheel and who was on the left? As the brave one
fought, which valiant ones protected his rear? Who advanced in front, killing the enemies in the battle? That unvanquished one, great archer, penetrated the Panchalas[This is a reference to Drona.]. The valiant tiger among men seemed to be dancing
around in the path of his chariot. Advancing on his chariot, Drona consumed the Panchalas with his arrows. He
was as angry as a fire[The word used in the text is dhumaketu. While this means comet, it can also be translated as something that
has smoke as its banner, that is, a fire.]. How did he come about his death? You always speak of the enemy as undisturbed and
unvanquished. But in the battle, you have always said that those on my side were killed, distressed and routed and
that the rathas were deprived of their chariots."

'Sanjaya replied, "O great king! During that night, Drona desired to fight. Discerning his mind, Duryodhana
spoke to his obedient brothers-Vikarna, Chitrasena, the Kourava Mahabahu, Durdharsha, Dirghabahu and their
followers[As mentioned earlier, there is inconsistency in naming Duryodhana's brothers. For example, Vikarna and Chitrasena have already been killed by Bhima in Section 69.]. 'O brave ones! Go and endeavour to protect Drona's rear. Hardikya will be near the right wheel and
Shalya on the left.' Saying this, your son addressed the remaining brave maharathas from Trigarta. 'The preceptor
is extremely controlled. The Pandavas are making great efforts. As he kills the enemy in the battle, protect the one
who is so controlled. Drona is powerful in battle. He is dexterous in the use of hands and valiant. He can defeat the
thirty gods in an encounter, not to speak of the Parthas and Somakas. O maharathas! All of you unite and make the
best of efforts. Protect Drona from the Panchala maharatha Dhrishtadyumna. O kings! With the exception of
Dhrishtadyumna, I do not see any warrior among the Pandaveya soldiers who can defeat Drona in a battle. Therefore, I think that all our efforts should be to protect Bharadvaja's son. Thus protected, he will slay the Somakas and
the Srinjayas and the kings. With the Srinjayas slain at the forefront of the array, there is no doubt that Drona's son
will kill Dhrishtadyumna in the battle. In that fashion, maharatha Karna will defeat Arjuna in the battle. Armouring
myself, I will defeat Bhimasena in the battle. It is evident that we will be victorious for a very long time. O maharathas! Therefore, protect Drona in this battle.' O foremost among the Bharata lineage! Having thus spoken,
your son, Duryodhana, instructed the soldiers in that terrible darkness.

'"O bull among the Bharata lineage! A battle commenced in the night. Both the armies were fierce and desired
victory. Arjuna attacked the Kourava soldiers and the Kouravas attacked Arjuna. They used many different kinds
of weapons and afflicted each other. Drona's son attacked the king of Panchala[Drupada.] and Bharadvaja's son attacked
the Srinjayas. In that battle, they enveloped them with straight-tufted arrows. O venerable one! As the Pandu, Pan-
chala and Kourava soldiers slaughtered each other, a terrible uproar arose. We, or our forefathers, had not seen or
heard of anything like this earlier. The battle that commenced in the night engendered great fear."'
