Yudhishthira said, "O grandfather! It has been said that tranquility is subtle and of many different types. But
having acted in this way, there is no peace in my mind. O unblemished one! In this connection, you have spoken in many different ways about peace. Because of what I myself have done, these diverse kinds of peace are not
available to me. I can see the terrible wounds left by the arrows on your body. O  brave one! Thinking of  the
wicked deeds I have done, I can find no peace. Blood is flowing from your limbs, like streams from a mountain. O
tiger among men! On seeing this, I am suffering, like a lotus during the rains. O grandfather! Could I have done
anything more painful than this? Having confronted your enemies in the field of battle, you have now been reduced
to this state. This is also what has happened to other kings, with their sons and relatives. Under the subjugation of
destiny, we, and the sons of Dhritarashtra, were overcome by anger. We have perpetrated this reprehensible act. O
king! What end will we obtain? I am the one who has caused your death. I am the one who has killed the well-
wishers. On seeing you in this miserable state, lying down on the ground, I cannot find any peace."

'Bhishma replied, "When something else is responsible, why do you see yourself as the cause? O immensely
fortunate one! The course of action is subtle and beyond the grasp of the senses. In this connection, an ancient history is cited, about a conversation between Mrityu[Death.], Goutami, Kala[Time or destiny.], a hunter and a serpent. O Kounteya! There
was an aged lady named Goutami and she was full of tranquility. She saw that her son had been bitten by a snake
and was unconscious. A hunter named Arjunaka was enraged with the snake. He tied it up with some rope and
brought it to Goutami. He said, 'This worst of snakes has killed your son. O illustrious one! Quickly tell me how I
should kill it. Should I fling it into the fire, or should I chop it up into bits? This slayer of a child does not deserve
to remain alive for much longer.'

'"Goutami said, 'O Arjunaka! You have limited intelligence. Release it. Do not kill it. Virtuous ones who have
thought about it do not act so as to impose such a heavy burden on their own selves. They use the boat of dharma
to tide over this world, like crossing the waters with a boat. Those who have made themselves heavy with sin sink,
like a weapon sinks in the water. By killing it, the one who is dead will not come back to life. What purpose will be
achieved by killing this creature? By letting it go, this creature will have life. Why should it be dispatched to the
eternal world of death?'

'"The hunter responded, 'I know that you know the difference between good and bad. Everyone bears a great
burden. But those words of instruction are for a balanced person only. Therefore, I will kill this inferior snake. For
the sake of something immediate, something far away in time must be abandoned. Those who know about objectives realize that it is the immediate that is good and not incessant grieving about what is good and what is bad[Good or bad behaviour leads to distant fruits in the future. In contrast, killing the snake is an immediately good
objective.].
That is the reason why it must not be released. Once it has been killed, conquer your sorrow.'

'"Goutami said, 'Those who know are not afflicted in this way. The virtuous always seek delight in dharma. The
death of this child was predetermined. I cannot go against the power of dharma. Brahmanas are not enraged[Obviously, Goutami was a brahmana.]. Why
should I face the pain from anger? O virtuous one! Be mild and forgiving. Let the serpent go.'

'"The hunter replied, 'Killing it will bring inexhaustible gain. An immediate gain and increase in strength is
praised. There is an immediate gain. And by killing such a wicked creature, there may even be long-lasting gain.'

'"Goutami asked, 'Why should one kill an enemy who has been captured, when one can obtain peace by releasing that enemy? O amiable one! Why don't you wish to forgive the serpent? What is the reason why you don't
want to release it?'

'"The hunter replied, 'O Goutami! There are many who can be protected from this one. A single one should not
be protected at the expense of many. Those who know about dharma abandon the vicious. This reptile is wicked
and you should allow it to be killed.'

'"Goutami said, 'O hunter! My dead son will not come back to life if this serpent is killed and I will not get him
back. Nor do I see any other good from killing it. O hunter! Therefore, save the life of this creature.'

'"The hunter replied, 'After killing Vritra, the king of the gods obtained the best share. By destroying a sacrifice,
the god with the trident obtained a share[Shiva and Daksha's sacrifice.]. Therefore, follow the conduct of the gods. Do not entertain any doubts
about quickly killing this snake.'"

'Bhishma continued, "The hunter asked the immensely fortunate Goutami to act in this wicked way towards the
serpent, but she had no intention of perpetrating that evil act. Meanwhile, tied up in the rope and afflicted, it was
facing difficulties. It sighed a little and spoke slowly, in a human voice. 'O foolish Arjunaka! What is the crime
that I have committed? I am not independent. I am powerless and Mrityu sent me here. I bit him because of his instructions, not because of any anger or desire. O hunter! If there has been any sin, that sin therefore vests with
him.'

'"The hunter said, 'O serpent! Even if you have committed an inauspicious act because you have been under
someone else's subjugation, since you have been the instrument, the sin also vests in you. When an earthen pot is
fashioned, the rod and the wheel are thought of as instruments. O serpent! You are also like that. Anyone who has
committed a crime deserves to be slain by me. O serpent! You have committed a crime. O serpent! Indeed, you
have described yourself as an instrument.'

'"The snake replied, 'The rod and the wheel are helpless in every way. I am just like that. Therefore, I am not
the cause that you have mentioned. If you hold a contrary view, realize that these objects are being used by someone else. When something is urged by something else, there is a doubt about which one is the cause and which one
is the effect. Thus, I am not guilty. I do not deserve to be killed. I have not committed a crime. Even if you think
that there has been a crime, the crime is due to multiple reasons.'

'"The hunter said, 'Even if you are not the prime cause, you have been the agent responsible for his death.
Therefore, you deserve to be killed. That is my view. O serpent! Even if you think that if you perform a wicked act
and you will not be touched by it, you are the cause whereby that act was undertaken. That is sufficient for you to
be killed. Why do you want to speak more?'

'"The snake replied, 'Regardless of whether there has been some other cause or not, an act is driven by its motive. The intention behind my words was to draw particular attention to the motive. O hunter! Even if you truly
think that I was the cause, the motive behind that use was someone else's. The sin of killing a living being then
also vests with someone else.'

'"The hunter said, 'O one who is extremely evil-minded! You deserve to be slain by me. You have committed
the cruel deed of killing a child. Why do you keep speaking? O worst among serpents! You deserve to be killed.'

'"The snake replied, 'O hunter! In this world and in the next, officiating priests who offer oblations into a sacrifice do not obtain any fruits[The fruits are obtained by the performer of the sacrifice.]. I am like that.'"

'Bhishma continued, "Having been goaded by Mrityu, the serpent spoke in this way. Mrityu then arrived before
the serpent and spoke these words. 'O serpent! I was goaded by Kala and I goaded you in turn. I or you are not the
causes behind this child's destruction. The clouds are moved here and there by the wind. O snake! Just like the
clouds, you and I are under Kala's subjugation. All the attributes of sattva, rajas and tamas exist in Kala's essence
and thus exist among beings. Mobile and immobile objects, in heaven and on earth, are all controlled by Kala. O
snake! The entire universe is influenced by Kala. Inclinations of people towards pravritti and nivritti and all their
various transformations are all said to be dependent on Kala. O serpent! Aditya, the moon, Vishnu, water, wind,
Shatakratu, Agni, the sky, the earth, Mitra, the herbs, the Vasus, the rivers, the oceans, existence and non-existence
-all these are created by Kala and destroyed again. O snake! Since you know this, why do you think that I am
guilty? Had I been a sinner, you would also have been a sinner.'

'"The snake replied, 'O Mrityu! I am not saying that you are absolved, nor am I saying that you are guilty. I
have only said that I have been goaded by you. Nor do I say anything about Kala being blamed, or not being
blamed. You or I do not possess the right to examine that crime. It is my duty to ensure that I am absolved of the
sin. It may also be necessary for me to show that Mrityu is innocent.'"

'Bhishma continued, "The snake then spoke to Arjunaka. 'You have heard what Mrityu said. I am innocent. You
should not torment me in these bonds.'

'"The hunter said, 'O serpent! I have heard your words, as well as those of Mrityu. O serpent! But that does not
make you innocent. You and Mrityu are both responsible for this creature's destruction. I think that both of you are
causes. Something that is a cause should not be regarded as not being a cause. Shame on the evil-souled Mrityu.
He cruelly afflicts the virtuous. I will kill you too[Meaning Mrityu.]. You are the sinful cause behind a sinner.'

'"Mrityu replied, 'We are helpless. We are under the subjugation of Kala. We do what he instructs us. If you
look at this objectively, there should not be anything to blame us.'

'"The hunter said, 'O Mrityu! O serpent! If both of you are under the subjugation of Kala, how are joy and anger
generated[The implication is that joy results from doing good and anger results from doing bad. Stated differently, if everything is driven by Kala, how can anything be 'good' or 'bad'?]? I desire to know this.'

'"Mrityu responded, 'Everything that all of us have endeavoured to do is because of us being goaded by Kala. O
hunter! I have already told you that all of this is because of Kala. If the two of us have caused any injury, that is
because we have been under Kala's subjugation. O hunter! There is no way that we can be held to be guilty.'"

'Bhishma continued, "At that time, while there was this confusion about dharma, Kala arrived at the spot. He
spoke to the serpent, Mrityu and the hunter Arjunaka.

'"Kala said, 'O hunter! Mrityu or the serpent or I am not guilty of any sin, on account of having caused the
death of any creature. O Arjunaka! These outcomes are caused by the deeds a creature commits. Nothing other
than one's own deeds is responsible for destruction and death. It was because of his deeds that he faced death. All
of us are under the subjugation of our deeds and those deeds are the reason for destruction. People reap the fruits
of their deeds. Being bound by one's deeds is the manifestation. One deed leads to another, just as we urge each
other. A doer fashions whatever he wants with a piece of clay. In that fashion, a man confronts the consequences of
his deeds. Light and shadow are always connected to each other. In that fashion, a deed and a doer are connected
because of past deeds. You, Mrityu, the snake, you and the aged brahmana lady are not the reasons for the child's
death.'"

'Bhishma continued, "O king! When he spoke in this way, Goutami, the brahmana lady, realized that people suffered the consequences of their own deeds. She told Arjunaka, 'Kala, the serpent or Mrityu aren't the cause of the
death. This child has died because of his own deeds. And it is because of my earlier deeds that my son has died. O
Arjunaka! Let Kala and Mrityu go and release this serpent.' Mrityu, Kala and the serpent went away to wherever
they had come from. Arjunaka was freed of his anger and Goutami of her sorrow. O king! Hearing this, be tranquil
and do not think a lot. O bull among men! Know that people obtain the three worlds because of their own deeds[Good deeds take them to heaven, bad deeds take them to hell and average deeds lead to rebirth on earth.].
O Partha! You did not do anything, nor did Duryodhana. Know that the kings died because of what Kala did."'

Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing these words, the immensely energetic Yudhishthira lost all his anxiety. The
one who followed dharma had more questions.'
