'Markandeya said, "O unblemished one! Thus, the genealogy of the different fires has been recounted by me. O
Kouravya! Now hear about the birth of the intelligent Kartikeya. I will tell you about Adbhuta's extraordinary and
infinitely energetic son, whose deeds were extensive. He was born from the wives of the seven brahmana rishis. In
ancient times, the gods and the asuras were always engaged in destroying each other. The danavas, terrible in form,
were always able to vanquish the gods. On witnessing that his armies had been destroyed by them several times,
Purandara[Indra. Literally, the sacker of cities.] was greatly anxious about finding a general for his army. He thought, 'I must find an extremely
powerful person who, on seeing the army of the gods destroyed, will have the valour to protect it.' On reflecting
about this, he went to Mount Manasa and heard terrible lamentations that were voiced by a woman. 'Let someone
come to me. Let a man come and protect me. Let him show me a husband. Or let him become my husband himself.' Purandara told her, 'Do not be afraid. You have no reason to be scared.' When he said this, he saw Keshi[The name of a demon.]
standing before him. He wore a crown on his head and held a club in his hand. He looked like a mountain, rich in
minerals.

'"Grasping the maiden by the hand, Vasava[Indra.] told him, 'Why are you acting towards this maiden like someone
who is not an arya? Know me to be the wielder of the vajra and refrain from causing her any violence.' Keshi
replied, 'O Shakra! Let her be. I desire her. O chastiser of Paka[Indra killed a demon named Paka.]! Return to your city with your life.' Having
said this, Keshi flung his club at Indra, so as to kill him. But as it descended, Vasava sliced it into two with his vajra. Enraged, Keshi then flung the peak of a mountain. O king! On seeing that mountain peak descend,
Shatakratu[Indra's name. Literally, the performer of one hundred sacrifices.] splintered it with his vajra and it fell down on the ground. As it fell, the peak hurt Keshi. Having
been thus hurt, he let go of the immensely fortunate maiden and fled. When the asura had left, Vasava spoke to the
maiden. 'O one with the beautiful face! Who are you? Whose are you? What are you doing here?' The maiden answered, 'I am Prajapati's daughter, famous by the name of Devasena. My sister Daityasena has already been abducted by Keshi[Literally, devasena means the army of the gods, while daityasena means the army of the daityas.]. When Prajapati gave us permission, we sisters always used to come to Manasa to sport, together with our friends. The great asura Keshi always craved for our favours. O chastiser of Paka! Daityasena desired him, but I did not. O illustrious one! She was then abducted, but I have been freed through your strength. O
lord of the gods! I desire that an invincible one like you should be my husband.' Indra replied, 'My mother is Dakshayani[In this context, Dakshayani means Daksha's daughter. Daksha's daughter was Aditi and she married
Kashyapa. The Adityas or gods, including Indra, were born from this union. Several of Daksha's daughters were
married to Kashyapa and Kashyapa was Devasena's father. However, it is not obvious which of Daksha's daughters, one of Aditi's sisters, was Devasena's mother.]. You are the daughter of my mother's sister. I desire that you should tell me about your own strength.'

The maiden said, 'O mighty-armed one! I am weak, but my husband will be strong. Through my father's boon, he
will be worshipped by the gods and the asuras.' Indra replied, 'O goddess! O unblemished one! What kind of
strength will your husband possess? I wish to hear this from you.' The maiden said, 'He will be immensely valorous and immensely strong. He will vanquish the gods, the danavas, the yakshas, the kinnaras, the serpents and the
rakshasas. He will be seen to vanquish all the evil ones. Together with you, he will vanquish all the beings. Such
will my husband be. He will have the traits of a brahmana. He will be extensive in his deeds.' On hearing her
words, Indra was unhappy and began to think, because there was no one who could be the husband the goddess
had spoken of.

'"Then the one, whose radiance was like the sun[Indra.], saw the sun rise on Udaya[Mountain from which the sun rises.]. He also saw the immensely
fortunate moon enter the sun. The new moon had set in and it was a terrible instant. He saw the gods and the asuras
fighting on Mount Udaya. Shatakratu saw that the dawn was tinged with red clouds. The illustrious one also saw
that Varuna's abode[The ocean.] was red. He saw Agni enter the sun, bearing oblations offered with mantras by Bhrigu, Angiras and the others. He also saw the twenty-four parvas surrounding the sun[Parva means part or division and this probably means the twenty-four hours.]. It was a terrible instant. The
moon, traversing the path of dharma, was united with the sun. On seeing the union of the sun and the moon, and on
witnessing that terrible instant, Shakra began to think. 'This great conjunction is terrible and is united with energy.
This conjunction of Agni, the sun and the moon is extraordinary. If the moon begets a son now, he may be the husband of the goddess. Agni has all the qualities too and Agni is also a god. If he begets a son, he may be the husband of the goddess too.' Having thought in this way, the illustrious one went to Brahma's world, taking Devasena
with him. Worshipping the grandfather, he said, 'Please grant a brave husband for this goddess.' Brahma replied,
'O destroyer of danavas! It will be done as you have thought. There will be an embryo with great strength and valour. O Shatakratu! Together with you, he will be your army's general. That valorous one will be the husband of
this goddess.' Hearing these words, the lord of the gods bowed in obeisance. Together with the maiden, he went to
the abode of the devarshis. With Vasishtha at the forefront, those chief among the foremost of the brahmanas were
extremely great in their vows. With Shatakratu leading them, the gods went to the sacrifice, thirsting for a share of
the soma that had been obtained through austerities. Having performed the sacrifice in accordance with the prescribed rites, the great-souled ones[The rishis.] offered oblations to all the gods into the well-kindled fire. The Adbhuta fire,
the bearer of oblations, was summoned from the sun's circle. According to the prescribed rules, the lord Agni
emerged. He restrained his speech, and entered the sacrificial fire, into which, oblations had been offered with
mantras. Various oblations had been rendered by the rishis and Agni accepted these. O best of the Bharata lineage!
Having accepted them, he carried them to the residents of heaven.

'"When he emerged, he saw the wives of those great-souled ones[The rishis.]. They were seated in their hermitages and
were happily bathing. Their complexions were as golden as sacrificial altars. They were as unblemished as a digit
of the moon[Chandralekha.]. Their limbs glowed with the radiance of the fire. They were as extraordinary as the stars. On seeing the wives of those foremost among brahmanas, Agni became overcome with desire and his mind and his senses
were stirred. But he thought, 'It is not proper for me to be excited. These are the wives of the foremost among
brahmanas. They are beyond the reach of desire and I am desiring them. I cannot look at them, or touch them,
without justified reason. I will therefore enter the household fire, and thereby, satisfy myself by always looking at
them.' He entered the household fire and happily looked at them. He touched all of them with his flames, golden in
complexion. Overcome by those beautiful ones, Agni lived there, his heart attracted by love for them. However, he
was not able to obtain the wives of the brahmanas. And since his heart was tormented by desire, Agni decided that
he would give up his body. He went to the forest. But Daksha's daughter, Svaha, had desired Agni earlier. For a
long time, the beautiful one had been watching out for a weakness. However, the unblemished one did not find one
in the god who was never distracted. But on learning that Agni had left for the forest, the beautiful one, who was
tormented by desire, began to think. 'I will assume the forms of the wives of the saptarshis and seek out Agni. He
is overcome with desire. I will seduce and desire him in those forms. On doing this, he will be delighted and my
desire will be satisfied.'"'
