Yudhishthira said, "O one with dharma in his soul! O unblemished one! You have spoken to me about the
dharma of the four varnas. O king! In that fashion, tell me everything about the rites to be followed in funeral
ceremonies."'

Vaishampayana continued, 'Thus addressed by Yudhishthira, Bhishma, Shantanu's son, sought to explain to him
everything about the rites to be followed in funeral ceremonies.

'Bhishma replied, "O  king! Listen  attentively  to  the  sacred  rites  that  have  been  prescribed  for  funeral  ceremonies. O scorcher of enemies! These sacrifices for the ancestors are praised and lead to fame and sons. Gods,
asuras, humans, gandharvas, serpents, rakshasas, pishachas and kinnaras always worship their ancestors. The ancestors are worshipped first and the gods are satisfied next. Therefore, a man must undertake every kind of effort
for such a sacrifice. O great king! It is said that a funeral ceremony for the ancestors can be undertaken later. But
that general rule is countered by the rule that it must be performed first[Before worshipping the gods.]. The grandfathers are pleased with a funeral ceremony that is performed on any day. But I will tell you about the qualities and demerits of specific tithis.
O unblemished one! Funeral ceremonies performed on different days yield different fruits. I will tell you everything. Listen attentively. If one worships the ancestors on the first day of shuklapaksha, one obtains beautiful wives
in one's own house and they give birth to many beautiful sons. On the second day, one obtains daughters. On the
third day, one obtains minstrels who praise. On the fourth day, one obtains many small animals in one's house. O
king! On the fifth day, many sons are born. A man who performs it on the sixth day gets radiance. O king! By performing a funeral ceremony on the seventh day, one gains through agriculture. By performing it on the eighth day,
one gains through trade. By performing a funeral ceremony on the ninth day, one obtains many animals with un-
cloven hooves. By performing a funeral ceremony on the tenth day, the cattle prosper. O king! By performing it on
the eleventh day, one obtains vessels made out of earth and base metals. Sons with the radiance of Brahma's rays
are born in the household. It is always seen in this world that if it is performed on the twelfth day, there are many
colourful and beautiful objects of silver and gold. If a funeral ceremony is performed on the thirteenth day, one becomes superior to one's relatives. If a man performs a funeral ceremony on the fourteenth day, he has to take part
in battles on earth. There is no doubt that the young men in his household will die. If it is done on the day of the
new moon, all the objects of desire are satisfied. In krishnapaksha, it can be done from the tenth day onwards, but
avoiding the fourteenth. The other tithis are not praised for funeral ceremonies. The subsequent paksha is superior
to the earlier paksha[Krishnapaksha is superior to shuklapaksha.]. For a funeral ceremony, the afternoon is also superior to the forenoon."'
