'"The lord said, 'O Kounteya! This body is known as the kshetra. 458 He who knows this is called the kshetrajna
by those who have the knowledge. 459 O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In every field, know me to be the
kshetrajna. My view is that knowledge about kshetra and kshetrajna is knowledge. 460 Briefly, hear from me what
is that kshetra, its nature and its transformation, and cause and effect within it. Also that 461 and its power. The
rishis have sung this 462 in different metres in several diverse ways. The definite logical arguments are also there
in the Brahmasutra passages. 463 The great elements, 464 the ego, the intellect and the unmanifest, 465 the ten organs of sense 466 and the single one 467 and the objects of the five senses, 468 desire, hatred, happiness, unhappiness, combination, 469 consciousness, patience, these together are said to be the kshetra and its transformations.
Lack of ego, lack of arrogance, lack of injury, 470 forgiveness, humility, servitude towards teachers, purity, singlemindedness 471 and control over the self, detachment towards gratification of the senses and lack of vanity, indifference towards unhappy travails like birth, death, aging and disease, non-attachment, 472 no sense of belonging in
wife, son and home, always equality in mind whether good or evil results, faithfulness in devotion to me, fixedness
and non-deviation in yoga, habitation in secluded spots, aversion to crowds, devotion to knowledge about the atman and search for true knowledge-these are known as knowledge. Anything opposed is ignorance. I will state
that which is to be known. Knowing that, attains immortality. 473 That brahman, without origin, is my form. It is
said, both eternal and transient. 474 That 475 has hands and feet everywhere, eyes, heads and mouths everywhere,
and ears everywhere, is established in everything in this world. Manifest in the qualities of all the senses, but without any senses, alone, like the abode of everything, without qualities and the preserver of all qualities. 476 That is
outside all beings and yet inside them, moving and unmoving, beyond knowledge because of subtleness, far and
yet near. That is indivisible, but exists in every being in divided form. Know 477 as the preserver, destroyer and
creator of all beings. That is the light of all bright bodies. Said to be beyond darkness. Knowledge, that which is to
be known and attainable through knowledge, is established in the heart of everything. 478 Briefly, kshetra and that
which is knowledge, and to be known, have been stated. Knowing this, my devotee attains my nature. 479 Know
both prakriti and purusha to be without origin. And know transformations and the qualities 480 to result from
prakriti. 481 Prakriti is said to be the reason behind caus and effect, 482 purusha said to be 483 for happiness and
unhappiness in enjoyment, because purusha is established in prakriti and enjoys prakriti's qualities. 484 And its
485 good and evil birth is because of its association with these qualities. The supreme being in this body is known
as one who witnesses, one who allows, one who sustains, one who enjoys, the supreme lord and the paramatman.
He who knows the nature of purusha, and of prakriti, with the qualities, whatever be the position he is in, will not
be reborn. Some, through meditation, see the atman in the atman with the atman. 486 Others use sankhya yoga 487
and still others use karma yoga. And others, failing to know, 488 hear from others and worship. Even they, who are
devoted to hearing, transcend death. O best of the Bharata lineage! Whatever movable and immovable objects are
created, know them to result from the link between kshetra and kshetrajna. He truly sees who beholds the indestructible supreme lord equally in all beings, while everything else is destructible. He who sees the great lord
equally established in everything, he doesn't kill the atman with the atman, 489 and therefore, attains supreme liberation. He who perceives all action as being performed by prakriti and the atman as a non-agent, he truly beholds.
When he sees the different aspects of beings as established in one 490 and also everything manifested from there,
he attains the brahman. O Kounteya! Because it is without origin and without qualities, this paramatman is unchanging and although based in the body, does nothing. It is not attached. 491 As the sky that is everywhere is not
attached because of its subtlety, like that, the atman is not attached, though it is in every body. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Just as a single sun lights up the entire world, like that, a single kshetri lights up all kshetras. 492
Those who, through their eyes of knowledge, know the difference between kshetra and kshetrajna in this way and
freedom from beings and prakriti, 493 they attain the supreme goal.'"'
