'Dhoumya said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Now listen to the sacred tirthas in the southern direction. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! I will recount them in detail, to the best of my intelligence. In this direction is
the sacred and auspicious river Godavari. It is pure, has many places to rest and a lot of water, and is frequented by
ascetics. There are the rivers Venna and Bhimarathi, both capable of destroying the fear of sin. They are full of animals and birds and are adorned with the habitations of ascetics. O bull among the Bharata lineage! There is the river of rajarshi Nriga, lord of the earth. This is the Payoshni, with beautiful tirthas and a lot of water, and frequented
by brahmanas. The immensely ascetic and great yogi Markandeya sang the praises of Nriga's lineage here. We
have heard that this really happened when Nriga performed a sacrifice. Indra became drunk with soma and brahmanas with their gifts. O best of the Bharata lineage! On Mount Varunasrotasa, there is the sacred and pure forest
of Mathara, with many roots and fruit. This has a sacrificial stake. It is said that to the north of Praveni, there is
Kanva's sacred hermitage and there are many forests inhabited by ascetics. O son! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Two sacrificial altars of the great-souled Jamadagni are in Shurparka-Pashana tirtha and Purashchandra. O
Kounteya! In Martya, there is Ashoka tirtha, with many hermitages. O Yudhishthira! In Pandya, there are the
tirthas known as Agasyta and Varuna. O bull among men! In Pandya, there is the sacred one known as Kumari[Kanyakumari.].

'"O Kounteya! Listen as I now recount Tamraparni[Tamraparni was an old name for Sri Lanka. But this must be the Tamraparni River in Tamil Nadu, now
known as Thamirabarani.]. The gods underwent austerities there, in a desire to attain greatness. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Gokarna is famous in the three worlds. O son! There is a lot of
water there and the water is cool. It is sacred and auspicious. The lake is extremely difficult to access for men who
have not purified their souls. Near that is the sacred hermitage of Agastya's disciple, on Mount Devasabha. It is
full of fruits and roots and is known as Trinasomagni. There is Mount Vaidurya, auspicious and beautiful, and full
of many gems. Agastya's hermitage is there, with a lot of roots, fruit and water. O lord of men! I will now describe
the sacred spots, hermitages, rivers, mountains and lakes in Surashtra. O Yudhishthira! The brahmanas speak of
Chamasonmajjana there and of Prabhasa tirtha on the sea, belonging to the thirty gods. There is the auspicious Pindaraka, visited by the ascetics and the great Mount Ujjayanta, which brings swift success. O Yudhishthira! Narada,
foremost among devarshis, has recited an ancient shloka about this. Listen. 'He who torments his body with austerities in Ujjayanta, on auspicious Mount Surashtra, frequented by animals and birds, attains greatness in the vault of
the sky[Heaven.].' The sacred Dvaravati is there. The ancient god Madhusudana, who is the eternal dharma, dwells there
in person. The brahmanas who are knowledgeable in the Vedas and those who are learned about the nature of the
soul say that the great-souled Krishna is the eternal dharma. It is said that Govinda is supremely pure among all
purifiers, most sacred among all things sacred and most auspicious among all things auspicious. Pundarikaksha,
the eternal god of the gods in the three worlds, Hari whose soul cannot be contemplated and Madhusudana dwells
there[All of these are Vishnu's names.]."'