'Markandeya said, "Miserable at Sita's abduction, Rama then went to Lake Pampa, which was a short distance
away. It was full of lotuses and blue lotuses[Kamalas and utpalas respectively.]. The wind was pleasant and cool and the forest was redolent with
the pleasant fragrance of amrita. There, his mind turned to his beloved. That Indra among kings remembered his
beloved and lamented, tormented by the arrows of love. Soumitri told him, 'O one who honours those who are
worthy! Such sentiments should not touch you, like a self-controlled man should not be tainted by disease or the
conduct of the aged. You have obtained information about Vaidehi and Ravana. Now use manliness and intelligence to recover her. Let us go to Sugriva, the bull among monkeys in the mountain. Be comforted, since I, your
disciple, servant and aide, am with you.' At these many different words of Lakshmana, Raghava recovered his natural state and thought about what should be done next. The brave brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, bathed in the
waters of Pampa. After rendering offerings to the ancestors, they departed. They reached Mount Rishyamukha, full
of many roots and fruits. The brave ones saw the five monkeys on the peak. Sugriva sent his wise adviser, the monkey Hanuman, who was as tall as a mountain, to them. Having first conversed with him, they went to Sugriva. O
king! Rama then had an agreement of friendship with the king of the monkeys. When the monkeys were told about
what had to be done, they displayed the garment that Sita had dropped while she was being abducted. Having thus
obtained assurance, Rama himself instated Sugriva, the lord of the monkeys, as the king of all the monkeys on
earth. Kakutstha also promised to kill Vali in battle. O king! Sugriva promised to bring Sita back.

'"Having thus concluded an agreement and having reposed trust in each other, all of them went to Kishkindha
and based themselves there, desirous of doing battle. Having reached Kishkindha, Sugriva let out a giant roar, like
the noise of a flood. Vali could not tolerate this. But Tara[Vali's wife.] restrained him and said, 'From the manner in which
the mighty monkey Sugriva is roaring, I think that he has obtained a protector. You should not go out.' At that, the
eloquent Vali, adorned in a golden garland, the king of the monkeys, told Tara, whose face was like the lord of the
stars[The moon is the lord of the stars.], 'You are familiar with the voices of all beings and you possess intelligence. See and find out whose protection this fake brother of mine has obtained.' Tara, with radiance like the lord of the stars, thought for an instant.
Then the wise one spoke to her husband. 'O lord of the monkeys! Listen to everything. The immensely powerful
Rama is Dasharatha's son and has lost his wife. That great archer has contracted an agreement of friendship with
Sugriva, with one's enemy regarded as the other's too. His brother is unvanquished, mighty-armed and wise
Soumitri Lakshmana, who stands by him for accomplishing the task. Mainda, Dvivida, the wind-god's son Hanuman and Jambavan, the king of the bears, are Sugriva's advisers and stand by him. All these great-souled ones are
immensely strong and intelligent. Resorting to Rama's valour, they are enough for your destruction.' But the lord
of the monkeys disregarded her words, which would have ensured his welfare. He was full of jealousy and suspected that her mind was attracted towards Sugriva. Having spoken harshly to Tara, he emerged from the mouth of
his cave. He went to Sugriva, who was stationed near Malyavan and said, 'O foolish you! You are fond of life. But
you have been defeated by me many times earlier. Considering our relationship, I have freed you earlier. Why do
you wish to rush to your death again?' Thus addressed, Sugriva, the destroyer of enemies, spoke to his brother for
a reason, as if to indicate to Rama that the time had come. 'O king! Know that I have been robbed of my wife[Tara was earlier married to Sugriva.],
and robbed of my kingdom, by you. What is the purpose of being alive? That is the reason I have approached you.'

Speaking to each other in these and many other ways, Vali and Sugriva engaged in a fight, with shala trees, tala
trees and rocks as weapons. They smote each other and flung each other down on the ground. Both of them moved
wonderfully and struck each other with fists. Both of them dripped with blood, lacerated by nails and teeth. Those
brave ones resembled blossoming kimshukas. No difference could be detected between the two fighters. Then
Hanuman placed a garland around Sugriva's neck[So that Rama could distinguish Sugriva from Vali.]. With that garland round his neck, the brave one was as radiant and handsome as Mount Malaya with a garland of clouds. Recognizing Sugriva through that mark, the great
archer Rama drew his giant bow and chose Vali as a target. The twang of the bow was like the sound of a machine.
Pierced in the heart through the arrow, Vali fell down. With his heart pierced and wounded, he began to vomit
blood through his mouth. He saw Rama standing there, together with Soumitri. He rebuked Kakutstha and fell
down unconscious on the ground. Tara saw him on the ground, like a dislodged lord of the stars. With Vali slain,
Sugriva obtained Kishkindha back and also Tara, with a face like the lord of the stars, now that her lord had fallen.
Worshipped by Sugriva, the wise Rama lived on the beautiful slopes of Malyavan for four months.

'"Having arrived at his city of Lanka, Ravana was overcome by the force of desire. He instated Sita in a house
that was like Nandana[Indra's pleasure garden.]. It was located near a grove of ashoka trees and was like the hermitage of an asectic. She
wore the garb of an ascetic and thinking of her husband, became lean. She was devoted to fasting and austerities.
The large-eyed one lived there in misery, surviving on fruits and roots. To guard her, the lord of the rakshasas appointed rakshasis. They held lances, swords, spears, axes, clubs and flaming brands. Some of them had two eyes,
others had three eyes. Some had eyes on the forehead. Some had long tongues, others had no tongue. Some had
three breasts and one leg. Others had three heads of matted hair and one eye. These and others had flaming eyes.
Their hair was as ugly as that of a young camel[Karabha, alternatively, young elephant.]. Incessantly, night and day, they surrounded Sita. Those
pishachis were gruesome to look at and had terrible voices. They always scolded the black-eyed one in terrible and
harsh words. 'Let us eat her. Let us tear her into shreds that are as small as sesamum. She lives here, but she disregards our lord.' Thus did they censure and terrify her repeatedly. Afflicted with grief for her husband, she sighed
and replied, 'O aryas! Eat me up swiftly. I have no desire to be alive, without the lotus-eyed one[Rama.] who has dark
and curly hair. Separated from my beloved, I would rather live without food and shrivel away my frame, like a serpent inside a tala tree. But for Raghava, I will not go to any other man. Know this to be the truth. And do what you
wish with me, thereafter.' On hearing these words, the rakshasis, whose voices were grating, went and told the Indra of the rakshasas everything that had transpired.

'"When all of them had left, a rakshasi named Trijata, who was learned about dharma and pleasant in speech,
comforted Vaidehi. 'O Sita! I will tell you something. O friend! Have trust in me. Give up your fear. O one with
the beautiful thighs! Listen to my words. There is an intelligent and old bull among the rakshasas, by the name of
Avindhya. With Rama's welfare in mind, and for your sake, he told me this. "Having comforted and assured Sita,
tell her these words of mine. Her husband Rama, with the powerful Lakshmana following him, are both well. For
your sake, the illustrious Raghava has become friends with the king of the monkeys, who is like Shakra in his energy. O timid one! Have no fear. Ravana is censured by the worlds. O unblemished one! You are protected by
Nalakubara's curse. In earlier times, the evil one was cursed when he sought to obtain Rambha as his wife. This
one is not in control of his senses. But he is incapable of forcibly violating any woman. Protected by Sugriva, and
together with Soumitri, your wise husband will swiftly arrive here and will set you free. I have had an extremely
terrible dream, signifying terrible calamity and the destruction of the evil-minded one who has demolished the lineage of Pulastya. That evil-souled roamer of the night is the performer of mean deeds and is terrible. Because of
his nature and the taint of wicked conduct, he increases the fear of all beings. Having lost his senses because of
destiny, he challenges all the gods. In my dreams, I have seen all the portents of his destruction. Smeared in oil and
with his head shaven, Dashanana was immersed in mud. He was stationed on a chariot drawn by donkeys and was
dancing. I have seen Kumbhakarna and the others naked, with their heads fallen. They were decorated with red
garlands and ointments and were being dragged towards a southern direction[The south is the direction of death, and of ghosts and demons.]. I have seen Vibhishana alone,
climbing up Mount Shveta, decorated with white garlands and ointments, crowned, and with a white umbrella over
his head. He and his four advisers, bedecked with white garlands and ointments, will climb Mount Shveta and be
freed from this great danger. The earth and the oceans will be made turbulent with Rama's weapons. Your husband
will fill the earth with his fame. I have seen Lakshmana, astride a collection of bones. He was eating honey and
payasa. He was glancing in all the directions. I have seen you protected by a tiger, weeping and with your body
covered in blood. You have repeatedly travelled in a northern direction. O Vaidehi! O Sita! You will soon be reunited with your husband Raghava, together with his brother, and will find joy."' When the maiden with the eyes
of a young deer heard these words of Trijata, she became hopeful of again being reunited with her husband. When
those terrible and extremely fearsome pishachis returned, they saw her seated with Trijata, as she had been
earlier."'
