Yudhishthira asked, "O grandfather! O immensely wise one! There may be people who have promised things
to  brahmanas,  but  because  of  confusion,  they  do  not  subsequently  give  these.  What happens to them? O
supreme among those who uphold dharma! Tell me about this kind of dharma. What happens to the evil-minded
men who do not give, despite having promised to?"

'Bhishma replied, "There may be a person who has promised to give a little or a lot, but does not give according
to that promise. All his hopes are destroyed, like an impotent person trying to get offspring. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Whatever good deeds he has performed between the night of his birth and the night of his death
and all the oblations that he has offered are destroyed. People who are learned about the sacred texts of dharma
have a saying about this. O best among the Bharata lineage! Using their supreme intelligence, they have spoken
about this. People who are learned about the sacred texts of dharma cite an example, about being freed if one gives
away one thousand horses with black ears[Freed from the sin of having gone back on the promise. But this statement about giving away one thousand horses is left dangling.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In this connection, an ancient
history is recounted, about a conversation between a jackal and a monkey. O scorcher of enemies! When they were
humans, they used to be friends. They were subsequently born in the wombs of a she-jackal and a she-monkey.
The monkey saw the jackal feeding off a corpse in the midst of a cremation ground. Remembering its earlier life, it
asked, 'What wicked and extremely terrible deed did you perform earlier? Why are you in this cremation ground,
feeding off vile and putrid carcasses?' Thus addressed by the monkey, the jackal replied, 'O monkey! I promised a
brahmana  something,  but  committed  the  injury  of  not  giving  it.  Because  of  that  sin,  I  have  been  born  in  this
species. That is the reason, when I am hungry, I have to eat this kind of food.' O king! Earlier, I heard this spoken
about, in connection with brahmanas[The Critical edition abruptly excises some shlokas that figure in non-critical versions. In those, the jackal asks a
counter-question to the monkey. The monkey replies that it has been born as a monkey because it (in the earlier
life) stole the fruits of brahmanas.]. The one who knows about dharma[Because of the abruptness, we do not know who this is.] recounted this ancient and auspicious
story. O lord of the earth! O Pandava! I heard this again, when Krishna related accounts about brahmanas earlier[This Krishna is probably Vedavyasa.].
This is the reason there is the perennial instruction. If one has promised to give something to a brahmana, one must
always give it. One must not bring about one's destruction through brahmanas[Through their curses.]. O lord of the earth! It has been
said that if a brahmana's hopes have earlier been raised, this is like a blazing fire into which kindling has been offered. O king! If the hopes have been raised and he glances at anything angrily, he will burn everything down, like
dead wood being consumed by a fire. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If he resides in the kingdom, he must
be rendered affectionate and satisfied, honoured with words. Then sons, grandsons, animals, relatives and stores in
the city and the countryside will be nurtured with peace and benefit. The supreme energy of brahmanas can be
seen, like the sun with the thousand rays shining down on the surface of the earth. O Yudhishthira! O  supreme
among the Bharata lineage! Therefore, if one has promised something and desires a good birth in the next life, one
must always give it. It is certain that one is capable of obtaining supreme heaven by giving to brahmanas. This is
the greatest rite and the best of gifts. Know that such donations to brahmanas are gifts that keep the gods and the
ancestors alive. O best among the Bharata lineage! Brahmanas are said to be like a great tirtha. There is no time of
the day when one should not honour a brahmana who has arrived."'
