Souti said, 'I have heard that at that time Astika brought about another great miracle. The king who was Parikshit's
son was about to grant a boon. The snake[Takshaka.], though thrown off from Indra's hand, remained suspended in the air.
At that, King Janamejaya became pensive. Although offerings were being poured into the sacrificial fire according
to the rituals, the frightened Takshaka did not fall into the flames.'

Shounaka asked, 'O suta! Did those wise Brahmanas not remember the mantras? Why did Takshaka not fall into
the fire?'

Souti said, 'When that supreme snake had been cast off from Indra's hand and had lost consciousness, Astika
told him thrice, "Stay! Stay! Stay!" Though his heart trembled, he remained suspended in the air, like a man inside
a circle. At that, being repeatedly urged by his sadasyas, the king said, "Let it be done as Astika wishes. Let the
sacrifice be stopped. Let the snakes be saved. Let Astika be satisfied. Also, let the words of the suta[Lohitaksha.] come true."

When Astika was granted his boon, a tumultuous roar of joy was heard in the sky. The sacrifice of Parikshit's son,
the king of the Pandava dynasty, came to an end. King Janamejaya of the Bharata lineage was pleased and gifted
riches in hundreds and thousands to the ritvijas and sadasyas who were assembled there. The lord also gave lots of
riches to the suta Lohitaksha, the builder who had predicted at the beginning that the snake-sacrifice would be
brought to an end through the action of a Brahmana. Thereafter, in accordance with the prescribed rites, he concluded the sacrifice. Exceedingly pleased, the king honoured Astika and sent him back to his home. The sage was
also pleased, because his object had been attained. The king told him, "You must come again and be a sadasya in
my great horse-sacrifice." Astika agreed. After performing his unrivalled deed and having pleased the king, Astika
was delighted and swiftly returned to his uncle and mother. Touching their feet, he told them in detail all that had
transpired.

'Having heard his words, the assembled snakes were extremely delighted with Astika. They were now freed
from their worries. They wished to bestow a boon on Astika. All of them repeatedly asked him, "O learned one! O
child! What is it that you desire? What can we do to please you? We are happy that we have now been freed by
you. What boon can we grant you?" Astika replied, "Let Brahmanas and other men, who read about this virtuous
act of mine with a tranquil mind in the morning and evening, have no reason to fear you." With cheerful hearts,
they told their nephew, "It shall be exactly as you wish. We will happily do what you have asked us to do. He who
invokes the immensely famous and truthful Astika, born to Jaratkaru from Jaratkaru, will be protected from
snakes. Those who remember Asita, Artimana and Sunitha[Names of great sages.], during the day or the night, will never face any
danger from snakes." Having thus saved the snakes at the snake-sacrifice, that supreme among Brahmanas, with
dharma in his soul, met his destiny at the appointed time. He left behind many sons and grandsons.

'Thus have I narrated to you Astika's story, exactly as it occurred. When recounted, this story dispels all fear of
snakes. O Brahmana! On hearing this virtuous and blessed account of Astika's exploits from the beginning, an account that increases one's store of merit, one has no fear of snakes.'

Shounaka said, 'O son of a suta! O son! You have narrated to me the great and extensive story of the Bhrigu lineage. I am extremely pleased with you. O son of a suta! I now ask you to recite for me again the wonderful accounts composed by Vyasa, exactly as they were recited by the great-souled sadasyas at the long-extending sacrifice[The snake-sacrifice.], during intervals at the ceremonies. O son of a suta! O great poet! O learned one! I wish to hear exactly the
reasons behind those narrations.'

Souti replied, 'During intervals at the ceremonies, the Brahmanas spoke about many accounts based on the
Vedas. But Vyasa recounted the wonderful and great history known as Bharata.'

Shounaka said, 'I wish to hear that sacred account known as the Mahabharata, which spread the fame of the
Pandavas. Asked by Janamejaya, Krishna Dvaipayana had it properly recited during intervals in the sacrifice. It
had its origins in the ocean-like mind of the maharshi of pure deeds. O best of men! O son of a suta! Recite it again
to me. I am not satisfied.'

Souti replied, 'I shall recite from the beginning the great and supreme account of the Mahabharata, as Krishna
Dvaipayana conceived it in his mind. O Brahmana! Listen to it. I too derive great pleasure in recounting it.'
