Bhishma said, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about a conversation between Narada and
Asita-Devala. The aged Devala, supreme among intelligent ones, was seated. Narada asked him about the
creation and destruction of beings. 'O brahmana! Where was this universe, with its mobile and immobile objects,
created from? Where do they go at the time of destruction? Tell me about this.'

'"Asita replied, 'It is said that when the time comes, the creator of all beings thinks about existence and brings
into being the five great elements. Time urges itself to create beings from these. There is no doubt that those who
say that there is anything else[Other than the five great elements, time and the creator of all beings.] utter a falsehood. O Narada! Know that these five are eternal, indestructible and
fixed. These naturally possess great energy and time is the sixth. Water, space, earth, wind and fire are the elements. Do not entertain the doubt that there is anything superior to these. There are no texts or arguments to substantiate that doubt. Know that the accumulation or withdrawal of these six leads to everything. These five, time,
the eight strands are the only eternal reason behind the creation and destruction of all beings[This needs explanation. The five elements and time add up to six. The other two, making up eight, are past deeds
and the resolution to create.]. When beings are
destroyed, it is into these that merger takes place. When beings are created, they emerge from these. When a creature is destroyed, it is divided into five parts, and is also created from these. The body comes from earth, hearing
from space. The eyes come from fire, life from the wind and blood from water. The eyes, the nose, the ears, the
skin and the tongue as the fifth are the senses of knowledge and the wise know that these are for attaining the objects of the senses. Sight, hearing, smell, touch and taste are known to be the qualities of the senses. There are five
senses, five qualities and five connections. Form, scent, taste, touch and sound are the qualities that are obtained
through the senses. There are five each of senses, qualities and connections. The senses don't actually comprehend
the qualities of form, scent, taste, touch and sound. These are actually understood by the kshetrajna. Consciousness
is superior to the accumulation of the senses. The mind is superior to consciousness. Intelligence is superior to the
mind. The kshetrajna is superior to intelligence. Initially, creatures consider all material objects through separate
senses. Subsequently, the mind reflects and resorts to intelligence. One then comprehends the truth about all the
objects perceived by the senses. Consciousness and mind interact with the accumulation of the senses, and intelligence is the eighth. Those who have thought about adhyatma and have thought about it know these eight to be the
organs of knowledge. Know that the hands, the feet, the anus, the penis and the mouth as the fifth are the organs of
action. The mouth is said to be the organ that is used for speaking and eating. The feet are the organs for moving
and the hand are the organs for doing something. The anus and the penis are similar in action and are both organs
for discharge. One is for the discharge of excrement, while the other is for discharge at the time of sexual desire.
However, it has rightly been said that there is a sixth organ of action and that is strength. I have spoken to you
about all the senses of knowledge, organs of action and their attributes. When the organs are exhausted, they cannot perform their own tasks. Since the action of the organs is suspended, a man sleeps. However, though the senses
are under suspension, if the mind is awake and concerns itself with material objects, this is known as a state of
dreaming. There  are  three  attributes  of  sattva,  rajas  and  tamas.  When  engaged  in  action,  the  state  of  sattva  is
praised. Joy, success in tasks, power and the supreme objective are said to be the signs of those who have resorted
to sattva. The sentiments that any creature properly resorts to and the sentiments that it aspires for, are always evident in its coming and going[In interpretations, this is explained in the following way. If one is emancipated, there is no difference in sentiments between states of being awake and dreaming. But in others, those sentiments differ.]. It is said that there are seventeen characteristics of the qualities and the senses[Five organs of knowledge, five organs of action, consciousness, mind, intelligence, strength and sattva, rajas and
tamas.].
The eighteenth one[The atman.] that dwells in the body is eternal. All those qualities adhere to the one who assumes a body
and dwells in the body. When he no longer dwells in the body, they are also disassociated from the body. The body
is reduced to the five elements. There are eighteen qualities in the body[Ignorance has been added to the earlier tally of seventeen. The atman is now being counted as the nineteenth.]. Heat is the twentieth and all this comes
about through an interaction between the five elements. Together with the breath of life, mahat sustains these in the
body. That is the reason for creation and destruction of the body. When those good and bad deeds are exhausted,
the body is reduced to the five elements. In due course of time, depending on the good and bad deeds that have
been performed, another body is entered. Through a process of death and rebirth, he repeatedly gives up one body
and resorts to another body. He is urged on by time, like a person abandoning a dilapidated house for a new house.
Those who are wise and firm in their resolution are not tormented because of this. Foolish people, those who are
proud of relationships, are the only ones who grieve on account of this. There is no one to whom he belongs. There
is no one who belongs to him. He is always alone, enjoying joy and misery in the body. Some creatures are born
again. There are others who are not reborn. Some are freed from their bodies and attain the supreme objective.
Having abandoned the body, the store of good and bad deeds, when the body is destroyed, such people attain the
brahman. Knowledge of sankhya is recommended for the destruction of good and bad deeds. Once those are destroyed, learned ones can see that the state of the brahman is the supreme objective.'"
