Yudhishthira asked, "There is a mixture of the varnas and children of mixed parentage are born out of addiction to wealth, desire, uncertainty about varnas or plain ignorance. What are the rules for children of such
mixed parentage? What  is  their  dharma  and  what  are  their  recommended  tasks?  O  grandfather! Tell  me  this."

'Bhishma replied, "Earlier, for the sake of performing sacrifices, Prajapati created the four varnas and there were
only four kinds of tasks. A brahmana can have four wives and in two of them, he himself is born[The sons born from the brahmana wife and the kshatriya wife have the status of a brahmana. But the sons born
from the vaishya wife and the shudra wife do not have this status.]. The sons who
are born from the two who are lower down are inferior and have the varna of their mothers. The son born through a
brahmana father and a shudra mother is known as a parashava, because this is like offspring from a corpse[Param means no more than and shava means corpse. A shudra woman is as defiled as a corpse.]. He
should not give up his own duty of servitude and should serve his own family. He should never abandon that kind
of conduct. He must make every kind of effort to hold up the different strands of the family. Even if he is the eldest, he must devote himself to serving the younger ones who are brahmanas. A kshatriya can have three wives
and he is himself born in two of these[Through the kshatriya wife and the vaishya wife.]. The third and shudra wife is inferior and the son born through this is
known as ugra. A vaishya can have two wives and is himself born in both of these. A shudra can have only one
wife and the son obtained through the shudra woman is also a shudra. Any birth outside the pale of the four varnas
is condemned by the four varnas. Such a person is especially inferior and will oppress his preceptor's wife. A
kshatriya gives birth[This is left implicit-the father is a kshatriya and the mother is a brahmana.] to an outcast son known as a suta, who is not entitled to sacrifice, but is only entitled to
sing praises and eulogies. A vaishya gives birth[The father is a kshatriya and the mother is a brahmana. The text uses the word moudgalya and earning a living
through moudgalya. What this means is unclear, though mudgala is a kind of grass.] to a vaidehaka, who earns a living through grass. A shudra
gives birth[The father is a shudra and the mother is a brahmana.] to a chandala, who is fierce, lives on the outskirts of habitations and acts as an executioner. These
sons are born from brahmana mothers and are the worst of their lineages. O best among intelligent ones! O lord!
These are the offspring of mixed parentage. The son born through a vaishya is a bandi or magadha[The father is a shudra and the mother is a kshatriya. Bandis and magadhas are synonymous, though bandi is
usually gender neutral and magadha is sometimes used for a woman. Both are bards and minstrels. It is possible
that bandis recited the compositions of others, while magadhas also composed their own.] and earns a
living through the use of words. If perversely, a shudra father has a son through a kshatriya mother, the son is
known as a nishada and becomes a fisherman. If a shudra father has a son through a vaishya mother, the son is
known as ayogava and he dwells in a village or earns a living from the forests. Brahmanas should not accept gifts
from them. If those with mixed parentage have offspring through women who are like them in status, the offspring
have the same varna. But if the mother's status happens to be inferior, then the offspring that are born are inferior.
For the four main varnas, the son has the same status as the father when the mother is of the same varna, or the one
immediately below it. However, if the mother's varna is below this too, in general, the offspring is outside the pale
of the father's varna. As long as parentage is from the same varna, the offspring also have the same varna. However, where the varnas have intercourse with each other, reprehensible categories are born. For example, a shudra father and a brahmana mother lead to offspring who are outcasts. In this way, those who are outside the four varnas
can have offspring with those who are outside the four varnas and this leads to deterioration. There can be such repeated violations of varna, with outcast uniting with outcast. More and more inferior offspring are generated and
there are fifteen in number. By having intercourse with someone one should not have intercourse with, a mixture of
varnas results. The offspring of vratya and magadha are sairandhra[The taxonomy given isn't very clear or consistent.]. They are servants, earn a living through
menial servitude and know about cosmetics and toiletries. The offspring of vratya and ayogava are suta and they
earn a living through words. The offspring of maireyaka and vaidehaka is madhuka. The offspring of nishada and
mudgara is dasha and they earn a living as boatmen. The offspring of mritapa and chandala are shvapaka and they
are extremely vile. The offspring of chatura and magadha are cruel and earn a living through deceit. They subsist
by selling flesh, fragrances, tasty substances and by lending money. Vaidehakas are wicked and cruel and live off
their wives. Nishadas give birth to madranabhas and they ride on vehicles drawn by asses. Chandalas give birth to
pulkasas and they eat the flesh of asses, horses and elephants. These dress themselves in garments stolen from
corpses and eat from broken vessels[Those discarded by others.]. Three inferior varnas are born from ayogavas-kshudra, vaidehaka and
andhra. They reside outside the outskirts of a village. Charmakaras are born from karavaras and nishadas. Pandusoupakas are born from chandalas and they make objects of use from stripped cane. Nishadas and vaidehakas give
birth to ahindakas. Chandalas and soupakas give birth to those who earn a living through moudgalya. Nishadas
and chandalas have sons who live outside human habitations. These sons live in cremation grounds and are exiled
outside. Depending on the transgressions of the father and the mother, many such children of mixed parentage are
born. Whether they disclose this or do not disclose this, they should know their own tasks. There is no dharma other than that for the four varnas. There are no indications about dharma for those who are outside the four varnas.
They have been born out of wilfulness. They are outside the pale of virtue and no sacrifices have been recommended for them. Outcastes and more outcastes hae been born. They can dwell where they please and earn a living as
they please. They reside at crossroads, in cremation grounds, in mountains, and even in trees. They wear ornaments and use many kinds of implements. There is no doubt that they act for the welfare of cattle and brahmanas.
They have traits of non-violence, compassion, truthfulness in speech and forgiveness. O tiger among men! There is
no doubt that by giving up their own lives to protect others, they can ensure success. I have recounted the instructions  about  how  the  intelligent  ones  have  thought  about  men  having  offspring.  One  should not have offspring
through a woman from a wrong varna. That would be like a stone sinking into the water. Irrespective of whether a
man possesses intelligence or does not possess intelligence, he must not come under the subjugation of desire and
anger and walk along an ignoble path. It is the nature of women to taint men. That is the reason learned people are
not attracted to women."

'Yudhishthira asked, "There may be a man who is born of a wicked lineage, but his varna is unknown. O king!
How does one discern whether he is noble or ignoble?"

'Bhishma replied, "Those who are born of mixed parentage have many different kinds of conduct. The purity of
birth can be discerned from one's virtuous acts. Ignoble conduct, contrary behaviour, cruelty and not practising the
rites-in this world, these are the signs of a man being born in a wicked lineage. A son inherits his father's conduct, his mother's conduct, or both. He will never be able to conceal his narrow nature. One is born with a form
that is like that of the mother or the father. Just as a tiger's stripes reveal, a man will be constrained by his own nature. Even if the origin of the lineage is hidden, if one is born of mixed parentage, a man will reveal himself, depending on whether his good conduct is a lot or is limited. To achieve some purpose, one may walk along a path
and adopt a conduct that is apparently noble. However, adherence to good conduct will enable one to determine
whether that person is from a superior varna or an inferior varna. People have many kinds of conduct and undertake many kinds of deeds. But in this world, there is nothing as important as good birth and good conduct. A man
is affected by his body and his spirit. The spirit can be superior, middling or inferior. Depending on the spirit, one
decides on what brings one pleasure. If a person has high birth, but lacks good conduct, he is not worshipped. And
if a shudra has good conduct, he is worshipped by those who know about dharma. A man makes himself known
through his own deeds. He shows his character through his conduct, good or bad. A man can destroy himself and
his lineage, but he also makes it resplendent through his own deeds. That is the reason learned people avoid all
those different kinds of women, where they are themselves not born[As was mentioned earlier, if the wife is from one of the sanctioned varnas, the husband is himself born, in the
sense of granting his status to his son.]."'