Bhishma said, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about words exchanged between Tuladhara
and Jajali on dharma. There was a brahmana named Jajali. He lived in the forest, following the conduct of
those who dwell in the forest. Once, the immensely ascetic one went to the region near the ocean and tormented
himself through austerities there. He controlled himself and was restrained in diet. He was dressed in tattered garments and skins and his hair was matted. He was covered in dirt and mud. The intelligent sage spent many years
there. O lord of the earth! The immensely energetic one dwelt in the water. Wishing to see the worlds, he travelled
around, with the speed of thought[Because of his powers, the gross body remained in the water, while the subtle body travelled around.]. He saw the earth, right up to the frontiers of the ocean, with its forest and
groves. Having done this, while he was inside the water, one day, the sage thought, 'In this world, with its mobile
and immobile objects, there is no one like me. Who else can dwell in the water and roam around with me in this
way?' While he said this in the water, the rakshasas noticed this. The pishachas said, 'You should not speak in this
fashion. There is the immensely illustrious Tuladhara in Varanasi and he follows the dharma of a trader. O supreme
among  brahmanas!  Even  he  should  not  speak  the  words  that  you  have.'  Having  been  thus  addressed  by  the
demons, Jajali, the great ascetic, replied, 'I will go and see the wise and illustrious Tuladhara.' When the rishi
spoke in this way, the rakshasas arose from the ocean and said, 'O supreme among brahmanas! Go. Follow this
road.' Thus addressed by the demons, Jajali departed, with distress in his mind. He went to Varanasi, met Tulad-
hara and spoke these words to him."

'Yudhishthira asked, "O father[The word used is tata.]! What were the virtuous deeds that Jajali had performed earlier? How did he
obtain supreme success? You should recount that to me."

'Bhishma replied, "He performed extreme and terrible austerities. The great ascetic was devoted to performing
ablutions in the morning and in the evening. He tended to the fire properly. The brahmana was devoted to studying.
Jajali knew about the ordinances of vanaprastha and blazed in his radiance. He was engaged in truth and austerities, but was still not able to comprehend dharma. When it rained, he slept under the open sky. During autumn, he
immersed himself in water. During summer, he exposed himself to the heat and the wind. But he still did not obtain dharma. He lay down on many uncomfortable beds and on the ground and changed these around. When it
rained, the sage would stand under the open sky. Rain showered down on his head from the sky and he repeatedly
received this. The lord's hair became matted and filthy and the strands were tangled. He always went to the forest,
covered in filth and dirt. Sometimes, the immensely ascetic one did not eat. Sometimes, he survived on air. Sometimes, he stood like a wooden pillar and did not move at all. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O king! While
he stood there, immobile like a pillar, two kulinga birds[A kulinga is a shrike or a sparrow. Subsequently, the word chataka is used, not to be confused with chaataka. A
chataka is a sparrow, so sparrows are meant.] built a nest on his head. However, the brahmana rishi
was overcome with compassion for this couple. He allowed them to use grass to build a nest in his matted hair. The
immensely ascetic one remained immobile, like a pillar. They[The birds.] were reassured and lived there happily. The rains
passed and autumn presented itself. Following Prajapati's rules, those carefree birds approached each other with
desire. O king! Those birds laid eggs on his head. The energetic brahmana, rigid in his vows, realized this. However, despite knowing this, the immensely energetic Jajali did not move. His mind was always firm on upholding
dharma, and adharma did not appeal to him. He was not going to harm anyone. O lord! They were thus assured
and happily lived on his head. The eggs were nurtured and young birds developed inside them. They began to
grow. But even then, Jajali did not move. Careful in his vows, he protected the eggs and the birds. Therefore, the
one with dharma in his soul did not move and meditated. In the course of time, the birds emerged and the sage realized when the young birds developed wings. Thus, one day, the one who was rigid in his vows saw the birds. The
supreme among intelligent ones was extremely delighted. He was happy to see them grow. The birds and their offspring were fearless there. Once the wings had developed, he saw that they would fly out and return again. The
birds  would  go  out  in  the  morning  and  return  in  the  evening.  The  brahmana  Jajali  did  not  move.  Sometimes,
though the mother and the father were not present, they would return and then fly out again. Jajali did not move. O
king! Then they began to go out and return again in the evening. The birds returned, to live there. After this, the
birds went out for five days before they returned. Then it became six days. Jajali did not move. In the course of
time, as they became strong, all the birds went out for many days at a time and did not return. Later, the birds did
not return for a month. O king! Finally, when they did not return at all, Jajali left. Jajali was overcome with wonder
at what had happened. He thought that he had obtained success, and pride penetrated him. The one who was careful in his vows saw that the birds, which had been born and reared on his head, finally left. He was full of delight.
When the sun arose, the immensely ascetic one went to the river. He bathed there and offered oblations to the fire.
Since those chataka birds had been born on his head, Jajali, supreme among ascetics, slapped his armpits and exclaimed, 'I have obtained dharma.' At this, Jajali heard an invisible voice speak in the sky. 'O Jajali! You are not
Tuladhara's equal in dharma. The immensely wise Tuladhara lives in Varanasi. O brahmana! Though he deserves
to, he does not speak the way you do.' On hearing these words, he became full of anger and wished to see Tulad-
hara. O king! The sage began to roam around the earth, without any fixed place of abode. After a long period of
time, he reached the city of Varanasi and saw Tuladhara, selling his wares. On seeing the brahmana arrive, the one
who earned a living from trading arose cheerfully and welcomed and honoured him. Tuladhara said, 'O brahmana!
I knew for certain that you would come here. O supreme among brahmanas! Listen to the words that I tell you.
You lived on the shores of the ocean and performed great austerities there. But earlier, you never had any sense of
what was dharma. O brahmana! When you obtained success in your austerities, birds were soon born on your head
and they were nurtured by you. When they developed wings, they flew around, here and there. O brahmana! Having given birth to those chatakas, you felt proud at having obtained dharma. O supreme among brahmanas! You
then heard a voice in the sky and it spoke about me. At this, you felt anger and that is the reason you have come
here. O supreme among brahmanas! What can I do to please you? Tell me.'"'
