Bhishma said, "When those many lunar days were over[When the fortnight was over.], the serpent completed his task. He took Vivasvat's[The sun's.]
permission and returned to his own house. On seeing that he had arrived, his wife gave him water to clean his
feet and performed other similar tasks. The virtuous one approached him and the serpent asked, 'O fortunate
one! I hope you have been attentive in tending to the gods and the guests, as used to be the case when I was
here. I hope you followed the ordinances I told you about. The intelligence of women is not straightforward and is
often false towards accomplishing an objective. O one with the excellent hips! I hope you have not violated the
norms of dharma in my absence.'

'"The serpent's wife replied, 'The duty of disciples is to serve the preceptor, that of brahmanas to be devoted to
the Vedas, that of servants to follow the words of their master and that of kings to protect people. It is said that the
dharma of kshatriyas is to protect all creatures and that of vaishyas is to support sacrifices and attend to guests. The
task of shudras is to serve brahmanas, kshatriyas and vaishyas. O Indra among serpents! The dharma of householders is to be engaged in the welfare of all beings. Restrained diet and the constant observance of vows, in the proper
order, are dharma. In particular, there is an association between dharma and the senses[Dharma requires control over the senses.]. Whom do I belong to?
Where have I come from? Who am I? Who belongs to me? If a person is devoted to the state of pursuing moksha,
it is necessary that he should always ask these questions. It is said that being devoted to the husband is the supreme
dharma for a wife. O Indra among the serpents! I have learnt the truth about this through your instructions. You are
always devoted to dharma and I also know about dharma. Why will I abandon the path of virtue and advance along
an uneven road? O immensely fortunate one! There has been no decrease in the dharma with which I have worshipped the gods. I have always been attentively engaged in tending to the guests. Fifteen days ago, a brahmana
arrived here. He desired to meet you and has not divulged his objective to me. He is waiting on the banks of the
Gomati, anxious to meet you. The brahmana is rigid in his vows and is seated there, concentrated on the brahman.
O Indra among serpents! O supreme among serpents! I pacified him and told him that when you arrived before me,
I would sent you to him. O immensely wise one! Having heard this, you should go there. O one who hears with the
eyes[Nagas were believed to hear with their eyes.]! You should show yourself to him.'"'
