Sanjaya said, "Those two armies clashed against each other, with cheerful horses, men and elephants. That great
encounter was like that between the armies of gods and asuras. In that great battle, elephants, chariots, horses and
infantry struck at each other, mangling bodies and destroying lives. The heads of men who were like lions were
strewn around on the ground and the faces of those lions among men who were killed were like full moon, the sun,
or lotuses in splendour. The heads of the warriors were severed with broad-headed and razor-sharp arrows in the
shape of the half-moon, swords, lances and battleaxes. They possessed thick and long arms and these were severed
by others with thick and long arms. Those thick arms were severed and fell down, with weapons and armlets still
on the hands. With those red fingers and palms, the earth looked resplendent. It was as if five-headed serpents had
been fiercely killed by Garuda. Horses, chariots, elephants and brave warriors were destroyed by the enemy and
fell down. It was as if residents of heaven had been dislodged from their celestial vehicles[Vimanas.], after their sacred
merits had been exhausted. In that battle, hundreds of brave and braver ones were uprooted through thick and
heavy clubs, maces and bludgeons. Rathas were killed by rathas and mad elephants by other mad elephants. As
they clashed in that supreme encounter, horses were brought down by horses. Rathas were destroyed by supreme
rathas, elephants by horse riders and foot soldiers. Horse riders and foot soldiers were killed and lay down on that
field of battle. Chariots, horses, foot soldiers and elephants were destroyed by chariots, elephants, horses and foot
soldiers. Chariots, foot soldiers, elephants and horses were destroyed by men, horses, chariots and elephants. Chariots, horses and men fought against men, horses and chariots and caused a great carnage, fighting with hands, feet,
weapons and chariots.

' "While those brave soldiers were being slaughtered and killed, the Parthas, with Vrikodara at the forefront, advanced against us. They were with Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi, Droupadi's sons, the Prabhadrakas, Satyaki, Chekitana and the Dravida soldiers. They were surrounded by a large army from the Pandyas, the Cholas and the Ker-
alas. They were broad in the chest and long in the arms. They were tall and handsome. They were ornamented and
possessed red teeth. They were like crazy elephants in their valour. They were adorned in garments of many
colours and were smeared with fragrant scents. They had girded swords and nooses in their hands. They were capable of countering elephants. O king! Prepared to die, they were stationed against each other in that army. There
were quivers and bows in their hands and their hair was long. They were pleasant in speech. The foot soldiers from
Andhra were terrible in form and valiant and were led by Satyaki. There were other brave ones from Chedi, Pan-
chala, Kekaya, Karusha, Kosala, Kashi and Magadha and they dashed forward. There were many kinds of chariots,
elephants, supreme horses and infantry amidst them and they could be seen to be dancing and laughing. Surrounded by supreme ones from the enemy, Vrikodara was in the midst of that large army. He was seated astride an elephant. That supreme among elephants was fierce and having been properly prepared, looked dazzling. It was like a
palace atop Mount Udaya, illuminated at the peak by the rising sun[Mount Udaya is believed to be the mountain from behind which, the
sun rises. The sun is believed to set behind Mount Asta. The mountain is
being compared to the elephant and the palace to Bhima.]. His[Bhima's.] supreme armour was made out of
iron and he was adorned with the best of gems. He sparkled like the autumn sky, studded with stars. There was a
fierce spear in his hand and it was beautifully adorned at the tip. Like the midday sun in autumn, he began to burn
up the enemy.

' "Seeing that elephant from a distance, Kshemadhurti arrived, seated on another elephant[Kshemadhurti has already been killed. But this is a different Kshemadhurti, the king of Kuluta.]. He was cheerful
and attacked and challenged someone who was more cheerful than he was. There was a clash between those two
elephants, both of which were fierce in form. They clashed as they wished, like two mountains with trees at the
top. Astride the clashing elephants, those two brave ones struck each other with their spears. The powerful ones
were as dazzling as the rays of the sun and striking each other, roared. They then retreated and circled on their elephants. Both of them picked up bows and struck each other. They slapped their arms and in every direction, there
was the sound of arrows. As they roared like lions, they delighted all the men. Those immensely strong lords were
on elephants that raised up their trunks. As they fought, the flags whirled around in the wind. Having severed each
other's bows, they roared. They showered down lances and spears, like clouds pouring down rain during the monsoon. Kshemadhurti used great force to strike Bhima between the breasts with a spear and striking him again with
another six, roared. Because of those spears, Bhimasena was resplendent in the field of battle. In that encounter, his
body blazed with anger, like seven suns seven times[This shloka is not very clear and is difficult to translate. But one can
guess the meaning. The sun has seven horses, hence the seven suns. And
Bhima has been struck by seven spears.]. Bhima carefully hurled a spear towards his enemy. It was
made out of iron and possessed the complexion of the sun. It flew straight. The lord of Kuluta affixed ten arrows to
his bow and shattered the spear. He then pierced Pandava with sixty more. Pandava picked up a bow that roared
like a giant cloud and afflicting his enemy's elephants with his arrows, roared. Having been afflicted by the arrows
of Bhimasena in the battle, the elephant did not remain there any longer, though one tried to restrain it. It was like
a cloud dispelled by the wind. Bhimasena's elephant, the king of elephants, pursued it, like a cloud driven by a
strong wind follows a cloud blown away by the wind. Having endeavoured to restrain his elephant, Kshemadhurti
attacked Bhimasena and his elephant and pierced them with arrows. The bull among men used a razor-sharp arrow
that was released well to sever his enemy's bow and oppressed his enemy's elephant. As if striking Bhima with a
rod, Kshemadhurti used iron arrows to pierce the elephant everywhere in its inner organs. Before the elephant
could fall down, Bhimasena descended and stationed himself on the ground. He struck down the enemy's elephant
with a club. When that elephant was brought down, Kshemadhurti advanced with an upraised weapon. But Vrikodara killed him with his club. He was killed, with the sword in his hand, and having been brought down, lay down
next to the elephant. He was like a lion killed by the vajra, alongside a mountain shattered by the vajra. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! On seeing that the illustrious king of Kuluta had been killed, your soldiers were distressed and fled." '
