Vyasa said,  'The  knowledge  known  as  trayi,  mentioned  in  the  Vedas  and  the  Vedangas,  must  be
experienced[Trayi means three. Though the Atharva Veda is also mentioned here, trayi means the Rig Veda, the Sama Veda
and the Yajur Veda.]. There are varnas and aksharas in the Rig and in the Sama, and in the Yajur and in the
Atharva[Varna is letter, while akshara is syllable.]. There are spirited and immensely fortunate ones who are accomplished in what is recounted in the
Vedas and skilled about adhyatma. They can see the beginning and the end. A person who acts in a virtuous way
must observe the rites laid down by dharma. A brahmana must desire to conduct himself so that he does not suppress any other being. He must obtain knowledge from virtuous and good people who are skilled in the sacred
texts. He must be devoted to the truth and undertake all the acts in the world that are in accordance with his own
dharma. Dwelling as a householder, a brahmana must perform the six tasks[Studying, teaching, performing sacrifices, officiating at the sacrifices of others, giving and receiving.]. He must always faithfully perform
the five sacrifices[Studying, worshipping the gods, offering oblations to the ancestors, feeding other people and feeding other living beings.]. He must be patient and should not be distracted. He must be self-controlled, in control over
his soul and knowledgable about dharma. A brahmana must be beyond joy, fear and anger and must not suffer
from lassitude. Donations, studying, sacrifices, austerities, modesty, uprightness and self-control increase energy
and drive away sin. An intelligent person must cleanse his sins and be restrained in his diet. He must conquer his
senses. Having subjugated desire and anger, he should seek to attain the brahman. He must worship the fire and
brahmanas. He must bow down before the gods. He must discard hateful words and all violence that is not in accordance with dharma. This is the kind of conduct that has first been laid down for brahmanas. Later, when knowledge arrives, he must engage in tasks. It is tasks that bring success. An intelligent person will be able to cross the
terrible river that is extremely difficult to traverse and is difficult to withstand. The five senses constitute the water.
The banks are made out of greed. Intolerance constitutes the mud. It originates from desire and anger and always
causes great delusion. The entire universe is always struck by that great force, ordained by destiny, and confused
and whirled around by the flow of nature. Time is the single great river and the years are the eddy. The months are
waves and the seasons are the current. The fortnights are moss and grass. The twinkling of the eyelids represents
the foam. Day and night are the force. The terrible crocodiles are represented by desire. The Vedas and sacrifices
are the rafts. For beings, dharma is like islands. Artha and kama are the springs. Truth represents the stairs along
the banks. Non-violence represents the trees that flow along. The yugas are the pools in the middle of the course.
This  is  as  difficult  to  comprehend  as  the  brahman.  The  creator  creates  beings  and  drags  them  along,  towards
Yama's abode. Those who are learned can cross it, using their wisdom and patience as rafts. But what can those of
limited intelligence, those who possess no rafts, do? A wise person can cross it, but not an ordinary person. From a
distance, the wise person sees everything, good and bad traits. However, a person with limited intelligence has
doubt in his soul and desire in his soul. His senses are fickle. A person who is not wise cannot cross and cannot go
to the further shore. He suffers from the great taint of not possessing a raft and advances towards delusion. There
are also those who have knowledge, but are grasped by the crocodile of desire. They don't possess a raft either.
Therefore, an accomplished person must make efforts so that he does not submerge. A person who is not submerged in this way is a brahmana. A person who speaks about the three[The three Vedas.], is born in a noble lineage and is without
doubt and performs the three acts[The rituals connected with the three Vedas. Alternatively, teaching, officiating at sacrifices and accepting gifts.] is thus not submerged and crosses with the help of wisdom. A person who has
refined himself, is self-restrained and controlled and has cleansed his soul is wise and subsequently obtains success
in this world and in the next. Following the conduct of a householder, he must be without anger and without envy.
He must perform the five sacrifices and always eat the leftovers from sacrifices. He must observe virtuous conduct
and act in accordance with righteous rites. He must follow a conduct that does not obstruct dharma. Greed is censured for him. He must know the truth about learning and knowledge. He must be accomplished in virtuous conduct. He must observe the tasks of his own dharma and not mix up tasks[Mix up the tasks of different varnas.]. He must faithfully perform the rites.
He must be generous, wise and devoid of jealousy. If he knows the difference between dharma and adharma, he
will be able to cross everything, even if it is difficult to traverse. He must possess fortitude and not be distracted.
He must be restrained, knowledgable about dharma and immersed in his soul. He must be without delight, fear and
anger. Such a brahmana does not suffer. This was the conduct that was laid down for brahmanas earlier. If he performs acts that bring him the wealth of knowledge, he is successful everywhere. Even if they desire dharma, those
who are not accomplished observe adharma. Dharma becomes like adharma for him and he is made to grieve. Deciding to do dharma, he achieves adharma. Wishing to do adharma, he achieves dharma. Such a person is foolish
and does not know these two kinds of acts. He adopts bodies and is born and dies[He goes through the cycle of birth and death.].'"'