'Sanjaya said, "On seeing that Bhimasena was shrouded by that weapon, Dhananjaya released the varuna weapon
to counter its energy. However, because of Arjuna's dexterity and because he was covered by energy, no one noticed that he had been covered by the varuna weapon[Bhima was already covered by the energy of the narayana weapon and the energy of varuna weapon provided a
protective covering for Bhima.]. Bhima, with his horses, charioteer and chariot, was covered by the weapon of Drona's son. He was like a blazing fire in the midst of another fire and it was extremely difficult to look at him. O king! Just as all stellar bodies head towards Mount Asta[The western direction. Mount Asta is the mountain over which the sun sets.] when night is over, all those arrows descended towards Bhimasena's chariot. O venerable one! Bhima, his chariot, his horses and his charioteer
seemed to be in the midst of a fire created by Drona's son. It was as if the entire universe, with its mobile and immobile objects, was consumed by a fire at the appointed time[The time of destruction. The fire entered the mouth of the Creator after completing the destruction.], which then entered the mouth of the Creator. Thus
did that weapon enter Bhima. It was like the sun entering the fire, or like the fire entering the sun. Such was the energy with which it penetrated that no one could see anything. The power of that weapon extended in the direction
of Bhima's chariot. And in that battle, the power of Drona's son increased and there was no one to counter him. All
the soldiers of the Pandus had laid down their weapons and were bereft of their senses. All the maharathas, with
Yudhishthira at the forefront, had turned their faces away.

'"On seeing all this, the brave and immensely radiant Arjuna and Vasudeva quickly descended from their chariot
and dashed towards Bhima. There was an energy created from the strength of the weapon of Drona's son. Those
two immensely strong ones resorted to their power of maya and immersed themselves in it. Because they had cast
aside their weapons, because of the use of the varuna weapon and because of their own energy, those two Krishnas
were not burnt by the fire of that weapon. To pacify the narayana weapon, Nara and Narayana[Famous ancient sages, identified with Arjuna and Krishna respectively.] forcefully
dragged Bhima away, together with all his weapons. While he was being dragged away, maharatha Kounteya[Bhima.]
continued to roar loudly and this fanned the extremely invincible and fierce weapon of Drona's son. Vasudeva said,
'O son of Pandu! O Kounteya! Though you have been restrained, why are you not retreating from this battle? If the
descendants of the Kourava lineage could have been defeated through fighting, then we, and all these bulls among
men, would have fought. All those on your side have descended from their chariots. O Kounteya! Therefore, descend from your chariot too.' Having thus addressed him, Krishna brought him[Bhima.] down from his chariot, though
he sighed like a serpent and his eyes were red with rage. When he was brought down from the chariot onto the
ground and forced to cast aside his weapons, the narayana weapon, the scorcher of enemies, was pacified. The energy, which was difficult to withstand, became pacified. All the directions and the sub-directions became clear.
Auspicious winds began to blow and the animals and birds were calmed. O lord of men! The mounts and the warriors became cheerful. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When its[The weapon's.] fierce energy was dispelled, the intelligent
Bhima looked resplendent, like the sun that arises at the end of the night. On seeing that the supreme weapon was
pacified, the remnants of the Pandava army stationed themselves, wishing to kill your sons.

'"O great king! When the weapon was countered and the soldiers were stationed thus, Duryodhana spoke to
Drona's son. 'O Ashvatthama! Quickly use that weapon again. The Panchalas are stationed again, desiring
victory.' O venerable one! Having been thus addressed by your son, Ashvatthama sighed in great distress and
spoke to the king. 'O king! This weapon cannot be brought back[The sense is that having been used, it had returned to Narayana.]. It cannot be used a second time. If brought
back, there is no doubt that it will kill the person who uses it. O lord of men! Vasudeva devised the means for repulsing the weapon. Otherwise, it would have slain the enemy in the battle. There can be defeat or death. But death
is superior to defeat. Having been defeated and forced to cast aside their[The enemy.] weapons, they are as good as dead.'

Duryodhana replied, 'O son of the preceptor! O one who is supreme in the knowledge of weapons! If that weapon
cannot be invoked a second time, let the slayers of the preceptor be killed with some other weapon. All the divine
weapons are vested in you, just as weapons are vested in Tryambaka[The three-eyed one, Shiva.]. If you so wish, even an enraged Purandara
cannot escape from you.'"

'Dhritarashtra asked, "When Drona was killed in that inferior way, that weapon was countered and Duryodhana
spoke those words, what did Drona's son do next? He saw that the Parthas were stationed for battle and were
roaming around at the head of the army, having been freed from the narayana weapon."

'Sanjaya replied, "Knowing the manner in which his father had been killed, the one with the tail of the lion on
his banner[Ashvatthama.] was extremely angry. He cast aside all fear and attacked Parshata. That bull among men struck that
bull among men[Ashvatthama and Dhrishtadyumna respectively.] with twenty kshudraka arrows and then powerfully pierced him with another five. O king!
Dhrishtadyumna was like a powerful fire. O king! He pierced Drona's son with sixty-three arrows. He used twenty
gold-tufted arrows sharpened on stone to pierce his charioteer and pierced his four horses with four sharp arrows.
Having been pierced and pierced again, Drona's son made the earth tremble with his roars, as if he was going to
rob all beings of their lives in that great battle. O king! Parshata was powerful, skilled in the use of weapons and
firm in his resolution. Deciding on death rather than retreat, he attacked Drona's son. Panchala, supreme among
rathas and possessing an immeasurable soul, showered down arrows on the head of Drona's son. Enraged in that
battle, Drona's son enveloped him with arrows. Remembering the death of his father, he pierced him with ten arrows. He used a couple of well-aimed and razor-sharp arrows to sever his standard and his bow. Then, Drona's son
struck the prince of Panchala with other arrows. In that great battle, Drona's son deprived him of his horses, charioteer and chariot. He angrily shrouded all his followers with arrows. O lord of the earth! At this, the Panchala soldiers began to flee. They were frightened, distressed and wounded by those arrows.

'"On seeing that the warriors were retreating and that Dhrishtadyumna was afflicted, Shini's descendant quickly
urged his chariot towards the chariot of Drona's son. He struck Ashvatthama with eight sharp arrows. He again
struck him violently with twenty arrows that had many different forms. He pierced his charioteer and struck his
four horses with four arrows. The great archer was thus violently struck by arrows of many different forms. However, Drona's son laughed and spoke these words to Yuyudhana. 'O Shini's descendant! I know your preference for
the slayer of the preceptor[Dhrishtadyumna. Given the quarrel between Satyaki and Dhrishtadyumna, it is possible that Ashvatthama was
being sarcastic.]. But when he has been grasped by me, you will not be able to save him.' Having spoken these words, Drona's son released a supreme arrow with excellent tufts. It was as radiant as the sun and it was
just as Hari had released his vajra towards Vritra[Hari means the tawny one and is a name for several gods, not just Vishnu. Hari is also a name for Indra, which
is the sense in which it is being used here.]. That arrow pierced his armour and having passed through it,
penetrated the ground, like a hissing snake entering a hole. With his armour shattered, the brave one was like an
elephant struck by a goad. Copious quantities of blood flowed from his wounds and he let go of his bow and arrows. He was senseless and covered with blood. He sank down on the floor of his chariot. On seeing this, his charioteer swiftly bore him away, away from the chariot of Drona's son.

'"With another well-tufted arrow with drooping tufts, the scorcher of enemies[Ashvatthama.] struck Dhrishtadyumna between the eyebrows. He had already been struck and was severely pierced again. Panchala was weak and grabbed
the pole of his standard. O king! He was like a crazy elephant, assailed by a lion. On seeing this, five brave Panda-
va rathas quickly advanced-Kiriti, Bhimasena, the Pourava Vriddhakshatra[The Pourava qualifies that this is not Jayadratha's father, Vriddhakshatra.], the prince of the Chedis and Sudarshana from Malava. Each of the five simultaneously struck him with five arrows. However, Drona's son shot
twenty-five arrows and simultaneously severed the five arrows, which were like venomous serpents, that each of
the five had released. Drona's son struck Pourava with seven sharp arrows, Malava with three, Partha[Arjuna.] with one
and Vrikodara with six. O king! All of those maharathas pierced Drona's son. Together, and separately, they used
gold-tufted arrows that had been sharpened on stone. The prince pierced Drona's son with twenty arrows, Partha
with eight and each of the others with three arrows. Drona's son struck Arjuna with six arrows, Vasudeva with ten
and Bhima with ten. He struck the prince with four arrows and used two more to sever his bow and his standard.
Piercing Partha again with a shower of arrows, Drona's son roared fiercely, like a lion. Drona's son used extremely
sharp and yellow arrows in torrents and covered the front and the rear. The earth, the sky, the firmament, the directions and the sub-directions were covered with these arrows, which were terrible in form. He was fierce in his energy. He was like Indra in his valour. With three arrows that were released at the same time, he severed the head and
the two arms, which were like Indra's standard, of Sudarshana, who was stationed on his own chariot. He killed
Pourava with a spear[Rathashakti.] and used his arrows to shatter his chariot into fragments. With broad-headed arrows, he
severed his[Pourava's.] arms, which were smeared with excellent sandalwood paste, and his head from his body. The youthful and beloved prince of Chedi was like the blue lotus[Indivara.] in complexion. Using supreme arrows that were like
blazing flames of fire, he[Ashvatthama.] laughed and pierced him, dispatching him, with his horses and his charioteer, towards
death. Having slain those two brave warriors in the battle, the lord who was Drona's son remained unvanquished
and delightedly blew on his large conch shell. All the Panchalas and Pandava Bhimasena were frightened. They
abandoned Dhrishtadyumna's chariot and fled in different directions. When they were running away in this way,
Drona's son pursued them and showered down arrows from the rear. He attacked them with great force and was
like Death amidst the Pandu soldiers. In that battle, those kshatriyas were slaughtered by Drona's son. O king! Terrified of Drona's son, they fled in all the directions."'
