Janamejaya said, 'Bhishma, great in soul and son of the water, was supreme among those who wielded weapons.
He was the grandfather of the Bharatas and was like a standard for the entire earth. He was Brihaspati's equal in
intelligence. He was the earth's equal in forgiveness. He was the ocean's equal in gravity. He was the equal of the
Himalayas in steadfastness. He was like a Prajapati in generosity. He was like the sun in energy. In destroying enemies with a shower of arrows, he was like the great Indra. He was consecrated in that terrible sacrifice of war,
which made the body hair stand up, for many nights. On hearing this, what did mighty-armed King Yudhishthira,
supreme among all wielders of weapons, say? What did Bhimasena, Arjuna and Krishna say?'

Vaishampayana replied, 'Yudhishthira was immensely intelligent and was skilled about dharma and artha to be
followed in times of calamities. He summoned all his brothers and Satvata Vasudeva. The foremost among speakers spoke these comforting words. "Survey the army. Be attentive and armoured. Our first battle will be with the
grandfather. Therefore, look for seven leaders for the army[The Pandavas had seven akshouhinis.]."
'Vasudeva said, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! Now that the time has come, you have spoken what should
be said. The words that you have spoken are appropriate. O mighty-armed one! What you have proposed as the
next step appeals to me. Let us choose seven leaders for your army and consecrate them."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Then Yudhishthira summoned Drupada, Virata, the bull among the Shinis[Satyaki.], Dhrishtadyumna of Panchala, King Dhrishtaketu, Shikhandi of Panchala and Sahadeva of Magadha. These seven brave
and great archers were delighted at the prospect of war. In the appropriate fashion, he consecrated them as the leaders of his army and Dhrishtadyumna as the overall general. He[Dhrishtadyumna.] arose from the fire for Drona's destruction. When
all those great-souled ones were assembled together, Gudakesha Dhananjaya was made the lord of the generals.
Sankarshana's[Balarama's.] younger brother, the handsome and immensely intelligent Janardana, was made Arjuna's guide
and the controller of his horses.

'On seeing that a great battle was imminent, the wielder of the plough[Balarama.] entered King Pandava's residence, in
the company of Akrura and the others, Gada, Samba, Ulmuka and so on, with Rukmini's son[Pradyumna.] and Akrura's son
led by Charudeshna. The mighty-armed one was protected by the foremost among the Vrishnis, who arrived like
tigers intoxicated with their strength, like the Maruts protect Vasava. He was dressed in a blue silk garment and he
was like the summit of Mount Kailasa. The illustrious one's gait was like that of a lion. His eyes were red with intoxication. On seeing him, Dharmaraja and the immensely radiant Keshava arose and so did Partha Vrikodara, the
performer of terrible deeds, the wielder of the Gandiva, and all the other kings who were present there. All of them
approached and worshipped the one who had the plough as a weapon. With Vasudeva leading the way, King Pan-
dava grasped him by the hand and all of them welcomed him. The one with the plough as a weapon saluted Virata,
Drupada and the elders. The destroyer of enemies then sat down with Yudhishthira.

'Rohini's son[Balarama.] glanced at Vasudeva. When all the kings were seated around him, he said, "There will be an extremely fearful and terrible slaughter of men. I think that this is certainly because of destiny and is incapable of being averted. When you emerge from the battle with your well-wishers, I hope that I will see you again, without disease and without injuries on your bodies. There is no doubt that all the assembled kshatriya kings have been
cooked by fate. There will be a great slaughter, with flesh, blood and mud. I repeatedly spoke to Vasudeva in private. 'O Madhusudana! Behave impartially towards your relatives. The Pandavas and King Duryodhana are the
same to us. Therefore, if he wishes, you should help him again and again.' But because of you, Madhusudana did
not act in accordance with my words. He has looked towards Dhananjaya and been devoted to you in every sentiment. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It is my view that the victory of the Pandavas is certain, because that is
what Vasudeva has decided. Without Krishna, I have no interest in looking at this world. Therefore, I have followed whatever Keshava desires. But both these brave ones, Bhima and King Duryodhana, skilled in fighting with
clubs, are my students and are equal in my affection. Therefore, I will visit the sacred tirthas along the Sarasvati. I
cannot remain indifferent to the destruction of the Kouravas." Having spoken this, the mighty-armed one took his
leave of the Pandavas. Rama left to visit the tirthas, asking Madhusudana to return.'
