Chyavana said, 'O bull among men! I should certainly tell you this. O lord of men! That is the reason I came
here, wishing to exterminate your lineage. O lord of men! Kshatriyas always have the assistance of the
Bhrigus in the performance of sacrifices. However, because of reasons determined by destiny, there will be conflict
between them. O lord of men! The kshatriyas will slay all the Bhrigus. Struck by the rod of destiny, they will not
even spare those who are in the wombs. Then, in our lineage, a person will be born to extend the line. His name
will be Ourva and he will be greatly energetic. His resplendence will be like that of the blazing fire. The flames of
his anger will be such that they will be capable of destroying the three worlds. He will be capable of reducing the
earth, with its mountains and oceans, to ashes. He will control the fire of his anger for some time. That supreme of
sages will hurl it into the ocean, in the form of the subterranean fire. However, the descendant of the Bhrigu lineage  will  have  an  immensely  fortunate  son  named  Richika.  O  unblemished  one!  The  entire  dhanurveda  will
present itself before him. Because of reasons determined by destiny, so as to destroy the kshatriyas, he will receive
it and pass it on to his son, Jamadagni, who will be immensely fortunate and will clease his soul through austerities. But that tiger among the Bhrigu lineage will still hold that knowledge. O supreme among kings! The one with
dharma in his soul will unite with a maiden from your lineage, for spreading that knowledge on. The great ascetic
will obtain your granddaughter and Gadhi's daughter. He will give birth to Rama, who will be a brahmana, but will
follow the dharma of kshatriyas. In your lineage will be born Visvamitra, as Gadhi's son. He will be extremely devoted to dharma and will be like Brihaspati in his energy. He will be a kshatriya, but will follow the dharma of
brahmanas. O immensely radiant one! Gadhi will have this son, who will be devoted to great austerities. There will
be a mixing up because of women[The charus were mixed up, a story that has already been told.
]. This has been determined by the grandfather. It will happen and there can be
no reversal. In the third generation from you, there will be a brahmana. The Bhrigus, cleansed in their souls, will
be your matrimonial allies.'"

'Bhishma continued, "Hearing the words of the sage, the great-souled Chyavana, Kushika was delighted. The
king, with dharma in his soul, replied in the following words. 'Let it be this way.' O supreme among the Bharata
lineage! The greatly energetic Chyavana again spoke to the king. He urged the king to ask for a boon, who said, 'O
great king! I will accept it and let my desire truly come true through you. Let my lineage have the status of brahmanas and let their minds always be fixed on dharma.' The sage, Chyavana, replied that it would indeed be this
way. Having taken the king's permission, he then departed for a visit to the tirthas. O king! I have told you everything, exactly as it occurred. This is the reason for the matrimonial alliance between the Bhrigus and the Kushikas.
O king! Everything happened exactly as the sage had said. The births of Rama and the sage, Vishvamitra, occurred
in that way."'

Volume 9 ends here. Section 87 will be concluded in Volume 10.
The final volume ends the instructions of the Anushasana Parva. The horse sacrifice is held, and Dhritarashtra,
Gandhari, Kunti, Vidura and Sanjaya leave for the forest. Krishna and Balarama die as the Yadavas fight among
themselves. The Pandavas leave on the great journey with the famous companion-Dharma disguised as a dog.
Refusing to abandon the dog, Yudhishthira goes to heaven in his physical body and sees all the Kurus and the Pandavas are already there.