'Vaishampayana said, "Bowing down first before my preceptor, with my mind and intellect concentrated and worshipping with devotion, reverence and single-mindedness all the Brahmanas and learned men, I shall now recite in
its entirety the account I heard from the great-souled Vyasa, a wise maharshi famous in the three worlds, infinite in
his accomplishments. O king! You are a worthy person to hear the history of Bharata. Having received the account
from my preceptor, I am delighted to be able to recite it. O king! Hear how the quarrel between the Kurus and the
Pandavas occurred. In a desire for the kingdom, hear about the exile[Exile of the Pandavas.] as a result of the game of dice. O bull of the
Bharata lineage! At your bidding, I shall recount to you how a battle ensued that destroyed the earth. On their father's death, these warriors[The Pandavas.] returned to their home from the forest. In a short while, they became skilled in the
art of archery and knowledge of the Vedas. However, the Kurus became envious of the Pandavas, who were all
gifted with immense physical strength, beauty and energy, fame and fortune. They were also loved by the citizens.

'"Thereupon, the evil-minded Duryodhana, with Karna and the son of Subala[Shakuni.], tried to banish them and oppressed them in various ways. That evil son of Dhritarashtra gave poison to Bhima with his food, but the warrior
Vrikodara[Bhima.] digested it. One day, the evil one tied the sleeping Vrikodara on the banks of the Ganga and throwing
Bhima into the water went away to the city. But when the son of Kunti woke up, he tore the ropes with which he
was tied with his strong arms and Bhima's pains disappeared. While he was asleep, he was bitten everywhere in
his body by black snakes with virulent poison, but that destroyer of enemies did not die. However, in all this oppression, the great-souled Vidura was always on guard, to neutralize the evil plans and save them from oppression.
As Shakra[Indra.] ensures happiness in heaven and the world of living beings, thus did Vidura always ensure happiness
for the Pandavas. When the Pandavas were not killed through all these means, open and hidden, since they were
protected by fate and destiny, he[Duryodhana.] consulted his advisers: Vrisha[Karna.], Duhshasana and the others. With Dhritarashtra's consent, he had a house of lac built. The Pandavas, of unlimited energy, were forced to live there and it was
burnt down by fire when they[The Pandavas.] least suspected it. Because of Vidura's warning, a trench was dug and that gave
them a wonderful means of escape and they were freed from danger.

'"Later, in a large and terrible forest, Bhima, who had fearsome strength when angered, killed a rakshasa named
Hidimba. Then, in complete agreement, those powerful warriors went to the town of Ekachakra and lived there,
with their mother, disguised as Brahmanas. Having won Droupadi, they lived there for one year. And having been
recognized, those destroyers of foes returned to Hastinapura. King Dhritarashtra and the son[Bhishma.] of Shantanu then
told them, 'Sons, so that conflict doesn't ensue between you and your brothers, we have thought and decided that
Khandavaprastha will be your abode. Therefore, give up your resentment and go and live in Khandavaprastha,
which has many towns and wide roads.' On hearing these words, they and their friends went to Khandavaprastha,
taking many jewels with them. And the sons of Pritha[Kunti.] lived there for many years. Through the force of their
weapons, they brought many kings under their vassalage. Thus they gradually increased in power, setting store to
virtue and the way of truth, not roused by anger, calm and subjugating those who wished to do them harm. The immensely powerful Bhimasena subjugated the east, the brave Arjuna the north, Nakula the west and Sahadeva, the
conqueror of brave enemies, the south. Having conquered everything, their kingdom extended over the whole
world. With five such sun-like ones and the sun himself extended, the earth seemed to have six suns with the truthful and valorous Pandavas.

'"Then, for some reason, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira sent his brother Dhananjaya[Literally, winner of riches and one of Arjuna's names.] to the forest. He lived in the
forest for one year and one month. He once went to Hrishikesha[Krishna.] in Dvaravati and there obtained as his wife Subhadra, with eyes like the blue lotus, sweet of speech and Vasudeva's younger sister. As Shachi[Indra's wife.]with the great Indra and Shri[Lakshmi.] with Krishna, Subhadra was delighted to be united with Pandu's son, Arjuna. O supreme among
kings! Kunti's son and Vasudeva then satisfied Agni by giving him Khandava[The forest Khandava. The story about why Agni was allowed to burn Khandava forest will be told later. The
fire-god had been suffering from indigestion and this was a cure.] to burn. Aided by Keshava, this
task wasn't difficult for Bibhatsu Partha, 26 just as when Vishnu sets his mind to destroying enemies, no task is too
difficult. Agni gave Partha the supreme of bows, Gandiva, an inexhaustible quiver of arrows and a chariot with a
monkey on the standard. It was on that occasion that Bibhatsu freed the great demon Maya. He[Maya.] built the divine
assembly hall, adorned with all kinds of jewels and precious stones. Seeing this, the evil-minded and deluded
Duryodhana was driven by avarice.

'"Thereupon he deceived Yudhishthira in a game of dice, played by Soubala[Shakuni.], and banished him to the forest
for twelve years, with an additional year to be spent in disguise, adding up to thirteen years. When in the fourteenth year they[The Pandavas.] returned and claimed their property, they didn't get it. O king! Then war was declared and after
destroying all the Kshatriya lineages and killing King Duryodhana, the Pandavas obtained their kingdom back,
mostly unpopulated. O great king! This is the ancient history of those whose deeds were everlasting, the account of
the conflict, the destruction of the kingdom and the victory."'
