'"Arjuna said, 'Those who discard 567 the prescriptions of the shastras, but worship 568 with recourse to faith,
what is their devotion like? Is it sattva, rajas or tamas?'

'"The lord said, 'According to their nature, people show three kinds of faith-sattva-type, rajas-type and tamas-
type. Listen to this. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Everyone's faith follows his inner nature. This being 569
is full of faith. The kind of faith one has makes the person. Those of the sattva-type worship the gods, those of the
rajas-type, yakshas and rakshas. 570 The others, of the tamas-type, worship ghosts 571 and devils. 572 Those who
perform terrible austerities, not sanctioned by the shastras, full of insolence and ego and deriving strength from desire and attachment, 573 devoid of consciousness, torture the elements in the body and also me, inside the body.
574 Know them to be driven by demonic resolution. The favoured food of all is of three types and so too, sacrifices, meditation and donations. Listen to the distinction between these. The sattva-type favour food that increases
life expectancy, vitality, 575 strength, freedom from disease, happiness and joy-tasty, oily, nourishing and pleasant. The rajas-type favour food that is extremely spicy, acidic, salty, hot, pungent, dry and burning-increasing unhappiness, sorrow and disease. The tamas-type favour food cooked a long time ago, 576 no longer succulent 577
and with a bad smell, stale 578 and tasted by others 579 -impure. The sacrifices performed according to prescribed rites, pacifying the mind, without attachment to fruits and only because such sacrifices ought to be performed, are of the sattva-type. O best of the Bharata lineage! But know sacrifices performed in search of fruits or
indeed because of insolence, 580 to be of the rajas-type. Sacrifices without following prescribed rites, without donating food, without mantras, without donations and without faith, are said to be of the tamas-type. Worship of
gods, brahmanas, 581 teachers and the wise, purity, simplicity, brahmacharya and non-violence 582 -these are
known as physical austerities. Not uttering words that lead to anxiety, speaking the truth and that which is pleasant
and leads to welfare, 583 and self-study 584 -these are known as verbal austerities. Tranquility of mind, lack of
cruelty, reserve in speech, control of one's self, purity in attitude 585 -all these are known as mental austerities.
These three types of austerities performed single-mindedly by men, without attachment to fruits and with supreme
faith, are said to be of the sattva-type. Austerities performed with the objective of obtaining praise, respect or worship, and based on insolence, are said to be of the rajas-type and in this, 586 are temporary and uncertain. Austerities performed on the basis of delusion, resulting in the oppression of one's self or undertaken to destroy others, are
said to be of the tamas-type. Alms donated for the sake of donation, 587 to those who have not benefited the donor,
588 and based on place, time and subject 589 -are said to be of the sattva-type. But donations for the sake of return favours or for the fruits or given unwillingly, are said to be of the rajas-type. Donations in the wrong place, at
the wrong time and to the wrong subject, given without respect and disdainfully-are said to be of the tamas-type.

"Om tat sat"-in these three ways, the brahman has been described in the sacred texts. From this, in the past, brahmanas and the Vedas and yajnas have been created. Therefore, according to prescribed rites, sacrifices, donations
and austerities by those who are learned in the brahman, are always undertaken after uttering "Om". Those who
desire liberation, give up desire for fruits and undertake sacrifices, donations and austerities after uttering "Tat". O
Partha! "Sat" is used to signify existence and superiority. And the word "Sat" is also used for auspicious acts.
Steadfastness in sacrifices, donations and austerities is known as "Sat" and action performed towards those ends is
also indeed known as "Sat". O Partha! Sacrifices, donations and austerities and any other action, undertaken without faith, are known as the opposite of "Sat", with nothing 590 in this world or in the afterworld.'"'
