'Yudhishthira asked, "How should a king who is devoted to dharma, and who
wishes to establish himself in dharma, behave? O best among the Kuru lineage! O grandfather! I am asking you. Please tell me."

'Bhishma replied, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted. The
intelligent Vamadeva saw the exact truth about this and sang it. There was a
king named Vasumana from Kosala. He was powerful and pure. He asked the
illustrious maharishi Vamadeva. 'O illustrious one! Instruct me with words
that are full of dharma and artha, so that I conduct myself in accordance with
them, I remain established and do not deviate from my own dharma.' The
supreme among those who meditated, the ascetic Vamadeva, replied to him,
as he[Vasumana.] was seated there, golden in complexion, like Yayati, the son of
Nahusha. 'Follow dharma alone. There is nothing that is superior to dharma.
Basing themselves on dharma, kings conquered the entire earth. The king
who thinks that dharma is superior to success in the matter of artha, and who
makes his intelligence truthful, is radiant with dharma. If a king looks towards adharma and acts on the basis of force alone, he is swiftly dislodged
from both the first and the second[Dharma and artha respectively.]. Because his advisers are wicked and
evil, he is a slayer of dharma and deserves to be killed by the people, together
with his relatives. He will swiftly perish. If he does not seek artha and is addicted to kama, and if he is boastful, even if he obtains the entire earth, he
will swiftly perish. However, if a king concentrates on what is beneficial, is
devoid of malice, conquers his senses and is intelligent, he flourishes, like an
ocean into which rivers flow. For dharma, artha and kama, he must always
think that he is not yet full[That is, he must want more of these.]. The progress of the worlds is based on all
these. If he listens to this, he will obtain fame, glory, prosperity and subjects.
A person who is proud about dharma, who thinks about dharma and artha,
who undertakes action only after thinking about artha, is certain to obtain
greatness. If the king is not generous, is not extremely affectionate, if he always wields the rod over his subjects and if he is naturally violent, he will
swiftly perish. The stupid one does not use his intelligence to see that he has
committed a wicked deed. He is covered in ill fame and, after death, attains
hell. If he shows honour, is generous, pure and discriminating about good
taste, men seek to destroy any hardships that he confronts, as if those are their
own. If he does not have a preceptor to tell him about dharma, if he does not
ask others, if he only concentrates on happiness and obtaining riches, his
greatness does not last long. If he shows importance to his preceptor in matters connected with dharma, if he himself glances towards the objectives, if
he places dharma at the forefront when dealing with people, his greatness
lasts for a long time.'"'
