Vaishampayana said, 'At night, after he had eaten and rested, Vidura told him, "O Keshava! It was not a wise decision for you to come. O Janardana! That ignorant one acts counter to artha and dharma. He insults those who deserve respect, though he himself craves for respect. He ignores the instructions of the aged. The foolish and evil-
souled one goes against dharma and the sacred texts. O Janardana! Dhritarashtra's wicked son is incapable of being controlled by his superiors. His soul is full of desire. He thinks himself to be wise. He harms his friends and is
suspicious of everyone. He does not do what he should. He is ungrateful. He has given up dharma and is addicted
to falsehood. He is full of these and many other vices. Because of this, he will not accept your advice and will not
accept what is good for him. O Madhusudana! He sees these soldiers who have been brought together on this earth
and without examining his own soul, in his foolishness, thinks that his objectives have been accomplished. Dhritarashtra's evil-minded son will not accept peace. He has decided that Karna alone is capable of defeating all the
others. He has the greatest faith in Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Karna, Drona's son and Jayadratha. Therefore, his mind
is not set on peace. O Janardana! The sons of Dhritarashtra, together with Karna, have made up their minds that the
Parthas will not be capable of countering Bhishma, Drona and Kripa. O Keshava! Because of brotherly feelings,
you are endeavouring to bring about peace. But all the sons of Dhritarashtra have resolved that they will not return
to the Pandavas what is rightly theirs. Any words addressed towards them will be pointless. O Madhusudana!
When good and bad advice is equal, a wise man does not speak, like a singer who is restrained in the midst of the
deaf. O Madhava! Those foolish ones have no reverence for others. You should not speak to them, like brahmanas
don't to chandalas[Chandala has different nuances and a chandala is not necessarily a shudra. A chandala is also of mixed parentage, with a shudra father and a brahmana mother. More generally, chandalas are outcastes, while shudras are within the caste fold.]. Because of his strength, this foolish one will not pay heed to your words. Therefore, it will
be fruitless for you to speak any words to him. O Krishna! It does not appeal to me that you should descend in the
midst, when all these evil-minded ones are gathered together. They are evil in intelligence. They are wicked. They
are many and they are evil in intelligence. O Krishna! It does not appeal to me that you should speak words in their
midst. Because of his delusion and insolence, he does not listen to his elders and accept what is superior. Because
of his age, insolence, delusion and intolerance, he will not accept what is good for him. He possesses a strong
army. O Madhava! If you speak to him, I have a great anxiety that he will not act in accordance with your words.
O Janardana! All the sons of Dhritarashtra have arrived at the conclusion that even Indra, together with the immortals, is incapable of vanquishing them in battle. Among those who are thus inclined and overcome by desire and
anger, your words will be ineffective, no matter how effective they may be. The evil and foolish one is stationed in
the midst of his army, with elephants, soldiers, chariots and horses. Duryodhana thinks that he has no reason to be
afraid of anyone else's anger and that he has conquered the entire earth. Dhritarashtra's son aspires for a great
kingdom on earth, without any rivals. No peace can be obtained from such a person, one who thinks that he has
obtained all the prosperity that can be achieved. The earth has been cooked by destiny. All the warriors on earth
have assembled together, for Duryodhana's sake and to fight with the Pandavas. The kings and the lords of the
earth have gathered together. All of them have old enmities with you[Because they were allied with Jarasandha and against the Yadavas.]. O Krishna! It is you who have robbed the
kings of their possessions. It is because of their anxiety from you that these brave ones have sought refuge with
Dhritarashtra's son and have gathered around Karna. They are with Duryodhana and are ready to give up their own
selves. All the warriors are happy at the prospect of fighting with the Pandavas. O brave Dasharha! It is not my
view that you should enter into their midst. There are many evil-minded ones gathered there. O destroyer of enemies! Why should you go in the midst of these foes? O mighty-armed one! Even the gods are incapable of withstanding you in any way. O slayer of enemies! I know your power, manliness and intelligence. O Madhava! I have
the same affection for you as I have for the Pandavas. I speak because of my affection, great reverence and friendship."'
