The preceptor said, 'A person who does not know about those four things does not know supreme dharma[The number four is left dangling and it's not immediately obvious which four are meant. In all probability, this
means the brahman with qualities, the brahman without qualities, that which is manifest and that which is not
manifest.].
The supreme rishi obtained the manifest, and that which is not manifest, as tattvam[As will soon be evident, this supreme rishi is the sage Narayana. Tattvam means the truth, the real state, the
essence.]. That which is manifest is in the jaws of death. Know that which is not manifest is the immortal objective. The rishi Narayana has spoken about the signs of inclination[Inclination towards, and attachment for, action and its fruits, pravritti.]. Everything in the three worlds, the mobile and the immobile, is established on
this. The traits of the dharma of renunciation[Detachment from fruits and renunciation of action, nivritti.] are that this leads to the eternal brahman, who is not manifest. Prajapati  has  spoken  about  the  characteristics  of  the  dharma  of  pravritti.  From  pravritti,  one  has  to  return
again[Rebirth.].Nivritti leads to the supreme objective. A supreme sage who is engaged in nivritti attains that supreme
end. He is devoted to knowledge and always discriminates between what is auspicious and what is inauspicious.
For that, one must know both the unmanifest and purusha. One must also know the one who is greater than the unmanifest and the purusha. One who is accomplished must specially look towards the differences between them.
The signs of both of them[Purusha and prakriti.] are that they are without beginning and without end. They are both always subtler
than the subtlest and greater than the greatest. They are similar in this way. But there are also differences between
them. Prakriti's dharma is creation and it has three kinds of traits[Sattva, rajas and tamas.]. Know that the traits of the kshetrajna are the
converse[In the sense that the kshetrajna or purusha is inactive and is beyond the three qualities.]. Because of the qualities, prakriti is seen to have transformations. But purusha and the more powerful
one[The brahman.] are incapable of being comprehended. Creation results from the union[Between purusha and prakriti.] and the attributes of action enable
one to understand. A doer is characterized by action and withdrawal from action. Though words like 'who', 'I' and
'this' are used, they are meaningless. It is like a person who wears a headdress made out of three pieces of cloth.
The embodied being is enveloped in sattva, rajas and tamas. Therefore, one must understand four subjects and aspects[Similarities between purusha and prakriti, differences between them, similarities between purusha and the brahman and differences between them.]. Someone who knows this will not be confused, even when his time draws to an end. If one desires the celestial prosperity of the brahman, one must be pure in words and mind. For the body, one must observe fierce rituals and be engaged in unblemished austerities. The three worlds are illuminated and pervaded by austerities performed by the inner being. The radiance of the sun and the moon in the sky is because of austerities. The power of
austerities is in knowledge. Austerities are praised in the world. Because of its attributes, austerities free a person
from acts committed because of rajas and tamas. Brahmacharya and non-violence are said to be the austerities of
the body. Control over words and the mind and tranquility are said to be austerities of the mind. In particular, following the ordinances, one must receive food from brahmanas. If one is restrained in food, the sins that result from
rajas are destroyed. In one's mind, one must withdraw from material objects and action. Thus, one must only accept that much of food as is necessary.

'"'When one is afflicted by old age and one's end has arrived, one must act without any distress. One must confront it by fixing one's mind on knowledge. Divested from rajas and the body, the embodied being silently moves
around. When one is freed from action and one's intelligence turns to lack of attachment, one is based in prakriti[Freed from the senses. But this does not mean that one has attained moksha.].
When one is freed from the distraction of the body, one can also be freed from what comes after the end of the
body[There are subtleties left implicit in the text. These concern transitions, after death, from the gross body to the
subtle body and so on. When one is truly emancipated, one is freed from these subtler forms of the body too.]. The creation and destruction of beings always has a reason. However, if one has belief in the supreme reason behind creation, one is freed from the compulsion to return[Rebirth.]. But there are those who are ignorant about the
forces behind the end of the world and creation and destruction. They use their patience to hold up their bodies and
use their intelligence to withdraw their minds. They withdraw from places and objects that are destructible and
worship what is subtle. They know everything that should be known from the sacred texts. After death, some of
them, with cleansed souls, attain the ultimate resort. Some virtuous ones worship the object of meditation[The text uses the word dharana, which is concentrated meditation. Dharana is one of the steps in the eight components of yoga.]. The
supreme god cannot be destroyed and has been described as a flash of lightning. When the end comes, some have
burnt their sins through austerities. All these great-souled ones go towards the supreme objective. The attributes[Of the brahman.]
are subtle and one must look at them with sight gained from the sacred texts. Freed from all possessions, one
knows that supreme body. One has fixed one's mind on dharana and has penetrated into what is inside. With the
mind united with knowledge, one is then freed from the mortal world. Pure and having obtained the brahman, one
attains the supreme objective. One obtains the knowledge that is free from folly and cannot be dislodged. This is
the divine and illustrious one, without origin. This is Vishnu, who has the attributes of not being manifest. Those
whose sentiments are pure have no desires and become content with that knowledge. With that knowledge, they
base themselves in Hari. They suffer no decay and do not return. They obtain the supreme resort and take delight
in the one who is without decay and without destruction. This is said to be knowledge and there is nothing else.
The entire universe is bound down by thirst and is whirled around on a wheel. The strands of a lotus plant penetrate everywhere within the lotus. In that way, for those who are thirsty[With desire.], it always penetrates everything in the
body, from the beginning to the end. This is like a weaver using his needle and thread to move around everywhere
in a garment. Like that, the threads of this cycle are bound down by the needle of desire. Prakriti is subject to transformation. Purusha is eternal. A person who knows this is freed from desire. The illustrious rishi Narayana, the
refuge of the universe, revealed all this, driven by compassion for beings and for the welfare of the universe. This
is immortality.'"'
