'Yudhishthira said, "You have instructed me about a terrible thing that is false and lacks devotion. This is the kind
of restraint followed by bandits and I avoid it. I am confused and distressed. My bonds of dharma have become
weak. I do not have any initiative in following this. How can I even think about it?"

'Bhishma replied, "In instructing you about dharma, I have not depended on the sacred texts alone. This is wisdom and experience and it is the honey that wise people have collected. A wise king will have many means of prevention, from here and there. Progress on the journey does not take place along a single branch of dharma. O
Kouravya! When kings ignite their intelligence to follow dharma, they are always victorious. Therefore, understand my words. Kings who desire victory and regard intelligence as the best, are always triumphant. Here and
there, using his intelligence, a king thinks of means that are in conformity with dharma. The dharma for kings was
not determined as a dharma that only has a single branch. Why has the dharma for weak ones not been described
earlier[Weak kings will not be able to follow dharma.]? If an ignorant person sees a fork in the road, he will be confused. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
You should have already realized that intelligence can also offer a dilemma[This is probably a reference to the confusion between dharma and
adharma.]. The wisdom is by one's side, but it
flows everywhere, like a river. One must know that the dharma followed by people can have a course and also the
opposite course. Some know this properly. There are others who possess an understanding that is false. Understanding the truth of all this, one acquires knowledge from the virtuous. Those who steal[Selectively.] from the sacred texts
are against dharma. They understand their purport unevenly and vainly seek to explain them. They desire fame in
every way and wish to earn a living off this learning. All of them are the worst among men and are against dharma.
They are stupid and their views are not ripe. They do not know the true purport. In every way, their final objective
is never to be accomplished in the sacred texts. They steal from the sacred texts and point to what is wrong in the
sacred texts. They do not act well when they proclaim their own knowledge. In an attempt to establish their own
learning, they criticize the knowledge of others. They use words as their weapons and words as their knives. Their
milking of knowledge is fruitless. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Know them to be the traders of knowledge,
like rakshasas. They laugh at dharma and believe that all of it is deceitful. 'We have not heard of any words of
dharma in their words, or any intelligence.' When speaking of Brihaspati's knowledge, Maghavan himself said
this[Maghavan is Indra. This probably means that Indra quoted Brihaspati to
this effect.]. There are no words that are spoken in this world without a reason and some are versed in the sacred texts.
But others do not act in accordance with them. There are learned ones who have said that dharma is only what people follow in this world. Even if a person is learned, virtuous and instructed about dharma, he cannot understand it
on his own. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He can be intolerant about the sacred texts, or confused in his
learning. Even when wise men speak about the sacred texts collectively, insight may be missing. What is praised is
intelligent words that are derived from the sacred texts. Even if an ignorant person speaks words that are full of
knowledge and reason, that is thought of as virtuous. In ancient times, to dispel the doubts of daityas, Ushanas
said, 'Know that if the sacred texts do not possess meaning, they are abhorrent. Knowledge that cannot be defined
is non-existent[The text does not clearly indicate where the Shukracharya quote ends.].' Why do you wish to be satisfied with something that has a severed root? Do not resort to words
that are false and injurious. You have been created for fierce deeds, but you are paying no attention to what you
should do. O king! Look towards my own limbs, decorated with the effects of good policy[A reference to Bhishma following his own dharma and fighting. His
limbs were pierced by arrows and some adversaries escaped.]. Others escaped and
are delighted because of this. Brahma created the goat, the horse and the kshatriya for similar reasons[So that they could be sacrificed.]. Therefore, some[Some kshatriyas look towards the welfare of other people.] are successful in their journey by glancing towards other beings. The sacred texts say that the sin
from killing someone who should not be killed is the same as the sin from not killing someone who should be
killed. This is certainly a rule which they[Probably weak kings, or bandits.] shun. If the king does not establish them in their own dharma, the subjects face extreme decay. They roam around and devour each other, like wolves. If there is a kingdom where bandits roam around and steal the possessions of others, like egrets snatching fish from the water, that person is the
worst among kshatriyas. Choose noble advisers who possess the learning of the Vedas. O king! Rule the earth. Follow dharma and protect the subjects. If a lord of the earth appoints inferior people to tasks and seizes, without
knowing the difference between the two[Seizes in the sense of levying disproportionate taxation, and not knowing the difference between proper taxation and improper taxation.], he is a eunuch among kshatriyas. According to dharma, fierceness is
not praised. But nor is lack of fierceness. One should not transgress either. Having been fierce, become mild. The
dharma of kshatriyas is difficult to follow and there is plenty of affection in you. But you were created for fierce
deeds. Rule the kingdom accordingly. Always chastise the wicked and protect the virtuous. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! The intelligent Shakra said that this was what should be done in a time of distress."

'Yudhishthira asked, "Do you think that there is a rule followed by bandits that should never be violated? O best
among righteous ones! O grandfather! I am asking you this. Tell me."

'Bhishma replied, "One must always serve learned and aged brahmanas and ascetics and also those who are firm
and pure in their learning, character and conduct. This is the supreme objective. The conduct towards brahmanas
must always be like that towards the gods. O king! If brahmanas are enraged, they can perform many acts. The
best fame arises from their affection and their disaffection leads to calamity. When pleased, brahmanas are like amrita. When wrathful, they are like poison."'
