Vaishampayana said, 'O descendant of the Kourava lineage! While Dhoumya was speaking thus, the great and immensely energetic rishi Lomasha arrived. The king, who was the eldest of the Pandavas, his retinue and the brahmanas arose for the immensely fortunate one, just as the immortals arise in heaven for Shakra. Having worshipped
him in accordance with what is prescribed, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira asked him the reason for his arrival and the
reason for his travels.

'Thus asked by Pandu's son, the great-souled one was pleased and replied in soft words, delighting the Pandava.
"O Kounteya! While I was travelling all the worlds according to my wishes, I went to Shakra's residence and saw
the lord of the gods there. I also saw your brave brother Savyasachi and was extremely astonished to see him share
half of Shakra's throne. O tiger among men! On my seeing Partha seated in that fashion, the king of the gods told
me there, 'Go to Pandu's sons.' Thus addressed, I have swiftly come to see you, with your younger brothers. I have
come because of the words of Puruhuta[Indra's name.] and the great-souled Partha. O son! O descendant of the Pandava lineage! I will tell you that which will bring you great delight. O king! Listen to my words, with your brothers and
with Krishna. O bull among the Pandava lineage! On your words, the mighty-armed one went out for weapons.
Partha has obtained from Rudra a great and unrivalled weapon. It is known as Brahmashira and Rudra obtained it
after great austerities. That terrible weapon arose with the ambrosia[Amrita has been translated as ambrosia. The reference is to the churning of the ocean. In the course of the
churning, both amrita and the weapon arose.] and Savyasachi has now obtained it, together with the mantras for withdrawing, repulsing and releasing it. O Yudhishthira! O descendant of the Kuru lineage! The infinitely powerful Partha has obtained other divine weapons too-like vajra and danda-from Yama,
Kubera, Varuna and Indra. He has learnt from Vishvavasu's son[Vishvavasu was the king of the gandharvas. Chitrasena was a king of the gandharvas and it was from Chitrasena that Arjuna learnt these skills, described in Section 32. Chitrasena is being described as Vishvavasu's son.] singing, dancing, the chanting of samas and
the playing of musical instruments, as is prescribed, according to the rules and according to the norms for learning.
Thus Kounteya has become skilled in weapons and has learnt gandharva veda[The knowledge of singing and dancing.]. Bibhatsu, younger to your
younger brother[Yudhishthira's younger brother is Bhima and Bhima's younger brother is Arjuna.], lives happily there. O Yudhishthira! I will now tell you the import of what the best of the gods
told me for your sake. Listen to me. 'There is no doubt that you will go the world of men. O supreme among brahmanas. Repeat these words of mine to Yudhishthira[Indra is telling Lomasha this.]. "Your younger brother Arjuna will swiftly return, after obtaining weapons, but after accomplishing a great task for the gods, which the gods themselves are incapable of.
Together with your brothers, devote yourself to austerities. Austerities are supreme and there is nothing greater
than austerities. O bull among the Bharata lineage! I know Karna exactly. In battle, he is not worth a sixteenth part
of Partha. O destroyer of enemies! I will dispel the fear that exists in your mind about him[Karna.] when Savyasachi
has returned. O brave one! You have a desire in your mind towards visiting the tirthas. There is no doubt that Lo-
masha will tell you everything about this. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Whatever the maharshi tells you
about the fruits of austerities and tirthas should be accepted by you as the bringer of welfare. It should not be otherwise[Indra is addressing these words to Yudhishthira and they are being repeated by Lomasha.]."'"'