'"Bhishma said, 'O great king! Rochamana is a maharatha on the Pandava side. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He will fight against the enemy soldiers in this battle, like an immortal. Kuntibhoja's son, Purujit, is a great
archer and is extremely strong. He is Bhimasena's maternal uncle and it is my view that he is an atiratha[Kunti was raised by Kuntibhoja. Purujit is Kuntibhoja's son and is thus, Bhima's maternal uncle.]. He is a
brave and great archer, skilled and trained. He is capable of fighting in colourful ways. It is my view that he is a
bull among rathas. He will fight with valour, like Maghavan[Indra.] against the danavas. He has many famous warriors,
all of whom are skilled in fighting. The brave one will fight for the sake of his sister's son. Engaged in ensuring the
welfare of the sons of Pandu, the king will perform extremely great deeds. O great king! The lord of the
rakshasas[Ghatotkacha.] is the son of Bhimasena and Hidimba. It is my view that he knows several things about maya and is the
leader of leaders among rathas. O son[The word used is tata.
]! He loves war and will use maya to fight in the field of battle. There are
brave rakshasas and advisers who follow his instructions. There are many other lords from many countries. With
Vasudeva at the forefront, they have assembled for the sake of the Pandavas. O king! These are the principal ones
on the side of the great-souled Pandavas-those who are, in my view, rathas, atirathas and equal to half a ratha. O
king! They will lead Yudhishthira's terrible army in battle, protected by the brave Kiriti, like the great Indra himself. Those brave ones are marching against you in battle, desiring victory. I will fight against them, wishing for
victory, or death in the field of battle. I will face Partha and Vasudeva together, the wielder of the chakra and the
Gandiva. They are supreme men, like the sun and the moon in conjunction at the time of twilight. I will lead the
rathas, together with your soldiers, against the soldiers of the sons of Pandu. I will be at the head of the battle. O
king! I have recounted the foremost rathas and atirathas to you, both yours and theirs. O king! O Indra among
Kouravas! I have also mentioned some who are half a ratha. There are Arjuna, Vasudeva and the other kings. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As soon as I see them, I shall drive them back. But I will not kill the mighty-
armed Shikhandi from Panchala, when I see him with weapons raised, marching against me in battle. The world
knows that in order to bring pleasure to my father, I gave up the kingdom that was due to me and adopted a vow of
brahmacharya. I instated Chitrangada in the kingdom of the Kouravas and consecrated the infant Vichitravirya as
the heir apparent. Among all the kings on the earth, I then became famous as Devavrata. I will never kill someone
who has been born as a woman, or someone who has been a woman earlier. O king! You may have heard that
Shikhandi was earlier a woman. She was born a woman and became a man later. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I will not fight with him. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O king! I will kill all the other lords of the earth,
whomsoever I encounter on the field of battle, with the exception of the sons of Kunti.'"'
