The brahmani replied, 'A person who is limited in his intelligence or has not cleansed his soul is incapable of
comprehending this. My intelligence is extremely fickle, limited and diffused. Tell me a means whereby I
can obtain intelligence. I wish to learn from you the source from which this knowledge emanates.'

'"The brahmana said, 'Knowledge of the brahman is the lower arani and the preceptor is the upper arani[Arani means the two pieces of wood that are rubbed together to generate a fire through friction.].
Austerities and the sacred texts provide the friction and this leads to the fire of knowledge being generated.'

'"The brahmani asked, 'Kshetrajna is said to be a sign of the brahman. What are its signs? How is one capable
of grasping it?'

'"The brahmana said, 'He[The brahman. The text is gender neutral.] is without signs and without qualities. There is nothing that is his origin. I will tell
you about the methods whereby he can be grasped, or not be grasped. I will instruct you about a proper method,
like the one that is seen in bees[The way bees determine where there is a flower.]. The signs are that intelligence must determine action and knowledge must determine intelligence. In instructions about moksha, it is not said that this must be done, or that must not be done.
Through hearing and sight, intelligence is generated in the atman[Hearing from the preceptor and sight through inner contemplation. It is easier to contemplate on direct and manifest objects first, ones that can be perceived. Once this has been mastered, one moves on to contemplate the unmanifest, that which is beyond perception.]. As long as one is capable of doing this, one
must contemplate hundreds and thousands of manifest and unmanifest forms. There are many kinds of yoga and all
of these directly provide the means. Through practice, one obtains the supreme, beyond which, nothing exists.'"

'Vasudeva said, "At this, the brahmani's intelligence became such that the kshetrajna was destroyed[Kshetrajna is being used in the sense of the jivatman. Kshetrajna was destroyed in the sense of the jivatman
merging with the paramatman.]. Having
obtained what is beyond kshetrajna, it became other than the kshetrajna."

'Arjuna asked, "O Krishna! Where is that brahmani and where is that bull among brahmanas? They obtained
success. O undecaying one! Tell me about them."

'Vasudeva  replied,  "Know  that  my  mind  is  that  brahmana.  Know  that  my  intelligence  is  that  brahmani.  O
Dhananjaya! The one who has been spoken of as kshetrajna is I."'
