'Sanjaya said, "Seeing him 97 thus overcome with pity, 98 his eyes filled with tears and struck thus with grief,
Madhusudana spoke the following words.

'"The lord said, 'O Arjuna! From where, when we have this emergency, has this kind of weakness overcome
you? This does not lead to heaven or fame, and characterizes those who are not aryas. O Partha! Give up this
weakness, this is not deserving of you. O one who scorches the foes! Give up this petty weakness of heart.'

'"Arjuna said, 'O Madhusudana! How will I use arrows to fight in this war against Bhishma and Drona? O slayer of enemies! They are deserving of worship. In this world, it is better to beg for alms than to kill one's respected
preceptors. If I kill my elders, the wealth and other objects of desire that I enjoy, will be drenched in their blood. I
don't know which is better for us, they defeat us or we defeat them. The sons of Dhritarashtra are in front of me.
Those are the people we don't want to kill in order to live. My normal nature has been overtaken by a sense of
helplessness. 99 Confused about what is dharma, I am asking you. Tell me that which is decidedly best for me. I
am your disciple. I have sought refuge in you. Instruct me. This grief is exploiting my senses and I don't see what
will remedy that, even if I win lordship over the gods, or this earth, without any enemies and prosperous.'"

'Sanjaya said, "Having said this to Hrishikesha, Gudakesha, the scorcher of foes, told Govinda, 'I will not fight,'

and fell silent. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! To the person who was immersed in grief between the two
armies, as if with a smile, Hrishikesha spoke the following words.

'"The lord said, 'You speak as if you are wise, but you are grieving over those that one should not sorrow over.
The wise don't sorrow over those who are dead or those who are alive. It is not the case that I, or you, or these
kings, did not exist before this. Nor is it the case that we won't exist in the future, all of us will be there. The soul
passes through childhood, youth and age in this body, and likewise, attains another body. The wise don't get bewildered by this. O Kounteya! Because of contact between senses and objects, feelings of warmth and cold, pleasure
and pain result. But these are temporary and are created and disappear. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Therefore, tolerate these. O best among men! The wise person who is not affected by these and who looks upon
happiness and unhappiness equally, attains the right to immortality. That which is untrue doesn't have an existence.
That which is true has no destruction. But those who know the truth realize the ends of both these. 100 But know
that which pervades all of this is never destroyed. No one can destroy that which is without change. 101 It has been
said that all these bodies inhabited by the soul are capable of destruction. But the soul is eternal, incapable of destruction and incapable of being established through proof. Therefore, O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Fight.
He who knows this 102 as a slayer and he who thinks of this as something that is slain, both of them do not know.
This is not a slayer, nor can it be slain. This is never born, nor does it ever die. This does not come into existence
because it has been born. This has no birth, it is eternal and without destruction. It has no end. When the body is
killed, this is not killed. 103 O Partha! He who knows this to be without destruction, eternal, without birth and incapable of change, how can that person cause anyone to be slain? Or how can he slay anyone? Like a person discards worn-out clothes and accepts others that are new, like that, the soul discards worn-out bodies and attains others that are new. Weapons cannot cut this. 104 Fire cannot burn this. Nor can water wet this. And the wind cannot
dry this. This cannot be cut. This cannot be burnt. This cannot be wetted. And this cannot be dried. This is eternal
and is everywhere. This is stable and does not move. This has no beginning. It has been said that this has no manifestation, that this cannot be thought of and that this has no transformation. 105 Therefore, knowing this to be like
that, you should not grieve.

'"'O mighty-armed warrior! But if you think this to be subject to continual birth and continual death, even then,
you should not grieve for this. Because death is inevitable for anyone who is born and birth is inevitable for anyone who is dead. Therefore, because this is inevitable, you should not grieve. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Beings are not manifest in the beginning. They are manifest in the middle and are not manifest again after death.
What is there to sorrow over? 106 Some people see this 107 as a wonder. Like that, some others speak of this as a
wonder. And some others hear of this as a wonder. But having heard, they are unable to understand this. 108 O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In everyone's body, the atman is indestructible. Therefore, you should not mourn
about any being. 109
'"'Also considering your natural dharma, you should not waver. Because there is nothing better for a kshatriya
than a war fought for the sake of dharma. O Partha! This war has arrived on its own, like an open door to heaven.
Happy are the kshatriyas who obtain a war like this. But if you do not take part in this war in the cause of dharma,
then you will forsake your natural dharma and fame, and sin will accrue to you. And all people will forever talk
about your ill fame. For someone who is honoured, dishonour is worse than death. These great warriors will think
that you have withdrawn from the war because of your fear. And those who have so far respected you will lighten
their opinion of you. Your enemies will say many things that should not be said and will criticize your prowess. Is
anything more painful than that? If you are slain, you will attain heaven. If you win, you will enjoy the earth. O
Kounteya! Therefore, arise, deciding certainly to fight. Therefore, get ready to fight, looking upon happiness and
unhappiness, gain and loss and victory and defeat equally. And sin will not touch you. O Partha! You have just
been told the wisdom that comes from knowledge of the self. 110 Now listen to the knowledge about yoga. 111
When united with this knowledge, you will be able to discard the bonds of action. In this, 112 the possibility of effort coming to waste does not exist. Nor is there the chance of committing a sin. Even a little bit of this dharma
protects from great fear. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! This certain knowledge is unwavering. 113 But for
those who cannot focus, their wisdom is many-branched and like the infinite. O Partha! Those who are ignorant
say these flowery words, praising the Vedas 114 and claiming there is nothing else. They are addicted to desire,
think of heaven as the supreme objective and are enamoured of the fruits of birth and action. 115 They praise many
rites and rituals that lead to pleasure and wealth. They are addicted to pleasure and wealth and because of those
words, their minds are deluded. They cannot focus on one object-the intellect that allows one to discriminate.
The Vedas deal with the three gunas. 116 O Arjuna! Rise above the three gunas. Without doubt, 117 always resort
to sattva. Do not be bothered about that which is yet to be attained or preserving what has already been attained.
118 Realize the atman. Whatever purpose is achieved by many small bodies of water is also achieved by one large
body of water. Like that, whatever all the Vedas achieve is achieved by a person who knows the brahman. You
have the right to action alone. You never have the right to the fruit. Do not be motivated to act because of the fruit.
But don't be motivated to not acting either. O Dhananjaya! Perform action by resorting to yoga. 119 Give up attachment. Look upon success and failure equally. This equal attitude is known as yoga. O Dhananjaya! Action is
far inferior to the yoga of wisdom. 120 Seek refuge in this wisdom. Pitiable are those who crave after the fruit. He
who has this wisdom, discards good action and evil action in this life itself. Therefore, use yoga in what you do.
Yoga is the skill of action. The learned who have this wisdom abandon the fruit of action and are freed from the
fetters of birth. They certainly attain that place which is bereft of all blemishes. When your intellect transcends this
maze of delusion, then you will attain indifference between that which has already been heard and that which is yet
to be heard. 121 Your mind is distracted at what you have heard. But when your intellect is unwavering and focused on samadhi, then you will attain yoga.' 122
'"Arjuna asked, 'O Keshava! What are the signs of a person who has attained samadhi and whose intellect
doesn't waver? How does he speak, how does he sit and how does he walk?'

'"The lord said, 'O Partha! A person is said to be unwavering in intellect when he banishes all desires from his
mind. He is content within his own atman. He is not disturbed by unhappiness and he is beyond desiring happiness. He has overcome attachment, fear and anger and he is known as a sage who is unwavering in his intellect. In
everything, he has no emotion, regardless of whether something pleasant or something unpleasant has been attained. He is not pleased, nor is he dissatisfied and in him, wisdom is established. Like a tortoise withdraws its
limbs, such a person withdraws his senses, in every way, from sensual objects. In him is wisdom established. Sensual objects are withdrawn from the body of a person who is starving himself; 123 but not desire. In him, 124 who
has seen the paramatman, even desire is restrained. O Kounteya! Even if a learned man takes care, the turbulent
senses violently steal his mind. He who is devoted to me, controls all those 125 and focuses his mind on me. If a
person can so control his senses, in him is wisdom established. If a man thinks about sensual objects, this gives
birth to attachment about those. 126 From attachment is created desire and desire gives birth to anger. Anger gives
birth to delusion and delusion leads to confusion of memory. 127 From confusion of memory comes loss of intellect and loss of intellect results in destruction. But he who has controlled his mind is freed from attachment and
hatred. 128 Having used himself to control his senses, he uses these to enjoy objects and satisfy himself. When
there is such serenity, in him is eliminated all unhappiness. Because in the mind of someone at peace, wisdom is
quickly established. He who has no control, has no intellect. He who has no control, has no thought. 129 Without
thought, there is no peace. How can there be happiness for someone who has no peace? The wind rocks a boat on
the water. Like that, the mind follows a sense 130 devoted to objects and even a single sense robs him of wisdom.
O, mighty-armed one! Therefore, he whose senses have been withdrawn from objects in every way, in him has
wisdom been steadily established. When it is night to ordinary beings, the controlled person is awake then. When
ordinary beings are awake, the sage perceives that as night. Just as the waters enter an ocean and leave the full
ocean undisturbed, like that, all sensual objects enter that person, but leave him at peace, unlike those attached to
desire. A man who gives up all desire and exists without longing, without ego and without a sense of ownership,
he attains peace. O Partha! This is the state of being established in the brahman. If one attains this, one is not deluded. Even at the end, 131 established in this state, one attains union with the brahman.'"'
