Maheshvara said, "In ancient times, Brahma created a supreme woman named Tilottama. The beautiful
one was created out of tiny particles from jewels[Tila is a tiny particle and uttama means excellent.]. In her beauty, she was unmatched on earth. That
goddess approached me. O beautiful one! The one with the beautiful face wanted to ostensibly circumambulate
me, but actually wanted to seduce me. O goddess! In whichever direction the one with the excellent teeth approached me, one of my handsome faces emerged. In a desire to see her, using the powers of yoga, I came to have
four faces. Using the yoga in my own self, I came to exhibit those four faces. With the face that is towards the east,
I rule everything, like a lord. O unblemished one! With the face that is towards the north, I sport with you. With the
face that is towards the west, I am amiable and bring happiness to all creatures. But towards the south, I am fierce
in form. I am terrible and destroy subjects. For the welfare of all the worlds, I have become a brahmachari with
matted hair. The Pinaka is in my hand to accomplish the tasks of the gods. In ancient times, hankering after my
prosperity, Indra hurled his vajra at me. That scorched my throat. That is the reason I have a blue throat."

'"'Uma asked, "There are many other excellent and handsome mounts. O god! Why have you accepted a bull as
your mount?"

'"'Maheshvara replied, "In ancient times, Brahma created a cow named Surabhi that yielded milk. Once she was
created, she had many offspring and all of them yielded milk that was like amrita. From the mouth of one of the
calves, some froth fell on my body. At this, I scorched the cows and they came to assume many different complexions. I was then pacified by the preceptor of the worlds[Brahma.], who knows about the meaning of good policy. He gave
me a bull for my standard and also as my mount."

'"'Uma asked, "There are many different kinds of abodes and they possess all the qualities of the universe. O
illustrious one! Having discarded all those, why do you find pleasure in the cremation ground? It is full of hair and
bones and is terrible with broken doors and pots[Pots are broken as part of the funeral ceremony. However, a door (kapata) has no role in such a ceremony. If this
is a typo, it occurs in non-Critical editions too and should probably be kapala (skull).]. It is infested with vultures and jackals and flames from funeral
pyres. It is impure because of the mire from flesh, fat and blood, with entrails strewn around. There are the howls
of jackals."

'"'Maheshvara replied, "During the night, I roam around the entire earth in search of a sacred spot. However,
there is nothing more sacred than a cremation ground. Among all kinds of abodes, that is the reason I find pleasure
in a cremation ground. It has the shade of banyan trees and is decorated with garlands that have been thrown away.
O one with the beautiful face! With the large numbers of bhutas, I am happy there. O goddess! Without those large
numbers of bhutas, I am not interested in residing anywhere. It is my view that this residence is sacred and is like
heaven. It is supreme and auspicious. It is applauded by those who desire something sacred."

'"'Uma said, "O illustrious one! O lord of all the creatures! O supreme among those who uphold all kinds of
dharma! O one who holds the Pinaka in the hand! O granter of boons! I have a great doubt. O lord! These large
numbers of sages have tormented themselves through all kinds of austerities. There are many kinds of people who
roam around in the world, attired as ascetics. O destroyer of enemies! For the sake of this large number of rishis
and also to do what is agreeable to me, you should dispel this doubt. What are said to be the signs of dharma? How
should men act? You are capable of speaking about dharma. You know about dharma. O lord! Tell me."'

'"Narada continued, 'At this, the entire assemblage of sages honoured the goddess. Those eloquent ones, who
were supreme among those who knew about meanings, praised her with hymns from the Rig Veda.

'"'Maheshvara replied, "Non-violence, truthfulness in speech, compassion towards all creatures, tranquility and
donations according to capacity-this is said to be the supreme dharma for a householder. Not desiring the wives
of others, protecting what has been left in trust, protecting women, not accepting what has not been given and the
avoidance of liquor and meat-these are five aspects. Dharma has many branches and all of these yield happiness.
Any embodied being must act in accordance with dharma and accumulate dharma."

'"'Uma asked, "O illustrious one! I wish to ask you about a doubt and you should explain it to me. For each of
the four varnas, dharma has qualities associated with the respective varnas. What is the nature of dharma for a
brahmana? What  is  it  for  a  kshatriya?  What  are  the  signs  of  dharma  for  a  vaishya?  What  are  the  signs  for  a
shudra?"

'"'Maheshvara replied, "O illustrious one! You have asked me about a very pertinent doubt. O immensely fortunate one! On earth, the brahmanas are like gods on earth. There is no doubt that fasting always constitutes dharma
for brahmanas. Dharma and artha result from this and they become immersed with the brahman[Fasting is interpreted as restraint of the senses.]. O goddess! The
rituals of dharma involve the law of following the vows. People are born twice through the sacrament of the sacred
thread[Those who are thus twice-born are the first three varnas.]. The supreme dharma for embodied beings is to worship the seniors and the gods and immerse oneself in
studying. Dharma results from acting in this way."

'"'Uma said, "O illustrious one! I have a doubt in this connection and you should explain it to me. Skilfully recount to me the dharma of the four varnas."

'"'Maheshvara replied, "Listening to the mysteries of dharma, observing the vows of the Vedas, following the
dharma of the vows, pleasing the preceptor by remaining near his feet, following the dharma of seeking alms, always  being  immersed  in  dharma,  always  following  the  dharma  of  studying  and  following  the  stage  of  brahmacharya-these are for a brahmana. After having finished studying and having received the preceptor's permission, he must follow the proper rites and accept a wife who is his equal. For him, dharma is to follow the path of
the virtuous and avoid food offered by a shudra. Dharma must always be followed and so must brahmacharya.
Controlling the senses, oblations must always be offered into the fire. A householder must be restrained in diet and
must subsist on leftovers. He must be pure and truthful in speech. Dharma is following the vow of serving guess.
Dharma is tending to the three sacred fires. Following the indicated ordinances, animals must be bound for the purposes  of  performing  sacrifices.  Sacrifices  and  non-violence  towards  creatures  constitute  supreme  dharma.  It is
dharma not to eat first and to only eat leftovers. It is said that there is dharma when one eats after the other family
members have eaten. This is especially true of a learned brahmana who is a householder. The dharma of a householder is that the husband and the wife should be equal in their pursuit of dharma. For the gods who reside in the
household, one must always offer flowers and sacrifices. The house must always be rubbed clean and fumigated
with smoke. For the sustenance of the worlds, this is the dharma of the twice-born who are householders. This is
always nurtured by virtuous brahmanas. O goddess! I will recount for you the dharma of kshatriyas. I will recite it
for you. Listen to me with undivided attention. It has been said that the dharma of kshatriyas is to protect the subjects. For a king who follows this dharma, his enjoyment of the fruits has been indicated. If a king follows the
dharma of protecting the subjects, because he has accumulated dharma through protecting the subjects, he conquers the worlds. In addition, the supreme dharma for a king is self-control and studying, the performance of agnihotra sacrifices and donations. He must wear the sacred thread and follow the rites of dharma associated with sacrifices. His dharma is to unwaveringly follow the tasks and support the servants. Dharma lies in applying the rod of
chastisement appropriately. It is dharma to follow the rites and sacrifices indicated in the Vedas. Dharma is being
devoted to truthfulness in speech and ensuring the resolution of disputes. If a king extends a helping hand to those
who are distressed, he obtains greatness in the world hereafter. He must exhibit valour for the sake of cattle and
brahmanas and lay down his life in battle. He conquers the world through horse sacrifices and obtains residence in
heaven. The eternal dharma of a shudra is animal husbandry and agriculture. He must perform agnihotra sacrifices
and donate gifts and study. He must engage in trade in virtuous ways. He must tend to guests and be tranquil and
self-restrained. He must welcome brahmanas. Renouncing is the eternal dharma of vaishyas. A vaishya who is engaged in the path of trade must never sell sesamum, fragrances and juices and must follow the path of truth. According to capacity and as is proper, he must tend to all the guests, and thus pursue the three objectives[Dharma, artha and kama.]. The
supreme dharma for a shudra is to always serve brahmanas. A shudra who is controlled, performs austerities, is devoted to the truth, conquers his senses and serves his guests obtains a store of greatness that is associated with austerities. An intelligent shudra will shun violence and be good in conduct. He will worship gods and brahmanas. He
thus obtains the fruits associated with dharma. O beautiful one! I have told you everything about the four varnas,
one by one. O beautiful one! What else do you wish to hear?"'"'
