'Sanjaya said, "O tiger among men! There were kings who were following Susharma's lead and Arjuna used sharp
arrows to dispatch them to the abode of the king of the dead. In that battle, Susharma pierced Partha with arrows.
He again pierced Vasudeva with seventy and Partha with nine. The maharatha who was Shakra's son repulsed
them with his own shower of arrows. In that battle, he dispatched Susharma's warriors to Yama's abode. They
were slain by Partha, like the fire at the destruction of a yuga. O king! Those maharathas were overcome with fear
and fled from the field of battle. O venerable one! Some abandoned their horses. Others gave up their chariots. And
still others discarded their elephants and fled in the ten directions. Others fled from the field of battle, with their
horses, elephants and chariots. O lord of the earth! They ran away with great speed. In that great battle, foot soldiers threw away their weapons. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As they ran away, they ignored everything
else. They were repeatedly restrained by Susharma of the Trigartas and by other chiefs among the kings. But they
did not stay in that battle.

'"On seeing that his army was being routed, your son, Duryodhana, placed Bhishma at the forefront of the battle, ahead of all the soldiers. Using the best of his great endeavour, he attacked Dhananjaya, for the sake of protecting the life of the lord of Trigarta. He alone remained stationed in the battle, together with all his brothers, and
showered many different kinds of arrows. The remaining men ran away. O king! The Pandavas were armoured.
For Phalguna's sake, they used their best endeavours to go to the spot where Bhishma was. They knew that the
wielder of Gandiva was invincible. But cries of lamentation had arisen in all directions from the spot where Bhishma was. In that encounter, the brave one with the palm tree on his standard used straight-tufted arrows to shroud
the army of the Pandavas. All the Kurus and the Pandavas seemed to be one single mass. O great king! They
fought and the sun reached midday. Satyaki pierced Kritavarma with five iron arrows. The brave one remained stationed in the battle, releasing thousands of arrows. King Drupada pierced Drona with sharp arrows. He again
pierced him with seventy arrows and his charioteer with seven. Bhimasena pierced his great-grandfather, King
Bahlika, and emitted a loud roar, like a tiger in a forest[Bahlika is the name of a kingdom, rather than of a specific king. Pratipa had three sons, Devapi, Bahlika and
Shantanu. Shantanu became a king because his elder brothers, Devapi and Bahlika could not, or did not. This
passage suggests that the Bahlika who took part in the war was Shantanu's elder brother and was thus Bhima's
great-grandfather. Given the age, this seems unlikely. Somadatta, Bhurishrava and Shala were descended from
this Bahlika and they are more likely candidates as the Bahlika who took part in the war.]. Arjuna's son pierced Chitrasena with many fast arrows.
Chitrasena was severely pierced in the chest with three arrows. These two great ones among men encountered each
other in the battle and were radiant. O king! They were like the extremely terrible Budha and Shanaishchara in the
sky[Mercury and Saturn respectively.]. Subhadra's son, the destroyer of enemy heroes, roared powerfully, after having slain his horses with four
arrows and his charioteer with nine. O lord of the earth! With his horses slain, the maharatha swiftly descended
from his chariot and climbed onto Durmukha's chariot. Drona pierced Drupada with straight-tufted arrows and the
valorous one also swiftly pierced his charioteer. At the head of his soldiers, King Drupada was thus oppressed. Remembering his earlier hostility, he retreated on swift horses. In an instant, Bhimasena deprived King Bahlika of his
horses, charioteer and chariot, while all the soldiers looked on. O great king! Bahlika, supreme among men, was
overcome by panic and confronted a great danger. He swiftly climbed onto maharatha Lakshmana's chariot. Satya-
ki repulsed maharatha Kritavarma. O king! He attacked the grandfather with many arrows. He pierced Bharata[Bhishma.]
with sixty sharp arrows that were tufted with hair and seemed to be dancing around on his chariot, brandishing his
large bow. The grandfather hurled a giant and iron javelin towards him. It was decorated with gold and was extremely swift. It was as beautiful as a maiden of the serpents. On seeing it suddenly descend, extremely energetic
and like death, the immensely famous Varshneya destroyed it with his dexterity. That extremely terrible javelin
could not touch Varshneya. It fell down on the face of the ground, like a giant meteor that has lost its brilliance. O
king! At this, Varshneya forcefully grasped and hurled a javelin towards the grandfather's chariot. It was terrible to
behold. In that great battle, it was hurled through the force of Varshneya's arms. It advanced with great force, like a
fatal night advancing towards a man. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing it suddenly descend,
Gangeya used two extremely sharp kshurapra arrows to slice it into two, so that it fell down on the ground. Having
severed the javelin, he angrily struck Satyaki on the chest with nine arrows and the destroyer of enemies smiled as
he did this. O Pandu's elder brother! The Pandavas surrounded Bhishma in that battle, with their chariots, elephants and horses, so that Madhava[Satyaki.] might be rescued. A tumultuous battle commenced and it made the body
hair stand up. In that encounter, both the Pandavas and the Kurus desired victory."'
