'Sanjaya said, "When the sun was on a downward course, the force of the sun's rays became less and everything
was covered in dust. Some soldiers relaxed their efforts. Some remained there. Others returned and fought again,
hoping for victory. Where the soldiers were thus engaged, striving for victory, Arjuna and Vasudeva slowly advanced towards Saindhava. With his sharp arrows, Kounteya created a path that was just sufficient for the chariot.
And in this way, Janardana followed along that path. O lord of the earth! Wherever the great-souled Pandava's
chariot advanced, your soldiers were shattered and routed there. The valiant Dasharha displayed his skills in driving the chariot. He exhibited circular motions that were superior, medium and inferior[Uttama, madhyama and adhama, probably referring to movement on high ground, level ground and low
ground respectively.]. The arrows were
marked with his name and were yellow[Arjuna's arrows were marked with his name.]. They flamed like the fire of destruction. They were tied with ligaments[Snayu. The arrows were tied with the ligaments or sinews of animals.]. They had well-crafted joints, were broad and could travel long distances. Those arrows were made out
of bamboo and iron. They were both similar and diverse. In that battle, together with the birds[Predatory birds.], they drank the
blood of beings. As he was stationed on his chariot, Arjuna shot his arrows at a distance of one krosha. Though the
chariot advanced one krosha ahead, those arrows killed the enemy. Hrishikesha advanced and caused the entire
universe to marvel. The well-trained horses possessed a speed like that of Tarkshya[Garuda.] or the wind. O lord of the
earth! It advanced with a speed that the sun's chariot, or that of Indra, Rudra or Vaishravana, could not muster. O
king! Never had anyone's chariot moved that fast in a battle, as that of Arjuna, as fast as mind or desire. O king! O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! In the battle, Keshava, the destroyer of enemy heroes, urged the swift horses
and penetrated into the midst of the soldiers.

'"Those supreme horses arrived in the midst of that mass of chariots. They were overcome with hunger, thirst
and exhaustion and bore the chariot with great difficulty. The horses were wounded with many weapons released
by many violent warriors. However, they[The horses.] executed diverse circular motions, as they crossed over destroyed
horses, elephants, chariots and men, lying down in thousands, like mountains. O king! Meanwhile, the two brave
brothers from Avanti saw that Pandava's horses were tired and suddenly attacked him. They pierced Arjuna with
sixty-four arrows, Janardana with seventy and the horses with one hundred and were delighted. O great king! In
that battle, Arjuna became angry. He knew about the inner organs and used nine arrows with drooping tufts to
strike them in the inner organs. At this, the two of them[Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti.] became wrathful. They enveloped Bibhatsu and Kesha-
va with a torrent of arrows and roared like lions. In the battle, the one with the white horses then used two broad-
headed arrows to sever their colourful bows and swiftly sliced down their standards, which were bright as gold. O
king! In that encounter, they then grasped other bows and, extremely angry, began to oppress Pandava with their
arrows. At this, Dhananjaya, Pandu's son, became wrathful. He used a couple of arrows to quickly sever their
bows again. He then swiftly used other arrows that were gold-tufted and had been sharpened on stone. With these,
he killed their horses, the two foot soldiers who guarded them and their parshni charioteers. With a kshurapra arrow, he severed the eldest one's[Vinda.] head from his body. Slain, he fell down on the ground, like a tree that has been
destroyed by a storm. On seeing that Vinda had been killed, the powerful Anuvinda abandoned his chariot, with
the horses having also been slain. The immensely strong one grasped a club. In the battle, remembering that his
brother had been killed, he attacked. The maharatha was foremost among those who fought with the club and
seemed to be dancing around with his club. The angry Anuvinda struck Madhusudana on the forehead with the
club. But though he was thus struck, he did not tremble and was like Mount Mainaka. At this, Arjuna used six arrows to slice off his neck, his two legs, his two arms and his head. Thus severed, they fell down, like hills. O king!
On seeing that those two had been killed, their followers were filled with rage and angrily attacked, releasing hundreds of arrows. O bull among the Bharata lineage! But Arjuna quickly killed them with his arrows. He roamed
around, like a consuming forest fire at the end of winter.

'"Dhananjaya passed over those soldiers with some difficulty. He was like a sun that has arisen, blazing through
the clouds. On seeing him, the Kurus were frightened. O bull among the Bharata lineage! But they recovered and
cheerfully attacked Partha from all directions. They knew that he was tired and they also knew that Saindhava was
far away. They roared loudly like lions and surrounded him from all directions. On seeing that they were so enraged, Arjuna, bull among men, smiled. He softly spoke these words to Dasharha. 'Our horses are oppressed by
arrows and are exhausted. Saindhava is at a distance. What do you think is the best course of action now? What is
your wish? O Krishna! Tell me exactly. You have always been the wisest. In this battle, with you as their eyes, the
Pandavas will be victorious over the enemy. Let me tell you what I think we should do next. Listen to me. O Madhava! I think it is best to unyoke the horses. Remove their stakes.' Having been thus addressed by Partha, Keshava
replied, 'O Partha! My view is identical to what you have expressed.' Arjuna said, 'O Keshava! I will repulse all
the soldiers. You can properly perform the task that must be undertaken next.' Dhananjaya got down from his chariot and stood there fearlessly. He held Gandiva bow and was stationed, as immobile as a mountain. The kshatriyas
desired victory. On knowing that Dhananjaya was now stationed on the ground, they thought that this was a weakness. Roaring loudly, they attacked. They surrounded the solitary one with a large number of chariots. They
stretched their bows and released arrows. They angrily displayed many different kinds of weapons. They covered
Partha with arrows, like clouds enveloping the sun. The kshatriyas forcefully attacked that bull among the kshatriyas. He was a lion among rathas and those warriors attacked him, like crazy elephants attacking a lion. The great
strength of Partha's arms was then seen, since he angrily resisted a large number of soldiers surrounding him from
every direction. The lord repulsed all the arms and weapons of the enemy. He quickly covered all of them with
many arrows. O lord of the earth! The sky was dense with arrows. As a result of the friction, a giant fire with
flames was ignited. The great archers sighed deeply and were covered with blood. Horses and elephants were shattered and roared in distress in all the directions. Desiring victory in the battle, those brave ones were angry and
many of them wrathfully attacked the solitary one. The arrows were like waves[The image is of a river.]. The standards were the currents. The elephants were the crocodiles and it was impossible to traverse. The foot soldiers were the innumerable
fish. There was the roar of conch shells and drums. There were many who crossed over to Yama and the dust was
intolerable. The headdresses were strewn around like tortoises. The pennants were like garlands of foam. The chariots were like waves on the ocean. The limbs of elephants were like mountains. With his arrows, Partha repulsed it,
like the shoreline[The enemy is being compared to an ocean.].

'"In the battle, the mighty-armed Janardana fearlessly addressed these words to his beloved Arjuna, supreme
among men. 'O Arjuna! In this battle, there is no well for the horses to drink from. They desire water to drink, not
to have a bath.' Having been thus addressed, Arjuna cheerfully replied, 'Here.' He struck the earth with a weapon
and created a pure lake from which the horses could drink. Arrows were the bamboos there. Arrows were the pillars and it was covered with arrows. It was extraordinary. Partha created an abode made out of arrows and this extraordinary deed was like one of Tvashtra's[Tvashtra is Vishvakarma, the architect of the gods. In addition to the lake, Arjuna created a pavilion for the
horses to rest.]. At this, Govinda laughed and spoke words of praise. In that great
battle, thus did Partha create a pavilion made out of arrows."'
