Bhishma said, "O son! Listen once again to an enumeration of the qualities in beings. O  unblemished one!
These are praiseworthy words, uttered from Dvaipayana's mouth. The words spoken by the illustrious one are
like a blazing fire, with flames that have no smoke. O son! I am recounting these examples to you yet again. The
earth has qualities of stability, gravity, hardness, productiveness, smell, heaviness, capacity, accumulation, establishment and fortitude. The water has qualities of being cool, juices, moisture, liquidity, softness, tranquility, taste,
flowing and wetness in earthy objects. The qualities of fire are difficulty of resisting, energy, heat, capacity to cook,
radiance, purification, affection, lightness, sharpness and the ability to rise upwards, as the tenth. The qualities of
the wind are control, touch, the location of speech, independence, strength, speed, confusion, effort and the performance of tasks. The qualities of space are sound, expanse, ability to pervade, the lack of a foundation, the lack of a
refuge, not being manifest, not being transformed, the ability of not being resisted and the ability to cause transformations in beings. Created by the five elements, it is said to possess fifty qualities[Each of the five basic elements possesses ten qualities.]. Fickleness, argumentation,
expression, detachment, imagination, forgiveness, propensity towards good, propensity towards evil and lack of
readiness-these are the nine qualities of the mind. Thinking good and evil, enterprise, concentration, doubt and
observation-these are the five qualities of intelligence.'"

'Yudhishthira asked, "How can intelligence have five qualities? How can the senses possess qualities? O grandfather! Tell me everything about this subtle knowledge."

'Bhishma replied, "There are said to be sixty qualities in beings[The five elements have fifty qualities. Intelligence possesses five qualities. Evidently, five out of the mind's nine
qualities are being singled out.]. Beings are always attached to those qualities.
Beings, and what they are attached to, have been created by Akshara. O son! That is what has always been spoken
about in this world. O son! Everything present in this world is said to have been thought in his mind and created.
That is the truth about the origin of all beings and about the origin and destruction of beings. Therefore, obtain
tranquility in your intelligence."'
