'Virata said, "If this is King Kouravya Yudhishthira, the son of Kunti, where is his brother Arjuna? Where is the
powerful Bhima? Where are Nakula, Sahadeva and the famous Droupadi? From the time they were defeated in the
gambling match, no one has got to know about the Parthas."

'Arjuna replied, "O lord of men! This cook of yours, known by the name of Ballava, is the mighty-armed Bhi-
ma, whose speed and valour are terrible. To fetch divine sougandhika flowers for Krishna, it is he who killed the
demons on Mount Gandhamadana[The story has been recounted in Section 35 (Volume 3). The word used in the text for demons is krodhavasha,
those who are prone to anger.]. He is the gandharva who slew the evil-souled Kichaka[This has been recounted in Section 46. It was said that a gandharva had killed Kichaka.]. It was he who slew
tigers, bears and boars in your women's quarters. The one who tends to your horses is Nakula, the scorcher of enemies. The one who looks after your cattle is Sahadeva, the other one of Madri's maharatha sons. These two bulls
among men are capable of withstanding thousands of warriors and are handsome and famous. They now wear the
garments and ornaments of love[Shringara.]. O king! This lotus-eyed, slender-waisted and sweet-smiling sairandhri is
Droupadi. It is because of her that the Kichakas were killed. O great king! I am Arjuna and you have no doubt
heard about me. I am Partha, the younger brother of Bhima and elder to the two twins. O great king! We have happily spent our period of concealment in your abode, like beings inside a womb."'

Vaishampayana said, 'When Arjuna had revealed the five brave Pandavas, Virata's son recounted Arjuna's valour. "This is the one who was like a lion among deer in the midst of the enemies. He ranged among the mass of
charioteers and killed the best of them. With a single arrow, he pierced and killed a giant elephant in the battle.
Adorned with a golden harness, it fell down, embedding its tusks on the ground. It is he who won back the cattle
and defeated the Kurus in battle. It is the sound of his conch shell that deafened my ears." On hearing these words,
the powerful king of Matsya, who had insulted Yudhishthira, told Uttara, "I think the time has come to seek the
favour of the Pandavas. If you so think, I will bestow Uttara on Partha[Meaning Arjuna. This is the princess Uttaraa.]." Uttara replied, "They deserve worship,
homage and honour and I think that the time has come. Let the immensely fortunate Pandavas, who are deserving
of honour, be honoured." Virata said, "When I myself came under the power of enemies in the field of battle, it
was Bhimasena who rescued me and won back the cattle[In the fight with the Trigartas.]. It is through the valour of their arms that we have been
victorious in battle. With all our advisers, let us seek the favours of Kunti's son, Yudhishthira, bull among the Pandavas, and his younger brothers. Let the fortunate lord among men forgive everything that we have said in ignorance. Pandava has dharma in his soul." Virata was extremely delighted and he made an alliance with the king. He
offered the great-souled one his entire kingdom, together with the royal staff, the treasury and the capital.

'Then addressing all the Pandavas, with Dhananjaya at the forefront, the powerful king of the Matsyas repeatedly kept on saying that he was fortunate. He repeatedly embraced and inhaled the fragrance of the heads[A sign of affection towards someone younger or junior.] of Yudhishthira, Bhima, Madri's two sons and Pandava[Arjuna.]. Virata, lord of an army, was not satisfied from looking at them.
He happily told King Yudhishthira, "It is through good fortune that all of you have returned safely from the forest.
It is through good fortune that you have spent the period of concealment, undetected by those evil-souled ones[The Kouravas.]. I
am offering this kingdom, and whatever else I possess, to the Parthas. May the Kounteyas accept everything, without any hesitation. Let Savyasachi Dhananjaya accept Uttara. That supreme among men is the right husband for
her." Thus addressed, Dharmaraja glanced towards Partha Dhananjaya. When his brother looked at him, Arjuna
spoke these words to Matsya. "O king! I will accept your daughter as my daughter-in-law. Such an alliance between supreme Matsyas and Bharatas will be proper."'
