Vaishampayana said, 'Hearing that the Pandavas were near, Vasudeva, the destroyer of enemies, went out with
his advisers, wishing to see them. Following the proper rites, the Pandavas and the Vrishnis met. O king! Together, they then entered the city of Varanasahvya. There was a large army and the sound of hooves. The sound
that arose filled up the earth and the firmament. Placing the store of riches in the front, they entered their own city.
The Pandavas were delighted and were accompanied by large numbers of advisers and well-wishers. As is proper,
they went and met King Dhritarashtra. They announced their own names and touched his feet. O  tiger among
kings! The best among the Bharata lineage met Dhritarashtra, Gandhari, Subala's daughter, and Kunti. They met
Vidura, the son of a vaishya, and worshipped him. O lord of the earth! The brave ones honoured the others and
were radiant. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing about the extremely wonderful and colourful way
your father had been born, those brave ones were struck by great amazement. Hearing about the deeds of the intelligent Vasudeva, they worshipped the one who deserves worship, Krishna, the son of Devaki.

'After a few days, Vyasa, Satyavati's immensely energetic son, arrived at the city of Nagasahvya. All the extenders of the Kuru lineage worshipped him in the proper way, accompanied by the tigers among the Vrishni and
Andhaka lineages. After many kinds of tales had been recounted, Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, spoke these words
to Vyasa. "O illustrious one! Through your favours, these riches have been obtained. I now wish to make arrangements for the great horse sacrifice. O supreme among sages! I wish to take your permission for this. All of us follow you and the great-souled Krishna." Vyasa replied, "O king! You have my permission to do what must be done
next. Follow the ordinances and perform the horse sacrifice, giving away dakshina. O Indra among kings! A horse
sacrifice cleanses all sins. There is no doubt that, having performed this sacrifice, your soul will be purified." O
Kouravya! Having been addressed in this way, Yudhishthira, king of the Kurus and with dharma in his soul, made
up his mind to perform the horse sacrifice. The king had obtained the permission of Krishna Dvaipayana. The eloquent one sought Vasudeva's permission and spoke these words. "O Purushottama! Through you, the queen Deva-
ki has come to be known as an excellent mother. O mighty-armed one! O Achyuta! Please ensure what I will tell
you about. O descendant of the Yadu lineage! It is through your favours that we have obtained these objects of
pleasure. It is through your valour and intelligence that we have conquered the earth. You are our supreme preceptor. Consecrate yourself to perform the sacrifice. O one who knows about dharma! O lord! If you perform the sacrifice, I will be cleansed of sin. You are the sacrifice. You are indestructible. You are everything. You are dharma.
You are Prajapati." Vasudeva replied, "O mighty-armed one! O scorcher of enemies! It is appropriate that you
should speak in this way. It is my considered view that you are the refuge of all creatures. Among all the brave
ones in the Kuru lineage, you are resplendent because of your dharma. O king! You have surpassed them in qualities. You are the king and you are our senior[Yudhishthira was older than Krishna.]. You have my permission to undertake the sacrifice. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! Employ us in whatever task you desire. O unblemished one! I tell you truthfully that I will
do everything that you ask me to. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When you perform the sacrifice, this will
also be a sacrifice for Bhimasena, Arjuna and Madravati's sons."'
