Vaishampayana said, 'On remembering Vasudeva's words, Yudhishthira again asked Varshneya, "How did the
wicked one speak? O Achyuta! At the present moment, what is the best course of action for us? How should we
behave so that we do not stray from our own dharma? O Vasudeva! You know the intentions of Duryodhana, Karna, Shakuni Soubala and also that of my brothers and me. You have heard the words of both Vidura and Bhishma
and you have heard everything that Kunti, great in her wisdom, wisely spoke. Reflect on all this again. O mighty-
armed one! Reflect on all this and tell us unhesitatingly about our capacity." On hearing these words of Dharmaraja, in conformity with dharma and artha, Krishna spoke these words, in a voice that rumbled like a cloud or a
drum. "I spoke beneficial words in conformity with dharma and artha. But for the Kouravya, deceit is wisdom and
he did not listen. The one with the evil mind did not listen to Bhishma or Vidura, or to what I said. He ignored
everything. He does not desire dharma. He does not desire fame. The evil-minded one resorts to Karna and thinks
that he has won everything. Suyodhana even gave instructions for my capture. But the evil-souled one with a
wicked resolution failed to accomplish his wishes. Bhishma and Drona did not speak what they should have. O one
without decay! With the exception of Vidura, all of them follow him. Shakuni Soubala, Karna and Duhshasana are
stupid and told the foolish one things about you that should not be said. What is the point of repeating everything
that the Kouravas said? In brief, the evil-souled one treats you in a way that you do not deserve. In all the kings
who constitute your army is there as much evil and as much lack of good as there is in him? We should not completely forsake our interests and seek peace with the Kouravas. Therefore, war will follow." O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! On hearing Vasudeva's words, all the kings were silent and looked towards the king's face. Yudhishthira understood the intentions of the lords of the earth. With Bhima, Arjuna and the twins, he gave the instructions that the yoking should be done.

'When the instructions for yoking were given, the soldiers were delighted. A joyous sound was heard in the
army of the Pandavas. On seeing that those who should not be killed would be killed, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira
sighed and told Bhimasena and Vijaya[Arjuna.], "I went to the forest and endured hardships to avoid an extreme calamity.
But in spite of our efforts, it is upon us. Despite our making efforts, it is almost as if we had made no efforts. We
have been unsuccessful in our attempts and great Kali[Kali yuga, symbolic of disaster.] is upon us. How will we fight with those who should not
be killed and accomplish our task? How will we kill our preceptors and elders? That cannot be victory." On hearing the words of Dharmaraja, Savyasachi, the scorcher of enemies, repeated to him the words that Vasudeva had
spoken. "Devaki's son has conveyed the words of Kunti and Vidura. O king! You have understood them in their
entirety. It is my firm view that they will not suggest anything that is adharma. O Kounteya! Therefore, we should
not turn back without fighting." Vasudeva heard Savyasachi's words. He smiled and told Partha, "It is just as you
have said." O great king! The Pandavyas then firmly made up their minds about the war. With their soldiers, they
passed the night in comfort.'
