Vaishampayana said,  'Meanwhile,  accompanied  by  the  Vrishnis,  the  valiant  Vasudeva  arrived  at  the  city  of
Varanasahvya. When he had left for his own city, Dharma's son had told him that the bull among men should
return when he knew that it was time for the horse sacrifice. He was accompanied by Rukmini's son[Pradyumna.], Yuyudhana, Charudeshna, Samba, Gada, Kritavarma, the brave Sarana, Nishatha and Ulmuka, with Baladeva leading the
way. Subhadra was also with him. They came to see and comfort Droupadi, Uttara, Pritha and all the other kshatriya women whose husbands had been slain. On seeing that they had come, King Dhritarashtra and the great-
minded Vidura received and welcomed them in the proper way. Worshipped by the greatly energetic Vidura and
Yuyutsu, Krishna, bull among men, resided there. O Janamejaya! The brave ones among the Vrishni lineage dwelt
there.

'O king! Your father, Parikshit, the slayer of enemy heroes, was born. O great king! That king had been afflicted
by the brahmastra[Released by Ashvatthama and invoked on a blade of grass. Parikshit was born dead, but Krishna had promised
that he would revive Parikshit. The incident has been described in Section 79 (Volume 8).]. He was born as a lifeless corpse and this increased both joy and grief. On hearing that he was
born,  loud  roars  of  joy,  like  those  of  lions,  were  let  out.  That  sound  penetrated  all  the  directions,  but  soon
stopped[On learning that the child had been born dead.]. At this, Krishna swiftly entered the inner quarters. His senses and mind were distressed and Yuyudhana
was with him. He saw that his father's sister[Kunti.] was quickly advancing. As she rushed forward, she wept and repeatedly called out to Vasudeva. Droupadi and the illustrious Subhadra were behind her. O king! They, and all the
female relatives, wept piteously. O tiger among kings! Kunti, the daughter of a king, met Krishna. She spoke in a
voice that was choking with tears. "O Vasudeva! O mighty-armed one! Having given birth to you, Devaki has
come to be known as an excellent mother. You are our destination and our refuge. This lineage depends on you. O
brave one of the Yadu lineage! O lord! This is the son of your sister's son. Because of Ashvatthama, he has been
born dead. O Keshava! Revive him. O descendant of the Yadu lineage! This is what you had promised when the
blade of grass was released. 'O lord! The child will be born dead, but I will revive him.' O son[The word used is tata.]! O bull among
men! Behold. The child has been born dead. O Madhava! Look at Uttara, Subhadra, Droupadi and me and also at
Dharma's son, Bhima, Phalguna, Nakula and Sahadeva. O invincible one! You should save all of us. The breath of
life of the Pandavas and of me is in the child. O Dasharha! He will offer the funeral cakes for Pandu and for my
father-in-law. O fortunate one! Abhimanyu was your beloved and like you. O Janardana! You should now do what
brings pleasure here and in the hereafter. O slayer of enemies! Uttara recounts the beloved words spoken to her by
Abhimanyu. O Krishna! There is no doubt that she loves those words. O Dasharha! In earlier times, this is what
Arjuna's son told Virata's daughter. 'O fortunate one! Your son will be reared in the family of my maternal uncle.
He will go to the lineage of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas and learn dhanurveda. He will learn about wonderful
weapons and also about the sacred texts of good policy.' O son! This is what Subhadra's son, the slayer of enemy
heroes, said in love. The invincible one spoke these words and there is no doubt about this. O Madhusudana! For
his sake, we are bowing down our heads and beseeching you. For the welfare of the lineage, act so as to ensure this
supreme benefit." Thus did the large-eyed Pritha speak to Varshneya. Having said this, she raised her arms up and,
with the other women, fell down on the ground. O great king! All the women had tears in their eyes. O lord! They
lamented, "The son of Vasudeva's sister's son has been born dead." When Kunti spoke in this way, Janardana
seized her. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He raised her from the ground and comforted her.'
