Vaishampayana said, 'Pandu saw his five handsome sons grow up in that great forest on the mountain, protected by
the strength of his arms. One day, it was the season of spring, when the forests are in full bloom and all beings are
drunk and maddened. The king was roaming through the forest with his wives. Pandu saw the forest, with trees
like palasha, tilaka, chuta[Mango.],champaka, paribhadraka and many other trees that were laden with flowers and
fruit. The ponds were beautiful with many different kinds of lotuses.

'On seeing this, his heart turned to thoughts of love. Like a god, he was wandering around happily. Madri followed him, clad in a beautiful and semi-transparent garment. On seeing her youth through that garment, desire
stirred in him, like a dense forest fire. The king stared at the one with eyes like that of a blue lotus, like his own. He
could not control his desire and desire overpowered him. In that private place, the king forcibly seized her. The
queen struggled and resisted, to the best of her strength. But his heart was taken over by desire. He did not remember the curse. Following the dharma of intercourse, he forcibly entered Madri. Under the control of love, the descendant of the Kuru lineage acted so as to end his own life. He had no fear of the curse and penetrated his beloved
forcibly. With desire in his heart, his intelligence was deluded by destiny itself. Since he was prey to his senses, his
consciousness was destroyed. Pandu, the descendant of the Kuru lineage and supremely devoted to dharma, succumbed to the law of time when united with his wife.

'Embracing the senseless king in her arms, the miserable Madri began to repeatedly and loudly lament. Kunti
and the Pandavas, who were her sons and Madri's sons, all came to the place where the king was lying. O king!
Madri called out to Kunti. "Come here alone and leave the children there." Hearing these words, she asked the
children to stay away. Coming closer, she screamed, "I am dead." On seeing both Pandu and Madri lying on the
ground, Kunti's body was overcome with grief and she lamented miserably. "This hero always protected me by
controlling himself[That is, he did not succumb to desire with Kunti.]. You knew about the hermit's curse. Why did you transgress it? O Madri! You should have
protected this king. Instead, why did you tempt him in this lonely place? Knowing and thinking about the curse, he
was always miserable. How did he find pleasure when he was alone with you? O daughter of Bahlika! You are
more fortunate than I. You have seen the lord of the earth's face when he was happy." Madri replied, "It was I who
got tempted. I tried to resist him repeatedly, but could not stay away. It was as if he was intent on making his destiny true." Kunti said, "By law, I am the eldest of the two wives. The fruits of dharma accrue to me. O Madri! O
beautiful one! Therefore, do not try to restrain me from what must be done. I will accompany my husband who has
gone to the land of the dead. Arise and let him go. Take care of the children." Madri replied, "I am still embracing
my husband and have not let him escape. Nor has my desire yet been satisfied. O elder one! Please give me permission. The best of the Bharata lineage came to me for the sake of desire. With his desire unsatisfied, how can I
let him go to Yama's abode? O revered one! If I live, it is certain that I will not be able to treat your children and
mine in the same way and that sin will touch me. O Kunti! But you will be able to bring up my children as your
own. The king has gone to the land of the dead because of his desire for me. Therefore, my body should be burnt
with the king's body. O revered one! Do what is pleasurable to me and burn them together. Watch over the children
and think kindly of me. I cannot think of anything else I need to say." Having said this, the illustrious daughter of
the king of Madra, wife by law to that bull among men, climbed onto the fire of that funeral pyre.'
