Bhishma said, "Yama spoke about funeral ceremonies to Shashabindu[Famous king.]. Hear about the desirable acts under
separate nakshatras. With his offspring, if a man always ignites the fire and performs a funeral ceremony at
the conjunction of Krittika, he becomes devoid of anxiety. One who desires offspring should do it under Rohini.
One who desires energy should do it under Mrigashira. If a man performs a funeral ceremony under Ardra, he becomes the perpetrator of cruel deeds. A mortal who performs a funeral ceremony under Punarvasu makes gains
through agriculture. A man who desires prosperity should perform a funeral ceremony under Pushya. A person
who performs a funeral ceremony under Ashlesha gives birth to brave sons. A person who performs a funeral ceremony under Magha becomes superior to the relatives. A person who performs a funeral ceremony under Purva
Phalguni obtains good fortune. Uttara Phalguni leads to offspring. Hasta leads to fruits being obtained. If a person
performs a funeral ceremony under Chitra, he obtains handsome sons. If a person worships the ancestors under the
conjunction of Svati, he earns a living through trade. A man who desires many sons should worship the ancestors
under Vishakha. If he does it under Anuradha, he becomes an emperor. O best among those of the Kuru lineage! If
a mortal is devoted and self-controlled and does this under Jyeshtha, such a man avoids difficulties and becomes a
sovereign. Under Mula, one recovers from disease. Under Purva Ashadha, one obtains excellent health. Under Uttara Ashadha, one roams around the earth, devoid of sorrow. A person who undertakes a funeral ceremony under
Abhijit obtains supreme learning. If a person undertakes a funeral ceremony under Shravana, after death, he goes
to the supreme destination. A man who does it under Dhanishtha obtains the status of getting a kingdom. If one
does it under Varuna's nakshatra[Shatabhisha.], one becomes successful as a physician. If one does it under Purva Proshthapada[The same as Bhadrapada.], one obtains many goats and sheep. If one does it under Uttara Proshthapada, one obtains thousands of cattle.
If one does it under Revati, one obtains the prosperity and wealth of a large amount of silver. If one does it under
Ashvini, one obtains many horses. Under Bharani, one obtains an excellent lifespan. Having heard about these
rites of funeral ceremonies, Shashabindu acted accordingly. He conquered the earth easily and ruled it."'
