'Sanjaya said, "Having killed all the Panchalas and all the sons of Droupadi, they together went to the spot where
Duryodhana had been struck down. Having gone there, they saw that there was still some life left in the king. Having descended from their chariots, they surrounded your son. O Indra among kings! His thighs had been shattered.
He was unconscious and was alive with great difficulty. They saw him lying down on the ground, vomiting blood
through his mouth. He was surrounded by a large number of carnivorous beasts and their forms were terrible.
There were a large number of jackals nearby, wishing to devour him[After he was dead. The word used is shalavrika, which we have interpreted as jackal. It is also possible to break this up into shala and vrika and interpret it as jackals and wolves separately.]. He was restraining those carnivorous
beasts, which wished to feed on him, with a great deal of difficulty. He was writhing on the ground and was suffering from severe pain. The great-souled one was lying down on the ground, covered in his own blood. In great
grief, the three remaining heroes, Ashvatthama, Kripa and Satvata Kritavarma, surrounded him. Those three maharathas were also covered in blood and sighed. Surrounded by them, the king looked like a sacrificial altar surrounded by three fires. They saw the king lying down there, in a state that he did not deserve. Those three were
overcome by great sorrow and wept. They wiped the blood from his face with their hands. On seeing the king lying down in the encounter, they wept in compassion.

'"Kripa said, 'Since he is covered in blood, there is nothing that is too difficult for destiny. Duryodhana was the
lord of eleven armies[Akshouhinis.]. He has been struck and is lying down. Behold. He loved the club and that club has fallen
down on the ground, near him. Its complexion is like that of gold and it is adorned with gold. From one battle to
another, this club never abandoned the brave one. Even now, when the illustrious one is about to go to heaven, it
has not abandoned him. Behold. Decorated with molten gold, it is lying down near the brave one, like a wife lying
down near her beloved, in accordance with dharma. This scorcher of enemies used to be ahead of all those whose
heads had been consecrated[That is, kings.]. Behold the progress of time. He has been brought down and is now devoured by
dust. Earlier, he slew many enemies and made them lie down on the ground. That king of the Kurus has now been
brought down by the enemy and is lying down on the ground. Hundreds of kings used to bow down before him in
fear. He is now lying down on a bed meant for brave ones, surrounded by predatory beasts. For the sake of wealth,
this lord used to be worshipped by the kings earlier. Shame. He has been struck and is lying down. Behold the
progress of time.'"

'Sanjaya said, "O supreme among the Bharata lineage! On seeing the best of kings lying down, Ashvatthama
wept piteously. 'O tiger among kings! You were spoken of as the foremost among all archers. You were Samkarshana's[Samkarshana is Balarama's name.] disciple and in a battle, you were the equal of the lord of riches[Kubera.]. O unblemished one! How did Bhimasena find a weakness in you? O king! You were always powerful and skilled and he was evil in his soul. O great
king! There is no doubt that time is the most powerful on this earth. We see that you have been brought down by
Bhimasena in the encounter. How did that happen? You have known about all forms of dharma. Vrikodara is inferior and wicked. There is no doubt that the wicked one slew you through deceit. Time is impossible to cross. He
summoned you to a duel in accordance with dharma. However, Bhimasena used adharma to shatter your thighs
with a club. Having brought you down through adharma, he kicked your head with his foot. Shame on Yudhishthira, since he ignored the act of that wicked one. There is no doubt that all warriors will censure Vrikodara's act in
the encounter, as long as living beings continue to exist. He brought you down through deceit. O king! The valiant
Rama, descendant of the Yadu lineage, always used to say that there was no one who was equal to Duryodhana in
fighting with the club. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Varshneya[Balarama.] used to take pride in you. The
lord used to say, "In fighting with the club, Kouravya is my worthy disciple." You have obtained the end that
supreme rishis applaud as the objective of a kshatriya. You have been slain and are headed towards that objective.
O Duryodhana! O bull among men! I do not grieve on your account. I grieve because Gandhari and your father
have lost their son. They will sorrow and roam around the entire earth as beggars. Shame on Varshneya Krishna
and the evil-minded Arjuna. They pride themselves on their knowledge of dharma and ignored it when you were
brought down. What will all the Pandavas tell the kings? How was Duryodhana slain in this shameless way? O
Gandhari's son! You are blessed that you have been brought down in an encounter. O bull among men! In accordance with dharma, you were advancing towards the enemy. Gandhari's sons have been slain. Her kin and relatives
have been killed. What will be her plight and that of the invincible one who possesses the sight of wisdom[Dhritarashtra.]?
Shame on Kritavarma, maharatha Kripa and me. Placing the king ahead of us, we should have also gone to heaven.
You have been generous in granting all the objects of desire. You have been a protector engaged in the welfare of
the subjects. Shame on us, worst among men, since we have not followed you. O tiger among men! It is because of
your valour that Kripa's house, and mine and that of my father, have always been full of jewels and servants. It is
through your favours that we, with our friends and our relatives, have performed the best of sacrifices and given
away copious quantities of gifts. With you at their head, all the kings have departed now. These riches are like
stones now. Where will those like us go? O king! The three of us are not headed towards the supreme objective.
We are not following you. We are deprived of heaven. We are deprived of riches and we are remembering your
good deeds. Since we are not going with you, what will we do now? O best among the Kurus! There is no doubt
that we will roam the earth in our sorrow. O king! Without you, how can there be peace? How can there be happiness? O great king! You will leave this place and meet the maharathas[Those who have died earlier.]. You will honour them, according to excellence and according to seniority. You will honour the preceptor[Drona.], the one with the best standard among all
archers. O lord of men! In the course of the conversation, tell him these words of mine, that I have killed Dhrishtadyumna today. Embrace King Bahlika, the great maharatha, and Saindhava, Somadatta and Bhurishrava, and also
the best of kings, who have gone to heaven before you. Tell them these words. Embrace them and ask about their
welfare.' These were the words that he spoke to the king, who was unconscious and whose thighs were shattered.
Ashvatthama then glanced at him and again spoke these words. 'O Duryodhana! If you are still alive, listen to this
welcome news. There are seven Pandavas left and three on the side of the sons of Dhritarashtra. There are the five
brothers and Vasudeva and Satyaki. Other than me, there are Kritavarma and Sharadvata Kripa. All the sons of
Droupadi have been killed and also Dhrishtadyumna's sons. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the Pancha-
las have been killed and the remaining Matsyas. Behold the revenge that has followed their deed. The sons of the
Pandavas have been killed. While they were sleeping in their camp, the men and the mounts have been killed. O
lord of the earth! I penetrated the camp in the night and killed Dhrishtadyumna, the one with the wicked deeds, as
one would slay an animal.' Hearing those pleasant words, Duryodhana found composure in his mind.

'"Having regained his senses, he spoke these words in reply. 'I have not been able to achieve this, or Gangeya,
or Karna, or your father. Engaged in my welfare, you have done this today, together with Kripa and Bhoja. You
have slain the inferior commander[Dhrishtadyumna.], together with Shikhandi. Because of this, I honour you, as an equal of
Maghavan[Indra.].O fortunate one! May you be prosperous. We will meet again in heaven.' Having spoken these
words, the great-minded king of the Kurus became silent. The brave one abandoned sorrow on account of his well-
wishers and gave up his life. They embraced the king and were embraced by him. They repeatedly glanced towards him and then ascended their own chariots. Having heard the piteous lamentations of your son, when it was
morning, overcome by grief, I left for the city[Hastinapura.]. O unblemished one! When your son went to heaven, I was overcome with sorrow. The divine sight that the rishi had given me was instantly destroyed[Vedavyasa had given Sanjaya divine sight, so that he could witness events without physically being
present and also divine the thoughts of others.]."'
Vaishampayana said, 'Having heard about the death of his son and his kin, the king[Dhritarashtra.] let out long and warm
sighs and became immersed in deep thoughts.'
