Vaishampayana said, 'Then another lordly Pandava was seen to approach King Virata, when he was inspecting his
horses. As he arrived, the people saw him, like the disc of the sun freed from behind the clouds. He began to examine the horses that were in every direction. On seeing him engaged in examining, the king of Matsya, the destroyer
of enemies, spoke to his attendants thus. "This man is an equal of the immortals. Where has he come from? He is
examining my horses with great thoroughness. It is certain that he is skilled in the knowledge of horses. Let him
swiftly be brought before me. This brave one's appearance is like that of an immortal." The destroyer of enemies[Nakula.]
now spoke to the king. "O king! O fortunate one! May you be victorious. O king! I have always been esteemed because of my knowledge of horses. I will become the skilled charioteer of your horses." Virata replied, "I will give
you vehicles, riches and a house. You deserve to be the charioteer of my horses. But where have you come from
and whom do you belong to? Why have you come here? Tell me about the arts that are known to you[There is a problem of transposition here and these words should have come earlier. Nakula has already told Vi-
rata about his expertise.]." Nakula
said, "King Yudhishthira is the eldest of the five sons of Pandu. O destroyer of enemies! I was earlier employed as
the tender of his horses. I know the nature of horses and everything about subduing them. I can control wicked
ones and I know everything about healing them. No steed that belongs to me is ever timid. No mare of mine is
wicked, not to speak of stallions. People, and Pandava Yudhishthira, knew me by the name of Granthika." Virata
replied, "From today, let all the horses and mounts that I possess be entrusted to your care. Let all my charioteers,
and all those who yoke horses, be subordinate to you from now on. O one who is like the gods! Tell me what you
wish for. What kind of salary do you desire? The tending of horses does not become you. It seems to me that you
are as radiant as a king. To me, your appearance is as pleasant as that of Yudhishthira himself. How can the Panda-
va[Referring to Yudhishthira.] find any pleasure dwelling in the forest, without any servants?" Thus the young one, who was like the best of
the gandharvas, was happily honoured by King Virata. No one got to know about him and he roamed around, making himself agreeable. Thus did the Pandavas, whose sight always bore fruit, dwell in Matsya, following the pledge
that they had given. They lived a careful life of concealment. But the lords of the earth, up to the frontiers of the
ocean, were extremely miserable.'
