Vaishampayana said, 'In their sleep during the night, the women saw a dark lady with white teeth enter Dvaraka
and run around there, laughing and plundering. Extremely terrible rakshasas were seen to steal ornaments, umbrellas, standards and armour. Krishna's chakra had been given to him by Agni[Described in Section 19 (Volume 2).]. Its handle was made out of iron
and it was as firm as the vajra. While the Vrishnis looked on, it disappeared into the sky. His chariot was divine
and was like the sun in complexion. While Daruka[Krishna's charioteer.] looked on, the four horses, supreme among horses and as
swift as thought, dragged it away along the turbulent surface of the ocean. Rama and Janardana's great standards
had a palm tree and Suparna respectively and were greatly honoured by them[Balarama's had a palm tree and Krishna's had Suparna/Garuda.]. They were taken away by apsaras
who, day and night, asked the maharatha Andhakas and Vrishnis to go on a visit to a place of pilgrimage. With the
women from the inner quarters, those bulls among men desired to set out on a visit to a tirtha. The Andhakas and
the Vrishnis prepared food, drink, many kinds of liquor and large quantities of meat. They were addicted to liquor.
Those handsome and fiercely energetic ones emerged from the city on vehicles, horses and elephants. With their
wives and with large quantities of food and drink, the Yadavas went to Prabhasa and began to dwell in that region,
just as they had done at home.

'The brave Uddhava[Krishna's cousin, the son of Devabhaga, Krishna's father's brother.] was accomplished in matters of artha and knew about yoga. While they dwelt on the
shores of the ocean, he came and sought permission[From Krishna.] to depart. Hari knew that the Vrishnis were about to be destroyed and did not wish to restrain him. He joined his hands in salutation and greeted the great-souled one who
was about to leave. The time had come for the maharatha Vrishnis and Andhakas. They saw Uddhava leave, enveloping heaven and earth in his energy. Food had been cooked for the great-souled brahmanas. They mixed this
with the scent of liquor and gave it away to monkeys. Those fiercely energetic ones then started a great festivity of
drinking in Prabhasa. There were hundreds of trumpets and there were actors and dancers. In Krishna's presence,
Rama, Kritavarma, Yuyudhana[Satyaki.], Gada and Babhru started to drink. In the midst of the assembly, Yuyudhana became intoxicated. He disrespected Kritavarma and said, "Is there anyone who thinks himself to be a kshatriya who
will kill those who are asleep and are therefore almost as if dead? O Hardikya! The Yadavas will not tolerate what
you have done." When Yuyudhana said this, Pradyumna, foremost among warriors, praised these words and dishonoured  Kritavarma.  Kritavarma  became  extremely  enraged.  He  stretched  out  his  left  hand  in  contempt  and
replied, "When Bhurishrava was in a state of praya in the battle, you severed his arm. How could a brave person
have brought him down and slain him in such a cruel fashion[In Section 78 (Volume 7), Kritavarma helped Ashvatthama in the night, when he killed many warriors from the
Pandava side. In Section 69 (Volume 6), Satyaki unfairly killed Bhurishrava.]?" Hearing these words, Keshava, the destroyer of
enemy heroes, cast an angry and oblique glance of anger[Towards Kritavarma.]. Satyaki reminded Madhusudana about the Syamantaka
gem that used to be with Satrajit[The story of the Syamantaka gem doesn't occur in the Mahabharata. It is mentioned in the Bhagavat Purana and
in the Vishnu Purana. Briefly, Satrajit, Satyabhama's father, got it from the sun god. Kritavarma (and a few others) coveted this jewel. When Krishna and Balarama were away, they killed Satrajit and stole it.]. Hearing this, Satyabhama was enraged. In her rage, she approached Janardana
and sat on his lap. In his rage, Satyaki arose and spoke these words. "I truthfully take a pledge this one will go
where the five sons of Droupadi, Dhrishtadyumna and Shikhandi have gone. While they were asleep, this evil-
souled one killed them in their sleep. This wicked Kritavarma was aided by Drona's son. O slender-waisted one!
His lifespan and fame have come to an end." Speaking in this way, he angrily picked up a sword and though he
was near Keshava, attacked him[Kritavarma.] and angrily severed his head. Once Yuyudhana had killed him, he attacked the
others in all directions and began to kill them, though Hrishikesha sought to restrain him.

'O great king! All of them were goaded by destiny. The Bhojas and the Andhakas united and surrounded Shini's
descendant[Satyaki.]. Janardana saw them descend, angrily and forcefully. But knowing that the time had come, the greatly
energetic one was not enraged. They were driven by intolerance and were intoxicated by the liquor. They began to
strike Yuyudhana with the vessels from which they had been eating. Seeing that Shini's descendant was being
struck, Rukmini's son[Pradyumna.] became angry. He rushed forward to free Satyaki, Shini's descendant, who was engaged
with the Bhojas and the Andhakas. However, while Krishna looked on, those two were slain by the many. On seeing that Shini's descendant and his own son had been killed, Keshava, the descendant of the Yadu lineage, angrily
picked up a clump of eraka grass in his hand. This turned into a terrible club that was as firm as the vajra. With
this, Krishna slew all those who were in front of him. Goaded by time, in that tumult, the Andhakas, the Bhojas,
the Shinis and the Vrishnis slew each other with clubs. O king! O lord! Whenever anyone plucked out a clump of
eraka grass, this was seen to turn into something like the vajra. The grass was seen to turn into clubs there. O lord
of the earth! Know that all this happened because of the brahmana's staff. O king! Whenever a blade of grass was
hurled, it was seen to become a firm club that was like the vajra and became something that could pierce even impenetrable objects. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Son killed father and father killed son. They were intoxicated. They descended on each other and crushed each other. The Kukuras and the Andhakas were like insects falling into a fire. While they were being killed, they didn't entertain any thoughts of running away. Knowing that the
time of destruction had come, the mighty-armed Madhusudana stood there, looking on and with the club upraised.
Madhava saw that Samba had been killed and so had Charudeshna. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! With
Pradyumna and Aniruddha also killed, he became angry. Seeing that Gada was lying down, he became extremely
wrathful. The wielder of Sharnga, chakra and the club slew all those who were left. When they were killed, the
greatly energetic Babhru, the destroyer of enemy cities, and Daruka spoke to Dasharha. Listen. "O illustrious one!
All of them have been killed by you. Let us follow Rama's footsteps and go where he has gone."'
