Vaishampayana said, 'Then Sharadvan's son, Kripa, spoke the following words. "Everything that the aged one[Bhishma.] has
said about the Pandavas is full of dharma and artha, is appropriate, and has been argued with reason. Listen to what
I have to say, and it is similar to Bhishma's words. Let us reflect about how we can determine their destinations
with the use of those who live in places of pilgrimage. Let us follow a policy that ensures our welfare. O son[The word used is tata.]!
One should not ignore even ordinary enemies. O son! In the field of battle, the Pandavas are skilled in the use of all
weapons. The great-souled Pandavas are in disguise and are dwelling in secret until the time is up. When the time
arrives for them to return, you should determine your own strength in your own kingdom and that of other kingdoms. There is no doubt that the time for the Pandavas to rise is near. When the time has elapsed, the great-souled
and immensely strong Parthas will be full of great endeavour. The Pandavas are infinitely energetic. Therefore, decide on forces, a treasury and a policy so that, when the time arrives, we can deal with them in an appropriate way.
O son! I think that you should get to know everything about your own strength and those of all your friends,
whether they are strong or weak. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! We should know our strength, whether it is
superior, inferior or equal. Whether we are happy or unhappy, we will then be able to enter into an agreement with
our rivals. With those who are stronger, we will use sama, bheda, dana and danda[The four elements of policy-conciliation, dissension, bribery and chastisement, respectively.]. With those who are weak in
strength, we will use force in the appropriate way. Having pacified our friends, we will easily raise an army. When
you have extended your treasury and your forces well, you will obtain complete success. You will then be able to
counter powerful enemies who arrive, and even the Pandavas, who are weaker in forces and vehicles. O Indra
among men! Having thus determined a decision in accordance with your own dharma and the appropriate time,
you will attain happiness for a long time."'
