'Sanjaya said, "O great king! All of them swiftly fought with Yuyudhana. They were skilled in striking and made
endeavours. They showered down a storm of arrows. He struck Drona with seventy-seven sharp arrows. Durmarshana struck him with twelve arrows, Duhsaha with ten. Vikarna struck him on his left side and between the
breasts with thirty sharp arrows that were tufted with the feathers of herons. Durmukha struck him with ten arrows
and Duhshasana with eight. O venerable one! Chitrasena pierced Shini's descendant with two arrows. Duryodhana
brought down a great shower of arrows on Madhava. O king! In that battle, other maharathas also afflicted him.
Your maharatha sons countered him from all directions. However, Shini's descendant pierced each of them back
with separate arrows. He struck Bharadvaja's son with three arrows, Duhsaha with nine, Vikarna with twenty-five,
Chitrasena with seven, Durmarshana with twelve, Vivimshati with four, Satyavrata with nine and Vijaya with ten
arrows. The maharatha struck Rukmangada's bow and brandished his own bow. Satyaki then quickly advanced
against your maharatha son[Duryodhana.]. While everyone looked on, he severely pierced the king, supreme among the
wielders of all weapons, with his arrows and a battle commenced between the two. Both of them affixed and released sharp arrows. In that battle, those two maharathas rendered each other invisible. Pierced by Satyaki, the
king of the Kurus looked extremely beautiful. A lot of blood flowed from his body, like the sap from a sandalwood
tree. Satvata was also pierced by a mass of arrows released by your son. He was as beautiful as a golden sacrificial
stake that had been erected. O king! In that battle, the Madhava archer suddenly severed the Kuru king's bow with
a kshurapra arrow and laughed. When the bow had been severed, he released many arrows and pierced the enemy
with those swift-acting arrows. In the battle, the king could not tolerate these signs of victory on the part of his foe.
He grasped another unassailable bow that possessed a golden back and quickly pierced Satyaki with a hundred arrows. He was severely and powerfully struck by your archer son. Overcome by sentiments of intolerance, he began
to afflict your son. On seeing that the king was oppressed, your maharatha sons showered powerful arrows on Sat-
vata and enveloped him. When he was shrouded by your maharatha sons in many ways, he pierced each of them
with five arrows and pierced them again with seven each. He swiftly struck Duryodhana with eight arrows. Laughing, he severed his bow and frightened the enemy. With more arrows, he brought down his standard, which was
decorated with a bejewelled elephant. He used four sharp arrows to slay his four horses. The immensely illustrious
one then brought down the charioteer with a kshurapra arrow. The maharatha countered the king of the Kurus with
many arrows that were capable of penetrating the inner organs and was delighted. O king! Having been thus struck
in the battle by the supreme arrows released by Shini's descendant, your son, Duryodhana, suddenly fled. The
archer king mounted Chitrasena's chariot and a great lamentation arose in the world on seeing that the king was
about to be devoured by Satyaki, like the moon by Rahu.

'"On hearing this great uproar, maharatha Kritavarma suddenly advanced towards the spot where the illustrious
Madhava was. He brandished his supreme bow and censured his charioteer, urging him to speedily goad the horses
and head swiftly in that direction. O great king! On seeing that he was descending, like Death with a gaping
mouth, Yuyudhana spoke to his charioteer. 'With his arrows, Kritavarma is quickly advancing towards me on his
chariot. Drive your chariot and let us clash against this supreme of all archers.' The horses were prepared well and
were fast and advanced in the battle against Bhoja, who was revered by archers. Those two tigers among men were
extremely angry and were like blazing fires. They clashed against each other, like two spirited tigers. Kritavarma
struck Shini's descendant with twenty-six sharp arrows and his charioteer with seven. He struck Satvata's four
horses, which were from the Sindhu region and were well trained and well controlled, with four supreme arrows.
His[Kritavarma's.] standard was golden and he brandished his giant bow, with a golden back. His armlets were golden and his
armour was golden. He countered him with gold-tufted arrows. Wishing to leave and see Dhananjaya, Shini's descendant also quickly struck Kritavarma with sharp arrows. Struck by his powerful enemy, the unassailable
scorcher of enemies[Kritavarma.] trembled, like a mountain during an earthquake. Satyaki then quickly pierced Kritavarma's
four horses with sixty-three sharp arrows and his charioteer with seven. Satyaki then affixed an arrow with golden
tufts and released it. It blazed like a giant fire and was like an angry serpent. The arrow was like Yama's staff and
he released it at Kritavarma. It penetrated his armour, which shone like the sun and was decorated with colourful
gold. Having drunk his blood, it fiercely penetrated the earth. Afflicted by Satvata, he was drenched in blood. He
cast aside his bow and sank down on the floor of the supreme chariot. His teeth were like that of a lion and he was
infinite in his valour. But afflicted by Satyaki's arrows, the bull among men sank down on his knees on the floor of
the chariot. Having countered Kritavarma, who was like the thousand-armed one[Kartavirya Arjuna.] and like an ocean that cannot
be agitated, Satyaki left. That place was full of swords, lances and bows and populated by elephants, horses and
chariots. It looked terrible, because of the blood shed by the bulls among the kshatriyas. While all the soldiers
looked on, the bull of the Shini lineage passed through it. He immersed himself in that army and penetrated it, like
the slayer of Vritra through an army of asuras. Meanwhile, Hardikya grasped another giant bow and stationed
there, began to powerfully resist and fight with the Pandavas."'
