Vaishampayana said, 'When the great-hearted Pandavas lived in disguise, Vyasa, Satyavati's son, once came to see
them. On seeing him come, those scorchers of enemies advanced to meet him. They prostrated themselves to welcome him and stood before him with folded hands. Returning their greetings, and worshipped and pleased by
Pritha's sons, the sage spoke to them in affectionate words, after they were all seated, "O scorchers of enemies! Do
you follow the path of dharma and that laid down in the sacred texts? Do you worship the Brahmanas and those
who deserve worship?" The illustrious rishi uttered many words about dharma and artha.

'Speaking about many subjects, he again said, "A great-souled rishi lived in a hermitage. He had a daughter who
was slender of waist and wide of hips. Her eyebrows were beautiful and she had all the qualities. Because of her
earlier deeds[In an earlier life.], she was unfortunate. Despite being beautiful and pure, that girl did not get a husband. With sorrow
in her heart, she then began to perform austerities so as to obtain a husband. She satisfied Shankara with her severe
austerities. Gratified, the illustrious lord spoke to the ascetic lady. "O fortunate one! O beautiful one! Ask for a
boon and I shall give it to you." Desirous of ensuring her own welfare, she repeatedly told the supreme god, "I
want a husband with all the qualities." Then the eloquent Ishana[Another name for Shankara.] Shankara told her, "O fortunate one! You will
have five husbands." Thus addressed, she told Shankara, "Give me only one husband." The god addressed her
again in these excellent words, "You have repeatedly asked me for a husband five times. Therefore, when you are
reborn in another body, it shall be as I have just said." That daughter of divine form was born in Drupada's family,
as the unblemished Krishna Parshati and is destined to be your wife. O mighty ones! Go to the city of Panchala.
There is no doubt that you will be happy in obtaining her as your wife." Having told the Pandavas this, the greatly
fortunate grandfather[Vyasa.], the great ascetic, bid his farewell to Kunti and Pritha's sons and left.'
