Yudhishthira asked, "O supreme among eloquent ones! How did the king become so valorous? O brahmana!
How did he accumulate so much gold? O illustrious one! Where are all those objects now? O one who is a
store of austerities! How can we get them now?"

'Vyasa replied, "O son! Daksha Prajapati had several offspring-asuras and gods and they challenged each other. Angiras had two sons who were equal in their vows-Brihaspati, great in energy, and Samvarta, a store of austerities. O king! They rivalled each other and went their separate ways. Brihaspati repeatedly obstructed Samvarta.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Always obstructed by his elder brother, he gave up his riches, went around
naked and evinced a desire to live in the woods. At that time, Vasava defeated and killed all the asuras. Having obtained the title of Indra of the worlds, he appointed the eldest son of Angiras, Brihaspati, best among brahmanas, as
his priest. Earlier, Angiras was King Karandhama's priest. In valour, conduct and strength, he[Karandhama.] was unmatched in
the worlds. He had dharma in his soul and was rigid in his vows. He was as energetic as Shatakratu. He possessed
many kinds of mounts, warriors and objects. O king! Through his meditations, all of these would be generated
from his mouth. Through these qualities, the king brought all the kings under his subjugation. After having lived
for as long as he wished, he went to heaven in his physical body. He had a son who was as knowledgable about
dharma as Yayati. O afflicter of enemies! His name was Avikshit and he brought the earth under his subjugation. In
valour and qualities, this king was like his father. He had a valiant son named Marutta, who was Vasava's equal.
The earth, up to the girdle of the ocean, was devoted to him. O descendant of the Pandu lineage! The king always
challenged the king of the gods and Vasava also challenged Marutta. King Marutta was pure and possessed qualities. Despite trying, Shakra wasn't able to get the better of him. So that he might surpass him, Harivahana[Indra.] summoned Brihaspati and, together with the other gods, spoke these words to him. 'O Brihaspati! Marutta never does
anything that I find agreeable. O Brihaspati! I have obtained the title of Indra in the three worlds and over the gods.
Yet, in rites for the gods and in rites for the ancestors, Marutta does what is disagreeable to me. O brahmana! You
are the officiating priest of the king of the gods. How can you be the officiating priest for a mortal? Without the
least bit of doubt, you have become the officiating priest of King Marutta, who is a mere mortal. O fortunate one!
You will have to choose me or King Marutta. Give up Marutta and come over to my side.' O Kouravya! The king
of the gods spoke in this way. Having thought for a while, Brihaspati replied to the king of the gods. 'You are the
lord of creatures. The worlds are established in you. You are the slayer of Namuchi, Vishvarupa and Bala. O brave
one! You have single-handedly obtained supreme prosperity for the gods. O slayer of Bala! You are the one who
always holds up earth and heaven. O lord of a large number of gods! O chastiser of Paka! After having acted as an
officiating priest for you, how can I be the officiating priest for a mortal like Marutta? O lord of the gods! I will
stay with you and never with a mortal. I am accepting the ladle for the sacrifice. Listen to my words. If I deviate
from this truth, may the one with the golden seed[The fire.] turn cold, may the earth begin to move and may the sun cease
to radiate heat.' On hearing Brihaspati's words, Shakra lost all sense of jealousy. Having praised him, he entered
his own abode."'
