Vaishampayana said, 'The strong and foremost one among the Yadu lineage then went to Indratirtha. In accordance with the prescribed rites, having given riches and jewels to the brahmanas, he bathed there. The
king of the immortals had performed a hundred horse sacrifices there. The lord of the gods had also given a
large quantity of riches to Brihaspati. As instructed by those who are learned about the Vedas, he had incessantly performed sacrifices there and given away all the indicated gifts. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! The
immensely radiant one had performed one hundred sacrifices. Having performed them in the prescribed way, he
had become famous as Shatakratu[Shata is one hundred and kratu is sacrifice.]. That sacred, auspicious and eternal tirtha is named after him. It is famous
as Indratirtha and cleanses from all sins. The one with the club as his weapon bathed there, in accordance with
the prescribed rites. He honoured the brahmanas and gave them food, drink and garments.

'He then went to the auspicious and supreme tirtha known as Ramatirtha. The immensely fortunate Bhargava
Rama[Parashurama.], the extremely great ascetic, subjugated the earth, slaying all the bulls among the kshatriyas. With his
preceptor Kashyapa, supreme among sages, at the forefront, he performed a vajapeya[Kind of sacrifice.] and one hundred horse
sacrifices there. As a gift, he gave him[Kashyapa.] the entire earth, with all its oceans. O Janamejaya! Rama[This means Balarama now.] gave
riches to the brahmanas there. He bathed there and duly honoured the brahmanas. In that sacred tirtha in that
auspicious land, the fair-complexioned one gave away riches and honoured the sages.

'He then went to Yamunatirtha. O lord of the earth! Fair in his complexion, the immensely fortunate Varuna,
Aditi's son, had performed a rajasuya sacrifice there. Varuna, the slayer of enemy heroes, had performed that
supreme sacrifice there, after defeating men and the gods in a battle. While that supreme sacrifice was going on,
a battle commenced between the gods and the danavas and this led to destruction in the three worlds. O Janamejaya! After that excellent rajasuya sacrifice was over, there was a great and terrible clash among the kshatriyas.
Madhava Rama, with the plough as his weapon, bathed in that supreme tirtha and gave away riches to the brahmanas. The delighted brahmanas praised Vanamali[Balarama's name. Literally, the one who wears a garland of wild
flowers.].

'The lotus-eyed one then went to Adityatirtha. O supreme among kings! The illustrious and radiant sun god
performed a sacrifice there and obtained power and lordship over the stellar bodies. O lord of the earth! All the
gods, together with Vasava, the Vishvadevas and the Maruts, the gandharvas and the apsaras, Dvaipayana, Shu-
ka, Madhusudana Krishna, the yakshas, the rakshasas and the pishachas are always there, on the banks of that
river. O scorcher of enemies! That apart, many thousands of others who are successful in yoga are always
present, in the sacred and auspicious tirtha on the Sarasvati. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! In earlier
times, having slain the asuras Madhu and Kaitabha, Vishnu had bathed in that supreme and excellent tirtha. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! Dvaipayana, with dharma in his soul, had also bathed there and had obtained
supreme success in yoga, accomplishing the ultimate objective. The great ascetics, rishis powerful in yoga,
Asita and Devala, had resorted to supreme yoga there.'
