'Brihadashva said, "Having heard all this, Damayanti was overcome with grief. She suspected that he was Nala
and told Keshini, 'O Keshini! Go and examine Bahuka in many ways. Do not say anything. But stay near him and
observe his conduct. O beautiful one! Whenever he does something, find out the reason. In particular, notice if he
does anything attentively. O beautiful one! If fire is to be given to him, place an obstruction. If he asks for water,
be in no hurry to give it to him. Observe everything about his conduct and come and tell me. Report to me everything about whatever else you happen to see.' Thus addressed by Damayanti, Keshini left quickly. She determined
that he had the marks of someone who was skilled in horses and returned. She told Damayanti everything that she
had observed, everything about Bahuka, human and divine.

'"Keshini said, 'O Damayanti! Never before have I seen, or heard of, a man with conduct like this. He is firm
and pure in his conduct. When he comes to a short passage, he never lowers his head. But on seeing him, the passage is elevated, and he comfortably passes through. Thus a narrow opening becomes a wide opening for him. The
king sent a lot of many kinds of food for Rituparna and there was the flesh of many animals. A vessel had been
provided for cleaning the meat. When Bahuka looked at the vessel, it filled up with water for cleaning. He then
wished to cook and grasped a handful of straw. He made it into kindling and held it up and suddenly, it blazed up
in flames. On witnessing that extraordinary sight, I was astounded and came back here. I also saw another great
marvel there. O beautiful one! Though he touched fire, it did not burn him down. The water flowed rapidly on his
instructions. I witnessed yet another great wonder. He took some flowers in his hand and pressed them gently.
When these flowers were pressed in his hands, they became even more fresh and fragrant. Having witnessed these
extraordinary wonders, I have swiftly come back here.' Having heard about the deeds performed by Punyashloka,
Damayanti decided that Nala was known through his acts and signs and had been regained.

'"She guessed that her husband Nala had assumed the form of Bahuka. She wept and again told Keshini in a soft
voice, 'O beautiful one! Go yet again. When Bahuka is inattentive, take from the kitchen some meat that he has
cooked and come back here.' The one who performed desired actions went swiftly. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! When Bahuka's attention was elsewhere, Keshini took some warm meat and instantly brought it to
Damayanti. In earlier times, she had often tasted meat prepared by Nala. On tasting it, she knew Nala to be the
cook. She wept in great sorrow, overcome by grief. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! She then washed her face
and sent Keshini with the twins. Bahuka recognized Indrasena[This is the daughter Indrasenaa. The son is Indrasena. But given the way names have been written in this
translation, Indrasenaa is also written as Indrasena.] and her brother. The king rushed to them, embraced them and placed them on his lap. Having regained his children, who were like divine children, Bahuka was
overcome by great grief and cried loudly. Thus, Nishadha repeatedly displayed his mental anguish. Suddenly, he
let his children go and told Keshini, 'O beautiful one! These twins are just like my own children and on suddenly
seeing them, I began to shed tears. You have been coming here quite often and people may interpret these signs
wrongly. We are guests in your country. O beautiful one! Therefore, I bow down before you. Go away.'"'
