'Dhritarashtra asked, "What did the king, Pandava, Dharma's son, say when he heard that many soldiers had assembled against him? O suta! How is Yudhishthira preparing himself for the war? When he is worried, among his
brothers and sons, whose face does he look at? Is there any among them who strives to pacify the war? He is
knowledgeable about dharma and follows dharma. However, he has been enraged by the wicked deceipt."

'Sanjaya replied, "The Panchalas and Pandavas look towards the king's face. O fortunate one! Yudhishthira
rules all of them. The separate arrays of chariots of the Pandavas and the Panchalas salute Kunti's son, Yudhishthira, when he arrives. Kounteya's radiant energy is like the sun rising out of darkness and the Panchalas honour this
mass of energy. The Panchalas, Kekayas, Matsyas, even cowherds and shepherds, worship Pandava Yudhishthira,
who brings them delight. Brahmana women, princesses and the daughters of vaishyas, when they are sporting, assemble to see Partha, when he is clad in his armour."

'Dhritarashtra asked, "O Sanjaya! What forces have the Pandavas gathered against us? How are Dhrishtadyumna and his soldiers? What is the strength of the Somakas?"'

Vaishampayana said, 'Thus questioned in the assembly hall where the Kurus had gathered, Gavalgana's son repeatedly heaved deep sighs and seemed to be lost in thought. Then, as if determined by destiny, the suta fell unconscious. In that assembly hall where the kings had gathered, a man said, "O great king! Sanjaya is unconscious and
has fallen down on the ground. He is bereft of his senses and his wisdom and cannot utter a word." Dhritarashtra
replied, "Sanjaya has seen the maharatha sons of Kunti. His mind must have been agitated at the sight of those
tigers among men." Sanjaya regained consciousness.

'Having been comforted, he told the great king Dhritarashtra in the assembly hall where the Kurus had gathered,
"O Indra among kings! I have seen the maharatha sons of Kunti. They are lean because of the restraints they faced
while dwelling in the abode of the king of Matsya. O great king! Listen to the ones the Pandavas have gathered
against you. There is Ajatashatru, supreme among those who uphold dharma. O great king! He is the one against
whom dharma is measured. He has dharma in his soul and never deviates from truth for the sake of anger, fear, desire, objectives, or any other reason. The Pandavas have gathered him against you. The Pandavas have gathered
Bhimasena against you. There is no one on earth who is his equal in the strength of arms. That archer brought all
the lords of the earth under his suzerainty. After escaping from the house of lac, Vrikodara, Kunti's son, was their
protector and saved them from the man-eating Hidimba[This has been described in Section 9 (Volume 1).]. When Yajnaseni was abducted by the king of Sindhu,
Vrikodara, Kunti's son, was their protector[This has been described in Section 42 (Volume 3).]. When all the Pandavas were being burnt in Varanavata, he is the one
who freed them[This has been described in Section 8 (Volume 1).]. He has been gathered against you. He is the one who killed the Krodhavashas and penetrated
the uneven and terrible Mount Gandhamadana in order to please Krishna[Meaning Droupadi. This has been described in Section 33 (Volume 3).]. The substance and valour of ten thousand elephants is in his arms. He has been gathered against you. The Pandavas have gathered Vijaya[Arjuna.] against you
in battle. In earlier times, with Krishna as a second, the brave and valorous one defeated Purandara in battle and
satisfied the god of fire[Purandara is Indra's name. This has been described in Section 19 (Volume 2).]. He satisfied in battle Mahadeva himself, the god of the gods, the consort of Uma,
Girisha, the wielder of the trident[This has been described in Section 31 (Volume 2). Girisha (lord of the mountain) is Shiva's name.]. That archer has subjugated all the lords of the world. The Pandavas have gathered Vijaya against you. Nakula is a warrior who uses wonderful weapons in battle. He conquered the western regions, populated by masses of mlecchas. He is brave and handsome and is supreme among archers. O Kouravya!
The Pandavas have gathered Madri's son against you. The Pandavas have gathered Sahadeva against you. In battle,
he conquered Kashi, Anga, Magadha and Kalinga. There are only four men on earth who are his equal in valour-
Ashvatthama, Dhrishtaketu, Pradyumna and Rukmi[Bhishmaka's son and Rukmini's brother.]. The Pandavas have gathered that Sahadeva against you. He
is the youngest and a brave one amongst men. He brought delight to Madri. O Kurus! Shikhandi, skilled in the use
of weapons, has been gathered against you. In earlier times, she was the daughter of the king of Kashi and performed great austerities, desiring to kill Bhishma[This story will be told in Section 60.]. O bull among the Bharata lineage! When she died, she was
born as the daughter of Panchala and, by destiny, became a man. O tiger among men! He knows about the qualities
and taints of both women and men. That Panchala is unassailable in battle and conquered Kalinga. We have heard
that a yaksha turned her into a man for the sake of killing Bhishma. The Pandavas have gathered that terrible and
great archer against you. There are five brothers who are Kekaya princes and are great archers. They are warriors
with beautiful armour. They have been gathered against you. Yuyudhana[Satyaki.], the Vrishni warrior, has long arms and
is swift in the use of weapons. He is steadfast and truth is his valour. He is against you. The Pandavas have gathered Virata against you in battle. The great-souled one offered refuge to the Pandavas for some time. The maharatha lord of Kashi, who is king in Varanasi, has become a warrior on their side and has been gathered against
you. Though they are children, Droupadi's great-souled sons are invincible in battle. Their touch is like that of virulent serpents and the Pandavas have gathered them against you. The Pandavas have gathered Abhimanyu against
you in battle. He is Krishna's equal in valour and Yudhishthira's equal in self-control. The Pandavas have gathered
Dhrishtaketu, the king of Chedi, against you. He is unmatched in renown and valour and is immensely famous.
That maharatha is invincible when he is enraged in battle and he is Shishupala's son. The Pandavas have gathered
Vasudeva against you. He is the refuge of the Pandavas, just as Vasava is of the gods. O bull among the Bharata
lineage! They have Sharabha, the brother of the king of Chedi, together with Karakarsha, and have gathered them
against you. They have Jarasandha's son, Sahadeva, and Jayatsena. There is the extremely energetic Drupada, with
a large army. He is ready to give up his life for the sake of the Pandavas and is gathered against you. These and
many other lords of the earth have come from the east and the north. With hundreds of them, Dharmaraja is prepared."'
