Vaishampayana said, 'King Susharma of Trigata, the leader of a large number of chariots, had been repeatedly defeated earlier by Kichaka, the suta of the Matsyas, accompanied by the Salveyakas. When the time was right, that
lord swiftly spoke these words of grave import. O lord! His forces, together with those of his relatives, had earlier
been defeated by that powerful one. He now looked at Karna and spoke to Duryodhana. "In earlier times, using his
greater powers, the king of Matsya oppressed my kingdom. The powerful Kichaka was his general. The evil-
souled one was terrible and invincible and was famous on earth because of his valour. That wicked and cruel one
has now been killed by the gandharvas. O king! On his being killed, it is my view that Virata has lost his insolence
and is without endeavour and without refuge. O unblemished one! If it pleases you, let me, all the Kouravas and
the great-souled Karna go there. I think that this occurrence requires immediate action that will fetch us benefits.
Let all of us go to that kingdom, which is full of foodgrains. We will take away all its jewels and many riches. We
will rob the villages and provinces and divide them up. We will invade his city by force and take away the many
thousands of excellent cattle. O lord of the earth! The Kouravas, together with the Trigartas, arrayed well, will take
away all the cattle. We will rob him of his virility and force an alliance on him. We will kill all his soldiers and
bring him under our suzerainty. Having brought him under our subjugation, we will dwell there happily. There is
no doubt that this will increase your strength."

'On hearing these words, Karna told the king, "Susharma has spoken words that are appropriate to the occasion
and they are for our welfare. Let our forces yoke their mounts and swiftly march out. O unblemished one! Let us
arrange our forces, or whatever else that you desire. Consult with the wise elders among the Kurus, our grandfather, the preceptor Drona and Sharadvan's son, Kripa. Do what all of them think and let us advance. We should advance quickly and overpower that lord of the earth. What do we have to do with the Pandavas? They are weak in
riches, forces and manliness. They have either been destroyed, or have reached Yama's abode. O king! Let us attack Virata's kingdom without any anxiety. Let us grab his cattle and his many other riches." King Duryodhana
swiftly accepted Vaikartana[Vaikartana is one of Karna's names.] Karna's words. He himself instructed Duhshasana, who was always devoted to his
commands. "Consult with the elders and swiftly yoke the army. As instructed, we will go there, with all the
Kouravas. As instructed, let maharatha King Susharma also go there, with all his forces and vehicles. Let him go to
Matysa first, but concealing his intentions. We will follow him, but a day later. Preparing ourselves well, we will
advance towards Matsya's territory. Suddenly arriving in Virata's city, we will swiftly subdue the cowherds and
take away their great riches. There are hundreds of thousands of handsome cattle, with all the qualities. We will
divide our forces into two and rob him of these." O lord of the earth! As commanded, Susharma marched in a
south-eastern direction. He began to rob the cattle on the seventh lunar day of dharmapaksha[Dharmapaksha is another term for krishnapaksha, the dark lunar fortnight.]. O king! On the
following day, the eighth day, all the Kouravas joined forces and robbed thousands of cowsheds.'
