'Dhritarashtra said, "He was a mere child, reared in great happiness. He was noble and proud because of his
strength. He was skilled in battle. He was brave. He was born in a noble lineage. He was ready to give up his own
life. He immersed himself in that army, borne by well-trained horses that were three years old. Was there any ratha
in Yudhishthira's army who followed him?"

'Sanjaya replied, "Yudhishthira, Bhimasena, Shikhandi, Satyaki, the twins, Dhrishtadyumna, Virata, Drupada
and the Kekayas, Dhrishtaketu and the Matsyas angrily advanced in that battle. Those armed ones, arranged in battle formation, sought to protect him. On seeing those brave ones advance, all those on your side retreated. On seeing that the extremely large army of your son was retreating, your energetic son-in-law[Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu. Jayadratha was married to Duhshala, Dhritarashtra's daughter.] sought to restrain them.
O great king! Jayadratha, the son of the king of Sindhu, repulsed the Parthas, together with their soldiers, when
they sought to protect their son[Abhimanyu.]. That fierce and great archer, the son of Vriddhakshatra, invoked his divine
weapons, like an elephant sporting on a sloping ground."

'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! I think that an extremely heavy burden was placed on Saindhava, since he had
to single-handedly repulse the enraged Pandavas who desired to protect their son. I think that Saindhava's strength
and valour were extremely wonderful. Tell me about the valour and extreme deeds of the great-souled one. O suta!
What donations did he make? What oblations did he offer? What austerities did he torment himself with? How
could the king of Sindhu counter the enraged Parthas single-handed?"

'Sanjaya replied, "At the time of Droupadi's abduction, he was vanquished by Bhimasena[Droupadi had been abducted by Jayadratha. That incident has been described in Section 42 (Volume 3).]. The king was tormented by his dishonour and desiring a boon, performed extremely great austerities. He withdrew his sensual organs from all objects that brought them pleasure. He bore hunger, thirst and heat and became so thin that he
seemed to be made out of veins. He chanted the name of the eternal brahman and worshipped the god Sharva[Shiva's name. Hara and Rudra are Shiva's names too.].
The illustrious one, compassionate towards devotees, became merciful towards him. In a dream, Hara revealed
himself to the son of the lord of Sindhu and said, 'O Jayadratha! I am pleased with you. Ask for a boon. What do
you desire?' Thus addressed by Sharva, Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu, joined his hands in salutation, controlled
his soul, bowed in obeisance before Rudra and replied, 'The Pandaveyas are terrible in battle because of their valour and prowess. I wish that I may alone be able to counter them in battle.' O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
This is what he asked for. Thus addressed, the lord of the gods spoke to Jayadratha in these words. 'O amiable one!
I will grant you the boon, but with the exception of Partha Dhananjaya. In a battle, you will be able to withstand
the other four sons of Pandu.' The king agreed to these words of the lord of the gods and awoke from his sleep. It
is because of the boon that he obtained as a gift and because of the strength of his divine weapons, that he was able
to repulse the army of the Pandavas single-handed. The twang of his bowstring and the slap of his palms overwhelmed the enemy kshatriyas with fear and also caused supreme delight among your soldiers. O king! The kshatriyas[On the Kourava side.] saw that Saindhava took up the entire burden and roared and rushed to the spot where Yudhishthira's army
was."'
