'Vasudeva said, "O king! When your great rajasuya sacrifice was over, I returned to the city of Anarta after he had
left it. O great king! I saw that Dvaraka had been robbed of its splendour. Studying and recitations had ceased.
Beautiful women were bereft of ornaments. The forms of the gardens of Dvaraka were such that they could no
longer be recognized. Alarmed at this, I asked Hridika's son[Kritavarma.], 'O tiger among men! Why do the men and
women of the Vrishni lineage look distressed? What has happened? I wish to hear all about it.' O supreme among
kings! On being thus addressed, Hridika's son told me everything in detail, about the siege by Shalva and its relief.
O best of the Kuru lineage! When I heard about everything in its entirety, I immediately made up my mind to kill
King Shalva. O best of the Bharata lineage! I reassured the citizens of the city and also King Ahuka[Ugrasena.] and
Anakadundubhi[Vasudeva's name, Krishna's father.]. Smilingly, I spoke to all the chiefs among the Vrishnis, 'O bulls of the Yadava lineage! Always be careful in tending to the city. Know that I will leave to go and destroy King Shalva. I will not return to the
city of Dvaravati without killing him. You will again see me after I have destroyed Shalva and the city of Soubha.
Strike the three beats on the kettledrum that enemies find so terrible.' O bull among the Bharata lineage! Having
thus been appropriately reassured by me, all the warriors happily told me to go and destroy the enemies. The delighted warriors blessed me and said farewell. The best of the brahmanas uttered benedictions over me and I
bowed my head before Ahuka. Then I yoked Sainya and Sugriva to my chariot and drove away, the directions
thundering with the roar. O king! I blew on Panchajanya, my supreme conch shell, as I left. O tiger among men! I
departed with a large army that I had gathered. It had the four kinds of forces and shone with the radiance of
victory.

'"I passed over many countries, mountains with many trees in them, lakes and rivers, until I reached Marttikavata. O tiger among men! I learnt there that Shalva had left the city on Soubha. But I followed after him. O destroyer
of enemies! Having reached the bay of the ocean where large waves billow, I found Shalva on Soubha, in the middle of the ocean[More literally, the navel of the ocean.]. O Yudhisthira! Having seen me from a distance, the evil-souled one challenged me again and
again to a battle. Then many arrows were shot from Sharnga[Krishna's bow, made of horn.], capable of piercing the heart. But the arrows
failed to reach his city and rage engulfed me. O king! That evil-natured and invincible wretch among the daityas
began to rain thousands of showers of arrows on me. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He showered arrows on
my soldiers, my charioteer and my horses. But without thinking about this, we continued to fight. Then the warriors who were Shalva's followers in battle shot hundreds and thousands of curved arrows[The word used is nataparva. Parva is the feathered shaft of the arrow and nata means bent or curved down.] at me. The asuras
covered my horses, my chariot and Daruka himself with arrows that were capable of piercing the heart. O brave
one! At that time, I could not see the horses, the chariot, or my charioteer Daruka. My soldiers and I were invisible
because of those arrows. O Kouravya! Then I also released many tens of thousands of arrows from my bow, invoking them with divine and prescribed mantras. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! But Soubha was one krosha up
in the sky and my soldiers and I could not see the object. All of them therefore only looked on, like spectators at
the enclosure of a performance. But they happily cheered me on, clapping their hands and roaring like lions. The
beautiful arrows released from my bow in that great battle entered the bodies of the danavas like locusts addicted
to blood. At that, sounds of wailing increased inside Soubha. Those who had been killed by those sharp arrows fell
into the great ocean. Having lost their arms and their necks, they assumed the form of headless trunks. With terrible roars, the danavas continued to fall down.

'"My conch shell Panchajanya originated in the ocean. It had the colour of cow's milk, jasmine, the moon, the
stalk of a lotus or silver. I filled it with my breath. On seeing them fall, Shalva, the lord of Soubha, began to fight
with me in a great battle of maya. He hurled iron clubs, barbed missiles, spears, lances, battleaxes and bhushundis
incessantly at me. But I grasped them and destroyed all of them through my own maya. On seeing that his maya
had been destroyed, he fought with me with mountain-peaks. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! At one moment, it seemed as if it was night. The next instant, it seemed as if it was morning. In one instant, it was a nice day.
The next instant, it was a foul day. It was cold, followed by hot. Creating such maya, the enemy fought with me.
But knowing this, I destroyed all this maya with my own. At the right time in battle, I scattered all of them with
my arrows. O great king! O Kounteya! Then the sky seemed to blaze forth with a hundred suns. There were a hundred moons, and suddenly, there were ten thousand stars. Neither day nor night could be detected, nor the directions. I was then bewildered and attached the prajna[The word prajna means intelligence or wisdom.] weapon. That weapon blew his arrows away, as if they
were cotton. Then a tumultuous battle raged, making the hair stand up. O Indra among kings! Having obtained
light, I again began to fight with the enemy."'
