Vaishampayana said, 'O bull among the Bharata lineage! Dharmaraja Yudhishthira again asked Markandeya, without sin, old in his austerities and with a long life. "O one learned in dharma! You know about the gods, the danavas
and the rakshasas, the various lineages of kings and the eternal lineages of the rishis. O supreme among brahmanas! There is nothing in this world that is unknown to you. O sage! You know about the celestial stories of men,
serpents and rakshasas. O brahmana! The famous Kuvalashva was born in the unvanquished lineage of the Ikshvakus. I wish to hear the details about why his name was changed to Dhundhumara. O best among the Bhargava
lineage! I wish to learn about this. What was the reason why the wise Kuvalashva's name was changed?"

'Markandeya replied, "O King Yudhishthira! I will tell you the story. Listen. The account of Dhundhumara is
full of dharma. O lord of the earth! Listen to it, how King Kuvalashva of the Ikshvaku lineage, lord of the earth,
became Dhundhumara. O son[The word used is tata.]! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There was a famous maharshi by the name
of Utanka. O Kourava! He had his beautiful hermitage in the desert regions. O great king! Wishing to worship
Vishnu, the lord Utanka performed difficult austerities for a large number of years. Pleased with him, the illustrious
and worthy one himself appeared before him. As soon as he saw him, the rishi prostrated himself and praised him
with many hymns. 'O god! All beings, with the gods, the asuras and men, and all mobile and immobile objects,
have been created by you. O immensely radiant one! Brahma, the Vedas and all that is capable of being learnt has
been created by you. O god! The heaven is your head. Your eyes are the moon and the sun. O one without decay!
The wind is your breath. The fire is your energy. All the directions are your arms. The great ocean is your stomach.
O god! The mountains are your thighs. O Madhusudana! The sky is your navel. The goddess earth is your feet. The
herbs are your body hair. Indra, Soma, Agni, Varuna, the gods, the asuras and the great serpents bow down before
you and praise you with many hymns. O lord of the earth! You permeate all beings. The immensely powerful practitioners of yoga and the maharshis praise you. When you are satisfied, the universe is at peace. But when you are
angered, there is great fear. O supreme among beings! You alone are the dispeller of all fear. You are the cause of
happiness to gods, humans and all beings. O god! Through three strides, you covered the three worlds. The prosperity of the asuras was destroyed by you. Through your valour, the gods attained supreme bliss. O immensely radiant one! It was your wrath that vanquished the Indras among the daityas. You are the creator and the destroyer of
all beings. Worshipping you, all the gods attain happiness.'

'"Having been thus praised by the great-souled Utanka, Vishnu Hrishikesha spoke to Utanka. 'I am pleased with
you. Ask for a boon.' Utanka replied, 'It is already enough of a boon that I have seen Hari, the eternal being, the
divine lord who is the creator of the universe.' Vishnu said, 'O supreme among brahmanas! I am pleased with your
steadfastness and your devotion. O brahmana! O twice-born one! But you must accept a boon from me.' O
supreme among the Bharata lineage! Thus instructed by Hari to ask for a boon, Utanka joined his hands in salutation and asked for a boon. 'O lord! O one with the lotus eyes! O great lord! If you are pleased with me, let my
mind always be fixed on dharma, truth and self-control, eternally, and let me always be devoted to you.' Visnu
replied, 'O brahmana! Through my favours, all this will happen. A yoga will manifest itself in you. United with it,
you will accomplish a great task for the dwellers of heaven and the three worlds. A great asura named Dhundhu is
now performing terrible austerities for the destruction of the worlds. Listen. I will tell you who will kill him. There
will be a famous king by the name of Brihadashva. He will have an obedient and sacred son, known by the name
of Kuvalashva. O brahmana rishi! On your instructions, this best of kings will use my powers of yoga and become
Dhundhumara[Mara means to kill. Dhundhumara is the one who slays Dhundhu.].' Having thus spoken to Utanka, Vishnu disappeared."'
