'Vasudeva said, "When the yuga of the gods was over[This probably means, when satya yuga or krita yuga was over.], the gods resolved to perform a sacrifice in accordance
with the dictates of the Vedas. They made all the due preparations. The foremost among the gods thought of an appropriate place where the sacrifice could be performed. Amongst themselves, the gods apportioned out the shares
of the objects offered at the sacrifice. O lord of men! Despite knowing about Rudra and about his true nature, the
gods did not determine a share for Sthanu. On knowing that the immortals had not thought of a share for him at the
sacrifice, Krittivasa[Literally, the one attired in skins. Shiva's name.] quickly determined to obtain a share and created a bow. There are sacrifices for the worlds,
sacrifices with rituals, sacrifices performed in households and eternal sacrifices that involve the five elements[The five great elements are ether/sky, air, fire, water and earth.].
Sacrifices performed by men are the fifth kind. Kapardi[The one with matted hair, Shiva's name.] constructed a bow for the sake of a sacrifice that was a
sacrifice for the worlds. He created a bow from the elements and it was five cubits long. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Vashatkara[The sacred exclamation of vashat.]constituted the bowstring. He wished to destroy the four limbs of the sacrifice[This is probably a reference to the four kinds of chants and priests involved in
any sacrifice, associated with each of the four Vedas.].
Therefore, Mahadeva angrily grasped his bow. He went to the spot where the gods had assembled. On seeing the
undecaying brahmachari arrive there with the bow, the goddess earth was distressed. The mountains began to tremble. Winds did not blow. Though offered kindling, fires would not blaze. The nakshatras, in their circle in the sky,
were anxious and roamed aimlessly. The resplendent sun and the moon lost the radiance in their discs. The entire
sky was enveloped in great darkness. The gods were distressed and confused. The top of the sacrificial altar could
no longer be seen. Rudra used his arrow to pierce the sacrifice in the heart. Thus attacked, the sacrifice assumed the
form of a deer and fled, together with the fire. O Yudhishthira! In that form, it roamed around in the sky. However,
Rudra pursued it in the firmament. When the sacrifice was attacked in this fashion, the gods lost their senses. Having lost their senses, the gods could not distinguish anything. Using the curved end of the bow, Tryambaka[The three-eyed one, Shiva's name.] then
angrily tore out Savita's arms, plucked out Bhaga's eyes and gouged out Pushana's teeth. The gods, and all the
parts of the sacrifice, fled. Some whirled around, as if they had lost their lives. Having driven all of them away,
Shitikantha[The one with the blue throat, Shiva's name.] laughed. He used the extremities of his bow to paralyse and obstruct the gods. When the immortals
shrieked, the bowstring broke. O king! When the bowstring was severed, he violently brandished his bow. The best
of the gods was without a bow and the gods, together with the sacrifice, approached him and sought refuge with
him. They sought the lord's favours. The illustrious one was pleased and cast his anger aside into a body of water.
O lord! That is the fire in the water, which always dries it up. O Pandava! He returned Bhaga's eyes, Savita's arms
and Pushana's teeth and the sacrifice was also restored. Everything was well, exactly as it had been earlier. The
gods thought of all the oblations as his share. O lord! When Bhava[Shiva's name.] was enraged, the entire universe was in disarray. When he was satisfied, everything was hale again. He[Shiva.] was gratified with the valiant one[Ashvatthama.]. That is the reason
all your maharatha sons have been killed, and so have many other brave Panchalas and their followers. In your
mind, you should not think that this has been done by Drona's son. This was because of Mahadeva's favours. Now
do whatever task must be done next."'

This ends Souptika Parva.