Vaishampayana said, 'Krishna's entreaties having failed, he left the Kurus and went towards the Pandavas. Kshatta
went to Pritha and in a soft and sorrowful tone, spoke these words. "O one whose sons are alive! You know that I
am always inclined towards kindness. Though I have raised my voice, Suyodhana has not accepted my words.
King Yudhishthira has the Chedis, Panchalas, Kekayas, Bhima, Arjuna, Krishna, Yuyudhana[Satyaki.] and the twins on his
side. Desiring dharma, he has camped in Upaplavya. Though he is strong, desiring friendship with his kin, he acts
like one who is weak. King Dhritarashtra is aged in his years, but does not seek peace. Intoxicated by the insolence
of his son, he is walking along the path of adharma. The dissension has arisen because of the evil intelligence of
Jayadratha, Karna, Duhshasana and Soubala. Using adharma, in this fashion, they robbed the kingdom from one
who follows dharma. But in this way, dharma's consequences bind one down. Who will not suffer from fever when
the Kurus forcibly oppress dharma in this way? Keshava has left without obtaining peace and the Pandavas will
prepare for war. Thus, the bad policy followed by the Kurus will lead to the destruction of warriors. I think about
this and cannot sleep, during the day and at night." Kunti heard these words, spoken by one who desired welfare.
She began to sigh in grief and her mind was also distressed.

'She thought, "Shame on artha! It is because of this that there will be this great carnage of relatives. There can
only be defeat in this war among friends. If the assembled Pandavas, Chedis, Panchalas and Yadavas fight the
Bharatas, what can be greater misery than that? I can see that there is a certain taint associated with war, but it is
also there in the case of defeat in war. For those who are without riches, it is better to die. But there cannot be a
victory in the destruction of relatives. The grandfather, Shantanu's son, the preceptor who is foremost among warriors and Karna are with Dhritarashtra's son and that increases my fears. The preceptor Drona will never willingly
wish to fight with his disciples. Why should the grandfather not be kindly disposed towards the Pandavas? This
leaves only one[Karna.] who unnecessarily follows the evil-minded son of Dhritarashtra. Because of his evil delusions,
he has always hated the Pandavas. He is immensely strong in his resolution and he is also powerful. Karna has always been against the Pandavas and I am now tormented by that. Today, I hope to turn Karna's mind towards the
Pandavas. I will meet him, tell him the truth and seek to obtain his favours. Satisfied, the illustrious Durvasa granted me a boon. When I dwelt in the inner quarters of my father, King Kuntibhoja's abode, I was honoured by the
ability of summoning the gods. With a trembling heart, I thought about this in many ways, about the strength and
weakness of the mantra and about the brahmana's boon. Because of the nature of a woman, who also possessed
childish sentiments, I thought about this repeatedly, though I was protected by a trusted nurse and surrounded by
friends. How could I avoid taints and how could I preserve my father's reputation? How could I do something
good for myself, without committing a sin? Thinking about that brahmana and bowing down before him, I was
overcome by curiosity and behaved like a child. Though I was still a maiden, I summoned the sun god to me.
Though I was a virgin, I conceived him in my womb. He was protected like my son. Why should he not listen to
my words, which will be beneficial for the cause of his brothers?"

'Thinking in this fashion, Kunti decided on an excellent course of action[Vaishampayana's account continues.]. So as to bring success to her objective, she went towards the Bhagirathi. On the banks of the Ganga, Pritha heard the sounds of incantations, being
recited by her compassionate and truthful son. He was facing the east, with his hands raised up. The ascetic lady
waited behind him, until the meditations were over. She was the daughter of a Kourava and descended from the
Vrishni lineage. She stood there, behind Karna's upper garments[Which he had taken off for the meditations.], oppressed by the sun, like a garland of lotuses
that has dried. He was rigid in his vows and meditated until his back was heated by the sun. When he turned
around, he saw Kunti and joined his hands in salutation. As was appropriate, the immensely energetic one, who
was supreme among those who upheld dharma, honoured her.'
