Vaishampayana said, 'O great king! When the Parthas were defeated in gambling with the dice and had left for the
forest, Dhritarashtra began to worry a lot. Dhritarashtra, lord of the people, was seated, worrying, sighing and with
his mind distracted. At that time, Sanjaya[Dhritarashtra's charioteer.] told him, "O lord of the earth! You have obtained the entire earth, with
all its riches. O king! The Pandavas have left from the kingdom. Why are you grieving?" Dhritarashtra replied,
"The maharatha Pandavas are terrible in battle and have allies. Knowing that the enmity will occur, should one not
sorrow?" Sanjaya said, "O king! This great enmity is the consequence of your great deed. There will be complete
destruction of the entire world and all the relatives. Though restrained by Bhishma, Drona and Vidura, your
shameless and evil-minded son Duryodhana sent the Pratikamin, the son of a suta, to bring the Pandavas' beloved
wife Droupadi, the follower of dharma."

'Dhritarashtra replied, "When the gods wish to defeat a man, they first take his intelligence away, so that his vision becomes distorted. When destruction is nigh and intelligence is clouded, an improper course of action appears
as the proper course of action and sticks to the heart. That which is evil appears in the form of that which is good
and that which is good appears in the form of that which is evil. When destruction is near, they appear thus and one
is content. Destiny does not arrive with a club and strike one on the head with it. The strength of time is that it
makes the opposite seem to be right. By dragging the ascetic Panchali into the middle of the sabha, those evil ones
have caused this terrible calamity that makes the hair on the body stand up. She is beautiful and she is not born
from a womb[She was born from the middle of the altar.]. She has been born from the fire. She is illustrious and is knowledgeable in all dharma. Who but a
deceitful gambler[Duryodhana.] could overpower her and drag her into the middle of an assembly hall? Following the dharma
of women[Droupadi was in her menses.], the one with the beautiful hips was covered in blood. Panchali was in single garment. She looked at
the Pandavas, robbed of their riches, deprived of their thoughts, robbed of their wife, robbed of their prosperity,
deprived of all their pleasures and reduced to a state of servitude. Bound by the noose of dharma, they were unable
to exhibit their valour. Among all the assembled Kurus, Duryodhana and Karna spoke harsh and insulting words to
the angry, defiant and miserable Krishna. O Sanjaya! The earth itself would be burnt down because of those
wretched eyes. Would anything have been left of my sons? On seeing Krishna being dragged into the sabha, all the
women of the Bharata lineage, who had assembled with Gandhari, loudly cried out in anguish. No agnihotras were
offered in the evening, because the brahmanas were enraged at Droupadi's oppression. Terrible winds began to
blow, as if the destruction of the beings had arrived. Terrible meteors descended from the sky and Rahu swallowed
the sun. This was not the time of parvani. But a terrible fear was created in the minds of the subjects. Fearful fires
blazed from the places where chariots are kept. All the flagstaffs crumbled, signifying disaster for the Bharatas. In
Duryodhana's agnihotra, jackals howled in terrible tones. From all the directions, donkeys brayed back in response. O Sanjaya! Bhishma then left with Drona and so did Kripa, Somadatta and the maharatha Bahlika. At that
time, prompted by Vidura, I told Krishna that I would grant her whatever boon she desired. Panchali then chose the
Pandavas, whose energy is unlimited. I then allowed them to leave, with their chariots and their bows. It is then
that the immensely wise Vidura, who knows all the dharma, spoke, 'O descendants of the Bharata lineage! This
dragging of Krishna into the assembly hall will bring about your destruction. The daughter of the king of Panchala
is the supreme Shri. It was decreed by destiny that Panchali would marry the Pandavas. The angry Parthas will
never pardon her humiliation. Nor will the mighty archers, the Vrishnis, or the immensely energetic Panchalas.
They are protected by Vasudeva, always fixed on the truth. Surrounded by the Panchalas, Bibhatsu will return.
Among them, there will be the immensely strong and mighty archer Bhimasena. He will come whirling his club,
like the staff of death. No kings will be able to withstand the sound of the intelligent Partha's Gandiva, or the speed
of Bhima's club. Therefore, it seems to me that one should always have peace, and not war, with the Parthas. I
have always thought that the Pandavas are stronger than the Kurus. With the force of his arms, Bhima killed in battle the immensely radiant and powerful King Jarasandha. O bull among the Bharata lineage! You must ensure
peace with the Pandavas. Without any hesitation, act impartially vis-à-vis the two parties.' O son of Gavalgana[Sanjaya.]!
Thus did Kshatta utter words that were steeped in dharma and artha. But out of the affection I bear for my son, I
did not accept these words."'
