Souti said, 'When he had heard the words of the snakes, Garuda told his mother, "I am going to get the amrita. But
I wish to eat something. Tell me what." Vinata replied, "The nishadas[Hunters, fishermen. Usually, they are described as dwelling in the mountains.] have their excellent home in a remote part
of the ocean. Eat thousands of nishadas and bring back the amrita. But never set your mind on killing a Brahmana.
Among all living beings, a Brahmana is like fire and is never to be killed. When he is angered, a Brahmana is like
fire, the sun, poison or a sharp weapon. Among all beings, he is the one who obtains the first share at a sacrifice, is
supreme among the varnas and is a father and preceptor."

'Garuda said, "O mother! I am asking you. What are the auspicious signs through which I will recognize a Brahmana? You should tell me." Vinata replied, "O son! If a man goes down your throat torturing you like a swallowed
fish hook or burning it like hot coal, know him to be a bull among Brahmanas." Out of the great love she bore for
her son, Vinata again repeated the words. Vinata knew her son's valour to be unparalleled. But she nevertheless
pronounced a blessing on him. "Let the Maruts protect your wings. O son! Let the moon protect your back. Let the
fire protect your head. Let the sun protect all your body. O son! I shall always be engaged in ceremonies that bring
you peace and welfare. O son! Go in safety and accomplish your objective." Having heard his mother's words, the
bird then stretched his wings and flew up into the sky.

'The powerful one soon descended hungrily on the nishadas, like Yama himself. Determined to destroy the
nishadas, he raised a great storm of dust that covered up the sky. This dried up the water in the ocean and shook the
mountains that grew around. The king of birds opened his gigantic mouth and stopped the route of the nishadas. In
great alarm, the nishadas also entered the mouth of the eater of snakes. Like frightened birds in a forest that rise in
thousands into the sky when there is a great storm, the nishadas were blinded by the dust and in thousands entered
the wide open mouth of the giant eater of snakes. Then the hungry bird, with great strength and swift speed, the
scorcher of his enemies, closed his mouth. The traveller in the sky killed many nishadas, who depend on diverse
fish for a living.'
