'Sanjaya said, "O king! Extremely enraged, like a gigantic elephant, Bhurishrava pierced Satyaki with nine arrows.
While all the worlds looked on, Satyaki, immeasurable in his soul, used straight-tufted arrows to repulse
Kourava[The word Kourava is being used because Bhurishrava was on the Kourava side.]. At this, King Duryodhana, surrounded by his brothers, surrounded Somadatta's son, who was striving
in that battle. In the same fashion, the immensely energetic Pandavas swiftly surrounded Satyaki in that encounter
and stationed themselves for battle. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Bhimasena was extremely angry. He
raised his club and confronted all your sons, with Duryodhana at the forefront. Surrounded by several thousand
chariots and inflamed with anger, your son, Nandaka, pierced the immensely strong Bhimasena with sharp arrows,
tufted with the feathers of herons and sharpened on stone. In that battle, Duryodhana was also angry and struck the
immensely strong Bhimasena in the chest with three sharp arrows. At this, the mighty-armed and immensely
strong Bhima climbed onto his own chariot, supreme among chariots, and told Vishoka[Bhima's charioteer.], 'These brave maharathas, the sons of Dhritarashtra, are extremely strong. They are extremely angry and are trying to kill me in battle. While you look on, there is no doubt that I will kill them today in this encounter. O charioteer! Therefore, in
this encounter, drive the horses carefully.' Having said this, Partha pierced your son, Duryodhana, with nine sharp
arrows that were decorated with gold. He pierced Nandaka in the chest with three arrows. Duryodhana pierced the
immensely strong Bhima with six. With another three extremely sharp arrows, he pierced Vishoka. O king! In that
encounter, as if he was smiling, the king[Duryodhana.] sliced off Bhima's radiant bow from his hand with three sharp arrows.
On seeing that Vishoka was oppressed in that encounter by the sharp arrows discharged by your archer son, Bhima
was unable to tolerate it. O great king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In great rage, he grasped a divine
bow, with the desire of killing your son. In his anger, he grasped a kshurapra arrow, tufted with hair. With this,
Bhima sliced off the king's supreme bow. Discarding the bow that was sliced down, he[Duryodhana.] was inflamed with
wrath and swiftly grasped another bow that was stronger. He took up an extremely terrible arrow that was as radiant as destiny and death. In great rage, he struck Bhimasena in the chest with this. Having been thus deeply
wounded in the chest, he was in pain and sunk down on the floor of the chariot, having lost his senses. On seeing
that Bhima was thus wounded, all the Pandava maharathas and great archers, with Abhimanyu at the forefront,
could not tolerate this. Those extremely energetic ones unleashed a tumultuous shower of terrible and sharp
weapons on your son's head. Meanwhile, the immensely strong Bhimasena regained consciousness. He again
pierced Duryodhana with five arrows. Pandava, the great archer, then pierced Shalya with twenty-five arrows that
had golden tufts and thus pierced, he fled from the field of battle.

'"Fourteen of your sons then attacked Bhima-Senapati, Sushena, Jalasandha, Sulochana, Ugra, Bhimaratha,
Bhima[Not to be confused with Pandava Bhima.], Bhimabahu, Alolupa, Durmukha, Dushpradharsha, Vivitsu, Vikata and Soma. Their eyes were red with
rage and they shot many arrows towards Bhimasena, piercing him simultaneously. The immensely strong Bhimsena saw your sons and the brave one licked the corners of his mouth, like a wolf amidst smaller animals. With a
kshurapra arrow, Pandava sliced off Senapati's head. He pierced Jalasandha and despatched him to Yama's abode.
He killed Sushena and sent him to the land of the dead. With a bhalla arrow, he brought down Ugra's head, with
the helmet and earrings and as handsome as the moon, to the ground. O venerable one! In that encounter, Bhima
then used seven arrows to despatch Bhimabahu to the land of the dead, together with his horses, his standard and
his charioteer. O king! Smilingly, Bhimasena swiftly despatched the brothers, Bhima and Bhimaratha, to Yama's
abode. In the sight of all the soldiers, in that great encounter, Bhima used a kshurapra arrow to convey Sulochana
to Yama's abode. On witnessing Bhimasena's terrible valour, your remaining sons were struck with fear on account
of Bhima[Only seven sons are directly mentioned as having been killed. However, all fourteen were killed by Bhima.].

'"Shantanu's son then spoke to all the maharathas. 'This Bhima, wielding a fierce bow, is angry in battle and is
slaughtering the maharatha sons of Dhritarashtra, though they are wise, superior, brave and united and the kings
are being scattered.' Having been thus addressed, all the soldiers on the side of the sons of Dhritarashtra angrily
rushed at the immensely strong Bhimasena. O lord of the earth! Bhagadatta mounted an elephant with rent temples
and swiftly descended on the spot where Bhima was stationed. Descending in that battle, he used arrows sharpened
on stone, so that in the encounter, Bhimasena became invisible, like clouds covering the sun. Depending on the
strength of their own arms, the maharathas, with Abhimanyu at the forefront, could not tolerate that Bhima should
be thus enveloped. They released a shower of arrows from all directions. The elephant was pierced by arrows from
all directions. The elephant of the king of Pragjyotisha was pierced by a shower of extremely energetic and excellent weapons of many types. It was oppressed and covered with blood. In that battle, it looked like a giant cloud
that was tinged with the rays of the sun. The elephant was exuding musth. Goaded by Bhagadatta, it rushed against
them, like Death urged by the Destroyer. It doubled its speed and made the earth tremble. On beholding its gigantic
and extremely terrible form, all the maharathas thought that it was intolerable and became dispirited. O tiger
among men! The maharatha king, who was a great archer, used an arrow with drooping tufts to strike him on the
chest. Thus struck, his limbs stiffened and losing his senses, he grasped the pole of the standard[Bhima was struck and lost his senses.]. On seeing that
the others were terrified and that Bhimasena had lost his senses, the powerful and strong Bhagadatta began to roar.

'"O king! On seeing Bhima in this state, the rakshasa Ghatotkacha became angry. Assuming a terrible form, he
created fearful maya, capable of creating terror among cowards. He disappeared in an instant and then again assumed a terrible form. He rode on Airavata, created through the use of his own maya. Other elephants that were
the guardians of the directions followed it-Anjana, Vamana and Mahapadma[There are eight elephants who guard the eight directions-Airavata, Pundarika, Vamana, Kumuda, Anjana,
Pushpadanta, Sarvabhouma and Supratika. Airavata is also regarded as the king of elephants and is Indra's
mount. Mahapadma is another name for either Pundarika or Kumuda.]. Rakshasas were seated on these
extremely radiant and giant elephants. O king! These three were gigantic in form and exuded a lot of musth. They
were energetic, courageous and powerful and extremely strong and valiant. Ghatotkacha goaded his own elephant.
The scorcher of enemies wished to kill Bhagadatta and his elephant. The other rakshasas, immensely strong, goaded the other elephants, each of which possessed four tusks. They descended on Bhagadatta's elephant and simultaneously pierced it with their tusks. Oppressed and pained by those elephants and wounded by the arrows, it uttered
a giant roar, like the sound of thunder. On hearing the roar and the extremely terrible and fearful sound, Bhishma
spoke to Drona and King Suyodhana. 'In fighting in this battle with Hidimba's evil-souled son, the great archer
Bhagadatta confronts a mighty danger. This rakshasa resorts to great illusion and the king is also extremely wrathful. These extremely valorous ones will confront each other, like Death and the Destroyer facing each other. We
can hear the great roars of the delighted Pandavas. We can hear the great lamentations of the frightened
elephant[Bhagadatta's elephant.]. O fortunate ones! Let us go and protect the king. If he is not swiftly protected in this encounter, he
will lose his life. O extremely valiant ones! Therefore, let us proceed without delay. This great and terrible encounter has commenced and it is making the body hair stand up. This brave leader of an army[Referring to Bhagadatta.] is devoted to us
and has been born in a noble lineage. O ones without decay! It is appropriate that we should save him together.' On
hearing these words of Bhishma, with Bharadvaja's son at the forefront, and accompanied by all the kings, they
advanced to protect Bhagadatta.

'"With great speed, they advanced to the spot where he was stationed. On seeing that they were advancing, with
Yudhishthira at the forefront, the Panchalas, together with the Pandavas, followed the enemy from behind. On seeing that large army, the powerful Indra among the rakshasas let out an extremely loud roar, which was like the
sound of thunder. On hearing this roar and on seeing the fighting elephants, Shantanu's son, Bhishma, spoke to
Bharadvaja's son. 'I do not wish to fight with Hidimba's evil-souled son. He is full of strength and valour now and
has support. The wielder of the vajra himself is incapable of vanquishing him in battle now. He is certain in his
aims and can strike. Our mounts are exhausted and at the end of the day, are wounded and lacerated on account of
the Panchalas and the Pandaveyas. Therefore, I do not think that we should fight any more with the victorious Pandavas. Let it be announced that we will withdraw for the day. Tomorrow, we will fight with the enemy again.' On
hearing the grandfather's words, the Kouravas, who were oppressed by the fear of Ghatotkacha, were happy and
resorted to the advent of night. The Kouravas retreated. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The Pandavas were
victorious and roared like lions, sounding conch shells and flutes. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Thus did the
battle rage on that day, between the Kurus and the Pandavas, with Ghatotkacha at the front. O king! The Kouravas
returned to their own camps. When night arrived, they were ashamed at having been defeated by the Pandaveyas.
The bodies of the maharatha sons of Pandu were wounded by arrows. But they were delighted at the outcome of
the battle and returned to their camps. O great king! They placed Bhimasena and Ghatotkacha in the front and in
great delight, honoured them. They roared in many different kinds of ways and this mixed with the sounds of the
trumpets. They roared like lions and this mingled with the sounds of conch shells. The great-souled ones roared
and made the earth tremble. O venerable one! This agitated the hearts of your sons. When night fell, those
scorchers of enemies retired to their camps. King Duryodhana was miserable at his brothers having been killed. He
reflected on this for some time, overcome by sorrow and tears. He then made arrangements in all the camps, according to what is decreed. He was tormented by sorrow and pained, on account of his brothers."'
