Sanjaya said, "O king! The remaining Kourava maharathas heard from the bards that Duryodhana had been
brought down. They were mangled with sharp arrows, clubs, spears and javelins. Ashvatthama, Kripa and Satvata
Kritavarma ascended swift steeds and quickly arrived at the field of the encounter. There, they saw Dhritarashtra's
great-souled son, who had been brought down. He was like a giant shala tree in the forest, shattered by the force of
a storm. He was like a giant elephant in the forest, slain by a hunter. He was writhing and was covered by copious
quantities of blood. It was as if the solar disc had been brought down. It was as if a giant tempest had arisen and
had dried up the ocean. It was as if the disc of the full moon in the sky had been covered by mist. He was mighty-
armed and like an elephant in valour, but was covered in dust. He was surrounded by a large number of fierce
demons and predatory beasts in every direction, as if they were servants greedy for riches, surrounding the best of
kings. There was a frown on his face and his eyes were dilated in rage. That tiger among men was like a tiger that
had been brought down. They saw the great archer, the king, lying down on the ground. Kripa and the other rathas
were extremely stupefied. They descended from their chariots and rushed towards the king. They saw Duryodhana
and sat down on the ground, around him.

' "O great king! Drona's son's eyes were full of tears and he sighed. He spoke to the best of the Bharata lineage,
the lord of all the kings on earth. 'There is no doubt that there is nothing that is permanent in the world of men. O
tiger among men! You are lying down thus, covered in dust. O king! You had earlier commanded the earth. O Indra among kings! How is it that you are alone in this deserted forest now? I do not see Duhshasana, or maharatha
Karna. O bull among the Bharata lineage! All your well-wishers aren't here either. It is a great sorrow that the
ways of Yama can never be known. You possessed all the worlds. Yet you are lying down, covered in dust. This
scorcher of enemies was foremost among those whose heads had been consecrated[That is, kings.]. Behold the course of destiny. He is covered with grass and dust now. O king! Where is your sparkling umbrella and whisk now? O supreme
among kings! Where has your large army gone? It is indeed impossible to fathom the course and cause and effect,
since you, who were the preceptor of all the worlds, have now been reduced to this state. Everything on earth is
temporary. It is seen that only prosperity and beauty are permanent[Prosperity and beauty in the hereafter.
]. You used to rival Shakra and we now see
you reduced to this terrible state.' O king! On hearing his words, which were especially full of sorrow, you son
spoke these words, appropriate to the occasion. He shed tears of sorrow and wiped them away from his eyes with
his hands. The lord of men spoke to those brave ones, Kripa and the others. 'It has been said that the creator has
ordained such a dharma for those who are mortal. In the course of time, death confronts all beings. In the presence
of all of you, it now confronts me. I have ruled over the earth and have now been reduced to this state. It is through
good fortune that I have not been defeated by the enemy in battle. It is through good fortune that I have been
brought down, especially through wickedness and deception. It is through good fortune that, while engaged in
fighting, I have always exhibited enterprise. After my relatives and allies have been slain in the battle, it is through
good fortune that I have been brought down. It is through good fortune that I see that you have escaped from this
destruction of men, and are well and hale. This is great delight for me. Because you are my well-wishers, do not
torment yourself at my death. If the Vedas are proof, I have obtained eternal worlds. I know about the powers of
the infinitely energetic Krishna. He has ensured that I did not deviate from following the dharma of kshatriyas. I
have obtained him. Therefore, I have nothing to sorrow about. You have done what those like you should have
done. You have always sought to ensure my victory. But destiny is impossible to cross.' O Indra among kings!
Having spoken these words, with tears in his eyes, the king became silent. He was severely agitated by agony.

' "Drona's son blazed up in anger, like the fire at the time of the destruction of the universe. Overcome by rage,
he pressed one hand with the other hand. His voice choking with tears, he spoke these words to the king. 'My father was slain by those inferior ones, through an extremely cruel deed. O king! But that did not torment me as
much as I am suffering now. O lord! Listen to these words. I am swearing this truthfully, on the sacrifices I have
performed, the donations, the dharma and the good deeds. While Vasudeva looks on, I will use every means possible to convey all the Panchalas to the abode of the lord of the dead today. O great king! You should grant me the
permission.' Having heard the words of Drona's son, which brought pleasure to his mind, Kourava spoke these
words to Kripa. 'O preceptor! Quickly bring a pot full of water.' On hearing the king's words, the supreme among
brahmanas followed his instructions. He brought a pot full of water and approached the king. O great king! O lord
of the earth! Your son spoke these words. 'O foremost among brahmanas! On my instructions, let Drona's fortunate son be consecrated as the commander, if you wish to do that which brings me pleasure. On the instructions of
a king, even a brahmana can fight, especially one who follows the dharma of kshatriyas. That is what those who
are learned about dharma say.' On hearing the king's words and following the king's instructions, Kripa Sharadvata consecrated Drona's son as the commander. O great king! Having been thus consecrated, he embraced the best
of kings. Roaring like a lion and making the directions resound, he departed. O Indra among kings! Duryodhana
was covered with blood. He passed the night, which was dreadful to all beings. O king! Those warriors quickly
left. Their minds were overcome with grief and they were immersed in their thoughts." '

This ends Shalya Parva.