'Markandeya said, "O king! After a long period of many days had elapsed, the time of Satyavan's death arrived.
Savitri counted every day that passed and Narada's words were always present in her heart. Having determined
that his death would occur on the fourth day, for three nights, the beautiful one observed a vow of fasting and remained standing, day and night. Hearing about this difficult vow, the king was unhappy. He arose and consoled
Savitri with these words. 'O daughter of a king! The vow that you have adopted is extremely severe. It is extremely difficult to remain standing for three nights.' Savitri replied, 'O father! Do not grieve over this act. I will complete the vow, which has been adopted with resolution. Resolution is the cause[That is, the cause of success.].' Dyumatsena said, 'Under no
circumstances can I ask you to give up your vow. Those like us should speak to you so that you complete it.' Having said this, the great-souled Dyumatsena refrained. Savitri remained standing, as if she had been made of wood.
O bull among the Bharata lineage! Thinking that her husband would die the next day[On the last day.], Savitri remained standing and the day passed in misery. 'Today is the day.' Thinking this, she offered oblations into the blazing fire. She
performed her morning rites when the sun had arisen four measures[The word used is yuga. A relatively rare meaning of yuga is four, the relevant meaning here. One probably
means that the sun had arisen four hastas (hands) or cubits.]. She bowed down before all the aged brahmanas and her mother-in-law and father-in-law, in due order, and restrained, stood standing before them with
hands joined in salutation. For the sake of Savitri's welfare, all the residents of the hermitage and all the holy ascetics pronounced the benediction that she might never become a widow. Savitri, who was immersed in the yoga
of meditation, wished in her mind that it might be this way and silently accepted the words of the ascetics. The
king's daughter waited for the hour and the moment, thinking grievously about the words that Narada had spoken.
O supreme among the Bharata lineage! The king's daughter was standing alone and her mother-in-law and father-
in-law affectionately told her, 'You have perfectly completed the vow, as has been prescribed. It is now time to eat.
After that, do whatever else remains to be done.' Savitri replied, 'I will eat when the sun has set and I have accomplished my desire. This is the resolution I have made in my mind about the time.' When Savitri was conversing in
this way about food, Satyavan grasped an axe. He placed it over his shoulder and proceeded to leave for the forest.

'"Savitri told her husband, 'You should not go alone. I will go with you. I am disinclined to be separated from
you.' Satyavan replied, 'O beautiful one! You have never gone to the forest earlier. The road is difficult. You are
thin from the vow and fasting. How will you be able to walk?' Savitri said, 'I am not weak from the fasting and I
do not feel exhausted. I have made up my mind to go. You should not restrain me.' Satyavan replied, 'Since you
have made up your mind to go, I will do what you desire. But first take leave of the elders, so that sin does not
touch me.' The one who was great in her vows went to her mother-in-law and father-in-law and said, 'My husband
is going to the great forest to collect fruit as food. I seek arya's[The mother-in-law.] and father-in-law's permission to go with him. I
cannot bear to be separated from him. Your son is going for the sake of agnihotra and for his elders. He cannot be
restrained. He could have been restrained had he gone to the forest for any other reason. I have not ventured out of
the hermitage for almost a year. I have great curiosity to see the forest in bloom.' Dyumatsena replied, 'From the
day Savitri's father gave her to me as a daughter-in-law, I do not remember her having ever requested me for anything. Let the daughter-in-law's desires be satisfied. O daughter! But along the way, see that Satyavan does not get
distracted from his task.' With the permission of both, the famous one departed with her husband. She seemed to
be laughing, but her heart was miserable. The large-eyed one saw colourful and beautiful woods in every direction,
resounding with the cries of peacocks. Satyavan spoke these sweet words to Savitri. 'Behold these rivers full of
sacred waters and these supreme trees in blossom.' The unblemished one always watched over her husband. Remembering the words of the sage, she thought that he was already dead. Walking gently, she followed her husband.
Her heart was cleft in two and she waited for the time."'
