Bhishma said, "Those who know about the ancient accounts recite the words of Prachetas. 'Gifts given to relatives cannot be regarded as a sale. Anyone who is not cruel should receive a maiden and, in particular, show
her honour by giving the girl gifts.' If they desire a great deal of welfare, the father, brothers, father-in-law and
brothers-in-law should honour and sustain her in this way. If the wife does not appeal to a man or does not cause
men pleasure, or if a man is not attracted to her, he should not have offspring. O lord of men! A wife must always
be honoured and cherished. When women are not honoured, all the rites become unsuccessful. When daughters-inlaw grieve, the family is destroyed. O king! When daughters-in-law curse a household, all the performed rites become undone. The houses do not dazzle and grow and their prosperity is destroyed. Before Manu ascended to
heaven, he handed over women to men, since they were weak, lightly clad, kind and devoted to the truth[The text uses the word svalpakoupina, which translates as lightly clad. The suggestion is that women need to be
protected, because they can be easily seduced.]. There
are others who hold that they are jealous, desire honour, are fierce, lack affection and lack learning. However,
women deserve to be honoured and men must show them respect. Dharma is in trusting women, not just in sex and
pleasure. Tend to them, honour them and give them what they want. Behold. The generation of offspring, the nurturing of offspring and pleasure in the way of the world-all these are tied to women. By respecting and honouring
them, one becomes successful in all the tasks. The daughter of the king of Videha sung a shloka. 'There are no sacrifices for women. There are no funeral ceremonies they have to observe. Their dharma is to serve their husbands
and that is the way they conquer heaven. The father protects her when a child, the husband protects her in youth.
The son protects her when she is aged. A woman does not deserve to be independent.' A person who desires affluence and prosperity must treat women well. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Whether she is nurtured or oppressed, a woman is like Shri and this is therefore reflected in one's prosperity."'
