'"Suparna said, 'In ancient times, Vivasvat performed a shrouta[Sacrifice enjoined by the Vedas.] sacrifice here. Because he offered dakshina to
his preceptor, this direction is known as dakshina[Dakshina means south and also means the stipend at sacrifices, or fees paid to a preceptor.]. It is there that pitripaksha of the three worlds is
established[The pitris are ancestors. Paksha has different meanings, one of which is a lunar fortnight. Pitripaksha is a dark
lunar fortnight in August-September.]. O brahmana! It is said that the gods who sustain themselves on warm oblations also dwell here[The ushmapas, so named because they survive on hot (ushna) food. Though described in the text as gods, the
ushmapas are actually a subcategory of the pitris (manes or ancestors).].
The Vishvadevas also live here, together with the ancestors. They are worshipped through sacrifices in this world
and are given equal shares. O brahmana! This is known as Dharma's second gate. Time is computed here through
trutis and lavas[A truti is a very small measure of time, equal to one-fourth of a kshana. Two trutis constitute a lava.]. The devarshis always dwell here, as do those who dwell in the world of the ancestors. All the
rajarshis, having transcended pain, live here. Dharma, truth and karma are heard of here. O foremost among brahmanas! Immersed in one's karma, one goes there. O foremost among brahmanas! This is the direction that everyone must traverse[The south is the direction of death.]. But confounded by ignorance, they do not obtain happiness. O bull among brahmanas! There
are thousands of Nairritas there. They have been created to obstruct those who have not perfected their souls. O
brahmana! There, in the groves of Mandara, dwell brahmana rishis and gandharvas sing songs that steal the heart
and the mind. Raivata heard the chants of the Sama Veda being sung here[Raivata, or Revanta, is a son of the sun god and is identified with forests and hunting.]. He gave up his wife, his advisers and
his kingdom and left for the forest. O brahmana! Savarni and Yavakrita's son[Savarni Manu, the son of the sun god. While there are many stories about Yavakrita, it is difficult to pin down
his son.] established limits here and the sun
does not transgress them. The great-souled Poulastya Ravana, the king of the rakshasas, performed terrible austerities here and obtained immortality from the gods as a boon[Ravana could not be killed by the gods. Ravana was the son of the sage Pulastya.]. Because of his conduct, Vritra became Shakra's enemy here. All living beings are reduced to the five elements here. O Galava! Men who are the performers of evil
deeds are cooked here. The river Vaitarani is here and is surrounded by people who cannot cross it[The Vaitarani River separates earth from Yama's world and etymologically, the name means something that is
true salvation. Evil people have to wait to cross the river.]. After having
faced extreme happiness, men confront extreme unhappiness here. On returning here[A reference to the southern transit (dakshinayana) of the sun.], the sun releases tasty water. Having reached the solstice, with the nakshatra Dhanishtha[The winter solstice begins with the nakshatra Dhanishtha.], it again begins to release the cold. O Galava! In
earlier times, I was oppressed by hunger here and began to think about satisfying it. I obtained a large elephant and
a large tortoise that were fighting with each other[This has been described in Section 1 (Volume 1).]. The great rishi Shakradhanu was born here from the sun. He
is the one who is known as the divine Kapila, the one who consumed Sagara's sons[The story has been told in Section 33 (Volume 3).]. Here the brahmanas named
the Shivas became learned in the Vedas and obtained success. After having studied all the Vedas, they attained
Yama's abode. This is the city named Bhogavati, ruled over by Vasuki, the serpent Takshaka and Airavata. At the
time of death, one encounters a great darkness here. It cannot be penetrated by the sun or the black-trailed fire itself. O Galava! You will yourself travel along this path of grief. Tell me if you wish to go[Galava will eventually die, but Suparna wishes to know if Galava wants to head in that direction now.]. Otherwise, hear
about the west.'"'
