Sanjaya said, "O king! On hearing the king's words, the powerful king of Madra spoke these words to Duryodhana. 'O Duryodhana! O mighty-armed one! O supreme among eloquent ones! Listen to my words. You think that
the two Krishnas, stationed on their chariot, are supreme among rathas. However, though united, they are not my
equal in strength of arms. Even if the entire earth were to arise, with gods, asuras and men, I will angrily fight with
them in the forefront of the battle, not to speak of the Pandavas. In the battle, I will vanquish the assembled Parthas
and Somakas. There is no doubt that I will protect your soldiers. I will construct a vyuha that the enemy will not be
able to cross. O Duryodhana! I am telling you this truthfully. Entertain no doubt on this score.' O supreme among
the Bharata lineage! O lord of the earth! The king was thus addressed by the lord of Madra and delightedly, in the
midst of the soldiers, sanctified him with water, in accordance with the rites laid down in the sacred texts. When he
was consecrated, a loud noise arose among the soldiers. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They roared like lions and musical instruments were sounded. The maharatha Madraka warriors were delighted. All the kings praised
Shalya, the ornament of a battle. 'O king! May you be victorious. May you live for a long time. Slay the assembled
enemy. The immensely strong son of Dhritarashtra has obtained the strength of your arms. Let him slaughter the
enemy and rule over the entire earth. You are capable of defeating the gods, the asuras and humans in a battle, not
to speak of the Somakas and the Srinjayas, who must follow the dharma of mortals.' The powerful lord of the
Madras was praised in this way. The brave one was filled with great joy, the likes of which cannot be obtained by
those who have not controlled their souls. Shalya said, 'O Indra among kings! In the battle today, I will slay all the
Panchalas and the Pandavas, or be slain and go to heaven. The worlds will see me roam around fearlessly today.
Let all the sons of Pandu, Vasudeva, Satyaki, the Panchalas, the Chedis, all the sons of Droupadi, Dhrishtadyumna,
Shikhandi and all the Prabhadrakas behold my valour and the great strength of my bow, in addition to the dexterity
and valour of my weapons and the strength of my arms in the encounter. Let the Parthas, the siddhas and the cha-
ranas behold me today, with the strength of my arms and the wealth of my weapons. The maharatha Pandavas will
witness my valour today. Let the enemy try out different means of countering me. Today, I will drive away the
Pandu soldiers in every direction. O Kourava! For the sake of bringing you pleasure, I will roam around and fight
in the battle today, surpassing Drona, Bhishma and the son of a suta.' O one who grants honours! Amidst your soldiers, Shalya was thus consecrated. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! No one felt any sorrow on account of
Karna. The soldiers were happy and cheerful in their minds. They thought that the Parthas had already been killed
and had come under the subjugation of the king of Madra. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Your soldiers were
filled with great joy. They were assured and slept happily during the night.

' "On hearing the sounds made by your soldiers, while all the kshatriyas heard, King Yudhishthira spoke these
words to Varshneya. 'O Madhava! Honoured by all the soldiers, Dhritarashtra's son has made the great archer,
Shalya, the king of Madra, the commander. O Madhava! Having heard this, do what is beneficial. You are our
leader and our protector. Do what must be done next.' O great king! Vasudeva told the king, 'O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! I know everything about Artayani[Shalya.]. He is brave and immensely energetic. In particular, he is
great-souled. He is accomplished and colourful in fighting. He also possesses dexterity. In an encounter, he is like
Bhishma, Drona and Karna. The king of Madra may even be superior to them. That is my view. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! O lord of men! On thinking about it, I cannot find a warrior on your side who is his equal. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! In the battle, he possesses a strength that is superior to Shikhandi, Arjuna, Bhi-
ma, Satvata[Satyaki.] and Dhrishtadyumna. O great king! The king of Madra is like a lion and an elephant in valour. He
will roam around fearlessly, like a wrathful Destroyer among beings, when the time for destruction has arrived. O
tiger among men! In the battle today, with the exception of you, I do not see any warrior who can fight against him.
He is like a tiger in his bravery. Barring you, there is no other man in all of heaven or earth. O descendant of the
Kuru lineage! In a battle, there is no one else who can kill the angry king of Madra. He has fought from one day to
another, agitating your troops. Therefore, kill Shalya in the battle, like Maghavan against Shambara. The brave one
is revered by Dhritarashtra's son. When the lord of Madra is killed in the battle, thereafter, victory will be certain.
When he is slain, the large army of the son of Dhritarashtra will also be completely destroyed. O great king! O
Partha! In the battle, having heard my words, advance against the large army of the king of Madra. O mighty-
armed one! Slay him, like Vasava against Namuchi[Namuchi was a demon killed by Indra.]. You should not think of him as your maternal uncle and
show any compassion. With the dharma of kshatriyas at the forefront, kill the lord of Madra. The ocean of Bhishma and Drona and the nether region of Karna have been crossed. Having encountered the trifle[The text uses the word goshpada. This literally means the mark of a
cow's foot in the soil and the small puddle of water that fills up such a
mark, that is, a trifle.] of Shalya, do not
get submerged, with your followers. You possess austerities and valour and the strength of kshatriyas. Exhibit all
of those in the battle. Kill the maharatha.' Having spoken these words, Keshava, the slayer of enemy heroes, was
honoured by the Pandavas. In the evening, he went to his own camp. When Keshava had left, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira dismissed all his brothers and the Panchalas and the Somakas. He slept happily in the night, like an elephant from which stakes have been removed. All the Panchalas and the Pandavas, great archers, were delighted
that Karna had been killed, and slept well during the night. The great archers were cured of their fever. The maharathas had reached a bank[After crossing a river or an ocean.]. The Pandaveya soldiers rejoiced during the night. O venerable one! With the son
of a suta slain, they had obtained victory." '
