Brahma said, "The mind is the lord of the five elements. In controlling them and releasing them, the mind is
like the soul of the elements. The mind always rules over the great elements. Intelligence possesses the
power and, over everything, is said to be kshetrajna. The mind controls the senses, like a charioteer controls well-
trained horses. The senses, the mind and intelligence are always associated with kshetrajna. The atman that is in
beings ascends the chariot and drives it around on all sides. The great elements are yoked to it and intelligence
constitutes the reins. The aggregate of senses are yoked[Like horses.] and the mind is the charioteer. Intelligence is always like
the reins and the chariot is immersed in the great brahman. A learned person always knows that the chariot is immersed in the brahman. In all the worlds, such a person is patient and is never overcome by confusion. The unmanifest  has  all  these  mobile  and  immobile  objects  as  an  end.  The  moon  and  the  sun  provide  illumination  to  the
worlds, adorned by the planets and the nakshatras. On every side, it is decorated by nets of rivers and mountains.
There are many kinds of ornaments in every direction. This provides sustenance to all creatures and it is also the
objective of all those who possess life. A person who knows about the kshetra always roams around in the forest
that is the brahman. There are many creatures, mobile and immobile, in this world. Those are the first to be destroyed. The qualities that result from the elements are destroyed later. Depending on their qualities, many different kinds of beings have originated from the five elements-gods, men, gandharvas, pishachas, asuras and rakshasas. All of them have been created from nature, not from deeds and not from any other cause. The brahmanas
are the creators of the universe and are born again and again. It is from them that the five great elements have been
generated. When the time arrives, they are destroyed, like waves in the ocean. Then, the elements that create the
universe merge into the great elements. These five elements are freed and merge into Prajapati. Through his austerities, Prajapati is the lord who created everything. The rishis know this through their austerities. In due order, they
undertake austerities, surviving on fruits and roots. They control themselves through their austerities. Having become  successful,  they  can  see  the  three  worlds.  Herbs,  medicines  and  many  kinds  of  knowledge  are  obtained
through austerities. Austerities are the foundation of success. There are things that are difficult to obtain, difficult
to name, difficult to conquer and difficult to learn. Austerities ensure success in all this. Austerities are difficult to
surpass. There may be a person who drinks liquor, kills a brahmana, steals, kills a foetus or violates his preceptor's
bed. By tormenting himself well through austerities, he is freed from his sins. If men, ancestors, gods, animals[This means sacrificial animals. The subsequent animals means other animals.],
animals, birds and all other mobile and immobile objects are always devoted to austerities, they can always obtain
success through austerities. It is through austerities that the immensely fortunate gods went to heaven. If a person
single-mindedly performs beneficial acts, even if these are tinged with egoism, he approaches Prajapati. However,
there are pure ones without a sense of ownership and without a sense of ego. They are pure and devoted to the
yoga of meditation. Those great-souled ones obtain supreme and great worlds. They are devoted to the yoga of
meditation and are always tranquil. Their selves penetrate the unmanifest and obtain undecaying bliss there. There
are those without a sense of ownership and without a sense of ego. They are devoted to the yoga of meditation.
They penetrate the unmanifest and obtain supreme and great worlds. They are generated from the unmanifest and
merge into it again. They are freed from tamas and rajas and resort to sattva alone. They are freed from all sins and
liberated from all divisions. They know kshetrajna. They know what there is to be known. A sage must always be
controlled and resort to consciousness alone. The mind must be fixed on the consciousness and on the eternal mystery. The unmanifest has objects as a manifestation. But a focus on these is said to be a sign of ignorance. Listen to
what is beyond all signs associated with the qualities. The word Mrityu has two syllables. Akshara, the eternal
brahman, has three syllables. Mama is Mrityu and namama is eternal[Mama means mine and has two syllables. Namama means not mine and has three syllables.]. There are some evil-minded men who
praise deeds. The great-souled ones who know do not praise deeds. Death leads to birth as a creature, characterized
by the sixteen[The five senses, the five organs of action, the five objects of the senses and the mind. Alternatively, the five objects of the senses can be replaced by the five great elements.]. The body is the creation of ignorance and those who are after immortality refuse to accept it. It is
said that Purusha is comprehended through knowledge, not through action. It is without something that has come
before. It is immortal. It is eternal. It is immutable. A person who realizes it within his atman refuses to accept
something that does not lead to immortality. It is because of this certain reason that they refuse to accept something
that is not immortal. Such a person casts aside all resolution and controls his atman through his own self. He
knows the auspicious brahman and there is no return after that. Through the favours of sattva, he obtains the benefit of tranquility. The signs of this favour is that everything is seen as if in a dream[Everything seems unreal.]. This is the destination of liberated ones who are devoted to knowledge. They can see all the consequences of action. They are not addicted to
these outcomes. This is eternal dharma. Those who possess knowledge obtain this. This is unblemished conduct.
Such a person is impartial towards all creatures. He is without desire and without hope. He is always indifferent
towards what he sees. He is capable of progressing to that destination. O supreme among brahmana rishis! I have
thus told you everything. Act swiftly in this way and you will obtain success."'

'"The preceptor said[As has been mentioned earlier, it is not clear who this preceptor is.], 'Thus addressed by the preceptor, Brahma, the great-souled sages acted in this way and
obtained the worlds. O immensely fortunate one! You should also act in accordance with Brahma's words. If you
purify yourself and act properly in that way, you will obtain success.'"

'Vasudeva continued, "The preceptor thus spoke to the disciple about supreme dharma. O Kounteya! He acted in
that way and obtained moksha. O extender of the Kuru lineage! Having accomplished what he was meant to do,
the disciple obtained that state. Having obtained it, one does not grieve."

'Arjuna asked, "O Krishna! O Janardana! Who was that brahmana and who was the disciple? O lord! If I can
hear the truth about this, tell me."

'Vasudeva replied, "O mighty-armed one! Know me. I am the preceptor and the mind is the disciple. O Dhananjaya! It is because of my affection towards you that I have revealed this secret to you. O one who is excellent in
vows! Having heard about adhyatma, act properly. O extender of the Kuru lineage! If you practise this dharma
properly, your soul will be cleansed of all sins and you will obtain moksha alone. I told you this earlier, when the
time for battle had presented itself. O mighty-armed one! Therefore, make up your mind to follow this. O foremost
among the Bharata lineage! O lord! It has been a long time since I have seen my father. O Phalguna! With your
permission, I wish to see him."'

Vaishampayana continued, 'Addressed by Krishna in these words, Dhananjaya replied, "O Krishna! Today, we
will go to the city of Gajasahvya. We will meet King Yudhishthira, who has dharma in his soul. O unassailable
one! Take his permission and then go to your city."'
