Vaishampayana said, 'O great king! The one with the plough as his weapon then went to Udapana, associated
with the illustrious Trita. He gave away a lot of objects and honoured the brahmanas. The one with the club as
his weapon bathed there and was delighted. The extremely great ascetic Trita, devoted to supreme dharma, had
lived there. The great-souled one had dwelt in a pit and had drunk soma juice. His two brothers had abandoned
him there and had returned home. At this, Trita, supreme among brahmanas, had cursed them.'

Janamejaya asked, 'O brahmana! How did the extremely great ascetic fall down in Udapana? Why did his brothers abandon that supreme among brahmanas? Why did the brothers leave him in the pit and return home? O brahmana! If you think that this can be heard, please tell me all this.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'O king! In an earlier yuga, there were three brothers who were sages. They were Ekata,
Dvita and Trita[Literally, first, second and third.] and they were as radiant as the sun. All of them were like Prajapati and they had offspring. All
of them were ascetics who knew about the brahman and they had attained Brahma's world. Their father, Goutama,
was always devoted to dharma. Because of their austerities, rituals and self-control, they always pleased him. After
having been pleased by them for a long time, the illustrious one went to the regions that were appropriate for
him[That is, Goutama died.]. There were kings for whom the great-souled one had been an officiating priest. After he had gone to heaven, all of them continued to honour his sons. Trita was the best among them and was just like his father. All the immensely fortunate and auspicious sages worshipped the immensely fortunate one, as they had the learned one[Goutama.]
before him. O king! Once, the brothers Ekata and Dvita thought of performing a sacrifice and in particular, were
concerned about the wealth required for this. O scorcher of enemies! They thought that they would take Trita and
go to the houses of those who performed sacrifices[Yajamanas, that is, the kings.]. They would collect the required animals. They would cheerfully drink soma juice and obtain the great merits of a sacrifice. O king! The three brothers did as they had deciced.
They visited all the yajamanas to collect the animals. From the yajamanas, they received a large number of animals for the sacrifice. For performing the act of sacrifice, they also obtained all the decreed gifts. The great-souled
maharshis then went towards an eastern direction. O great king! Trita was cheerfully walking in front and Ekata
and Dvita were following him from the rear, herding the animals. On seeing that large number of animals, they began to think about how they could appropriate all the cattle, without giving a share to Trita. O lord of men! Listen
to what the cunning and wicked Ekata and Dvita said to each other, as they conversed. "Trita is skilled in performing sacrifices. Trita is established in the Vedas. Trita is capable of obtaining many other cattle. Let us go away, taking these cattle with us. Let Trita go wherever he wishes. We do not have to be with him." As they proceeded
along the path, it became night and they saw a wolf before them. Not very far from the spot, there was a pit along
the banks of the great Sarasvati. Trita was in the front. On seeing the wolf along the path, he ran in fear and fell
down into the pit. It was extremely deep and extremely terrible and was the cause of great fright to all beings. The
immensely fortunate Trita, supreme among sages, began to scream from inside the pit. From this, the brothers realized that the sage had fallen into the pit, but they were frightened of the wolf. They were frightened of the wolf and
also driven by avarice. They abandoned him and went on. O great king! The brothers were greedy for the animals
and abandoned the great ascetic in Udapana[The word udapana means well.], in a spot that was full of dust and without any water. Trita found
that he was inside a pit, covered with creepers and herbs. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! He thought that
he was submerged, like a wicked person in hell. However, the wise one was scared of dying, since he had not yet
drunk soma juice. He began to think about how he might be able to drink soma juice there. That is what the immensely ascetic one thought about in the pit. He then saw that a creeper was hanging down there. Though the pit
was covered with dust, the sage imagined that there was water there. He also thought of a fire there and thought of
himself as the officiating priest. The immensely ascetic one thought of the creeper as soma. In his mind, the sage
thought of the mantras of the Rig, Yajur and Sama Vedas. O king! He imagined the pebbles to be grains of sugar.
He thought the water to be clarified butter and allotted shares to the residents of heaven. Having drunk the soma[Mentally.],
he created a tumultuous noise. O king! Those sounds created by Trita rose up into heaven. The sacrifice had been
performed in accordance with the norms laid down by those who know about the brahman. While the extremely
great-souled Trita performed the sacrifice, heaven was agitated. But no one knew the reason. Brihaspati heard the
tumultuous sound. On hearing this, the priest of the gods spoke to all the gods. "O gods! Trita is performing a sacrifice and all of us must go there. If he is enraged, the great ascetic is capable of creating other gods[If the gods do not turn up.]." Hearing
his words, all the gods were frightened. Together, they went to the spot where Trita was performing his sacrifice.
The gods went to the pit where Trita was. They saw the great-souled one, consecrated in the task of performing the
sacrifice. They saw the great-souled one, supreme in his resplendence. They told the immensely fortunate one, "We
have come for our shares." On seeing the gods, the rishi replied, "O residents of heaven! Look at me. I am submerged in this fearful pit and am devoid of my senses." O great king! However, Trita gave them their shares, in accordance with the decreed rites, uttering the mantras. They accepted these and were delighted. The residents of
heaven obtained their shares, in accordance with the decreed rites. Pleased with him, they gave him the boons that
he desired. He asked the gods for the boon that he should be freed from his distressful state. He also said, "Let a
person who bathes in this pit obtain the same end as one who drinks soma." With her waves, Sarasvati then descended into the pit. Trita was raised up by the waters and worshipped by the thirty gods. O kings! The gods
agreed to what he had said and returned to where they had come from. Trita cheerfully returned to his own house.
He met his brothers, the rishis, and angrily spoke harsh words to them. The immensely ascetic one cursed them.

"Because of your greed for the animals, you abandoned me and ran away. You will therefore adopt their forms[The forms of predatory beasts like wolves.]
and roam around, with sharp teeth. Because of your wicked deeds, this is how you will be cursed by me. The offspring that you have will be leopards, bears and apes." O lord of the earth! As soon as he spoke these words, because his words were always truthful, they were seen to assume these forms. The one with the plough as his
weapon touched the waters there. He gave away many kinds of donations and honoured the brahmanas. Having
seen Udapana, he praised it repeatedly. The one whose soul was never distressed then went to Vinashana, which
was also on the river.'
