Vaishampayana said, 'Once upon a time, the mighty-armed king went to the dense forest, with hundreds of horses
and elephants and accompanied by many men and mounts. As he progressed, he was surrounded by hundreds of
warriors armed with swords, spears, clubs, maces, javelins and lances in their hands. As the king marched on, the
warriors roared like lions. Conches and drums sounded. The wheels of the chariots thundered. The huge elephants
trumpeted. The horses neighed. And there was the sound of arms, all resulting in a deafening roar. Beautiful
women came out on the balconies of terraced palaces to gaze upon the royal and famous warrior. The women
knew their king to be the equal of Shakra[Indra.] in destroying his enemies. In fending off enemy elephants, it was as if
the women gazed upon the wielder of the vajra himself. They saw a tiger among men, extremely powerful in battle. The strength of his arms allowed no enemy to be alive. Having uttered these words of praise, the women, out
of love for the king, showered down flowers on his head. Wherever he went, the best of Brahmanas paid homage
to him along the way.

'Extremely pleased, he went to the forest for a hunt. For a long distance, the citizens and residents of the country
followed the king. They were restrained from going further only on the king's instructions. The lord of the earth's
chariot filled the earth, even heaven, with its roar. It was like Suparna[That is, Garuda. The speed was like that of Garuda.]. After progressing, the wise one saw a
beautiful forest like Nandana[Indra's garden.]. It was full of bilva, arka, khadira, kapittha and dhava trees. It was uneven and
full of mountains and valleys and was strewn with boulders. There was no water and no human habitations. It
stretched on for many yojanas. This terrible forest abounded with herds of deer and other forest animals. With the
help of his servants, force and mounts, Duhshanta, tiger among men, killed deer of many kinds. Many families of
tigers were killed as they came within the reach of his arrows. Many were pierced with Duhshanta's arrows. That
bull among men killed those that were near with his sword. Supreme among those who wield spears, he killed
many in that way. His valour was boundless and he was skilled in the circular motions of the club. He roamed
around the forest, killing wild animals with his spear, sword, mace, club and javelin. The great forest was perturbed by the extraordinarily powerful king and his soldiers, who loved the fight, and the larger animals fled. Having lost their leaders, their herds dispersed, the deer screamed out in fright and fled in all directions. The river beds
were dry. Emaciated in their thirst for water and their hearts tired with exhaustion, they dropped down unconscious, hungry, thirsty and tired.

'Some of them were eaten raw by those hungry tigers among men. Others built a fire and, having ignited it, cut
up the pieces of meat and ate them in the proper way. Many mighty elephants were wounded by weapons and went
mad. Raising their trunks, they stamped violently, flowing blood and emitting urine and dung in fear. These wild
elephants trampled to death many men. With the cloud of strength and the rain of arrows, the king eliminated the
once teeming forest of its large animals, as if a buffalo had run amuck.'
