Vaishampayana said, 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In a similar way, Kounteya Yudhishthira, the son of
Dharma, urged his warriors, with Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront. He instructed the leaders of the Chedis, the
Kashis and the Karushas, who were firm in their valour, the general Dhrishtaketu, the destroyer of enemies and the
slayer of foes, Virata, Drupada, Yuyudhana, Shikhandi and the two great archers from Panchala, Yudhamanyu and
Uttamouja. The brave ones wore colourful armour and were adorned in golden earrings. They blazed like a fire in a
sacrificial altar, when clarified butter is poured into it. The great archers were as resplendent as planets. The lord of
the earth, bull among men, honoured the soldiers in the appropriate fashion and instructed the soldiers to advance.
Pandu's son first sent Abhimanyu, Brihanta and all the sons of Droupadi, who were led by Dhrishtadyumna. Yudhishthira despatched Bhima, Yuyudhana and Pandava Dhananjaya in the second part of the army. As the delighted
warriors collected their weapons of war and moved and dashed around, the sound seemed to touch heaven. With
the other kings and with Virata and Drupada, the king himself marched at the rear. That army with terrible archers
had Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront. It looked like the Ganga, overflowing, retreating and then flowing again. So
as to confuse the intelligence of the sons of Dhritarashtra, the king again regrouped his army. Pandava ordered
Droupadi's sons, great archers, Nakula, Sahadeva, all the Prabhadrakas, ten thousand horses, two thousand elephants, ten thousand infantry, five thousand chariots and the invincible Bhimasena to be the first division of the
army. He placed Virata, Jayatsena from Magadha, the two maharathas from Panchala, Yudhamanyu and Uttamouja, both of whom were valiant and great-souled and wielded clubs and bows, in the middle. Vasudeva and Dhananjaya also followed them in the centre. These men wielded weapons and were consumed with rage. Those brave
ones carried twenty thousand flags. There were five thousand elephants and chariots everywhere, with infantry and
soldiers, brandishing bows, swords and clubs. There were thousands in the front and thousands at the rear. The other kings mainly surrounded the spot where Yudhishthira himself was, with his soldiers and an ocean of troops. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were thousands of elephants, tens of thousands of horses and thousands
of chariots and infantry. Depending on these, he marched against Dhritarashtra's son, Suyodhana. There were hundreds and thousands, and tens of thousands, of men at the rear. In thousands and tens of thousands, those delighted
men sounded thousands of kettledrums and tens of thousands of conch shells.'

This ends Udyoga Parva.