'Sanjaya said, "When the narayana weapon was invoked, violent winds mixed with rain began to blow, though
there were no clouds in the sky. The earth trembled and the great oceans were agitated. Instead of flowing towards
the ocean, the rivers flowed in an opposite direction. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The summits of mountains were shattered. Small animals kept the sons of Pandu to the right[The animals were to the left of the Pandavas and the left is inauspicious.]. There was darkness and the sun became
dim. Different kinds of carnivorous beings cheerfully descended there. O lord of the earth! The gods, danavas and
gandharvas were terrified. On seeing ferocity, all the kings became extremely anxious. They were pained and lost
their senses on witnessing the terrible and fearful form of the weapon used by Drona's son."

'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! In that battle, Drona's son was angry because his father had been killed. He was
tormented by severe sorrow and made the soldiers[The Kourava soldiers.] rally again. On seeing that the Kurus were attacking, what
consultations did the Pandavas hold, so that Dhrishtadyumna might be protected? Tell me everything."

'Sanjaya replied, "Earlier, Yudhishthira had seen that the sons of Dhritarashtra were running away. Now he
heard them make a tremendous noise and spoke to Arjuna. 'The preceptor, Drona, has been killed by Dhrishtadyumna in the battle, like the great asura, Vritra, slain by the one with the vajra in his hand. O Dhananjaya! The
Kurus lost all hope of being victorious in the battle. They were miserable in their minds. They fled, making up
their minds to protect themselves. With their parshnis and charioteers slain, some swiftly fled on their chariots. The
kings were without flags, standards and umbrellas and the poles of their chariots were shattered. The seats of the
chariots were broken. Some lost their senses and climbed onto horses. Some were frightened and themselves urged
the horses of their chariots with their feet. With the yokes, wheels and axles broken, some were distressed and
quickly fled. Others were dislodged from the backs of elephants and pinned there by iron arrows. Elephants were
killed by the storms of arrows and driven away in the ten directions. Others lost their weapons and armour and
their mounts took to the ground. Others were crushed by broken wheels and horses and elephants. As they fled
from the enemy in fear, they loudly called out to fathers and sons. They lost their energy and were overcome by
depression. They could no longer recognize each other. Some removed the armour from the severely wounded
bodies of sons, fathers, friends and brothers and washed them with water. After Drona was killed, the army was
quickly reduced to such a state. How has it returned again? If you know this, tell me. There are the sounds of horses neighing and elephants trumpeting. This is mingling with the loud sound from the roaring of chariot wheels.
This great and fierce sound has arisen in the ocean of the Kurus. It is repeatedly arising and is making those on my
side tremble. It is my view that this will swallow up the three worlds, together with Indra. I think that this fierce
and loud roar is being made by the wielder of the vajra himself. On Drona being killed, Vasava is appearing on the
side of the Kouravas. Our body hair is standing erect and the rathas and elephants are anxious. O Dhananjaya!
What is this extremely fierce uproar that can be heard there? The Kouravas were in a shattered state. Which maharatha, like the lord of the gods, has rallied them for the sake of fighting in this battle?'

'"Arjuna said, 'They are ready to perform fierce deeds, basing themselves on patience. The Kouravas are making a noise and blowing on conch shells, depending on the valour of a person. After the preceptor cast aside his
weapons and was slain, there should be no doubts about who that person is. The sons of Dhritarashtra have resorted to him and are roaring. The mighty-armed one is modest. He is like a crazy elephant in his gait. His face is
glossy and he is the performer of fierce deeds. He has freed the Kurus from their fear. When he was born, Drona
gave the wealth of one thousand cows to brahmanas. That Ashvatthama is roaring. As soon as he was born, the
brave one neighed like Uchchaihshrava and the earth and the three worlds trembled because of this. On hearing
this, an invisible voice named him Ashvatthama then[Uchchaishrava is the name of Indra's horse, which arose from the churning of the ocean. Ashva means horse and
that is the reason he was named Ashvatthama.]. O Pandava! That brave one is roaring now. There was the
one[Drona.] who was killed by Parshata, as if he was without a protector. It was an extremely cruel deed and his protector is now stationed there. Panchala grievously seized my preceptor's hair. Because of that, and because of his own
manliness, Drona's son will not forgive him. Because of the kingdom, you have also spoken a falsehood to the preceptor. Though you know about dharma and are known as a virtuous person, you have performed an extremely
grave deed of adharma. "Pandava knows about all forms of dharma. He is also my student. He will not utter a lie."

Thinking this, he[Drona.] believed what you said. You spoke a lie, though you garbed it in the guise of truth when you
spoke to the preceptor, since you said that an elephant had been killed. At this, he discarded his weapons and became indifferent. O king! He was bereft of his senses and became distracted. O lord! You saw what happened. Affectionate towards his son, he was unwilling to fight and was full of sorrow. Abandoning eternal dharma, the preceptor was killed by the student[Dhrishtadyumna had also been taught by Drona.]. Though he had cast aside his weapons, your preceptor was killed and this was
adharma. If you can, protect Parshata with all your advisers. With his relative slain, he will now be devoured by
the preceptor's angry son. Even if all of us try, we will not be able to protect Parshata today. He[Ashvatthama.] is extremely affectionate towards all beings. On hearing that his father was seized by the hair, he will destroy us in the battle today. I loudly exclaimed that the preceptor should be protected. However, transgressing his own dharma, the student
slew the preceptor. We have already spent most of our lives and only a little bit is left. But now, even that little bit
has been tainted by this great act of adharma. He[Drona.] was always like a father in his affection. According to dharma,
he was also our father[There are seven (sometimes five) kinds of father (pita)-one who gives food, one who provides freedom from
fear, one who gives a daughter (the father-in-law), one who gives birth, one who gives a mantra, one who is a
teacher and one who performs the sacred threat investiture. Drona was a teacher.]. To obtain the kingdom for a brief period, we have killed our preceptor. O lord of the
earth! Dhritarashtra gave the entire earth to Bhishma and Drona and his sons, who were even more valuable. Having obtained such a livelihood from him, he always treated the others[That is, the Pandavas.] well. The preceptor always loved us, even
more than his son. He was not subjugated by us in the battle. He was killed by your words, when he cast aside his
weapons. Had he fought, even Shatakratu[The performer of a hundred sacrifices, Indra.] would not have been able to kill him. The preceptor was aged. He always did what was good for us. But we injured him. We have performed an ignoble deed for the sake of the kingdom and because of our limited intelligence. My preceptor had always known that I, Vasava's son, would have given up everything out of affection for him-sons, brothers, fathers, wives, and even life itself. But because of desire
for the kingdom, I ignored him when he was being killed. O king! O lord! Because of that, I am covered with
shame and have attained hell. He was a brahmana. He was an aged preceptor. He had cast aside his weapons. He
was like a sage. We have killed him today, for the sake of the kingdom. It is better for us to be dead than to remain
alive.'"'
