Vaishampayana said, 'Having approached the ascetic, who had burnt away all his sins, Yudhishthira announced his
name and happily greeted him, with his head bowed down. After that, Krishna, Bhima and the famous twins lowered their heads before the rajarshi and stood there, surrounding him. In that fashion, Dhoumya, learned in dharma
and the priest of the Pandavas, approached the rishi who was rigid in his vows, in accordance with propriety.
Through his divine sight, the sage who was learned in dharma had already recognized Pandu's sons, the best of the
Kuru lineage, and greeting them, asked them to be seated. The great ascetic showed honours to the wise bull
among the Kurus[Yudhishthira.].

'When he was seated with his brothers, he asked him about his welfare. "Does your mind ever turn towards that
which is not true or do you follow dharma? O Partha! Does your conduct towards your mother and father ever diminish? Are your preceptors, all the elders and those who are learned worshipped by you? O Partha! Does your
mind ever turn towards evil acts? O best of the Kuru lineage! Do you know how to reward a good deed and ignore
an evil deed? Do you treat them according to the law and without any conceit? Do virtuous ones rejoice when such
deserving ones are honoured by you? Though you dwell in the forest, do you follow that which is dharma? O
Partha! Has Dhoumya been tormented by the way you treat him? Do you follow the dharma of donations, austerities, purity, uprightness and forbearance? O Partha! Do you follow the conduct of your fathers and grandfathers? O
Pandava! Do you tread the path followed by the rajarshis? It is said that when a son or a grandson is born in one's
lineage, the ancestors in the world of the ancestors either sorrow or laugh. 'What will happen to us if he performs
evil deeds? Or will we prosper because he performs good deeds?' O Partha! He who honours his father, his mother, the fire, the preceptor and his own soul as the fifth, conquers both the worlds[This world and the next.]. There are rishis who live on
water and on the wind. At the time of parvasandhi[The junction between the fifteenth day of a lunar fortnight and the first day of the next lunar fortnight.], they fly through the air and visit this greatest of mountains.
O king! Kimpurushas, lovers with their beloveds, devoted to each other, can be seen on the peaks of this mountain.
O Partha! Many masses of gandharvas and apsaras can be seen. They are attired in spotless garments and in those
made of silk. There are masses of handsome and garlanded vidyadharas and masses of great serpents, giant birds[Suparnas.]
and other serpents. At the time of parvasandhi, the sounds of kettledrums, panavas[Type of musical instrument.], conch shells and drums can
be heard on this mountain. O bull among the Bharata lineage! You can hear all of that from this place. But you
should never act or think so as to venture closer. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! Beyond this point, it is impossible to go. That place is the sporting ground of the gods, beyond the access of humans. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! At that spot, all beings hate the fickle deeds of humans and rakshasas chastise them. O Yudhishthira! Beyond the peak of this mountain can be seen the radiant objective of devarshis, those who are supremely successful. O Partha! O destroyer of enemies! If one is fickle enough to continue on the journey beyond this
point, the rakshasas kill him with iron spears and other means. At the time of parvasandhi, Vaishravana Naravahana[Kubera, the lord of riches. Kubera is the son of Vishrava and is therefore known as Vaishravana. Kubera is
described as Naravahana, because he has a man (nara) as his mount or vehicle (vahana).] can be seen there in his prosperity, surrounded by apsaras. All the beings then see the lord of the rakshasas
seated on the peak of the mountain, as resplendent as the rising sun. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! The
peak of that mountain is the sporting ground of gods, danavas, siddhas and Vaishravana. O son[The word used is tata, affectionately used for anyone who is younger or junior.]! At the time of
parvasandhi, Tumburu[Famous gandharva.] worships the lord of riches there and the sounds of his songs and hymns can be heard on
Gandhamadana. O son! O Yudhishthira! At the time of parvasandhi, all the many different beings witness this
wonderful sight here. O best of the Pandavas! Dwell here. Live on succulent fruit and other tasty food, until you
see Arjuna. O son! Now that you have reached this place, you should never be fickle. O best of those who wield
weapons! After living here, as you desire, and sporting yourself, you will protect the earth."'
