Vaishampayana said, 'Having thus conquered him, Kunti's son, the mighty-armed Dhananjaya then went towards
the north, protected by the lord of riches[Kubera.]. Kounteya, bull among men, conquered the inner mountains, the outer
mountains and the upper mountains. Having conquered all the mountains and all the kings who lived there, he
brought them under his sway and extracted riches from all of them. O king! Having won the riches and the loyalty
of those kings, he marched with them against Brihanta, who lived in Kuluta. The earth trembled with the sound of
his supreme drums, the clatter of the edges of his chariot wheels and the roar of his elephants.

'The young Brihanta came out from his city with a fourfold army to do battle with Pandava. The battle between
Brihanta and Dhananjaya was a great one. But Brihanta was unable to withstand Pandava's valour. Realizing that
Kounteya could not be beaten down, the lord of the mountains[Brihanta.], whose intelligence was limited[It is not clear why Brihanta's intelligence was limited. Some regional versions say that Brihanta was invincible and that certainly fits the circumstances better.], brought him
all his riches. O king! Having established the kingdom, he set out with Kuluta[Arjuna was aided in his next campaign by Brihanta.] and swiftly threw Senabindu out
of his kingdom. He then subjugated Modapura, Vamadeva, Sudamana, Susamkula and the northern Kulutas and
their kings. O king! Having brought those men under Dharmaraja's rule, Dhananjaya then conquered five countries. On arriving in Divahprastha, Senabindu's great capital, the lord[Arjuna.] set up a base there, with his fourfold army.
Surrounded by them, that bull among men marched against King Vishvagashva Pourava. O king! After conquering
in battle the brave warriors from the mountains, he used his flag-bearing troops to subjugate the city protected by
Pourava. After vanquishing Pourava, Pandava defeated the seven mountain-dwelling dacoit tribes known as Utsavasamketa[A wild tribe that lived in the Himalayas. The word utsava means festival and also means height or elevation.
It is not obvious how the name Utsavasamketa relates to the word utsava.]. Then that bull among kshatriyas defeated the valorous kshatriyas from Kashmir and Lohita, using
ten encircling armies. O king! Kounteya then took on the Trigartas, the Darvas, the Kokanadas and many other
kshatriyas who attacked him collectively. The descendant of the Kuru lineage then conquered the charming city of
Abhisari and defeated in battle Rochamana, who lived in Urasha. The son of the chastiser of Paka then conquered
beautiful Simhapure, protected by Chitrayudhasura. Then, Kiriti[Arjuna's name, meaning the one who wore a diadem.], bull among the Pandavas and descendant of
the Kuru lineage, conquered the Suhmas[Identified with what is West Bengal now.] and the Cholas[The famous Cholas ruled in the south. So this must be a different set of Cholas.] with his entire army. The descendant of the Kuru lineage then conquered Bahlika[The region around Punjab.] with supreme valour. They were difficult to defeat, so there was a great battle.
Phalgu[Another name for Arjuna, shorter form of Phalguna or Phalguni.] Pandava, son of the chastiser of Paka, then took a select force and defeated the Daradas and the Kambojas[Area around the Hindu Kush, extending up to Ladakh and Tibet.]. The lord then defeated the bandits who live towards the north-east and those who live in the forests. Thereafter, the son of the chastiser of Paka subjugated the Lohas, the superior Kambojas and the northern Rishikas. The
battle in Rishika, between the superior Rishikas and Partha was a fearful one, like the battle known as
tarakamaya[Famous battle between the gods and the demons. It took place after Chandra, the moon, abducted Tara, Brihaspati's wife.]. O king! After defeating the Rishikas in the field of battle, he extracted eight horses that had the
colour of a parrot's breast. There were some others that had the colours of peacocks and still others that had both
colours. Having thus conquered in battle the Himalaya and Nishkuta Mountains, the bull among men arrived at the
white mountains and began to live there.'
