'"The god said, 'O brahmana! It is certain that the gods do not know me as I really am. But I am pleased with you
and I will tell you how I create. O brahmana rishi! You are devoted to your ancestors and you have sought refuge
with me. That is the reason you have seen me in person. Your brahmacharya is also great. The waters are known as
nara and I consciously gave them that name. Because the waters are always my abode, I am known by the name of
Narayana[The word ayana means abode or path.]. O supreme among brahmanas! I am known by the name of Narayana. My powers are eternal and un-
decaying. I am the creator and the destroyer of all beings. I am Vishnu. I am Brahma. I am Shakra, the lord of the
gods. I am king Vaishravana[Kubera.]. I am Yama, the lord of the dead. I am Shiva. I am Soma. I am Kashyapa Prajapati.
O supreme among brahmanas! I am the creator and the special creator[Dhata and vidhata respectively.]. I am the sacrifice. The fire is my mouth.
The earth is my feet. The sun and the moon are my eyes. The directions and the sky are my body. The wind is established in my mind. I have performed many hundreds of sacrifices, in which large numbers of gifts have been
given. I am the sacrifices performed by those learned in the Vedas. I am present in the sacrifices of the gods. On
earth, the lords and kings of the kshatriyas, desirous of attaining heaven, sacrifice to me. The vaishyas, desirous of
attaining heaven, also sacrifice to me. I become Shesha and hold up this earth full of riches, bounded by the four
seas and adorned by Meru and Mandara[Shesha naga holds up the earth.]. In earlier times, in the form of a boar, I used my valour to raise up the
earth, when it was immersed in the water[This is a reference to Vishnu's boar (varaha) incarnation.]. O brahmana! O supreme among brahmanas! As the vadava fire, I
drink up the turbulent waters and disgorge them again[The vadava (or badava) fire is a submarine fire. It has the shape of a collection of mares.]. Through my valour, in due order, the brahmanas emerged
from my mouth, the kshatriyas from my arms, the vaishyas from my thighs and the shudras from my feet. The Rig
Veda, the Sama Veda, the Yajur Veda and the Atharva Veda issued from me and return to me. Ascetics desire
supreme tranquility. They wish to control their souls. They are free from desire, anger and hatred. They are without
attachment and have overcome sin. They are pure and without pride. They are always learned about matters concerning the soul. These brahmanas always meditate on me. They worship me. I am the light of destruction. I am
Yama, the destroyer. I am the sun of destruction. I am the wind of destruction. O supreme among brahmanas!
Know that the forms that can be seen in the sky in the form of stars are manifestations of me. So are the oceans,
the storehouses of jewels and the four directions. Know them to be my garments, my beds and my abodes. O virtuous one! Desire, anger, happiness, fear and delusion-know them to be different forms of me. O brahmana! So are
whatever is obtained by men through performing good deeds, speaking the truth, performing austerities and observing non-violence towards creatures. It is my rules that determine all beings who live in bodies. They do not act
in accordance with their desires, but their minds are guided by me. There are brahmanas who have properly studied the Vedas. They perform different kinds of sacrifices. They pacify their souls and control their anger. They earn
merits. O learned one! These are incapable of being earned by men who perform evil deeds and are overcome by
greed-men who are mean, inferior and not in control of their souls. Know that I am the greatest reward that righteous men strive for. This is the path chosen by those who resort to yoga, but is impossible for ignorant ones to
achieve. O learned one! Whenever dharma goes into a decline and adharma[Evil, the negation of dharma.] raises its head, then I create myself.
Whenever daityas, addicted to violence and incapable of being killed by the supreme among the gods, and terrible
rakshasas are created in this world, then I am born in the houses of those who perform good deeds. I assume a human form and pacify everything.

'"'I create gods, humans, gandharvas, serpents, rakshasas and mobile and immobile objects. Then I destroy
them with my maya. When the time arrives for acting, I think again about a body and create myself. Assuming a
human form, I ensure that the boundaries are maintained. My complexion is white in krita yuga, yellow in treta
yuga and red now in dvapara. It is black in kali yuga. At that time, adharma accounts for three-fourths[Because only one quarter of dharma remains in kali yuga.]. When
that period of destruction arrives, I assume the terrible form of time and myself destroy the three worlds, with their
mobile and immobile objects. I am the one with three strides[This is a reference to Vishnu's dwarf (vamana) incarnation, when he covered the three worlds with three
strides.]. I am the soul of the universe. I bring happiness to
all the worlds. I am the lord. I go everywhere. I am Hrishikesha, whose stride is expansive. O brahmana! I am the
one who moves the wheel of time. I am without form. I am the one who pacifies all beings. I am the endeavour behind the tasks of all the worlds. O supreme among sages! Thus my soul pervades all beings. O Indra among brahmanas! But no one knows me. O brahmana! O unblemished one! Whatever pain you have encountered while inside me, all of that is for your happiness and welfare. O supreme among sages! Whatever you have seen of the
worlds, mobile and immobile, all of those have been ordained by my soul. The grandfather of all the worlds[Brahma.] is
half of my body. I am the one known as Narayana. I hold the conch shell, the chakra and the mace. O brahmana
rishi! Throughout the cycle of one thousand yugas, I, the soul of the universe and the grandfather of all the worlds,
sleep. O supreme among sages! Throughout that period, I am established here, not a child but in the form of a
child, until Brahma wakes up. O brahmana! It is I who granted you boons in the form of Brahma. You are worshipped by masses of brahmana rishis and I am satisfied with you. On seeing everything, mobile and immobile,
flooded in a single ocean, you were afflicted. Knowing this, I showed you the universe when you entered my body.
On seeing all the worlds there, you were astounded and did not understand. O brahmana rishi! Therefore, I brought
you out through my mouth and told you everything about myself, incomprehensible to gods and demons. O brahmana rishi! Until the immensely ascetic and illustrious Brahma awakes, comfortably rest and roam here. O
supreme among brahmanas! When the grandfather of all the worlds awakes, as if they are but one, I will create
from my body the sky, the earth, light, wind and water and whatever else exists in the world, mobile and immobile.'"

'Markandeya said, "O son[The word used is tata.]! After he had spoken thus, the extremely wonderful god disappeared. I then saw
the creation of subjects, varied and manifold. O king! O best of the Bharata lineage! O best among all those who
uphold dharma! At the end of the yuga, I witnessed all these wonderful things. O tiger among men! The lotus-eyed
god whom I saw in earlier times, has now become your relative Janardana. O Kounteya! Because of the boon he
bestowed on me, my memory has not failed me. I have a long life and I can die when I wish. He is the lord Krishna
Varshneya, the ancient being. He is the mighty-armed Hari, who cannot be thought of, and who seems to be sporting. He is Satvata[A term used for Krishna and for the Yadavas.], the creator and the special creator and the destroyer. He is Govinda with the srivatsa mark,
the universal lord of all Prajapatis. On seeing this tiger of the Vrishni lineage, the original being Vishnu who has
no birth and who is dressed in yellow garb, my memory has returned to me. Madhava is the father and mother of
all beings. O bulls among the Kourava lineage! Seek refuge with the one who grants protection."'
