Sanjaya said, "On seeing the clash between the two foremost ones of the Kuru lineage, Arjuna spoke to the illustrious Vasudeva. 'Between those two brave ones who are fighting, who do you think is superior? O Janardana!
Who possesses the greater qualities? Tell me.'

' "Vasudeva replied, 'They are equal in what they have learnt, but Bhima is stronger. However, Dhritarashtra's
son is superior to Vrikodara because of the efforts that he has undertaken. Using dharma, Bhimasena will not be
able to win this encounter. He will be able to kill Suyodhana only if he fights through unfair means. It has been
heard that the gods defeated the asuras through the use of maya. The slayer of Bala robbed Vritra of his energy
through maya. O Dhananjaya! At the time of gambling with the dice, Bhima took a pledge that in the encounter, he
would shatter Suyodhana's thighs with a club. This destroyer of enemies needs to accomplish that pledge. The king
uses maya[The word is being used here in the sense of deception.] and has to be brought down through maya. If he uses his strength and fights through fair means, King
Yudhishthira will face a hardship. O Pandava! I am saying this again. Listen to me. It is because of Dharmaraja's
transgression that this fear has again confronted us. Having performed the great deed of slaying the Kurus, with
Bhishma as the leader, he had obtained victory and fame and an end to the enmity with the adversary. However,
having obtained the victory, he has once again placed himself in a situation of uncertainty. O Pandava! This has
been great stupidity on Dharmaraja's part. He has staked the entire victory on the outcome of a single encounter.
Suyodhana is accomplished and brave. He is firm in his resolution. There is an ancient song by Ushanas[Shukra, the preceptor of the demons.] and we
have heard it. I will recite the shloka, with its deep meaning. Listen. "Those who have been routed, wishing to protect their lives, but rally and return, must be feared. They will be single-minded in their resolution." Suyodhana
was routed. With his soldiers slain, he had immersed himself in a lake. He had been defeated. Hopeless about obtaining the kingdom, he had wished to go to the forest. Which wise one would challenge such a person to a duel
again? Suyodhana may now obtain the kingdom that we had won. Having made up his mind, he has practised with
the club for thirteen years. Wishing to kill Bhimasena, he leaps up and moves diagonally. If the mighty-armed one
does not slay him through unfair means, Kourava, Dhritarashtra's son, will be the king.'

' "Hearing Keshava's words, the great-souled Dhananjaya glanced in Bhimasena's direction and slapped his
thigh with his hand[Though not explicitly stated, this is Sanjaya speaking again.]. Understanding the sign, Bhima roamed around with his club in the battle. He executed wonderful circular motions and doubled back. He circled to the right and the left and alternated between the two. O
king! Pandava roamed around confounding the enemy. In that fashion, your son was also skilled in executing motions with the club. Wishing to kill Bhimasena, he roamed around, executing dexterous and wonderful motions.
They whirled terrible clubs that had been smeared with sandalwood paste and unguents. They were like two angry
Yamas, wishing to bring an end to the hostility. Those foremost ones, bulls among men, wished to kill each other.
They fought like two Garudas who were after the same serpent. O king! Both of them executed wonderful circular
motions. Because of the descent of the clubs, sparks of fire were generated there. In the encounter, those brave and
powerful ones struck each other equally. O king! They were like two oceans agitated by storms. Like crazy elephants, they struck each other equally. Thunderous sounds were generated from the blows of the clubs. That fierce
and terrible clash continued. As they fought, both scorchers of enemies were exhausted. Having rested for some
time, those scorchers of enemies again angrily grasped their giant clubs and attacked. O Indra among kings! They
fought a terrible battle with the descending clubs and severely wounded each other. With eyes like bulls, they
spiritedly rushed towards each other. Those brave ones fiercely struck each other, like buffaloes stuck in mud. All
their limbs were mangled and they were covered with blood. They looked like two flowering kimshukas on the
Himalayas.

' "Partha showed Duryodhana a weakness and smiling, he suddenly extended himself forwards[Duryodhana extended forwards. There was no real weakness and Bhima
tempted Duryodhana to attack.]. Vrikodara
was learned about fighting. On seeing the advance, the strong one powerfully hurled the club. O lord of the earth!
Seeing that the club had been hurled, your son moved from the spot and baffled, it fell down on the ground. Having respectfully warded off that blow, your son, supreme among the Kuru lineage, struck Bhimasena with the club.
Struck severely by that blow and with blood flowing down, the infinitely energetic one was stupefied. However, in
that encounter, Duryodhana did not realize that Pandava was afflicted. Though his body suffered great pain, Bhima
bore himself. He[Duryodhana.] thought that he was still steady and ready to strike back in the encounter. That is the reason
your son did not strike him again. O king! Having rested for a while, the powerful Bhimasena attacked Duryodhana, who was stationed before him, with force. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On seeing that the angry and
infinitely energetic one was attacking, he wished to save himself from the blow. Your great-minded son made up
his mind to take a stand. O king! He leapt up, wishing to deceive Vrikodara. However, Bhimasena understood what
the king wished to do. He dashed forward, roaring like a lion. O king! As the king leapt up to avoid the blow, Pan-
dava powerfully struck him on the thighs with the club. He was terrible in his deeds and struck with a force like
that of the vajra. Duryodhana's handsome thighs were fractured. The tiger among men fell down, making the earth
resound. O lord of the earth! Your son's thighs were fractured by Bhimasena.

' "Fierce winds began to blow and showers of dust fell down. The earth, with its trees, shrubs and mountains,
began to tremble. The brave one was the lord of all the kings on earth. When he fell down, a great sound was heard
and there were blazing and fearful winds. When the lord of the earth fell down, giant meteors descended. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were showers of blood and showers of dust. When your son was brought
down, Maghavan[Indra.] showered these down. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Large roars were heard in the firmament, made by the yakshas, the rakshasas and the pishachas. Because of that terrible roar, animals and birds emitted many more terrible sounds in all the directions. When your son was brought down, the remaining horses, elephants and men emitted loud roars. When your son was brought down, there were the loud sounds of drums, conch
shells and cymbals and a sound seemed to emerge from inside the ground. O king! In all directions, headless torsos, fearful in form, with many feet and many legs, were seen to dance around, generating fear. O king! When your
son was brought down, those who held standards, weapons and arms trembled. O supreme among kings! Lakes
and wells vomited blood. Extremely swift-flowing rivers began to flow in a reverse direction. Men looked like
women and women looked like men. O king! This is what happened when your son, Duryodhana, was brought
down. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On seeing these evil portents, all the Panchalas and the Pandavas were
anxious in their minds. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The gods, the gandharvas and the apsaras went away,
wherever they wished to go, after that wonderful encounter between your sons was over. O Indra among kings! So
did the siddhas, the bards and the charanas. Having praised those two lions among men, the brahmanas went away,
to wherever they had come from." '
