'Sanjaya said, "While they were thus conversing, Dhananjaya arrived. He wished to meet the king who was the
foremost among the Bharata lineage, together with his well-wishers. He entered the auspicious chamber and having saluted him[Yudhishthira.], stood in front. The bull among the Pandavas[Yudhishthira.] arose from his seat and affectionately embraced
Arjuna with his arms, inhaling the fragrance of his head. Having pronounced his blessings, he smilingly said, 'O
Arjuna! It is evident that you will certainly accomplish a great victory in the battle. Your countenance shows that
Janardana is extremely pleased with you.' Jishnu recounted to him the great and supremely wonderful incident. 'O
fortunate one! I witnessed it through Keshava's favours.' Dhananjaya told him everything that he had witnessed
and about his encounter with Tryambaka, and thus assured his well-wishers. All of them were astounded and lowered their heads on the ground. Having shown obeisance to the one with the bull on his banner, they spoke words
of praise. All the well-wishers then took their leave of Dharma's son. They swiftly armoured themselves and happily emerged to do battle.

'"Having shown their honours to King Yudhishthira, Yuyudhana, Achyuta and Arjuna also happily emerged
from his abode. The invincible Yuyudhana and Janardana were on a single chariot and together, went to brave Arjuna's abode. Having gone there, Hrishikesha prepared the chariot, like a charioteer. It was a supreme chariot and
bore the signs of the bull among monkeys. It possessed a roar like that of the clouds. It possessed the complexion
of molten gold. That supreme of chariots was prepared and was as resplendent as the morning sun. The tiger
among men[Krishna.] prepared himself. Having prepared himself, he told Partha, who had finished his morning ablutions,
that the chariot was ready. Kiriti, the supreme among men in this world, donned golden armour. With the bow and
arrows in his hand, he circumabulated[The chariot.]. The learned and the aged, who were in control of their senses and had
performed rites, pronounced benedictions for the maharatha's victory. The supreme chariot had earlier been invoked with mantras that would bring about triumph in battle. Having been invoked with mantras, it dazzled like
the rays of the morning sun. The foremost among rathas, clad in gold, ascended the golden chariot. He was as resplendent as the unblemished rays of the sun on Meru. After Partha had ascended, Yuyudhana and Janardana also
climbed up[Onto the same chariot.], like the Ashvins coming with Indra to Sharyati's sacrifice[Sharyati was a famous king and was the father of Sukanya. The story of Sharyati's sacrifice has been recounted
in Section 33 (Volume 3).]. Govinda, supreme among those who
hold reins, grasped the reins, like Matali for Vasava[Vasava is Indra and Matali is the name of Indra's charioteer.], when he departed to slay Vritra. Partha was with both of
them, on that supreme chariot. He was like the moon, the dispeller of darkness, together with Budha and Shukra[Mercury and Venus respectively.].
The destroyer of large numbers of the enemy departed, wishing to kill Saindhava. He was like Indra in Tarakamaya[Famous battle fought between the gods and the demons.], accompanied by the lord of the oceans[Varuna.] and Mitra. There was the sound of musical instruments and auspicious and sacred chants. Arjuna proceeded, praised by bards and minstrels. The auspicious chants of bards and
minstrels wished for his victory. These mingled with the sound of musical instruments and became extremely
pleasant. Auspicious winds began to blow from the rear, with fragrant scents. They delighted Partha and dried up
his enemies. O venerable one! Many omens of victory manifested themselves in favour of the Pandavas and it was
the reverse for those on your side.

'"On beholding these signs of victory, Arjuna spoke to the great archer, Yuyudhana, who was on his right. 'O
Yuyudhana! I can see that victory is certain in the battle. O bull among the Shini lineage! These good portents can
be seen. Let me go to the spot where King Saindhava is. He is waiting to witness my valour and to proceed to
Yama's world. The slaying of Saindhava is the supreme task for me. It is also a great task to protect Dharmaraja. O
mighty-armed one! You protect him today. You will protect him the way I would have protected him myself. I do
not see anyone else I can depend on, with the exception of maharatha Pradyumna. O bull among men! Ignoring
this[The task of protecting Yudhishthira.], I can then kill Saindhava. O Satvata! You should not entertain any anxiety on my account. Devote all your
attention to the supreme task of protecting the king. Where the mighty-armed Vasudeva is stationed, and where I
am, it is certain that there is no scope for danger there.' Thus addressed by Partha, Satyaki, the destroyer of enemy
heroes, signified his assent to the words and went to the spot where King Yudhishthira was."'
