Sanjaya said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing the words spoken by Keshava, Bibhatsu cast off
his sorrow and in a short instant, became cheerful. He quickly touched the bowstring and stretched Gandiva bow
for the sake of Karna's destruction. He spoke to Keshava. 'O Govinda! Protected by you, my victory is certain.
You are the lord of the past, the present and the future and you are pleased with me. O Krishna! With you as my
aide, I can kill the three worlds and attain the supreme world in a battle, not to speak of Karna. O Janardana! I can
see that the army of the Panchalas is being driven away. I can see Karna roaming around fearlessly in the encounter. I can see Bhargava's weapon coursing in every direction. O Varshneya! It has been released by Karna, like
the great vajra by Shakra. O Krishna! But as long as the earth exists, beings will talk about what will be done by
me in the battle. O Krishna! Today, my arrows without barbs will convey Karna to the land of the dead. They will
be released and shot from Gandiva and dispatched by my arms. Today, King Dhritarashtra will curse his intelligence, as a result of which, he instated Duryodhana in the kingdom, though he did not deserve the kingdom. O
mighty-armed one! Today, Dhritarashtra will be deprived of his kingdom, his happiness, his prosperity, his kingdom, his city and his sons. Today, King Duryodhana will lose all hope of remaining alive. O Krishna! Karna will
be slain. I am telling you this truthfully. On seeing Karna mangled by my arrows, the lord of men[Duryodhana.] will remember the words that you had spoken about peace. O Krishna! Today let Soubala know that my arrows are dice, Gan-
diva is the box used to throw them and my chariot the spread on which the game is played. In a battle, the son of a
suta thinks that there is no other man who is equal to him on earth. Let the earth drink his blood today. Released
from Gandiva, they[The arrows.] will grant Karna the supreme objective. Today, Radheya will repent the words that he
spoke to Panchali. In the midst of the assembly hall, he spoke cruel words and cast aspersions on the Pandavas.
They were described as sterile sesamum seeds then[In Section 27 (Volume 2), on the occasion of the gambling match.], but will turn out to be sesamum today, when Vaikartana
Karna, the evil-souled son of a suta, has been killed. He said, "I will save you[Duryodhana.] from fear about the sons of Pandu." My sharp arrows will render his words false. He said, "I will kill all the Pandavas and their sons." While all
the archers look on, I will kill that Karna today. Resorting to his valour, the great-minded[This great-minded is to be interpreted in the sense of insolent, that is,
this is what Duryodhana thought of himself.] son of Dhritarashtra,
evil-souled and evil in his intelligence, always disregarded us. O Madhusudana! I will kill that Radheya Karna today. O Krishna! When Karna has been killed today, the sons of Dhritarashtra and the kings will be terrified and run
away in different directions, like deer frightened of a lion. King Duryodhana will see the earth, with Karna killed
by me in the battle today, with his sons and his well-wishers. O Krishna! On seeing that Karna has been killed,
Dhritarashtra's intolerant son will know me to be the foremost among all archers in a battle. O Krishna! Today, I
will repay the debt I owe to all wielders of the bow, to my anger, to the Kurus, to my arrows and to Gandiva. Today, I will free myself of the sorrow I have borne for thirteen years. O Krishna! I will kill Karna in the battle, like
Maghavan against Shambara[Shambara was the name of a demon killed by Indra.]. Today, when Karna has been slain in the battle, the Somaka maharathas, who
wish to serve their friends in the battle, will think that their task has been accomplished. O Madhava! I do not
know whether Shini's descendant will be more delighted at Karna having been killed, or at the prospect of victory.
In the battle, I will kill Karna and his maharatha son and bring delight to Bhima, the twins and Satyaki. O Madhava! Having slain Karna in the great battle today, I will free myself of the debt I owe to Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi
and the Panchalas. The wrathful Dhananjaya will be seen in the battle today, fighting with the Kouravas in the encounter and bringing down the son of a suta. In your presence, let me again indulge in self-praise. In the world,
there is no one who is my equal in knowledge of dhanurveda. Where is the person who is my equal in valour? Is
there anyone else who is as forgiving as me? There is no one else who is my equal in anger. With the bow in my
hand and resorting to the strength of my arms, I can defeat the gods, the asuras and all the beings united together.
Know that my manliness is supreme among the best. With the arrows from Gandiva, which are like rays, I alone
will consume all the Kurus, Bahlikas and Kashis, with large numbers of their followers, like the fire burning dead
wood at the end of winter. The arrows have left marks on my palms. An arrow is affixed to the left of the bow. The
soles of my feet have the marks of a chariot and a standard. When someone like me advances into a battle, he cannot be vanquished.'" '
