Janamejaya asked, 'O brahmana! Are there many Purushas or is there only one? Which is the best Purusha and
what is said to be the origin of everything?'

Vaishampayana replied, 'In the reflections of sankhya and yoga, people have spoken about many Purushas. O
extender of the Kuru lineage! They do not wish to accept that there is a single Purusha. All these many Purushas
are held to have a single origin. That is explained as the single Purusha in the universe, possessing superior qualities. I will first bow down before my preceptor, the infinitely energetic Vyasa. He is a supreme rishi, controlled and
united with austerities, deserving to be worshipped. O king! This purushasukta exists in all the Vedas[The famous purushasukta is 10.90 in the Rig Veda and also occurs in the other three Vedas.]. It is famous as both rita and satya[Rita and satya both mean truth, but there is a subtle difference. Satya means truth vis-a-vis the external world
and rita means truth vis-a-vis what is internal.]. The lion among rishis[Vyasa.] thought about this. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Kapila and the other rishis thought about adhyatma and devoted themselves to the contradictions spoken about in
the sacred texts. Vyasa brought all this together and spoke about a single Purusha. Through the favours of that infinitely energetic one, I will tell you about the truth. O lord of the earth! In this connection, there is an ancient history about a conversation between Brahma and Tryambaka. O king! In the midst of the ocean of milk, there is a
supreme mountain, known by the name of Vaijayanta. Its hue is like that of gold. Thinking about the progress of
adhyatma, the god[Brahma.] used to go there alone. He always went there from his resplendent abode and spent time on
Vaijayanta. The intelligent one with the four faces was seated there. His son, Shiva, born from his forehead, arrived
there. Travelling as he willed through the sky, the three-eyed lord of yoga saw him seated there. From the sky, the
lord quickly dropped down on the summit of the mountain. He cheerfully presented himself before his superior
and worshipped his feet. On seeing him prostrate at his feet, Prajapati, the single lord, raised him with his left
hand. Having met his son after a long time, the illustrious one welcomed him and said, "O mighty-armed one!
Welcome. It is through good fortune that you have come before me. O son! Is everything well? You are always engaged in studying and austerities. You are always engaged in fierce austerities. That is the reason I am asking you
about those."

'Rudra answered, "O illustrious one! Through your favours, all is well with my studies and austerities. The entire universe is also without decay. O illustrious one! It has been a long time since I saw you in your radiant abode.
That is the reason I have come to this mountain, where your feet are resting now. Since you have decided to come
here alone, I am curious. O grandfather! There must be a grave reason why you have done that. Your excellent
abode is free from hunger and thirst. It is always inhabited by gods, asuras, the infinitely radiant rishis and gandharvas and apsaras. Why have you given that up and come alone to this supreme mountain?"

'Brahma said, "Vaijayanta, this supreme mountain, is always frequented by me. Here, with concentration in my
mind, I think of the great Purusha."

'Rudra replied, "O Brahma! You are Svayambhu and you have created many Purushas. O Brahma! You are creating others too. But there is only a single great Purusha. O Brahma! Whom are you thinking about? Who is that
Purushottama[Literally, the supreme Purusha.]? I have great curiosity and a doubt about this. Tell me."

'Brahma said, "O son! As has been stated by you, there are many Purushas. But this one cannot be seen and
transcends all the others. I am telling you that this single Purusha is alone the foundation. That single one is said to
be the origin of the many Purushas. That Purusha is the universe. He is supreme and extremely great. He is devoid
of qualities. Devoid of qualities, they[The other Purushas.] enter the eternal one."'
