Vaishampayana said, 'Drupada's priest went to Kouravya. Together with Bhishma and Vidura, Dhritarashtra's son
welcomed him with honours. He[The priest.] asked them about their welfare and whether they were all in good health. In
the midst of the leaders of the army, he then spoke the following words. "All of you know what the eternal dharma
of kings is. But though it is known, I will refer to it, because it leads up to the words that I will say. It is known that
Dhritarashtra and Pandu are sons of the same father. There is no doubt that they possess equal rights to what belonged to their ancestors. The sons of Dhritarashtra have now obtained those ancestral riches. Why have the sons
of Pandu not obtained a share of the ancestral riches? This is the way it is. In earlier times too, it is known that the
Pandavas did not obtain a share of the ancestral objects. The sons of Dhritarashtra gathered them. There have been
several occasions when attempts have been made on their lives. But because their lives were not over, they could
not be sent to Yama's abode. Through their own powers, the great-souled ones again obtained a kingdom. But together with Soubala, that was deceitfully taken away from them by the mean sons of Dhritarashtra. That act was
undesirable, but this one[Referring to Dhritarashtra.] approved it. With their wife, these brave ones were terribly mistreated in the assembly
hall. They went through many extremely terrible hardships in the forest. Then, in Virata's city, it was as if they
went through another birth[They assumed new identities.]. These great-souled ones went through extreme difficulties, as if they had performed
evil acts. Having left all that, and all the earlier difficulties, behind, the bulls among the Kurus[The Pandavas.] only wish for
conciliation with the Kurus. Knowing their conduct and the conduct of Duryodhana, the well-wishers of Dhritarashtra's son should entreat with him. Those brave ones do not wish to fight with the Kurus. The Pandavas want
what is theirs, without destroying the world. Whatever reasons Dhritarashtra's son cites in favour of a war, cannot
be regarded as a reason, because they[The Pandavas.] are stronger. Dharma's son has assembled seven akshouhinis. They are
eager to fight with the Kurus and are waiting for instructions. There are other tigers among men, who are equal to
thousands of akshouhinis. There are Satyaki and Bhimasena and the extremely strong twins. These eleven armies
are assembled on one side. But on the other side, there is the mighty-armed Dhananjaya, who possesses many
forms. Just as Kiriti surpasses all armies, so does the mighty-armed and immensely radiant Vasudeva. Knowing the
multitude of their armies, Kiriti's valour and Krishna's wisdom, which man will wish to fight? Since the stipulated
time has passed, in accordance with dharma, you must return what should be returned. Do not let time pass by
idly."'
