'"Rama said, 'O beautiful one! In the sight of all the worlds, to the supreme extent of my capacity, I have shown
great manliness. But in battle, I have not been able to establish my superiority over Bhishma, supreme among
those who wield weapons, even though I exhibited my supreme weapons. This is the ultimate of my power. This is
the ultimate of my strength. O fortunate one! Go wherever you wish. What else can I do for you? Seek refuge with
Bhishma. There is no other recourse for you. Unleashing his great weapons, Bhishma has vanquished me.'"

'Bhishma said, "Having spoken in this way, the great-minded Rama sighed and was silent. The maiden then
spoke to the descendant of the Bhrigu lineage. 'O illustrious one! It is just as your illustrious self has said. The intelligent Bhishma is invincible in battle, even to the gods. You have performed my task to the best of your capacity
and the best of your endeavours. In this battle, you have been unrestrained in valour and have used many weapons.
But in the end, he could not be surpassed in battle. Under no circumstances, will I go back to Bhishma again. O
one rich in austerities! O extender of the Bhrigu lineage! Instead, I will go where I can myself bring Bhishma
down in battle.' Her eyes red with anger, the maiden spoke in this way. Thinking about my death, she made up her
mind to engage in austerities. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! After taking leave from me, Rama, supreme
among the Bhrigu lineage, went with the sages to Mahendra, from where he had come. Praised by the brahmanas, I
ascended my chariot and having entered the city, told my mother, Satyavati, everything that had transpired. O great
king! She congratulated me. I instructed wise men to watch over the maiden's doings and from one day to another,
they reported to me her goings, words and deeds. Every day, they were engaged in ensuring my welfare. From the
moment the maiden left for the forest to perform austerities, I was miserable and wretched. It was as if I had lost
my senses. O son[The word used is tata.]! No kshatriya can vanquish me in battle with valour, except one who knows about the brahman, has performed austerities and is rigid in his vows.

'"O king! Because of my fear, I informed Narada and Vyasa about her deeds. Both of them told me, 'O Bhishma! You should not be despondent about the deeds of the daughter of Kashi. Through human efforts, who can
counteract destiny?' O great king! The maiden resorted to a circle of hermitages that was on the banks of the Yamuna and engaged in superhuman austerities. She gave up food. She became thin and coarse. She had matted hair.
She became covered with dirt and mud. Rich in austerities, she lived on air for six months and was like a pillar.
Later, the beautiful one went to the banks of the Yamuna and stood in the water for one year, without taking any
food. After that, for another year, she survived on a single leaf every day. She was terrible in her anger and stood
on the tips of her toes. She continued in this way for twelve years and heated up heaven. None of her relatives
were capable of restraining her. She went to Vatsabhumi[This has been translated as the name of a hermitage. But it could also be a reference to the Vatsa kingdom, located at the confluence of the Ganga and the Yamuna.], frequented by siddhas and charanas. This was the hermitage of great-souled ascetics whose deeds were sacred. In that sacred region, she bathed day and night. O king!
O Kouravya! The maiden from Kashi roamed around, as she willed, in the hermitage of Nanda, in the sacred hermitage of Uluka, the hermitage of Chyavana, the region of the brahman, Prayaga, the sacrificial region of the gods,
the forests of the gods, Bhogavati, the hermitage of Koushika, the hermitage of Mandavya, the hermitage of Dili-
pa, Rama's lake[Meaning Parashurama and the lake in Kurukshetra.] and the hermitage of Pailagargya. O king! O lord of the earth! The maiden from Kashi bathed at
these tirthas and performed terrible austerities.

'"O Kouraveya! My mother arose from the water and asked her, 'O fortunate one! Why are you undergoing this
pain? Tell me truthfully.' O king! The unblemished one joined her hands in salutation and replied, 'O one with the
beautiful eyes! Bhishma has not been defeated by Rama in battle. When he raises his arrows, who else can strive
against that lord of the earth? I will myself observe extremely difficult austerities for Bhishma's destruction. O
goddess! I will roam around the earth in order to kill that king. May this be the fruit that I obtain in another body.'

The river that goes to the ocean then said, 'O beautiful one! You are following a crooked path. O one with the unblemished limbs! O lady! This desire of yours is impossible to accomplish. O maiden from Kashi! O beautiful one!
If you observe a vow for Bhishma's destruction, if you indeed give up your body in this vow, you will only become a crooked river that has water during the rainy season. You will have terrible tirthas that no one will recognize. You will only flow during the rains and will remain dry for eight months. You will have terrible and fearful
crocodiles and will be horrible to all beings.' O king! Having spoken thus, my immensely fortunate and beautiful
mother smiled and tried to restrain the maiden from Kashi.

'"The one with the beautiful complexion did not eat or drink water, sometimes for eight months, sometimes for
ten months. O Kourvaya! In her desire for more tirthas, the daughter of the king of Kashi again roamed around and
fell into[Because she became a river.] Vatsabhumi. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! She became a river in Vatsabhumi, known as
Amba[There is an Amba River in Maharashtra, but that doesn't fit.]. She only flows in the rainy season. She has many crocodiles and terrible tirthas. She is crooked. O king!
Through her austerities, half of the maiden became a river in Vatsa. The other half remained a maiden."'
