'Sanjaya said, "On seeing the samshaptaka army return again, Arjuna spoke to the great-souled Vasudeva. 'O
Hrishikesha! Drive the horses towards the army of the samshaptakas. They will not return alive from the battle.
That is my view. Today, you will witness the terrible strength of my weapons and my arms. I will bring them
down, like an angry Rudra against animals.' Hearing this, Krishna smiled and addressed him with auspicious
words. The invincible one conveyed Arjuna to the spot where he desired to go. They were radiant on a chariot
drawn by white horses and because of this, seemed to cause a loss of the senses, like a vimana that has risen in the
sky. The chariot performed circular motions, it moved forwards and back. O king! It was like Shakra's chariot, in
the battle between the gods and the asuras in ancient times. The angry Narayanas raised different kinds of weapons
in their hands. They surrounded Dhananjaya and enveloped him with a storm of arrows. O bull among the Bharata
lineage! In that battle, they made Dhananjaya, Kunti's son, invisible, together with Krishna. In that encounter,
Phalguna became wrathful and showed double his valour. In that battle, he grasped the Gandiva and touched its
string. There were frowns on his forehead, a sign of rage. Pandava blew on the great conch shell Devadatta. Arjuna
resorted to the weapon known as tvastra, which was capable of destroying large numbers of the enemy at the same
time. Many thousand of separate forms appeared[That is, many different forms of Krishna and Arjuna appeared.]. Confused by these many different forms, they began to kill
each other. Thinking each other to be Arjuna, they began to kill each other. 'This is Arjuna. This is Govinda. These
are Yadava and Pandava.' They were confused and speaking in this way, they killed each other in that battle. They
were confused by that supreme weapon and destroyed each other in this way. In that battle, the warriors were as
beautiful as flowering kimshukas. The thousands of arrows released by those brave ones were reduced by that
weapon to ashes and it conveyed them to Yama's abode.

'"Bibhatsu laughed and used his arrows to shatter the Lallittha, Malava, Machellaka and Trigarta warriors.
Those brave kshatriyas were propelled by destiny. They were slaughtered and released many different showers of
arrows towards Partha. Shrouded by that terrible shower of arrows, Arjuna, Keshava or the chariot could no longer
be seen there. On seeing that the arrows had found their mark, they told each other in delight. 'Krishna and Arjuna
have been killed.' They waved their garments in the air. The brave ones sounded thousands of drums, tambourines
and conch shells. O venerable one! They emitted terrible roars, like lions. Krishna was covered in sweat and was
exhausted. He told Arjuna, 'O Partha! Where are you? I cannot see you. O slayer of enemies! Are you alive?' He
who knows all sentiments, thus adopted human sentiments. On discerning this, Pandava swiftly used the vayavya
weapon and dispelled that shower of arrows. The illustrious Vayu[Vayavya is a divine weapon named after Vayu, the wind god.] created a storm that blew away the samshaptakas, with their horses, elephants, chariots and weapons, as if they were heaps of dry leaves. O king! As they were
borne away by the wind, they looked beautiful. O venerable one! They were like birds, flying away from trees at
the right time[Such as at dawn.]. Having afflicted them in this way, Dhananjaya swiftly killed hundreds and thousands of them
with his sharp arrows. He used broad-headed arrows to sever their heads and their arms, still grasping weapons. He
used his arrows to bring down thighs that were like the trunks of elephants. Some were wounded on their backs.
Others lost their legs, or their heads, eyes and fingers. Dhananjaya deprived their bodies of many limbs. Their
many chariots looked like the cities of gandharvas. He shattered them, and the horses, chariots and elephants, with
his arrows. With the standards brought down, some of those groups of chariots looked like forests of palm trees,
with the heads lopped off. There were elephants with excellent weapons, standards, goads and warriors. They were
brought down, like wooden mountains struck with Shakra's vajra. There were horses with tails like whisks and armoured riders. Wounded by Partha's arrows, they fell down on the ground, with their entrails and eyes plucked out.
Foot soldiers held swords that looked like nails. But these dropped from their hand and their armour was shattered.
Their inner organs were mangled. They were killed and whirled around. They fell and were falling down. Because
of this, the field of battle looked terrible. A great cloud of dust had arisen and was now pacified by the shower of
blood. Strewn with many headless torsos, the ground became difficult to cross. In that battle, Bibhatsu's chariot
was fierce and radiant. He sported around like Rudra, slaughtering animals at the time of destruction. Killed by
Partha, the horses, chariots and elephants became anxious. But they continued to rush at him, like guests visiting
Shakra[Implying that they were about to die.]. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! The ground was strewn with many slain maharathas. With all of
them lying there, it looked like the world of dead spirits. While Savyasachi was thus furiously engaged, Drona and
his battle formations attacked Yudhishthira. There were many armed ones in arrays and they swiftly attacked, so as
to capture Yudhishthira. There was a great and tumultuous encounter."'
