Yudhishthira asked,  "How  should  a  king  who  has  been  emancipated  move  around  on  earth?  What  qualities
should he always possess, so that he is freed from the noose of attachment?"

'Bhishma replied, "In this connection, there is an ancient history about what Arishtanemi spoke when Sagara
asked him."

'"Sagara asked, 'O brahmana! What is supremely beneficial? What action enables one to obtain happiness? How
does one avoid grief and agitation? I wish to know about this.'"

'Bhishma said, "Tarkshya[Arishtanemi was descended from Tarkshya.] was knowledgable about all the sacred texts. He also knew that the person who was
before him deserved to hear virtuous words. Having been asked, he said, 'The real happiness in the world is the
happiness that comes from emancipation. People do not understand this, because they are attached to sons and animals and anxious about riches and grain. If the intelligence is full of attachment and if the atman is not tranquil,
treatment is impossible. A stupid person who is tied to the bonds of affection cannot be free. I will tell you about
the bonds that result from affection. Listen to them. Using the ears and the head, one is capable of knowing and
severing them. At the right time, one must have offspring. When they attain youth, after ascertaining that they are
capable of earning a living, one should be cheerful and roam around free. When one's wife has had a son that she
is devoted to, when she is aged and is affectionately attended to by that son, know that this is the time to depart and
search for a superior objective. However, whether one has obtained offspring or one has not obtained offspring, the
senses and the objects of the senses have been pursued in the proper way. Therefore, one should be cheerful and
roam free. One has performed one's tasks. One should be inquisitive and cheerful, roaming freely. One must be
equal vis-à-vis what has been gained and the reasons that do not lead to any gain. I have recounted this briefly to
you. I will again tell you in detail about the objective of emancipation. Listen. A free man roams around happily in
this world, bereft of fear. There is no doubt that a man who has sentiments of attachment is destroyed, just like insects and ants engaged in the accumulation of food. Those who are detached are happy in this world. Those with
attachments are destroyed. A person whose intelligence has turned towards emancipation has no business to think
about his relatives, such as, "How will these people survive without me?" A creature is born on its own. A creature
grows on its own. A creature advances towards happiness, unhappiness and death on its own. In this world, people
do not obtain anything because of anything that they have done, or because of the food and garments that have
been stored up by their mother and father. It is all because of what they have done earlier. On earth, the one who
ordain has laid down food for all living beings. Though people run after it, this has actually been determined by
their own acts. A man is himself like a lump of clay. He is always under someone else's control. What is the reason
behind sustaining one's relatives? Instead, one should be firm in protecting one's atman. While you look on, your
relatives will be slain by death, even if you make great efforts. Therefore, know your own atman. While they are
still alive and you are engaged in sustaining and protecting them, you may have to give it up incomplete, since you
end up dying. In that way, when your relatives die, you will never know whether they are happy or miserable.
Therefore, you should know your own atman. While you are alive, these people die or are freed because of their
own deeds. Therefore, one should turn one's intelligence towards ensuring welfare for the atman. In this world,
since one knows this, how does one determine who belongs to whom? Therefore, fix your mind on emancipation. I
am entreating you again. A man who has conquered hunger and thirst and similar sentiments, and also anger, greed
and confusion, such a spirited person is indeed free. If a man is not distracted by gambling, drinking, women and
hunting and is not confused, such a person is free. If a man is only anxious about what he will enjoy from one day
to another day and from one night to another night, his intelligence is said to be tainted. A person who always realizes that his birth is due to nothing but attachment for women, such a person is free. In this world, a person who
knows the truth about the birth, destruction and exertion of beings is indeed free. A person who sees no difference
between a handful of corn and thousands of crores of carts loaded with it, or a person who sees no difference between a palace and a clump of bamboos is free. The world suffers from death and is afflicted by disease and oppressed by famine. A person who sees this is free. A person who sees it in this way is happy and content. A person
who does not see this, is destroyed. If a person is satisfied with only a trifle, he is free in this world. A person who
sees that everything is destroyed, as if by fire, and is not touched by sentiments on account of this, is free. If a person regards a bed and the bare earth, or shali rice and awful food, as equal, he is free. If a person regards linen and
grass or rags, silk and bark, sheepskin and ordinary leather, as equal, such a person is free. A person who sees that
everything in this world results from the five elements and having seen this, acts in accordance with this, is free. If
a person regards happiness and unhappiness, gain and lack of gain, victory and defeat, like and dislike, fear and
anxiety[Lack of fear, or lack of anxiety, would have fit better.] as equal, he is always free. The body is full of many taints, it is a store of imperfections like blood, urine
and excrement. A person who sees it in this way is free. It is subject to decay, wrinkles, emaciation, paleness,
bending down and old age. One who sees it in this way is free. In the course of time, there is impotence, weakness
of sight, deafness and a slowdown in the life force. One who sees it in this way is free. The rishis, the gods and the
asuras have gone from this world to other superior worlds. One who sees it in this way is free. There are thousands
of powerful lords of the earth who have had to leave the earth and depart. A person who knows this is free. In this
world, the accumulation of riches is extremely difficult. Hardship is extremely easy. There is misery on account of
relatives. A person who sees this is free. There are offspring without qualities. There are people without qualities.
If a person repeatedly sees this in the world, why should he not hanker after emancipation? There may be a man
who sees everything in the world on the basis of the intelligence of the sacred texts. He sees that everything human
is without substance. Such a person is free in every way. Having heard these words of mine, you should always
roam around as if you are free. Whether you pursue garhasthya or whether you pursue emancipation, act so that
your intelligence is not clouded.' On hearing these words attentively, the lord of the earth[Sagara.] protected the subjects,
acquiring qualities that are conducive to emancipation."'
