Vaishampayana said, 'When the lord of the Dasharhas[Krishna is the lord of the Dasharhas.] had left, Yudhishthira, Bhimasena, Arjuna, the twins,
Krishna[Droupadi.] and the priest[Dhoumya.] ascended chariots that were extremely expensive and yoked to supreme horses. In
forms that resembled that of Bhutapati[Literally, Bhutapati means the lord (pati) of beings (bhuta) and is one of Shiva's names. The Pandavas
looked like Shiva because they were dressed in skins and had matted hair.], the warriors left for the forest[They were already in the forest. So they left for another forest.]. They gave golden coins, garments
and cattle to those who were knowledgeable in studies, letters and mantras[That is, the brahmanas.]. They were led by twenty armed
servants with bows, shields, yellow arrows[This is odd. The text says pitan, which means yellow. Arrows can be yellow if they are made of brass, but
that seems unlikely. Perhaps the text should have said diptan, meaning blazing or radiant. That fits better.], bowstrings, implements and arrows. All of them followed behind.
Indrasena[Yudhishthira's charioteer.] swiftly collected the garments of the princess[Droupadi.], her nurses, maidservants and ornaments into another chariot and followed them.

'Then the citizens went to the best of the Kurus[Yudhishthira.]. With dejected minds, they circumambulated him. All the
brahmanas happily pronounced their blessings, as did all the chiefs of Kurujangala. With his brothers, Dharmaraja
happily greeted them back. The great-souled lord stood there for some time, to see the great numbers of people in
Kurujangala. The great-souled bull among the Kurus felt for them the way a father feels for his sons. For the chief
of the Bharata lineage, they too felt the way sons feel for their father. The people approached in large numbers and
stood around the chief of the Kurus. They lamented, "Oh, Protector!", "Oh, dharma!" and the like, and tears rolled
down all their shamed faces. "You are the supreme lord of the Kurus and we are subjects[The citizens are saying this.]. O Dharmaraja!
Where are you going, leaving all the inhabitants of the cities and the countryside, like a father deserting his sons?
Shame on the cruel-minded son of Dhritarashtra! Shame on the evil-minded Soubala and Karna! Those evil ones
wish for destruction. O Indra among men! You are always devoted to dharma, but they harm you. O great-souled
one! You have yourself established a great and unmatched city that is as radiant as a city of the gods.
Shatakratuprastha is unfailing in deeds. O Dharmaraja! You are ours and where are you going, leaving us and that?
Great-souled Maya built an unmatched sabha for you that was like the sabhas of the gods. It was like divine maya
and had divine mysteries. O Dharmaraja! You are ours and where are you going, leaving us and that?" Then energetic Bibhatsu, learned in dharma, kama and artha, spoke in a loud voice to the gathering, "The king will make his
home in the forest so as to rob the enemies of all their fame. With the brahmanas at the forefront, separately and
collectively, let all the ascetics approach us and bless us. Let those who are learned in dharma and artha exactly tell
us how we will attain our supreme success." O king! When these words were uttered by Arjuna, all the brahmanas
and all the varnas were delighted and rejoiced. They circumambulated the one who was supreme among all those
who uphold dharma[This is a reference to Arjuna.]. They said farewell to Partha[Yudhishthira.], Vrikodara, Dhananjaya, Yajnaseni[Droupadi.] and the twins.
Then they took Yudhishthira's permission and sorrowfully returned to the kingdom, to wherever they lived.'
