Vaishampayana said, 'After listening to Kunti's words, maharatha Bhishma and Drona spoke these words to Duryodhana, who was beyond control. "O tiger among men! You have heard the words Kunti spoke in Krishna's presence. They are foremost and full of meaning. They are in conformity with supreme dharma. With Vasudeva's approval, the Kounteyas will act accordingly. O Kourava! They will not be pacified without the kingdom. You oppressed the Parthas and Droupadi in the assembly hall. But they were then restrained by the noose of dharma and
had to tolerate it. However, Arjuna, skilled in the use of weapons, and Bhima, firm in his resolution, and Gandiva,
the two quivers[Arjuna's inexhaustible quivers.], the chariot and the standard, Yudhishthira and Vasudeva as the ally, will no longer forgive. O
mighty-armed one! Earlier, you have yourself witnessed how the intelligent Partha vanquished everyone in battle,
in the city of Virata. The nivatakavacha danavas, terrible in their deeds, were burnt in battle with his roudra
weapon, the weapon with flames. Karna and the others and you yourself with your armour and chariot, were freed
at the time of the expedition of the cattle. This is sufficient proof. O foremost among Bharatas! Make peace with
your brothers, the Pandavas. Save this entire earth, which is headed towards the jaws of death. Your elder
brother's[Yudhishthira's.] conduct is in accordance with dharma. He is affectionate. He is gentle in speech. He is pure. Get rid of
these evil intentions and go to that tiger among men. If the Pandava sees that you have laid down your bow, the illustrious one will smoothen his brows and bring peace to our lineage. Having gone to him with your advisers, embrace that son of a king. O destroyer of enemies! Honour the king, as you used to do earlier. Let Kunti's son, Yudhishthira, Bhima's elder brother, embrace you in his arms with affection when you greet him. Bhima is supreme
among warriors. He has shoulders, thighs and arms like a lion and his arms are round and large. Let him embrace
you with those arms. Kunti's son, Gudakesha Partha Dhananjaya, has a neck like a lion and eyes like lotuses. Let
him salute you. The sons of the two Ashvins are tigers among men and are unmatched in their beauty on earth. Let
them affectionately honour you, as they would for an elder. Let these kings, with Dasharha at the forefront, release
tears of joy. O king! Having discarded your vanity, be united with your brothers. Together with your brothers, rule
the entire earth. Having happily embraced each other, let these kings return. O Indra among kings! Refrain from
war. Listen to the reasons of your well-wishers. In the case of a war, the certain destruction of the kshatriyas can be
seen. The stars are against us. Birds and animals are behaving in a terrible way. Flaming meteors are seen to descend on your army. O lord of the earth! Our mounts are miserable and seem to be weeping. Vultures are circling
our soldiers in every direction. The city and the king's residence no longer seem to be as they used to be before.
The directions are blazing and jackals are inauspiciously howling in every direction. Listen to the words of your
father and mother and of your well-wishers. O mighty-armed one! Peace or war depends on you. O destroyer of
enemies! If you do not heed the advice of your well-wishers, you will see your soldiers oppressed by Partha's arrows. You will hear Bhima's loud roars and see his strength in battle. On hearing these and Gandiva's roar, you
will remember my[The singular is used, which means that it is Bhishma speaking.] words. If you do not find my words to be acceptable, all of this will come to pass."'
