'Markandeya said, "Shiva[Strictly speaking, Shivaa.] was the wife of Angiras. She was endowed with conduct, beauty and qualities. O
lord of men! The goddess assumed her form first. The beautiful lady went to Agni and said, 'O Agni! I am tormented by desire and you should satisfy my desire. O god! If you do not do this, know that I will kill myself. O
Agni! I am the wife of Angiras and my name is Shiva. I have decided to come here after consulting my
friends[The other wives.].' Agni asked, 'How did you know that I was suffering from desire? How did all the others, the beloved
wives of the saptarshis, come to know this?' Shiva said, 'You have always been our beloved. But we were afraid of
you. Now that we have got to know about your desire through signs, they have sent me to you. O Agni! I have
come here to have intercourse with you. Now quickly satisfy the desire we feel. The mothers[The other wives.] are waiting for
my return.' Extremely happy, Agni then lived with Shiva.

'"The goddess was pleased with this union and caught the semen in her hand. She thought, 'If people see this
form in the forest, they will speak about the misdeeds of the wives of the brahmanas with Agni. Therefore, to prevent this, I will become a Garudi and will easily escape from this forest[Garudi is the feminine of the Garuda bird. Garuda is also known as Suparna and Suparni is the feminine.].' She then became a Suparni and left
the great forest. She saw Mount Shveta, covered extremely well with reeds. The mountain was guarded by extraordinary seven-hooded serpents, with poison in their eyes. It was populated by rakshasas, pishachas, masses of
terrible demons, female rakshasas and many animals and birds. She quickly went to the mountain peak that was
difficult of access. She then hurriedly hurled the semen into a golden well. Then the goddess assumed the forms of
the other wives of the great-souled saptarshis and united with Agni. But she was not able to assume the celestial
form of Arundhati[Vasishtha's wife.], because of her faithfulness towards her husband and because of the power of her austerities.
O supreme among the Kuru lineage! Driven by desire, Svaha hurled Agni's semen into the well six times.

'"On the first day of the lunar fortnight, the energy of the semen that had fallen down gave birth to a son. He
was worshipped by the rishis and because the semen had fallen down, he became Skanda[Skanda is another name for Kartikeya or Kumara. Guha is another of his names, as is Mahasena. Skanna
means fallen or fallen down, and Skanda is derived from that.]. He had six heads and
twice that many ears. He had twelve eyes and twelve arms. But Kumara had one neck and one torso. The child assumed form on the second lunar day and became a child on the third lunar day. Guha's limbs were developed on
the fourth lunar day. He was surrounded by a great mass of red clouds, with lightning in them, and looked like the
sun rising on a gigantic red cloud. He held a giant bow in his hands, which made the body hair stand up. For the
destruction of the enemies of the gods, it was placed there by the slayer of Tripura[Shiva is the slayer of Tripura.]. Seizing that supreme bow,
he roared with a great strength, and this terrified the three worlds, with all their mobile and immobile objects. The
roar was like that of masses of giant clouds and on hearing this, the great nagas Chitra and Airavata jumped up. On
seeing them fall, Agni's son, with radiance like that of the morning sun, grabbed them with two of his hands. He
held a spear in another hand. The one with the gigantic form, supreme among strong ones, grasped a cock in one
hand[The word used is tamrachuda. This means cock. But since tamra also means coppery red, the cock may
have had this hue.]. Having grasped the cock, the immensely strong one roared terribly and sported. The strong one grasped a
supreme conch shell in two of his arms and blew on it, striking fear even among powerful beings. As he played repeatedly, he pounded the sky with two of his other hands. It seemed as if Mahasena was about to drink up the three
worlds with his mouths. On the mountain peak, the one whose soul was infinite, looked like the sun's rays at the
time of sunrise. The one whose valour was extraordinary sat on the mountain peak. The one whose soul was infinite looked at the directions with his many faces. He saw the different types of beings and roared again. On hearing
those roars, many beings fell down. They were terrified and anxious and sought refuge with him. All the beings of
different varnas sought refuge with the god whom the brahmanas dub the greatest of all great companions. Arising,
the mighty-armed one comforted all beings. He then drew his bow and shot arrows at the great Mount Shveta.
With those arrows, Mount Krouncha, the son of the Himalayas, was rent asunder. Through that breach, swans and
vultures travel to Mount Meru. On being shattered, the mountain fell down, uttering terrible lamentations. On seeing it fall, other mountains also screamed miserably. The supremely strong one heard those piteous lamentations.
But he was not moved. The one whose soul is infinite, raised his spear and roared. The great-souled one then
hurled his great spear and swiftly cleft the terrible peak of Mount Shveta. Having been thus shattered, Mount
Shveta was miserable. Frightened of the great-souled one, it left the earth and arose, with the other mountains. This
pained the earth and it trembled on all sides. In distress, it sought refuge with Skanda and was made strong again.
The mountains also worshipped him and returned to earth. The worlds now worship Skanda on the fifth day of
shuklapaksha."'
