'"Shounaka said, 'Therefore, since your senses have been agitated, I will speak to you about dharma. You are prosperous, immensely strong and content and are looking towards dharma. Having been terrible earlier, you have now
become extremely distinguished. O king! Favour all beings through your own conduct. In this world, there is good
and bad in everything. You were like that earlier. But you are now looking towards dharma. O Janamejaya! You
gave up extremely wonderful food and objects of pleasure and resorted to austerities. These things seem extraordinary to beings. There is nothing extraordinary in a weak person becoming generous, or in a miserable person resorting to the store of austerities. It is said that this conduct is close to their state of being. This
wretchedness[That Janamejaya has voluntarily reduced himself to. He is neither weak,
nor miserable (in riches).] has not been considered properly. Therefore, one must examine it properly. Only then will one appreciate its qualities. O lord of the earth! Sacrifices, donations, compassion, the Vedas and truth-these are the five
things that purify. Extremely severe austerities constitute the sixth. O Janamejaya! This is the supreme form of purification for kings. If you accept this completely, you will obtain supreme dharma. Visiting auspicious spots is
said to be the supreme purifier. On this, the song sung by Yayati is recounted. "A mortal can obtain a long life, or
even live again, by attentively performing sacrifices alone. Thereafter, having renounced, he should observe austerities." Kurukshetra is said to be an auspicious region and Prithudaka[Pehowa in Kurukshetra district.], on the banks of the Sarasvati. If a person
bathes or drinks there, he need not be tormented about premature death[Literally, death the next day.]. You must go to the great lakes,
Pushkara, Prabhasa and Manasa, to the north. Having gone to Kaloda[Also known as Kalodaka, Mundkol lake in Kashmir.], one obtains one's breath of life again.
You should go to the confluence of the Sarasvati and the Drishadvati. You must study and observe good conduct in
all these places, touching the waters there. He[Yayati.] said that renunciation and sannyasa is sacred and supreme dharma. On this, a song composed by Satyavat is recited. "Be as truthful as a child, without any auspicious or wicked
deeds. Then, since there will be no unhappiness for all the beings in this world, how can there be happiness[Both unhappiness and happiness are transitory illusions.]?
This is the natural state of all beings. In general, this is characteristic of the lives of those who give up all kinds of
association and abandon both good and wicked deeds." I will now tell you about the tasks that are best for a king.
Use your strength and generosity to again conquer heaven. A man who possesses strength and energy becomes the
lord of dharma. For the sake of the happiness of brahmanas, roam around this earth. Since you disrespected them
earlier, placate them now. This is despite being condemned and abandoned by many of them. O learned one! Have
knowledge of your own self. Do not be enraged and injure them. Be engaged in your own tasks and work towards
supreme welfare. A king can be as cold as ice, or as fiery as the fire. O scorcher of enemies! Others can be like a
plough or thunder[A plough uproots enemies, thunder scorches them.]. Do not think that there will be no remnants[Of the lineage.], or that treatment is not possible. Thinking that
there is nothing left of your existence, do not associate with those who are wicked. If one repents one's wicked
deed, one is freed from one-fourth of the sin. If one decides that one will not act in this way again, one is freed
from a second one-fourth. If one resolves to follow dharma, one is freed from a third one-fourth. A man who desires prosperity should only think about welfare. Those who smell good fragrances also smell like that. Those who
smell foul smells also smell like that. A person who devotes himself to austerities is immediately freed from his
sins. A person who has been accused is freed if he worships the fire for a year. A person guilty of feticide is freed
if he worships the fire for three years. If a person guilty of killing foetuses, saves as many living beings as would
naturally have been killed[The number saved is equal to the number of foetuses killed.], he is freed. Manu has said that if one immerses oneself in the water and chants
Aghamarshana three times[This is a reference to the Aghamarshana suktam (after the sage
Aghamarshana) from the Rig Veda. This is used for consecration ceremonies, ablutions and at times of bathing.], one obtains the benefits equal to those from the final bath after a horse sacrifice. One
is swiftly freed from sins and obtains great reverence. Beings seek his favours, as if they are dumb and mute. O
king! Once, all the gods and the asuras assembled and asked Brihaspati, the preceptor of the gods. "O maharshi!
You know about the fruits that result from dharma and also about those that lead to hell, the world of the wicked.
When a person has performed both of these well, which of these triumphs over the other? O maharshi! Tell us
about the fruits of deeds. How does a person with auspicious conduct dispel evil?"

'"'Brihaspati replied, "Having ignorantly performed wicked deeds earlier, if a person deliberately performs auspicious deeds, his auspicious conduct dispels that evil, just as a dirty garment is cleansed with a caustic substance.
A man who has committed a wicked deed should not think that he has been destroyed. Without any malice and
with devotion, he should desire to ensure welfare, just as a hole in a garment can be covered with a good piece.
Even after having performed a wicked deed, a man can obtain welfare, just as the sun arises again and drives away
all the darkness. If one acts so as to ensure welfare, all sins can be driven away."'"

'Bhishma said, "Indrota spoke in this way to King Janamejaya. Having said this, following the prescribed rites,
Shounaka performed a horse sacrifice. After this, the king's sin was cleansed. He was full of prosperity and his
form was like that of a blazing fire. The destroyer of enemies entered his own kingdom, like the full moon rising in
the sky."'
