'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! On hearing that his aged brahmana father had been killed by Dhrishtadyumna
through adharma, what did Ashvatthama say? Human, varuna, agneya, brahma, aindra and narayana weapons were
always vested in the valiant one[Divine weapons respectively named after Varuna, Agni, Brahma, Indra and Narayana.]. O Sanjaya! He was always devoted to dharma. On hearing that the preceptor had
been killed by Dhrishtadyumna through the use of adharma, what did Ashvatthama say? The great-souled one obtained his knowledge of Dhanurveda from Rama[Rama is Parashurama, Dhanurveda is the science of fighting.]. Wishing to be like a preceptor towards his son, he gave him all
these divine weapons. There is only one person in the world whom men desire to possess qualities that are superior
to those in their own selves. That is the son. There is no one else. All great-souled preceptors pass on the secrets to
their sons and to their devoted students. O Sanjaya! He especially obtained all those skills. In a battle, Sharadvati's
brave son has become like a second Drona. He is like Rama in knowledge of the sacred texts and like Purandara in
battle. He is Kartavirya's equal in valour and Brihaspati's equal in intelligence[Kartavirya is Kartavirya Arjuna and Brihaspati is the preceptor of the gods.]. The young one is like a mountain
in his fortitude and like the fire in his energy. He is like the ocean in gravity and like a serpent's venom in his
anger. He is firm in wielding the bow and has conquered exhaustion. He is the foremost among rathas in the world.
He is as swift as the wind in speed. He roams around like an enraged Yama. When he is stationed in battle, the
earth itself seems to suffer. Truth is his valour and the brave one is not distressed in battle. He has learnt the Vedas.
He knows about sacrifices. He is skilled in Dhanurveda. Like the great ocean and like Rama, Dasharatha's son, he
is not agitated. In the battle, a person who followed dharma was killed by Dhrishtadyumna through the use of adharma. On hearing about the preceptor's death, what did Ashvatthama say? The great-souled one was created for
Dhrishtadyumna's death, just as Panchala, Yajnasena's son, was generated for Drona's destruction. He[Drona.] was killed
violently by a cruel and wicked one who did not possess foresight. On hearing about the preceptor's death, what
did Ashvatthama say?"

'Sanjaya replied, "O bull among men! On hearing that his father had been killed through deception by the
wicked one, Drona's son's eyes filled with tears and he was angry. O Indra among kings! Because of the rage, his
body seemed divine. It was like that of the Destroyer, wishing to consume beings at the end of a yuga. He repeatedly wiped his eyes, which were full of tears. He sighed in anger and spoke these words to Duryodhana. 'My father was brought down by inferior ones after he had cast aside his weapons. A wicked act has been committed by
those who should have upheld the standard of dharma. Dharma's son acted ignobly and cruelly. I have heard
everything about all that now. If one is engaged in a battle, there will either be victory, or there will be defeat. O
king! Of the two, death is always praised. If death results in a battle where the fight is according to norms of fairness, there should not be sorrow. This is what brahmanas have said. There is no doubt that my father has gone to
the world reserved for heroes. I should not sorrow for that tiger among men because he has been slain. However,
though he was engaged in dharma, his hair was seized while all the soldiers looked one. That is tearing out my vitals. Because of desire, anger, ignorance, insolence and folly, acts of adharma are performed to subdue others. In
that way, Parshata has performed this great act of adharma. The evil-souled one has acted cruelly and has certainly
disregarded me. Dhrishtadyumna will witness the extremely terrible consequences of that. He has performed an
extremely ignoble deed and so has the liar Pandava. They resorted to deception against the preceptor, when he had
cast aside his weapons. That is the reason the earth will drink Dharmaraja's blood today. I will use every means to
kill Panchala. I will kill Dhrishtadyumna, the perpetrator of a wicked deed, in the battle, whether the task be a gentle or a violent one. O Kourava! Having killed Panchala, I will obtain peace. O tiger among men! This is the reason
men desire sons, so that they may be saved from great calamities in this world and the next. My father was reduced
to a miserable state, as if he had no relatives, and this was while I, his son and his student, was still alive, like a
mountain. Shame on my divine weapons. Shame on my arms. Shame on my valour. Though he possessed a son,
Drona's hair was seized. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! I will act so that I am freed of the debt I owe to
my father, who has now gone to the world hereafter. Noble ones never praise themselves. However, because I am
angry at my father's death, I am now speaking about my manliness. The Pandavas, with Janardana, will witness
my valour today. I will crush all the soldiers, as if it is the end of a yuga. O bull among men! While I am stationed
on my chariot, gods, gandharvas, asuras and rakshasas will be incapable of defeating me in the battle today. In the
world, there is no one superior to me and Arjuna in use of weapons. I will blaze amidst the soldiers, like the rays of
the sun, and use weapons created by the gods. In the battle today, I will use them against the son of the one with
the lean horses[Drupada is being described as the one with the lean horses.]. I will exhibit my valour and crush the Pandavas. O king! Today, all the directions will be enveloped with showers of my sharp arrows and those on our side will see this. I will shroud everything with nets of
arrows that make a fearful noise. I will bring down the enemy, like trees uprooted by a violent storm. O Kouravya!
Bibhatsu, Janardana, Bhimasena, the twins, King Yudhishthira, the evil-souled Parshata, Shikhandi and Satyaki do
not know the weapons that I possess, or techniques for releasing and withdrawing them. In earlier times, Narayana
appeared before my father in the form of a brahmana, who worshipped him in accordance with the proper rites and
tendered him offerings. Having received them himself, the illustrious one offered to grant him a boon. My father
asked for the supreme narayana weapon. O king! The illustrious one, supreme among the gods, told him[Drona.], "There
will never be another man who will be as great a warrior as you. O brahmana! However, you must never use this
suddenly. This weapon never returns without killing the enemy at whom it has been aimed. O lord! But it is impossible to know whom it will not kill. It might even slay those who should not be killed. Therefore, it should not be
used[That is, it should not be used without proper care.]. O scorcher of enemies! In a battle, this great weapon must not be used to kill those who are running away,
those who have cast aside their weapons, enemies who have yielded and those who have sought refuge. In a battle,
if it is used to kill those who should not be slain, it will always oppress the user himself." My father received it.
The lord also told me, "In a battle, with this weapon, your energy will blaze and you will be able to shower down
many divine weapons." Having said this, the illustrious lord went to heaven. That is how my relative[Meaning Drona, his father.] obtained the
narayana weapon. With it, I will drive away the Pandavas, Panchalas, Matysas and Kekayas in the encounter, like
Sachi's consort[Indra. Sachi is Indra's wife.] against the asuras. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! With this, my arrows will be showered
wherever I wish and destroy the valour of the enemy. I will be stationed in the battle and bring down innumerable
showers of stones and use arrows with iron heads to drive away the maharathas. There is no doubt that I will bring
down many different kinds of battleaxes. O scorcher of enemies! With the great narayanastra, I will destroy the
enemy and repulse the Pandavas. The wicked Panchala hates his friends, brahmanas and his preceptor. He has performed an extremely despised deed and will not escape from me with his life.' Having heard Drona's son, the army
returned.

'"Those supreme among men blew on giant conch shells. Cheerfully, they sounded drums and thousands of
smaller drums. The earth roared with the sound of hooves and wheels. That tremendous sound echoed on earth, the
sky and heaven. The Pandavas heard that sound, which was like the thunder of clouds. Those best of rathas united
and consulted each other. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having spoken those words, Drona's son touched
water and invoked the divine narayana weapon."'
