Yudhishthira said, "The sacred texts urge us-give this, give that. The kings give many things. Which of these
is the best donation?"

'Bhishma replied, "Among the many gifts, the earth is said to be the first. It does not move and is indestructible.
Land yields all the supreme objects of desire. It yields garments, jewels, animals, grain and barley. Among all beings, a giver of land prospers for an eternal number of years. As long as the land lasts, a giver of land earns prosperity. O Yudhishthira! There is nothing that is superior to giving land. We have heard that earlier, everyone gave a
little bit of land. Since all of them gave a little bit of land, everyone enjoys the earth. In this world and in the next,
a man sustains himself on the basis of his deeds. The earth is prosperity and is a great goddess. She does agreeable
things for a person who gives her. A lord of the earth who gives the indestructible earth as dakshina is again born
as a man and becomes a king. Enjoyment is dependent on what one has given. That is the determination of dharma.
One must give the earth or give up one's body in battle. It is said that this is supremely beneficial for kshatriyas
and their relatives. We have heard that donating the earth purifies the giver. If a man is wicked in conduct, has
killed a brahmana or has indulged in falsehood-all these sins are cleansed. One is freed from these sins. If a king
has performed wicked deeds, the virtuous wish to accept only land from him and nothing else. The earth purifies,
like a mother. There is an eternal and sacred name of the goddess and that is Priyadatta[Something that is agreeable in the act of giving, both to the giver and to the receiver.]. This is a name known to
both the giver and the recipient, because it is supremely loved. A king who gives the earth to a brahmana obtains it
back. However, an owner of land must never give that prosperous gift of land to an unworthy recipient. If he acts
in this way, that gift vanishes. There is no doubt that a person who desires land should act in this way and no other.
A person who takes away a virtuous person's land will never get any land. A person who gives land to virtuous
people will get land. After death, such a person, with dharma in his soul, will obtain great fame. O king! The brahmanas always praise a person who gives land to righteous people. He has no enemies and the entire earth praises
him. In an attempt to ensure subsistence, if a man commits any wicked deeds, all those are cleansed by giving
away as much of land as can be covered by a cow hide. Kings who are narrow in their deeds and terrible in their
deeds should be told that they can be purified by making the supreme gift of land. The ancient ones thought that
there was little difference between a person who performs a horse sacrifice and one who gives land to virtuous
people. Learned ones may have doubts about other kinds of good deeds. But they are incapable of entertaining
doubts about the supreme gift of land. An immensely wise person gives land, since this is the same as giving gold,
silver, garments, jewels, pearls, riches and everything else. Austerities, sacrifices, learning, good conduct, lack of
greed, devotion to the truth and worship of seniors and the gods-all these are vested in a person who gives away
land. There are those who are engaged in what brings benefit to their masters and cast aside their lives in the field
of battle. They are successful and go to Brahma's world. However, even they are surpassed by those who give
away land. The mother nurtures her son with her milk. In that way, all the tastes on earth favour a person who
gives away land. If a person gives away land, Yama's servants, the staff of punishment, heat, extremely fierce fires
and Varuna's terrible noose are unable to touch him. If a person is tranquil in his soul and gives away land, the ancestors in the world of the ancestors and the gods in the world of the gods are satisfied. If a man gives away land to
someone who is emaciated, about to die and suffering from a means of subsistence, thereby granting him sustenance, this is like performing a sacrifice. With her udders overflowing with milk, a cow rushes towards her calf. O
immensely fortunate one! In that way, the earth runs towards someone who gives away land. If a person gives
away land tilled by the plough, or sown, or with crops, and thereby provides the greatest refuge, all his desires are
met. If a man persuades a brahmana, who has good conduct, sacrifices to the fire and is pure in vows, to accept
land, he doesn't go to Yama's abode. From one day to another, the moon waxes. In that way, every time the land
given by someone yields crops, his own crops increase.

'"In this connection, those who know about the ancient accounts chant a song about land. On hearing this, Jamadagni's son[Parashurama.] gave away the earth to Kashyapa. 'Accept me[The earth.]. Donate me. By giving me, you will obtain me.
Anything given away in this life will be obtained later in the next life.' A brahmana who bases himself on the
brahman and recites this at a funeral ceremony, merges with the brahman. Those who cause great injuries in the
course of undertaking a wicked sacrifice can obtain atonement in this way and save ten generations[In either direction, both ancestors and descendants.]. A person
who knows this injunction of the Vedas also benefits in that way. It has been held that the earth is the eternal origin
of all creatures. After a king has been consecrated, he should be made to hear this. On hearing this, he should give
land to virtuous people and not take it away from them. There is no doubt that all of a king's riches are meant for
brahmanas. The first sign of prosperity in a kingdom is a king who is knowledgable about dharma. If their king
doesn't know about dharma and is a non-believer, they will not awake in happiness. Nor will they sleep happily.
Because of his wicked acts, the men will always be anxious. The many kinds of yoga and kshema will then be nonexistent in the kingdom. However, if the king is wise and follows dharma, they will awake in happiness. They will
also sleep happily. The subjects will also be restrained through the king's auspicious deeds. Yoga and kshema will
shower down and they will prosper in their own tasks. A person who donates the earth is truly a man. He is born in
a noble lineage. He is a friend and is a performer of auspicious deeds. He is benevolent and valorous. Men who
give prosperous tracts of land to brahmanas who are learned in the Vedas blaze in their energy on earth, like suns.
When they are sown on the ground, seeds sprout into crops. In that way, objects of desire are the crops for those
who  give  away  land.  Aditya,  Varuna,  Vishnu,  Brahma,  Soma,  Hutashana[The fire god.]  and  the  illustrious  wielder  of  the
trident[Shiva.] find delight in a person who gives away land. Men are born on earth and it is on earth that they faithfully
wander. There are four kinds of creatures that have the qualities of the earth[Born from wombs, born from eggs, born from sweat and plants and trees.]. O lord of the earth! The earth is the
mother and the father of the universe. O lord of men! There is no other element that is its equal.

'"O Yudhishthira! In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about a conversation between Brihaspati
and Indra. Maghavan performed one hundred sacrifices, giving away copious quantities of dakshina. He then asked
Brihaspati, the supreme among eloquent ones, 'O illustrious one! What is the single gift that ensures bliss in heaven? What grants inexhaustible and excellent fruits? O supreme among eloquent ones! Tell me this.' Thus addressed
by Indra of the gods, the immensely energetic Brihaspati, the priest of the gods, replied to Shatakratu. 'O slayer of
Vritra! An immensely wise person who gives gold, gives cattle and gives land is freed from all sins. O Indra of the
gods! O lord! But there is nothing that is superior to giving away land. I think it is superior and the learned ones
have also said this. O best of the gods! Among the brave ones who are killed in battle and among the ones who
give to those who solicit gifts, there is no one who is superior to the one who gives away land. There are those who
are engaged in ensuring the welfare of their masters and give up their lives in battle. Those brave ones go to Brahma's world. But they cannot surpass the ones who give away land. A man who gives away land saves eleven generations of his lineage, the five generations that will follow and the six generations that have gone to the nether regions. O Purandara! A man who gives away the earth, with all its riches, is freed from all sins and obtains greatness in the world of heaven. A king who gives away the prosperous earth, with qualities that satisfy all the objects
of desire, becomes the king of kings because of that supreme gift. O Vasava! When the earth, with all its objects of
desire, are given to someone like Kashyapa, all the creatures think that it has been given to them. O one with the
thousand eyes! It is like a cow that yields all the objects of desire and satisfies the best of wishes. A man who gives
this, goes to heaven. O Indra of the gods! It has flows of honey. The flows of water in the rivers are like milk and
curds. The donation of land satisfies everything. O king! By giving away land, a king is said to be freed from all
sins. There is no other gift that is superior to the giving away of land. If a man uses his sword to conquer the earth,
up to the frontiers of the ocean, and then gives it away, men in this world talk about him as long as fame is talked
about. O Purandara! If a man gives away the earth with all its sacred juices, then the qualities that he has obtained
by donating land are never destroyed in this world. O Shakra! A king who desires his own prosperity and desires
his own happiness must always follow the proper rites and give away land to worthy recipients. If a man commits
sins  and  then  gives  away  land  to  brahmanas,  he  abandons  all  those  sins,  like  a  snake  casts  aside  old  skin.  O
Shakra! If a man gives away the earth, with its oceans, rivers, mountains and groves, that is like giving away
everything. The donation of the earth is like giving away lakes, wells, streams and rivers. Because of the earth's
moisture, it is like giving away the best of juices. The donation of the earth is like giving away herbs full of juices,
trees that are covered with flowers and fruits and groves and hills. There are sacrifices like agnishtoma, performed
with the giving away of a lot of dakshina. However, the fruits obtained from those are nothing compared to those
obtained from giving away land. The giver of land saves ten generations[Of his lineage, ancestors, as well as descendants.]. However, having given land, if one subsequently takes that away, ten generations are cast into hell. If a person promises to give, but does not give later, or
having given, if he takes it back, on the instruction of Death, such a person is bound up in Varuna's nooses. Those
who offer oblations into the fire, always perform sacrifices, tend to their beloved guests even if they lack servants
and sustain the best of brahmanas-are not approached by Yama. O Purandara! The king must repay the debt that
he owes to brahmanas. That apart, he must save the weak and the distressed among other varnas. O lord of the
gods! O best among the gods! One must never touch land that belongs to someone else, especially to a brahmana
who lacks a means of subsistence. If tears fall from the eyes of such miserable and suffering brahmanas because
the land has been taken away, then three generations of the lineage are destroyed. O one with the thousand eyes! If
a person re-establishes a king who has been dislodged from his kingdom, such a person obtains greatness in the
vault of heaven. There may be a person who conquers the earth with the valour of his arms and that land is always
full of sugar cane, barley, wheat, cattle, horses and other kinds of mounts, being covered with jewels above the surface, as well as all kinds of riches under the surface. If he gives this away, that is known as a land sacrifice and
earns the inexhaustible regions. All his sins are washed away. He is radiant, revered by the virtuous. If he gives
away the earth to virtuous people, he obtains greatness in this world. O Shakra! If a drop of oil falls on water, it extends on every side. In that way, if land is given away, the fruits are enhanced on every side. O Shakra! There are
brave kings who are the ornaments of assemblies. Without retreating, they are slain on the field of battle and obtain
Brahma's world. Noble women, adorned in divine garlands and well versed in dancing and singing, tend to them
there. O Indra of the gods! Those who give land always obtain heaven[The text has a break in continuity. The givers of land obtain the same fruits as the kings who die in the field of
battle.]. They obtain bliss in heaven and are worshipped by the gods and the gandharvas. This happens to those who properly give away land to brahmanas. O Indra of the gods! If a man gives away land, one hundred apsaras, adorned with divine garlands, always serve him. If
a person gives away land, he obtains a conch shell, an excellent seat, an umbrella, excellent horses, excellent elephants, flowers and stores of gold. His commands are never disobeyed and he is greeted with sounds of victory. O
Purandara! Heaven constitutes the flowers and fruits of giving away land. A man who gives away land, the origin
of immortality, obtains gold, flowers, herbs, kusha grass, refined gold and pastures. There is no gift that is equal to
giving away land. There is no preceptor who is equal to the mother. There is no dharma equal to the truth. There is
no wealth equal to donations.' Having heard this from the son of Angiras, Vasava gave the son of Angiras the
earth, with its riches and jewels. If these chants about the merit of giving away land are recited at funeral ceremonies, rakshasas and asuras will not take away any of the shares. There is then no doubt that anything offered to
the ancestors will become inexhaustible. Therefore, on the occasion of a funeral ceremony, a learned brahmana
must make other brahmanas listen to this, while they are engaged in the act of eating. O unblemished one! O tiger
among the Bharata lineage! I have told you about the best of gifts. What do you wish to hear again?"'
