'"Bhrigu replied, 'The living being, what has been given and what has been done, are not destroyed. The being
goes into another body. It is the body alone that is destroyed. Though the being has resorted to the body, when it is
destroyed, the being is not destroyed. It is like the fire not being destroyed when the kindling has been consumed.'

'"Bharadvaja said, 'If it is like the fire and faces no destruction, then it is also the case that when there is no kindling, the fire cannot be seen. When there is no kindling, I know that the fire has been pacified and destroyed. If
there is no movement and no existence can be discerned, that is proof enough.'

'"Bhrigu replied, 'When there is no kindling, it is true that the fire can no longer be seen. It goes up into space,
because there is no longer any refuge it can adhere to. In that way, after the body has been discarded, the being is
located in space. There is no doubt that, like the fire, it cannot be discerned because it is subtle. It is fire that sustains prana and that holds up the living being. The fire holds up the breath of life and is destroyed when breathing
is restrained. Therefore, when the fire in the body is extinguished, the body loses its consciousness. It falls down
on the ground and the earth is the destination. This is true of all mobile and immobile objects. The wind goes up
into space and the fire follows them. Those three are united and two of them[The water and the earth.] exist on the ground. The wind exists
where there is space. The fire exists where there is wind. They are known to have no form. Water and the earth
have form.'

'"Bharadvaja said, 'O unblemished one! If fire, wind, earth, space and water exist in all bodies, then what are
the signs of a living being? Tell me that. I wish to know about life in the bodies of living beings, since those five
come together[The five elements.], one is engaged in the five acts[The five organs of action.] and one is united with the five kinds of discernment[The five senses.]. The body
is a mixture of flesh and blood, a store of fat, sinews and bones. When that is destroyed, the living being can no
longer be discerned. The body of a living being consists of the five elements. When that is not there, who experiences pain and physical and mental sorrow? How can a living being hear, if there are no ears to hear with, or if his
mind is elsewhere? O maharshi! Therefore, life is futile. Sight can see everything when the mind is united with the
eyes. If the mind is anxious, though the eyes see, they do not really see. Then again, when one is asleep, one does
not see, or speak, or hear, or smell. Nor does one experience touch and taste. Who feels joy? Who is angered? Who
grieves? Who suffers? Who is the one who desires, meditates, hates and speaks?'

'"Bhrigu replied, 'Just as the five general elements become one in the body, it is like that in the inner atman too.
That is the one who knows scent, taste, sound, touch, form and the other qualities. These five come together and
become one and are everywhere in the body. The inner atman follows and witnesses these five qualities. It knows
unhappiness and happiness. When it is separated from the body, it no longer experiences these. When there is no
form, no touch and no heat in the fire, the fire in the body is pacified. But though it gives up the body, it is not destroyed. Everything is made out of water. Water manifests itself in bodies. Brahma, the creator of all beings and the
worlds, is in the mind and in the atman. Know the atman, which intends the welfare of all the worlds. It is the one
which seeks refuge in the body, like a drop of water in a lotus. Always know the kshetrajna[The atman is the kshetrajna, the one who knows the field. The field
(kshetra) is the body.], who intends the welfare of all the worlds. Know that tamas, rajas and sattva are the qualities of living beings. Consciousness is said to
be the quality of a living being. It[The atman.] strives and makes everything else strive. Those who know about kshetras say
that the supreme one has created the seven worlds[The supreme one is the brahman or the paramatman. There are actually
fourteen worlds (lokas), seven above and seven below. This is a reference
to the seven above-bhurloka, kharloka, svarloka, maharloka, janarloka,
taparloka and satyaloka (brahmaloka).]. When the body is destroyed, the living being is not destroyed.
Those who are foolish falsely state that it dies. The living being goes to another body. Death is only the destruction
of the body[The text states death in an interesting way, not even using panchatva, but
saying dashardhatva (half of ten) instead.]. This is the way it is with all living beings, moving in subtle and unnoticed ways. Using their attentive intelligence, those who know about the subtle truth can see this. Having eaten and having purified his soul,
through mediation, every night, before and after sleep, a wise person can see his atman within himself. With a
cheerful consciousness, abandoning all auspicious and inauspicious acts, basing oneself on one's joyous atman,
one can obtain infinite happiness. Inside the body, there is a fire in the mind and this is known as the living being.
Prajapati created this. This is the determination of those who have examined living beings and the atman.'"'
