'Sanjaya said, "Having heard Uluka's words, Kunti's son, Yudhishthira, instructed the army to march out, with
Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront. That army had the four kinds of forces-infantry, chariots, elephants and horses.
It was as terrible and unshakeable as the earth itself. It was protected by Bhimasena and the others and maharathas
like Arjuna. Commanded by Dhrishtadyumna, it was invincible and was as pervasive as the ocean. The great
archer from Panchala[Dhrishtadyumna.], unassailable in battle, was at the forefront. Dhrishtadyumna led the troops, desiring an encounter with Drona. In accordance with their strength and inclinations, he assigned the rathas[Ratha means chariot, as well as charioteer. As a charioteer, a ratha is a warrior. A maharatha is in general a
mighty warrior. More specifically, a maharatha is skilled in the use of all weapons and can take on ten thousand
warriors single-handedly. An atiratha is an unrivalled warrior, whose valour is unlimited, greater than a maharatha.]. The suta's son was
assigned to Arjuna, Duryodhana to Bhima, Ashvatthama to Nakula, Shaibya to Kritavarma and Saindhava to
Varshneya Yuyudhana[Varshneya Yuyudhana is Satyaki and Saindhava is Jayadratha.]. In the encounter with Bhishma, he instructed Shikhandi to be at the forefront. Shakuni was
assigned to Sahadeva, Shala to Chekitana, Shalya to Dhrishtaketu, Goutama[Kripa.] to Uttamouja and the five Trigartas to
Droupadi's sons. He assigned Subhadra's son[Abhimanyu.] to Vrishasena and the remaining kings, because he considered him
to be superior even to Partha in battle. Having thus divided the warriors, separately and collectively, the great
archer, whose complexion was like the fire, earmarked Drona as his own portion. The great archer, Dhrishtadyumna, was the commander. The intelligent one arranged battle formations in the prescribed fashion and made up his
mind to do battle. He yoked the soldiers of the Pandavas in the appropriate places. He stood ready on the field of
battle, for the victory of the sons of Pandu."'
