'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! What is to the north and on the eastern side of Meru? O immensely intelligent
one! Tell me everything about Mount Malyavan."

'Sanjaya replied, "O king! To the south of Nila and on the northern side of Meru is Uttara Kuru, inhabited by the
siddhas. The trees there yield sweet fruit and are always full of flowers and fruit. The flowers have excellent fragrance and the fruits are succulent. O lord of men! Some of the trees there yield fruit that satisfy every desire. O
lord of men! Other trees there are known as those that yield milk. They yield milk that is like amrita, with the six
different kinds of taste[Sweet, sour, salty, pungent, bitter and acidic.]. They also yield garments[As bark.] and the fruits are also ornaments. The entire ground is
strewn with jewels and fine golden sand. O lord of men! Everything is pleasant to the touch and there is no mud.
The men who are born there are those who have been dislodged from the world of the gods. Whether on plain or
uneven terrain, everyone is similar in beauty and qualities. Twins are born there and the women are the equals of
apsaras. They drink the milk there and the milk is like amrita. When the twins are born, they grow up equally.
They are similar in beauty and qualities and wear similar garments. O lord! Like chakravakas[The ruddy goose.], they are devoted
to each other. They are without disease, devoid of sorrow and always delighted in their minds. O great king! They
live for eleven thousand years and never abandon each other. There is a bird named Bharunda. It has sharp beaks
and is extremely strong. When they die, this picks up the dead and hurls them into mountainous caverns. O king! I
have briefly described Uttara Kuru to you.

'"I will now describe the eastern side of Meru to you exactly. O lord of the earth! Bhadrashva is the first. There
is a forest of bhadrasala[Either the kadamba or the devadaru (deodar) tree.] there and a large tree named Kalamra. O great king! Kalamra is beautiful and always
has flowers and fruit. This dvipa is one yojana in expanse and is frequented by siddhas and charanas. The men
there are white and possess energy and great strength. The women there are lovely. They are beautiful to look at
and have the complexion of the moon. They have the radiance of the moon. They have the complexion of the
moon. Their faces are like the full moon. Their bodies are as cool as the moon and they are skilled in dancing and
singing. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The lifespan there is ten thousand years. They always remain young by
drinking the juice of Kalamra. To the south of Nila and to the north of Nishadha, there is a large and eternal jambu
tree by the name of Sudarshana. It has fruits that provide every object of desire. It is sacred and is worshipped by
the siddhas and charanas. The eternal Jambudvipa owes its naming to this. O bull among the Bharata lineage! That
king of trees rises up to heaven. O lord of men! It is one thousand and one hundred yojanas tall. When measured
by hand, the fruit of that is two thousand and five hundred cubits in circumference. When ripe, it bursts and falls
down on the ground with a loud noise. O king! It releases a juice that is silvery in colour. O lord of men! The juice
of the jambu fruit becomes a river. Having circled Meru, this goes to Uttara Kuru. O lord of men! People are always delighted at having drunk this juice. Having drunk the juice of this fruit, they do not suffer from old age.
There is a gold named Jambunada there and it is used for divine ornaments. Men who are born there have the complexion of the rising sun. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The fire known as Samvartaka blazes on the summit
of Malyavan. This is the fire of destruction. On the summit of Malyavan, towards the east, are smaller mountains.
Malyavan extends for one thousand and fifty yojanas. Men who are born there have the complexion of gold[The word used is maharajata, which also means turmeric.].
They have all been dislodged from Brahma's world and are knowledgeable about the brahman. They torment
themselves through austerities and hold up their semen. For the sake of protecting beings, they enter the sun. There
are sixty-six thousand of them[These are the valakhilya sages, usually stated to be sixty thousand in number. They are as long as a thumb and
were created from Brahma's body. They precede the sun's chariot.]. They surround the sun and travel ahead of the sun. Having been heated by the
sun for sixty-six thousand years, they enter the lunar circle."'
