Vaishampayana said, 'Seeing that the rakshasa was furious with his sister, Bhimasena laughed in scorn and said,
"O Hidimba! Why are you waking those who are sleeping peacefully? O evil one! Attack me quickly, you eater of
men! Use your blows on me. You should not kill a woman who has done no wrong, especially since she has been
wronged against. Afflicted by desire for me, this woman has no control over herself. She has been goaded by the
bodiless one[Kama, the god of love. He has no body because he was burnt to ashes by Shiva.] who has pervaded her body. O evil one! You bring disrepute to your lineage. Your sister came here
on your instructions and, on seeing my beauty, the timid one was afflicted by desire. O evil-souled rakshasa! The
wrong was committed by Ananga[The god of love.], she has not erred. While I am here, you will not kill a woman. O eater of men!
Come to me and fight it out, one against another. Today, I will singly send you to the land of Yama. O rakshasa!
Your head will be squashed on the ground till it breaks, as if squashed by the foot of a powerful elephant. When I
have killed you in the fight today, your body will be happily torn apart by carnivorous animals, hawks and jackals.
In an instant, I will free this forest of its thorn. It has been polluted for too long a time by those who eat men. Today, your sister will see how I drag the evil one, like a lion drags a large elephant that is the size of a mountain. O
worst of the rakshasas! When you have been killed by me, the men who live in this forest will roam safely in the
forest, without hindrance."

'Hidimba said, "Human! What is the need for this pointless roaring and bragging? Perform the actions first, then
comes the bragging. Don't take long. You think yourself to be powerful and valorous. In your fight with me today,
you will find out that I am stronger. Till that time, I will not harm those who are sleeping and dreaming. I shall first
kill you, the stupid one who speaks such wicked words. After drinking your blood from your body, I will kill them
and then this one[His sister.], who has done that which brought displeasure to me." Having uttered these words, the maneater
stretched out his arms and angrily dashed towards Bhimasena, the conqueror of enemies.

'But the immensely powerful Bhima quickly seized his arms and laughingly flung him down. Seizing the struggling demon with great force, Bhima dragged him eight bow-lengths away, like a lion drags a small deer. At that,
the furious rakshasa clasped the Pandava Bhimasena with great force and let out a terrible roar. Yet again, the immensely strong Bhima dragged him away, so that the sound would not wake his brothers who were happily sleeping. Clasping and dragging each other with great force, both Bhimasena and the rakshasa exhibited supreme
strength. Fighting like two enraged sixty-year-old elephants, they tore down large trees and ripped off the creepers
that grew around. At that great noise, those bulls among men[The Pandavas.] and their mother woke up and saw Hidimba standing before them.'
