Vaishampayana said, 'After Krishna and Baladeva Madhava had left for Dvaravati, with hundreds of Vrishnis,
Andhakas and all the Bhojas, the king who was Dhritarashtra's son, secretly employed messengers and spies and
got to know everything that the Pandavas were attempting. Having heard that Madhava[Krishna.] had left, he himself set
out for the city of Dvaraka[Dvaraka is another name for Dvaravati.]. He took a force with him that was not too large, and superb horses that were equal to
the wind. On that very day, Kounteya Dhananjaya, the son of Pandu, went to the beautiful city of the Anarta[Anarta is the region the Yadavas lived in. So Dvaravati is the city of Anarta.].
Those two tigers among men, descendants of the Kuru lineage, arrived in Dvaraka. They went to Krishna and saw
that he was supine and asleep. When Govinda was asleep, Suyodhana entered. He seated himself on a supreme seat
that was towards Krishna's head. Then the great-souled Kiriti entered. With his hands joined in salutation, he stood
towards Krishna's feet. On waking up, Varshneya saw Kiriti first. He welcomed both of them with the appropriate
honours. Madhusudana asked them the reason for their arrival. Then Duryodhana smiled and told Krishna, "You
should come to my aid in this battle. Your friendship with me and Arjuna is equal. O Madhava! Your relationship
with us is also equal. O Madhusudana! Today, I have come to you first. From ancient times, the virtuous serve
those who arrive first. O Janardana! You are now supreme among the virtuous ones in this world. You always deserve honour. You always follow virtuous conduct."

'Krishna replied, "I have no doubt that you arrived earlier. O king! But I saw Partha Dhananjaya first. O Suyodhana! Since you arrived first and since I saw him first, I will help both of you. But it has been said that the younger
one should have the first choice. Therefore, I will offer the first choice to Partha Dhananjaya. There is a large number of one hundred million cowherds, equal to me in strength. They are famous as Narayanas and all of them are
warriors who have fought in battle. These warriors, who are unassailable, will be the soldiers on one side. I will
not bear weapons and will not fight in the battle. I will be on the other side. O Partha! According to your preferences, choose either of these two first. It is dharma that you should have the right of choice first."'

Vaishampayana said, 'At these words of Krishna, Kunti's son, Dhananjaya, chose Keshava, though he would not
fight in the battle. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Knowing that Krishna was excluded from the battle, Duryodhana was extremely delighted at having obtained the thousands and thousands of warriors. O lord of the earth!
He accepted all those soldiers. Then the fearsomely strong one went to Rohini's immensely strong son[Balarama.]. He reported to him the reason why he had come. Shouri[Balarama. Shouri means someone who is descended from Shura or Shurasena and is a name for both Balarama
and Krishna.] replied to Dhritarashtra's son in the following words. "O tiger
among men! It is appropriate that you should know everything that I have said earlier in the kingdom of Virata, on
the occasion of the wedding. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! It is for your sake that I sought to restrain
Hrishikesha[Krishna.]. O king! I said repeatedly that my relationship with both of you was equal. But Keshava did not accept the words that I had spoken. I cannot exist for an instant without Krishna. I will come to the aid of neither
Partha, nor Duryodhana. After looking towards Vasudeva, this is the decision I have arrived at. You have been
born in the Bharata lineage, one that is honoured by all the lords of the earth. O bull among the Bharata lineage!
Go and fight in accordance with the dharma of the kshatriyas." At these words, he embraced the one who wields
the plough as a weapon. Knowing that Krishna had excused himself from the war, he thought that his own victory
had been assured. The king who was Dhritarashtra's son then went to Kritavarma. Kritavarma gave him an army
that consisted of one akshouhini. Surrounded by all these terrible soldiers, the descendant of the Kuru lineage returned happily, causing delight to his well-wishers.

'When Duryodhana had left, Krishna asked Kiriti, "I will not take part in the battle. What did you think of when
you decided to choose me?" Arjuna replied, "There is no doubt that you are alone capable of slaying all of them. O
supreme among men! I am also capable of slaying them alone. Your deeds are famous in this world and this fame
will also devolve on you. I too wish to be famous and that is the reason I have chosen you. It has always been my
desire that you should be my charioteer. I have desired this over many nights and you should satisfy my wishes."

Vasudeva said, "O Partha! It is appropriate that you desire to rival me. I will be your charioteer. Let your desire be
satisfied." Having been thus delighted, Partha, accompanied by Krishna and surrounded by the foremost among the
Dasharhas, returned to Yudhishthira.'
