Vaishampayana said, 'Yayati's capital resembled Indra's capital. He entered his capital and instated Devayani in
the women's quarters. There was a grove of ashoka trees nearby. With Devayani's permission, he instated Vrishaparva's daughter in a house that he built there. He honoured asuri Sharmishtha with 1000 maid servants and made
good arrangements for her food and clothing. Like the gods, the king who was Nahusha's son, passed many happy
years in Devayani's company. When her season arrived, the beautiful Devayani conceived and gave birth to a boy
as her first child.

'When a thousand years had passed, Vrishaparva's daughter Sharmishtha saw that having attained youth, her
season had arrived. She began to think, "My season has arrived, but I do not yet have a husband. What will happen? What shall I do? What is proper for me to do? Devayani has given birth, but my youth is in vain. I shall
choose as my husband the same person and in the same way as her. I am certain in my mind that the king will give
me a son. Will the one who is devoted to righteous conduct come and meet me in private?" On one occasion, the
king emerged and came to the ashoka grove. On seeing Sharmishtha there, he came and stood before her. The
sweet-smiling Sharmishtha found the king alone before her. She greeted the king with joined palms and said, "O
son of Nahusha! No one can touch the women who dwell in the inner quarters of Soma, Indra, Vishnu, Yama,
Varuna and you. O king! Know that I am beautiful, have been born in a good lineage and show good conduct. O
ruler of men! I seek your favour for my season." Yayati replied, "I know about your conduct, since you are an unblemished maiden born among the daityas. I can also see your beauty. I do not even see a blemish that is as small
as the point of a needle. However, when I married Devayani, Kavya Ushanas told me that Vrishaparva's daughter
should never be in my bed." Sharmishtha said, "O king! It is no sin to commit a falsehood in five cases-in jest, to
women, at the time of marriage, when confronting death and when all one's riches are liable to be lost. O lord of
men! It is true that he who bears false witness is demeaned. When a general purpose is sought to be attained, only
then does a falsehood harm the speaker." Yayati replied, "A king must be a role model to his subjects and if it is
proven that he lied, destruction follows. I cannot afford to lie, even when I am confronted with the greatest loss."

Sharmishtha said, "O king! It is held that one's husband and one's friend's husband are closely related. A friend's
marriage is equal to one's own. I have chosen my friend's husband as mine." Yayati replied, "The vow I have taken is that the gift should match the one who asks. You are asking my favour. Tell me what I should do?"

Sharmishtha said, "O king! Save me from sin and protect my dharma[That of giving birth to a child.]. If I conceive a child through you, I will
perform the most righteous act in the world. O king! It is decreed that three people can never own-a wife, a slave
and a son. Whatever they obtain belongs to the one who owns them. O king! I am Devayani's slave and that descendant of the Bhrigu lineage is yours. She and I are equally yours. Love me as I love you." Having been thus addressed, the king was persuaded.

'He paid honour to Sharmishtha and protected her dharma. He united with Sharmishtha and satisfied their desires. Then they lovingly bade farewell and returned to where they had come from. As a consequence of the union
with that best of kings, Sharmishtha, with the sweet smile and beautiful eyebrows, conceived her first child. O
king! In due time, the one with eyes like blue lotuses gave birth to a son. He was like the son of a god, with eyes
that had the complexion of blue lotuses.'
