'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! From one day to another, my blazing fame is being destroyed. Many of my warriors have been killed and I think that this is because of destiny. The enraged Dhananjaya has penetrated into my
army. It is protected by Drona and Karna and is incapable of being penetrated by the gods. Krishna and Bhima, the
two with blazing energy, are with him and have increased his valour. There is also the bull among the Shini lineage. Ever since I have heard about his entry, my sorrow is consuming me, like a fire on dry grass. I can see all the
lords of the earth, with Saindhava, being devoured. The king of Sindhu has done an extremely great injury to Kiriti
and if he comes within his sight, how can he escape with his life? O Sanjaya! From the signs, I do not see Saindhava remaining alive. But I am asking you to tell me about how the battle raged. How did the angry one penetrate my
large army single-handed and agitate and trouble it, like an elephant amidst lotuses? Tell me exactly about the battle that the brave one from the Vrishni lineage fought, for Dhananjaya's sake. O Sanjaya! You are skilled in
narration."

'Sanjaya replied, "O king! On seeing that Bhima, foremost among men, was oppressed by Vaikartana in the
midst of those brave men, the foremost of the Shini lineage followed him on his chariot. He roared, like the wielder of the vajra at the end of summer. He blazed, like the sun at the end of the monsoon. With his firm bow, he killed
the enemies and made the army of your son tremble. The brave one among men fought and roamed around, drawn
on mounts that were silvery in complexion. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! No one among the rathas on your
side was capable of countering the fierce Madhava. Alambusa, foremost among kings, became intolerant[This Alambusa is not to be confused with a rakshasa named Alambusa, killed earlier by Ghatotkacha.]. He
was clad in golden armour, wielded a bow and arrow and never retreated from the field of battle. He attacked
Satyaki, foremost among the Madhava lineage. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The likes of the encounter
between them has never been seen before. All the warriors, on your side and that of the enemy, became spectators
in that clash between those two ornaments of battle. Alambusa, supreme among kings, shot ten arrows at him.
However, the bull among the Shini lineage, struck those arrows down with his own arrows, before they could
reach him. He[Alambusa.] drew his bow back up to his ears and again struck him with three well-tufted and sharp arrows
that were like the fire. These shattered Satyaki's armour and penetrated his body. Having pierced his body with
those arrows that had the force of the fire and the wind, he again struck his four horses, with the complexion of silver, with four other arrows. Shini's grandson was as spirited and powerful as the wielder of the chakra himself[Meaning Krishna.].
Though he was struck, he used four forceful arrows to kill Alambusa's four horses. With a broad-headed arrow, he
severed his charioteer's head and used other arrows that were like the fire of destruction to sever his too. It[Alambusa's head.] was
beautiful, with a face like the full moon, and was adorned with earrings. It was severed from the body. O king!
Having killed that son and grandson of a king in that battle, the brave bull among the Madhu lineage tormented
and countered your soldiers and went towards Arjuna. The supreme among the Vrishni lineage was seen to circle
around in the midst of the enemy. As he proceeded, he repeatedly slaughtered the Kuru forces with his arrows, like
the wind dispelling a mass of clouds. He was borne on well-trained and controlled horses from the Sindhu region.
They were as white as cow's milk, the kunda flower, the moon or snow. They were well-trained horses and had
harnesses that were golden in complexion. They bore the lion among men wherever he desired.

'"O Ajamidha[Ajamidha is one of Dhritarashtra's names.]! Your sons united with the other warriors on your side and swiftly attacked him. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! They made your son, Duhshasana, chief among warriors, their leader. In that battle, those
leaders of battle formations surrounded Shini's descendant from all sides and struck him. The brave one, supreme
among the Satvata lineage, countered them with his net of arrows. Shini's grandson, the slayer of enemies, used
arrows that were like the fire and quickly countered them. O Ajamidha! He raised his bow and slew Duhshasana's
mounts."'
