Bhishma said, "If one is born as a brahmana, one is immensely fortunate. One is revered by all creatures and if
one is a guest, one gets to eat first. O son! Brahmanas are well-wishers towards everyone. They have excellent minds and mouths. When they are worshipped, they pronounce auspicious words of benediction. O son! There
may be those who hate brahmanas and disrespect their birth. When they are not properly worshipped, let them pronounce terrible curses on these. Those who know about the ancient accounts recount a hymn that was sung by
Brahma. In  ancient  times,  having  created  brahmanas,  the  creator  ordained  their  tasks.  'He[A brahmana.]  should  never  do
something that has not been properly laid down for him. When they are protected, brahmanas protect. They are the
best ornament of any habitation. When a brahmana undertakes his own tasks, there is prosperity. They set the standards for all beings and also restrain them along their paths. A learned brahmana must never undertake tasks recommended for a shudra. If he performs tasks recommended for a shudra, dharma is obstructed. Through studying,
he obtains prosperity, intelligence, energy, powers, influence and unadulterated greatness. By offering oblations,
they are established in great fortune. Prosperous brahmanas have been thought of as those who deserve to eat even
before expectant mothers. If such a person has great faith, is without violence and without greed and is devoted to
self-control and studying, he obtains all the objects of desire. Through their austerities, knowledge and humility,
they can be successful in obtaining everything that exists in the world of men and gods.' O unblemished one! I
have thus recounted to you what Brahma chanted. Out of compassion towards brahmanas, the intelligent one himself stated this. I think that the strength of those who are ascetics is equal to that of those who are kings. They are
impossible to assail, fierce, proud and swift in action. There are some virtuous ones who are as spirited as lions.
There are others who are as spirited as tigers. There are some who are as spirited as boars or deer. Others are as
spirited as elephants. There are some who are as mild as cotton. Others are like makaras to the touch. There are
some who can destroy those who speak against them. Others can slay with their sight. There are virtuous ones who
are like the poison of serpents. But there are also virtuous ones who are mild. O Yudhishthira! Many kinds of conduct  are  followed  by  brahmanas.  Because  there  are  no  brahmanas  among  them,  Mekalas,  Dramidas,  Kashas,
Poundras, Kollagiras, Shoundikas, Daradas, Darvas, Chouras, Shabaras, Barbaras, Kiratas, Yavanas and many other tribes of kshatriyas have been reduced to the status of vrishalas. Having been defeated by brahmanas, asuras had
to resort to the depths of the ocean. It is through the favours of brahmanas that gods got to reside in heaven. One is
incapable of touching the sky. The Himalaya mountains are incapable of moving. A bridge cannot be constructed
over the Ganga. On earth, brahmanas are incapable of being defeated. If one acts counter to brahmanas, one is incapable of ruling the earth. Great-souled brahmanas are like gods among the gods. If you desire to enjoy this entire
earth, right up to the girdle of the ocean, always worship them through gifts and servitude. O unblemished one!
When they receive gifts, the energy of brahmanas is pacified. O unblemished one! If you wish to protect yourself,
do not engage with those who do not receive."'
