'"Narada said, 'This city is named Bhogavati and is ruled over by Vasuki. It is as beautiful as Amaravati, the beautiful city of the king of the gods. The naga Shesha is stationed here. Because of his austerities, foremost in the
worlds, and his power, he always holds up the earth. In size, he is as large as Mount Shveta and he is adorned in
many kinds of ornaments. He is immensely strong. He has a thousand[A thousand hoods.] on his head and a flaming tongue.
Adorned in many kinds of ornaments, the nagas who are Surasa's sons dwell here. They have many different kinds
of forms and live here happily. They are marked with the signs of jewels, svastikas, chakras and kamandalus. They
are many thousands in number. All of them are strong and naturally terrible. Some have one thousand heads. Others have five hundred faces. Some have one hundred heads. Others have three heads. Some have three heads. Others have seven faces. They have strong coils and gigantic forms, with the coils resembling mountains. In a single
lineage, there are many thousand, million and crore of nagas. Listen to the most famous ones. There are Vasuki,
Takshaka, Karkotaka, Dhananjaya, Kaliya, Nahusha, Kambala, Ashvatara, Bahyakunda, Maninaga, Apurana, Kha-
ga, Vamana, Elapatra, Kukura, Kukuna, Aryaka, Nandaka, Kalasha, Potaka, Kailasaka, Pinjaraka, the naga Airavata, Sumanomukha, Dadhimukha, Shankha, Nanda, Upanandaka, Apta, Kotanaka, Shikhi, Nishthurika, Tittiri,
Hastibhadra, Kumuda, Malyapindaka, the two Padmas, Pundarika, Pushpa, Mudgaraparnaka, Karavira, Pitharaka,
Samvritta, Vritta, Pindara, Bilvapatra, Mushikada, Shirishaka, Dilipa, Shankhashirsa, Jyotishka, Aparajita,
Kouravya, Dhritarashtra, Kumara, Kushaka, Viraja, Dharana, Subahu, Mukhara, Jaya, Badhira, Andha, Vikunda,
Virasa and Surasa. These and many others are known as Kashyapa's descendants[The sage Kashyapa was married to Surasa and the serpents are descended from that line.]. O Matali! See if there is anyone here who appeals to you as a groom.'"

'Kanva said, "Matali was listening attentively and continuously glancing at one particular one. He seemed to be
delighted and asked Narada, 'There is this one who is standing before the Kouravya Aryaka. He is radiant and
handsome. Whose lineage is he descended from? Who are his father and mother? From what serpent is he descended? Of what great lineage is he the flag-bearer? He has energy, fortitude, beauty and age. My mind finds delight in him. O devarshi! He will be a worthy husband for Gunakeshi.' On seeing that Matali was delighted at having seen Sumukha, he[Narada.] then told him about his greatness, birth and deeds. 'His name is Sumukha and he is a king
of the nagas. He has been born in Airavata's lineage. He is the grandson of Aryaka on the father's side and of Va-
mana on the mother's. O Matali! His father is the naga named Chikura, who has recently been reduced to the five
elements by Vinata's son[Vinata's son is Garuda. Reduced to the five elements means killed.].' Delighted, Matali then addressed Narada in these words. 'O father[The word used is tata.]! This supreme
among serpents pleases me as a son-in-law. I am delighted with him and let us make swift endeavours. O sage! I
wish to bestow my beloved daughter on this serpent.'"'
