Vayu said, 'O foolish person! Listen to the qualities associated with the great-souled brahmanas. O king! The
brahmanas are superior to the ones you have spoken about. The earth challenged King Anga and lost her
essence in the ground. She was stupefied by the brahmana Kashyapa and faced destruction. O king! The brahmanas are always indestructible, on earth and in heaven. In ancient times, the one from the Angiras lineage himself
used his energy to drink up the waters. Having drunk up the waters, as if they were milk, the great ascetic wasn't
satisfied. O king! He covered up the giant ocean with land everywhere. When the one from the Angiras lineage
was angry with me, I had to flee from the earth for a long period of time and reside in the agnihotra sacrifice. When
Purandara  desired  Ahalya,  he  was  cursed  by  the  illustrious  Goutama.  It  was  only  for  the  sake  of  dharma  that
greater injury was not done to him. O king! The ocean became full of salty water. O lord! That salinity was due to
the curse of brahmanas. Agni[The text uses the word kavi, a slightly unusual name for Agni.] is golden in complexion, without any smoke and the flames rise upwards together.
However, when cursed by an angry Angiras, all these qualities vanished. Behold the Maruts. They were crushed
when they laughed at the great ocean. Those who wear gold[Presumably kings.] have always been cursed by brahmanas. O lord of
men! You are not their equal. Know brahmanas to be superior, even when these lords, the brahmanas, are still inside wombs. The great kingdom of Dandaka was destroyed by a brahmana. The great kshatriya named Talajangha
was destroyed by Ourva alone. You have obtained your extensive kingdom, strength, dharma and learning because
of the favours of Dattatreya and these are extremely difficult to obtain. O Arjuna! Why do you always offer obla-
tions to Agni? He is nothing but a brahmana. He is the one who bears the oblations of all the worlds. Don't you
know this? A brahmana is foremost. He is the protector of beings. He is the creator of the world of the living. Despite knowing this, why are you confused? Prajapati Brahma is unmanifest[There is an abrupt quality to the text and a discontinuity with what has come before.]. He is powerful and without decay.
He created everything in this universe, mobile and immobile. Some learned people say that Brahma was born from
an egg. When that original egg cracked, mountains, directions, water, earth and heaven were created. No one saw
that happen. How could he have been born from that darkness? The sacred texts also say that space was the egg
from which the grandfather was generated. "Tell me. Since there was nothing then, where was he stationed then?"

O king! "The lord was nothing but pervasive energy and is said to be Ahamkara. There was no egg. But Brahma,
the creator of the worlds, was that energy[This is the answer to the implied question in the earlier line.]."'"
'Bhishma continued, "Having been thus addressed, he was silent and Vayu spoke again."'
