'Kichaka said, "O one with the beautiful hair! Welcome. My night has happily turned into day. I have obtained you
as my mistress. Do what brings me pleasure. Let them bring golden garlands, conch shells, earrings made out of
gold, silken garments and other skins. I have arranged that a divine bed should be spread out for you. Come with
me there and drink the honeyed liquor."

'Droupadi replied, "The princess has sent me to you to fetch liquor. She told me she was thirsty and I should
quickly fetch her something to drink."

'Kichaka said, "Some other fortunate one will take refined liquor to the princess."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having said this, the suta's son grasped her by the right hand. Having been thus seized,
she threw Kichaka down on the floor. She rushed to the assembly hall where King Yudhishthira was seated and
sought protection. Kichaka pursued the fleeing one and grasped her by the hair. While the king looked on, he flung
her down and kicked her with his foot. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! However, the rakshasa who had been
employed by the sun god pushed Kichaka away with the force of the wind. Struck by the strength of the rakshasa,
he fell down on the ground. He was whirled around and was motionless, like a tree that has been uprooted. Both
Bhimasena and Yudhishthira were seated there and looked on. They could not bear the sight of Krishna being
kicked by Kichaka. The great-minded Bhima wished to kill the evil-minded Kichaka and gnashed his teeth in
anger. O king! But Dharmaraja restrained Bhima by pressing his thumb with his own[Because they did not wish to be discovered.].

'Drupada's daughter was weeping and clung to the door of the assembly hall. The one with the beautiful hips
glanced at her husbands, whose appearances were dejected. She was also bent on protecting the pledge they had
taken in the name of dharma. With terrible eyes that seemed to burn down, she told Matsya, "The son of a suta has
kicked me with his foot. I am the revered wife of those whose enemies do not dare to sleep when they traverse the
earth. The son of a suta has kicked me with his foot. I am the revered wife of those who give and do not ask, those
who are truthful and are like brahmanas. The son of a suta has kicked me with his foot. I am the revered wife of
those whose war drums and bow twangs are continually heard. The son of a suta has kicked me with his foot. I am
the revered wife of those who are energetic and self-controlled, who are powerful and extremely proud. The son of
a suta has kicked me with his foot. I am the revered wife of those who, had they not been bound by the noose of
dharma, are capable of destroying the entire world. They provide succour to those who seek refuge. They are
roaming the world in disguise. Where are those maharathas now? Those powerful and infinitely energetic ones are
suffering like eunuchs, while their beloved and chaste wife is tortured by the son of a suta. Where is their intolerance? Where do their valour and energy flow? They cannot protect their wife from being tortured by an evil-minded one. What can I possibly do with Virata, when dharma is being reviled? He witnesses an innocent one being tortured, but tolerates it. O king! You are not acting like a king in your treatment of Kichaka. Your dharma is that of a
dasyu[While dasyus can be translated as bandits or miscreants, they were also evil demons and a class of uncivilized
tribes, the enemies of gods and men.] and is not deserving of an assembly hall. I do not see any adherence to one's own dharma in Kichaka, or in
Matsya. It seems to me that the courtiers are also oblivious of dharma. O King Virata! I will not censure you in this
assembly of people. O Matsya! But it is not right that I should be tortured in your presence. The courtiers have witnessed that Kichaka is being treated as an exception." Virata replied, "I do not know anything about your quarrel,
since that occurred outside my sight. Unless I know the truth, how can I judge skilfully?" Having learnt what had
happened, those present in the assembly honoured Krishna a lot. They congratulated her and condemned Kichaka.
The courtiers said, "The man who possesses this long-eyed one with the unblemished limbs as a wife, has obtained
the supreme and need not sorrow over anything." The courtiers saw Krishna and honoured her in this fashion.

'Because of anger, there were drops of perspiration on Yudhishthira's forehead. Kouravya spoke to the princess
who was his beloved queen. "O Sairandhri! Do not stay here. Go to Sudeshna's abode. The wives of brave ones
suffer on account of their husbands. Though suffering, they conquer the worlds of their husbands through their
servitude. I think that your husbands do not see this as a time for anger. Therefore, the gandharvas, who are like the
sun in their energy, are not rushing to help you. O Sairandhri! You do not know that this is not the right time and
are prancing around like a dancing girl. You are disturbing the Matsyas, who are gambling in the king's assembly
hall. O Sairandhri! Depart and the gandharvas will act so as to bring you pleasure." Droupadi replied, "I follow
dharma for the sake of those who are extremely tolerant. If the eldest one is addicted to dice[A reference to Yudhishthira.], anyone can oppress
them." Having spoken these words, Krishna rushed to Sudeshna's residence. The one with the beautiful hips had
her hair flowing freely and her eyes were red with anger. When she stopped crying, her face was like the lunar disc
in the sky, freed from a net of clouds. Sudeshna asked, "O one with the lovely hips! O beautiful one! Who has oppressed you and why are you crying? O fortunate one! Whose happiness will end today and who has acted towards
you in an unpleasant way?" Droupadi replied, "Kichaka kicked me when I went to fetch liquor for you. The king
looked on in the assembly hall, as if this had occurred in private." Sudeshna replied, "O one with the beautiful
hair! If you so think, I will have Kichaka killed. He has been intoxicated by desire and has lusted for one who is
not obtainable." Droupadi said, "He has caused injury to others and they will kill him. I think it is certain that he
will go today to the world beyond."'
