Vaishampayana said, 'At that moment, Adhiratha entered the arena, swaying on his feet and supporting himself on
a staff. He was trembling and perspiring and his upper garments were in disarray. On seeing him, Karna discarded
his bow. Out of regard for his father, he bowed down his head, still wet with water from the coronation. The charioteer quickly covered his feet with the end of his garment and addressed Karna, who had been crowned with success, as his son. Trembling with affection, he kissed him on the head and wet with his tears the head that was already damp with water from the instatement as the king of Anga. When Pandava Bhimasena saw him, he deduced
that he[Karna.] was a charioteer's son and jeeringly said, "O son of a charioteer! You don't have the right to be killed by
Partha in battle. You had better take up a whip, more befitting of your lineage. O worst of men! You have no right
to enjoy the kingdom of Anga, just as a dog has no right to eat the cake that is offered at a sacrificial fire." At these
words, Karna's lips quivered a little. He looked up at the sun in the sky and sighed.

'The immensely strong Duryodhana arose angrily from among his brothers, like a mad elephant arises from a
pond of lotuses. He told Bhimasena, of the terrible deeds, who stood there, "O Vrikodara! You should not speak
these words. Strength is the most important virtue of Kshatriyas and even the most inferior of Kshatriyas deserves
to be fought with. The sources of warriors and rivers are both the same; they are always unknown. The fire that
covers the entire world arises from water. The vajra that destroyed danavas was made from Dadhichi's bones. It is
said that the birth of the illustrious god Guha[One of Kartikeya's epithets.] is a complete mystery. Some say he is the son of Agni, or of the
Krittikas[One of the twenty-seven nakshatras, actually consisting of six stars, the Pleiades. The Krittikas reared Kartikeya. Hence, the name.], or Rudra's son, or Ganga's. It is said that those who have been born Brahmanas have become Kshatriyas. Our preceptor was born in a water pot, Kripa in a clump of reeds. And we also know how all of you were
born. Can a deer give birth to this tiger, equal to the sun, with natural armour and earrings and possessing all the
auspicious marks? This lord of men deserves to be king, not only of Anga but of the entire world, through the valour of his arms and my obedience to him. If there is any man to whom my action seems condemnable, let him ascend his chariot, or on foot bend his bow." At this, a loud uproar arose in the arena, intermingled with cheers of
applause. At that time, the sun went down.

'King Duryodhana grasped Karna's hand and led him out of the arena, lit with the flames of myriad torches. O
lord of the earth! With Drona, Kripa and Bhishma, the Pandavas also returned to their own homes. Everyone went
to their respective houses. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As they went away, some hailed Arjuna, some
Karna and some Duryodhana. Kunti was also delighted out of affection for her son, because she recognized him
from the various auspicious marks on his body, and he had become the king of Anga. O king! Having obtained
Karna, Duryodhana quickly banished his fears arising out of Arjuna's skills. Skilled in use of arms, that warrior[Karna.]
also gratified Suyodhana with sweet words. At that time, Yudhishthira also thought that there was no archer equal
to Karna on earth.'
