Vaishampayana said, 'With humility, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira again asked the famous Markandeya, "O great
sage! You have witnessed the end of many thousands of eras. No one is known who has lived for as long as you,
except for the great-souled Brahma Parameshthi[Parameshthi means the supreme lord and is an epithet used for Brahma, Vishnu, Shiva, and even Agni and
Garuda.]. O brahmana! You worshipped Brahma at the time of the destruction, when there was no sky in this world and no gods and danavas. O brahmana rishi! When that destruction
is over and the grandfather[Brahma.] arises again, you are the only one who witnesses the four types of beings[Those born from wombs, those born from eggs, vegetables and plants and those born from sweat (insects).] being exactly created by Parameshthi, after he has filled the directions with air and has dispersed the waters. O foremost
among brahmanas! You have worshipped the preceptor of the world himself, the grandfather of all the worlds, with
supreme meditation. O brahmana rishi! Therefore, through Parameshthi's grace, death, the destroyer of everything
and old age, the destroyer of the body, do not overcome you. When there is no sun and fire, no wind and moon,
nothing is left of the sky and the earth, when the world with its mobile and immobile objects becomes one large
ocean, when the masses of gods and asuras are destroyed and the great serpents uprooted, when the one with the
infinite soul is on the lotus and finds his abode on the lotus[This is a reference to Vishnu, asleep on the lotus.], you alone are there to worship Brahma, the lord of
all beings. O supreme among brahmanas! Everything that has happened before has been seen by you. Therefore,
we wish to hear the account about the reasons behind everything. O supreme among brahmanas! You have experienced these many times. There is nothing in all the worlds that is not always known to you."

'Markandeya replied, "I will recount this. I bow down before the one who creates himself[Brahma.], and the ancient and
eternal being without decay, Janardana[Vishnu.], whose eyes are long and wide and who is attired in yellow. He is the
creator and special creator of all beings that are manifest[The text uses both the words karta and vikarta. It is difficult to distinguish between them. Hence, karta has
been translated as creator and vikarta as special creator.]. He cannot be thought of. He is a great wonder. He is
supreme purification. He is without beginning and without end. He is the imperishable being that is everywhere in
the universe. He is without decay. He is the creator. But he is not created. He is the reason behind all energy. He is
the being whom even the gods do not know. O tiger among men! In the beginning, after the destruction of the universe, there is krita yuga. It is said that this lasts for four thousand years[The four yugas or eras are krita (or satya), treta, dvapara and kali. Between two eras, there is an intermediary
period of conjunction (sandhya).]. It is preceded by a sandhya of four
hundred years and succeeded by a sandhya of the same duration. Treta yuga is said to last for three thousand years.
It is preceded by a sandhya and succeeded by another sandhya of three hundred years each. After that, dvapara
yuga has a measure of two thousand years. It is preceded by a sandhya and followed by a sandhya of two hundred
years each. The learned have said that kali yuga lasts for one thousand years. It is preceded by a sandhya and succeeded by a sandhya of one hundred years each. Know that the duration of the preceding sandhya and the succeeding sandhya is the same. When kali yuga has decayed, krita yuga returns again. This total period of twelve thousand years is known as a yuga. One thousand such cycles are known as one of Brahma's days. O tiger among men!
When the entire universe retreats into Brahma's abode, the wise ones know this as the destruction of the worlds.

'"O bull among the Bharata lineage! When there is little time of one thousand years left at the end of a yuga, all
men usually become the speakers of falsehood. O Partha! They perform sacrifices through representatives. They
donate through representatives. When such a time arrives, vows are observed through representatives. The brahmanas perform the tasks of shudras. Shudras become the earners of wealth and resort to the dharma of kshatriyas.
This is what occurs when the yuga decays. When kali yuga arrives, brahmanas abstain from sacrifices and studying. They discard the offerings of oblations to ancestors. They resort to eating anything. O son[The word used is tata.]! Brahmanas no
longer meditate and shudras become addicted to meditation. O lord of men! When the earlier form of the world decays, everything is perverse. There are many mleccha[Mlecchas are barbarians, those who do not speak Sanskrit.] kings. They rule on the basis of falsehood and evil. They
resort to false promises. O supreme among men! Andhras, Shakas, Pulindas and Yavanas become kings, and Kambojas, Ournikas, shudras and abhiras[Shakas are identified as Scythians and Yavanas as Greeks. Pulindas are uncivilized mountainous tribes. Kambojas lived in the Hindu Kush region. Ournikas are those who earned a living off wool. Abhiras are a tribe.]. Not a single brahmana makes a living from his own dharma then. O lord
of men! Kshatriyas and vaishyas also do what they should not do. Men are limited in life expectancy and feeble in
strength. They are weak in energy and valour. They have little substance and their bodies are weak. They rarely
speak the truth. The country is generally empty and the directions are infested with animals and predators. When
the end of the yuga is at hand, learning about the brahman is futile. The shudras address as 'bho' and the brahmanas address as 'arya[Bho is used when addressing an inferior and arya is used when addressing a superior. The sense is that shudras should be saying 'arya' and brahmanas should be saying 'bho'.]'. O tiger among men! At the end of the yuga, there are many animals. O lord of the
earth! Everything that is fragrant no longer possesses any smell then. O tiger among men! What is succulent is no
longer fit to be eaten then. There are many children, short in stature, devoid of good conduct. O king! When the
destruction of the yuga is near, women use their mouths as their vaginas. The country is dotted with towers[Presumably indicative of a lot of fighting.]. The
crossroads are infested with jackals. O king! At the time of the destruction of a yuga, the women are covered with
hair. O lord of men! The cows then yield very little milk. The trees yield very little of flowers and fruit and are full
of crows. O lord of the earth! Brahmanas accept gifts from kings who are guilty of killing brahmanas and are the
makers of false accusations. The brahmanas are overcome by avarice and delusion. They falsely invoke their own
dharma. O lord of the earth! They roam the land in search of alms. Fearful of the burden of taxation, householders
become robbers. Others assume the disguise of hermits, but earn a living from trade. Men then bear nails and hair
under false pretences[Fraudulently pretending to be hermits.]. O tiger among men! Those practising brahmacharya become greedy for riches. They observe evil conduct in hermitages and are addicted to drinking. They unite with the wives of their preceptors. They
pander to the desires of this world, nourishing their flesh and blood. O tiger among men! When the destruction of
the yuga is near, hermitages are infested with many evil characters, who have the quality of living off the food of
others. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The illustrious chastiser of Paka[Indra. Indra killed a demon named Paka.] no longer showers rain at the right
time. All the seeds that are sown, no longer sprout. O unblemished one! The fruits of not following dharma become manifold. O protector of the earth! He who is united with dharma only has a short span of life. There is no
dharma left then. O tiger among men! People generally sell goods with false weights. There is a lot of deceit associated with trade. People who are devoted to dharma, decay. The evil ones prosper. Dharma loses its strength and
that which is not dharma becomes powerful. Men who are devoted to dharma have short spans of life and are poor.
At the time of the destruction of the yuga, those who are against dharma have long spans of life and are prosperous. Subjects seek to attain their objectives by resorting to that which is not dharma. Having accumulated only a
little, they become insolent. O king! Having become addicted to deceit, men generally rob riches that have been
placed with them in trust. Predators that live off men, birds and animals roam around in parks and sanctuaries in
cities. O king! Women conceive at ages of seven years and eight. Men who are ten and twelve years of age beget
sons. When they are sixteen years old, men become aged and a man's lifespan is swiftly over. O great king! At the
end of a yuga, young ones act like the old. The conduct that should be seen in the young is seen in the old. Women
exhibit perverse conduct and deceive their husbands. These lascivious ones pleasure with servants, and even
animals.

'"O great king! At the end of those one thousand yugas[One of Brahma's days.], when life decays, there is a drought for many years.
O lord of the earth! Because beings have weak lives and are starving, they die in large numbers on the surface of
the earth. O lord of men! Seven blazing suns appear then. They drink up all the waters from the oceans and the
rivers. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Everything is then reduced to ashes, be it of wood or grass, dry or wet. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Then the fire of destruction arrives, together with the wind, in a world that has already been dried up by the suns. It penetrates the earth and goes all the
way to the nether regions, generating great terror among the gods, the danavas and the yakshas. It burns down the
world of the nagas and whatever can be found on earth. O protector of the earth! It burns down everything in an
instant. Twenty yojanas at a time, that fire of destruction, helped by the inauspicious wind, consumes everything in
hundreds and thousands, with all the gods, asuras, gandharvas, yakshas, serpents and rakshasas. That blazing lord
burns up the entire universe. Then large clouds, extraordinary to see, arise in the sky. They are like herds of elephants, adorned with garlands of lightning. Some are dark like blue lotuses, others are like white lotuses. Some are
like filaments. Other clouds are yellow. Still others have the complexion of a raven's egg. Some have the colour of
lotus leaves. Others have the complexion of vermilion. Some have the shapes of large cities. Others are like herds
of elephants. Some are like collyrium. Others have the shape of crocodiles[Makara.]. The dense clouds are adorned with
garlands of lightning. O great king! They are terrible in form and utter a terrible roar. Full of rain, they cover up the
entire sky. O great king! They cover up the earth, with all its mountains, forests and mines. They fill and flood it
with water. O bull among men! Instructed by Parameshthi, those clouds, with a terrible roar, flood everything. The
copious quantities of water fill up the earth. They extinguish the extremely terrible and inauspicious fire. The
clouds generate a flood for twelve years. Instructed by the great-souled one, the rains fill everything. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! The ocean flows over its tideline. The mountains are splintered. In particular, the earth is
also shattered. Then swift winds suddenly whirl the clouds in the sky and that gust tears them up. O lord of men! O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! The self-creating original god[Vishnu.] drinks up these terrible winds and continues to
sleep on his lotus bed. In that terrible ocean, everything is destroyed, mobile and immobile. The gods, the masses
of asuras, the yakshas and the rakshasas are destroyed. O protector of the earth! There are no men, no animals and
no trees. There is no firmament in this world. I alone wander around anxiously.

'"O supreme among kings! Once, when I roamed around in this terrible ocean of water, I was filled with great
affliction at not seeing any being. O lord of men! I had floated around for a long time in this flood. I was exhausted. But I continued uninterrupted, since I could not find a place to rest. O lord of the earth! Then, in that great flood
of water, I saw an extremely tall and wide banyan tree. O lord of men! The branches of that tree were extensive. O
protector of the earth! O great king! There, on a bed adorned with celestial spreads, I saw a seated child. His face
was like a lotus or the moon. His eyes were as large as a blossoming lotus. O protector of the earth! I was struck
with great wonder. How could this child be lying there, when the entire world has been destroyed? O lord of men!
Through the power of austerities, I can reflect upon the past, the present and the future. But I could not fathom this
child. He had the complexion of an atasi flower[The flower of flax, Linum usitatissimum. Krishna's complexion is often likened to this flower.]. He bore the srivatsa mark[Vishnu bears the srivatsa mark (or curl) on his chest. This is the place where Lakshmi resides.]. This seemed to me to be the
abode of Lakshmi herself. The radiant child, with eyes like a lotus and bearing the srivatsa mark, spoke to me in
words that were pleasant to hear. 'O son[The word used is tata.]! I know that you are exhausted and desire to rest. O Markandeya! O
Bhargava[Markandeya was born in Bhrigu's lineage.]! Rest here for as long as you wish. O supreme among sages! Enter my body. Rest here. That is the
place that has been earmarked for you because of my favours.' O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thus addressed by the child, I lost all interest in my long life and human state. Then that child suddenly opened his mouth
wide. Propelled by destiny, I powerlessly entered his mouth. O lord of men! O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
O tiger among men! Thus suddenly entering the inside of his mouth, I saw the entire earth, covered with all its
kingdoms and cities, the rivers Ganga, Shatadru, Sita, Yamuna, Koushiki, Charmanvati, Vetravati, Chandrabhaga,
Sarasvati, Sindhu, Vipasha, Godavari, Vasvokasara, Nalini, Narmada, the rivers Tamra and Vena with pure waters
that bring fortune, Suvena, Krishnavena, Irama, Mahanadi, Shona, Vishalya and Kampuna. O supreme among
men! I saw many other rivers that flow on earth. I wandered around inside that great-souled one. I saw oceans infested with aquatic animals. I saw that supreme abode of the waters, a storehouse of gems. I saw the sky there, illuminated with the moon and the sun. It blazed with energy, like the fire and the sun. O king! I saw the earth, beautifully adorned with its forests. O king! The brahmanas were engaged in many sacrifices. The kshatriyas were engaged in ensuring the welfare of all the varnas. O lord of men! The vaishyas were engaged in agriculture. The shudras were always engaged in the servitude of the brahmanas[The word used in the text is vrishala. While this means shudra, it also means outcast. Servitude is towards a
dvija, or twice-born. While dvija does mean brahmana, it is a term that can be applied to all the three upper varnas.]. O king! Then, wandering around inside the great-
souled one, I saw the Himalayas and Mount Hemakuta. I saw Nishadha and Shveta, adorned with silver. O protector of the earth! O tiger among men! I saw Mount Gandhamadana and the great mountains Mandara and Nila. O
great king! I saw the golden Mount Meru. I saw Mahendra and Vindhya, supreme among mountains. I saw Malaya
and Mount Pariyatra. I saw many other mountains too. I saw all these inside his stomach, adorned with jewels. O
lord of men! O lord of the earth! I saw lions, tigers, boars and serpents and all the other beings that populate the
earth. I saw all these as I was roaming around there. O tiger among men! Having entered the inside and wandering
around in various directions, I saw the masses of gods headed by Shakra, the gandharvas, the apsaras, the yakshas
and the rishis. O lord of men! There were the daityas, the danavas and collections of kaleyas, the sons of Simhika
and other enemies of the gods. Whatever could be seen in the world, mobile or immobile, everything could be seen
inside the great-souled one. Surviving on fruits, I roamed around in this entire universe inside his body for more
than one hundred years. O lord of the earth! But while I constantly roamed around and thought, nowhere could I
see an end to the body.

'"O king! Not being able to find an end to the great-souled one, following the prescribed rites, I sought refuge,
in both thought and deeds, with this great-souled one, the granter of boons and worthy among gods. O king! O
supreme among men! Then suddenly, a gust of wind expelled me from the mouth of the great-souled one, the
mouth having been opened wide. O lord of the earth! O tiger among men! Then, seated on the branch of the
banyan tree, I saw the one who had swallowed up the universe. He was in the form of a child, with the srivatsa
mark. O tiger among men! I saw the infinitely energetic one seated there. The immensely radiant one blazed in his
yellow attire, bearing the srivatsa mark. He smiled and gently addressed me. 'O Markandeya! O supreme among
sages! Tell me. Have you rested while you have been residing inside my body?' Instantly, I seemed to acquire a
new insight. I saw myself with a new consciousness, free from the confines of the soul. O son[The word used is tata.]! The soles of his
well-established feet were coppery red. They were delicate and adorned with soft and red toes. I grasped them,
placed them reverentially on my head, and worshipped him. I had seen the limitless powers of that infinitely energetic one. Humbly, I joined my hands in salutation and carefully approached him. I saw the lotus-eyed god who
was the soul of all beings. Bowing before him with hands joined in salutation, I said, 'O god! I wish to know about
you and about your supreme maya. O illustrious one! Having entered your body through your mouth, I saw all the
worlds gathered in your stomach. O god! The gods, the danavas, the rakshasas, the yakshas, the gandharvas and
the nagas and all the mobile and immobile objects in the universe were inside your body. O god! Though I ran and
continuously roamed around inside your body, through your favours, my memory never failed me. O Pundarikaksha! O unblemished one! I wish to know why you have established yourself in the form of a child. Why have you
swallowed up the entire universe? You should explain this to me. O unblemished one! O destroyer of enemies! For
what purpose is everything in the universe inside your body? For how long will you be established here? O lord of
the gods! I wish to hear this. It is a brahmana's desire. O lotus-eyed one! Tell me everything in detail. O lord! What
I have seen is greatly beyond my comprehension.' Having been thus addressed by me, the handsome god of the
gods, immensely radiant, supreme among eloquent ones, comforted me and spoke these words to me."'
