The preceptor said, 'Those who exhibit signs of being engaged in action think that they are obtaining dharma
through this. But others who are devoted to knowledge find no delight in them. Those who know about the
Vedas and base themselves on what the Vedas have said are extremely rare. In this case, those who are learned, desire to follow the superior path[The Vedas talk about both action and abstention from action. But absention from action is superior, because it
leads to emancipation.]. Those who are of virtuous conduct practise this praiseworthy behaviour. These
intelligent ones advance towards the supreme objective. Having obtained a body, everyone is seized by delusion.
Such a person is overcome by desire and anger and rajas and tamas[Rajas and tamas are the qualities of passion and darkness respectively.]. Therefore, one should not perform impure
acts and should desire disassociation from the body. Having driven deeds into a hole, one obtains the auspicious
worlds. When gold is mixed with iron, it becomes impure and does not shine. In that way, if mixed with the impure
and the astringent[These are material objects and possessions.], knowledge no longer shines. Because of confusion, desire and avarice, if one follows adharma, one transgresses the path of dharma and is continuously destroyed. Therefore, one must not have attachment
towards sound and the others[That is, the senses.] and material objects. Anger, delight and misery feed on each other. The five elements are in the body and so are sattva[The quality of purity.], rajas and tamas. Who will one censure? Who will one praise? What will
one say? Foolish people follow attachment towards things like touch, form and the others. Because of their ignorance, they do not realize that the bodies only represent earthy qualities. A house made of earth is plastered with
earth. Like that, this body is made out of earth and is attached to earth[This earth means food, which is a manifestation of earth.]. Honey, oil, milk, butter, meat, salt, molasses,  grain,  fruits  and  roots  are  modifications  of  earth,  mixed  with  water.  There  are  those  who  resort  to  the
wilderness. They are not interested in roaming around with other men. They obtain food with difficulty and taste it
only for remaining alive. That is the way one should dwell in this world, which is also a wilderness. One must
make efforts and take food only for the journey, like medicine by a patient[The journey is the progress of life.]. Using truth, purity, uprightness, renunciation,  fame,  valour,  forgiveness,  fortitude,  intelligence,  the  mind  and  austerities,  one  must  search  out  the
proper nature of everything, in due order. One must desire tranquility and not be distressed in the soul. One must
restrain the senses. In their ignorance, beings are confused by sattva, rajas and tamas and are severely whirled
around on the wheel. Therefore, one must properly examine all the sins that arise from ignorance. One must always cast aside the power of ignorance and ego. The great elements, the senses, the qualities of sattva, rajas and
tamas and the three worlds and their lord are all established in the ego[The ego has a base in ignorance.]. Time always shows afflicted people its
qualities. In that way, know that, in all beings, it is the ego that makes beings embark on action. Know that tamas is
responsible for confusion. It represents darkness and results from ignorance. All joys and sorrows are attached to
the three qualities of sattva, rajas and tamas. Listen to them. Lack of confusion, delight, affection, lack of doubt,
fortitude and memory-know that these are the virtuous qualities associated with sattva. Desire, anger, distraction,
avarice, confusion, fear, exhaustion, despondency, sorrow, excessive pride, insolence, lack of nobility-without
any distress, the severity or lack of severity of these faults must be examined. Each of these must always be tested,
to the extent that they exist in the atman.'

'"The disciple asked, 'To loosen the bonds[Of this world and life.], which sins do intelligent people banish from their minds? Like the
fruits of confusion, which are the ones that keep on recurring? Using reasoning and intellect, which are the strong
and weak faults an intelligent person should think about? O lord! Tell me about all this and instruct knowledge to
me.'

'"The preceptor replied, 'A person who is pure in his soul severs the sins from their roots and is freed. An axe
made of steel can destroy an object made of steel. That is the way a person who has cleansed his soul easily destroys the sins associated with rajas. In all bodies with the atman, rajas, tamas and those which give rise to pure
deeds[Sattva.] are like seeds. Therefore, the atman in the body must discard rajas and tamas. Having been freed from rajas
and tamas, the sattva will make it clean. There are those who say that sacrifices and rites, when performed with
mantras, are instruments in following pure dharma. However, if one performs acts of dharma driven by rajas, or if
one performs them with a desire for artha, all these amount to a serving of kama. When tamas is united with
avarice, one serves anger and one becomes full of violence, addicted to pleasure, lassitude and sleep. However, one
who is based in sattva is virtuous. He sees, and resorts to, only what is virtuous. Such a being is sparkling, handsome, pure and full of learning.""