Sanjaya said, "At this time, Krishna spoke these words to Partha, pointing out to Kounteya, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira. 'O Partha! Pandava, your brother, is being swiftly pursued by the immensely strong sons of Dhritarashtra. They are great archers and wish to kill him. The angry Panchalas, invincible in battle, are also following at
great speed, wishing to save the great-souled Yudhishthira. O Partha! Duryodhana is the king of all the worlds. He
is armoured and is following the king with an array of chariots. With his brothers, the powerful one desires to kill
that tiger among men. Their touch is like that of venomous serpents and they are skilled in all manner of fighting.
Wishing to kill him, these elephants, horses, chariots and foot soldiers are also advancing. The sons of Dhritarashtra are after Yudhishthira, like those after a supreme jewel. Behold. They have been checked by Satvata and the
lord Bhima. They are like daityas desiring amrita, but held in check by Shakra and Agni. However, many of them
are again swiftly advancing towards Pandava. Those maharathas are like waters made turbulent by the wind, rushing towards the ocean during the monsoon season. They are roaring like lions, or like clouds at the end of the summer. The powerful and great archers are brandishing their bows. I think that Yudhishthira, Kunti's son, has entered
the jaws of death. The fortunate one has come under Duryodhana's subjugation and is like an oblation poured into
the fire. O Pandava! The army of the sons of Dhritarashtra has been prepared properly. Even Shakra will not be
able to escape, if he comes within the range of their arrows. Duryodhana, Drona's son and Sharadvata are brave.
The force of Karna's arrows can shatter mountains. Duryodhana is valiant and shoots a storm of arrows quickly.
When he is angry, he is like Yama. Who is capable of withstanding his force in battle? The king, the scorcher of
enemies, has already been forced to retreat by Karna, who is powerful, dexterous and accomplished, and skilled in
fighting. Radheya is capable of oppressing the best of the Pandavas in the battle. In addition, the brave one is with
the great-souled sons of Dhritarashtra. He[Yudhishthira.] is controlled in his soul. When he fought with them in the battle, other maharathas robbed Partha of his armour. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! The king is severely emaciated
because of his fasts. He is established in the strength of the brahman, but he does not possess a great deal of
strength of the kshatriya variety. O Partha! I do not think that Yudhishthira, the great king, will remain alive, even
though Bhimasena is with him and is roaring intolerantly, like a lion. O scorcher of enemies! The sons of Dhritarashtra are roaring repeatedly. Desiring victory in the battle, they are blowing on their giant conch shells. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! Pandaveya Yudhishthira will be killed. Karna will urge the immensely strong sons of
Dhritarashtra towards Partha. He will shroud the king with sthunakarna, indrajala and pashupata and the maharathas will follow him[Sthunakarna is a broad-headed arrow, while pashupata is a divine
weapon named after Pashupati or Shiva. Literally, indrajala means Indra's net and signifies magic or illusion.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It is my view that the king must be in distress.
At a time when speed is of the essence, the Panchalas and the Pandavas, supreme among all wielders of weapons,
are following him. They are like powerful ones dashing to save someone who has been submerged in the nether
regions. O Partha! The king's flags cannot be seen. They may have been brought down by Karna's arrows, while
the twins, Satyaki, Shikhandi, Dhrishtadyumna, Bhima, the lord Shatanika and all the Panchalas and Chedis
looked on. O Partha! In this battle, Karna is destroying the Pandava soldiers with his arrows, like an elephant
among lotuses. O descendant of the Pandu lineage! The rathas on your side are being driven away. O Partha! Look
at how the maharathas are retreating. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In the battle, the elephants have been
struck by Karna. They are shrieking and are running away in the ten directions. O Partha! Behold. Arrays of chariots are fleeing in different directions. They have been routed in the battle by Karna, the destroyer of enemies. In
the battle, behold the chariot of the son of the suta roaming around here and there. He is stationed on it. He has the
best of standards and it is marked with the sign of an elephant's housing. Radheya is advancing towards Bhimasena's chariot. He is showering down hundreds of arrows and slaughtering your army. Behold the Panchalas being
driven away by the great-souled one. He is like Shakra destroying the daityas in a great battle. This Karna has defeated the Panchalas, Pandus and Srinjayas. He is now searching around in all the directions for you. That is my
view. O Partha! Behold. He looks beautiful, as he is stretching the best of bows. Having defeated the enemy, he is
like Shakra, surrounded by large numbers of gods. On witnessing Karna's valour, the Kouravas are roaring. Thousands of Parthas and Srinjayas have been frightened in the battle. In this great battle, he has wholeheartedly terrified the Pandus. O one who grants honours! Radheya is addressing all the soldiers. "O Kouravas! Attack them
quickly. Advance and drive them away, so that no one among the Srinjayas can escape from this encounter with his
life. Act united in this way and we will follow you." Having said this, he is advancing behind them, showering arrows. O Partha! Behold Karna in the battle. He is under a white umbrella and is as radiant as the sun behind Mount
Asta. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A white umbrella that is like the full moon and possesses a hundred
spokes is held aloft his head in the battle. O lord of the earth! Karna is casting his glances around, looking for you.
He will certainly make the best of efforts in this battle. O mighty-armed one! Behold him brandishing his giant
bow. The immensely strong one is releasing arrows that are like venomous serpents. O one with the ape on the
banner! Radheya can be seen to be headed in this direction. He is advancing for his own destruction, like an insect
towards a lamp. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing that Karna is alone, Dhritarashtra's son has turned
his array of chariots towards him, controlling them so as to protect him. If you desire fame, the kingdom and
supreme happiness, make efforts to kill him, with all the evil-souled ones who are with him. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! You have controlled your soul. Glance towards your own self. Radheya is firm in his hatred for
the great-souled Yudhishthira. Accomplish the end that Radheya has set for himself. O noble one! Set your mind
on fighting and repel that leader of rathas. O supreme among rathas! Five foremost rathas are powerfully advancing towards you[The names of these five are not indicated.], with hundreds of others. They are strong and fierce in their energy. There are five thousand
elephants and twice that number of horses. O Kounteya! Ten thousand foot soldiers are also advancing. O brave
one! Protecting each other, that army is advancing towards you. Reveal your own self to the son of a suta, the great
archer. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Make the best of efforts and repulse them. This Karna is extremely angry and is attacking the Panchalas. Behold his flag in the direction of Dhrishtadyumna's chariot. O scorcher of enemies! I think that he will uproot the Panchalas. O Partha! O bull among the Bharata lineage! But I will tell you
something that will please you. Kouravya King Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, is alive. The mighty-armed Bhima has
returned and is stationed at the head of the army. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He is surrounded by the
Srinjaya soldiers and by Satyaki. O Kounteya! In this encounter, Bhimasena and the great-souled Panchalas are
slaying the Kouravas with sharp arrows. The soldiers of Dhritarashtra's son are retreating and running away from
the field of battle. Slain by Bhima's forceful arrows, they are being routed. With blood flowing from their wounds,
they look like the earth after a crop has been harvested. O best of the Bharatas! The army of the Bharatas[That is, the Kourava army.]
presents a miserable sight. O Kounteya! Behold. They have been forced to retreat. Bhimasena, the lord of warriors,
who is like a venomous serpent, has angrily driven away the army. O Arjuna! Yellow, red, black and white flags,
with the signs of stars, the moon and the sun, and many umbrellas are strewn around. There are golden and silver
standards and those that are made of other metals. They have been brought down and are scattered around, and so
are elephants and horses. Deprived of their lives, rathas have fallen down from their chariots. They have been slain
by many-hued arrows released by the Panchalas, who are not running away. O Dhananjaya! The army of the sons
of Dhritarashtra is without men, elephants, horses and chariots, and the Panchalas are spiritedly driving it away. O
scorcher of enemies! The enemy's army was unassailable. But ready to give up their lives and seeking refuge with
Bhimasena, they[The Panchalas.] are driving it away. The Panchalas are roaring, like clouds at the end of the summer. They are
driving away the enemy in the battle and slaying them with arrows. O scorcher of enemies! Behold the greatness
of heaven before the Panchalas[If they die in the battle, the Panchalas will ascend to heaven.]. They are angrily slaying the sons of Dhritarashtra, like lions against elephants.
Every part of the large army of the sons of Dhritarashtra has been attacked. The force of the Panchalas is like that
of swans that leave Manasa[Lake Manasa.] for the Ganga. Kripa, Karna and other brave ones are severely trying to counter the
valorous Panchalas, like bulls against bulls. However, the maharathas among the sons of Dhritarashtra are deeply
submerged in Bhima's weapons. On seeing that the rathas in the great army of the sons of Dhritarashtra are distressed, the brave ones, with Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, are slaying the enemy in thousands. Behold. The
elephants have been shattered by Bhima's iron arrows and are falling down. They are like summits that have fallen
down on the ground, after being struck by the vajra of the wielder of the vajra. Mighty elephants have been struck
by Bhimasena's straight-tufted arrows. As they are running away, they are slaying their own soldiers. Do you not
know Bhima's unbearable leonine roar? O Arjuna! Desiring victory in the battle, the brave one is roaring. Astride a
supreme elephant, the Nishada[Obviously a king among the nishadas.] is advancing against Pandava. He is angrily attacking him with javelins, like
Yama with a staff in his hand. Bhima is roaring and breaking down those javelins with his bare hands. He has then
used ten sharp iron arrows, which are like the flames of the fire, to slay him. Behold. Having slain him, the striker
has again attacked other elephants that are like blue clouds and are driven by skilled drivers. Vrikodara has slain
those elephants, seven at a time, with spears and javelins and has brought down their victorious standards. They
have been slain and mangled with sharp arrows by Partha's elder brother. Each of ten elephants has been slain by
ten sharp arrows. The roars of the sons of Dhritarashtra can no longer be heard now. They have been forced to retreat by the angry bull among the Bharata lineage[Bhima.], who is Purandara's equal. Three akshouhinis from the sons
of Dhritarashtra united against him. However, Bhimasena, lion among men, angrily countered them.' On seeing
that Bhimasena had accomplished that extremely difficult deed, Arjuna slaughtered the remaining ones with his
sharp arrows. O lord! Large numbers of samshaptakas were slaughtered in that battle. Bereft of sorrow and filled
with delight, they became Shakra's guests. With straight-tufted arrows, Partha, tiger among men, destroyed the
fourfold[Chariots, elephants, horses and infantry.] army of the sons of Dhritarashtra." '
