'Sanjaya said, "Both Vasudeva and Dhananjaya spent the night immersed in grief and sighed like serpents. They
could not sleep, even for an instant. Knowing that Nara and Narayana[Nara and Narayana are ancient sages. Nara is identified with Arjuna and Narayana with Krishna.] were enraged, the gods, together with
Vasava, were distressed. They began to reflect about what would transpire. Extremely terrible and harsh winds began to blow, portending of fearful calamities. A headless torso and a club could be seen on the disc of the sun.
Though there were no clouds in the sky, there were thunderstorms, tinged with lightning. The earth, with all its
mountains and forests, began to tremble. O great king! The ocean, the habitation of makaras, was turbulent. Rivers
flowed in an opposite direction, rather than towards the ocean. The lower and upper lips of rathas, horses, men and
elephants trembled. Predatory beasts seemed to be delighted, since Yama's kingdom would be extended. Mounts
wept and released excrement and urine. All these omens were terrible and made the body hair stand up. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! On beholding these, all the soldiers on your side were distressed. They heard about the
fierce vow that the extremely strong Savyasachi had taken.

'"The mighty-armed son of the chastiser of Paka[Paka was a demon destroyed by Indra and Indra is known as the chastiser of Paka.] spoke to Krishna. 'Comfort your sister, Subhadra, together
with her daughter-in-law[Abhimanyu's wife, Uttara.]. O Madhava! Dispel the sorrow from the daughter-in-law and the mother-in-law. O
lord! Comfort them with truthful words and assure them with what you say.' Thus addressed, with a distressed
mind, Vasudeva went to Arjuna's house. He comforted his distressed sister, who was overcome with grief on account of her son. 'O one born in the Varshneya lineage! Do not grieve, together with your daughter-in-law, for the
sake of your son. O timid one! All beings have an end that is determined by destiny. This is especially true of kshatriyas who are born in brave lineages. Your son has attained a death like that. Do not sorrow. This was good fortune for the brave maharatha who was like his father in valour. He has attained the objective decreed for kshatriyas, one that brave ones desire. He has conquered many enemies and sent them to their death. He has gone to the
eternal worlds that satisfy all desire, those obtained by those with meritorious deeds. These are obtained by those
with austerities, brahmacharya, learning and wisdom. The virtuous go there and your son has obtained them. You
are the mother of a hero. You are the wife of a hero. Your father-in-law is a hero and so are your kin. O fortunate
one! Do not grieve over a son who has attained the supreme objective. The inferior Saindhava, the slayer of a
child, together with his well-wishers, followers and relatives, will reap the fruits of his insolent deeds. O one with
the beautiful hips! As soon as night has passed, he will suffer for his wicked acts. Even if he goes to Amaravati[Indra's capital.],
he will not be able to escape from Partha. Tomorrow, you will hear that Saindhava's head has been severed in the
battle, in the vicinity of Samantapanchaka[Samantapanchaka is another name for Kurukshetra, usually explained because of the five (pancha) lakes created
by Parashurama. Alternatively, it is said that the land was five yojanas in every direction.]. Dispel your sorrow and do not weep. Having placed the dharma of
kshatriyas at the forefront, the brave one has attained the virtuous end. We, all the others whose livelihood is based
on arms, will also attain that. He was broad in his chest. He possessed mighty arms. He did not retreat from battle.
He killed the best. O one with the beautiful hips! Your son has gone to heaven. Overcome your fever. The valiant
one obeyed his fathers and those on his mother's side. Having killed a thousand enemies, the brave maharatha has
been slain. O queen! O kshatriya lady! Comfort your daughter-in-law and do not sorrow grievously. O one who
brings delight[The word used in the text is nandini. If Krishna is still addressing Subhadra, as seems to be the case, this is the
only way in which it can be translated. However, nandini also means daughter. And it is possible that Krishna is
also addressing Uttara, though later in the section, there is the suggestion that Uttara arrived later.]! You will hear extremely pleasant news tomorrow. Be free from sorrow. Partha accomplishes
whatever he pledges. It cannot be otherwise. Whatever your husband wishes is never unsuccessful. Even if men,
serpents, pishachas, wanderers of the night, birds, gods and asuras come to the aid of the king of Sindhu in the battle in the morning, he will no longer exist.'"'
