Bhishma said, "Thinking about emancipation, Shuka went to his father. Humbly and desiring what was beneficial, he saluted the preceptor and said, 'O illustrious one! You are accomplished in the dharma of moksha.
Tell  me  about  it.  O  lord! Let  supreme  tranquility  be  generated  in  my  mind.'  On  hearing  his  son's  words,  the
supreme rishi replied, 'O son! Study the different texts on moksha and dharma.' O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Shuka, supreme among those who know about the brahman, accepted the instructions of his father and studied the sacred texts of yoga and everything propounded by Kapila[That is, sankhya.]. He was united with the prosperity of the
brahman and became like Brahma in his valour. Vyasa thought that his son had become accomplished in knowledge about moksha. He said, 'Go to Janaka, the lord of Mithila. In particular, he will tell you everything about the
objective of emancipation.' Instructed by his father, he decided to go to Janaka, the king of Mithila, to ask him
about the benefit of dharma and devotion to moksha. He was told[By hjs father Vyasa told him not to use the powers of yoga.], 'Follow the path that humans take. Do not
proceed so as to cause wonder. Do not use your powers to travel through the sky. Be upright in your path. Do not
seek happiness along the way. In particular, do not get attached. And in particular, do not seek out companions.
You must not show any insolence when you perform sacrifices for that lord of men. If you are obedient to him, he
will dispel your doubts. The king is skilled about dharma and is accomplished in the sacred texts of moksha. I am
the officiating priest at his sacrifices. Without any doubt, you should do whatever he asks you to.' Having been
thus addressed, the sage, with dharma in his soul, left for Mithila.

'"He proceeded on foot, though he was capable of traversing the earth, with all its oceans, through the sky. He
passed mountains and traversed rivers and lakes. There were many kinds of forests, full of predators and diverse
other animals. He passed through the two varshas, Meru and Hari, and went through the varsha Himavat[A varsha is a division of the earth, a bit like a continent. Varshas are separated by mountain ranges. While geographical descriptions vary a bit, Meru, Hari and Himavat varshas are to the north of Bharatavarsha.]. In due
course, he arrived in Bharatavarsha. Having seen many countries, inhabited by the Chins and the Hunas, the great
sage arrived in the country known as Aryavarta. Thinking about the words of instruction given by his father, he
travelled, like a bird travelling through the sky. Despite many beautiful habitations, prosperous cities and wonderful gems, Shuka saw them, without quite seeing them[He did not stop there. Like a bird, he did not alight.]. There were beautiful groves and plains and sacred places
of pilgrimage. The traveller passed through them. In a short while, he reached Videha, protected by the great-
souled Dharmaraja[A title used for kings who follow dharma, not to be confused with Yudhishthira, to whom, the term is also
applied.] Janaka. He saw many villages there and many men with food. There were prosperous habitations of cowherds, full of large numbers of cattle. There were fields rich with rice and barley and hundreds of
lakes full of lotuses, inhabited by swans and cranes. They were beautiful and adorned. Videha was rich and densely
populated. Passing through it, he arrived in the beautiful and expensive groves of Mithila. It was full of elephants,
horses and chariots and populated with men and women. The undecaying one passed through them, seeing, but not
quite seeing. His mind bore a burden and he kept thinking about this. He found pleasure in his atman. He took delight in his atman and arrived in Mithila. When he arrived at the gate, he was restrained by the gatekeepers. He
waited there, free and devoted to meditation.

'"Having obtained permission, he entered. He advanced along the royal road, frequented by prosperous people.
Without any hesitation, he entered, desirous of meeting the king. But there too, the gatekeepers used harsh words
to bar his entry. Like earlier, without any anger, Shuka waited. The heat and the travel had not distressed him, despite his suffering from hunger, thirst and exhaustion. He did not suffer from any misery, nor did the heat trouble
him. Shuka waited there, like the midday sun. On seeing him there, one of the gatekeepers was filled with grief. He
honoured him in the proper way, greeting him with hands joined in salutation. He  escorted him to the second
chamber in the king's palace[This explains the earlier sets of gatekeepers. The first set stopped him at the gate of the city. The second set
stopped him at the entry to the palace, the first chamber, so to speak.]. O son! Seated there, Shuka began to think about moksha. The immensely radiant
one was indifferent as to whether a place was in the sun or in the shade. In a short while, the king's minister arrived. Joining his hands in salutation, he escorted him to the third chamber in the king's palace. The great inner
quarters were there, the equal of Chaitraratha[The name of Kubera's garden.]. It was excellently divided into waterbodies used for pleasure.
There were beautiful and flowering trees. The minister showed Shuka that supreme grove. He instructed that a seat
should be given to him and departed. There were young and beautiful women there, attired in handsome garments.
Their hips were excellent and their attire was wispy. They were adorned in ornaments made out of molten gold.
They were skilled in conversation and accomplished in dancing and singing. They smiled before they spoke and
their beauty was like that of apsaras. They were accomplished in all aspects of kama. They could discern signs and
were skilled in everything. Fifty such excellent women, foremost among courtesans, surrounded him. One after another, they seized his feet and washed them, worshipping him. They satisfied him with excellent objects that were
appropriate to the time and the place. O son! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Once he had eaten, one after another, they led him and showed him the beautiful groves in the inner quarters. They sported, laughed and sang before Shuka. He was generous in his spirit and knew about the truth. However, all of them entertained him in this
way. The one with the pure soul had been born from two sticks. His senses were under subjugation and his anger
had been conquered. The performer of the three kinds of karma did not have the three kinds of doubt concerning
these[The number three is difficult to understand. It can conceivably refer to sanchita (accumulated) karma, prarabdha karma (Icarma that has ripened or matured) and kriyamana karma (that undertaken in the current life).]. He was neither delighted, nor enraged. Those supreme women gave him a bed and a seat, decorated with
jewels, excellent and supreme. They were strewn with spreads and cushions. Having washed his feet, Shuka performed his evening prayers. He sat down on the seat and began to think about his auspicious objective. In the first
part of the night, he engaged in meditation there. As is proper, in the middle of the night, the lord ate and went to
sleep. In a short while, he arose and performed the rites of ablution. Surrounded by those women, the intelligent
one meditated. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Following the rites, in this way, Krishna's undecaying son
spent the day and the night in the king's household."'
