'Sanjaya said, "O foremost among the bulls of the Kuru lineage! Having vanquished Drona and other foremost
men on your side, with Hardikya at the forefront, the brave one of the Shini lineage laughed and spoke these words
to his charioteer. 'O charioteer! We are only instruments today. They have been consumed by Keshava and Phalguna. We have slain those whom that bull among men, the son of the lord of the gods, has already killed.' Having
thus spoken in that great battle, the bull among the Shini lineage, fierce archer and the destroyer of enemies, swiftly showered powerful arrows in every direction, like a hawk in search of flesh. The foremost of brave ones was
borne on horses that had the complexion of the moon, or conch shells. He immersed himself in the soldiers and
though they surrounded him from all sides, no one was capable of withstanding him. That fierce man was like the
rays of the sun. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He was valiant and his spirit was indomitable. Not a single
one from those masses was capable of standing up to him. His prowess was like that of the one with a thousand
eyes[Indra has a thousand eyes.]. He was like the sun in the firmament, when the rainy season is over.

'"There was a colourful warrior named Sudarshana and he was full of intolerance. He bore bow and arrows and
sported golden armour. That supreme among kings advanced against Satyaki and sought to counter him. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! An extremely terrible encounter took place between them and the warriors on your
side, and the Somakas praised it. The large number of immortals compared it to that between Vritra and Indra. Sudarshana pierced the foremost one of the Satvata lineage with hundreds of extremely sharp arrows. But before
those arrows could reach him, the bull among the Shini lineage struck them down with his own arrows. Sudarshana was stationed on his chariot. In similar fashion, when Satyaki, who was like Shakra, released arrows at him,
Sudarshana severed those supreme arrows into two or three fragments. On seeing that his arrows were destroyed
by the force of Satyaki's arrows, Sudarshana, whose energy was fierce, became angry. He released golden and
colourful arrows. He drew his bow completely back up to his ear and again released three sharp arrows that had
excellent tufts and were like the fire. These pierced Satyaki's body armour and penetrated his body. Yet again, the
son of the king affixed another four flaming arrows and struck the four horses that possessed the complexion of silver. Shini's grandson was like Indra in his valour. Thus afflicted, the spirited one quickly released a mass of extremely sharp arrows and killed Sudarshana's horses, roaring loudly. He released a broad-headed arrow that was
like the vajra or thunder and sliced off the head of his[Sudarshana's.] charioteer. The brave one from the Shini lineage then
used a kshurapra arrow to sever Sudarshana's head. It sported earrings and was like the full moon. It possessed a
radiant face and was severed from the body. O king! This was like the battle in ancient times, when the wielder of
the vajra used extreme force to kill Bala. Having slain the son and the grandson of a king in the battle, the spirited
and great-souled bull of the Yadu lineage was overcome by great delight. He was as resplendent as the king of the
gods. He then followed the path that Arjuna had taken, repulsing your soldiers with his mass of arrows. The chariot was borne by well-trained horses and the brave one among men filled everyone with wonder. All the supreme
warriors who were assembled there honoured him and wondered at his fierce deeds. With his arrows, he was like a
blazing fire that consumed everything that came within the range of the arrows."'
