'Dhritarashtra asked, "When Arjuna's son, the great archer, caused a rout with his straight-flying arrows, who were
the ones on my side who sought to counter him?"

'Sanjaya replied, "O king! Listen to how that young one sported around in that great battle, when he shattered
the array of chariots protected by Bharadvaja's son. On seeing that the lord of Madra was crushed in that battle by
the arrows of Subhadra's son, Shalya's younger brother angrily advanced and covered him with a shower of arrows. He pierced Arjuna's son, his horses and his charioteer, with ten arrows and roared loudly, asking him[Abhimanyu.] to
wait. However, Arjuna's son severed his head from his neck, his arms, his feet, his bow, his horses, his umbrella,
his standard, his charioteer, the three poles on the chariot, his seat, his wheels, his yoke, his quiver, the floor of the
chariot, his bows, his flag, those who protected his wheels and all his other implements. He was so swift in piercing them that no one could see him. That infinitely energetic one lost his life and fell down on the ground, pierced
through his ornaments and garments, like a giant tree[The word used in the text is chaitya. Chaitya has several meanings, such as place of worship, funeral mound,
sanctuary and so on. Given the context, tree seems to be the best translation.] shattered by the wind. His followers were terrified and fled
in all the directions. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On witnessing the deeds of Arjuna's son, all the beings
roared in applause in every direction. After Shalya's brother had been killed, many of his soldiers advanced against
Arjuna's son, loudly proclaiming their lineages, their residences and their names. They angrily attacked him, with
many different kinds of weapons in their hands. Intoxicated in their strength, they were on chariots, horses and elephants. There were others on foot. The great sound of arrows mingled with the sounds of hooves. There were roars
and loud exclamations, sounds like that of roaring lions. Some slapped their palms and twanged their bowstrings,
trying to scare Arjuna's son. They said, 'As long as we are alive, you will not escape with your life today.' On
hearing and seeing them, Subhadra's son laughed. Having smiled, he used arrows to pierce those who had struck
him first. He exhibited many wonderful weapons and his dexterity. In that encounter, Arjuna's brave son fought
gently with them[That is, he did not take them seriously.]. He had obtained weapons from Vasudeva and Dhananjaya. Krishna's son displayed them, just
like the two Krishnas[Krishna is also one of Arjuna's names. The two Krishnas are Krishna and Arjuna and Krishna's son means Arjuna's son.]. He strove again and again, flinging away the heavy burden that he had taken on. No gap
could be seen between his taking up and shooting an arrow. The blazing circle of his outstretched bow could be
seen in all the directions, like the flaming circle of the sun destroying all darkness. The twanging of his bowstring
and the terrible slapping of his palms could be heard. It was like the roaring of the clouds when a great thunderclap
is disgorged. Though he was intolerant, Subhadra's son was modest. The handsome one showed due reverence.
Showing respect to the heroes, he fought with arrows and other weapons. O great king! He started gently and became fierce later, like the illustrious sun during the autumn, after the monsoon is over. His great shower of arrows
was colourful. The arrows were gold-tufted and sharpened on stone. He angrily released hundreds of them, like the
rays of the sun in the sky. While Bharadvaja's son looked on, the immensely illustrious one shot kshurapras, vatsadantas, vipathas, narachas, half-narachas, bhallas and anjalikas[These are different types of arrows. Kshurapras are arrows with sharp edges, vatsadantas have heads like a calf's
tooth, vipathas are large arrows, narachas are made out of iron, bhallas have broad heads and anjalikas have
heads shaped like crescents.] and covered that array of chariots. Oppressed
by those arrows, those soldiers retreated."'
