'Vasudeva said, "O Sanjaya! I desire that the Pandavas are not destroyed and that they are prosperous. I love them.
O suta! In the same way, I desire the prosperity of King Dhritarashtra and his many sons. O Sanjaya! It has always
been my desire that there should be peace between them and I have told them this. I hear that this is also desired by
the king[Dhritarashtra.]. I think that this is also best for the Pandavas. O Sanjaya! Pandava[Yudhishthira.] has already exhibited a kind of
peacefulness that is extremely difficult to attain. Though Dhritarashtra and his sons are avaricious, there need not
be any quarrel between them. O Sanjaya! You know the nature of dharma better than I do or Yudhishthira does. O
Sanjaya! Why are you then finding fault with Pandava, who is endeavouring to accomplish his own duty? As is
known, his conduct towards his relative has always been virtuous, right from the beginning. On the present issue,
there is a difference of opinion among the brahmanas. Some say that deeds bring success in the hereafter. Others
discard deeds and say that success comes from learning. It is known to brahmanas that those who have food, but
fail to eat it, will remain hungry. It is only knowledge which leads to deeds that bears fruit, not other kinds[Not other kinds of knowledge.].
Deeds can be seen to bear fruits. One who is thirsty is satisfied by drinking water.

'"O Sanjaya! Therefore, the rites of deeds have been laid down and it is deeds that circulate. Thus, I think that
there is nothing superior to deeds. It is weak and vain to speak otherwise. Elsewhere[In the other world.], the gods are radiant because of their deeds. It is because of deeds that the wind blows. Determining day and night through his deeds, the
sun ceaselessly rises every day. Ceaselessly, the moon goes through fortnights and months, through nakshatras and
conjunctions. The fire burns ceaselessly and through his deeds, kindles for the welfare of beings. Through her
strength, the goddess earth ceaselessly bears a heavy load. The rivers ceaselessly bear the waters that satisfy the
wishes of all beings. The destroyer of Bala[Indra.] has a lot of energy and ceaselessly showers down, resounding in the
sky and in heaven. He ceaselessly practises brahmacharya, desiring to be the foremost among the gods. Shakra
gave up happiness and his mind's desires. He became the foremost through his deeds. He steadfastly protects truth
and dharma, with self-control, fortitude, equanimity and amiability. Cultivating all these, the foremost Maghavan
obtained the kingdom of the gods. Brihaspati controlled his mind and restraining his soul in the proper fashion, followed brahmacharya. He gave up happiness and controlled his senses. He thus obtained praise and reverence from
the gods[Brihaspati is the preceptor of the gods.]. The nakshatras shine because of their deeds. So do the Rudras, the Adityas, the Vasus, the Vishvas[The Vishvadevas.],
King Yama, Vaishravana Kubera, the gandharvas, the yakshas and the shining apsaras. The sages shine there[In another world.] because they observe brahmacharya, study the Vedas and follow the rituals. You know this to be the dharma of all the
worlds and for brahmanas, kshatriyas and vaishyas. You know what learned ones know.

'"O Sanjaya! Why are you then pleading for the Kouravas? Know that he is always devoted to the sacred texts
and to ashvamedha and rajasuya[Horse sacrifice and royal sacrifice respectively. The reference is to Yudhishthira.]. He is also united with bows and armour, with arm guards, chariots and
weapons. If the Parthas knew of some other means of accomplishing the objective, without slaughtering the
Kouravas, whereby dharma could be saved and the purity of deeds preserved, they would force Bhimasena to follow the conduct of an arya[Meaning that they would force Bhimasena to control his rage.]. But if they are engaged in deeds followed by their ancestors, and in the process, destiny makes them confront death, that death will be regarded as praiseworthy, because they will have accomplished
their own deeds, to the best of their capacities. I think that you know everything and I would like to hear your response to a question. Is it better for a king to wage war in accordance with dharma, or is it better for him not to
wage war in accordance with dharma? O Sanjaya! You must first consider the division into the four varnas and the
deeds that are decreed for each. After having determined the duty of the Pandavas, you can then praise or censure
it, according to your inclination. A brahmana must study, sacrifice, give, visit the sacred tirthas, teach, officiate for
those who are fit to sacrifice and receive gifts that he knows he can accept. A king must protect his subjects, act in
accordance with dharma, steadfastly give, perform sacrifices, study all the Vedas, take a wife and observe the sacred deeds of a householder. A vaishya must not study. He must steadfastly sustain agriculture, animal husbandry
and trade, accumulate riches, do what is pleasant for brahmanas and kshatriyas and observe the conduct of dharma
and the sacred deeds of a householder. The ancient dharma of shudras is known to be that he must serve and honour brahmanas. Both study and sacrifice are prohibited for him. He must ceaselessly ensure the welfare of all beings. The king must tirelessly protect all the varnas in the pursuit of their own dharma. He must not be addicted to
desire and must be impartial across all beings. He must never be addicted to desire that is adharma. If there is
someone with all the qualities of dharma, he must acknowledge his superiority. He must chastise inferior subjects.
If he acts in this fashion, he is virtuous. If he violently seizes land that belongs to others, intoxicated because of his
powers, he angers destiny and this leads to strife between kings, creating armour, weapons and bows. For the task
of killing dasyus, Indra created armour, weapons and bows. Whether riches are stolen secretly in private, or
whether they are stolen forcibly in public, the two crimes are equally reprehensible. O Sanjaya! How is the act of
Dhritarashtra's son different?

'"Overcome by intolerance and because of his avarice, he thinks that whatever he desires is dharma. The share
of the Pandavas was determined. Why should we be robbed of those by others? If we are killed in battle, that will
be praiseworthy. Inheritance is better than the conquest of another's kingdom[It is better that the Pandavas fight to obtain their ancestral kingdom than fight and win another kingdom.]. O Sanjaya! In the midst of their
kingdom[The critical edition says rajya (kingdom), while other versions say raja (kings). The latter translative as 'in the
midst of the kings'. Given what follows, this alternative version fits better.], recount this ancient dharma to the Kouravas. Those who have been assembled by Dhritarashtra's sons
are stupid and evil and are under the control of death. Behold again the evil deed that the Kurus committed in the
midst of their assembly hall. The illustrious Droupadi is the beloved wife of the Pandavas and she has virtuous
conduct. With Bhishma at the forefront, the Kurus ignored it when she was seized by that lecher[Duhshasana.] and was forced
to weep. If the Kurus who were assembled there, young and old, had tried to prevent it then, Dhritarashtra would
have performed an act I would have approved of. This would have been a good deed for his sons too. Disregarding
all norms, Duhshasana dragged Krishna to the midst of the assembly hall, with her fathers-in-law persent. Brought
there, she was in a pitiable state, but found no protector other than Kshatta[Vidura.]. The kings in that assembly hall were
such wretches that they were incapable of protesting. For the sake of dharma, Kshatta was the only one who spoke.
Knowing dharma, he censured the one who possesses limited intelligence[Duhshasana.]. You did not speak of dharma in that
assembly hall. But you see it fit to instruct the Pandavas now. However, when she was brought into that assembly
hall, Krishna did perform a pure deed that was extremely difficult. Like a boat in the midst of the ocean, she freed
herself and the Pandavas from that difficult situation[This has been described in Section 27 (Volume 3).]. When Krishna stood before her fathers-in-law in that assembly hall, the son of the suta[Karna.] spoke to her. 'O Yajnaseni! You have no other recourse left. Go to Dhritarashtra's
house. They have been defeated and are no longer your husbands. O beautiful one! Choose another man as your
husband.' This was as heart-rending as a stake. They were extremely terrible and pierced the heart. Karna's words
were like arrows that possessed great energy. They were embedded in Bibhatsu Phalguna's heart. When they
donned garments that were made of black antelope skin, Duhshasana also spoke these harsh words. 'All of you are
like sterile and destroyed sesamum seeds. You have been ruined and will go to heaven for a very long time.'

Shakuni, the deceitful king of Gandhara, spoke to the Parthas at the time of gambling with the dice. 'Nakula has
been won. What stake is left other than Krishna Yajnaseni[The sequence is not quite right. Nakula was the first of the Pandavas to be won. The question of Droupadi becoming the stake arose after the other Pandavas had also been won over.]?' O Sanjaya! You yourself know these reprehensible
words that were spoken at the time of the gambling.

'"I wish to go there myself, to settle matters before there is a disaster. If I can bring peace to the Kurus, without
sacrificing the interests of the Pandavas, I will accomplish a great and auspicious task. I will free the Kurus from
the noose of death. I will speak words that are full of wisdom. They will be based on dharma and will be in conformity with the principles of non-violence. When I go there, I hope the Kurus honour me and the sons of Dhritarashtra listen to my words. If it is otherwise, Phalguna will ride on his chariot and Bhima will arm himself for
war. Know that because of their own evil deeds, the wretched sons of Dhritarashtra will be burnt down. When the
Pandavas were vanquished[In the gambling match.], Dhritarashtra's son spoke many terrible words. Wielding a club in his hand, the enraged Bhimasena will remind Duryodhana about these at the right moment. The angry Suyodhana is a giant tree.
Karna is the trunk and Shakuni constitutes the branches. Duhshasana is the abundance of flowers and fruit. The
foolish King Dhritarashtra is the root. Yudhishthira is a giant tree that is full of dharma. Arjuna is the trunk and
Bhimasena constitutes the branches. The sons of Madri constitute the abundance of flowers and fruit. The brahman
and brahmanas constitute the root. King Dhritarashtra and his sons are the forest. O Sanjaya! The Pandavas are the
tigers. Do not cut down the forest with its tigers. Do not banish the tigers from the forest. Without the forest, the
tiger is killed. Without the tigers, the forest is cut down. Therefore, the tiger protects the forest and the forest sustains the tiger. O Sanjaya! Dhritarashtra's sons are like the creepers of dharma, but the Pandavas are shala trees. A
creeper cannot grow without resorting to a large tree. The Parthas are positioned to serve, but those scorchers of
enemies are also positioned, ready to fight. Let Dhritarashtra, lord of men, decide on what he has to do. The great-
souled Pandavas are the followers of dharma and are positioned for peace. But they are capable of fighting. O
learned one! Relate this accurately."'
