'Sanjaya said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were many in the ranks of both the sides and they were
arrayed in vyuhas. All of them advanced, aspiring to attain Brahma's world. In the encounter that followed, similar
types of soldiers did not fight. Rathas did not fight with rathas, nor foot soldiers with foot soldiers. Horses did not
fight with horses, nor elephants with warriors on elephants. In that great and dreadful clash between the armies,
there were perversions. There were men, elephants and chariots scattered all over the place. In that great and terrible destruction, there was no discrimination.

'"O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Shalya, Kripa, Chitrasena, Duhshasana and Vikarna quickly resorted to
their chariots. Those brave ones made the standards of the Pandavas tremble in the battle. In the encounter, the soldiers of the Pandus were slaughtered by those great-souled ones. They could not find a protector and were like a
boat submerged in the water. Just as the winter strikes the inner organs of cattle, like that, Bhishma wounded the
inner organs of the sons of Pandu. The great-souled Partha did likewise towards your soldiers. Many elephants that
were like mountains or clouds were brought down. Partha was also seen to bring down leaders among men. He
struck them with thousands of iron arrows. The great elephants were seen to fall down there, shrieking piteously.
Great-souled ones were killed, their bodies still adorned with ornaments. There were beautiful and scattered heads,
still wearing earrings. O king! That extremely terrible encounter was destructive of the supreme among brave ones.
Bhishma fought with the valiant Pandava Dhananjaya. O king! On witnessing the valour with which the grandfather fought, the Kouravas placed Brahma's world at the forefront and did not retreat. They wished to be killed in
battle, so that they might attain heaven. The Pandavas did not retreat from that destruction of the supreme among
brave ones either. O great king! O lord of men! The Pandavas remembered the many and varied hardships that they
had to suffer earlier on account of you and your son. The brave ones abandoned fear in that battle and placed Brahma's world at the forefront. They cheerfully fought with your sons and those on your side.

'"In the battle, the maharatha commander[Dhrishtadyumna.] addressed the soldiers. 'O Somakas! Together with the Srinjayas,
attack Gangeya.' On hearing the words of the commander, the Somakas, together with the Srinjayas, attacked
Gangeya and showered down weapons on him from every direction. O king! Thus assailed, your father, Shantanu's
son, became intolerant and started to fight with the Srinjayas. O father[The word used is tata.]! His achievements were glorious. In earlier times, the intelligent Rama[Parashurama.] had imparted an instruction of weapons to him, one that could destroy the
armies of enemies. He resorted to that instruction, capable of destroying the forces of the enemy. The aged grandfather of the Kurus, Bhishma, slew ten thousand of enemy heroes from the ranks of the Parthas every day. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! But with the tenth day having been reached, Bhishma alone slew seven maharathas from the Matsyas and the Panchalas in the encounter and killed innumerable elephants and horses. In the
great battle, the great-grandfather killed five thousand rathas and fourteen thousand men. He again killed one thousand elephants and ten thousand horses. O lord of the earth! Your father killed them through the strength of his instruction. He agitated the ranks of all the kings and brought down Virata's beloved brother, Shatanika. O great
king! Having killed Shatanika in the battle the powerful Bhishma brought down another one thousand kings with
broad-headed arrows. In the army of the Parthas, there were kings who had followed Dhananjaya. Whichever one
among these approached Bhishma was sent to Yama's abode. In this way, Bhishma remained at the head of the
army and surpassed the soldiers of the Parthas. He covered them and all the ten directions, with his net of arrows.
He performed extremely great deeds on the tenth day. With the bow and arrows, he was stationed between the two
armies. O king! None of the kings were capable of glancing at him. He was like the scorching midday sun in the
sky, during the summer. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Just as Shakra scorched the army of the daityas in
battle, Bhishma scorched that of the Pandaveyas.

'"On witnessing his valour, Madhusudana, the son of Devaki, affectionately spoke these words to Dhananjaya.
'This Bhishma, Shantanu's son, is stationed between the two armies. Kill him with your power and become victorious. He is shattering our soldiers there. Go and use your strength to repulse him there. O lord! No one other than
you is capable of withstanding Bhishma's arrows.' O king! The one with the monkey on his banner was incited at
that moment. He used his arrows to make Bhishma, his standard, his chariot and his horses disappear. But the bull,
the foremost among the Kurus countered Pandava's arrows with his own torrent of arrows and dispersed the many
showers of arrows that had been targeted towards him. O great king! The valiant Dhrishtaketu, the king of Pancha-
la, Pandava Bhimasena, Parshata Dhrishtadyumna, the twins, Chekitana, the five from Kekaya, Satyaki, Subhadra's son, Ghatotkacha, Droupadi's sons, Shikhandi, the brave Kuntibhoja, Susharma[The Susharma on the Pandava side mentioned earlier.], Virata and many other
immensely strong ones among the Pandaveyas were oppressed by Bhishma's arrows and were immersed in an
ocean of grief. Phalguna rescued them. With great force, Shikhandi grasped a supreme weapon. Protected by Kiri-
ti, he dashed towards Bhishma. Knowing what must be done in the battle, the victorious Bibhatsu killed all the followers[Bhishma's followers.] and himself rushed against Bhishma. Satyaki, Chekitana, Parshata Dhrishtadyumna, Virata, Drupada
and the Pandavas who were Madri's sons also attacked Bhishma, protected by the one whose bow was firm. In that
battle, Abhimanyu and Droupadi's five sons also attacked Bhishma in the encounter, holding up great weapons. All
of them were firm in wielding the bow and never ran away from the field of battle. They pierced Bhishma with
well-aimed arrows all over his body. However, the one whose soul was never distressed disregarded all those arrows released by the best of kings. He penetrated the Pandava army. As if smiling, the grandfather repulsed all
those arrows. Bhishma smiled repeatedly at Panchala Shikhandi and remembering that he had been a woman, did
not target a single arrow at him. But he killed seven maharathas from Drupada's army of rathas. Cries of lamentation then arose among the Matsyas, the Panchalas and the Chedis, all of whom had attacked the solitary one. With
supreme horses, a cluster of chariots, elephants and foot soldiers, they enveloped the solitary one, like clouds
around the sun. Bhishma, the son of Bhagirathi, scorched many enemies in that battle. There was a battle between
Bhishma and Kiriti, who placed Shikhandi at the forefront, there, like that between the gods and the asuras."'
