Sanjaya said, "When Karna was brought down, your soldiers fled. Dasharha joyfully embraced Partha and said,
'O Dhananjaya! Through your strength, Karna, who was like Vritra, has been killed. Men will talk about the deaths
of Karna and Vritra. The infinitely energetic one[Indra.] used the vajra to slay Vritra in a battle. You have slain Karna
with your bow's sharp arrows. Your fame will be renowned in this world and will bring you glory. O Kounteya!
Go and tell this to the intelligent Dharmaraja. For a long time, this death of Karna in the battle has been desired.
You should go and tell this to Dharmaraja and free yourself of the debt.' Having been thus addressed by Keshava,
bull among the Yadu lineage, Partha agreed. The foremost chariot of the foremost among rathas was turned back.
Govinda spoke these words to Dhrishtadyumna, Yudhamanyu, Madri's sons, Vrikodara and Yuyudhana, 'Remain
here and carefully confront the enemy, until we have returned, after informing the king that Karna has been killed
by Arjuna.' Having taken their leave of those brave ones, they departed for the king's abode.

' "With Partha, Govinda saw Yudhishthira. The tiger among kings was lying down on an excellent golden bed.
Joyfully, they touched the king's feet. On discerning their joy and the superhuman marks of wounds, Yudhishthira
deduced that Radheya must have been killed and arose. Vasudeva, the descendant of the Yadu lineage, pleasant in
speech, told him everything about Karna's death. Joining his hands in salutation, Achyuta Krishna smiled a little
and told Yudhishthira that his enemy had been killed. 'O king! It is through good fortune that the wielder of Gandi-
va, Pandava Vrikodara, you and the Pandavas who are the sons of Madri are safe. You have been freed from the
battle that led to a destruction of heroes and made the body hair stand up. O king! Quickly undertake whatever
tasks must be done next. The cruel and immensely strong Vaikartana, son of a suta, has been slain. O Indra among
kings! It is through good fortune that you have obtained victory. O Pandava! You are prospering through good fortune. The worst among men laughed at Krishna[Krishnaa, Droupadi.] when she had been won in the gambling match. The earth is
now drinking the blood of that son of a suta. O bull among the Kuru lineage! With arrows mangling his limbs, that
enemy of yours is now lying down. O tiger among men! Look at him. He has been shattered by many arrows.' Delighted, Yudhishthira honoured Dasharha back in return. O Indra among kings! He joyfully said, 'This is good fortune. It is fortunate. O mighty-armed one! O Devaki's son! This is all because of you. With you as a charioteer,
Partha was able to exhibit this manliness today.' The best of the Kuru lineage grasped his[Krishna's.] right hand, adorned
with a bracelet, and addressed both Partha Arjuna, the upholder of dharma, and Keshava. 'Narada had said that
you were the gods Nara and Narayana. You are the ancient and supreme men, united in establishing dharma. The
revered and intelligent Krishna Dvaipayana also told me this. O mighty-armed ones! The lord told me about that
divine account. O Krishna! It is because of your powers that Dhananjaya confronted his enemies with Gandiva and
defeated them, not retreating before any of them. Our victory is certain and their defeat is certain. After all, when
Partha fights in the battle, you have agreed to be his charioteer.' O great king! Having spoken these words, the maharatha ascended his gold-decorated chariot, which was yoked to horses with the complexion of ivory and with
black tails. The tiger among men was surrounded by his own soldiers. The brave Krishna and Arjuna cheerfully
followed him. Surrounded by many and conversing pleasantly with the brave and resplendent Madhava and Phal-
guna, he went to see the field of battle.

' "He saw Karna, bull among men, lying down in the battle. Arrows released from Gandiva had splintered all
over his body. King Yudhishthira saw that Karna had been slain, together with his son. He praised those two tigers
among men, Madhava and Pandava, and said, 'O Govinda! Today, with my brothers, I have become the king of the
earth. This is because you are our protector and we are sheltered by your bravery and your learning. On seeing that
the proud Radheya, tiger among men, has been slain, Dhritarashtra's evil-souled son will lose all hope today, both
about remaining alive and about the kingdom. Maharatha Karna has been killed. O bull among men! It is because
of your favours that we are successful. O descendant of the Yadu lineage! You have ensured that the wielder of
Gandiva is victorious. O Govinda! It is through good fortune that you have been victorious. It is through good fortune that Karna has been brought down.' O Indra among kings! Delighted, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira praised Janardana, and also Arjuna, in many ways. The joy of the kings and the maharathas also increased. O great king! When
the descendant of the suta lineage was killed, Nakula, Sahadeva, Pandava Vrikodara, Satyaki, the foremost rathas
among the Vrishnis, Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi, the Pandus, the Panchalas and the Srinjayas honoured
Kounteya[Arjuna.]. They increased the desire of King Yudhishthira, Pandu's son, for victory. Those strikers delighted in
fighting and wished to accomplish their objective. With eloquent words, they praised and honoured the two Krishnas, the scorchers of enemies. Then, filled with great delight, the maharathas left for their respective camps. In this
way, there was a great destruction and it made the body hair stand up. O king! All of this was the consequence of
your evil counsel. Why are you grieving?" '

Vaishampayana said, 'O king! On hearing the unpleasant news, Dhritarashtra, the lord of the earth, fell down unconscious on the ground. Kouravya was overcome by supreme distress. Queen Gandhari, who was devoted to the
truth and knew about dharma, also fell down. Vidura and Sanjaya raised the king and comforted the monarch. The
women of the king's household raised Gandhari. Comforted by them, the king regained his senses, but was silent.'

This ends Karna Parva.