Parashara said, 'O son! I have told you about the dharma that is recommended for householders. I will now
tell you about the techniques for austerities. Listen attentively. O best among men! It is often seen that because of being overcome with tamas and rajas, householders suffer from attachment and have a sense of ownership. Since they resort to homes, men acquire cattle, fields, riches, wives, sons and servants. In their conduct, they
are always seen to look towards these. Their attachment and aversion are always seen to increase. Overcome by
attachment and aversion, a man comes under the control of material objects. O lord of men! When confusion has
been generated, the object known as desire is generated. Seeking to obtain objects of pleasure, he becomes addicted to desire. He does not see anything beyond the gains from ordinary pleasure and desire. Having become overwhelmed by greed, attachment is increased in people. Men become interested in sustaining these objects. Even if
he knows, a man performs acts that should not be undertaken, for the sake of objects. Because he is overcome with
affection for the children, he is tormented at the prospect of these[The objects.] being destroyed. He is full of pride and seeks
to protect himself against all defeat. He acts so as to enjoy pleasure and is thereby destroyed. It is known that those
who have seen the brahman are full of intelligence and engage in austerities. Such men seek auspicious deeds and
give up happiness[Happiness that results from desire.]. O king! They obtain indifference towards loss of affection and riches and physical and mental hardships. That indifference leads to knowledge of the atman and knowledge of what the sacred texts have said.
O king! Having seen the purport of the sacred texts, they see the importance of austerities. O Indra among men! A
man who realizes what is essential and what is damaging is extremely rare. Realizing that all beloved happiness
decays, he resorts to austerities. O son! Austerities are everything. They are recommended even for those who are
inferior. A person who has conquered his senses and is self-controlled is on the road to heaven. O king! Earlier, the
lord Prajapati created subjects through austerities, sometimes resorting to different kinds of  vows. O  son!  The
Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, Agni, the Ashvins, the Maruts, the Vishvadevas, the Sadhyas, the ancestors, the
large numbers of Maruts[Maruts are mentioned twice.], the yakshas, the rakshasas, the gandharvas, the siddhas, the other residents of heaven
and all other celestial ones obtained success through austerities. In the beginning, Brahma created brahmanas. Earlier, through their austerities, they prospered the earth and also roamed around in heaven. In the world of mortals,
kings and other householders who are seen to have been born in great lineages have all obtained the fruits of their
austerities[Austerities performed in earlier lives.]. The silken garments, the radiant ornaments, the mounts, the seats and the vehicles-all these are the
fruits of austerities. Thousands of beautiful women who follow them and the dwelling in palaces-all these are the
fruits of austerities. The best of beds, many kinds of objects of pleasure and all that is-these are the outcomes of
past deeds. O scorcher of enemies! There is nothing in the three worlds that cannot be obtained through austerities.
The renunciation of objects of pleasure also represents the fruits of earlier deeds. Whether he is happy or miserable, a man must abandon greed. O supreme among kings! He must use his mind and intelligence to look towards
the sacred texts. Discontent leads to misery. Greed leads to confusion of the senses. Wisdom is then destroyed and
knowledge is not accompanied by practice. When wisdom is destroyed, one does not see what is proper. Therefore,
even when happiness has been destroyed, a man must resort to fierce austerities. Whatever is beneficial represents
happiness. Whatever is hated is said to represent misery. Behold. These are the fruits of austerities that have been
performed and have not been performed. If one performs unblemished austerities, one goes to what is best. One
always faces the fortunate and enjoys the objects of pleasure. However, a person who gives up the virtuous path
and goes after the fruits[That is, unblemished austerities are those that are performed without any desire for the fruits.] obtains the unpleasant and faces many kinds of misery, despite obtaining objects of
pleasure. Dharma, austerities and donations are desirable. But because desire is generated, one performs wicked
deeds and obtains hell. O supreme among men! But whether he faces joy or misery, if a man does not deviate from
his own conduct, he possesses the sight of the sacred texts. O lord of the earth! It is said that the pleasure from
touch, taste, sight, scent and hearing only lasts for as long as it takes for an arrow to fall down on the ground.
When these are over, a fierce pain again takes over. That is the reason the learned praise emancipation, productive
of supreme bliss. Those who follow that obtain fruits with superior qualities. For those who always have a conduct
in accordance with dharma, kama and artha do not diminish them. Householders must never make efforts to serve
objects of pleasure. But it is my view that they must always make efforts to follow their own dharma. Those who
are revered and are born in noble families always have the sight of the sacred texts. However, those who have separated themselves from acts of dharma are incapable of controlling their atmans. All other deeds that are performed by men are destroyed. These should be ignored in this world and nothing other than deeds of austerities
followed. However, there may be householders who have made up their minds to perform deeds. O king! They
should skilfully observe their own dharma and offer havya and kavya. All the male and female rivers flow to the
ocean and find their refuge there. In that way, all the other ashramas are based on that of the householder.'"'
