'"Akritavrana said, 'O fortunate one! O woman! O child! There are two hardships. Which of these do you actually
wish to redress? O fortunate one! If it is your view that the lord of Soubha should be urged, then, desirous of your
welfare, the great-souled Rama will ask him accordingly. Or if you wish to see Bhishma, the son of the river, vanquished in battle by the intelligent Bhargava Rama, he will do that also. O one with the beautiful smiles! We will
think about what should be done after hearing your words, and those of Srinjaya.'

'"Amba replied, 'O illustrious one! When he abducted me, Bhisma acted out of ignorance. O brahmana! Bhishma did not know that my mind was set on Shalva. Before deciding, you should bear this in mind too. Having decided in accordance with what is right, then determine what should be done. O brahmana! Decide what needs to be
done about both Bhishma, tiger among the Kurus, and the king of Shalva. I have told you exactly about the reasons
for my unhappiness. O illustrious one! In accordance with the reasons, decide on a course of action.'

'"Akritavrana said, 'O fortunate one! O one with the beautiful complexion! What you have said about dharma is
correct. Now listen to these words of mine. O timid one! If the son of the river had not taken you to Gajasahrya, on
the instructions of Rama, Shalva would have bowed down his head and accepted you. O fortunate one! O beautiful
one! But you have been won over and abducted. O one with the beautiful waist! Therefore, King Shalva has a
doubt about you. Bhishma is insolent about his manliness and victory. I think it is appropriate that action should be
taken against Bhishma.'

'"Amba replied, 'O brahmana! That has always been the great desire in my heart, if only I could kill Bhishma in
battle. O mighty-armed one! Whether you think that the fault lies with Bhishma or King Shalva, chastise the one
because of whom I have faced this extreme misery.'"

'Bhishma said, "While they were conversing in this way, the day passed. O best of the Bharata lineage! It was
night and a pleasant and cool breeze blew. Then Rama appeared, like the blazing fire in his energy. O king! He was
surrounded by his disciples. The sage had matted hair and was clad in bark. The unblemished one with an indomitable soul held a bow in his hand and a sword and a battle axe. O tiger among kings! He approached King
Srinjaya. On seeing him, all the ascetics and the immensely ascetic king arose, hands joined in salutation. So did
the ascetic maiden. They eagerly honoured Bhargava with madhuparka[A respectful offering made to guests, consisting of honey and curd.]. Having been shown homage, he seated
himself among them. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Jamadagni's son and rajarshi Srinjaya conversed about
earlier times. When this conversation was over, in due course of time, the rajarshi spoke these sweet words, full of
meaning, to the immensely strong Rama, foremost among the Bhrigus. 'O Rama! This is my daughter's daughter.
O lord! She is the daughter of the king of Kashi. O one who knows what should be done! Listen to her and decide
on an appropriate course of action.' Rama replied, 'Tell me your supreme account.' She approached Rama, who
was like a blazing fire. The beautiful one lowered her head at Rama's feet. She touched them with hands that were
like the petals of lotuses and stood before him. Her eyes were filled with tears and she wept in grief. She sought
refuge with the descendant of the Bhrigu lineage, the one who is everyone's refuge.

'"Rama said, 'O daughter of a king! You are like Srinjaya to me. Tell me about the grief in your mind and I will
act in accordance with your words.'

'"Amba replied, 'O illustrious one! O one who is great in his vows! I have sought refuge with you. I am immersed in this ocean and mud of sorrow. O lord! Save me.'"

'Bhishma said, "Rama saw her beauty, her youthful age and her extremely delicate form and began to think.

'What is she going to say?' Flooded by compassion, Rama, supreme among those of the Bhrigu lineage, thought in
this fashion for a long time. Rama spoke to the one with the beautiful smiles. 'Tell me.' She told Bhargava everything, exactly as it had happened. After having heard the words of the princess, Jamadagni's son made up his mind
and told the one with the beautiful thighs, 'O beautiful one! I will send word to Bhishma, foremost among the Kurus. When he has heard my words, in conformity with dharma, that lord of men will act accordingly. O fortunate
one! If Jahnavi's son[Bhisma. Jahnavi is another name for Ganga.] does not act in accordance with my words, I will use the energy of my weapons to burn
him down in battle, together with his advisers. O princess! Or if you are so inclined, I will force the brave lord of
Shalva to a course of action.'

'"Amba replied, 'O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! When Bhishma heard that my mind had earlier turned towards King Shalva, he discarded me. I went to the king of Soubha and spoke words that were difficult to speak[As a woman.].
But doubting my character, he did not accept me. O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! You should think about all
this and then use your own intelligence to decide on the right course of action. Bhishma, the one who is mighty in
his vows, is the root cause of my hardship. He used force to overcome and abduct me. O mighty-armed one!
Bhishma is the reason behind this unhappiness. Kill him. O tiger among the Bhrigu lineage! It is because of him
that I am wandering around in this supreme misery. O Bhargava! He is greedy and insolent because of his victory.
O unblemished one! It is appropriate that you should take revenge against him. O lord! When the descendant of the
Bharata lineage was abducting me, I thought of this resolution in my mind, that the one who is great in his vows
should be killed. O Rama! O unblemished one! Therefore, fulfil this desire of mine. O mighty-armed one! Kill
Bhishma, like Purandara[Indra.] slew Vritra.'"'
