'Lomasha said, "Maharshi Bhrigu had a son by the name of Bhargava Chyavana. This immensely radiant one performed austerities near this lake. O Pandava! That immensely energetic one established himself like a pillar in this
spot for the brave. O lord of the earth! He remained in the same spot for a very long period of time. O king! After a
long period of time, the rishi was covered by an anthill and that was covered with creepers. This was coverd by
ants. Thus that intelligent one became like a mound of earth on every side. O king! He continued with his austerities inside that anthill.

'"After a long period of time, a king named Sharyati came to amuse himself in that beautiful and supreme lake.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were four thousand women with him, ones he had married. There was
also a daughter named Sukanya and her brows were beautiful. Surrounded by her friends and adorned in diverse
ornaments, she roamed around and approached Bhargava's anthill. On seeing the beautiful trees there, the one with
the beautiful teeth began to roam around, surrounded by her friends. She was beautiful, young and intoxicated with
pangs of love. She broke off the branches of the trees in the forest, burdened with heavy blossoms. The wise Bhargava saw her alone, when she was without her friends. Like a flash of lighning, he saw her clad in a single piece of
garment and adorned in her ornaments. On seeing her roaming in the forest alone, the supremely radiant brahmarshi, endowed with the strength of austerities, was stirred by desire. He spoke to the fortunate one in his broken
voice, but she could not hear him. Then Sukanya saw Bhargava's eyes through the anthill. Because of her curiosity,
she was deluded of her intelligence. Exclaiming, 'What is this!' she pierced the eyes with a thorn.

'"He was easily stirred to great rage and when his eyes had been pierced, he was angered. He cursed Sharyati's
soldiers that all their bowel and bladder movements should cease. On seeing that the bowel and bladder movements of his soldiers had stopped, the king was saddened and asked, 'The great-souled Bhargava is old and is especially prone to anger. He is always engaged in austerities. Who has injured him today, knowingly or unknowingly?
Tell me the truth immediately.' At that, all the soldiers replied, 'We do not know of any injury. Do what you wish
and find out through some other means.' Then the king himself used conciliation and threats. He asked his group
of well-wishers, but they did not know anything. On seeing her father saddened and his soldiers oppressed by distress, Sukanya then said, 'When I was roaming, I saw some shining being inside the anthill. I thought that it was a
firefly and I pierced it.' Having heard this, Sharyati immediately went to the anthill. He saw Bhargava there, aged
in austerities and aged in age. Joining his hands in salutation, the lord of the earth prayed for his soldiers. 'Please
pardon what that girl did to you out of ignorance.' Bhargava Chyavana then told the lord of the earth, 'She is beautiful and generous. But she has been overcome by grief and delusion. O king! Give your daughter to me as a wife.
O lord of the earth! I tell you truly that only then will I pardon.' On hearing the rishi's words, Sharyati did not hesitate at all. He gave his daughter to the great-souled Chyavana.

'"After having married the maiden, Chyavana became pacified. Having obtained the favours, the king returned,
together with the soldiers. The unblemished Sukanya obtained the ascetic as her husband. She always tended to
him lovingly and observed the rules of austerities. The one with the beautiful face, devoid of discontentment,
served the fire and the guests and swiftly began to worship Chyavana."'
