Kapila said, 'Ascetics see these are the outcomes and there is nothing in the three worlds that can obstruct
them[The sense has to be deduced. Ascetics can see that the outcomes of all acts lead to temporary fruits that are not
permanent.]. Those learned ones are without opposite sentiments. They do not bow down. They are not bound
down by any hopes. They are free from all kinds of sins. They roam around, pure and unblemished. They are firm
in their resolution that renunciation represents emancipation. They base themselves in the brahman. They are full
of the brahman. They have made the brahman their abode. They are devoid of sorrow and have destroyed rajas.
They obtain the eternal worlds. They obtain the supreme objective. Why do they need garhasthya[Since being a householder seems to be inferior to renunciation.]?'
'"Syumarashmi said, 'Even for those with supreme faith, even for those who seek the supreme objective, there
is no option but to resort to garhasthya. All other ashramas depend on it. All living beings sustain themselves by
depending on their mothers. In that way, all the other ashramas are possible because they are based on garhasthya.
The householder performs sacrifices. The householder observes austerities. Any dharma that one wishes to pursue
has garhasthya as its foundation. O sage! Everything that has life is engaged in procreation. It is not possible to
generate offspring in any other mode. O brahmana! All grass and grain, in plains and mountains, depend on this
mode. And life is sustained on those grass and grain. Therefore, how can any eloquent person say that there can be
emancipation without the householder stage? Those who are without faith, those who are without wisdom, those
who are devoid of subtle insight, those who are without hope, those who are lazy and exhausted and those who are
tormented because of their own deeds-even though they may be regarded as learned-these are the only ones
who regard renunciation as the supreme ashrama. The firm and eternal injunctions are for the sake of the three
worlds. That is the reason an illustrious brahmana is worshipped from the time of his birth[Presumably because brahmanas uphold those injunctions.]. Even before the ceremony of conception has been performed, mantras exist in brahmanas and enable them to perform, without any uncertainty, direct and indirect acts. In cremations, renewed attachment[Probably rebirth in a new body.], using vessels for food, donating cattle and
other animals and immersing funeral cakes in water, these[The mantras.] become necessary. There are three kinds of ancestors
-archishmats, barhishads and kravyads[Respectively meaning bright, those who are seated on sacrificial grass and those who eat flesh.]. After death, they grant permission for mantras to be chanted. Mantras
are thus the reason[Reason for success in rites.]. When this has been pronounced in the Vedas, how can mortals obtain emancipation without
repaying their debts to ancestors, gods and brahmanas? There are indeed the speculations of some learned people.
But they are lazy and devoid of prosperity. They may say that they know about the words of the Vedas. But they
speak lies in the guise of truth[Clearly those who denigrate garhasthya and uphold sannyasa.]. If a brahmana performs sacrifices in accordance with the sacred texts of the
Vedas, he is never afflicted by sin. With his sacrifices, the animals that have been killed and his dharma, he ascends
upwards. He satisfies his desires and satisfies them[By deduction, the animals killed in the sacrifices.]. A man cannot obtain greatness by ignoring the Vedas, deceit
or illusion. The brahman is obtained through the practices of brahmanas.'

'"Kapila said, 'There are darsha, pournamasa, agnihotra and chaturmasya[These are names of sacrifices. Darsha is the day of the new moon and the sacrifice performed on that day. Pournamasa is likewise the sacrifice on the day of the full moon. A chaturmasya sacrifice is performed once every
four months.]. These are eternal sacrifices for intelligent people. There are those who no longer have any resolutions and are extremely firm in their fortitude. They
are pure and have sought refuge in the brahman. They desire immortality and through the brahman, can satisfy the
gods and the ancestors. They see their own selves in all beings and all beings in their own selves[Such people don't need to sacrifice animals.]. The gods are
themselves confused when they try to follow in their footsteps. The being inside has four gates and four faces.
Therefore, censure can also come from four directions. The gatekeeper has those four gates of the two arms, the
organ of speech, the stomach and the genital organ[The being inside is the atman. If the four gates are not kept in check, there can be censure on account of all four.
The four faces refer to the atman's properties of being all-embracing, extremely fine, omniscient and
unblemished.]. One should not gamble with dice and take the riches that belong to others. One should not accept cooked food from those who have not been born in a womb[This probably means those who have had inferior birth.]. An intelligent
person will not come under the influence of anger and strike others with hands and feet, thus protecting these well.
He will not loudly indulge in verbal abuse, nor will he indulge in slander and rumour. He will be devoted to the
truth and restrained in speech. He will not be distracted. Thus, he will protect the gate that is the organ of speech
extremely well. He will not refrain from food. But nor will he eat a lot. He will not be greedy and solicit the companionship of the virtuous. He will eat just enough to sustain the progress of life. Thus will he protect the gate that
is the stomach. When there is a brave wife, he will not have intercourse with another woman. Nor will he summon
a woman when it is not her season. He will devote himself to the vow of serving his wife. The gate of the genital
organ will be protected in this way. The learned brahmanas protect all the gates of the genital organs, the stomach,
the arms and the organ of speech, as the fourth, extremely well. If all these gates are not guarded, there will be failure. What will such a person obtain through austerities? What will be accomplished through sacrifices or his atman? If a person casts aside his upper garment, if he sleeps on the bare ground, using his arm as a pillow and if he
is tranquil, the gods know such a person to be a brahmana. Such a sage finds pleasure alone and is comfortable
with all the opposite sentiments. He does not think about others. The gods know such a person to be a brahmana.
He knows everything about nature and its transformations. He knows about the objectives of all beings. The gods
know such a person to be a brahmana. He grants fearlessness to all beings and is engaged in being free of fear from
everyone. He sees himself inside all beings. The gods know such a person to be a brahmana[That is, he is not interested in temporary fruits, but in emancipation.]. He is not concerned
with the Vedas and the fruits of rites. However, following the sanctions of all these, he takes delight in the absence
of fruits. But it is certain that his tasks bring the rewards of fruits. They are seen to be without qualities and are obtained alone and in private. Those qualities are extremely difficult to comprehend and extremely difficult to obtain.
But the fruits of rites come to an end. That is what you should see.'

'"Syumarashmi said, 'The Vedas provide support for both renunciation and fruits[Fruits of action.]. Both those paths are evident. O illustrious one! Tell me about this.'

'"Kapila replied, 'You should see it as evident that you should resort to the path of the virtuous. What is evident
about the one that you wish to follow[The fruits of yoga are evident. But what is evident about the fruits of rites ?]?'
'"Syumarashmi replied, 'I am Syumarashmi. I have come here to ask you about the brahman. I desire what is
beneficial for me. That is the reason, in an upright way, I started this conversation. My intention wasn't a debate. O
illustrious one! It is just that I have this terrible doubt. Explain it to me. You have said that, for those who resort to
virtuous paths, the benefits can directly be seen. For the path that you follow, what can be directly seen? There are
sacred texts about argumentation and there are the other sacred texts. Avoiding the sacred texts about argumentation, I have studied the other sacred texts, which bring success. Those sacred texts are the words of the Vedas. It
can be seen that those sacred texts have determined that the signs of success are directly manifest. This is like a
boat that has been tethered, so that it cannot be borne along by the tide. O brahmana! How can we be dragged
away? If we possess wicked intelligence, how can we cross it[The image of a river.]? O illustrious one! Tell me about this. I have resorted to you. Instruct me. There is no one who has completely renounced, is completely content, is completely
without sorrow and disease, and is completely free from desire, resolution and action. You indulge in joy and misery, just as we do. You are no different from all the other animals in serving the objects of the senses. Conduct has
accordingly been laid down for the four varnas and ashramas and they follow this. How does one determine what
brings happiness?'

'"Kapila replied, 'If one acts according to the sacred texts and follows all the injunctions and rites, there will always be happiness. For a person who pursues knowledge, knowledge saves from everything. Any conduct that deviates from knowledge destroys subjects. That is the reason learned people are always happy in every way. Sometimes, one obtains the sense of complete unity[Unity with the universe.]. Without understanding the truth about the sacred texts, some
weak people come under the subjugation of desire and anger and are overwhelmed by arrogance. They do  not
know the truth about the sacred texts. They are like bandits who rob the sacred texts. Their intelligence has not
ripened and they are inauspicious. They do not seek to attain the brahman. They see the lack of qualities. Their
bodies are based on the qualities of tamas and they are devoted to tamas. Any being follows the inherent traits of
his natural characteristics. Because of the qualities that are always generated by their nature, they are overcome by
hatred, desire, wrath, insolence, falsehood and arrogance. However, there are those who use their intelligence and
abandon both the good and the bad. They desire the supreme objective and endeavour to remain engaged in self-
restraint.'

'"Syumarashmi said, 'O brahmana! Everything that I have said has been recounted in the sacred texts. If one
does not understand the true purport of the sacred texts, one engages in rites. It has been heard that learning is that
which is in conformity with the sacred texts. It has also been determined that not following the rites is against the
sacred texts. The words of the Vedas represent the learning of the sacred texts. However, it is seen that many insolent people act against the sacred texts. For both this world and for the next, they see faults in the sacred texts. Ignorance destroys their wisdom and with wisdom in decay, they become enveloped in tamas. A person who resorts
to this and roams around in every direction, basing himself on the words of the Vedas, is alone capable of being
emancipated and being successful in every possible way. He is said to be liberated. This is an extremely difficult
task for someone who lives in a household. Even if he indulges in donations, studying, sacrifices, generating offspring and uprightness, he is not capable of being freed. Shame on the doer and the tasks and on the futile exertions. However, if one turns one's back on the rites of the Vedas, one becomes a non-believer. O illustrious one!
This is what I quickly wish to hear about. O brahmana! Tell me about this. I have sought refuge with you. Instruct
me. I wish to learn everything that is known to you about emancipation.'"'
