Vaishampayana said, 'On seeing Bhimasena and Arjuna, the intolerant kshatriyas raised a terrible roar in that forest. On seeing the foremost pennants of those bulls among the Kurus, the evil-souled King Jayadratha was robbed
of his energy. He spoke to Yajnaseni, resplendent on his chariot. "O Krishna! Five great chariots are advancing. I
think they must be your husbands. You know them. O beautiful one! Point out to me the separate Pandavas, riding
on their separate chariots."

'Droupadi replied, "O foolish one! How will it help you to know those great archers, now that you have performed your terrible and evil deed? My brave husbands have arrived here and you will have no remnants left in
this war. However, you are about to die and everything should be told to such a person. It is the dharma that I
should answer your question. On having seen Dharmaraja and his younger brothers, I suffer no pain or fear on account of you. Two beautiful drums[Mridanga.] sweetly sound at the top of his pennant. They are named Nanda and Upananda. He knows how to decide about the true nature of dharma and those who are successful, always follow him. His
complexion is like that of pure gold. His nose is high. He is lean and his eyes are large. He is known as the foremost among the Kurus, Yudhishthira, the son of Dharma, and my husband. He provides refuge even to an enemy.
He is brave among men and is a follower of dharma, ready to give up his life for it. O foolish one! For your own
welfare, run to him quickly. Discard your weapons and join your hands in salutation. You will see a mighty-armed
one seated on his chariot, like a fully grown shala tree. He is biting his lips and his brows are furrowed. His name
is Vrikodara and he is my husband. He is immensely strong and brave and is drawn by well-controlled and strong
horses. The deeds that he has done are superhuman. He is known on earth by the name of Bhima. Nothing is left of
those who commit crimes against him. He never forgets an enemy. He thinks of every possible way to avenge the
enmity and even after that, he is not pacified. He is gentle, generous, forbearing and famous. He is brave among
men. He is in control of his senses and serves his elders. He is Yudhishthira's brother and disciple. His name is
Dhananjaya and he is my husband. Desire, fear or avarice will never cause him to abandon dharma. He never performs a cruel act. His energy is equal to that of the fire-god. He is Kunti's son and he withstands and represses all
his enemies. He is knowledgeable about everything concerning dharma and artha. The learned one removes the
fear from those who are frightened. It is said that his form is the most beautiful on earth. All the Pandavas protect
him. He is devoted to his vows and he is dearer to me than my life. This brave one is Nakula, my husband. The
second one is light of hand and fights with the sword. He is mighty and intelligent and he is Sahadeva. O foolish
one! You will witness his deeds in battle today, like Shatakratu against the army of the daityas. He is brave and
skilled in the use of weapons. He is wise and learned. He performs acts that bring pleasure to the king, the son of
Dharma. He is like the moon and the sun in his energy. He is the youngest of the Pandavas and is loved by them.
There is no other man who is his equal in intelligence. He is eloquent in an assembly of the wise. He is brave and
always intolerant. He is wise and learned. He is Sahadeva, my husband. He is ready to give up his life or enter the
fire, rather than act against dharma. He is always wise and devoted to the dharma of kshatriyas. He is brave among
men and is dearer to Kunti than her life. Like a boat filled with gems on the edge of the ocean, riding on the back
of a shark[Makara is a mythical aquatic animal, which can be translated as crocodile or shark.] and destroyed, you will see the soldiers in your army destroyed and freed[Freed of their lives.] by the sons of Pandu. I
have thus described to you the sons of Pandu, whom you have foolishly shown disrespect for. If you escape from
them with an uninjured body, you will have been reborn, though you are still alive."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Then the five Parthas, equal to five Indras, ignored the terrified infantry, standing with
hands joined in salutation. They angrily attacked the army of chariots from all sides, with dark showers of arrows.'
