Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing these words of Bhishma, the immensely valorous king of Chedi desired to fight
with Vasudeva and spoke to Vasudeva, "O Janardana! I am challenging you to battle. Come and fight with me, until I have killed you, along with all the Pandavas. O Krishna! Together with you, the Pandavas also deserve to be
killed, since they have passed over the kings and worshipped you, who is not a king. O Krishna! It is my view that
I must kill them. The evil-minded ones have acted like children and have offered homage to an undeserving one
who is a slave and not a king." Having uttered these words, that tiger among kings stood up and roared in anger.

'Having heard these words, in the presence of all the kings and the Pandavas, Krishna replied in a soft voice. "O
kings! This son of a lady of the Satvata lineage[The Yadavas.] is a great enemy of the Satvata clan. Though we have never done
him harm, the cruel-minded one always seeks to injure us. O kings! Hearing that we had gone to the city of Pragjyotisha, this cruel one came and burnt down Dvaraka, though he is my father's sister's son. When the royal ones
from Bhoja were sporting themselves on Mount Raivataka, he killed and captured all of them and took them to his
own city. With certain evil in his heart, he wished to obstruct my father's sacrifice and stole the horse of the ashvamedha[Horse sacrifice.], though it was surrounded by guards. The famous Babhru's[Another name for Akrura.] wife-to-be was travelling to the Souvira
region to be married. But out of delusion and desire, he abducted her. He was cruelly disposed towards his maternal uncle, the ascetic Karusha and used his powers of maya to abduct Bhadra of Vishala[She was to have been married to Karusha.]. For the sake of my father's sister, I have borne a great deal of unhappiness. However, it is fortunate that this is happening before all
these kings. You are now witness to the malevolence he bears towards me. Know also the deeds that he has performed secretly. I can no longer pardon his offence today. He deserves to be killed only because of his insolence in
front of this assembly of kings. Desiring a speedy death, this fool once offered himself to Rukmini[Krishna's wife.]. But the fool
did not obtain her, the way a shudra cannot hear the Vedas." Having heard these words of Vasudeva, all the assembled kings began to censure the king of Chedi.

'Having heard these words, the powerful Shishupala burst into laughter and uttered these scornful words. "O
Krishna! Are you not ashamed to recount this, especially before all these kings? Rukmini was mine first[Rukmini was the daughter of King Bhishmaka of Vidarbha. Her father had promised her in marriage to
Shishupala. However, Rukmini loved Krishna and sent him a letter. At that, Krishna and Balarama arrived, defeated Rukmini's brother Rukmi, and took Rukmini away.]. O
Madhusudana! No self-respecting man but you will admit before respectable ones that his wife had been someone
else's first. O Krishna! Pardon me. Whether you pardon me or whether you show me respect, whether you bear
friendship or enmity towards me, what can you possibly do to me?" When he was talking in this way, the illustrious Madhusudana, the destroyer of his enemies, angrily sliced off his head with the chakra. The mighty-armed one
fell down like a mountain struck by the vajra. The kings saw a terrible energy rise up from the body of the Chedi
king. O great king! It was like the sun rising in the sky. O lord of men! That energy then paid homage to the lotus-
eyed Krishna, worshipped by the worlds, and entered his body. On seeing the energy enter the mighty-armed one,
supreme among all beings, all of the lords of the earth thought that this was extraordinary. When the Chedi was
killed by Krishna, the cloudless sky poured forth rain. The earth trembled and blazing lightning struck. Some of
those lords of the earth did not speak a word. At a time when these indescribable things were happening, they
looked on at Janardana. Some angrily rubbed one hand with the tip of another. Others bit their lips, losing their
senses in anger. But there were other kings who privately praised Varshneya. Some were angry. Others were in the
middle[They were undecided.]. The maharshis were delighted and went to Keshava and praised him. So did the great-souled brahmanas
and the immensely powerful kings.

'Pandava[Yudhishthira.] then instructed his brothers to perform the funeral rites for the brave lord of the earth who had been
Damaghosha's son. The brothers followed these instructions. Then Partha[Yudhishthira again.], with all the other lords of the earth,
instated his[Shishupala's.] son in the kingdom of Chedi.

'O king! Then occurred the sacrifice of the king of the Kurus and brought prosperity to everyone and joy to the
young, with an abundance of opulence-with great quantities of riches and grain, large amounts of food and eatables, auspicious in its beginnings and with the obstructions to peace removed. It was protected by Keshava. Until
the great sacrifice of rajasuya was completed, the mighty-armed Janardana, the lord Shouri, the wielder of the
sharnga[In general, a bow made of horn. Specifically, the name of Vishnu's bow.], chakra and club, guarded it. On completion, after Dharmaraja Yudhishthira had bathed[The text has the word avavritha. This is the ceremonial bathing at the end of any sacrifice, for purposes of
purification.], all the kshatriya kings came to him and uttered these words. "O Ajamidha[Yudhishthira's name.]! O one who is knowledgeable in dharma! Your
prosperity has been extended. You have obtained sovereignty. Your fame has been extended. O Indra among kings!
With this deed, you have accomplished a great act for dharma. O tiger among men! We crave your leave. We have
been shown homage in every way we desire. We now wish to return to our own kingdoms. Please grant us leave."

On hearing these words of the kings, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira worshipped each king as he deserved and told all
his brothers, "All these kings have assembled here out of their own pleasure. These scorchers of enemies are now
leaving for their own kingdoms and are seeking my permission. O fortunate ones! Conduct these kings to the ends
of our kingdom." The Pandavas were always followers of dharma. Hearing their brother's instructions, they followed each principal king, as each one deserved. O king! The powerful Dhrishtadyumna quickly conducted Virata,
the maharatha Dhananjaya the great-souled Yajnasena[Drupada.], the immensely strong Bhimasena, Bhishma and Dhritarashtra, the great warrior Sahadeva the brave, Drona and his son, Nakula Subala and his son and the sons of
Droupadi and Subhadra[Subhadra's son was Abhimanyu.] the kings of the mountains. Other bulls among the kshatriyas conducted other kshatriyas. And worshipped properly, all the brahmanas departed.

'O bull among the Bharata lineage! On the departure of all the lords among kings and the brahmanas, the powerful Vasudeva spoke to Yudhishthira. "O son of the Kuru lineage[As has been mentioned before, the word nandana also means beloved. So, this can also be translated as-O
beloved of the Kuru lineage!]! I seek your leave to go to Dvaraka. Through
good fortune, you have achieved rajasuya, supreme among sacrifices." Having been thus addressed, Dharmaraja
told Madhusudana, "O Govinda! It is through your favour that I have achieved this supreme sacrifice. Through
your grace, all the kshatriyas have come under my sway and have attended upon me, bringing rich tributes. O
brave one! Without you, we will find no pleasure. But of course you must go to the city of Dvaravati." Having
been thus addressed, the greatly famous Hari, with the righteous Yudhishthira with him, went to Pritha and affectionately said, "O father's sister! Your sons have now obtained sovereignty and have obtained success and great
riches. You should be pleased. Please grant me leave so that I can return to Dvaraka." Keshava then bade farewell
to Subhadra and Droupadi. Then, accompanied by Yudhishthira, he came out of the inner quarters. O great king!
After he had bathed and prayed and the brahmanas had blessed him, Daruka yoked the beautifully constructed
chariot that looked like a cloud and came. It had the great Garuda[The text says Tarkshya, which is one of Garuda's names.] on the banner. The great-souled Pundariksha
then circumambulated it and ascending, departed for the city of Dvaravati. The fortunate Dharmaraja Yudhishthira,
accompanied by his brothers, followed the immensely strong Vasudeva on foot. Then Pundariksha Hari stopped
the supreme chariot for a moment and spoke to Yudhishthira, Kunti's son. "O lord of the earth! Always remain
steadfast in protecting your subjects, just as the god of rain[Parjanya. Indra is the god of rain, so Parjanya is one of Indra's names. The word parjanya can also mean
clouds in general and that translation, without invoking the god of rain, is also possible.] protects all beings and a large tree protects all birds.
May you be the refuge of your relatives, like the thousand-eyed one[Indra.] is of the immortals." After conversing with
each other, Krishna and the Pandavas took each other's leave and went to their houses. O king! When Krishna,
supreme among the Satvatas, had left for Dvaravati, only Duryodhana and Soubala[Shakuni was the son of Subala, king of Gandhara.] Shakuni, bulls among men,
remained in that celestial sabha.'
