'Gandhari said, "Look at the invincible Kamboja, who was like a covering for Kamboja[Sudakshina.]. O Madhava! He possessed shoulders like a bull. He has been slain and is lying down in the dust. His arms used to be smeared with sandalwood paste and are covered with blood now. When his miserable wife saw them, she lamented in grief. 'These
arms were as thick as clubs. They possessed auspicious palms and fingers. When I was in their embrace, I used to
be full of desire. O lord of men! Without you, what will be my end now?' Her relatives are far away and she is
without a protector. Her voice is exceedingly melodious. Even when they are scorched by heat, the beauty of many
kinds of garlands does not vanish. In that way, though these women are exhausted, beauty has not abandoned their
bodies.

'"O Madhusudana! The brave king of Kalinga is lying down. Look at his immensely large arms, encased in
blazing armlets.

'"O Janardana! Jayatsena was the lord of Magadha. Look at him. He is surrounded by the weeping women from
Magadha. O Janardana! They possess long eyes and excellent voices. Their lamentations are pleasant to hear and
are confounding my mind. They have thrown away all their ornaments. They are weeping, oppressed by grief.
Each of the women from Magadha possessed her own bed. But they are lying down on the ground.

'"Brihadbala was the prince and lord of Kosala. He has been separately surrounded by these women, who are
weeping over their husband. The arrows of Krishna's son were struck with the strength of his arms and they are
plucking them out from his body[Krishna means Arjuna here. Arjuna's son is Abhimanyu, Brihadbala
having been killed by Abhimanyu in Section 67 (Volume 6).]. As they are doing this, they are miserable and are repeatedly losing their senses. O Madhava! All of them are overcome by the heat and the exhaustion. Their faces are as beautiful as wilting
lotuses.

'"All the five brave brothers from Kekaya were slain by Drona. They are lying down, wearing beautiful armlets.
They were headed towards Drona. Their armour was made out of molten gold. Their standards, chariots and garlands were coppery in hue. They are illuminating the ground, like blazing and radiant fires.

'"O Madhava! Look. Drupada was brought down by Drona in the battle. He was like a giant elephant, slain in
the forest by a giant lion. O Pundarikaksha! The king of Panchala's umbrella is large and pale. It is shining, like
the sun in the autumn sky. The wives and daughters-in-law of the aged Drupada are miserable. Having burnt the
king of Panchala, they are circumambulating him, keeping him to the right.

'"The great archer, Dhrishtaketu, was a bull among the Chedis. The brave one was killed by Drona. Bereft of
their senses, the women have moved him. O Madhusudana! Having countered Drona's weapons, the great archer
was crushed. He has been slain and is lying down, like a tree brought down by a river. The brave maharatha,
Dhrishtaketu, was the lord of Chedi. Having slain thousands of enemy in the battle, he has been slain and is lying
down. The birds are tugging at him and his wives are tending to him. O Hrishikesha! The king of Chedi has been
slain, with his forces and his relatives. Truth was his valour and the brave son of the daughter of Dasharha is lying
down[Dhrishtaketu was the son of Shishupala. Thus, he was the king of Chedi.
However, Shishupala's mother was Shrutadeva. She was from a Yadava
(Dasharha) lineage and Dhrishtaketu was descended from the Dasharhas
on this side.]. The beautiful women have placed the king of Chedi on their laps and are weeping. O Hrishikesha! His
son has an excellent face and beautiful earrings. Look at him. He has been mangled by Drona with many arrows in
the battle. As long as his father was fighting with the enemy, it is certain that he did not abandon him. O Madhusudana! He has never moved from that brave one's rear. O mighty-armed one! In that way, my son's son, Lakshmana,
the destroyer of enemy heroes, followed his father.

'"O Madhava! Look at Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti. They have fallen down. They are like flowering shala
trees, destroyed by a storm at the end of winter. Their armlets and armour are golden. They wield arrows, swords
and bows. Their eyes are like those of bulls. They are lying down, with unblemished garlands.

'"All the Pandavas, together with you, cannot be killed. They were freed from Drona, Bhishma, Vaikartana Kripa, Duryodhana, Drona's son, maharatha Saindhava, Somadatta, Vikarna and the brave Kritavarma. Those bulls
among men could have slain even the gods with the force of their weapons. However, they have been killed in the
battle. Behold the progress of time. O Madhava! It is certain that there is no burden that is too heavy for destiny,
since these brave ones, bulls among kshatriyas, have been slain by kshatriyas. O Krishna! When you came to Upaplavya and returned unsuccessfully again, my spirited sons were already killed[A reference to Krishna's mission of peace, described in Section 54 (Volume 4).]. That is what Shantanu's son
and the wise Vidura told me then. 'Do not show any affection towards your sons.' O son! What they saw, was certain to have come true. O Janardana! In a short while, my sons were consumed and became ashes."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having said this, Gandhari was oppressed by grief and fell down on the ground. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Her senses were distracted by her grief and she abandoned her fortitude. Because
she was overcome by sorrow on account of her sons, her body was overcome by rage. With her senses distressed,
Gandhari ascribed the blame to Shouri[Krishna.].

'Gandhari said, "O Krishna! The Pandavas and the sons of Dhritarashtra were malicious towards each other. O
Janardana! Why was their destruction ignored by you? You were capable. You had many servants and were stationed with a large army. Both sides were capable of listening to your words. O Madhusudana! You wilfully ignored the destruction of the Kurus. O mighty-armed one! Therefore, you will have to reap the fruits of what you
have done. O wielder of the chakra and the club! I have earned something through my austerities and through serving my husband. You may be difficult to fathom. But through that, I am cursing you. The relatives, the Kurus and
the Pandavas, slaughtered each other. O Govinda! Since you ignored this, you will slay your own relatives. O
Madhusudana! When thirty-six years have elapsed, your relatives will be killed, your advisers will be killed and
your sons will be killed. You will wander around in the forest. You will confront a horrible death. With the sons
slain, with the kin and relatives killed, your wives will be tormented, as the women of the Bharata lineage are
now."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having heard these terrible words, the great-minded Vasudeva smiled a little and replied
to Queen Gandhari. "O beautiful one! No one other than me can destroy the circle of the Vrishnis. O kshatriya
lady! I know what has already been decided. You have acted in accordance with what has been ordained. The Yadavas cannot be killed by any other men, or by gods and danavas. They will confront their destruction at each other's hands." When Dasharha said this, the Pandavas lost their senses. They became extremely anxious and no
longer wished to remain alive.'
