'Dritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! They have said that the sons of Pandu have reached Upaplavya. Go there and show
homage to Ajatashatru and tell the unblemished one that it is fortunate that they have stationed themselves in that
village. O Sanjaya! Honour them all, in words of conciliation. Say that they did not deserve the difficulties of
dwelling in exile. Say they will soon be at peace with us. Though they have been falsely acted against, they retain
affectionate feelings towards us. O Sanjaya! I have never seen any kind of falsehood on the part of the Pandavas.
Having obtained all the riches through their own valour, the Pandavas offered them to me. Having scrutinized the
Parthas for misdemeanours, I have never been able to find any sin in them. They have always performed tasks for
dharma and artha, and not in pursuit of happiness, pleasure or desire. They have endured hot and cold, and hunger
and thirst. They have controlled sleep, lassitude, anger and delight. They have overcome delusion with fortitude
and wisdom. The Parthas have sought to obtain dharma and artha. When the time is right, they have given away
riches to their friends. Even living together for a long time does not diminish their friendship. The Parthas honour
with homage and riches those to whom these are due. In Ajamidha's lineage[Ajamidha was an ancestor.], there is no one who hates the
Parthas, except that evil, hateful and evil-minded Duryodhana and the even more inferior Karna. Those two engendered anger in those great-souled ones, when they tried to reduce their pleasure and comfort. Duryodhana is used
to pleasures and because his valour has increased, he thinks that he is in the right. As long as the Pandavas are
alive, only a child can think that their share can be taken away.

'"Ajatashatru's footsteps are followed by Arjuna, Keshava, Vrikodara, Satyaki, Madri's two sons and all the
Srinjayas[The Yadavas.]. It is better to give it to him than to fight. Savyasachi, the wielder of the Gandiva, is capable of subjugating the earth alone on his chariot. The unassailable and great-souled Keshava Vishnu is the lord of the three
worlds. Which mortal man can stand before him? He is worthy of being honoured by all the gods. The shower of
his arrows is like the roar of the clouds and they are as swift as locusts[The word used is patanga, which can also be translated as birds or bees. The context doesn't make it clear
whether Krishna or Arjuna's arrows are being referred to, probably the latter.]. With a single chariot, the wielder of the
Gandiva conquered the northern direction and the northern Kurus[This has been described in Section 23 (Volume 2). The northern Kurus are distinct from those of the Kuru
lineage.]. Savyasachi robbed them of their riches and
forced the soldiers to follow and pay tribute. In Khandava, Savyasachi, the wielder of the Gandiva, defeated Indra
and the gods[This has been described in Section 19 (Volume 2).]. Phalguna rendered the offerings to the fire god and increased the honour and the fame of the Pandavas. There is no one who is Bhima's equal in wielding the club, or his equal in riding an elephant. It is said that
he is Arjuna's equal on the chariot and he has the valour of ten thousand elephants in the strength of his arms. He
is well trained, skilled and swift. As an enemy, he will swiftly burn down the sons of Dhritarashtra. He is intolerant
and powerful and even Vasava will be unable to defeat him in battle. Phalguna's brothers[Nakula and Sahadeva.] have been taught well.
They are extremely intelligent and strong and their arms are swift. Like vultures destroying a flock of birds, the
sons of Madri will not leave any remnants among the Kurus. The swift Dhrishtadyumna is in their midst and he is
regarded as one of the Pandavas. With his advisers, the joy of the Somakas[Drupada was the king of Panchala and the Somakas seem to have been synonymous with the Panchalas. However, in some places, there is a suggestion that the Somakas were a sub-branch of the Panchalas. Dhrishtadyumna
was Drupada's son.] has devoted his soul for the victory of
the Panadavas. The aged Virata, the lord of the Shalveyas[There is a problem with the text. This should probably be the Shalvas. But even then, there is a problem. The
Shalvas were a distinct kingdom, while Virata was the king of the Matsyas.], is one with whom they have lived for a long time. He
has opted for the Pandavas, together with his sons. I have heard that he is devoted to Yudhishthira. The five brave
and spirited brothers, who are great archers, have been barred from Kekaya[There was a battle for succession within the Kekaya family. Five brothers, who were deprived of the kingdom,
fought on the side of the Pandavas. There were others who fought on the side of the Kouravas.]. They desire to obtain the kingdom of
Kekaya, and eager to fight, follow the Parthas. All the brave ones among the lords of the earth have been assembled for the sake of the Pandavas. I have heard that these brave ones are devoted to him[Yudhishthira.]. With great affection,
they have resorted to Dharmaraja. There are warriors who dwell in the mountainous passes on earth. They are pure
and have been born in noble lineages. There are valorous mlecchas[Mlecchas are barbarians, they do not speak Sanskrit.] with many weapons. They have single-mindedly assembled for the sake of the Pandavas. The limitless King Pandya is equal to Indra in battle. He is accompanied in battle by many warriors. He is valorous in this world and his energy cannot be countered. That great-souled
one has arrived for the sake of the Pandavas. I have heard that Satyaki learnt about weapons from Drona, Arjuna,
Vasudeva, Kripa and Bhishma and that he is an equal of Krishna's son[While Krishna had several sons, this is probably a reference to Pradyumna.]. He is also devoted to the cause of the
Pandavas.

'"The Chedis and the Karushakas have also joined him, with all the enterprising lords of the earth. In their
midst, blazing in prosperity like the sun, used to be the flaming king of Chedi. He was regarded as unassailable in
battle. In drawing the bow, he was foremost on earth. He was chief among the kshatriyas. But using his powerful
force, Krishna crushed and killed him. In earlier times, he crushed Shishupala in battle, thus increasing the fame of
the Yadavas. All the Indras among men, the kings of the Karushas, then increasingly extolled his honour. When
Krishna rode on his chariot with Sugriva, they realized that Keshava was invincible[The text says Karushas, but Karushas and Karushakas mean the same thing. Sugriva is the name of one of
Krishna's horses, Sainya being the other. The killing of Shishupala has been described in Section 26 (Volume 2).]. They ran away, deserting
the king of Chedi, like small animals at the sight of a lion. Whoever insolently wishes to engage in a duel with Vasudeva, is smitten down lifeless by Krishna, like a karnikara[Tree with colourful flowers, but no fragrance.] struck down in a storm. O Sanjaya! O son of Gavalgana! On remembering what I have been told about Keshava's valour, undertaken for their[Pandavas.] sake, and on remembering Vishnu's other deeds, I cannot find any peace. No enemy can withstand those who are led by that lion
among Vrishnis. My heart trembles when I hear that the two Krishnas[Krishna is also one of Arjuna's names.] are united on the same chariot. I hope my
evil-minded son, whose intelligence is contrary, does not fall foul of them in a fight. O Sanjaya! Otherwise, they
will burn down the Kurus, like Indra and Vishnu against the armies of the daityas. It is my view that Dhananjaya is
Shakra's equal and the Vrishni warrior[Krishna.] is the eternal Vishnu. Kunti's spirited son, Pandava Ajatashatru, is humble
and has sought refuge in dharma. The intelligent one has been deceived by Duryodhana. I hope that in his anger,
he does not burn down the sons of Dhritarashtra.

'"I am not afraid of Arjuna, Vasudeva, Bhima or the twins, as much as I have always feared the flaming rage of
that king. O suta[A suta is a bard or charioteer. Sanjaya was Dhritarashtra's charioteer.]! He is united with austerities and brahmacharya. Any resolution that he sets his mind on, is always successful. O Sanjaya! I am extremely terrified of his anger on the field of battle and I know that his cause is
just. Therefore, swiftly depart on your chariot. Having gone to the abode of the king of Panchala, you must ask
Ajatashatru about his welfare repeatedly, in words full of affection. O son[The word used is tata.]! When you meet Janardana, immensely wise, brave and generous, on my instructions, you must ask him about his good health too. Say that Dhritarashtra wishes for peace with the Pandavas. O suta! There is no word of Vasudeva's that Kunti's son will not carry out.
Krishna is as dear to them as their own selves. He is intelligent and is always attentive to their cause. On meeting
the Pandavas, the Srinjayas, Janardana, Yuyudhana and Virata, on my instructions, you must ask about their health
and also that of the five sons of Droupadi. O Sanjaya! At the right time, whatever you think should be said for the
welfare of the Bharatas, say that in the midst of the kings, but do not say anything that incites them to the war."'
