'Duryodhana said, "O Radheya[Karna, Radha's son.]! I do not take offence at your words, because you do not know what transpired.
You think that I defeated the gandharva enemies through my energy. O mighty-armed one! My brothers and I did
fight with the gandharvas for a long time and there was destruction on both sides. But when those brave ones
fought with the use of maya, the battle with the travellers of the sky was no longer equal. We then encountered defeat in the battle and were taken captive, together with the servants, advisers, wives, riches and vehicles. We were
then extremely miserable and were abducted by them through the sky. Then, miserable, some of our advisers and
soldiers went to the maharatha Pandavas and sought refuge. 'King Duryodhana, Dhritarashtra's son, together with
his younger brothers and his advisers and wives, is being carried away through the sky by the gandharvas. O fortunate ones! Please free the king and his wives. Otherwise, all the wives of the Kuru lineage will suffer a lot[These words were spoken by Duryodhana's advisers and soldiers.].' The
eldest of Pandu's sons has dharma in his soul. Having been thus addressed, he pacified his brothers and ordered
them to free us. The Pandavas, bulls among men, went to that spot. Though they were capable, the maharathas
tried conciliation first. But though they were conciliatory, the gandharvas did not free us. Then, insolent in their
strength, Arjuna, Bhima and the twins unleashed many showers of arrows at the gandharvas. At that, all of them[The gandharvas.]
gave up the fight and fled to the sky, though dragging our miserable selves along in delight. I then saw Dhananjaya,
surrounded by nets of arrows on all sides, release his superhuman weapons. All the directions could be seen to be
enveloped by the Pandava's sharp arrows. Chitrasena, Dhananjaya's friend, showed himself and he and the Panda-
va, scorcher of enemies, embraced each other. They asked each other about their welfare. On meeting each other,
they discarded their armour and arms. The brave gandharvas mixed freely with the Pandavas. Chitrasena and
Dhananjaya displayed each other honours."'
