'Sanjaya said, "Having killed Alayudha, the rakshasa Ghatokacha was delighted. He stood at the forefront of the
army and roared in many ways. On hearing those tumultuous sounds, the elephants trembled. O great king! Those
on your side were overcome by terrible fear. On seeing that Bhimasena's immensely strong son was engaged with
Alayudha, the mighty-armed Karna had attacked the Panchalas. He drew his firm bow all the way back and releasing arrows with drooping tufts, pierced Dhrishtadyumna and Shikhandi with ten arrows each. The supreme among
rathas used other iron arrows and made Yudhamanyu, Uttamouja and Satyaki tremble. O lord of men! Both on the
left and on the right, all their bows could be seen, drawn into circles as they fought. There was the twang of bowstrings, the slapping of palms and the clatter of chariot wheels. During the night, these sounds were tumultuous,
like that of clouds at the end of the summer. O king! The battle was beautiful, as if between clouds. The twang of
bowstrings and the clatter of wheels were the roar. The bows were drawn into circles. The standards were like
peaks. The torrent of arrows was like rain. Vaikartana was like a mountain that did not tremble. He had the essence
of a large mountain. O Indra among men! In that battle, the scorcher of a large number of enemies repulsed that
hail of arrows and it was wonderful. His sharp arrows were gold-tufted and colourful. They possessed the force of
thunder. In that encounter, the great-souled one struck the enemy. Vaikartana was engaged in ensuring the welfare
of your sons. The standards of some were brought down. The bodies of others were mangled by the arrows. Some
lost their charioteers. Others lost their horses. Achieving this quickly, Vaikartana was resplendent. In that battle,
many were severely afflicted and went and joined Yudhishthira's army.

'"On seeing that they were shattered and routed, Ghatotkacha became angry. He ascended a supreme chariot that
was decorated with gold and gems and roared like a lion. Approaching Vaikartana Karna, he pierced him with arrows that were like the vajra. They covered the sky with showers of hollow arrows, iron arrows, arrows sharpened
on stone, hollow arrows, arrows with long shafts, vatsadantas, arrows with heads like the ears of boars or the horns
of bulls and kshurapras and roared. That storm of arrows covered the sky in the battle and traversing diagonally,
made it look beautiful. They were gold-tufted and flamed like the fire. It was as if the sky was covered with diverse
flowers. Their power was equal and they struck each other with supreme weapons. In that battle, no one could discern that either of those brave ones was superior to the other. That encounter between the sons of the sun god and
Bhima was wonderful in form. Many terrible weapons were showered down. It was as if Rahu was tormenting the
sun in the sky. O king! Ghatotkacha saw that he could not get the better of Karna. The supreme among those who
have knowledge of weapons then invoked a terrible weapon. With that weapon, the rakshasa first killed Karna's
horses and then the charioteer. Next, Hidimba's son quickly disappeared."

'Dhritarashtra asked, "When the rakshasa, who fought in devious ways, disappeared, what did those on my side
think? O Sanjaya! Tell me this."

'Sanjaya replied, "On seeing that the rakshasa had disappeared, all the Kurus loudly exclaimed, 'The rakshasa
fights in devious ways. He will show himself and kill Karna in the battle.' Karna was a wonderfully dexterous warrior. He covered all the directions with his net of arrows. The sky became dark because of those arrows and all the
creatures were rendered invisible. The son of a suta exhibited his dexterity and no one could discern when he affixed an arrow, when he aimed it, when he released it and when he touched the quiver with his fingers. The entire
sky was covered by those arrows. From the sky, the rakshasa resorted to a terrible and fierce maya. We saw what
looked like red clouds in the sky. They blazed, like the fierce flames of a fire. O Indra among Kouravas! Lightning
issued from these and so did blazing meteors. Loud and fierce roars issued forth, like the sound of a thousand
drums being beaten. Gold-tufted arrows rained down. There were javelins, spears, clubs, other weapons, battleaxes, swords washed in oil, axes that blazed at the edges, spikes, sparkling clubs that were girded with iron, colourful
bludgeons, lances that were sharp at the tip, heavy maces decorated with gold and bound in cloth and shataghnis.
They showered down in every direction. Thousands of giant boulders fell down there, with thunder and lightning.
There were hundreds of razor-sharp chakras. They manifested themselves, blazing like the fire. There were spears,
rocks, battleaxes, javelins, vajras and extremely terrible bolts of thunder. That large and blazing shower descended.
With his storm of arrows, Karna could not destroy these. Horses were struck by the arrows and fell down. Elephants were struck by the vajras and fell down. Maharathas were struck by the rocks and fell down, shrieking loudly. Using that extremely terrible shower of weapons in every direction, Ghatotkacha caused destruction. Duryodhana's army was distressed and could be seen to roam around. As they wandered around, there were sounds of
lamentation. They were being destroyed and were miserable. Because they were noble, the foremost among the
brave ones did not run away[It was only the ordinary soldiers who ran away.]. Nor were they distressed. However, that shower created by the rakshasa was extremely fierce and terrible. The large weapons descended. On seeing that the large army was being destroyed, a
great fear arose in the hearts of your sons. Hundreds of jackals howled in extremely fierce tones. Their tongues
seemed to blaze with fire. O Indra among kings! On seeing that the large numbers of rakshasas were yelling, the
warriors were extremely pained. Their[This is a description of the rakshasas.] tongues and faces flamed. Their teeth were sharp. They were fierce.
Their bodies were like mountains. They were in the sky, with lances in their hands. They looked like clouds that
showered down rain. They[The Kourava soldiers.] were killed by the arrows, lances, spears, fierce clubs, flaming maces, vajras, tridents, thunder, chakras and shataghnis. They were crushed and fell down. On the soldiers of your son, they[The rakshasas.]
showered down long shafts, catapults, boulders, shataghnis and pillars made out of black iron and tied in cloth. It
was terrible and they[The Kourava soldiers.] were overcome by lassitude. Their weapons were flung away. Their heads were severed.
Their limbs were mangled and the brave ones began to fall down. The horses, elephants and horses[There is a typo in the Critical edition, and the word horses is used twice. One of these horses should probably
read foot soldiers.] were shattered and routed. The chariots were shattered by the boulders. Terrible in form, the yatudhanas[Evil spirits or demons.] released a great
shower and they were created by Ghatotkacha, through the use of maya. Those who sought refuge and those who
were frightened were not spared. That terrible destruction was caused by destiny and the brave ones among the
Kurus were crushed. The kshatriyas were destroyed. They were shattered and violently driven away. All the
Kouravas wailed. As they fled, the Kurus exclaimed, 'For the sake of the Pandavas, Indra and the gods are killing
us.' The Bharatas were thus submerged and none of them could find a refuge. During that tumult and the carnage
and destruction of the Kuru soldiers, it was impossible to distinguish between the different divisions and differentiate between who was a Kuru and who was not. That cruel destruction was terrible. All the directions seemed to be
empty. O king! We could only see Karna there, submerged in that shower of weapons.

'"He covered the sky with his arrows and sought to counter the divine maya with which the rakshasa fought. He
was modest and accomplished extremely difficult and noble deeds. The son of a suta was not confounded in that
battle. O king! All the frightened Saindhavas and Bahlikas looked towards Karna. He was not confounded in that
battle and they worshipped him, while witnessing the rakshasa's victory. He[Ghatotkacha.] created a shataghni with wheels
and hurling it, killed his[Karna's.] four horses at the same time. They lost their lives and sank down on their knees. They
lost their teeth, eyes and tongues. With the horses killed, he[Karna.] leapt down from the chariot and saw that the Kurus
were being driven away. His divine weapon had been destroyed by the maya. He began to think about what should
be the appropriate course of action. All the Kurus saw Karna and the terrible maya. They said, 'O Karna! Quickly
kill the rakshasa now with your spear[The spear Karna obtained from Indra and had preserved for Arjuna. It would only kill one antagonist and then
return to Indra.]. The Kurus and the sons of Dhritarashtra are being destroyed. What can
Bhima and Arjuna possibly do to us? Kill the rakshasa who is destroying us in the night. We will be able to fight
with the Parthas in the battle only if we escape from this terrible encounter. Therefore, kill the rakshasa, terrible in
form, with the spear that Vasava has given you. O Karna! All the Kouravas are like Indra. Let these warriors not be
destroyed in the night.' O king! He saw that the army was being destroyed by the rakshasa in the night. He heard
the loud lamentations of the Kouravas.

'"Karna made up his mind to use the spear. Unable to bear the assaults made in the battle, he was like an angry
and intolerant lion. That supreme spear was always victorious and he decided to use it to kill him[Ghatotkacha.]. O king! He
had preserved it for many years, worshipping it for the sake of Phalguna. Shakra had given that supreme spear to
Karna in exchange for the earrings. That spear was resplendent and flaming. It was tied with ropes and in the night,
looked like Death. Flaming like a meteor, it was like Death's sister. Vaikartana released it towards the rakshasa.
That flaming weapon was released from the arm of the son of a suta. It was supreme and was capable of destroying
the body of every enemy. O king! On seeing it, the rakshasa was frightened. He fled, assuming a body that was as
large as the foothills of the Vindhya mountains. O Indra among kings! On seeing that spear in Karna's hands, all
the beings in the sky roared loudly. O king! Turbulent winds began to blow. Bolts of thunder began to strike. Blazing away, it reduced the rakshasa's maya to ashes and severely penetrated his heart. Then it blazed and ascended
up in the night, entering among the nakshatras.

'"The brave rakshasa had fought in many colourful ways, using the weapons of gods, humans and rakshasas.
His life was robbed by Shakra's spear and uttering many fierce yells, he fell down. This was yet another wonderful
and extraordinary deed that he performed for the destruction of the enemy. At that time, his heart was shattered by
the spear. O king! He was as beautiful as a mountain or a cloud. The Indra among rakshasas fell down from the
sky, devoid of life. With his body shattered, he fell down on the ground. As he fell down dead, Ghatotkacha made
his body assume a gigantic form. With that fierce form, Bhimasena's son, the performer of terrible deeds, performed another terrible deed. He fell down on one part of your army and fiercely crushed the Kouravas. A loud uproar arose, mixed with the sounds of drums, conch shells, kettledrums and cymbals, and roars like lions'. With the
maya destroyed and the rakshasa killed, the Kouraveyas were delighted and roared in joy. Karna was honoured by
the Kurus, just as Shakra was by the Maruts, after the slaying of Vritra. He[Karna.
SECTION SEVENTY-ONE: DRONA-VADHA PARVA] ascended your son's chariot and
cheerfully entered the army."'
