Dhritarashtra said, "Describe the battle between Arjuna and the samshaptakas and also tell me about the one between the others on my side and the Pandavas."

'Sanjaya replied, "O king! Listen. I will describe the battle exactly as it happened. The brave ones fought with
the enemy and this destroyed bodies and lives. Partha penetrated the mass of samshaptakas, which was like an
ocean[However, in Section 66 (Volume 5), Arjuna had effectively destroyed the samshaptakas.]. The destroyer of enemies was like a giant storm that agitated the ocean. Dhananjaya used his sharp and
broad-headed arrows to slice off the heads of the brave ones. The faces were like full moons, with excellent eyes,
eyebrows and teeth. He[Arjuna.] quickly scattered these around on the ground, like lotuses devoid of their stalks. The
faces were well formed and large and were smeared with sandalwood paste and perfumes. With weapons and armour on their bodies, they looked like five-headed serpents. In that encounter, Arjuna severed the arms of his enemies with razor-sharp arrows. With his broad-headed arrows, Pandava severed the best of charioteers, standards,
bows and hands decorated with gems. O king! Arjuna shot thousands of arrows in that battle and dispatched elephants, horses and chariots, with their riders, to Yama's eternal abode. The foremost of brave ones roared like angry bulls that desired intercourse. They roared and attacked. As they were being killed, they struck him with their
arrows, like bulls goring with their horns. The battle between them and him was wonderful and it made the body
hair stand up. It was like one between the wielder of the vajra and the daityas, for the conquest of the three worlds.
With his weapons, Arjuna countered all the weapons of his enemies on every side. He swiftly pierced them with
many arrows and robbed them of their lives. He shattered the poles[Trivenu. Literally, trivenu means something with three poles. A trivenu was a triangular piece made out of
bamboo, used to provide strength to a chariot. The base was towards the chariot. The other two poles were extended in the direction of the horses and were fastened to the central yoke.], wheels and axles and killed warriors, horses and charioteers. He shattered the weapons and quivers and brought down the standards. The yokes, harnesses,
poles and bumpers of chariots were fragmented. The place became impassable because of the shattered yokes and
the heaps of weapons. The chariots were scattered, like giant clouds by the wind. Everyone was astounded on seeing this and this, increased the terror of the enemy. Arjuna rivalled the deeds of one thousand maharathas acting
together. Masses of siddhas, devarshis[Divine sage.] and charanas[Celestial singers.] were satisfied. The drums of the gods were sounded
and flowers were showered down on Keshava and Arjuna's heads. An invisible voice was heard. 'Keshava and Arjuna possess the beauty of the moon, the sun, the wind and the fire. They blaze in strength and are resplendent.
Those two brave lords always dazzle. When those two brave ones are stationed on the same chariot, they are as invincible as Brahma and Ishana[Shiva.]. Those two brave lords are foremost among all beings and are Nara and
Narayana[Nara and Narayana are ancient sages. Nara is identified with Arjuna and Narayana with Krishna.].' O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On witnessing this great wonder and on hearing these words,
Ashvatthama controlled himself and rushed against the two Krishnas in the battle[Krishna is also one of Arjuna's names.].

' "He advanced against Pandava and attacked him with arrows that were like the destroyer Yama. Drona's son
laughed on his chariot. In his hand, he held up an arrow and said, 'O brave one! A guest has arrived before you. If
you think me to be deserving, with all your heart, grant the guest the opportunity of fighting with you.' Having
been thus challenged by the preceptor's son, who wished to fight, Arjuna thought that he had been greatly honoured and spoke to Janardana. 'The samshaptakas should be killed by me, but Drona's son is challenging me. O
great-armed one! Instruct me about which one I should do first.' Having been thus addressed, Krishna drove
Partha, like Vayu taking Indra to a sacrifice, towards Drona's son, who had issued a challenge in the appropriate
manner. Drona's son was single-minded in his intentions and Keshava spoke to him. 'O Ashvatthama! Be patient.
Strike and bear the counter-strike. The time has come for those who live off others to repay the food they have received from their masters[Since Drona and Ashvatthama obtained a livelihood from Duryodhana.]. Brahmanas are subtle in settling disputes. Kshatriyas are coarser, resulting in victory
or defeat. Because of your folly, you have asked for excellent and divine hospitality from Partha. Now be patient
and receive what you have asked for from Pandava.' When Vasudeva had spoken thus, the supreme among brahmanas agreed. He pierced Keshava with sixty iron arrows and Arjuna with three. Arjuna became extremely angry
at this and used three broad-headed arrows to slice down his bow. Drona's son then picked up a bow that was more
terrible. He strung it in an instant and pierced Arjuna and Keshava, with three arrows for Vasudeva and one thousand for Pandava. Carefully, Drona's son shot a thousand arrows, then another one million and then ten million. He
confounded Arjuna in the battle. O venerable one! He was knowledgeable about the brahman and arrows issued
from his quiver, his bow, his bowstring, his fingers, his arms, his hands, his chest, his face, his nose, his eyes, his
ears, his head, his limbs, his pores, his chariot and his standard. He pierced Keshava and Pandava with a great net
of arrows. Drona's son roared in joy, like the rumbling of a large cloud. On hearing the roar, Pandava spoke to
Achyuta[The one without decay, Krishna's name.]. 'O Madhava! Behold Drona's son's wickedness towards me. He thinks that since we have entered
this chamber of arrows, we are about to be slain. But with my training and my strength, I will destroy his resolution.' The foremost among the Bharata lineage shattered each of Ashvatthama's arrows into three fragments. It was
like the wind dispelling a mist.

' "Then Pandava used his fierce arrows to pierce the samshaptakas and their horses, charioteers, chariots, elephants, standards and large numbers of infantry. Everyone who was a spectator there, in whatever form, thought
himself to have been covered by those arrows. Arrrows of many different types were shot from Gandiva. In that
battle, they killed elephants, horses and men who were within a distance of a krosha[Measure of distance equal to two miles.]. Broad-headed arrows severed and brought down the trunks of elephants that were mad with musth. They were sliced down, like trees in the
autumn by an axe. After this, the elephants themselves, like mountains, were brought down, with their riders. It
was as if the mountains were being shattered by the wielder of the vajra with his vajra. There were chariots that
had been properly prepared and were like the cities of gandharvas. Well-trained and swift horses, indomitable in
battle, were yoked to them. Dhananjaya showered down arrows on these enemies, ornamented horse riders, foot
soldiers and horses. In that great ocean of the samshaptakas, Dhananjaya was like the sun that arises at the end of a
yuga. They were difficult to dry up[The image is that of an ocean.]. But with his fierce arrows that were like rays, he dried them up.

' "Drona's son was like a gigantic mountain and swiftly, he again pierced him with extremely forceful iron arrows that were as energetic as the sun, like the wielder of the vajra against a mountain. At this, the preceptor's son
became wrathful and wished to fight. He advanced towards Partha, wishing to strike his horses and his charioteer
with his swift arrows. But these were struck down. He[Arjuna.] next released a multitude of arrows towards Ashvatthama, who was like a guest whohad arrived in a house. Abandoning the samshaptakas, Pandava attacked
Drona's son, like a giver abandons the undesirable in favour of the desirable[This translation doesn't capture the entire nuance. The words used are pankteya (desirable or admissible), vis-
à-vis apankteya (undesirable or inadmissible). Pankti means line or row. Pankteyas are those with whom one
sits down in the same row to eat. Apankteyas are those with whom one does not eat together. One will serve
pankteyas first.]. There was a clash like that between Shukra and the radiant Angirasa[Brihaspati is the son of the sage Angirasa and is the preceptor of the gods. Shukra is the preceptor of the
demons and Brihaspati and Shukra are therefore rivals. Brihaspati is Jupiter and Shukra is Venus.]. It was as if Shukra and Angirasa were clashing in the sky to enter the
same nakshatra[One of the translations of nakshatra is constellation. It can also be translated as a star.]. Their flaming arrows traversed the sky and scorched each other. They terrified the worlds with
those rays, like planets that had been dislodged from their positions. With an iron arrow, Arjuna severely struck
Drona's son in the midst of his eyebrows and he looked as resplendent as the sun, with its rays extending upwards.
The two Krishnas were also severely wounded by the hundreds of arrows shot by Ashvatthama. They looked like
two suns that dazzled with their rays at the end of a yuga. Protected by Vasudeva, Arjuna released a weapon that
was sharp on every side. He struck Drona's son with arrows that were like the vajra, the fire, or Vaivasvata's[Yama's.]
staff. The performer of terrible deeds pierced the extremely energetic Keshava and Arjuna in the inner organs.
These were arrows that were released well and were extremely fierce and forceful. Struck by these, even Death
would have been pained. But Arjuna countered the arrows of Drona's son and covered him with twice that number
of well-tufted arrows.

' "Having enveloped that solitary and brave one and his horses, charioteer and standard, he struck the samshaptakas again. Partha shot arrows and severed the bows, arrows, quivers, bowstrings, hands, arms, weapons held in
the hands, umbrellas, standards, horses, garments, garlands, ornaments, shields, armour, wishes and all the beautiful heads of his enemies, as they were stationed there and did not retreat[Samshaptakas did not retreat. The word 'wishes' needs an explanation, since, without the pun, its inclusion
seems strange. Ratha is a chariot. Manoratha is a chariot of the mind, that is, a wish or a desire.]. Those brave ones made every endeavour, stationed on well-prepared chariots, horses and elephants. But they were restrained by the large numbers of
Partha's arrows and the foremost among men fell down. The heads of men were like lotuses, the sun and the full
moon. They were adorned with diadems, garlands and crowns. They were severed by broad-headed and razorsharp arrows and arrows that were in the shape of a half-moon. They incessantly fell down on the ground. Brave
ones from Kalinga, Vanga, Anga and Nishada wished to kill Pandava and rushed against him. They were astride
elephants that looked like the elephant of the king of the gods. They were angry and insolent, as insolent as the enemies of the gods. Partha sliced down those elephants, their trunks and their armour and mangled their inner organs. He brought down the standards and flags, as if the one with the vajra in his hand was bringing down the
peaks of mountains.

' "When they were routed, Kiriti enveloped his preceptor's son with arrows that possessed the complexion of
the rising sun. It was as if a rising sun was dispelling a large net of clouds created by the wind. Countering Arjuna's arrows with his own arrows, Drona's son covered Arjuna and Vasudeva with his arrows, as if the moon and
the sun were being covered in the sky by a thundering cloud at the end of the summer. Afflicted by these arrows,
Arjuna directed his weapons towards those on your side and suddenly made everything dark with his arrows. He
pierced all of them with his well-tufted arrows. In that encounter, no one could discern when Savyasachi picked up
an arrow, affixed it and released it. One could only see that horses, elephants, foot soldiers and rathas were slain
and their bodies fell down. Swiftly, Drona's son affixed ten iron arrows. He released them so quickly that they
seemed to be a single arrow. They were released well and Arjuna was pierced by five and Achyuta by another five.
Having been thus wounded, those two foremost of men, who were like the lord of riches[Kubera.] and Indra, began to
exude blood. They were afflicted by the one who had completed his learning[Ashvatthama.]. Some thought that they had been
killed. The lord of Dasharha spoke to Arjuna. 'Why are you hesitating? Kill this warrior. If you commit the error of
ignoring him, he will cause great hardship, like a disease that spreads.' Having been thus addressed by Achyuta, he
was no longer distracted and sought to wound Drona's son with his arrows. He severed the harnesses of the horses
and pierced the steeds, which then bore him[Ashvatthama.] a long distance away. The intelligent one did not return again to
fight with Partha. The one with self-control knew that the victory of the brave one from the Vrishni lineage and
Dhananjaya, the best of the Angirasa lineage[There is no obvious connection between Arjuna and the sage Angirasa. However, Angirasa is also described
as the first man. Hence, this probably means no more than that Arjuna was the best among men.], was certain. Reversing, Ashvatthama withdrew his horses from
the field of battle, like a disease is treated through mantras, herbs and remedies and withdraws from the body. Keshava and Arjuna headed in the direction of the samshaptakas. Flags were stirred by the wind and fluttered atop
their chariot, which rumbled like the clouds." '
