Vaishampayana said, 'Utanka returned to his friend[Meaning Soudasa.] and asked for a sign. The supreme one of the Ikshvaku lineage gave him a sign.

'"Soudasa said, My present status cannot be tolerated. But there is no other escape. That being the case, it is my
instruction that you should give the earrings away[These words of Soudasa, conveyed to Madayanti through Utanka, are meant to be the sign, since the secret of
the curse wouldn't be known to everyone, but would certainly be known to his wife. In addition, since no other
escape was possible, one might hope for some good merit to come from the act of giving the earrings to a
brahmana.]."'
Vaishampayana continued, 'Thus addressed, Utanka went and told her what her husband had said. Hearing this,
she gave him those earrings. Having obtained the earrings, he went to the king and said, "O king! I wish to hear the
secret that was implicit in your words."

'Soudasa replied, "Since the time subjects were created, kshatriyas have worshipped brahmanas. But we have
committed many sins towards brahmanas. I have always bowed down before brahmanas, but my present state is
also because of a sin committed towards a brahmana. Without Madayanti's aid, I do not perceive any other escape,
whether it is in terms of advancing towards the gate of heaven or in this world. O supreme among brahmanas! In
particular, a king who is against brahmanas is incapable of obtaining status in the world of men, or obtaining happiness after death. That is the reason I asked that the earrings you desired should be given to you. You should now
successfully complete the agreement that you made with me."

'Utanka said, "O king! I will truly act that way and again place myself under your control. O scorcher of enemies! But there is a question I wish to ask you. Please answer the question."

'Soudasa replied, "O brahmana! Tell me what you wish. I will reply to your words. I will instantly dispel whatever doubt you have. There is no need to think about this."

'Utanka said, "Those who are learned and accomplished in their insight about the dharma to be followed vis-à-
vis friends say that one who behaves unfairly towards friends is like a thief. O king! You have become my friend
today. O supreme among intelligent ones! Therefore, use your intelligence to give me proper advice. I have now
obtained what I wanted and you are a maneater. Should I now come back before you or not[Following the agreement and after delivering the earrings to Ahalya.]?"
'Soudasa answered, "O supreme among the best of brahmanas! You should not ask me to answer this. O foremost among brahmanas! You should never return before me. O extender of the Bhrigu lineage! I can see that this is
best for you. O brahmana! If you return, there is no doubt that you will die."'

Vaishampayana continued, 'He was thus addressed by the intelligent king about what was beneficial for him.
Having obtained the king's permission, he went to meet Ahalya. He grasped the divine earrings that were so desired by his preceptor's wife. With great speed, he left for Goutama's hermitage. He protected them in the way Madayanti had instructed. He carried the earrings after having bound them in black antelope skin. On one occasion, he
was overcome by hunger. Afflicted by hunger, he saw a bilva tree that was heavy with the burden of fruit. O
scorcher of enemies! The best among brahmanas hung the black antelope skin, with the earrings bound in them, to
a branch and climbed the tree, so as to gather fruit. But the bond was loosened and the black antelope skin fell
down on the ground. A certain serpent, born in the lineage of Airavata, saw the earrings and swiftly seized them in
its mouth. With the earrings, it then entered a termite hill. On seeing that the earrings had been stolen by the serpernt, he was overcome by sorrow and great rage and quickly descended from the tree. Grasping a wooden stick,
he began to dig up the termite hill. The bull among brahmanas was so overcome with rage that his limbs became
hot. The earth was incapable of tolerating this force. Its limbs were severely afflicted by the wooden stick and it
began to tremble. The brahmana rishi was still digging away on the surface of the ground. He had made up his
mind that he would find a way to the world of the serpents. The immensely energetic wielder of the vajra came to
the spot on a chariot that was yoked to tawny horses and saw the supreme among brahmanas. He assumed the form
of a brahmana who was also grieving at Utanka's sorrow and told him, "O son! This task of yours cannot be accomplished. The world of the serpents is thousands of yojanas away. I do not think your task can be undertaken
with a wooden stick."

'Utanka replied, "O brahmana! O supreme among brahmanas! If I cannot get back the earrings from the world
of the serpents, then, while you look on, I will cast aside my breath of life."'

Vaishampayana continued, 'The one with the vajra in his hand failed to dissuade him from the task he had set
his mind on. Thereafter, he infused the wooden stick with the vajra weapon. O Janamejaya! The earth was shattered at being struck by the vajra and a path was created to the world of the serpents. Through that path he entered
the world of the serpents and saw the world of the serpents, extending for thousands of yojanas. There were many
celestial walls, adorned with pearls and jewels. O immensely fortunate one! These were made out of molten gold.
There were tanks with crystal staircases leading down to them. There were rivers with sparkling water. He saw
many trees, populated by large numbers of birds. The extender of the Bhrigu lineage saw the gate to that world. It
was five yojanas high and one hundred yojanas wide. On seeing the world of the serpents, Utanka was distressed.
O son! He lost all hope of getting the earrings back again. But a horse arrived. It was dark, with a white tail. O
Kouravya! Its eyes were coppery in complexion and it blazed with energy. It said, "O brahmana! Blow into my
apana duct[Meaning, blow into my anus.]. You will then get back the earrings that were seized by Airavata's son. O son! Do not hesitate. For
your sake, this attempt will not be fruitless. When you were in Goutama's hermitage, this is what you used to do."

Utanka asked, "How did I know you in my preceptor's hermitage? I wish to hear how I earlier did what you have
asked me to do now."

'The horse replied, "O son! Know that I am the blazing Jataveda[The fire god. Chitrabhanu is also a name for the fire god.], your preceptor's preceptor. For the sake of
your preceptor, you always worshipped me. O brahmana! O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! You always purified
yourself and worshipped me. That is the reason I will ensure your welfare. Do it without any delay."'

Vaishampayana continued, 'Thus addressed by Chitrabhanu, Utanka did what he had been asked to. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The fire god was pleased with him. From the horse's pores, flames issued and blazed
in the directions. Thick smoke billowed and caused terror in the world of the serpents. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! O great king! That smoke suddenly increased and nothing could be seen in the world of the serpents. O
Janamejaya! There were cries of lamentation everywhere in Airavata's abode, among the serpents, with Vasuki as
the foremost. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Obstructed by the smoke, the residences could no longer be
seen. They looked like forests and mountains that were enveloped in mist. They[The serpents.] were tormented by the energy of
the fire. Because of the smoke, their eyes were red. They arrived before the infinitely energetic Bhargava to ascertain what had happened. They heard what had occurred from the greatly energetic maharshi and all of them honoured him in their minds, worshipping him with the appropriate rites. All the serpents, with the aged and the young
at the forefront, joined their hands in salutation. They bowed their heads down and asked the illustrious one to be
pacified. When the brahmana was pacified, they offered him water to wash his feet and a gift[Respectively padya and arghya.]. The serpents returned the greatly revered and divine earrings. The powerful Utanka was thus worshipped by the serpents. He circumambulated the fire and left for his preceptor's house. O king! He swiftly proceeded towards Goutama's residence. O unblemished one! He gave his preceptor's wife the divine earrings. O Janamejaya! In this way, the great-
souled one roamed around the three worlds, for the divine earrings that had been stolen. O bull among the Bharata
lineage! This was the power of the sage Utanka, about which you had asked me. He was supreme in austerities.'
