'Narada said, "As soon as he was recognized by those virtuous ones, Yayati, bull among men, regained his divine
status and was freed from his fever. He had celestial garlands and garments. He was adorned in divine ornaments.
He had celestial fragrances and qualities. He no longer touched the ground with his feet[A trait of the gods is that they do not touch the ground with their feet.]. Vasumana was famous
in the world as the lord of giving. In a loud voice, he first spoke these words to the king. 'I have obtained merit in
this world through my commendable treatment of all the varnas. I will give that to you. The fruits of being generous, the fruits of being forgiving and possessing good conduct and the fruits of maintaining fires-I bestow all that
on you.' Pratardana, bull among kshatriyas, then spoke these words. 'I have always been devoted to war and have
been addicted to dharma in this way. I have obtained fruits in this world and earned fame, through the dharma of
kshatriyas. I bestow these consequences of being brave on you.' The intelligent Shibi Oushinara spoke these sweet
words. 'I have never uttered a falsehood to children, women, or even in jest-or in battles, calamities and emergencies. Go to heaven by virtue of that truth. O king! I can give up my life, my kingdom, my deeds and my happiness, but I cannot forsake truth. Go to heaven by virtue of that truth. I have pleased dharma with truth, the fire with
truth and Shakra with truth. Go to heaven by virtue of that truth.' Rajarshi Ashtaka, the son of Koushika and Madhavi, who knew about dharma, also spoke to the one who had performed many hundreds of sacrifices[Yayati.]. 'O lord! I
have performed hundreds of pundarika and gosava sacrifices and vajapeya sacrifices too. Obtain the fruits of
those. I have no jewels, riches or other possessions that have not been used in these sacrifices. Go to heaven by
virtue of that truth.' As his grandsons spoke to that lord of men one by one, the king gradually left the earth and
ascended towards heaven. In this way, through their own dharma, sacrifices, generosity and deeds, those four kings
and grandsons who had been born in royal lineages and extended their lineages, saved their maternal grandfather
Yayati, who had been dislodged from heaven, through their good deeds. They rescued the immensely wise one and
made him ascend to heaven.

'"The kings said, 'O king! We are your daughter's sons and we possess the dharma and qualities of kings. We
have the qualities of all dharma. O king! O lord of the earth! Ascend to heaven.'"'
