'The danavas said, "O Suyodhana! O Indra among kings! O extender of the Bharata lineage! You are always surrounded by brave and great-souled ones. Why have you resorted to this rash deed of fasting to death? Suicide always brings a person down and ill words are spoken about such a person. Intelligent ones like you should never
embark on contrary tasks that strike at the roots of their best interests. Restrain this resolution. O king! This is destructive of dharma, artha and happiness. It kills fame, power and fortitude and increases the happiness of the enemies. O lord! O king! Hear the truth about your divine origins and how this body of yours came to be created.
Then resort to fortitude. O king! In ancient times, through our austerities, we obtained you from Maheshvara[Shiva.]. O
unblemished one! The upper part of your body has been made from a collection of vajras and is impenetrable to
every type of weapon[The text uses both astra and shastra. These are both weapons and the words are often used synonymously.
However, an astra is a weapon that is hurled or released, while a shastra is held in the hand.]. The lower part was created by the goddess[Since Maheshvara is mentioned, the goddess probably means Parvati.] herself, out of flowers, and its handsome
form is attractive to women. O supreme among kings! O tiger among kings! Thus, your body was created both by
Ishvara and by the goddess. You are divine, not human. There are extremely valorous kshatriyas, with Bhagadatta
at the forefront. They are brave and skilled in the use of divine weapons and will kill your enemies. Therefore, do
not grieve. There is no reason for fear. To aid you, many brave danavas have been born on earth. Other asuras will
penetrate Bhishma, Drona and Kripa. Possessed by them, they will discard their kindness and fight with your enemies. O supreme among Kurus! When the danavas have possessed their inner souls, they will cast aside all affection and kill everyone in battle-sons, brothers, fathers, relatives, students, kin, young and old. Those tigers among
men will be deluded through ignorance. They will be driven by the dictates of destiny. Their minds will be dark
and they will discard all love. They will gleefully tell each other, 'You will not escape with your life.' They will
establish themselves in their manliness and release every kind of weapon[The text uses both astra and shastra.]. Priding themselves, those foremost
ones among the Kurus will destroy a large number of people. The great-souled Pandavas will be capable of fighting back. Those greatly strong ones are favoured by destiny. O king! They will kill masses of daityas and rakshasas
who have been born in the wombs of kshatriyas and who will fight with your enemies with clubs, maces, swords
and missiles[Shastras.]. O brave one! Whatever fear there exists in your heart about Arjuna, for that too, we have devised a
means for Arjuna. The soul of Naraka, who had been killed, has entered Karna. O brave one! Because of that enmity, he will fight Keshava and Arjuna[Naraka is a demon who had been killed by Krishna.]. Karna is supreme among warriors. He is proud in battle. That maharatha
will defeat Partha and all the enemies in battle. The wielder of the vajra[Indra.] knows this. To protect Savyasachi, he
will rob Karna of his earrings and armour. But there are hundreds and thousands of daityas with us. We have also
appointed rakshasas by the name of samshaptakas[Samshaptakas are warriors who have taken an oath in battle, either to kill the enemy or fall in battle.]. Those famous ones will kill the brave Arjuna. Do not sorrow. O king! This entire earth will be yours, without any rivals. Do not resort to despondency. That is not worthy
of you. O Kourava! If you are destroyed, our side will be weakened. O brave one! Depart. You should never direct
your intelligence towards any other task. You are our recourse, just as the Pandavas are of the gods."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having thus addressed him, the daityas then embraced that elephant among kings. Like a
son, the bulls among the danavas consoled that invincible one. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They steadied
his intelligence with loving words. Then they gave him permission to leave, saying, "Go," and "Be victorious."

When he had obtained permission, Kritya again brought the mighty-armed one back to the spot where he had decided to fast unto death. Having placed the brave one down and having honoured him, Kritya took his permission
to leave and instantly disappeared. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When she had disappeared, King Duryodhana thought that it had all been a dream. But a thought always remained with him. "I will vanquish the sons of
Pandu in battle." Suyodhana thought that Karna and the samshaptakas had been given the task of killing of Partha,
the slayer of enemies, and that they were capable of this. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Thus did resolution
harden in Dhritarashtra's evil-minded son, about defeating the Pandavas. Karna's mind and soul had been possessed by Naraka's soul. This turned his mind towards the cruel task of killing Arjuna. Various rakshasas possessed
the intelligence of the brave samshaptakas. They were overtaken by rajas and tamas[The qualities of passion and darkness respectively.] and wished to kill
Phalguna[Arjuna.]. The minds of Bhishma, Drona, Kripa and the others were taken over by the danavas. O lord of the
earth! They were no longer as affectionate towards the sons of Pandu. But King Suyodhana did not tell anyone
this. When the night was over, Karna Vaikartana smiled at King Duryodhana, and joining his hands in salutation,
spoke words full of reason to him. "No one who is dead can defeat his enemies. Only those who are alive witness
fortune. O Kouravya! How does a dead one obtain fortune? Where is the victory? This is not the time for despondency, fear or death." He then embraced the mighty-armed one with his arms and said, "O king! Arise. O destroyer
of enemies! Why are you lying down? Why are you sorrowing? How can you desire to die when the enemy has
been tormented through your valour? Or if fear has been engendered at the sight of Arjuna's valour, I truly promise
that I will kill Arjuna in battle. O lord of men! When thirteen years have elapsed, I swear on my weapons that I
will bring the Parthas under your subjugation." Having been thus addressed by Karna, remembering the words of
the daityas and witnessing the prostrations of the others, Suyodhana arose. Having heard the words of the daityas,
he adopted a firm resolution in his heart. The tiger among men asked his army to be prepared, with many chariots,
elephants, horses and large numbers of infantry. O king! The great army marched like the waves of the Ganga. It
had white umbrellas and pennants and extremely white whisks. It was extremely radiant with chariots, elephants
and infantry, like the sky when the thick clouds have disappeared and autumn is yet to arrive. Indras among brahmanas pronounced benedictions of victory over him and praised him like an emperor. With hands joined in salutation, Dhritarashtra's son, the lord of men, received the homage of garlands. O Indra among kings! Blazing in
supreme prosperity, Suyodhana was in the front, together with Karna and the dice-player Soubala. Beginning with
Duhshasana, all his other brothers were there, and Bhurishravas, Somadatta and the great king Bahlika. The extenders of the Kuru lineage followed that lion among kings on many types of chariots, horses and excellent elephants.
O king! In a short while, they entered their own city.'
