Sanjaya said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When that army of elephants was slain by Pandu's son[The singular is used, presumably meaning Bhima.] and
when that army was slaughtered in the battle by Bhimasena, Bhimasena, the scorcher of enemies, was seen to be
wandering around there. He was enraged as Yama with a staff in his hand, destroying all beings. O king! In the encounter, he clashed against and killed your remaining sons, while your son, Kouravya Duryodhana, could not be
seen. Those and other brothers united and attacked Bhimasena. O great king! They were Durmarshana, Jaitra,
Bhuribala and Ravi. These sons of yours united and attacked from every direction. They obstructed Bhimasena
from all the directions. O great king! At this, Bhima again ascended his chariot. He shot sharp arrows towards the
inner organs of your sons. In the great battle, your sons were afflicted by Bhima and tried to drag Bhimasena away,
like an unwilling elephant. In the encounter, the wrathful Bhimsena swiftly used a kshurapra arrow to sever Durmarshana's head and it fell down on the ground. With another broad-headed arrow that was capable of penetrating
all armour, Bhima slew your maharatha son, Shrutanta. The scorcher of enemies seemed to smile. He pierced
Kouravya Jayatsena with an iron arrow and brought him down from his seat on the chariot. O king! He was quickly killed and fell down from his chariot onto the ground. O venerable one! At this, Shrutarva angrily pierced Bhi-
ma with one hundred arrows with drooping tufts that were shafted with feathers of vultures. In the encounter, Bhi-
ma angrily pierced Jaitra, Bhuribala and Ravi. Those three were struck with three arrows that were like the poison
or the fire. Having been slain, those maharathas fell down from their chariots onto the ground. They were like blossoming kimshuka trees during the spring that had been struck down. With another sharp and iron arrow, the
scorcher of enemies struck Durvimochana and sent him to the world of the dead. Having been slain, that supreme
of rathas fell down from his chariot onto the ground. He was like a tree on a mountain top that had been struck
down by a storm. In that battle, in the forefront of that army, he then struck two of your sons, Dushpradharsha and
Sujata, with two arrows each. Those arrows had stone heads. Their limbs were struck by these and the supreme of
rathas fell down. Bhima saw that Durvisaha, another of your sons, was impetuously advancing in the battle. He
pierced him with a broad-headed arrow. While all the archers looked on, he was slain and fell down from his
mount. On seeing that many of his brothers had been single-handedly killed in the battle, Shrutarva became intolerant and attacked Bhima. He brandished his giant bow, decorated with gold. He shot many arrows that were like
poison and the fire. O king! In the battle, he severed Pandava's bow and when the bow was severed, struck him
with twenty arrows. However, maharatha Bhimasena picked up another bow. Enveloping your son with arrows, he
asked him to wait. The great duel that took place between the two of them was wonderful and fearful. Such a duel
had earlier occurred between Jambha and Vasava. They shot sparkling arrows that were like Yama's staff and
shrouded the entire earth, the sky and all the directions. O king! In the battle, Shrutarva angrily picked up his bow
and struck Bhimasena in the arms and the chest with arrows. O great king! Thus severely pierced by your archer
son, Bhima was angry and agitated, like the ocean during the new or the full moon. O venerable one! Overcome by
anger, Bhima used his arrows to convey your son's charioteer and his four horses to Yama's eternal abode. On seeing that he was without a chariot, the one with an immeasurable soul showed the dexterity of his hands and covered him with tufted arrows. O king! Devoid of his chariot, Shrutarva picked up a sword and a shield. The sword
was as radiant as the sun and was marked with the signs of one hundred moons. However, Pandava used a kshurapra arrow to sever his head from his body. The great-souled one severed his head with a kshurapra arrow and the
headless torso fell down from the chariot onto the ground, making a loud noise.

' "When that brave one fell down, those on your side were overcome by fear. Despite this, they advanced
against Bhimasena in the battle, wishing to fight with him. Those were the only ones left from the army that was
like an ocean. When they speedily attacked, the armoured and powerful Bhimasena received them. They attacked
him, surrounding him from all sides. Bhima enveloped those on your side with sharp arrows. He afflicted all of
them, like the one with the one thousand eyes[Indra.] against the asuras. He destroyed five hundred maharathas and destroyed the bumpers of their chariots. In the battle, he again slaughtered an army of seven hundred elephants. With
supreme arrows, he slew ten thousand foot soldiers and eight hundred horses. Pandava was radiant. O lord! Having
slain your sons in the battle, Bhimasena Kounteya thought that his task and the purpose of his birth had been accomplished. He slew all those on your side who battled. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! No one among your
soldiers was capable of glancing towards him. All the Kurus were driven away and their followers slain. He then
made a loud noise by slapping his armpits and terrified the giant elephants. O lord of the earth! There were many
warriors in your army who were killed. O great king! The few who were left were overcome by distress." '
