'Sanjaya said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When night had passed and it was morning, Shantanu's son,
Bhishma, instructed that a battle formation should be created. Wishing to ensure victory for your sons, Shantanu's
son, Bhishma, the grandfather of the Kurus, formed the great vyuha known as Garuda. Your father Devavrata stationed himself on Garuda's mouth and Bharadvaja's son and Satvata Kritavarma were the eyes. Ashvatthama and
the famous Kripa were the head, supported by Trigartas, Matsyas, Kekayas and Vatadhanas. O venerable one!
Bhurishrava, Shala, Shalya, Bhagadatta, Madrakas, Sindhus, Souviras and those from the land of the five rivers,
together with Jayadratha, constituted the neck. King Duryodhana, together with his brothers and followers, constituted the back. O great king! Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti, together with the Kambojas and the Shakas and the
Shurasenas, constituted the tail. Magadhas and Kalingas, together with masses of Dasherakas, were armoured and
stationed themselves on the right wing of the vyuha. Kananas, Vikunjas, Muktas, Pundravishas, together with Brihadbala, were stationed on the left wing.

'"On seeing this battle formation of your soldiers, Savyasachi, the scorcher of enemies, together with Dhrishtadyumna, arranged a counter vyuha for the encounter. This vyuha was in the form of a half-moon and this vyuha
was extremely terrible. Bhimasena stationed himself on the right horn. He was surrounded by kings from many
countries, wielding many different kinds of weapons. Maharatha Virata and Drupada were next to him. Next to
him was Nila, accompanied by Nilayudha. Next to Nila was maharatha Dhrishtaketu. He was surrounded by the
Chedis, the Kashis, the Karusha and the Pouravas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Dhrishtadyumna,
Shikhandi, the Panchalas and the Prabhadrakas were stationed in the midst of the large army, ready for battle.
Dharmaraja was also there, surrounded by an army of elephants. O king! Satyaki was also there, together with
Droupadi's five sons. Abhimanyu was there and beyond him was Iravan. O king! Bhimasena's son[Ghatotkacha.] was there,
together with the maharatha Kekayas. Next to him, on the left flank, was the foremost of men[Referring to Arjuna.]. His protector
was Janardana, the protector of the entire universe. It was thus that the Pandavas formed a giant vyuha as a counter
vyuha, for the death of your sons and of those who have assembled on your side. The battle between those on your
side and those of the enemy then commenced, seeking to kill each other in a melee of chariots and elephants. O
lord of the earth! Masses of horses and masses of chariots were seen there. They were seen to descend on each other, seeking to kill each other. Masses of chariots dashed towards each other, or engaged each other individually.
They created a tumultuous sound, mixed with the sound of drums. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As they
sought to kill each other in that tumultuous battle, the shouts of the brave men on your side, and on theirs, seemed
to touch heaven."'
