Sanjaya said, "Karna penetrated the soldiers and attacked Dharmaraja. He was surrounded by thousands of chariots, elephants, horses and infantry. The enemy hurled thousands of diverse weapons at Vrisha. But without any
fear, he used hundreds of fierce arrows to strike these down. He cut down their heads, arms and thighs. In every
direction, they were killed and fell down on the ground. The others were shattered and fled. The Dravidas, the
Andhakas and the Nishadas were again rallied by Satyaki. In that battle, wishing to kill him, they attacked Karna
with their infantry. Struck by Karna's arrows, they lost their arms and helmets. They fell down simultaneously on
the ground, like a forest of shala trees that had been struck down. In this way, hundreds, thousands and tens of
thousands of warriors lost their lives. Their bodies fell down on the ground and they filled the directions with their
fame. In that battle, Vaikartana Karna was like Yama. The Pandus and Panchalas tried to counter him, like a disease with mantras and herbs. He repulsed them and again attacked Yudhishthira, like an irresistible disease that
cannot be countered by mantras and herbs. However, though he wished to advance against the king, he was held
back by the Pandus, the Panchalas and the Kekayas. It was like death not being able to conquer those who know
about the brahman.

' "Yudhishthira, the slayer of enemy heroes, was some distance away from Karna, who had been checked. His
eyes red with rage, he said, 'O Karna! O Karna! Your eyesight is in vain. O son of a suta! Listen to my words. You
have always sought to rival the illustrious Phalguna in battle. You have always devoted yourself to the views of
Dhritarashtra's son and have opposed us. Today, exhibit the strength, the valour and the enmity towards the Pan-
dus. Based on your great manliness, display all of those today. In this great battle today, I will destroy the love you
bear towards fighting.' O great king! Having thus addressed Karna, Pandu's son smiled and used ten sharp and
gold-tufted arrows to pierce him. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The son of the suta, scorcher of enemies
and great archer, pierced him back with nine vatsadanta arrows[Arrows that had heads like the tooth of a calf.] and laughed. In the battle, the brave and great-
souled one then used two razor-sharp and straight-tufted arrows to slay the two Panchalas who were protecting his
chariot wheels[The two Panchalas who were protecting Yudhishthira's chariot wheels.
In shlokas excised in the Critical edition, their names are given as Chandradeva and Dandadhara.]. Those two brave ones had been resplendent along Dharmaraja's flanks. Along his chariot, they
had been like Punarvasu by the side of the moon[Punarvasu is the seventh of the twenty-seven nakshatras. However,
Punarvasu is actually a double star, Castor and Pollux in the constellation
Gemini.]. However, Yudhishthira again pierced Karna with thirty arrows and struck both Sushena and Satyasena with three arrows each[Since Satyasena has already been killed, there is an inconsistency.]. He pierced Shalya with ninety arrows and
the son of the suta with seventy-three arrows. He struck each of the ones who were protecting his horses with three
arrows each. At this, Adhiratha's son laughed and brandished his bow. He pierced the king with a broad-headed
arrow, pierced him again with another sixty arrows and laughed. Then, the brave ones among the Pandus rushed
towards Yudhishthira. Wishing to save him from the son of the suta, they struck Karna with arrows. Among these
were Satyaki, Chekitana, Yuyutsu, Pandya, Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi, Droupadi's sons, the Prabhadrakas, the
twins, Bhimasena, Shishupala's son, the Karushas, the remaining Matsyas, the Kekayas and those from Kashi and
Kosala. These spirited and brave ones countered Vasushena. Janamejaya from Panchala pierced Karna with sharp
arrows-varahakarnas, narachas, nalikas, vatsadantas, vipathas, kshurapras and atakamukhas[Varahakarnas have heads like a boar's ear, narachas are iron arrows,
nalikas are hollow arrows, vatsadantas have heads like a calf's tooth,
vipathas are large arrows, kshurapras are sharp as razors and atakamukhas have heads that roam around freely (probably meaning multiple
heads).]. Wielding many
fierce weapons, chariots, elephants, horses and riders surrounded and attacked Karna from every direction, wishing
to kill him.

' "He was attacked from every direction by the best among the Pandavas. At this, he invoked brahmastra and
enveloped the directions with his arrows. The fire that was Karna had valour and anger and his arrows flamed
greatly. Consuming the Pandavas, who were like a forest, he resplendently roamed around in that battle. The great-
souled and wonderful archer repulsed all those great weapons. He laughed and used his arrows to sever the bow of
that Indra among men[Yudhishthira.]. In that battle, in the twinkling of an eye, he affixed ninety sharp arrows with drooping
tufts and penetrated the king's armour. That armour was decorated with gold. As it fell down, it looked dazzling,
like clouds tinged with lightning and tossed around by the wind, when penetrated by the sun. Having fallen off the
limbs of that Indra among men, the armour looked beautiful, like celestial clouds in the night sky, ornamented with
gems[There is implicit imagery of the stars.]. Devoid of armour and wounded by arrows, Partha was covered with blood. He angrily hurled a lance
that was completely made out of iron towards Adhiratha's son. While it blazed through the sky, he[Karna.] cut it down
with seven arrows. It was severed by the great archer's arrows and fell down on the ground. At this, Yudhishthira
struck Karna in the arms, the forehead and the chest with four javelins and roared delightedly. With blood flowing
from his body, Karna was enraged and sighed like a snake. He struck down Pandava's standard with a broad-headed arrow and pierced him with three more. He struck down his quivers and shattered his chariot into tiny fragments. With his parshni charioteers slain, Partha retreated. He was incapable of remaining in front of the evil-
minded Karna. Radheya pursued him and touched him on the shoulder with his hand. O king! He laughed at him
and spoke disparaging words to Pandava. 'You have been born in a famous lineage and are established in the dharma of kshatriyas. How is it that you are seeking to protect your life in this great battle and are abandoning this encounter with the enemy? I don't think you know the dharma of kshatriyas well. That is my view. You possess the
strength of the brahman and are devoted to studying and the task of performing sacrifices. O Kounteya! Do not
fight again and do not advance against brave ones. Do not speak unpleasant words towards them. Do not advance
towards a great battle.' Having said this, the immensely strong one released Partha. He began to slaughter the Pan-
dava soldiers, like the wielder of the vajra against the asuras. O king! That lord of men fled in shame. On seeing
that the king was departing, the Chedis, the Pandavas, the Panchalas, maharatha Satyaki, Droupadi's brave sons
and the Pandavas who were the sons of Madri followed the undecaying one. On seeing that Yudhishthira's army
was unwilling to fight, Karna pursued them from the rear, together with the brave Kurus. There was the sound of
conch shells and drums and the twang of bows. The sons of Dhritarashtra roared like lions.

' "O Kouravya! Yudhishthira swiftly climbed onto Shrutakirti's chariot[Shrutakirti (or Shrutakarma) was the son of Arjuna and Droupadi.]. Dharmaraja Yudhishthira saw that
his[Karna's.] strength was like that of Death and that he was slaying thousands of warriors. At this, he[Yudhishthira.] became angry.
Instructed by the king, all the maharatha Pandavas, with Bhimasena at the forefront, attacked your sons. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The warriors raised a tumultuous sound there. Here and there, there were elephants,
horses, chariots, foot soldiers and weapons. 'Arise. Strike. Advance towards death.' As they killed each other in
that field of battle, these were the words the warriors spoke to each other. Because of the shower of arrows, it was
as if the sky was covered by the shadow of clouds. The best of men clashed against each other and killed each other. In that battle, penants, standards and umbrellas were brought down. Horses, charioteers and warriors were destroyed. Those lords were slain. They lost their limbs and their bodies and fell down shattered on the ground.
Supreme elephants looked like the lofty summits of mountains. Their riders were slain and they fell down, like
mountains shattered by the thunder. Armour, ornaments and bodies were mangled, shattered and dispersed. In
thousands, horses fell down, with their brave riders. The limbs of warriors were scattered. Elephants, horses and
rathas were slain. Thousands of arrays of foot soldiers were crushed by enemy heroes. Everywhere, the earth was
strewn with the heads of fierce warriors. Their eyes were copper coloured and dilated. Their faces were like the lotus and the moon. As on earth, a sound could be heard in the sky. There were large numbers of apsaras on celestial
vehicles and they sounded musical instruments. They welcomed the thousands of brave ones who were headed in
their direction, after having been killed by the valiant enemy. The masses of apsaras made them ascend the celestial vehicles and bore them away. On beholding this great and extraordinary marvel in person, the brave ones were
delighted in their minds. They desired to obtain heaven and angrily struck each other. In that battle, rathas fought a
wonderful battle with rathas. Infantry fought with infantry, elephants with elephants and horses with horses. Thus
did the battle continue, causing carnage among elephants, horses and men. The dust raised by the soldiers covered
everything. Those on the same side slew each other. And those on the enemy's side slew each other. In the battle,
they pulled each other by the hair. They fought with teeth and with nails. They fought with fists in an encounter
that destroyed bodies and sins. Thus did the battle continue, destructive of elephants, horses and men. A river of
blood was created from the bodies of men, horses and elephants. It carried away many fallen bodies of men, horses
and elephants. There were the bodies of men, horses and elephants and there were men, horse riders and elephant
riders. That extremely terrible river had currents of blood and its mud was red. It bore along the bodies of men,
horses and elephants and increased the fear of those who were cowards. Desiring victory, some went over to the
other side[They died.]. There were others who were submerged in it and sank and swam. All their limbs were covered with
blood. Their armour, weapons and garments became red. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Some bathed in it.
Others drank the water and lost their senses. There were chariots, horses, men, elephants, weapons, ornaments,
garments and armour of those who were slain, or were being slain. The earth, the sky, the firmament and the directions were generally seen to be red. Smell, touch and taste became red in form. Above this, there were the sounds
raised by those who were engaged. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In general, the soldiers were overcome by
great distress.

' "The soldiers, with Bhimasena at the forefront, and brave rathas with Satyaki at the forefront, again attacked
your soldiers, who had already been routed. The great-souled ones descended with such great force that it was irresistible. O king! The large army of your sons retreated. The chariots, horses and men were scattered. Their armour
and mail were in disarray. Their weapons and bows were dislodged. Your soldiers were agitated and driven away
in different directions. They were like a herd of elephants, afflicted by lions in a great forest." '
