Vaishampayana said, 'The Kounteyas, with Yudhishthira at the forefront, arrived in Kamyaka and were welcomed
by the masses of sages. They began to live there with Krishna[Droupadi.]. When Pandu's sons dwelt safely there, they were
surrounded on all sides by many brahmanas. Then a certain brahmana said, "The mighty-armed Shouri[Krishna's name. Hari is also Krishna's name, as is Keshava.], Arjuna's
beloved friend, self-controlled and endowed with wisdom, will come here. It is known to Hari that the extenders of
the Kuru lineage have arrived here. Hari always wishes to see you and has your welfare in mind. The immensely
ascetic Markandeya has lived for many years, devoting himself to studies and austerities. He will soon arrive to
meet you." While he was still speaking, Keshava could be seen. That supreme of charioteers was on his chariot,
yoked to Sainya and Sugriva[The names of Krishna's horses.]. He was with Satyabhama, like Maghavan with Poulami[Satyabhama is Krishna's third wife. Maghavan is Indra. Indra's consort is Shachi. Shachi is Puloma's daughter, thus known as Poulami. Krishna's mother is Devaki.]. Devaki's son had arrived
to visit the best of the Kurus.

'Descending from his chariot, the wise one happily greeted Dharmaraja, as is prescribed, and Bhima, supreme
among strong ones. He worshipped Dhoumya and was himself worshipped by the twins. Then he embraced Gudakesha[Gudakesha and Phalguna are Arjuna's names. Yudhishthira and Bhima were senior in age to Krishna and
thus, warranted homage.] and spoke comforting words to Droupadi. Having seen the beloved warrior Phalguna, who had returned
after a long time, Dasharha[Krishna. In general, Dasharha is a term for the Yadavas.], the destroyer of enemies, embraced him again and again. Similarly, Satyabhama,
Krishna's beloved queen, embraced Droupadi, the beloved wife of the Pandavas. Then all the Pandavas, with their
wife and their priest[Dhoumya.], worshipped Pundarikaksha[Krishna's name. Literally, the one with eyes like a lotus.] and seated themselves around him. The wise Krishna was
reunited with Partha Dhananjaya, the oppressor of asuras. The great-souled lord of beings was as radiant as the illustrious lord, when united with Guha[By the illustrious lord, one means Shiva. Guha is Kartikeya's name and Kartikeya is Shiva's son. The imagery is of Shiva being united with Kartikeya.]. The one with the diadem on his head recounted the details of what had
happened in the forest to Gada's senior, exactly as they had occurred[Arjuna is the one with the diadem on his head. Because of the diadem on his head, Arjuna is known as Kiriti.
Gada is Krishna's younger brother.]. He then asked him how Subhadra was, together with Abhimanyu. In the prescribed fashion, Madhu's slayer[Krishna is Madhu's slayer and one of Krishna's names is Madhusudana.] showed honours to Partha[Arjuna.], Krishna[Droupadi. Droupadi's name is Krishna. This should really be written as Krishnaa, to avoid confusion with
Krishna. But we have written Droupadi as Krishna, to keep it simple. From the context, it should be clear whether
Krishna or Droupadi is meant.] and
the priest.

'When Yudhishthira was seated with them, he praised the king[Yudhishthira.] and spoke these words. "O Pandava! Dharma
is superior to winning the kingdom. O king! It is said that austerity leads to it. You have lived by your own dharma, with truthfulness and virtue. You have won this world and the next. You first studied, and then observed the
vows. You next became skilled in the use of weapons. You obtained riches by practising the dharma of kshatriyas.
You have performed all the ancient sacrifices. You are not addicted to the dharma of sexual pleasure and desire. O
Indra among kings! You have never acted out of desire. Nor have you given up dharma out of greed for artha. It is
for these reasons that you are Dharmaraja. O king! O Partha! Though you obtained the kingdom, riches and objects
of pleasure, benevolence, truthfulness, austerities, devotion, conciliation, forbearance and forgiveness always
brought you supreme pleasure. O Pandava! When the assembled inhabitants of Kurujangala[The forest of the Kurus, a term for Kurukshetra.] saw Krishna afraid
and outraged in the assembly hall, an act that was contrary to dharma and good conduct, who but you could have
endured it? There is no doubt that you will soon protect your subjects again and be restored to all the prosperity
that you desire. Once your oath has been fulfilled, we will act so as to chastise the Kurus." Then the lion of the
Dasharhas spoke to Dhoumya, Krishna, Yudhishthira, the twins and Bhima. "It is your good fortune that Kiriti has
happily returned, having obtained the weapons." The lord of the Dasharhas, together with his well-wishers, then
spoke to Krishna Yajnaseni. "O Krishna! O Yajnaseni! Your young ones are devoted to truthful vows, show good
conduct and wish to become foremost in the knowledge of weapons. They always associate with righteous ones.
Your sons follow the path of meditation. O Krishna! Though your father and your brothers seek to attract them
with the kingdom and the territory, these young ones find no attraction in the houses of Yajnasena[Drupada, Droupadi's father.] or their maternal uncles. In a desire to become foremost in the knowledge of weapons, they safely travelled in the direction of
Anarta[Anarta was the kingdom of the Yadavas in the northern parts of Gujarat.]. O Krishna! Your sons entered the city of the Vrishnis[The Vrishnis were a line of the Yadavas.]. They do not feel any jealousy towards the
gods[They are content with their state.]. Without fail, Subhadra always instructs them in conduct, just as you yourself would have instructed them,
or the arya Kunti. O Krishna! Just as Rukmini's son is the instructor and guide of Aniruddha, Abhimanyu, Sunitha
and Bhanu, he is just the same to your sons too[Pradyumna is the son of Krishna and Rukmini. Aniruddha is Pradyumna's son and Krishna's grandson.
Bhanu is the son of Krishna and Satyabhama. This Sunitha is the son of Krishna and Rukmini.]. Prince Abhimanyu is a skilled teacher. He constantly instructs
the brave ones in fighting with clubs, swords, shields and missiles, and in handling chariots and horses. Like an instructor, Rukimini's son has given them many weapons and has taught them well. He finds great satisfaction in the
valour of your sons and of Abhimanyu. O Yajnaseni! When your sons go out for sport, each of them is followed by
a retinue of chariots, vehicles and elephants." Then Krishna again addressed Dharmaraja. "O king! Let the warriors
of Dasharha, Kukura and Andhaka[Lines of the Yadavas.] always be intent on following your orders. Let them be established wherever
you desire. The army of the Madhus[Madhu was an ancestor of the Yadavas. So Madhus is another term for the Yadavas.] has infantry, horses, chariots and elephants. It raises a forceful storm with
its bows and is led by Halayudha[Halayudha is the one with a plough (hala) for his weapon (ayudha) and is Balarama's name.]. O Indra among men! It is ready to accomplish your tasks. O Pandava! Let
Dhritarashtra's son Suyodhana[Duryodhana.], foremost among the performers of evil deeds, traverse the path followed by
Soubha and Soubha's lord, together with his relatives and well-wishers[Soubha's lord or king was Shalva and the story of Krishna's destruction of Soubha and Shalva has been recounted in Section 31 (Volume 2).]. O Indra among kings! Live where you
desire, for the time appointed by you in the assembly hall. But after that, when the Dasharha warriors have cut
down the warriors[Of the enemy.], the city of Nagapura[Another name for Hastinapura.] will await your return. When you have subdued your anger and
cleansed your torment, when you have finished roaming around as you desire, then, bereft of sorrow, you will return to the prosperous city of Nagapura and regain your kingdom." On hearing the detailed views of that great-
souled one, supreme among men, Dharmaraja approved of them. He joined his hands in salutation and replied to
Keshava, "O Keshava! There is no doubt that you are the refuge of the Partha Pandavas. When the time has come,
there is no doubt that you will accomplish these deeds. As we have promised, we will spend a complete twelve
years in this wilderness. O Keshava! After spending the stipulated time incognito, the Pandavas will resort to you
again."'

Vaishampayana said, 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! While Varshneya[Descendant of the Vrishni lineage, Krishna.] and Dharmaraja were conversing in this way, the great ascetic Markandeya, with dharma in his soul, was seen to arrive. He had lived for many
thousands of years and had become aged through his austerities. When the aged rishi, who had lived for many
thousands of years, arrived-all the brahmanas, together with Krishna and the Pandavas, offered him worship.
When the supreme among rishis was comfortably seated, with the approval of the brahmanas and the Pandavas,
Keshava addressed him. "The Pandavas, the assembled brahmanas, Droupadi, Satyabhama and I myself wish to
hear your supreme words. O Markandeya! Therefore, tell us about the sacred accounts of the past, characterized by
eternal and wise good conduct on the part of kings, women and rishis." While they were seated there, devarshi
Narada, pure in soul, also arrived to see the Pandavas. All those bulls among men honoured the great-souled one.
As has been decreed, they offered the learned one padya and arghya[Padya and arghya are offered to a guest. The former is water for washing the feet and the latter is a gift.]. On knowing that they were about to hear
Markandeya's words, devarshi Narada approved of the proposal. Narada knew everything about time and smilingly told him, "O brahmarshi! Tell the Pandavas whatever you wish to say." Thus addressed, the great ascetic
Markandeya replied, "Wait for some time. There are many accounts to be told." Thus addressed, the Pandavas, together with the brahmanas, waited for some time. They looked at the great sage, as radiant as the sun at noon.'
