Bhishma said, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about the oaths taken in the course of a visit
to the tirthas. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! O great king! This is about what was done by rajarshis
and brahmana rishis when there was a theft of lotuses. The rishis assembled on the western side of Prabhasa. Having assembled there, they consulted each other. They decided that they would roam around, visiting all the sacred
tirthas on  earth. Having said this, all of  them departed on  that task. O  king! There  were  Shukra,  Angiras,  the
learned Kavi, Agastya, Narada, Parvata, Bhrigu, Vasishtha, Kashyapa, Goutama, Vishvamitra, Jamadagni, the rishi
Galava,  Ashtaka,  Bharadvaja,  Arundhati,  the  Valakhilyas,  Shibi,  Dilipa,  Nahusha,  Ambarisha,  King  Yayati,
Dhundhumara and Puru. O Indra among men! Those great ones proceeded, placing Shatakratu, Vritra's slayer, at
their head. Having visited all the tirthas, in the month of Magha, they went to the sacred tirtha of Koushiki. They
had cleansed their sins after visiting all the tirthas. After this, they went to that extremely sacred lake that was
Brahma's. They were like fires and they bathed in that tirtha of the gods. They then gathered lotus stalks and ate
them. O king! Some of them extracted the stalks of lotuses. Other brahmanas extracted the roots of the lotuses.

'"However, they found that the lotuses uprooted by Agastya had been stolen by someone. Agastya, foremost
among the rishis, spoke to them. 'Who has stolen my excellent lotuses? I suspect it must be one of you. Give my
lotuses back. It is unworthy of you to steal my lotuses. I have heard that time destroys the strength of dharma. That
time must have arrived and dharma's affliction is increasing. Before adharma increases further, I should quickly
leave for the world of the hereafter. There will be a time when brahmanas will recite the Vedas in loud tones in the
midst of villages, within the hearing of vrishalas. There will be a time when kings will conduct themselves according to adharma. I do not wish to see all that. Before all that happens, I will leave for the world of the hereafter.
There will be a time when men will regard the superior, the middling and the inferior as the same. A great darkness
will pervade everything. Before that happens, I wish to quickly leave for the world of the hereafter. There will be a
time when strong mortals will oppress weaker ones. Before I see that, I wish to quickly leave for the world of the
hereafter. I am not interested in seeing this state of affairs in the world of men.'

'"Thus addressed by the maharshi, the rishis replied, 'We have not stolen your lotuses. You should not suspect
us in vain. O maharshi! We will take terrible oaths.' O Indra among men! Since the maharshis were certain that
they had not dishonoured dharma, with the kings, and their sons and grandsons, one after another, they took these
oaths. Bhrigu said, 'Let the person who has stolen the lotuses abuse when he is censured, strike back when he is
struck and let him eat the flesh from the backbones of animals[Forbidden meat. A brahmana shouldn't retaliate either.].' Vasishtha said, 'Let the person who has stolen
the lotuses not be interested in studying, let him be surrounded by dogs and as a mendicant, let him live in a
city[A mendicant is not supposed to live in a city.].' Kashyapa said, 'Let the person who has stolen the lotuses sell merchandise everywhere, let him covet objects left in trust and let him bear false witness.' Goutama said, 'Let the person who has stolen the lotuses live with
insolence in his mind, let him earn a living through trade and tilling the ground and let him be malicious.' Angiras
said, 'Let the person who has stolen the lotuses be impure and a crooked brahmana, let him be surrounded by dogs
and let him not be freed from the sin of causing injury to brahmanas.' Dhundhumara said, 'Let the person who has
stolen the lotuses be ungrateful towards his friends, let him be reborn to a shudra mother and let him eat the food
alone.' Puru said, 'Let the person who has stolen the lotuses be a physician, let him be sustained by his wife and let
him obtain a means of living through his father-in-law.' Dilipa said, 'Let the person who has stolen the lotuses
dwell in a village that has a common well, let him be the husband of a vrishala and let him go to the worlds meant
for such people.' Shukra said, 'Let the person who has stolen the lotuses eat flesh from the backbones of animals,
let him have intercourse during the day and let him become the servant of a king.' Jamadagni said, 'Let the person
who has stolen the lotuses study in a prohibited way, let his friends eat at his funeral ceremonies[Instead of brahmanas being fed.] and let shudras
eat at his funeral ceremonies.' Shibi said, 'Let the person who has stolen the lotuses die without having ignited the
sacrificial fire, let there be impediments at his sacrifices and let him obstruct the ascetics.' Yayati said, 'Let the person who has stolen the lotuses be false to his vows and procreate through his wife when he wears matted hair and
let him disrespect the Vedas.' Nahusha said, 'Let the person who has stolen the lotuses be a householder who drives his guests away because he has initiated himself into the pursuit of desire, let him pass on learning to his servants.' Ambarisha said, 'Let the person who has stolen the lotuses be extremely cruel and a follower of adharma in
his treatment of women, relatives and cattle and let him disregard brahmanas.' Narada said, 'Let the person who
has stolen the lotuses be ignorant, let his fire remain hidden, let him read the sacred texts in mispronounced tones,
let him show disrespect to those who are superior.' Nabhaga said, 'Let the person who has stolen the lotuses always utter falsehoods, let him quarrel with the virtuous, let him bestow his daughter for a price.' Kavi said, 'Let
the person who has stolen the lotuses strike a cow with his feet, let him urinate towards the sun, let him abandon
those who seek refuge.' Vishvamitra said, 'Let the person who has stolen the lotuses be a servant to a king during a
drought, let him act as an officiating priest to those who should not perform sacrifices.' Parvata said, 'Let the person who has stolen the lotuses have lordship over a village, let him travel on vehicles drawn by asses, let him use
dogs for a means of subsistence.' Bharadvaja said, 'Let the person who has stolen the lotuses suffer all the sins
committed by those who perform all the cruel and wicked acts, let him utter lies.' Ashtaka said, 'Let the person
who has stolen the lotuses become a king who is not accomplished in his wisdom and is wicked in conduct and addicted to desire, let him rule the earth in accordance with adharma.' Galava said, 'Let the person who has stolen
the lotuses be worse than a person who is a sinner, let him be a man who injures his own through his wicked deeds,
let him boast about the gifts he has donated.' Arundhati said, 'Let the person who has stolen the lotuses speak ill of
her  mother-in-law,  let  her  harbour  evil  thoughts  towards  her  husband,  let  her  eat  the  tasty  food  alone.'  The
Valakhilyas said, 'Let the person who has stolen the lotuses stand on one foot at the entrance to a village, seeking
alms[This is not an austerity that should be practised in a village.], despite knowing about dharma, let him abandon dharma.' Pashusakha said, 'Let the person who has stolen
the lotuses become a brahmana who disregards the agnihotra fire and sleeps happily, let him adopt the life of a
mendicant and yet be addicted to desire.' Surabhi said, 'Let the person who has stolen the lotuses become a cow
who, despite possessing her own calf, is milked by some other cow's calf, with the milk being placed in a brass
vessel.' O Indra among Kouravas! In this way, they were ready to curse with too many different kinds of oaths.

'"The one with the thousand eyes, the king of the gods, was delighted. He glanced at the angry ones, foremost
among brahmanas. The rishis were enraged and Maghavan told them what he thought. He spoke to the brahmana
rishis, the devarshis and the rajarshis. O king! Hear from me.' Shakra said, 'Let the person who has stolen the lotuses bestow his daughter in marriage on a brahmana who knows about the metres, follows brahmacharya and has
studied the Atharva Veda. Let the person who has stolen the lotuses become a person who has studied all the
Vedas. Let him be pure in conduct and devoted to dharma. Let him go to Brahma's abode.' Agastya replied, 'O
slayer of Bala! Instead of a curse, you have pronounced a benediction. Follow eternal dharma and return my lotuses[It being deduced that Indra must have stolen the lotuses.].' Indra said, 'O illustrious one! I did not steal the lotuses because of greed. You should not be angry at me. I
stole them because I desired to hear about dharma. Dharma represents the essence of the sacred texts. Dharma is
the  bridge  that  leads  to  welfare.  From  the  rishis,  I  have  heard  what  is  eternal,  undecaying  and  everlasting.  O
supreme among sages! Take back the lotus stalks. O illustrious one! O unblemished one! You should forgive my
transgression.' Thus addressed by the great Indra, the extremely angry ascetic accepted the lotuses. The intelligent
sage was pleased. Those residents of  the forest visited tirthas again. They washed  their bodies at those sacred
tirthas. If a person reads this account on auspicious and festive days, his son will not be born stupid and wicked.
He will never be touched by any anxiety or dirt. After death, he will be radiant and obtain excellence in heaven.
These are the sacred texts followed by the rishis. O supreme among men! A person who follows these goes to
Brahma's undecaying world."'
