'Yudhishthira said, "O one who knows about conduct! What is the conduct through which one can roam around on
earth, free from sorrow? What should a man do in this world, so as to attain the supreme objective?"

'Bhishma replied, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted. This is a conversation between Prahrada
and the sage Ajagara. O king! There was a brahmana who was intelligent and revered by the wise. His consciousness was unblemished. While he was roaming around, he was asked by Prahrada. 'You are at ease, capable, mild,
self-controlled, without any desire, free from malice, extremely eloquent, extremely revered in the world and wise.
You roam around like a child. There is nothing that you seek to obtain. You do not grieve over anything that has
not been obtained. O brahmana! It is as if you are always content. There is nothing that you think about. The beings are distracted, as they are borne along on currents of deeds connected with dharma, kama and artha. But to
you, these seem to be illusory. You do not follow dharma or artha, nor are you engaged in kama. You ignore the
objectives of the senses. You roam around free, like a witness. O sage! What is your wisdom? What is your learning? What is your conduct? How did you become like this? O sage! O brahmana! If you think that is beneficial for
me, please tell me this immediately.' The intelligent one, who knew about dharma and the conduct of the worlds,
was asked in this way.

'"Asked by Prahrada, he gently spoke these words, which were full of import. 'O Prahrada! Behold. The origin,
decay, increase and destruction of beings have no evident reason. That is the reason I am not delighted, nor distressed. They are seen to be engaged in their own natural conduct. Everyone is engaged in natural conduct and
there is nothing to be tormented about. O Prahrada! Behold. Every kind of union is subject to separation. All stores
eventually end in destruction. Hence, my mind has never turned to acquisition. In front of us, every being that possesses qualities comes to an end. If one knows about origin and destruction, what tasks remain to be undertaken?
In due course, it is seen that every aquatic creature in this great ocean, be its form gigantic or subtle, confronts destruction. O lord of asuras! I see it as evident that death comes to all beings on earth, and all mobile and immobile
objects. O supreme among danavas! When the time comes, all the birds which rise up and roam around in the sky
come under the power of death. When the time is right, all the stellar bodies that roam around in the firmament,
whether they are small or large, are seen to fall down. Thus, all beings are seen to be attracted by death. Knowing
that everything has this general nature, I sleep happily, doing nothing, since there is nothing to be done. If, without
trying for it, I obtain a great deal of food, I eat it. There are again many days when I lie down, without having had
anything to eat. There are many who give me many different kinds of food, with many different qualities. However, sometimes I get little, with few qualities, or nothing at all. There are times when I eat minute grains, and food
from which the oil has been squeezed out. There are also times when I eat the best food, rice mixed with meat.
There are times when I sleep on beds and times when I sleep on the bare ground. There are also times when I get a
bed inside a palace. I am sometimes attired in rags, hemp, linen and hides. There are also times when I am clad in
extremely expensive garments. As I wish, I do not reject objects of pleasure that are in conformity with dharma.
but I do not strive for things that are difficult to obtain. I follow the pure vow that is known as ajagara[Ajagara is the boa constrictor, the python. The belief is that the python
does not strive for food, but eats whatever comes to it. If food does not
come before a python, it starves.]. I do not
waver from this and have no possessions. This is auspicious and bereft of sorrow. This is infinitely sacred and I
have immersed myself in this intelligence of the learned. Foolish ones do not follow it and show it disrespect. I follow the pure vow that is known as ajagara. My mind does not deviate from it. I have not been dislodged from my
own dharma. I am restrained in everything and know everything about cause and effect. I am devoid of fear, stupidity, greed and confusion. I follow the pure vow that is known as ajagara. This has no rules about consequences,
what should be eaten, what should be enjoyed and what should be drunk. Since everything depends on destiny,
nothing is determined in accordance with the time and the place. This contributes to the happiness of my heart and
those who are mean do not follow this. I follow the pure vow that is known as ajagara. Because of their thirst, people pursue many kinds of riches. When they don't get them, they grieve. I have used my accomplished intelligence
to discern the truth. I follow the pure vow that is known as ajagara. To obtain riches, I have seen distressed people
seek refuge with both noble and ignoble men. However, I am relieved of this and have found peace in my soul. I
follow the pure vow that is known as ajagara. I know the truth-everything is ordained by destiny. I look on happiness and unhappiness, the acquisition of riches and the loss of riches, love and hatred and death and life equally. I
follow the pure vow that is known as ajagara. I have overcome fear, attachment, confusion and insolence. I have
fortitude, wisdom, intelligence and tranquility. I am content with enjoying the fruit that presents itself before me[The image of the python.].
I follow the pure vow that is known as ajagara. I have no restrictions on where I should sleep and what I should
eat. I am naturally united with self-control, restraint, vows, truth and purity. I have transcended the need to store
any fruits. I follow the pure vow that is known as ajagara. I have always controlled the thirst in my mind. Based on
my atman, I look towards everything with my intelligence. I have transcended the sorrows that come from the pursuit of riches and the lack of riches. I follow the pure vow that is known as ajagara. The heart and the mind strive
for the agreeable and the pleasant. But these are difficult to obtain and are transient and I have realized both these
aspects. Therefore, I have overcome these. There are learned and intelligent men who have spoken about this in
many ways. Those wise ones have sought to establish their own views. They have spoken about this and that and
have censured the views of others. But this is beyond debate. I have seen that there are many men who are confused and have been led in separate directions. However, I dwell in the infinite that is beyond all these taints. Having controlled anger and thirst, I roam around among men.' If there is a great-souled man who follows the vow of
ajagara in this world, having controlled attachment and having overcome fear, anger, avarice and confusion, he
will certainly he happy. He will find delight in this pleasure."'
