Yudhishthira said, "O extender of the Kuru lineage! I have heard this great account. O supreme among eloquent ones! You have said that the status of a brahmana is extremely difficult to obtain. O excellent one!
However, though you have said that it is extremely difficult to obtain, it has been heard that in ancient times, Vishvamitra became a brahmana. I have also heard that rajarshi Vitahavya became a brahmana[Vitahavya was a king from the Haihaya dynasty.]. O Gangeya! O lord!
I wish to hear everything about this. O supreme among kings! What deeds enabled him to become a brahmana?
Was it through a boon or austerities? You should explain this to me in detail."

'Bhishma replied, "O king! Listen. King Vitahavya was greatly illustrious. Though he was a kshatriya, he became a brahmana and was revered by the worlds. O son! The great-souled Manu followed dharma and ruled his
subjects. He had a famous son named Sharyati, who possessed dharma in his soul. O king! Two kings were born in
that lineage. O supreme among victorious ones! They were Haihaya and Talajangha and they were the sons of Vat-
sa. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Through his ten wives, Haihaya had one hundred brave sons, who did not
retreat in battle. They were equal in beauty and power. They were learned and accomplished in fighting. In every
way, they completed their learning of dhanurveda and of the Vedas. O king! There was a king in Kashi and he was
Divodasa's grandfather. He was famous as Haryashva and he was foremost among victorious ones. O bull among
men! Because of enmity, in the area between the Ganga and the Yamuna, Vitahavya's sons brought him down in a
battle[This is cryptic. Vitahavya is another name for Haihaya and the sons of Vitahavya/Haihaya killed Haryashva.]. Having slain that best of men, the maharathas who were the sons of Haihaya fearlessly returned to their
beautiful city in the land of the Vatsas. Haryashva's son became the king of Kashi. His name was Sudeva. He was
like a god and he was dharma personified. With dharma in his soul, the descendant of the Kashi lineage ruled the
earth. However, because of enmity, Vitahavya's sons again invaded and conquered everything in the battle. Having
become victorious in this way, they returned to wherever they had come from. Sudeva's son, Divodasa, was instated as the king of Kashi. Divodasa realized that his great-souled enemies were valorous. On Shakra's instructions,
the extremely energetic one rebuilt the fortifications of Varanasi. There were large numbers of brahmanas, kshatriyas, vaishyas and shudras there. There were stores of many kinds of objects and provisions and prosperous shops
and stalls. O supreme among kings! The area extended from the northern banks of the Ganga to the southern banks
of the Gomati and it was like Shakra's Amaravati. O lord of the earth! The tiger among kings used to dwell there.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Yet again, the Haihayas advanced and attacked. The immensely radiant Divo-
dasa emerged and fought with them. It was a terrible battle, like that between the gods and the asuras. O  great
king! He fought against them for one thousand days. However, since his mounts were repeatedly slain, he  was
overcome by distress. O king! The warriors were killed and the king's treasury was exhausted. Abandoning his
city, Divodasa fled. He went to the hermitage of the intelligent Bharadvaja. O scorcher of enemies! The king joined
his hands in salutation and sought refuge with him.

'"The king said, 'O illustrious one! Vitahavya's sons have destroyed my lineage in battle. I am the only one who
has escaped and I have sought refuge with you. O illustrious one! You should protect me, just as you would a disciple. Those performers of wicked deeds have destroyed my lineage.'"

'Bhishma  continued,  "The  powerful  and  immensely  fortunate  Bharadvaja  replied,  'Do  not  be  frightened.  O
Sudeva's son! Do not be scared. Dispel your fear. O lord of the earth! So that you can have a son, I will immediately perform a sacrifice. You can use him to strike down thousands on Vitahavya's side.' Desiring a son, the rishi
performed a sacrifice. A son was born and he was known as Pratardana. As soon as he was born, he grew up and
looked like someone who was thirteen years old. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He learnt all the Vedas and
dhanurveda. The intelligent Bharadvaja immersed himself in yoga. He accumulated all the energy of the worlds
and made it penetrate into him[Into Pratardana.]. He was clad in armour and wielded a bow and arrows. He blazed like a fire.
Wielding the bow and with his form like that of a monsoon cloud, the archer advanced. On seeing him advance,
Sudeva's son was filled with great delight. In his mind, the king thought that Vitahavya's sons had already been
consumed. He instated Pratardana as the heir apparent. The king thought that he had already become successful
and was full of joy. The king instructed his son Pratardana, the scorcher of enemies, to advance and slay the sons
of Vitahavya. On his chariot, the valiant one swiftly crossed the Ganga. The destroyer of enemy cities advanced
towards the city of the sons of Vitahavya. The sons of Vitahavya heard the sounds created by that chariot. They
emerged on their own chariots, which were like cities, and advanced against the enemy's chariot. They were as
swift as tigers. They were colourful in fighting. They emerged, attacked Pratardana and showered down arrows and
weapons on him. O Yudhishthira! They attacked the king with many kinds of weapons and floods of chariots, like
rain clouds showering down on the Himalayas. King Pratardana repulsed their weapons. The immensely energetic
one slew them with arrows that were like the vajra or the fire. O king! Hundreds and thousands of broad-headed
arrows were used to sever the heads. Flowing with blood, they fell down, like severed kimshuka trees. When all of
his sons were slain, Vitahavya abandoned his city and fled to Bhrigu's hermitage. King Vitahavya went to Bhrigu
and sought refuge with him. Bhrigu offered him shelter, as if to a disciple. Following him, Pratardana swiftly arrived there.

'"Having arrived there, Divodasa's son said, 'O disciples of the great-souled Bhrigu! O those who are in the hermitage! Listen. Please go and tell the sage that I wish to see him.' When he got to know, Bhrigu emerged from the
hermitage. Following supreme rites, he honoured him and asked, 'O Indra among kings! What is your purpose
with the king[That is, Vitahavya.]?' O king! He told him the reason why he had come.'O brahmana! King Vitahavya has come here.
Please surrender him. O brahmana! His sons have destroyed my entire lineage. They have devastated the kingdom
and the stores of jewels in Kashi. Through my valour, I have slain one hundred of his insolent sons. O brahmana!
By killing this one now, I will repay the debt to my father.' Bhrigu, supreme among the upholders of dharma, was
overcome by compassion, and replied, 'There is no kshatriya here. Everyone who is here is a brahmana.' Hearing
Bhrigu's words, Pratardana thought that this must be the truth. He touched his feet, laughed and gently spoke these
words.'O illustrious one! There is no doubt that I have become successful. Because of my valour, the king will
now have to give up the state he was born in. O brahmana! Grant me permission to leave and pronounce your auspicious benedictions on me. O extender of the Bhrigu lineage! Because of you, the king has been forced to give up
my varna.' O great king! Having obtained his permission, King Pratardana departed to where he had come from,
like a serpent that has given up its poison. O great king! Thanks to Bhrigu's words alone, Vitahavya became a
brahmana rishi and became knowledgable about the brahman. He had a son named Gritsamada, who was Indra's
equal in beauty. Once, taking him to be Indra, the daityas oppressed him. O lord of the earth! There is a hymn in
the Rig Veda that states, 'Wherever the brahmana Gritsamada goes, the brahmanas regard that place as great.' The
illustrious Gritsamada was a brahmana rishi and a brahmachari. Gritsamada had a brahmana son named Suteja[The text actually says Sucheta. This should be Suteja and we have corrected it.].
Suteja's son was Varcha and his son was Vihavya. Vihavya's son was Vitatya. Vitatya's son was Satya and Satya's
son was Santa. Santa's son was the rishi Shravas and Shravas had a son named Tama. Tama had a son named
Prakasha, who was supreme among brahmanas. Prakasha's son was Vagindra and he was supreme among victorious ones. His son was Pramati, accomplished in the Vedas and the Vedangas. Through Ghritachi, he had a son
named Ruru[Pramati had a son named Ruru. Ghritachi was an apsara.]. Through Pramadvara, Ruru had a son named Shunaka and he was a brahmana rishi. His son was
Shounaka. O  lord of  men! O  bull  among  kshatriyas!  O  Indra  among  kings!  Thus,  though  he  was  a  kshatriya,
through Bhrigu's favours, Vitahavya became a brahmana. In that way, I have also described Gritsamada's lineage
to you in detail. O great king! What else do you wish to ask?"'
