'Brihadashva said, "Then Damayanti saw that King Punyashloka had lost his senses and because of the gambling,
was like one maddened. O king! But Bhima's daughter was not mad and was overcome by fear and grief. She
thought about the great task that should be performed for the sake of the king. She was alarmed at his sin and
wished to ensure his welfare. On seeing that Nala had lost all his possessions, she told her nurse, 'O Brihatsena! As
if on Nala's instructions, go and bring all the advisers here. Go and tell them what objects have been lost and what
riches still remain.' Having heard of Nala's summons, all the advisers remarked that their misfortune might have
been reversed and returned. Thus all the subjects arrived for a second time and when Bhima's daughter reported
this, he still did not reply. On seeing that her husband did not utter a single sentence in reply, Damayanti was overcome by shame and returned again to her house. When she learnt that the dice were always being unfavourable towards Punyashloka and that Nala had lost all his possessions, she told her nurse, 'O Brihatsena! O fortunate one!
As if on Nala's instructions, go again and bring the suta Varshneya here. A great task has to be performed.' On
hearing what Damayanti had said, Brihatsena summoned Varshneya through reliable servants.

'"Bhima's unblemished daughter was well versed about place and time. She knew that the time had come. She
told Varshneya in a soft voice, 'You know that the king has always behaved properly towards you. Now that his
moment of distress has arrived, you should help him. The more the king is defeated by Pushkara, the more his addiction towards gambling grows. The dice behave as if in Pushkara's control. Nala's destruction through the dice is
thus seen. He does not listen to the sentences of his well-wishers and relatives, as he should. I think that nothing
will be left of the great-souled Nishadha. The king is so intoxicated that he does not welcome my words either. O
charioteer! I have sought refuge with you. Act in accordance with my words. My mind is not peaceful, in case he
is destroyed. Yoke Nala's beloved steeds that have the speed of thought and taking the twins[Nala and Damayanti's son and daughter.], go to
Kundina[Kundina is the capital of Vidarbha, that is, Damayanti's father's capital.]. Leave the horses, the chariot and the children there, with my relatives. Then stay there if you wish, or
go elsewhere.' Varshneya, Nala's charioteer, told Nala's chief advisers about Damayanti's words. O lord of the
earth! They met, decided and gave their permission. He placed the twins on the chariot and left for Vidarbha. The
suta left the horses and the excellent chariot there and also the daughter Indrasena[That is, Indrasenaa, to distinguish from the boy Indrasena.] and the son Indrasena. Distressed and unhappy, he informed King Bhima about King Nala. He then roamed around and went to the city of
Ayodhya. Extremely miserable, he presented himself to King Rituparna and was employed by the king as a charioteer."'
