Bhishma said, "Having been thus addressed, the woman agreed to what the brahmana had said. She brought
some divine oil and a garment he would wear during his bath. Having obtained the sage's permission, the
woman rubbed the great-souled one's limbs, everywhere, with the oil. She rubbed him gently and then took him to
the bathroom. The rishi was made to sit on a colourful, new and excellent seat. When he was seated on that excellent seat, she used her hands to pleasurably and gently wash the rishi all over. She tended to the sage in many divine ways. Because of the pleasure associated with the warm water and because of the pleasure associated with the
touch of the hands, the one who was great in his vows did not realize that the entire night had passed in this way.
When he arose, the sage was extremely surprised. He saw that in the eastern direction, the sun was rising in the
sky. He thought that his intelligence had been confounded. Having worshipped the one with the thousand rays, he
asked her what he should do next. She gave the rishi some food that tasted like amrita. Because the food was so
delicious, he couldn't eat much. In the course of this, the day passed and it again became evening. The woman requested the illustrious one to go to sleep. Excellent beds were prepared for him and for her.

'"Ashtavakra said, 'O fortunate one! My mind is not interested in intercourse with another person's wife[The Critical edition excises shlokas and there is a break in continuity. As on the previous night, the lady leaves
her own bed and comes to Ashtavakra's bed.]. O
fortunate one! Arise. It is better that you should desist. Go and sleep.'"

'Bhishma continued, "She was thus rebuffed by the brahmana's fortitude. She replied, 'I am independent and
you will not commit any deviation from dharma[That is, she wasn't anyone else's wife.].'
'"Ashtavakra  said,  'There  is  no  independence  for  women.  Women are dependent. It  is  Prajapati's  view  that
women do not deserve to be independent.'

'"The woman replied, 'O brahmana! I am constrained by the need for intercourse. Behold my devotion to you.
O brahmana! You will suffer from adharma if you do not give me delight.'

'"Ashtavakra said, 'If a man is wilful, there are many kinds of sins that lead him astray. O fortunate one! I possess the strength of my fortitude. Go to your own bed.'

'"The woman replied, 'O brahmana! I am bowing down my head before you and you should show me your
favours. O unblemished one! I am lying down on the ground before you and have sought refuge with you. O brahmana! I am giving myself to you. If you perceive a sin from congress with another person's wife, then touch me
and accept my hand now. There will be no sin associated with this. I am telling you truthfully. Know that I am independent. If there is any adharma, it will vest with me[If she has lied about not being married.].'
'"Ashtavakra said, 'O fortunate one! How can you be independent? Tell me the reason. There is no woman in
this world who should be regarded as independent. The father protects her when she is a maiden, the husband protects her when she is young and the son protects her when she is aged. There is no woman who deserves to be
independent.'

'"The woman replied, 'Since I have been young, I have followed the vow of brahmacharya. There is no doubt
that I am a virgin. O brahmana! Do not have a doubt about me. Do not destroy my devotion towards you.'

'"Ashtavakra said, 'Just as you are attracted towards me, I am also attracted towards you[The woman had assumed a beautiful form.]. However, there still
remains a doubt. Will the pledge I made to the rishi[Vadanya.] not be violated? This is a great wonder. What will bring
greater benefit? This maiden has presented herself before me and she was adorned in divine garments and ornaments. How does she possess this supreme beauty and why was she enveloped in that aged appearance earlier? She
has assumed the form of a maiden now. Who knows what form she will assume later? However, I should resort to
the great strength of my fortitude and never deviate. Deviations do not appeal to me. I will obtain success by resorting to my fortitude.'"'
