Janamejaya asked, 'How long did the great-souled sons of Pandu, all of them divine in valour, live on Mount
Gandhamadana? O virtuous one! What did those great-souled ones, valorous in the world, subsist on, while they
lived there? Tell me. Tell me in detail about Bhimasena's prowess. What did the mighty-armed one accomplish in
those Himalaya mountains? O, supreme among brahmanas! Did he wage war against the yakshas again? Did they
ever meet Vaishravana? Arshtishena did say that the lord of riches visits the place. O one rich in austerities! I wish
to hear all this in great detail. I am never satiated on hearing about their deeds.'

Vaishampayana said, 'After having heard the instructions of the immensely energetic one[Arshtishena.], good for their welfare, the bulls among the Bharata lineage always abided by them. They lived on the food of hermits, succulent
fruits, the meat of deer shot with pure arrows[Probably arrows not tipped with poison.] and different kinds of pure honey. The Pandavas, bulls among the
Bharata lineage, dwelt on the slopes of the Himalayas. In this fashion, they lived there for five years, listening to
the many words spoken by Lomasha. O lord! Ghatotkacha had left earlier with all the other rakshasas, saying that
he would return whenever the occasion demanded. Many months passed while the great-souled ones dwelt in Arshtishena's hermitage and they witnessed many great marvels. While the Pandavas happily lived there and sported
themselves, many immensely fortunate hermits and charanas, pure in soul and rigid in their vows, came to see the
Pandavas and held conversations with the supreme of the Bharata lineage on celestial matters.

'After some time, a suparna suddenly carried away a handsome and giant serpent that used to dwell in the giant
lake. The mighty mountain began to tremble and many large trees were torn down. With all beings, the Pandavas
witnessed this extraordinary sight. Then, from that supreme mountain, a wind blew towards the Pandavas and carried many different kinds of beautiful and fragrant flowers. With their well-wishers and with the famous Droupadi,
the Pandavas saw those divine flowers, with five different colours. At that time, when the mighty-armed Bhimasena was comfortably seated at a secluded spot on the mountain, Krishna told him, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! As a result of the forceful wind generated from the suparna's great force, five-coloured blossoms have been
dropped near the river Ashvaratha and all the beings have witnessed this. Your great-souled brother[Arjuna. The story of the burning of the Khandava forest has been recounted in Section 19 (Volume 2). Vasa-
va is one of Indra's names.], always driven by truth, once restrained gandharvas, serpents, rakshasas and even Vasava himself, in Khandava. After killing
the ones who resort to maya[Maya is the power of creating delusions. Rakshasas resort to maya.], he obtained the bow Gandiva. You also possess enormous energy and great
strength of arms. You are indomitable and irresistible and are the equal of Shatakratu[Shatakratu is one of Indra's names and means the performer of one hundred (shata) sacrifices (kratu).] in your strength. Let all
the rakshasas be terrified of the force and strength of your arms. O Bhimasena! They will leave this mountain and
flee in the ten directions. Then, devoid of all fear and delusion, let all your well-wishers behold this supreme
mountain, auspicious and adorned with colourful flowers. O Bhima! This thought has been in my mind for a long
time. Protected through the strength of your arms, I wish to see the top of this mountain." The scorcher of enemies
was maddened by Droupadi's words. The mighty-armed one could not stand it, like an excellent bull that has been
beaten. His gait was like that of a lion or a bull. He was handsome and noble. His complexion was like that of
gold. He was spirited and strong, powerful and proud. The brave Pandava's eyes were red and his shoulders were
wide. He was like a maddened elephant in his valour. His teeth were like a lion's and his shoulders were expansive.
He was as tall as a young shala tree. The great-souled one was beautiful in all his limbs. His neck was like a conch
shell[A conch shell has three lines. A neck marked with three lines, like a conch shell, is believed to bring good
fortune.] and his arms were huge. He grasped his gold-plated bow, his sword and his quivers. Like an insolent lion,
or like a maddened elephant, the strong one rushed towards the mountain, free from fear or delusion.

'All the beings saw him, wielding his arrows, sword and bow, like a king of the beasts[A lion.], or a maddened elephant. The Pandava was devoid of fear or delusion. To increase Droupadi's happiness, he grasped a club and penetrated the king of the mountains. Partha, the son of the wind-god, was not bothered by fatigue, fear, lassitude or
envy. He came to a terrible-looking and uneven passage that only one person could pass through at a time.
Through this, the immensely strong one ascended the peak, as tall as many palm trees. Agitating kinnaras, great
serpents, hermits, gandharvas and rakshasas, the immensely strong one ascended the mountain. The bull among the
Bharata lineage saw Vaishravana's abode there. It was ornamented with golden and crystalline buildings. Gladden-
ing all beings, an extremely pleasant breeze blew there, arising from Gandhamadana, and carrying all the various
fragrances in it. There were many beautiful trees of diverse kinds, extraordinary and colourful and beyond all
thought. The bull among the Bharata lineage then saw the abode of the lord of the rakshasas. It was covered on all
sides by a network of gems. It was pure and was adorned with beautiful flowers. The mighty-armed Bhimasena
stood there, as immobile as a mountain. Prepared to give up his life, he held a club, a sword, a bow and arrows in
his hand. He then blew on his conch shell and this made the body hair of his enemies stand up. He twanged his
bow and slapped his arms and terrified all beings.

'Their body hair standing up, yakshas, rakshasas and gandharvas rushed towards the sound and approached Pan-
dava. The clubs, maces, swords, spears, lances and battleaxes, taken up by the yakshas and rakshasas in their arms,
began to blaze. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Then a war started between them and him. With terrible force
and speed, Bhima used his arrows to slice off the spears, lances and battleaxes hurled at him by those gigantic
ones. The immensely powerful one pierced the bodies of the rakshasas with his arrows and they roared, while
roaming around in the sky and on the ground. A great shower of blood rained down on the immensely strong one,
flowing from the bodies of the rakshasas in every direction. Many heads and bodies of the yakshas and the rakshasas were seen to be sliced off through what Bhima's mighty arms released. All the beings then saw the handsome Pandava enveloped by the rakshasas, like the sun with masses of clouds. But just as the sun penetrates everything with its rays, the mighty-armed and powerful one, with truth as his valour, penetrated all of them with his arrows. They uttered loud roars and victorious cries. But all the rakshasas could not see any delusion in Bhimasena.
All their limbs were wounded with his arrows and they were oppressed with their fear of Bhimasena. Throwing
away their great weapons, they roared in scared and terrible voices. Discarding their clubs, spears, swords, lances
and battleaxes, they fled in a southern direction[The southern direction is the direction of death and it is also a direction frequented by demons.], scared of the one whose bow was firm.

'There remained a mighty-armed and broad-chested rakshasa. His name was Maniman and he held a spear and a
club in his hands. He was Vaishravana's friend. The mighty-armed one exhibited his authority and his manliness.
On seeing them flee, he smilingly said, "On reaching Vaishravana's abode, what will you tell the lord of riches,
since several of you have been defeated in battle by a single man?" Having spoken these words, the rakshasa restrained them and dashed towards Pandava, with a lance, a spear and a club in his hands. On seeing him forcefully
approach, like a maddened elephant, Bhimasena pierced his side with three calf-toothed arrows[Arrows had different names, classified according to the arrow's head and the shaft. This one was
vatsadanta, vatsa meaning calf and danta meaning teeth, a reference to the arrow's tip or head.]. Angered,
Maniman grasped a gigantic club. Having grasped it, he hurled it with great force at Bhimasena. That gigantic club
flashed like lightning in the sky and was extremely terrible. But Bhimasena shot many arrows that had been sharpened on stone. However, all those arrows were blunted on the club and despite their great force, could not restrain
its swift force. But the valorous one knew the art of fighting with a club and the courageous Bhima warded off the
blow. Then the wise rakshasa grasped an extremely terrible javelin with a golden shaft and struck him with it. The
extremely terrible weapon was blazing in flames and uttered a loud roar. It pierced Bhima's right arm and swiftly
fell down on the ground. Having been severely pierced by the javelin, Kouravya, skilled in fighting with clubs, a
mighty archer and infinite in valour, grasped his club. That club was made entirely out of iron. Brandishing it, Bhi-
ma rushed with great speed towards the immensely powerful Maniman. Maniman also grasped a giant and blazing
spear. Uttering a great roar, he flung it at Bhimasena with force. But the one who was skilled in fighting with clubs
splintered the spear with the end of his club and rushed to destroy him, like Garuda against a serpent. With the club
in his hand, the mighty-armed one suddenly jumped up in the sky. He roared in battle and flung it. With the speed
of the wind, like the vajra hurled by Indra, it struck the rakshasa. Having killed him, it fell down on the ground,
like a she-demon[The word used is kritya, meaning a she-demon or a malevolent goddess.]. All the beings saw how the rakshasa, terrible in strength, was felled by Bhimasena, like a
bull by a lion. On seeing him dead on the ground, the remaining roamers of the night[The rakshasas and other demons are those who roam (chara) in the night (nisha) and are known as
nishacharas.] uttered terrible cries of
distress and fled in an eastern direction.'
