Yudhishthira said, "O supreme among those who uphold all kinds of dharma! I wish to hear about the good
conduct of virtuous women. O grandfather. Tell me the truth."

'Bhishma replied, "There was a lady named Sumana, from the Kaikeya lineage. Shandili knew about everything
and about all kinds of dharma. In the world of the gods, she asked the spirited one[Sumana asked Shandili.]. 'O fortunate one! What conduct did you follow? How did you cleanse all your sins and arrive in the world of the gods? You are blazing in
your own energy, like the flames of a fire. You seem to be like a daughter of the lord of the stars[The moon.], creating day
with your own radiance. You are clad in a white garment and you show no signs of exhaustion. You are resplendent astride a sparkling celestial vehicle and there are one thousand qualities in your energy. Your austerities, donations and rituals cannot have been minor, since you have obtained this world. Therefore, tell me the truth.' The one
with the sweet smiles was thus gently asked by Sumana.

'"In private, Shandili spoke these words to Sumana. 'I did not wear ochre robes. I did not dress myself in bark. I
did not shave my head, nor did I sport matted hair. That is not the reason I have obtained divinity. In a fit of distraction, I never addressed my husband in any hurtful or harsh words. I worshipped the gods, the ancestors and
brahmanas. I was never careless and served my father-in-law and my mother-in-law. I never allowed any calumny
to penetrate my mind. I never stood at the door, speaking to someone for a long period of time. I did not laugh
when a wicked act was performed. I did not perform any injurious acts. I never divulged a secret, or what was not
a secret. When my husband went out for work and returned home, I was controlled and honoured him by offering
him a seat. I did not eat food that he did not know about, or did not approve of. I avoided anything like that,
whether it was eaten, swallowed or licked. I arose in the morning and performed all the tasks that needed to be
done to honour the relatives. If my husband had to go elsewhere on some task, I always remained engaged in tasks
that would bring many benedictions. Until my husband returned, I did not use beautiful collyrium, wear garlands
and apply fragrances after bathing, or ornament myself. I never awoke my husband when he was happily asleep. I
satisfied my mind by undertaking tasks for the afflicted. For the sake of the family, I did not urge my husband to
exert himself. I never divulged secrets and I kept the household clean. If a woman is controlled and protects this
path of dharma, she will obtain greatness in heaven, just as Arundhati did amongst all the women.' The ascetic
goddess recited this account to Sumana. The immensely fortunate one described this dharma towards the husband
and instantly disappeared. O Pandava! A person who reads this account on an auspicious occasion obtains the
world of the gods and resides in great happiness in Nandana."'
