Janamejaya asked, 'Why did Dharmaraja Yudhishthira, tiger among kings, send Vasudeva, the scorcher of enemies, to Gandhari? Krishna had earlier gone to the Kouravas, seeking peace. He was not successful and the battle followed. The warriors were slain and Duryodhana was also brought down. In the battle, the Pandaveyas eliminated their rivals from the earth. The camp[Of the Kouravas.] was emptied and everyone fled. They obtained supreme fame. O
brahmana! Why did Krishna go again? O brahmana! It seems to me that the reason must have been a grave one,
since Janardana, immeasurable in his soul, himself went. O supreme among officiating priests! Tell me everything
about this. O brahmana! What was the reason behind deciding on such a course of action?'

Vaishampayana replied, 'O king! The question that you have asked me is one that is deserving of you. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! I will tell you everything, exactly as it occurred. O king! Dhritarashtra's immensely
strong son was brought down in the battle by Bhimasena, in contravention of the rules. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In the duel with the clubs, he was brought down by unfair means. O great king! On seeing this, Yudhishthira was overcome by a great fear. He thought of the immensely fortunate and ascetic Gandhari. Because of
her terrible austerities, she was capable of burning down the three worlds. Thinking about this, he arrived at this
conclusion. "The flame of Gandhari's anger must first be pacified. Otherwise, on hearing about her son being killed
by the enemies in this way, she can use the fire of her mind to angrily reduce us to ashes. How will Gandhari tolerate such fierce misery? She will hear that her son has been brought down through deceit and fraudulent means."

Thinking about this in many ways, he was overcome by fear and sorrow. Therefore, Dharmaraja spoke these words
to Vasudeva. "O Govinda! Through your favours, the kingdom has been deprived of its thorns. O Achyuta! We
have obtained that which our minds thought was unattainable. O mighty-armed one! O descendant of the Yadava
lineage! In the battle that made the body hair stand up, I have witnessed the extremely great blows that you have
had to bear. In earlier times, you rendered your help in slaying the enemies of the gods. O mighty-armed one! O
Achyuta! You have aided us in that way. O Varshneya! By agreeing to be our charioteer, you have supported us. If
you had not been Phalguna's protector in the great battle, how would we have been capable of defeating this ocean
of soldiers in the encounter? For the sake of our welfare, you have borne great blows with the club, strikes with
bludgeons, spears, catapults, javelins, battleaxes and harsh words. O Achyuta! Now that Duryodhana has been
brought down, all of that has become fruitful. O mighty-armed one! O Madhava! But you know about Gandhari's
anger. The immensely fortunate one has always tormented herself through fierce austerities. On hearing about the
slaughter of her sons and grandsons, there is no doubt that she will consume us. She will be oppressed with grief
on account of her sons and her eyes will blaze in anger. O brave one! I think the time has come to seek your
favours. O Purushottama! Which man, other than you, is capable of glancing at her? O Madhava! I think it is a
good idea for you to go there, so that you can pacify the anger of Gandhari's wrath. O scorcher of enemies! You
are the creator, the agent and the pervading power in the worlds. You will use words full of reason, appropriate for
the occasion. O immensely wise one! Pacify Gandhari quickly. Krishna, the illustrious grandfather, will be there[Meaning Krishna Dvaipayana Vedavyasa.].
O mighty-armed one! O best of the Satvata lineage! For the sake of the welfare of the Pandavas, it is your duty to
destroy Gandhari's rage in every possible way." On hearing Dharmaraja's words, the extender of the Yadu lineage
sent for Daruka and asked him to prepare the chariot in the proper way. Hearing Keshava's words, Daruka quickly
prepared the chariot and came and told the great-souled Keshava that it was ready. The scorcher of enemies, best
of the Yadava lineage, ascended the chariot. The lord Keshava swiftly left for Hastinapura. O great king! The illustrious ratha, Madhava, departed. The valiant one approached and entered Nagasahvya.

'The brave one's chariot wheels clattered as he entered the city. Having sent word to Dhritarashtra, he alighted
from that supreme chariot. Distressed in his mind, he entered Dhritarashtra's abode. He saw that the supreme
among rishis[Vedavyasa.] had arrived there before him. Janardana embraced Krishna's[Krishna Vedavyasa's.] feet and the king's. Keshava
showed his honours to Gandhari, who was before him. Adhokshaja[Krishna and Vishnu's name.], best among the Yadava lineage, held King
Dhritarashtra by the hand and wept in a melodious voice. For some time, overcome by sorrow, he shed warm tears.
Following the proper rites, he then washed his eyes with water. The scorcher of enemies then spoke these flowing
words to Dhritarashtra. "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Nothing is unknown to you, about what has happened and what will happen. O lord! You know everything about the passage of time extremely well. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! Because their hearts are devoted to you, all the Pandavas sought to prevent the destruction
of the lineage and that of the kshatriyas. They are peaceful and devoted to dharma. Having contracted an agreement with their brothers, after being deceitfully defeated in the gambling match, they bore the hardship of dwelling
in the forest. Attiring themselves in different garments, they spent the period of concealment. They always bore
many other hardships, as if they were incapable. When the time for war presented itself, I myself arrived and in
everyone's presence, asked for five villages[Described in Section 54 (Volume 4).]. Driven by destiny and because of your avarice, you did not accept
this. O king! It is because of your crimes that all the kshatriyas have confronted destruction. Bhishma, Somadatta,
Bahlika, Kripa, Drona and his son and the intelligent Vidura have always asked for peace. But you did not act accordingly. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It was as if everyone was confounded by destiny. In so far as this
is concerned, you also acted foolishly. What can this be, other than the dictate of destiny? Destiny is supreme. O
great king! Do not ascribe any fault to the Pandavas. O scorcher of enemies! The great-souled Pandavas did not
commit a trifling transgression, in dharma, fairness and affection. You know everything about this and about the
fruits of your own deeds. Therefore, you should not harbour any malice towards the sons of Pandu. For both you
and Gandhari, the family, the lineage, funeral oblations and the fruits obtained from begetting sons now vest on the
Pandavas. Think about all this and about your own transgressions. Think peacefully about the Pandavas. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! I salute you. O mighty-armed one! O tiger among the Bharata lineage! You know
about Dharmaraja's natural devotion and affection towards you. Having caused this carnage amongst the enemy,
even though they injured him, day and night, he is tormented and cannot find any peace. O best of the Bharata lineage! The tiger among men sorrows for you and the illustrious Gandhari and can find no peace. Knowing that you
are tormented by sorrow on account of your sons and that your intelligence and senses are agitated, he is overcome
by supreme shame and has not come before you." O great king! The supreme among the Yadu lineage spoke these
words to Dhritarashtra.

'He then spoke these supreme words to Gandhari, who was afflicted by sorrow. "O Subala's daughter! O one
who is excellent in vows! Listen to the words that I tell you. O beautiful one! There is no woman[The word used is simantini. While this means woman, in particular, it
means a married woman, with the sign of marriage on the parting of the
hair.] like you in this
world now. O queen! You know the words that you spoke in the assembly hall in my presence. Those words, full
of dharma and artha, were for the benefit of both sides. O fortunate one! You spoke those words, but your sons did
not listen. Duryodhana desired victory and you spoke harsh words to him. 'O foolish one! Listen to my words.
Victory exists where there is dharma.' O daughter of a king! Those words of yours have now come to pass. O fortunate one! Knowing all this, do not harbour any sorrow in your mind. Do not think about the destruction of the
Pandavas. O immensely fortunate one! Through the blazing anger in your eyes and through the strength of your
austerities, you are capable of burning down the earth, with everything that is mobile and immobile." On hearing
Vasudeva's words, Gandhari spoke these words. "O mighty-armed one! O Keshava! It is exactly as you have described it. My heart is burning and my mind is agitated. O Janardana! But after hearing your words, I have steadied
myself. O Keshava! The king is aged and blind and his sons have been slain. You are his refuge, with the brave
Pandavas, best among men." Having spoken these words, Gandhari was tormented by sorrow on account of her
sons. She covered her face with her garment and wept. The lord, the mighty-armed Keshava, comforted the one
who was afflicted by sorrow, speaking words that were full of reason.

'Having comforted Gandhari and Dhritarashtra, Keshava got to know[Mentally.] what Drona's son was planning. O Indra among kings! He swiftly arose. He bowed down before Dvaipayana and touched his feet with his head. He
then told Kourava, "O best among the Kuru lineage! I must take your leave. Do not sorrow in your mind. Drona's
son has a wicked intention. That is the reason I have suddenly got up. He has decided to kill the Pandavas in the
night." On hearing these words, Dhritarashtra and Gandhari spoke to Keshava, the slayer of Keshi[Demon killed by Krishna.]. "O mighty-
armed one! Go quickly and protect the Pandavas. O Janardana! Let us meet again, soon." With Daruka, Achyuta
left swiftly. O king! When Vasudeva had departed, Dhritarashtra, the lord of men, was comforted by Vyasa,
revered by the world and immeasurable in his soul. O king! Having been successful, Vasudeva, with dharma in his
soul, departed from Hastinapura, wishing to see the Pandavas in their camp. Having arrived in the camp in the
night, he met the Pandavas and seated with them, told them everything that had happened.'
