Sanjaya said, "O venerable one! When Dharmaraja was thus afflicted by the king of Madra, Satyaki, Bhimasena
and the Pandavas who were Madri's sons surrounded Shalya with chariots and oppressed him in the battle. On seeing that the single-handed one was afflicted by the maharathas, great sounds of praise arose from the delighted siddhas[The siddhas were delighted that he could fight with them single-handed.]. The assembled sages also said that it was extraordinary. Shalya was like a dart in his valour[There is a pun on the word shalya, which means arrow, spear or dart.] and in the
battle, Bhimsena pierced him with an arrow. He then pierced him again with seven. Satyaki wished to rescue Dharma's son. He covered the lord of Madra with hundreds of arrows and roared like a lion. Nakula pierced him with
five arrows. Sahadeva pierced him with seven and then swiftly pierced him again with another seven. While he endeavoured in the battle, the brave one was afflicted by those maharathas. He brandished his terrible bow, which
was extremely forceful and capable of bearing a great load. O venerable one! Shalya pierced Satyaki with twentyfive arrows, Bhimasena with seventy-three and Nakula with seven. In the battle, he used broad-headed arrows to
sever the archer Sahadeva's bow, with an arrow affixed to it, and pierced him with seventy-three arrows. Sahadeva
strung another bow. In the encounter, he struck his greatly radiant maternal uncle with five arrows that were like
virulent serpents and blazed like the fire. In the battle, extremely enraged, he struck his charioteer with arrows with
drooping tufts and pierced him[Shalya.] again with three arrows. Bhimasena struck Shalya in his body with seventy-three
arrows, Satyaki with nine and Dharmaraja with sixty. O great king! Shalya was pierced by those maharathas.
Blood began to flow from his body, like red chalk from a mountain. O king! He spiritedly struck those great
archers with five arrows each and it was wonderful. O venerable one! He then used another broad-headed arrow to
sever the bow of Dharma's son in the battle. At this, Dharma's maharatha son picked up and strung another bow
and shrouded Shalya, his horses, his charioteer, his standard and his chariot with arrows. He was thus enveloped in
the encounter by the arrows of Dharma's son. He pierced Yudhishthira with ten sharp arrows. Satyaki was angry
that Dharma's son was thus afflicted by arrows. He enveloped the brave lord of Madra with torrents of arrows. In
Bhimasena's presence, he then used a kshurapra arrow to slice down Satyaki's large bow and struck him with three
arrows. O great king! Satyaki, for whom truth was his valour, became wrathful. He hurled an extremely expensive
spear with a golden handle. Bhimasena shot an iron arrow that was like a flaming serpent. In the battle, Nakula
hurled a javelin and Sahadeva a sparkling club. Dharmaraja used a shataghni. All of them wished to kill Shalya in
the battle.

' "They were swiftly released from the arms of those five[Satyaki, Bhima, Nakula, Sahadeva and Yudhishthira.]. Shalya severed the spear Satyaki had hurled with a
broad-headed arrow. Bhima had shot an arrow decorated with gold. In the battle, the powerful one displayed the
dexterity of his hands and severed it into two fragments. Nakula had hurled a fearful javelin with a golden handle
and Sahadeva a club. He countered these with torrents of arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! While the
sons of Pandu looked on, he used a couple of arrows to sever the king's shataghni and roared like a lion. Shini's
descendant could not tolerate that the enemy should be victorious in the battle. Senseless with rage, Satyaki picked
up another bow. With two arrows, he pierced the lord of Madra and used another three to pierce his charioteer. O
great king! Shalya became extremely angry. He severely pierced each of them with ten arrows, like a giant elephant being struck with a goad. In the encounter, those maharathas were repulsed by the king of Madra. Those
slayers of enemies were incapable of remaining before him. King Duryodhana witnessed Shalya's valour and
thought that the Pandavas, the Panchalas and the Srinjayas had been killed. O king! The mighty-armed and powerful Bhimasena made up his mind to give up his life and fought with the lord of Madra. Nakula, Sahadeva and maharatha Satyaki surrounded Shalya and showered down arrows on him. The powerful king of Madra was surrounded by those four Pandava maharathas and great archers. However, he fought with them. O king! In the great battle,
Dharmaraja used a kshurapra arrow to swiftly slay the one who was guarding the chariot wheel of the king of
Madra[However, we have earlier been told that the two who were guarding the
chariot wheels had been killed.]. The king of Madra was extremely strong and enveloped the soldiers with arrows. O king! On seeing that
the soldiers were enveloped in that battle, Dharmaraja Yudhisthira began to think. 'The great words that were spoken by Madhava have really come true. I hope that the king will not angrily destroy my army in the battle.' O Pandu's elder brother! With their chariots, elephants and horses, the Pandavas approached the lord of Madra and afflicted him from every direction. They used many diverse kinds of weapons. A shower of arrows arose. O king! In
the battle, he drove these away, like clouds dispelled by the wind. Shalya poured down gold-tufted arrows. We beheld that shower of arrows, like locusts descending. The king of Madra released those arrows in the field of battle.
We saw them descend, like a flight of locusts. Gold-decorated arrows were shot from the king of Madra's bow. O
lord of men! They did not leave a single bit of space in the sky. Nothing could be discerned there, the Pandavas,
nor those on our side. He created a great darkness because of those arrows and there was great fear. The powerful
king of Madra used his dexterity to shower down arrows. The Pandava army was seen to be agitated there, like the
ocean. The gods, the gandharvas and the danavas were overcome by great wonder. O venerable one! Everyone
who strove against him was afflicted by those arrows. He enveloped Dharmaraja and roared repeatedly, like a lion.
The Pandava maharathas were shrouded by him in that battle. In the encounter, no one was capable of standing up
to the maharatha and fighting against him. But those that had Dharmaraja at their head or the rathas who had Bhimasena at the forefront, did not retreat in the battle before the brave Shalya, the ornament of a battle." '
