Bhishma said, "When night was over, the extremely intelligent king awoke. Having performed the morning
ablutions, with his wife, he headed for the forest. There, the king saw a palace that was completely made out
of gold. There were a thousand pillars covered with jewels and it was like a city of the gandharvas. Kushika saw
that everything seemed to have been divinely designed. There were hills with beautiful peaks and valleys. There
were lilies and lotuses. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were galleries with many kinds of gates. The
ground was verdant, as if the fields were made out of gold. There were blossoming sahakaras, ketakas, uddalakas,
dhavas, ashokas, muchukundas, flowering atimuktas, champakas, tilakas, bhavyas, panasas, vanjulas and flowering
karnikaras[A sahakara is a mango tree, ketaka is the crew pine, uddalaka is probably a typo for uddanaka (mimosa), dhava
is the axle-wood tree, ashoka is Saraca indica, muchukunda is the cork-leaved bayur tree, atimukta is the Indian
rosewood, champaka is the sampangi flower, tilaka is the bleeding-heart plant, bhavya is starfruit, panasa is
jackfruit, vanjula is similar to ashoka, karnikara is the Indian laburnum, varanapushpa is a kind of plant and ashtapadika is the bread-flower tree.]. This is what he saw there, here and there. There were dark varanapushpas and ashtapadika creepers. The king saw that these had been properly trimmed. There were trees on which there were lotuses and lilies
and there were flowers from every season. He saw many mansions that were as beautiful as celestial vehicles and
mountains. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Some of the water was cool and some was warm. There were
colourful seats and the best of beds. The beds were made completely out of gold and were strewn with expensive
covers and cushions. Large quantities of food and drink had been prepared and were properly laid out. There were
parrots that spoke, she-parrots, fork-tailed shrikes, cuckoos, woodpeckers, lapwings, wild cocks, peacocks, domestic  cocks,  putrakas[Since there is no bird with this name, this is probably a typo.],  partridges,  Greek  partridges,  monkeys,  swans,  cranes  and  ducks.  There  were  beautiful
sounds and sights on every side. O king! In some places, there were large numbers of apsaras and gandharvas. He
saw that they were sporting with their loved ones. Sometimes, the king was able to see them and sometimes, he
was unable to see them. There was the extremely beautiful sound of singing and also the sounds of teaching going
on. The king also heard the melodious sound of geese. On seeing this extraordinary sight, the king began to think.

'This must be a dream. Perhaps my mind has gone. Is this for real? In my body, have I attained the supreme end?
'"C
This must be the sacred land of Uttara Kuru or Amaravati. What is this wonder that I have seen?' He thought in
this way.

'"While he was thinking, he saw the bull among the sages. He was in a celestial vehicle made out of gold and its
pillars were encrusted with jewels. The descendant of the Bhrigu lineage was lying down on an expensive and divine bed. With great delight, the king and his wife approached him. Chyavana would be seen to disappear and
would then appear again. He next saw him in a part of the forest. He was seated on a mat made out of kusha grass
and was meditating, engaged in a great vow. Through his powers of yoga, the brahmana confounded the king. In
an instant, the forest, the large numbers of apsaras, the gandharvas and the trees-all of these vanished. O king!
The banks of the Ganga became silent again. As had been the case earlier, it was again covered with kusha grass
and termite hills. King Kushika and his wife were supremely astounded at these deeds. They thought it was a great
wonder that everything had disappeared. Kushika was filled with delight and spoke to his wife. 'O fortunate one!
Behold. The colourful sight that we have witnessed is extremely difficult to see. This is because of the favours of
the foremost one of the Bhrigu lineage. Other than the strength of austerities, what can this be? These things can be
obtained through austerities, not merely by wishing for them. Austerities are superior to the kingdoms of the three
worlds. The store of austerities has tormented himself with extremely great austerities and is sporting. Through the
valour of his austerities, he is even capable of creating other worlds. Brahmanas are born to perform auspicious
deeds and use their intelligence. Who other than Chyavana could have endeavoured to do this? A kingdom is very
easy for a man to obtain. However, in this world, the status of a brahmana is extremely difficult to obtain. It is because of the brahmana's powers that we were yoked to the chariot, like beasts of burden.' Chyavana got to know
about these thoughts of his. He glanced at the king and said, 'Come here quickly.' Thus addressed, he and his wife
advanced towards the great sage. The king bowed his head down and they worshipped the one who should be
revered. The sage pronounced a benediction over the king. O bull among men! The intelligent one comforted him
and asked him to be seated. O king! Assuming his natural form, Bhargava comforted the king. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! To reassure him, he spoke these gentle words. 'O king! You have properly controlled the five
senses, the five organs of action and the sixth sense of the mind. That is the reason you have escaped from the
hardship. O supreme among eloquent ones! O son! You have honoured me properly. I have not been able to detect
the slightest bit of taint in you. O king! With your permission, I will now return to wherever I had come from. O
Indra among kings! I am pleased with you. Accept a boon from me.'

'"Kushika replied, 'O illustrious one! In your presence, I have been like one who is in the midst of a fire. O tiger
among the Bhrigu lineage! It is sufficient that my lineage and I have not been burnt down. O descendant of the
Bhrigu lineage! This is the best of boons and I have already obtained it. O unblemished one! If you are pleased
with me, let the conduct of my lineage be auspicious. O brahmana! If you grant me this, the purpose of my life will
have been accomplished. This is the fruit of my kingdom and this is my supreme austerity. O descendant of the
Bhrigu lineage! However, I have a doubt. If you are pleased with me, you should explain this to me.'"'
