Vaishampayana said, 'Then, when she was ready to depart, in extreme grief, Krishna went to the famous Pritha and
took her leave from her and the other ladies who were there. She paid her respects and showed homage to each, as
each deserved, and then got ready to go. At that, great lamentations were heard from the inner quarters of the Pandavas. Kunti was extremely miserable on seeing that Droupadi was about to leave. She uttered these words, in a
voice that was choked with grief. "O child! Do not grieve because of this great calamity that has befallen you. You
know very well the dharma for women and you also possess good character and conduct. O one with the sweet
smiles! I need not instruct you about the duties towards your husbands. Two families[The Kouravas and the Pandavas.] have been graced by your
qualities and righteous conduct. The Kurus in the assembly hall are fortunate that they have not been burnt down
by your rage. O unblemished one! Blessed by my thoughts about you, travel on a route that has no difficulties. The
minds of good women are not distorted by what is inevitable. You are protected by the dharma of your superiors
and you will swiftly obtain prosperity. When you live in the forest, always keep an eye on my son, Sahadeva, so
that his mind does not sink under this great calamity that has come." The queen[Droupadi.] replied, "So shall it be." She
went out, her hair undone, in a single garment that was stained with blood and marked with her flowing tears[She was in her menses.].

'As she wept and left, Pritha followed her, in grief. She saw all her sons, deprived of their ornaments and garments. Their bodies were covered in the skins of ruru deer and their faces were lowered in shame. They were surrounded by delighted enemies and mourning well-wishers. Driven by affection, she approached all her sons in that
state. In words of great lamentation, she spoke to them and their relatives. "You have always followed good dharma. You have always been adorned by fortitude in conduct. You have never been mean. You have always been firm
and devoted. You have always been respectful of the gods. Why should this calamity befall you? Why should there
be this reversal in fortune? I do not see whose envy and wickedness have led to this. Because I have given birth to
you, all this may be because of my ill fortune. So despite possessing supreme qualities, you are suffering the oppression of limitless grief. You do not lack in valour, strength, courage, energy and fortitude. But thin of body, and
deprived of your riches, how will you live in that desolate forest? If I had known that you were destined to live in
the forest, after Pandu's death, I would not have brought you down from the Shatashringa Mountains to Gajasahrya[The city of the elephant, another name for Hastinapura.]. I think your father was fortunate. His mind was set on austerities and wisdom. His mind was set on going to heaven before he encountered misery because of his sons. I think that Madri, knowledgeable in dharma and
virtuous in every way, was fortunate. She had the foresight of knowing what was going to happen and attained
supreme salvation. Love and thoughts and purpose determined my decision. Alas on my love for life. I suffer all
this misery because of that." When Kunti lamented in this way, the Pandavas comforted her and showed her
homage. Unhappily, they then set out for the forest. Vidura and the others, who were themselves aggrieved, consoled the afflicted Kunti. Explaining the reasons, and thus suffering even more, they slowly led her to Kshatta's[Vidura's.]
house. King Dhritarashtra's mind was immersed in grief. He asked Kshatta to come to him at once. So Vidura went
to Dhritarashtra's house. In great anxiety, Dhritarashtra, lord of men, questioned him.'
