'Sanjaya said, "Desiring that Dhananjaya might obtain victory quickly, the mighty-armed one was swiftly advancing towards Duhshasana's chariot. The great archers from Trigarta, their standards decorated with gold, surrounded
him from all sides and he was immersed in an ocean of soldiers. They surrounded him from all sides with an army
of chariots. They angrily released a storm of arrows towards that supreme archer. But in that great battle, Satyaki,
with truth as his valour, single-handedly defeated fifty enemy princes who had advanced against him. He penetrated the midst of the Bharata soldiers, which resounded with the noise of the slapping of palms. It was like an ocean,
with the many swords, lances and clubs as boats. In that battle, we then witnessed the extraordinary conduct of
Shini's descendant. We saw him in the western direction and then in the east. We beheld his dexterity. He seemed
to extend in the north, the south, the east and the west. The brave one seemed to be dancing around, as if he was
one hundred rathas alone. On witnessing the conduct of the one whose gait was like that of a brave lion, the Trigartas were tormented and retreated towards their own kin. The brave Shurasenas then strove to counter him in that
battle. They released a storm of arrows on him, like a crazy elephant being urged with a goad. Satyaki took only a
short instant to counter all of them and then began to fight with the Kalingas. His strength and valour were unthinkable. He passed that army of Kalingas, which was incapable of being crossed.

'"The mighty-armed one then reached Partha Dhananjaya. He was exhausted, like one who has swum through
the waters and has reached land. On seeing that tiger among men, Yuyudhana was reassured. Having seen him approach, Keshava spoke to Arjuna. 'O Partha! Shini's descendant is arriving, following in your footsteps. O one
who has truth as his valour! He is your disciple and your friend. The bull among men has conquered all the warriors, regarding them as grass. He has created terrible carnage among the Kourava warriors. O Kiriti! Satyaki is approaching and he is dearer to you than your own life. O Phalguna! Satyaki is approaching and he has used his arrows to crush Drona and Bhoja Kritavarma. He is devoted to ensuring Dharmaraja's welfare and has killed the
supreme among the best of warriors. O Phalguna! Satyaki is approaching. He is brave and skilled in the use of
weapons. The immensely strong one has performed extremely difficult deeds in the midst of the soldiers. O Panda-
va! Satyaki is approaching, wishing to see you. He has fought with many maharathas, with the preceptor at the
forefront, on a single chariot. O Partha! Satyaki is arriving. Depending on the strength of his own arms, he has
shattered the army. He has been sent by the son of Dharma. O Partha! Satyaki is approaching. Among the
Kouravas, there is no warrior who is equal to him. O Kounteya! Satyaki, for whom truth is his valour, is arriving.
He has been freed from the Kuru soldiers, like a lion from amidst cattle. He has killed many soldiers. O Partha!
Satyaki is approaching. He has strewn the earth with the faces, as beautiful as lotuses, of a thousand kings. O
Partha! Satyaki is swiftly approaching. He has defeated Duryodhana and his brothers in the battle and has killed
Jalasandha. Satyaki is swiftly arriving. He has created a river of blood, with blood as the mud, and has regarded
the Kouravyas as grass. Satyaki is arriving.' However, Kounteya was not happy and spoke these words to Kesha-
va. 'O mighty-armed one! I do not find this arrival of Satyaki's to be pleasant. O Keshava! I do not know about the
state Dharmaraja is in. Without Satvata, I do not know whether he is alive or not. O mighty-armed one! He should
have protected the king. O Krishna! Why has he abandoned him and followed in my footsteps? The king has been
left to Drona and Saindhava has not yet been brought down. In the battle, Bhurishrava is advancing against Shini's
descendant. A greater burden than that of Saindhava has now been imposed on me. I should find out about the king
and I should also protect Satyaki. I must also kill Jayadratha and the sun is low. The mighty-armed one[Satyaki.] is exhausted and he has only a little bit of spirit left. O Madhava! His horses are tired and so is his charioteer. O Kesha-
va! Bhurishrava is not tired and he has aides. How will Satyaki, for whom truth is his valour, be successful in this
encounter? He has crossed an ocean. Will the immensely energetic bull of the Shini lineage now succumb before a
trifle[The text uses the word goshpada. This literally means the mark of a cow's foot in the soil and the small puddle
of water that fills up such a mark, that is, a trifle.]? He will clash against the great-minded Bhurishrava, who is foremost among the Kurus and is skilled in
the use of weapons. How will Satyaki be safe? O Keshava! I think that Dharmaraja committed an error. He should
not have given up his fear of the preceptor and sent Satyaki. Drona has always sought to seize Dharmaraja, like a
hawk in the sky, in search of meat. Will the king be safe?"'
