'Sanjaya said, "While they were still fighting, the sun set. Terrible twilight set in and the field of battle could no
longer be seen. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! King Yudhishthira saw that twilight had set in and that his
own soldiers were being slaughtered by Bhishma, the destroyer of enemies. They had discarded their weapons and,
surrounded by the enemy, had begun to run away. In the battle, maharatha Bhishma was incited by supreme anger.
He saw that the Somakas had been vanquished and that the maharathas were dispirited. He thought for a short
while and gave the instructions for withdrawal. King Yudhishthira instructed that the soldiers should be withdrawn.
In a similar way, your soldiers were also withdrawn at the same time. O best of the Kurus! Having withdrawn the
soldiers, the maharathas entered their camps, having been wounded in the battle. The Pandavas reflected on what
should be done vis-à-vis Bhishma in the battle. Oppressed by Bhishma, they could not find any peace. In the battle,
Bhishma had vanquished the Pandavas, together with the Srinjayas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He was
worshipped by your sons and praised by them. With the delighted Kurus surrounding him in every direction, he
entered his camp. It was night and all the beings lost their senses. Towards the beginning of that terrible night, the
Pandavas, the Vrishnis and the invincible Srinjayas sat down to have a consultation. All those immensely powerful
ones thought that the time had come to consult about what would be beneficial for them. Those wise ones anxiously consulted to determine what would be best.

'"O king! King Yudhishthira consulted for a long time. He glanced towards Vasudeva and spoke these words. 'O
Krishna! Behold the great-souled Bhishma, terrible in his valour. He crushes my soldiers like an elephant amidst a
clump of lotuses. We do not even have the enterprise to glance at the great-souled one. He is like an expanding fire
that is consuming my soldiers. He is like the terrible and great serpent Takshaka, whose venom is virulent. O
Krishna! In the battle, the powerful Bhishma uses sharp weapons. He grasps his bow in the encounter and releases
sharp arrows. It is possible to vanquish an angry Yama, the king of the gods with the vajra in his hand, Varuna with
his noose and the lord of riches with his club. But if he is enraged, it is impossible to defeat Bhishma in a great battle. O Krishna! It is because of this reason that I am immersed in an ocean of grief. Having confronted Bhishma in
the battle, I am suffering from weakness of intelligence. O invincible one! I will go to the forest. It is beneficial
that I should go there. O Krishna! I have no desire to fight. Bhishma always kills us. He is like a flaming fire, towards which insects are attracted. I will obtain the same result of death by daring to fight with Bhishma. O Varshneya! Despite being valorous, for the sake of the kingdom, I am being conveyed towards destruction. My brave
brothers are sorely afflicted through arrows. It is because of me, and because of affection towards their brother, that
they were dislodged from the kingdom. O Madhusudana! Krishna[Krishnaa, Droupadi.] was oppressed because of what I had done. I
think that being alive has great value. But it is now extremely difficult to remain alive. If I remain alive today, I
will spend the remaining part[Of the life.] in pursuing supreme dharma. O Keshava! If you show your favours towards me
and towards my brothers, tell me what I should do. O Keshava! But this should be without contravening my own
dharma.' Krishna heard these words and their detailed description.

'"Overcome by compassion, he comforted Yudhishthira and replied, 'O Dharma's son! You should not grieve.
You are devoted to the truth. Your brave brothers are invincible and are the destroyers of enemies. Arjuna and Bhimasena are as energetic as Vayu and Agni. Madri's two sons are as valorous as the lord of the thirty gods. O Pan-
dava! For the sake of the good relationship that exists between us, employ me to fight with Bhishma. O king! Instructed by you, there is nothing I will not do in this great battle. While the sons of Dhritarashtra look on, if Phal-
guna does not desire it, I will challenge Bhishma, the bull among men, in this battle and kill him. O Pandava! If
you see that Bhishma's death will ensure that you win the kingdom, alone on a chariot, I will slay the aged grandfather of the Kurus today. O king! Witness my valour in this battle, like that of the great Indra. I will use great
weapons and bring him down from his chariot. There is no doubt that someone who is an enemy to the sons of
Pandu is my foe too. My welfare is your welfare. All that is mine is yours. Your brother is my friend, relative[Referring to the matrimonial alliance through Subhadra.]
and disciple. O lord of the earth! For Arjuna's sake, I can slice off and give my own flesh. This tiger among men
will also lay down his life for my sake. O father[The word used is tata.]! This is our understanding, that we will protect each other. O
Indra among kings! Employ me, so that I can be your protector. In Upaplavya, Partha earlier took an oath before
many people. "I will slay Gangeya." I should protect the oath that the intelligent Partha took. If Partha gives me
permission, there is no doubt that I should perform this task. Or let Phalguna bear this limited burden in battle. Let
him kill Bhishma, the destroyer of enemy cities, in battle. If Partha stirs himself, there is nothing that he cannot accomplish in battle, even if the thirty gods have raised their arms against him, together with the daityas and the
danavas. O lord of men! They can be killed by Arjuna in battle, not to speak of Bhishma. Bhishma, Shantanu's immensely valorous son, has now become perverse and has lost his intelligence. He will not live for long. He no
longer understands what his duty is.'

'"Yudhishthira replied, 'O mighty-armed one! O Madhava! It is exactly as you have spoken. All of them together are not capable of withstanding your force. O tiger among men! With an immensely strong one like you as my
protector, I am always certain of obtaining everything that I desire. O supreme among victorious ones! With
Govinda as a protector, I can vanquish the gods, together with Indra, in battle, not to speak of Bhishma in this great
battle. But I cannot make your words come false for the sake of glorifying my own objective. O Madhava! As you
had promised, help us, but without taking part in the fight. O Madhava! Bhishma had come to an agreement with
me. "For your sake, I will proffer advice. But I will never fight for you. O lord! I tell you truthfully that I will fight
for Duryodhana's cause." O Madhava! He may provide counsel, as to how we can obtain the kingdom. Let all of
us go to Devavrata, to ask him about the means whereby he may be killed. O Madhusudana! Together with you, let
all of us go and ask him. O supreme among men! Together with you, let all of us quickly go to Bhishma. O Varshneya! If this seems desirable to you, let us go and seek Kourava's counsel. O Janardana! He will offer us beneficial
and truthful advice. O Krishna! In this battle, let us do what he asks us to do. The one who is rigid in his vows will
give us counsel and victory. We lost our father when we were children and he reared us. O Madhava! This is the
aged grandfather whom I wish to kill. He is the father of our beloved father. Shame on the livelihood of
kshatriyas.'"

'Sanjaya said, "O great king! On hearing these words, Varshneya spoke to the descendant of the Kuru lineage.

'O mighty-armed one! I have always liked whatever you have said. Devavrata Bhishma is accomplished. He can
burn down with his glance. Let us go to the one who is the son of the one who goes to the ocean[Ganga goes to the ocean.] to ask about
the means of his death. He will certainly speak the truth, especially if he is asked by you. Let us go there, to ask the
grandfather of the Kurus.' 'O Madhava! Let us bow down our heads and go and ask him for counsel. He will offer
us counsel about how we can fight with the enemy[Though not explicitly stated, this is Yudhishthira speaking now.].' O Pandu's elder brother! Having thus consulted, all the
brave Pandavas, together with the valiant Vasudeva, departed. They discarded their weapons and armour and proceeded to Bhishma's residence. They entered and bowed their heads in obeisance before Bhishma. O great king! O
bull among the Bharata lineage! The Pandavas worshipped him. They lowered their heads and sought Bhishma's
protection. The mighty-armed Bhishma, the grandfather of the Kurus, told them, 'O Varshneya! Welcome. O
Dhananjaya! Welcome. O Dharma's son! O Bhima! O twins! Welcome. What is the task that I can accomplish for
you now? What will extend your pleasure? Even if it should prove to be extremely difficult, I will do it with all my
heart.' With affection, Gangeya repeatedly spoke in this way. Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, was miserable in his
soul and spoke these words. 'O one who is learned in dharma! How will we obtain victory and the kingdom? How
can this destruction of subjects be stopped? O lord! Tell us this. You yourself tell us the means whereby we can
bring about your own death. O king! How will we be able to withstand you in battle? O grandfather of the Kurus!
You do not exhibit the slightest bit of weakness. In the battle, your bow is always seen, whirling around in a circle.
No one can distinguish when you affix an arrow, aim or stretch your bow. O mighty-armed one! We see you stationed on your chariot, like the sun. O slayer of enemy heroes! You slaughter men, horses, chariots and elephants.
O bull among the Bharata lineage! Which man is capable of killing you? O supreme among men! You bring down
a great shower of arrows. Because of you, my large army is decaying from one day to another. How can we defeat
you in battle? How can the kingdom be ours? How can there be peace among my soldiers? O grandfather! Tell us
this.' O Pandu's elder brother! Shantanu's son then spoke these words to Pandava. 'O Kounteya! As long as I am
alive in battle, your prosperity will never be seen. I tell you this truthfully. After you have vanquished me in battle,
your victory over the Kouravas is certain. If you wish to obtain victory in this battle, strike me down quickly. O
Partha! You have my permission to happily strike at me. I think it is good for you that you know my nature[It is not immediately obvious what this means. It probably means that everyone knows that Bhishma will not
fight with Shikhandi.].
After I have been killed, everyone else will be killed. Therefore, do as I am asking you to.'

'"Yudhishthira said, 'Tell us the means whereby we may defeat you in battle. When you are enraged in battle,
you are like Yama with a staff in his hand. It is possible to defeat the wielder of the vajra, or Varuna, or Yama. But
you are incapable of being defeated in battle, even by the gods and the asuras, together with Indra.'

'"Bhishma replied, 'O mighty-armed one! O Pandava! What you have said is true. I am incapable of being defeated in battle, even by the gods and the asuras, together with Indra. But this is when I grasp my weapons in battle
and grasp my supreme bow. O king! But when I cast aside my weapons, the maharathas can kill me in battle. I do
not wish to fight with someone who has cast his weapons aside, someone who has fallen down, someone whose
armour and standard have been dislodged, someone who is running away, someone who is frightened, someone
who solicits sanctuary, someone who is a woman, someone who bears the name of a woman, someone who is disabled, someone who only has one son, someone who does not have a son and someone who is difficult to look at.
O Partha! Hear about the vow that I took a long time ago. I will never fight if I see an inauspicious sign on the
standard. O king! This son of Drupada is a maharatha in your army. Shikhandi is a brave and victorious one who
always desires to fight. But he was a woman earlier. He became a man later. All of you know everything about
how this came about. In the battle, let the brave Arjuna place Shikhandi ahead of him. Let the armoured one attack
me with sharp arrows. I will see an inauspicious sign on the standard then, especially that of someone who was
earlier a woman. Even if I have grasped my bow, I will never strike him then. O bull among the Bharata lineage!
Let Pandava Dhananjaya then strike me from every side with his arrows. Truly, with the exception of the immensely fortunate Krishna and Pandava Dhananjaya, I do not see anyone in the worlds who is capable of killing me.
Therefore, placing him[Shikhandi.] at the front, let Bibhatsu strive his utmost to bring me down. Victory will be obtained.
O Kounteya! Act in accordance with the words I have spoken. You will then be able to defeat the assembled sons
of Dhritarashtra in the battle.'"

'Sanjaya said, "Having taken his permission and having shown their respects to the great-souled Bhishma, the
grandfather of the Kurus, the Parthas then returned to their own camp. Gangeya prepared himself for his departure
to the next world. Arjuna was tormented by grief and he was overcome with shame. He said, 'O Madhava! How
can I fight with my senior, the aged one of the lineage? He is accomplished in wisdom and intelligence. How can I
fight with the grandfather in a battle? O Vasudeva! As a child, I used to play with the great-minded one. O Gada's
elder brother! I used to sully the great-souled one's garments with the dust on my body, when I used to climb onto
his lap as a child. He is the father of my father, the great-souled Pandu. "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I am
not your father, but your father's father." These are the words he used to tell me in my childhood. How can he be
killed by me now? I wish that my soldiers are killed. I cannot fight with that great-souled one. O Krishna! Which
do you think is superior, victory or death?' Krishna replied, 'O Jishnu! Earlier, you have promised to kill Bhishma
in the battle. O Partha! Established in the dharma of kshatriyas, how can you not kill him now? O Partha! Bring
him down from his chariot, like a tree that has been struck by lightning. Without killing Gangeya in battle, victory
cannot be obtained. This has been determined by destiny earlier. The killing has been ordained by destiny. Bhishma's killer is an earlier Indra[Indra is a title and there have been earlier Indras. The present one is Purandara. But having said this, it is difficult to make sense of the text. No earlier Indra is associated with any of the Bhishma stories. It is possible that
this is an oblique reference to Arjuna being Indra's son. In all probability, this is a typo, since non-critical versions don't have this expression.]. It cannot but be otherwise. O invincible one! Bhishma is like Death with a gaping mouth. No one other than you is capable of fighting with him, not even the wielder of the vajra himself. O
mighty-armed one! Kill Bhishma. Listen to these words of mine. This is what the immensely intelligent Brihaspati
told Shakra in earlier times. "O Shakra! One must kill someone who possesses all the qualities, if he comes as an
assassin, or if he arrives to kill." O Dhananjaya! This is the eternal dharma in which kshatriyas have been established. They must fight, protect and perform sacrifices, without any malice.' Arjuna replied, 'O Krishna! It is certain that Shikhandi will be the cause of Bhishma's death. As soon as he sees Panchala, Bhishma will withdraw.
Therefore, we will place Shikhandi ahead of all of us. It is my view that this is the means for bringing about
Gangeya's downfall. I will restrain the other great archers with my arrows. Shikhandi will fight with Bhishma, the
best of warriors. I have heard from the chief of the Kurus that he will not kill Shikhandi. He was born as a maiden
earlier and became a man later.' Having decided this, the Pandavas, together with Madhava, retired to their own
beds. The bulls among men were happy."'
