Uma asked, "O illustrious one! O lord of all the bhutas! O one who is worshipped by the gods and the asuras! O god! O lord! I have a doubt about dharma and adharma for men. Tell me about this. Men are always
bound down in three ways-deeds, thoughts and words. They are also freed from nooses through these means. O
god! Through what kinds of good deeds, what kinds of qualities in conduct and what kinds of speech do men go to
heaven?"

'"'Maheshvara replied, "O goddess! You know the truth about the purport of dharma. You are always devoted to
truth and self-control. However, engaged in the welfare of all beings, you have asked a question that enhances intelligence. Listen. A virtuous person is devoted to the dharma of truth. He discards every kind of desire. He dispels
all his doubts and is not bound down by dharma or adharma. He is omniscient and looks on everything equally. He
knows  the  truth  about  destruction  and  falling  down.  Such  men  are  beyond  attachment  and  are  freed  from  all
bondage. Such a man does not cause any injury in deeds, thoughts and words. They are never attached and are not
bound down by any kinds of deeds. They are not addicted to taking the lives of others. They are virtuous in conduct and are full of compassion. They are impartial towards what is hated and what is agreeable. They are controlled and are freed from all the bondage of deeds. They are compassionate towards all creatures. They grant assurance to all beings. Such men discard all injurious tendencies in their conduct and go to heaven. They never have
a sense of ownership about what belongs to others. They avoid the wives of other people. Men who enjoy the riches obtained through dharma go to heaven. Men who always act towards other people's wives as if they are mothers, sisters or daughters, go to heaven. They always refrain from theft and are satisfied with their own riches. Men
who are content with what fortune has given them go to heaven. They are devoted to their own wives and have intercourse when it is the season. Men who do not hanker after sexual intercourse like vulgar people go to heaven.
Their conduct is such that they always withdraw their glances from looking towards the wives of other people.
They control their senses. Such men exhibit supreme good conduct and go to heaven. These men always tread
along the path that has been created by the gods. Learned men always tread along this path, even if they are not attired in ochre. They follow the dharma of donating. They observe good conduct and purity. They are compassionate. For the sake of earning a living, such men always follow dharma. Virtuous men who wish to reside in heaven
should follow this and nothing else."

'"'Uma said, "There are words that bind down and there are also those that lead to liberation. O god! O lord of
creatures! O unblemished one! Tell me about those."

'"'Maheshvara replied, "For one's own self, for the sake of someone else, for sport or for laughter, if a man never utters a falsehood, he goes to heaven. For the sake of subsistence, for the sake of dharma, or for the sake of satisfying desire, if a man never utters a falsehood, he goes to heaven. Men who speak gentle, harmless and sweet
words that are devoid of sin, and those who utter words of welcome go to heaven. Virtuous men do not utter bitter,
harsh and cruel words, and are not addicted to slander. They go to heaven. There are men who avoid calumny and
do not use words that cause dissension. They only utter words that ensure friendship. They go to heaven. There are
men who never seek to hate others and do not seek to search out their weaknesses. They are self-controlled and
equal in treatment towards all creatures. They go to heaven. There are those who avoid deceitful and vain talk and
words that are against others. They always indulge in amiable speech. They go to heaven. Because of anger or fear,
they do not utter words that shatter the hearts of others. Even when angered, they speak comforting words. Such
men go to heaven. O goddess! In speech, a man must always follow this kind of dharma. This is auspicious and
has the quality of truth. A learned person must always avoid falsehood."

'"'Uma said, "A man is always bound down by his thoughts and deeds. O immensely fortunate one! O god of
the gods! O wielder of Pinaka! Tell me about those."

'"'Maheshvara replied, "A man must always exhibit dharma in his thoughts. O fortunate one! He will then go to
heaven. I will tell you about it. Listen. If there are wicked thoughts, the acts these lead to are more evil. They bind
men down. O one with the beautiful face! Listen. Even if a man seeks something that belongs to someone else,
abandoned in a deserted forest, and does not entertain thoughts about appropriating it, he goes to heaven. If a man
never desires an object that belongs to someone else, in a village, house or a deserted place, he goes to heaven. In
that fashion, if a man never desires to have intercourse with someone else's wife, not even in his mind, he goes to
heaven. A man whose thoughts are such that he always regards a friend and an enemy as equal, and treats both as
friends when he meets them, goes to heaven. A man who is learned, compassionate, pure, devoted to the truth and
satisfied with what belongs to him, goes to heaven. A man whose nature avoids enmity, one whose intelligence is
always turned towards friendship and one who is compassionate towards all beings, goes to heaven. If a man is
faithful, compassionate, virtuous, loves association with virtuous people and always knows the difference between
dharma and adharma, he goes to heaven. O goddess! If a man knows the fruits and consequences of good and bad
deeds, he goes to heaven. A man who follows the law, possesses the qualities, is always devoted to gods and brahmanas and reveres those who should be shown respect, goes to heaven. I have recounted to you the fruits of auspicious deeds about the path that leads to heaven. What do you wish to hear next?"

'"'Uma said, "O Maheshvara! I have a great doubt about mortal creatures. Therefore, you should explain this to
me in a skilful way. O lord! Through what deeds does a man obtain a long life? O lord of the gods! Through what
great austerities does one obtain a long life? On earth, because of what deeds does a man obtain a short life? O
god! O unblemished one! You should tell me about these perverse deeds. Some obtain great fortune. Others obtain
ill fortune. Some are born in ignoble families. Others are born in noble families. Some men are hideous and look
like pieces of wood. Other men are handsome and beautiful to behold. Some are limited in intelligence, others are
wise. Some are extremely wise and have insight about jnana and vijnana. Some face few obstructions, others confront great impediments. O god! Men are seen to be like this. You should instruct me about this."

'"'Maheshvara replied, "O goddess! I will tell you about the fruits of deeds. In the world of mortals, all men enjoy these fruits. There may be a fierce man who is engaged in taking the lives of others, with a staff raised in his
hand. With staffs raised in their hands, large numbers of demons always attack him[In hell.]. There may be a man who is
cruel towards all beings. He always causes anxiety to everyone. He is so wicked that he doesn't even spare insects
and ants. O goddess! Such a man goes to hell. If a hideous person has dharma in his soul, he is reborn handsome.
A person with injurious tendencies in his soul goes to hell. A person who doesn't cause injury goes to heaven. In
hell, a man confronts terrible hardships. Having passed through hell, some are reborn as humans, but have short
lifespans. O goddess! A man who is addicted to violence is bound down by his wicked deeds. A person who causes injury to all creatures is reborn as one with a short lifespan. A person who does not kill beings, has cast aside his
staff and does not use his staff against anyone, one who does not strike or kill even when he is struck and one who
is affectionate towards all creatures, treating others like his own self, is reborn as a pure person. O goddess! These
kinds of men are the best and obtain divinity. They obtain happiness and all the objects of pleasure. They will obtain bliss. When such a person is reborn in the world of men, he obtains happiness and a long life. Through good
conduct and good deeds, this is the path to obtain a long life. Brahma has spoken about liberation through lack of
injury towards creatures."'"'
