'Narada said, "O Kourvaya[Descendant of Kuru. In this case, Yudhishthira.]! Shakra's divine sabha is radiant and he obtained it as a result of his acts. Shakra
built it himself and it possesses the radiance of the sun. It is one hundred yojanas[A yojana is a measure of distance and is between eight and nine miles.] wide and one hundred and fifty
yojanas long. It is five yojanas high. It is airborne and can roam anywhere at will. It dispels old age, misery and
fatigue. It is free from fear, and pure and auspicious. It is full of rooms and seats and is beautiful, adorned with celestial trees. O Partha! O descedant of the Bharata lineage! There is a supreme seat in that sabha and the lord of the
gods sits there with Mahendrani Shachi, who is Shri and Lakshmi[Shachi is Indra's wife. Mahendra means the great Indra and is one of Indra's ephithets. Shri and Lakshmi
were originally independent goddesses, but eventually became identical. Shri is the goddess of prosperity, while
Lakshmi is the goddess of wealth.]. His form cannot be described. He wears a
crown and red[The word used is lohita, which can also be translated as copper.] bracelets on his upper arms. He is dressed in spotless garments and adorned with brightly
coloured garlands. Hri, Kirti and Dyuti are with him[These are feminine personifications of modesty, fame and radiance respectively.]. O king! There the great-souled Shatakratu is always worshipped by all the Maruts, all the householders, the siddhas, the sadhyas and the masses of gods. They and their
followers are all divine in form and adorned with ornaments. They worshipped the great-souled king of the gods,
the vanquisher of enemies.

'"O Partha! All the devarshis worship Shakra. They are unblemished, cleansed of sin, radiant, like the fire in
form, without blemish and without fatigue. They are performers of the soma sacrifice-Parashara, Parvata,
Savarni, Galava, Shankha, Likhita, the sage Gourashira, Durvasa, Dirghatapa, Yajnavalkya, Bhaluki, Uddalaka,
Shvetaketu, the lord Shatyayana, Havishmat, Gavishtha, King Harishchandra, Hridya, Udarashandilya, Parasharya,
Krishihvala, Vataskandha, Vishakha, Vidhata, Kala, Anantadanta, Tvashta, Vishvakarma and Tumburu. They were
born from wombs and not born from wombs. They lived on air and on fire. All of them worshipped the lord of the
worlds, the wielder of the vajra-Sahadeva, Sunitha, the immensely ascetic Valmiki, Shamika, Satyavak, the truthful Prachetas, Medhatithi, Vamadeva, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Marutta, Marichi, the immensely ascetic Sthanu,
Atri, Kakshivat, Goutama, Tarkshya, the sage Vaishvanara, the sage Kalakavrikshiya, Ashravya, Hiranyada, Samvartta, Devahavya and the powerful Vishvaksena. O Pandava! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the divine
waters and herbs, Shraddha[Faith.], Medha[Wisdom.], Sarasvati[The goddess of learning, also a river.], artha, dharma, kama, lightning, clouds bearing rain, the
winds, thunder, the eastern direction, the twenty-seven fires that convey sacrificial offerings, Agni, Soma, Indragni,
Mitra, Savita, Aryama, Bhaga, the Vishvadevas, the Sadhyas, Shukra, Manthi, the sacrifices, the dakshinas, the
planets, all the stobhas[A stobha is a sacrificial hymn.] and all the mantras uttered at sacrifices are seated there. O king! There are also the apsaras and the beautiful gandharvas. With dancing, music and songs, and various other forms of entertainment, they
amuse Shatakratu, the king of the gods. O king of men! With hymns and rituals, they praise the valorous acts of the
great-souled destroyer of Bala and Vritra. All the brahmana rajarshis and all the devarshis are there, riding various
divine chariots that blaze like the fire. They are garlanded and adorned and all of them come and go. Brihaspati
and Shukra go there together. O king! These and many other ascetics who are rigid in their vows, riding chariots
that are like the moon and themselves, as handsome as the moon Bhrigu and the seven great sages[Saptarshi or seven great sages.] go there on
Brahma's instructions. O king! I have myself seen this sabha of Shatakratu's, named Pushkaramalini. O great king!
O unblemished one! Now hear about Yama's."'
