Vaishampayana said, 'Having said this, the immensely famous Bhishma became quiet. Then Sahadeva uttered
these words of great import. "If there are any kings here who cannot tolerate the homage I have shown to Keshava
Krishna, of immeasurable valour and the slayer of Keshi[Demon killed by Krishna.], I place my foot on the heads of those strong ones. As I
utter these words, let him give a fitting reply. Let the intelligent kings accept that he is the teacher, the father and
the preceptor, one who is shown homage, who should be shown homage and who is deserving of homage." When
he displayed his foot, not one among those intelligent, wise, proud and powerful kings replied. At that, a shower of
flowers rained down on Sahadeva's head. An invisible voice exclaimed, "Excellent! Excellent!" Attired in black
antelope skin, Narada, the foreteller of both the past and the future, the dispeller of all doubts and the knower of all
the worlds, approved.

'All the masses[Of kings.] who had been invited there, with Sunitha[Another name for Shishupala.] at the forefront, seemed to be angry and their
faces paled. The kings spoke of Yudhishthira's instatement and the homage offered to Vasudeva. They were disgusted and decided they had deserved it. Though they were restrained by well-wishers, their forms were angry and
they looked like roaring lions that were dragged away from raw meat. Krishna understood that this ocean of kings,
surrounded by waves of soldiers, was getting ready to do battle. Sahadeva, god among men, completed the ceremony, worshipping especially the brahmanas and the kshatriyas who deserved such homage. When Krishna had
been shown homage, Sunitha, the one who dragged his enemies, spoke to the lords of men. He was angry and his
eyes were extremely copper-red. "Do you think that I am still the general of your army? Do we stand here ready to
fight the assembled Vrishnis and Pandavas?" When he had thus inspired all the kings, the bull among the Chedis
consulted with the kings about disrupting the sacrifice.'
