'Vaishampayana said, "There was a king, a ruler of the earth, always devoted to righteous conduct. His name was
Uparichara and he loved hunting. That descendant of the Puru lineage was also named Vasu and, on Indra's instructions, conquered the beautiful and handsome kingdom of Chedi. After some time, the king gave up the use of
weapons and lived in a hermitage, practising austerities. One day, the thunder-wielding god[Indra.] came to him.

'"Believing that he was trying to become the king of the gods through the practice of austerities, he tried to
wean the king away from his austerities. Indra said, 'O ruler of the world! You should ensure that the path of righteous conduct is not confused. Protect the path of righteous conduct, because that holds up the world. Protect meticulously and rigidly the practice of virtue in the world. If you protect virtue, you will see many other eternal and sacred worlds[Beyond death.]. Though I am in heaven and you are on earth, you have become a dear friend to me. O ruler of men!
Live in that place that is the udder of the earth, stable with animals, flowers, wealth and foodgrains. It has a pleasant climate meant for enjoyment and has all the qualities of the earth and is well protected like heaven. O king of
Chedi! Beyond compare on earth, this land is full of wealth, precious stones, other objects and minerals. The citizens in the cities in this land are contented, pious and follow righteous ways. They never indulge in falsehood, not
even in jest. The sons there never divide their wealth with their fathers and are engaged in the welfare of their superiors. Thin cows are never yoked to ploughs or carts for carrying goods. O king who gives reason for pride! In
Chedi, all the castes are always engaged in their respective duties. Nothing that exists in the three worlds is unknown to you. I shall give you a great and excellent flying chariot[Vimana.], made of crystal and possessed by the gods
alone, that is capable of carrying you through the sky. Among all the mortals on earth, you alone, though you possess a physical body, will ride in that best of flying chariots, as if in the form of a god. I shall also give you this
garland known as vaijayanti[Literally, that which produces victory.], made of lotuses that never fade. If you wear this, you will never be hurt by
weapons in battle. O ruler of men! This unparalleled, supreme and great garland, known as Indra's, will be your
distinctive mark.' The slayer of Vritra also gave a staff made of bamboo to protect the good and the peaceful. After
one year was over, the lord of the earth[Uparichara.] planted this in the earth for the sake of worshipping Shakra. O ruler of
the earth! From that day till now, all kings, following the example that was started, plant a bamboo pole in the
ground. After that, the kings make it stand upright and decorate it with garlands, perfumes, ornaments and baskets.
The worshipping is done in accordance with the rites, with garlands and ornaments, and the god who brings fortune is worshipped in his smiling form, a form he himself adopted out of his love for the great-souled Vasu. On
seeing this welfare-granting and god-directed worship done, the great Indra was pleased with Vasu, chief among
kings, and said, 'The men and kings who worship me and observe my festival like the king of Chedi will gain
prosperity and victory, with their kingdoms. Their cities will also expand and will always be full of joy.' O lord of
men! Thus did the great-souled and great Maghavan[An epithet of Indra's.] Indra bless the great king Vasu, out of his love for him.
Men who observe this festival of Shakra's, with gifts of land and jewels, become pure and are blessed with boons,
like Vasu, lord of Chedi and the performer of great sacrifices, was blessed by Maghavan. Ruling Chedi in a righteous way, Vasu, the lord of Chedi, was loved by Indra, and continued with Indra's festival and protected the earth.

'"He had five sons, who had great valour and infinite might. He[Vasu.] was a universal emperor and instated his sons
in many kingdoms. His famous maharatha[Maharatha can loosely be translated as great warrior. However, more specifically, a maharatha was a warrior
who could take on 10,000 warriors single-handed.] son Brihadratha was instated in the kingdom of Magadha. Others[Other sons.]
were Pratyagraha and Kushamba, also known as Manivahana and Macchilla, and Yadu, powerful kings invincible
in battle. O king! These were the sons of that rajarshi with unbounded powers. They established kingdoms and
cities named after them. Thus, the five kings, sons of Vasu, established separate dynasties that were eternal. When
he seated himself or travelled through the sky in the crystal chariot obtained through Indra's grace, the apsaras and
the gandharvas worshipped the great king. And he became famous as Uparichara[Literally, someone who travels through the upper regions.].

'"The river that flowed near his city, Shuktimati, was once attacked by the mountain Kolahola, maddened by
lust[The mountain lusted for the river.]. The mountain Kolahola was kicked by Vasu with his foot and the river flowed out freely through the gully
caused by the kick. From the embrace of the mountain, the river gave birth to twins and, grateful, the river gave
them to the king. Vasu, supreme among rajarshis and the provider of prosperity and vanquisher of enemies, made
the son the general of his army.

'"The daughter of the river was named Girika and the king[Uparichara.] made her his wife. Once, the time for intercourse
arrived and Vasu's wife, Girika, having purified herself by bathing at the fertile time, informed her husband about
her state. But on that very day, his ancestors came to him and asked the best of kings and wisest of men to kill
some deer. Thinking that the command of his ancestors should be followed, he went out to hunt, thinking of Giri-
ka, who was exceedingly beautiful and like Shri[Lakshmi.] herself. He was so excited that the semen was discharged in the
beautiful forest and wishing to save it, the king of the earth collected it in the leaf of a tree. The lord thought that
his semen should not be wasted in vain and that his wife's fertile period should not pass barren. Then the king
thought about this many times and the best of kings firmly decided that his semen would be productive, since the
semen was issued when his queen's time was right. Learned in the subtleties of dharma and artha, the king consecrated the semen, which was productive for producing progeny, and addressed a hawk that was seated nearby. 'O
amiable one! Please take this seed to my wife Girika. She is in her season now.' The swift hawk took it from him
and flew speedily through the sky.

'"When the bird was thus swiftly flying through the sky, another hawk saw him and thought that the hawk was
carrying some meat and flew at him. The two birds fought with their beaks in the sky. When they were thus fighting, the semen fell into the waters of the river Yamuna. An apsara known by the name of Adrika lived in the water
of the Yamuna as a fish, because she had been cursed by Brahma. In the form of a fish, Adrika speedily came to
where Vasu's semen fell from the hawk's claw and swallowed it up immediately. O best of the Bharata lineage!
Some time after this, the fish was caught by fishermen and she was in her tenth month[After swallowing the semen.]. From the stomach of the
fish there emerged twins in human form, a boy and a girl. They[The fishermen.] marvelled at this and went and told the king, 'O
king! These two have been born in human form inside a fish.' Then King Uparichara accepted the male child and
he later became the righteous and truthful king named Matsya. As soon as the children were born, the apsara was
also immediately freed from her curse. The beautiful one had earlier been told by the illustrious god[Brahma.] that she
would be freed from her non-human form when she gave birth to two human children. Following these words, after giving birth to two children and after being killed by the fishermen, she left the form of a fish and assumed her
own divine form. The beautiful apsara then went up to the sky, following the path of the siddhas[Semi-divine, pure and holy species.], rishis and cha-
ranas[Celestial singers.]. The girl, the daughter of the fish, smelt of fish. She was given by the king to the fishermen, saying that
she would be their daughter.

'"This girl was called Satyavati. She was possessed of great beauty and had every quality and character. But because she lived among fishermen, that sweet-smiling girl carried the smell of fish for a long time. Wishing to serve
her father, she plied a boat on the water. One day, when going on a pilgrimage, Parashara saw her. She was extremely beautiful and an object of desire even to siddhas. As soon as the wise one saw the beautiful one, the best of
the sages wanted to make love to Vasu's daughter. She told him, 'O holy hermit! The rishis are standing on both
banks of the river. How can we have intercourse when they are looking at us?' Thus addressed by her, the great
lord[Parashara.] created a fog so that the entire place seemed to be covered in darkness. On witnessing this sudden creation
of fog by the great rishi, the girl was surprised and overcome with modesty. Satyavati spiritedly said, 'O great lord!
Know me to be a virgin and under my father's protection. O unblemished one! My virginity will be sullied if I
unite with you. O best of the Brahmanas! If my virginity is lost, how will I be able to return home? O wise one! I
will not be able to stay at home. O great lord! Bear this in mind and then do what is proper.' The best of the rishis
was very pleased at her words and replied, 'Even after you do that which pleases me, you will remain a virgin. O
beautiful, but timid one! Ask me for any boon that you desire. O one with beautiful smiles! My boon has never
proven to be fruitless.' Having been thus addressed, she asked for the boon that her body might always have sweet
scents. The great lord granted her what her heart desired. Then, having obtained the boon, she was extremely happy. The one adorned with all the charms of a woman had intercourse with that rishi of wonderful deeds. Thereafter,
she became known on earth as Gandhavati[Gandha means smell.]. Men on earth could smell her fragrance from the distance of one yojana and after that, she was also known as Yojanagandha.

'"The great lord Parashara went on to his own home. And Satyavati was extremely happy to have obtained this
matchless boon. On that very day, she conceived as a result of the intercourse with Parashara and gave birth to
Parashara's immensely powerful son on an island in the Yamuna. With his mother's permission, he decided to
adopt a life of asceticism and went away, saying that he would instantly appear before her whenever she remembered him for any specific act. Thus was Dvaipayana born in Satyavati's womb through Parashara. Because he was
born on an island, he came to be known as Dvaipayana. Knowing that dharma loses one leg at the end of every
yuga[Dharma has four legs in Satya Yuga, three in Treta Yuga, two in Dvapara Yuga and one in Kali Yuga. The
word leg (pada) is used metaphorically and the word also means one quarter. Thus, completion has four quarters,
which is what one has in Satya Yuga. Therefore, it becomes 75% in Treta Yuga, 50% in Dvapara Yuga and 25% in
Kali Yuga.] and that human life expectancy on earth and strength follow the pattern of the yugas, and moved by his desire to please Brahma and the Brahmanas, the learned one divided the Vedas. Thus, he came to be known as
Vyasa[The word vyasa means to distribute or divide.]. The greatest lord and granter of boons then taught the Vedas and the fifth Veda Mahabharata to Sumantu,
Jaimini, Paila, his own son Shuka and his disciple Vaishampayana. Separately through them the Bharata Samhita
became manifest. Then, Bhishma, of great valour and great fame, successor to Shantanu, was born in Ganga's
womb through the semen of the Vasus.

'"There was a great and famous ancient rishi known as Animandavya. Though not a thief, he was suspected of
being a thief and was impaled on a stake. Thereupon, the ancient maharshi summoned Dharma[Yama, the god of death and justice.] and addressed
him in these words. 'In my childhood, I pierced a locust[Shakuntika in the original text. Shakuntika also means bird, but given the context, locust or cricket seems
more appropriate.] with a blade of grass. O Dharma! I remember that sin of
mine. But I cannot remember any other. Since then, I have practised austerities a thousand times. Have not these
great austerities neutralized a single sin? The killing of a Brahmana is more heinous than the killing of all other beings. O Dharma! Because of your sin[The sin of killing Animandavya.], you will be born in the womb of a Shudra.' Being thus cursed, Dharma
was born in the womb of a Shudra in the form of Vidura, learned, righteous and pure of body. From Gavalgana,
Sanjaya[Sanjaya was a suta, that is, a charioteer-cum-raconteur. He was an aide to Dhritarashtra, who was blind, and
Sanjaya has become famous because he was granted divine sight so that he could describe the incidents occurring
in the Kurukshetra war to Dhritarashtra from a distance. Sanjaya's father was Gavalgana.], who was like a sage, was born as a suta.

'"Karna, of great strength, was born from Surya when Kunti was still a virgin. He emerged from his mother's
womb with natural armour[Kavacha in the original text. A charm that works like armour is another possible translation.] and a face adorned with earrings[Kundala.].

'"Vishnu himself, worshipped by all the worlds, appeared in Devaki through Vasudeva, for the welfare of the
world. He is of great fame, the god without beginning and without end, the lord and creator of the universe, unmanifest, without decay, the brahman, the chief, without any attributes, the great soul, eternal, nature, the lord who
controls, the prime being, the creator of the universe, the source of the sattva quality, perennial, without deterioration, infinite, incapable of being moved, the god who is the supreme soul, Lord Narayana, the upholder, perpetual,
the supreme one without decay. This prime being, with infinite wealth and the lord and grandfather of all beings,
took his birth in the lineage of the Andhakas and the Vrishnis in order to increase righteousness in the world.

'"The great warriors Satyaki and Kritavarma, skilled in the use of weapons and well versed in the use of all
arms, always obedient to Narayana, were born from Satyaka and Hridika, as experts in use of weapons. The spilt
semen of maharshi Bharadvaja, great in the practice of austerities, was kept in a vessel. There it grew and from that
was born Drona. Goutama's semen fell on a clump of reeds and from that were born twins, Kripa[Son of Sharadvata, also known as Kripacharya.] of immense
strength and Ashvatthama's mother[Kripi.]. Ashvatthama was born from Drona, blessed with the boon of knowing all
weapons. From the sacrificial fire was then born Dhrishtadyumna, as radiant as the fire itself. The mighty hero was
born with a bow in his hand, for Drona's destruction. From the sacrificial altar was born Krishna[Droupadi.], beautiful and
radiant. She had a fascinating body and shone with supreme beauty. Then were born Prahlada's disciples, Nagnajit
and Subala. Subala had a son named Shakuni. Through the curse of the gods, the son of the king of Gandhara[Subala was the king of Gandhara.]
became the enemy of virtue and a destroyer of beings. The other[Gandhari, Subala's daughter and Shakuni's sister.] became Duryodhana's mother. Both[Shakuni and Duryodhana.] were
skilled in material pursuits.

'"In Vichitravirya's field, from Krishna Dvaipayana, were born Dhritarashtra, lord of men, and also Pandu, of
immense strength. Through his two wives, from Pandu, were born five separate sons, the equals of the gods. Yudhishthira was the first-born, the eldest, born from Dharma. Vrikodara was born from Maruta[The god of wind.]. The best of all,
blessed with the boon of knowing all weapons, was Dhananjaya, born from Indra. From the Ashvins were born the
handsome twins Nakula and Sahadeva, always devoted to serving their superiors. One hundred sons were born to
the wise Dhritarashtra-Duryodhana and the others and the inter-caste Yuyutsu[Yuyutsu had a Vaishya mother.].

'"From Arjuna, Abhimanyu, the great-souled Pandu's grandson, was born to Subhadra, Vasudeva's sister. From
the five Pandavas, five sons were born to Krishna[Droupadi.], handsome and skilled in the usage of all weapons-Prativindhya from Yudhishthira, Sutasoma from Vrikodara, Shrutakirti from Arjuna, Shatanika from Nakula and the mighty
Shrutasena[This Shrutasena should not be confused with Janamejaya's brother.] from Sahadeva. From Bhima, Hidimba gave birth to Ghatotkacha in the forest. Drupada[The king of Panchala and the father of Dhrishtadyumna and Droupadi.] had a
daughter named Shikhandi, but later, she was transformed into a son. For the sake of her welfare, she was transformed into a man by the yaksha Sthuna. At that great battle of the Kurus, hundreds of thousands of kings assembled, eager to fight with each other. Their names are so many that I cannot recount them, for it would take many
years. I have only mentioned the principal ones who figure in this account."'
