'Sanjaya said, "O great king! Abhimanyu fought against your valiant son, who was supported by a large army for
Bhishma's sake. In the battle, Duryodhana struck Krishna's son with nine arrows with drooping tufts. He was enraged in the battle and again struck him with three arrows. In that encounter, Krishna's son angrily hurled a javelin
towards Duryodhana's chariot. It was terrible and seemed to have been created by Death itself. O lord of the earth!
On seeing it suddenly descend, dreadful in form, your maharatha son severed it into two with a kshurapra. On seeing the javelin fall down, Krishna's son became extremely enraged. He struck Duryodhana in the arms and the
chest with three arrows. O best of the Bharata lineage! He again struck the king, the intolerant Duryodhana, between the breasts with ten terrible arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The battle between the two was
dreadful and wonderful. It created pleasure among those who witnessed it and was applauded by all the kings. For
the sake of Bhishma's death and Partha's victory, those brave ones, Subhadra's son and the bull among the Kurus,
fought in that battle.

'"Drona's son, bull among the brahmanas, was enraged in the battle. The scorcher of enemies struck Satyaki in
the chest with an iron arrow. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Shini's descendant, immeasurable in his soul,
struck the preceptor's son in all of his inner organs with nine arrows shafted with the feathers of herons. In the encounter, Ashvatthama struck Satyaki with nine arrows and again wounded him in the arms and the chest with thirty. Having been thus pierced by Drona's son, the immensely illustrious and great archer from the Satvata lineage
pierced Drona's son back with three arrows.

'"In the battle, maharatha Pourava covered Dhrishtaketu with arrows and severely wounded the great archer.
However, the extremely strong maharatha, Dhrishtaketu, pierced Pourava in the encounter with thirty sharp arrows. Maharatha Pourava severed Dhrishtaketu's bow and having pierced him with sharp arrows, emitted a powerful roar. O great king! He grasped another bow and pierced Pourava with seventy-three sharp arrows that had been
whetted on stone. Those two noble maharathas who were great archers rained down a great shower of arrows towards each other. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They severed each other's bows and slew each other's
horses. Bereft of their chariots, the maharathas began to fight with each other with swords. Each had a beautiful
shield made out of the hide of a bull, decorated with the signs of one hundred moons and marked with the signs of
one hundred stars. O king! They grasped extremely brilliant and polished swords and rushed towards each other.
They were like lions in the great forest, wishing to have intercourse with the same female. They circled in wonderful motions, advanced and retreated. They exhibited their movements, wishing to strike each other. Incited with
rage, Pourava asked Dhrishtaketu to wait and struck him on his frontal bone with the large sword. In the encounter,
the king of Chedi[Dhrishtaketu.] struck Pourava, bull among men, on the shoulder joint with the sharp tip of his giant sword.
O great king! Those destroyers of enemies advanced against each other in the great battle. They struck each other
with great force and both of them fell down. O king! Your son, Jayatsena, took Pourava up on his own chariot and
carried him away from the field of battle. O king! In the encounter, the powerful Sahadeva, Madri's son and the
scorcher of enemies, carried Dhrishtaketu away from the battle.

'"Chitrasena pierced Susharma with nine swift arrows[The only Susharma we know of is the king of the Trigartas. He fought on the Kourava side and Chitrasena is
Duryodhana's brother. Clearly, this must be some other Susharma, fighting on the Pandava side. However, no
such other Susharma has ever been mentioned. Therefore, these shlokas have probably just been thrown in. In
any event, they are irrelevant.]. He again pierced him with sixty and yet again with
nine arrows. O lord of the earth! In that battle, Susharma became enraged with your son and pierced him with one
hundred sharp arrows. O king! Chitrasena became angry in the battle and pierced him with thirty arrows with
drooping tufts and was pierced back in return.

'"O king! In the battle over Bhishma, which increased fame and honour, Subhadra's son fought with Prince Brihadbala. The king of Kosala pierced Arjuna's son with five iron arrows and again pierced him with twenty straight-
tufted arrows. Subhadra's son pierced Brihadbala with nine iron arrows. But despite piercing him again and again,
he could not make him waver in the battle. Phalguna's son then severed the bow of the king of Kosala and wounded him with thirty arrows that were tufted with the feathers of herons. But Prince Brihadbala grasped another bow
and in that battle, angrily pierced Phalguna's son with many arrows. O scorcher of enemies! They fought this battle
for Bhishma's sake. O great king! In that battle, those wonderful fighters were excited with anger and were like
Maya and Vasava in the battle between the gods and the asuras.

'"Bhimasena fought against that army of elephants. He was as resplendent as Shakra, with the vajra in his hand,
after shattering mountains. Bhima killed elephants that were like mountains. They fell down in large numbers,
making the earth resound with their roars. Those shattered elephants were like large mountains made out of col-
lyrium. They were strewn over the ground, like shattered mountains.

'"In the battle, the great archer, Yudhishthira, fought with the king of Madra. He was protected by a large army
and oppressed him. In that encounter for the sake of Bhishma, the valiant king of Madra was enraged and afflicted
the maharatha who was Dharma's son.

'"The king of Sindhu pierced Virata with nine straight-tufted and sharp arrows and again wounded him with another thirty. O great king! In the forefront of that battle, Virata struck Saindhava between the breasts with thirty
sharp arrows. Matsya and Saindhava possessed colourful bows and swords. Their armour, weapons and standards
were handsome. They looked handsome and resplendent in that battle.

'"Drona advanced against the son of Panchala[Dhrishtadyumna.] in the great battle and used straight-tufted arrows in the great
clash. O great king! Drona severed Parshata's giant bow and wounded Parshata with fifty arrows. But Parshata, the
destroyer of enemy heroes, grasped another bow and in that encounter, fiercely unleashed arrows at Drona. The
maharatha repulsed those arrows with his own shower of arrows. Drona released five arrows towards Drupada's
son. O great king! Parshata, the destroyer of enemy heroes, became enraged at this. In the battle, he hurled a club
towards Drona and it was like Yama's staff, decorated with golden garments. On seeing it suddenly descend towards him in that battle, Drona countered it with fifty arrows. O king! Because of the unassailable arrows released
by Drona, it shattered into many fragments. Shattered and fragmented, it fell down on the ground. On seeing the
club destroyed, Parshata, the destroyer of enemies, hurled a javelin towards Drona. It was beautiful and was completely made out of iron. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that battle, Drona sliced it down with nine arrows. In that encounter, he afflicted Parshata, the great archer. In this fashion, there was a great battle between
Drona and Parshata. O great king! It was fearful and dreadful and was fought over Bhishma.

'"Arjuna approached Gangeya and oppressed him with sharp arrows. He angrily advanced against him, like a
crazy elephant attacking another in the forest. The powerful and immensely strong Bhagadatta counter-attacked
Partha on a crazy elephant that had musth flowing down three streams. On seeing it suddenly descend towards
him, like the great Indra's elephant, Bibhatsu took the greatest care in repulsing it. In that encounter, the powerful
King Bhagadatta was astride an elephant and countered Arjuna with a shower of arrows. In the great encounter,
Arjuna used extremely sharp and polished arrows that had the complexion of silver to pierce the elephant in battle.
O great king! Kounteya kept addressing Shikhandi. 'Proceed. Proceed. Go towards Bhishma. Kill him.' O Pandu's
elder brother! O king! Pragjyotisha abandoned Pandava and quickly went towards Drupada's chariot. O great king!
Placing Shikhandi at the forefront, Arjuna advanced against Bhishma and in that battle, an encounter commenced,
when the brave ones on your side fiercely attacked Pandava. All of them advanced, roaring in rage, and it was extraordinary. O lord of men! There were many divisions in the army of your sons. Arjuna scattered them, like the
wind disperses a mass of clouds in the sky. Shikhandi approached the grandfather of the Bharatas. Quickly and eagerly, he pierced him with many arrows.

'"In the battle, Bhishma killed the Somakas who were following Partha. He repulsed the soldiers of the maharatha Pandava. The chariot was the storehouse for the fire. The bow constituted the flames. The javelins and
clubs were the kindling. He released a great shower of flaming arrows and consumed the kshatriyas in the battle.
He was like a large fire that consumes deadwood when it moves around, driven by the wind. Bhishma blazed like
that, showering his divine weapons. There were gold-shafted, straight-tufted and sharp arrows. The immensely illustrious Bhishma roared in the directions and the sub-directions. O king! He brought down chariots and elephants,
with their riders. The chariots roamed around, like palm trees that had been shorn of their tops. O king! In that battle, chariots, elephants and horses were bereft of men. Bhishma, supreme among those who wield all weapons,
roamed around. The clap of his palms and the twang of his bow were like the clapping of thunder. O king! In every
direction, the soldiers were disturbed and trembled. O lord of men! The arrows of your father were invincible. The
unassailable arrows released by Bhishma never failed to penetrate the bodies. O king! The chariots had no men.
But they were still yoked to swift horses. O lord of the earth! With the speed of the wind, we saw them being
dragged around in different directions. There were fourteen thousand famous maharathas from the Chedis, the
Kashis and the Karushas. They were born in noble lineages and were ready to give up their lives. These brave ones
did not retreat from battle. Their standards were decorated in gold. With their horses, chariots and elephants, they
advanced in battle against Bhishma and confronting the one who was like death with a gaping mouth, they left for
the other world. O great king! There was not a single maharatha among the Somakas, who having approached
Bhishma in that battle, returned alive from the engagement. In that battle, he sent all those warriors to the capital of
the king of the dead. On seeing them conveyed there, all the people witnessed Bhishma's valour.

'"The only exceptions were Pandu's brave son, borne on white horses and with Krishna as his charioteer, and
Panchala Shikhandi, who was infinitely energetic in battle. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Shikhandi approached Bhishma in that battle and in that great encounter, struck him with one hundred arrows. Gangeya glanced
at Shikhandi with anger blazing in his eyes. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He seemed to burn him down
with the look in his eyes. O king! But while all the world looked on, he remembered that he was a woman. Bhishma did not strike him in battle, though he[Shikhandi. However, there was no reason for Shikhandi not to understand, since Bhishma had already mentioned the reason.] did not understand the reason. O great king! Arjuna addressed
Shikhandi. 'Advance quickly and kill the grandfather. O brave one! What do you wish to say? Kill maharatha
Bhishma. I do not see anyone else in Yudhishthira's army who can kill him. Nor is there anyone who can fight with
grandfather Bhishma in this battle. You are the exception. O tiger among men! I am telling this truthfully.' O bull
among the Bharata lineage! Having been thus addressed by Partha, Shikhandi quickly pierced the grandfather with
many kinds of arrows. Your father, Devavrata, paid no heed to these arrows. Enraged in the battle, he countered
Arjuna with arrows. O venerable one! In that encounter, he released sharp arrows and dispatched all the soldiers of
the maharatha Pandava to the other world. O king! Supported by their large army, the Pandavas surrounded Bhishma and enveloped him, like clouds around the sun. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The descendant of the
Bharata lineage was covered in every direction. In that battle, he consumed the enemy, like a flaming fire burns
down a forest.

'"We then beheld the extraordinary manliness of your son. So as to protect the one who was rigid in his vows,
he fought with Partha. All the worlds were gratified at the deeds of your great-souled archer son, Duhshasana, in
that battle. In that battle, he alone fought with Partha and his followers and fought so fiercely that the Pandavas
were unable to resist him. O great king! In that encounter, Duhshasana deprived rathas of their chariots and tuskers
of their riders. He shattered them with sharp arrows and brought them down on the ground. With other arrows, he
drove the tuskers away in different directions. He was like a fire that has obtained kindling and blazes with fierce
flames. In that way, your son blazed and consumed the Pandavas. No Pandava maharatha could defeat the noble
one of the Bharata lineage. Nor did anyone venture against him. The only exception was the great Indra's son,
borne on white steeds and with Krishna as his charioteer. O king! Vijaya Arjuna defeated him in that encounter.
While all the soldiers looked on, he then advanced against Bhishma. Though he had been vanquished, your son resorted to the strength of Bhishma's arms. O king! Intoxicated in that battle, he repeatedly comforted his side and
continued to fight resplendently against Arjuna. O king! In that battle, Shikhandi pierced the grandfather with arrows that were like the vajra to the touch and were like the poison of serpents. O lord of men! But these did not
cause your father any pain. Gangeya received all these arrows with a smile, like a man suffering from heat craves
the pouring down of rain. In that fashion, Gangeya received the shower of arrows from Shikhandi. O great king!
As Bhishma consumed the soldiers of the great-souled Pandavas, the kshatriyas saw his terrible visage in that
battle.

'"O venerable one! Your son[Duryodhana.] spoke to all the soldiers. 'Attack Phalguna in the battle and surround him with
chariots from all sides. Bhishma is knowledgable about dharma and will protect all of us in this battle. Give up
your great fear and counter-attack the Pandavas. There is the blazing palm tree[On Bhishma's standard.]. Bhishma is stationed there and
is protecting us, and the honour and the armour of all the sons of Dhritarashtra in this battle. Even if the thirty gods
endeavour, they cannot assail Bhishma, not to speak of the great-souled Partha and his soldiers. They are mortal
beings. O warriors! Therefore, do not run away. We have obtained Phalguna in this battle. I will endeavour to fight
against Phalguna in the battle today, together with all of you. O lords of the earth! Make efforts.' O king! On hearing the words of your archer son, the powerful maharathas united against Arjuna-Videhas, Kalingas and large
numbers of Dasherakas. With the Nishadas and the Souviras, the Bahlikas, the Daradas, those from the east, those
from the west, the Malavas, the Abhishahas, the Shurasenas, the Shibis, the Vasatayas, the Shalvas, the Shrayas,
the Trigartas, the Ambashthas and the Kekayas advanced in the great battle. They attacked Partha in the encounter,
like insects drawn to a fire. O great king! The maharathas were with all their armies. Dhananjaya invoked and affixed divine weapons. Bibhatsu, the immensely strong one, quickly released those extremely forceful weapons and
consumed them with his arrows, like a fire before insects. The one with the firm bow created thousands of arrows.
Gandiva was seen to be blazing in the sky. O great king! Oppressed by those arrows, the chariots and the standards
were shattered. The kings could not approach the one with the monkey on his banner. Rathas were brought down
with their standards, horses with their riders, elephants with elephant-riders. They were afflicted by Kiriti's arrows,
created through Arjuna's arms. The earth was strewn in all directions with the many forces of the kings, which
were running away. The mighty-armed Partha drove away those armies.

'"In that encounter, he then dispatched arrows towards Duhshasana. They possessed iron heads and they pierced
your son, Duhshasana. All of them then entered the ground, like snakes penetrating a termite hill. He killed his
horses and brought down his charioteer. The lord used twenty arrows to deprive Vivimshati of his chariot. He severely wounded him with five arrows with drooping tufts. He pierced Kripa, Shalya and Vikarna with many iron
arrows. Kounteya, borne on white steeds, deprived them of their chariots. O venerable one! Having been deprived
of their chariots and having been vanquished in battle by Savyasachi, these five-Kripa, Shalya, Duhshasana,
Vikarna and Vivimshati-fled. O king! Having defeated those maharathas in the forenoon, Partha blazed in the
battle, like a fire without any smoke. He showered down arrows, like the rays of the sun. O great king! He brought
down many other kings. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Because of that shower of arrows, the maharathas
retreated from the field of battle and a great river of blood began to flow between the armies of the Kurus and the
Pandavas. Elephants, horses and large numbers of rathas were slain by the rathas. Rathas killed elephants and elephants killed horses and infantry. Bodies were sliced in the middle and heads lopped off. Elephants, horses, chariots and warriors fell down in all directions. The shattered bodies were still radiant with expensive earrings and
armlets. Princes and maharathas fell down, or were falling down. Some were mangled by the wheels of chariots,
others were trod on by elephants and horses. Foot soldiers, horses, horses with horse-riders, elephants, horses and
masses of chariots were seen to fall down in every direction. The earth was littered with broken chariots and shattered wheels, yokes and standards. The masses of elephants, horses and chariots were covered with blood. It
looked as beautiful as an autumn sky covered with red clouds. Dogs, crows, vultures, wolves, jackals and other
dreadful animals and birds howled at the sight of the feast of flesh. Many kinds of winds were seen to blow in all
the directions. Rakshasas and demons were seen to be roaring. Golden ropes and expensive flags were seen to be
covered in smoke, suddenly stirred by the wind. There were thousands of white umbrellas and pennants of the maharathas. They were seen to be scattered around in hundreds and thousands. Elephants were afflicted by arrows and
fled in all directions, with their standards. O Indra among men! Kshatriyas, holding clubs, javelins and bows, were
seen to have fallen down on the ground.

'"O great king! Bhishma used a divine weapon and in the sight of all the archers, advanced against Kounteya. In
the battle, the armoured Shikhandi also endeavoured to attack. At this, Bhishma withdrew that weapon, which was
like the fire. At this time, Kounteya, borne on white horses, confounded the grandfather and killed your soldiers."'
