Sanjaya said, "O Indra among kings! The terrible battle between the Kurus and the Srinjayas commenced. It was
like that between the gods and the asuras and increased one's fear. Men, chariots, crowds of elephants, thousands
of riders and horses powerfully clashed against each other. Elephants that were terrible in form rushed forward,
and a great noise was heard, like clouds roaring in the sky during the rains. Some rathas were struck by the elephants and fell down from their chariots. In the battle, those brave ones were routed and driven away by those
crazy ones[The elephants were crazy.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Large numbers of well-trained horses were stationed there, to
guard the feet of the rathas. Because of the arrows, they were dispatched to the world of the hereafter. O king!
Trained horse riders surrounded the maharathas and, roaming around in the battle, slew them with spears, javelins
and swords. Some men used bows to repulse the maharathas. Many attacked one and dispatched him to Yama's
eternal abode. Maharathas surrounded elephants and the best of chariots. They severed the heads of the warriors
and drove them away, with a great roar. The rathas were enraged and shot many arrows. O great king! In every direction, they surrounded and slew the elephants. In the battle, elephants attacked elephants and rathas attacked
rathas. Using spears, javelins and iron arrows, they killed each other. In the field of battle, foot soldiers, chariots,
elephants and horses were seen to be driven away, creating a great tumult. Horses adorned with whisks were routed and drank up the earth[This is a reference to the speed of the flying horses. They seemed to
drink up the earth and were as fast as swans.] and were like swans on the slopes of the Himalayas. O lord of the earth! The earth was
marked with the hooves of the horses and was as beautiful as a woman with the marks of nails on her body[Marks left from a session of love.].
There were sounds from the hooves of the horses and the wheels of chariots. There were the sounds of foot soldiers and the trumpeting of elephants. Musical instruments were sounded and conch shells blared. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! The earth resounded, as if it had been struck by a storm. There was the twang of bows.
Swords blazed and the armour was radiant. Nothing could be seen. Many arms were severed and were like the
trunks of kings of elephants. They writhed fearfully with great force, or were immobile. O great king! Heads fell
down on the surface of the earth and a sound was heard, like that when ripe palm fruit falls down. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Because of the heads that fell down, the earth was red with blood and looked beautiful, as if
adorned with golden lotuses in the right season. O great king! With lives lost, the eyes were dilated. With all those
wounds, it looked beautiful, as if covered with lotuses. O Indra among kings! Severed hands fell down on the
ground, smeared with sandalwood paste and adorned with extremely expensive armlets. They were as dazzling as
Shakra's standard. In the great battle, the thighs of the kings were severed. They adorned the field of battle, like the
trunks of elephants. Hundreds of headless torsos were strewn around, and umbrellas and fans. That forest of soldiers was as beautiful as a blooming forest. O great king! The warriors roamed around fearlessly. With blood flowing from their limbs, they were seen to be like flowering kimshukas. Elephants were seen there, afflicted by arrows
and spears. They fell down in the battle, like dispersed clouds. O great king! The great-souled ones slaughtered divisions of elephants. They drove them away in all the directions, like clouds dispelled by the wind. Those elephants were like clouds. In every direction, they shrieked and fell down. They were like mountains shattered by
thunder, at the time of the destruction of a yuga. Horses fell down on the ground, together with their riders. With
their harnesses, those heaps were seen to be like mountains. A river was created on the field of battle and it flowed
towards the world hereafter. The water was made out of blood and the chariots were the eddies. The standards
were like trees and the bones were the rocks. The arms were the crocodiles. The bows were the current. The elephants were the boulders. The horses were the stones. Fat and marrow constituted the mire. The umbrellas were
the swans. The clubs were rafts. Armour and headdresses were scattered around. The flags were like beautiful
trees. There were a large number of wheels, trivenus and poles. This delighted brave ones and generated terror
among cowards. That terrible river, full of Kurus and Srinjayas, flowed along. That extremely horrible river flowed
along to the world of the ancestors. Those brave ones possessed arms like clubs and used their mounts as boats to
cross it. O lord of the earth! That cruel battle raged on. It was fierce and led to the destruction of the four kinds of
forces[Chariots, elephants, infantry and cavalry.], like that in earlier times between the gods and the asuras. O scorcher of enemies! Relatives called out to
each other. Other terrified ones returned, after being summoned by their relatives. That battle was cruel and fierce.

' "Arjuna and Bhimasena confounded the enemy. O lord of men! They slaughtered your large army. Your soldiers were confounded by Bhimasena and Dhananjaya. They lost their senses, like a woman under the influence of
alcohol. They[Bhima and Arjuna.] blew on their conch shells and roared like lions. On hearing that loud noise, with Dharmaraja at
the forefront, Dhrishtadyumna and Shikhandi attacked the king of Madra. O lord of the earth! It was terrible in
form and we witnessed something that was extraordinary. Those brave ones, who were fighting in different segments, united and attacked Shalya. Madri's sons were proud, skilled in the use of weapons and invincible in battle.
Wishing to slay your soldiers, they attacked spiritedly. O bull among the Bharata lineage! At this, your forces retreated. The Pandavas, desiring victory, used arrows to mangle them in many ways. While your sons looked on, the
army was slaughtered. O great king! Afflicted by the ones who wielded firm bows, they were routed in different
directions. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A great sound of lamentation arose among your warriors. There
were some other great-souled kshatriyas who still desired victory in the battle[On the Kourava side.], and they asked them to wait.
However, your soldiers were shattered and routed by the Pandavas. In the battle, they abandoned their beloved
sons, brothers, grandfathers, maternal uncles, sisters' sons, kin and relatives. Urging the horses and elephants to
speed up, the warriors fled in different directions. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Those on your side were only
interested in saving themselves." '
