Shounaka said, 'My son, in days long past, your father learnt all the Puranas. O son of Lomaharshana! Is it the case
that you have learnt them too? In the Puranas are described divine stories and accounts of the wise of the original
lineage. In the past, long ago, we have heard these from your father. From those tales, I wish to hear that of the
Bhrigu lineage. Tell us that story. We are all eager to hear.'

Souti said, 'That which was correctly learnt in ancient times by great-souled Brahmanas who were the best, that
which was learnt and recited by the Brahmana Vaishampayana, that which was correctly studied by my father and
from him learnt by me, O descendant of the Bhrigu race[Shounaka was descended from Bhrigu.], hear that story of the Bhrigu lineage, revered by the
gods, Indra, Agni and the Maruts[Wind-gods.]. O chief and great sage, I shall recite to you the history of this lineage, and related stories, as it is recounted in the Puranas. Bhrigu gave birth to a beloved son, named Chyavana Bhargava. Chya-
vana had a righteous son named Pramati and Pramati, in turn, had a son named Ruru, from Ghritachi. From his
wife Pramadvara, Ruru had a son named Shunaka. He was righteous and learned in the Vedas, he was your greatgrandfather. He was devoted to asceticism, famous, learned in the shrutis, truthful, righteous, wise in knowledge of
the brahman and always had control over his senses.'

Shounaka said, 'O son of Suta, why was the great-souled son of Bhrigu known as Chyavana? I am asking you,
tell me.'

Souti replied, 'Bhrigu had a beloved wife, widely known as Puloma. She conceived from Bhrigu's semen and a
child formed in her womb. In time, when the equable and chaste wife Puloma was in that condition, one day, the
famous and righteous Bhrigu went out for his ablutions. It was then that a rakshasa named Puloman came to his
hermitage. Having entered the hermitage, he saw Bhrigu's unblemished wife, and seeing her, he was filled with
lust and lost his senses. On seeing that a guest had come, the beautiful Puloma served him with roots and fruits
from the forest. O Brahmana, having seen her, the rakshasa burned with lust and wished to carry away the unblemished woman. He went to the room where the holy fire was blazing brightly and the rakshasa then asked the flaming fire, "O Agni! Tell me truthfully, under oath, whose wife is she? O Pavaka[Agni.]!Tell me the truth, I am asking you.
This beautiful lady was earlier engaged to be my wife. But later, her father gave her to Bhrigu, who thus committed a falsehood. Tell me truly if this beautiful lady can be called Bhrigu's wife. Since I have found her in the hermitage, I wish to carry her away. My hurt burns with rage that Bhrigu should have obtained this slim-waisted
woman who was my wife first." Thus did the rakshasa repeatedly ask the flaming fire this uncertain question of
whether the lady was Bhrigu's wife. "O Agni! You are always there in every being as witness of their righteous
deeds and evil ones. O wise one! Answer my question truthfully. The wrong-doer Bhrigu abducted her, though she
was my wife first. I wish to hear the truth from you. When I hear the truth from you about whether she is Bhrigu's
wife or not, I shall carry her away from the hermitage in your presence. Therefore, O fire, tell me the truth." Having heard these words, the seven-tongued fire was extremely distressed. He was afraid to lie because of the fear of
a curse. At the same time, he was scared of Bhrigu's curse.'
