'Arjuna said, "While I was returning, I saw another great city. It was divine, as resplendent as the fire and the sun,
and it could roam as it wished. It had trees that were covered with jewels, with colourful birds that had sweet voices. It was inhabited by Poulamas and Kalakeyas who were always happy[Puloma is a demon who is Indra's father-in-law. Indra's wife Shachi is Puloma's daughter. The Poulamas
are demons. The Kalakeyas are demons too.]. It was impregnable, with turrets, entrances and four gates. It was covered with jewels everywhere and was celestial and wonderful to see. There were
trees with flowers and fruit, covered everywhere with divine gems. There were extremely beautiful celestial birds.
It was filled everywhere with asuras who were always happy, armed with weapons like spears, swords, clubs, bows
and maces in their hands. O king! On seeing this extraordinary city of the daityas, I asked Matali, 'What is this that
I see here?'

'"Matali replied, 'There was once a daitya lady named Puloma and another great asura lady named Kalaka.
They observed supreme austerities for one thousand celestial years. When they had completed the austerities, the
one who created himself[Brahma.] granted them a boon. O Indra among kings! They chose the boon that their sons
should not suffer much and should be incapable of being killed by the gods, the rakshasas and the serpents. This
beautiful city that roams in the sky is the result of those good deeds. It is full of jewels everywhere and is incapable
of being conquered even by the gods, the yakshas, the masses of gandharvas, the serpents, the asuras and the rakshasas. It contains all the objects of desire and qualities and is devoid of sorrow and disease. O best of the Bharata
lineage! This was created for the Kalakeyas by Brahma. This is the divine city that is roaming around in the sky,
avoided by the immortals. O brave one! It is inhabited by the Poulama and Kalakeya danavas. This great city is
known by the name of Hiranyapura[Literally, a city (pura) made of gold (hiranya).]. It is protected by the great Kalakeya and Poulama asuras. They are always
happy there and cannot be killed by all the gods. O Indra among kings! They always live here happily, devoid of
anxiety and with nothing left to ask for. It was earlier destined by Brahma that they would die at the hands of a human.'"

'Arjuna said, "O lord! Having learnt that they could not be slain by the gods and the asuras, I happily told
Matali, 'Go swiftly to that city. I will use my weapons to destroy those who hate the thirty gods. There are no evil
haters of the gods who do not deserve to be slain by me.' In that divine chariot, yoked to tawny horses, Matali
swiftly conveyed me to the city of Hiranyapura. On seeing me, Diti's sons, adorned in colourful garments and ornaments, mounted their chariots and hastened at great speed. The chiefs of the danavas, terrible in valour, angrily
attacked me with darts[Nalikas, weapons not easy to identify. They could be arrows, spears or darts. All one knows is that they were
hollow.], iron arrows, missiles[Bhallas, weapons that were hurled.], spears, cudgels and clubs. I warded off this great shower of
weapons. O king! Resorting to the strength of my knowledge, I unleashed a great shower of arrows. In that battle, I
confounded all of them through the course of my chariot. Completely confounded, the danavas fell down on one
another. They were so confounded that they rushed at each other. I sliced off their heads with hundreds of blazing
arrows. Thus slaughtered by me, the daityas resorted to their city again. Using the power of maya that danavas
possess, they rose up into the sky with their city. I restrained them with a great shower of arrows. I blocked the
path of the daityas and restrained their movement. But the daityas were supported by their boon. With ease, that
celestial city, divine in radiance and capable of going anywhere at will, remained suspended in the sky. It would
suddenly plunge into the ground, then be established up in the sky again. It would swiftly adopt a diagonal movement and immerse itself in the waters. O lord of men! That giant city, capable of going anywhere at will, was like
Amaravati. I attacked it with many types of weapons. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Then I subdued the
daityas, together with the city, with a net of arrows invoked with divine weapons. O king! It was wounded through
the straight and iron arrows shot by me. The city of the asuras was destroyed and fell down on the ground. O king!
Pierced by my iron arrows, as swift as the vajra, and driven by destiny, the asuras roamed around. Matali swiftly
descended on the ground in that chariot, as radiant as the sun, as if taking a forward leap. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Wishing to fight with me, those indomitable ones surrounded me with sixty thousand chariots.
But I destroyed them with sharp arrows that had feathers of vultures as plumes. Thus vanquished in battle, they retreated like the waves of the ocean. Thinking that no man was capable of defeating them in battle, I discharged all
my other weapons, one after the other[That is, Arjuna resorted to divine weapons.]. But slowly, my divine weapons, and the thousands of chariots of those
skilled warriors, neutralized each other. The maharathas roamed around, in different manoeuvres of their chariots.
They could be seen in hundreds and thousands. They were adorned in colourful crowns and garlands for the head
and dazzling armour and flags. With many beautiful ornaments, they delighted my mind.

'"In that battle, with all my showers of arrows, I was not able to oppress them. But they oppressed me. Thus
hard-pressed by many who were accomplished in weapons and were skilled warriors, I felt pain in that great battle.
A great fear took hold of me. In the battle, I bowed down to Rudra, god of the gods. Saying, 'May there be welfare
to all beings,' I used the great weapon famous by the name of roudra, capable of destroying all enemies. I then saw
a man with three heads, nine eyes, three faces and six arms, with hair blazing like the sun and the fire[This was the weapon personified.]. O
scorcher of enemies! There were giant serpents with flaming tongues on his head. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On beholding that terrible and eternal roudra weapon, I lost my fear and attached it to Gandiva. I bowed in
obeisance to the three-eyed and infinitely energetic Sharva[Shiva.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I discharged
it, to defeat the lords of the danavas. O lord of the earth! As soon as I discharged it, it assumed thousands of different forms everywhere-deer, lions, tigers, bears, buffaloes, serpents, cattle, elephants, marsh-deer, sharabhas,
bulls, boars, cats, hyenas, ghosts, bhurundas[Animal that cannot be identified.], vultures, garudas, sharks[Makaras.], pishachas, yakshas, haters of gods,
guhyakas, nairritas, large fish with mouths like elephants, owls and masses of fish and tortoises, all brandishing
many kinds of weapons and swords. There were yatudhanas[Evil spirit, kind of demon.], wielding clubs and maces. There were many other
beings in different forms. They filled up the universe when that weapon was discharged. Those many different
forms-with three heads, four tusks, four faces and four arms-devoured the flesh, fat and marrow of the danavas.
They continuously killed the ones who had gathered there. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In an instant, I
also killed the danavas with arrows that were destructive of enemies, as hard as the vajra and as radiant as lightning, blazing like the sun and the fire.

'"On seeing them destroyed through weapons shot from Gandiva, deprived of life and hurled down from the
sky, I once again bowed to the god who destroyed Tripura[Tripura was a city of the demons and was destroyed by Shiva.]. On seeing that they had been destroyed, with all
their celestial ornaments, shattered by the roudra weapon, the charioteer of the gods was extremely delighted. On
seeing that I had performed a task that was impossible even for the gods, Matali, Shakra's charioteer, worshipped
me. He joined his hands in salutation and said in a happy voice, 'The task that you have accomplished was impossible for the gods and the asuras. Even the lord of the gods could not have achieved this in battle. This great city
that roamed around in the sky could not have been destroyed by the gods and the asuras. O brave one! You have
vanquished it through the strength of your own valour, weapons and austerities.' When the city had been destroyed
and the danavas killed, all the lamenting women emerged from the city. They were smitten by grief, their hair was
dishevelled and they were miserable like ospreys. They threw themselves down on the ground, sorrowing over
their sons, fathers and husbands. In miserable tones, they loudly grieved over their dead lords. They beat their
breasts with their hands and the garlands and ornaments were thrown away. The city of the danavas was overcome
with sorrow, misery and distress. It had lost all its splendour and all its lords had been slain. It was no longer radiant. Like a city of the gandharvas, like a pond deserted by elephants and like a forest that is full of dry trees, that
city disappeared.

'"With a happy mind, Matali quickly took me from the field of battle to the abode of the king of the gods. I had
accomplished my task. I had destroyed Hiranyapura and killed the great asuras and the nivatakavachas. I returned
to Shakra. O immensely radiant one! Matali recounted my deeds in detail to the Indra of the gods, completely and
exactly as it had happened-the destruction of Hiranyapura, the use of maya, the way it was repulsed and the slaying of the immensely powerful nivatakavachas in battle. On hearing this, the illustrious Purandara, the one with the
thousand eyes, was delighted. In the midst of the Maruts, he spoke words like, 'Wonderful' and 'Well done'. Together with the other gods, the king of the gods repeatedly congratulated me and spoke these gentle words. 'In battle, you have accomplished a deed that was impossible for the gods and the asuras. O Partha! By slaying my enemies, you have paid a great preceptor's fee. O Dhananjaya! You will always remain as steady in battle. You will
know what has to be done and will not be confounded in using these weapons. The gods, the danavas, the rakshasas, the yakshas, the asuras and the gandharvas, together with masses of birds and serpents, will not be able to
withstand you in battle. O Kounteya! Through the strength of your arms, Kunti's son, Yudhishthira, with dharma in
his soul, will conquer the earth and protect it.'"'
