'Sanjaya said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! King Yudhishthira alighted from his chariot. With his eyes
full of tears, he embraced the two Krishnas. His fair face had the complexion of a lotus. Wiping it, he spoke to Vasudeva and Pandava Dhananjaya. 'O maharathas! It is through good fortune that I see you after you have accomplished this burden in the battle. It is through good fortune that the wicked Saindhava, worst of men, has been
killed. O Krishna! It is through good fortune that you have brought me this great delight. It is through good fortune
that large numbers of the enemy are immersed in an ocean of grief. There is nothing in the worlds that is impossible for you. O Madhusudana! You are the preceptor of all the worlds. You are the protector. O Govinda! It is
through your favours that we will vanquish the enemy, just as in earlier times, the chastiser of Paka defeated the
danavas through your favours. O Varshneya! O Madhava! Whether it is the conquest of the earth or whether it is
the conquest of the three worlds, it is certain that those who satisfy you will be successful in that. O lord of the lord
of the gods! Those who satisfy you do not obtain sin, nor are they defeated in battle. O Hrishikesha! It is through
your favours that Shakra became the lord of the gods, obtained prosperity and succeeded in conquering the three
worlds in the field of battle. O lord of the thirty gods! O Krishna! It is through your favours that the thirty gods obtained immortality and enjoyed the eternal worlds. O destroyer of enemies! It is because of valour originating from
your favours that Shakra killed thousands of daityas and became the lord of the gods. O Hrishikesha! O brave one!
It is through your favours that everything in this universe, mobile and immobile, is established in its own place and
is engaged in meditation and the offering of oblations. In the beginning, everything was immersed in an ocean of
water and there was darkness. O supreme among men! It is through your favours that the universe became manifest. O Achyuta! You are the creator of all the worlds and the supreme soul. Those who seek refuge in Hrishikesha
are never confounded. You are without beginning and without death. You are the undecaying god who drives the
worlds. O Hrishikesha! Those who are devoted to you can overcome every difficulty. You are supreme. You are
ancient. You are the Being. You are ancient. You are supreme[There is probably a typo in the Critical edition. It says purananam param, which leads to the duplication of ancient and supreme. It should probably read parananam param, in which case, the translation would be-you are
the supreme deliverer.]. Those who attain such a supreme one, obtain
supreme prosperity. You have been sung about in the four Vedas. The Vedas chant about you. O great-souled one!
By seeking refuge in you, I will obtain supreme prosperity. You are Dhananjaya's friend. You are engaged in ensuring Dhananjaya's welfare. You are Dhananjaya's protector. He who attains you, obtains happiness.' Having
been thus addressed, the great-souled Keshava and Pandava cheerfully replied to the king, the lord of the earth.

'The wicked King Jayadratha has been burnt in the fire of your anger. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The
army of the sons of Dhritarashtra is extremely great. But in the battle, it is decaying. It has been struck, slain and
destroyed. O destroyer of enemies! The Kouravas are being destroyed because of your anger. O brave one! The
evil-minded Duryodhana has enraged you. With his friends and relatives, he will give up his life in this battle, destroyed by your sight. Earlier, because of your anger, Bhishma, the grandfather of the Kurus and extremely difficult for even the gods to defeat, was struck and made to lie down on a bed of arrows. O destroyer of enemies! It
will be extremely difficult for them to obtain victory in this battle. O Pandava! Because of your wrath, they have
come under the clutches of death. O granter of honours! One who enrages you will soon have his kingdom, life,
dear ones, sons and all kinds of happiness destroyed. O Yudhishthira! You have always been devoted to the dharma
of kings. I think that the Kouravas, with their sons, animals and relatives, have been destroyed because of your
anger[The singular is being used. It is probably Krishna, and not Arjuna, who is saying this.].'
'"The mighty-armed Bhima and maharatha Satyaki, both of whom were mangled and wounded by arrows, saluted their senior and elder. Those great archers were stationed there, surrounded by the Panchalas. On seeing those
two joyful ones, stationed before him, with their hands joined in salutation, Kounteya[Yudhishthira.] congratulated Bhima and
Satyaki. 'O brave ones! It is through good fortune that I see that the two of you have been freed from that ocean of
soldiers. Drona and Hardikya were like invincible crocodiles in that abode of makaras. It is through good fortune
that you have defeated all the kings of the earth in the battle. It is through good fortune that I see you victorious in
this battle. It is through good fortune that Drona and the immensely strong Hardikya have been defeated in the battle. O unblemished ones! It is through good fortune that I see that you have passed through that ocean of soldiers.
O brave ones! You pride yourselves in battle and you do not run away from an encounter. You are as dear to me as
my life. It is good fortune that I am seeing both of you.' Having thus spoken to Yuyudhana and Vrikodara, tigers
among men, King Pandava embraced them and shed tears of joy. O lord of the earth! Everyone in that army was
delighted. Having witnessed victory, the Pandavas set their minds on fighting."'
