'Dhritarashtra asked, "O Sanjaya! My army, with Bhishma as the leader, and that of the Pandavas, with Bhima as
the leader, desired to fight. When the sun arose, which of these was cheerful when it approached the other? To
which side were the moon, the sun and the wind adverse? Against which army did predators utter inauspicious
sounds? Which were the young ones who had cheerful complexions on their faces? Tell me all this, exactly and in
detail."

'Sanjaya said, "O Indra among kings! When the two armies were equally arranged in vyuhas, they were equally
cheerful. They were equally beautiful, as resplendent as forests. They were full of elephants, chariots and horses.
Both the armies were large and terrible in form. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Each one was incapable of
withstanding the other. It was as if both had been created for conquering heaven. Both were protected by virtuous
men. Dhritarashtra's sons, the Kurus, faced the west. The Parthas were stationed facing the east, ready to fight. The
Kouravas were like the army of the Indra of the daityas, the Pandavas were like the army of the Indra of the gods.
The wind blew from behind the Pandavas. The predators howled from behind the sons of Dhritarashtra. The elephants of your son could not bear the sharp smell from the musth of those Indras among elephants. 57 Duryodhana
was on an elephant with the complexion of a lotus. It was armoured and had rent temples. It possessed a golden
girdle. He was stationed in the midst of the Kurus and the bards and the minstrels praised him. A white umbrella
with a golden chain, as brilliant as the moon, was held aloft his head. Shakuni, the king of Gandhara, followed
him, surrounded in every direction by mountainous people from the region of Gandhara. The aged Bhishma was in
front of all the soldiers. He had a white umbrella, a white bow, a conch shell, a white headdress, a white flag and
white horses, and looked like a white mountain. All the sons of Dhritarashtra were in his army and also Shala, who
came from the country named Bahlika. The kshatriyas from Ambashtha, those from Sindhu and Souvira and the
brave ones from the land of the five rivers 58 were also there.

'"The great-souled Drona was on a golden chariot with red horses. He was mighty-armed and his spirit never
waned. He was the preceptor of almost all the kings. He was like an Indra on earth, protecting from the rear. Vardhakshatri, Bhurishrava, Purumitra, Jaya, Shalva, Matsya and all the Kekayas, with their brothers, were in the midst
of all the soldiers. They possessed an army of elephants and wished to fight. Sharadvat's great-souled son 59 always fought in the front. He was the great archer Goutama, wonderful in fighting. With Shakas, Kiratas, 60 Yavanas 61 and Pahlavas, he stationed himself in the forefront of the army. That large army was protected by maharathas from Andhaka, Vrishni and Bhoja and also those from Sourashtra and the south-west, skilled in the use of
weapons. There was also Kritavarma, who advanced behind your army. There were ten thousand samshaptaka
rathas, 62 who had been created for death or for triumphing over Arjuna. O king! They were skilled in the use of
weapons. They advanced with the brave Trigartas, resolved to follow Arjuna at every step. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! There were ten thousand fierce elephants on your side. A hundred chariots were assigned to each
elephant, a hundred horses were assigned to each chariot, ten archers were assigned to each horse and ten shield-
bearers were assigned to each archer. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thus did Bhishma arrange your troops
in battle formation. From one day to another, Bhishma, the general and Shantanu's son, arranged it in human
vyuhas, or vyuhas of gods, gandharvas and asuras. With a large number of maharathas, it was like the ocean on the
night of the full moon. Arranged in a vyuha by Bhishma, the army of Dhritarashtra's son was stationed facing the
west, ready to fight. O Indra among kings! Your side was innumerable with standards. It was terrible. But though it
was not like yours, 63 it seemed to me that the one of the Pandavas was larger and invincible, with leaders like Keshava and Arjuna."'
