'"Bhrigu said, 'Brahma is truth. Austerities are truth. Subjects are created through truth. The world is sustained
through truth. It is through truth that one goes to heaven. Falsehood is the form of darkness. Darkness takes one
downwards. When one is grasped by darkness, one cannot see the light, because one is enveloped in darkness. It is
said that heaven is light and hell is darkness. Those who roam around in this universe can obtain both truth and
falsehood. In this world, different kinds of conduct can lead to truth and falsehood, dharma and adharma, light and
darkness, joy and misery. That which is truth is dharma. What is dharma is light. What is light is joy. That which is
false is adharma. What is adharma is darkness. What is darkness is misery. It is said-those who are discerning see
that this created world is full of physical and mental misery and that joy also ends in misery. They are not confused. The discerning person seeks to free himself from misery. For living beings, joy is temporary, in this world
and in the next[Happiness in heaven lasts only till one's merits are not exhausted.]. When Rahu devours the moon, the moonlight is no longer radiant. In that way, darkness overcomes beings and the joy of beings is destroyed. It is indeed said that there are two types of joy, physical and mental. In this world and in the next, every kind of conduct is prescribed for the sake of happiness. There is nothing
superior to the fruits of the three objectives. These are the specific qualities of dharma, artha and kama. All acts are
undertaken with the specific purpose of obtaining happiness.'

'"Bharadvaja said, 'You have said that happiness is the supreme objective behind these three. But I don't accept
this. The great rishis do not base themselves on these qualities. Nor do they desire these. It has been heard that the
illustrious lord Brahma, the creator of the three worlds, is established as a brahmachari. He does not want the happiness of kama for himself. The illustrious lord, the consort of Uma, overcame kama and pacified Ananga[Kama is the god of love. Shiva burnt him down to ashes. Since he no
longer possessed a body, Kama came to be known as Ananga.].
Therefore, great-souled ones do not want this. This is evidently not a specific quality that the illustrious ones want.
O illustrious one! I cannot accept what you have said, that happiness is the supreme objective behind those three.
In this world, it is said that there are two kinds of fruits-happiness from good deeds and unhappiness from bad
deeds. This is what is commonly said.'

'"Bhrigu said, 'Indeed, darkness results from falsehood. Those who are devoured by darkness follow adharma,
not dharma. Those who are enveloped by anger, avarice, confusion and falsehood do not obtain happiness in this
world, or in the next. It is said that they suffer from many kinds of disease and hardships. They are oppressed by
death, imprisonment and disease. They are tormented by hunger, thirst and other kinds of exhaustion. They suffer
from turbulent winds, burning heat, extreme cold and fear and are tormented by many kinds of physical grief. They
are also overcome by many kinds of mental grief-the destruction of relatives and wealth and separation from
these. There are also old age and death. A person who is not touched by physical and mental grief experiences happiness. None of these blemishes is experienced in heaven. Instead, there are extremely pleasant breezes and extremely fragrant scents in heaven. There is no hunger, thirst or exhaustion. There is no old age and no sin. There is
only happiness in heaven. In this world, there are both happiness and unhappiness. It is said that there is only unhappiness in hell. Therefore, that[Happiness.] is the supreme objective. The earth is the womb of all beings and women represent the earth. Man is like Prajapati. Know that semen is full of energy. This is the way Brahma created the worlds
in ancient times and determined their conduct. Subjects wander around, engaged in their own respective tasks."'
