'Sanjaya said, "You have asked me about the deeds performed by Partha in that battle. O great king! Listen to what
Partha accomplished in that battle. On seeing that a dust had arisen and on hearing the roar of the elephant, when
Bhagadatta caused subjugation, Kounteya spoke to Krishna. 'O Madhusudana! It is certain that this tumult has
been caused by the elephant of the king of Pragjyotisha, when he has swiftly attacked. He is not inferior to Indra in
battle. He is skilled in steering an elephant. In my view, on this earth, he is the first or the second[In fighting with elephants. Effectively meaning that there is no one superior to Bhagadatta.]. He possesses
the best of elephants and there is no elephant which can withstand it in battle. It can tolerate all the sounds of battle. It is accomplished in deeds and has conquered exhaustion. O unblemished one! It can tolerate the downpour of
all weapons and can even bear the touch of fire. It is evident that it will destroy the Pandava army today. With the
exception of the two of us, there is no one who is capable of countering it. Therefore, swiftly go to the spot where
the lord of Pragjyotisha is. He is Shakra's friend[Bhagadatta was Indra's friend.]. He is strong because of the elephant. He should be marvelled
at, despite his age. I will dispatch him today, as a beloved guest, to the destroyer of Bala.' As soon as Savyasachi
spoke these words, Krishna left and went to the spot where Bhagadatta was mauling the Pandava army. As he was
going there, fourteen thousand maharatha samshaptakas summoned him from the back. O lord of men! Ten thousand of those were Trigartas and another four thousand were followers of Vasudeva[These were the followers of Krishna who participated on the Kourava side in the war.]. O venerable one! On seeing
that Bhagadatta was shattering the army and on also being challenged, he[Arjuna.] was caught in two minds and thought,
'What is the best course of action for me? Should I return here, or should I go to Yudhishthira?' O extender of the
Kuru lineage! Thus did Arjuna reflect in his mind and decided that he should kill the samshaptakas. The one with
the foremost of monkeys on his banner suddenly returned. Vasava's son wished to single-handedly kill thousands
of rathas in battle. This is what Duryodhana and Karna had also plotted, when the two of them had thought about
means of killing Arjuna. That is the reason they had arranged for this divided feeling in Pandava's mind. But he
foiled them by deciding to take on those foremost of rathas on his chariot.

'"O king! The maharatha samshaptakas shot hundreds and thousands of arrows with drooping tufts towards Arjuna. O king! Enveloped by those arrows, Partha, Kunti's son, Krishna Janardana, the horses and the chariot could
not be seen. Janardana was deprived on his senses and began to sweat. At this, Partha used the vajra weapon and
killed most of them. Hundreds of arms, still holding bowstrings and bows, were severed. Standards, horses, charioteers and rathas fell down on the ground. Slain by Partha's arrows and bereft of their riders, elephants fell down on
the ground. They were like mountain summits with trees and looked like well-crafted rain clouds. Their seats and
harnesses were shredded. Their temples were shattered and they were destroyed. Wounded by Partha's arrows,
horses fell down, together with their riders. With their arms severed, but still holding on to swords, shields, scimitars like nails, clubs and battleaxes, men were brought down by Kiriti's broad-headed arrows. O venerable one!
There were youthful and dazzling heads, as beautiful as the morning sun, the lotus, or the moon. These were severed by Arjuna's arrows. The enemy soldiers who were slaughtered by the enraged Phalguna, with arrows that fed
on lives, seemed to blaze in many different forms. The soldiers were agitated, like lotuses by an elephant. Masses
of beings applauded and worshipped Dhananjaya. On witnessing Partha's deeds there, like those of Vasava himself, Madhava was overcome by great wonder and applauded him with his hands. Having killed most of the
samshaptakas who were stationed there, Partha urged Krishna to take him to Bhagadatta."'
