Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! You have earlier spoken about that great hero, famous in the worlds. But you have
not recounted his deeds in the battle. Now, in detail, recount to me that hero's valour, learning, power, bravery, expanse and pride."

'Sanjaya replied, "Drona, Bhishma, Kripa, Drona's son, Karna, Arjuna and Janardana completed their learning
of archery and you think that they are the foremost among warriors. But he thinks himself to be an equal of Karna
and Bhishma and does not wish to be regarded as inferior to Vasudeva and Arjuna. Such was Pandya, foremost
among kings and supreme among all wielders of weapons. He was like Yama and overcame and killed Karna's soldiers. Stationed in the midst of that army of chariots, horses, foot soldiers and elephants, Pandya crushed them. He
whirled them around like a potter's wheel. Pandya's arrows dispelled them, like the wind amidst a mass of clouds.
The horses, charioteers, standards, rathas and warriors of the enemy were struck. Elephants were killed. Flags,
standards and weapons were uprooted. The destroyer of enemies killed the elephants, together with those who
guarded their feet. He killed horse riders, armed with spears, javelins and quivers. The Pulindas, Khashas,
Bahlikas, Nishadas, Andhrakas, Tanganas, those from the south and the Bhojas were fierce and did not retreat from
a battle. However, Pandya used his arrows to deprive them of their weapons and armour and robbed them of their
lives. In that battle, Pandya used his arrows to slaughter the four divisions of the army[Chariots, horses, elephants and infantry.]. He showed no fear. On
seeing this, Drona's son fearlessly advanced towards him.

' "As he seemed to be dancing around, he[Ashvatthama.], best among strikers, fearlessly challenged him and spoke to him
in sweet words. 'O king! O one with eyes like the petals of a lotus! You are foremost among those who are borne
into a battle. You are known as someone who can withstand the vajra and you are foremost in strength and manliness. You have weapons in your hands and you are using your arms to stretch your giant bow. As you extend it
with your arms, you seem to be like a large cloud. With great force, you are showering down torrents of arrows on
the enemy. In this battle, with my exception, I do not see anyone who is your match in bravery. You have singlehandedly crushed many chariots, elephants, foot soldiers and horses, like an extremely fierce and powerful lion
kills large numbers of deer. The sky and the earth resound with the great noise of your chariot. O king! At the end
of the monsoon, you are filling the earth and its crops[The sense is of untimely showers destroying crops.]. You are taking out sharp arrows from your quiver and
they are like venomous serpents. You should fight with me alone, like Andhaka fighting with Tryambaka[Tryambaka, the three-eyed one, is one of Shiva's names and Shiva killed a demon
named Andhaka.].'
Having been thus addressed, he[Pandya. Malayadhvaja was clearly his name and he was the king of Pandya. He is
also described a little later as the lord of Malaya or the lord of the mountains, since
Malaya is a mountain.] agreed.

' "Asking him to strike, Drona's son struck him and Malayadhvaja struck him back with a barbed arrow.
Drona's son, supreme among preceptors, smiled and struck Pandya with fierce arrows that were like the flames of
fire and could penetrate the inner organs. Ashvatthama then released nine other sharp and iron arrows that were
tufted with the feathers of herons and covered the ten directions. Pandya severed five of these with five sharp arrows. However, four swiftly struck his horses and robbed them of their lives[To make it clearer, Ashvatthama shot nine arrows. Five were cut down by Pandya,
but the remaining four killed his horses.]. Pandya, who was as radiant as the
sun, severed the bowstring of Drona's son with sharp arrows. However, Drona's son, the destroyer of enemies,
fixed another string to his bow and shot thousands of arrows at Pandya. He enveloped the sky and all the directions
with his torrents of arrows. Pandya, the great-souled bull among men, knew that the arrows shot by Drona's son
were inexhaustible. However, he made efforts to cut down the arrows of Drona's son and then used sharp arrows to
rob the ones who were protecting his chariot wheels of their lives. On seeing his dexterity, Drona's son stretched
his bow into a circle and showered down arrows, like rain pouring from a cloud. O venerable one! That encounter
lasted for an eighth part of a day[Three hours.]. Nevertheless, Drona's son shot as many weapons as could be carried on eight
carts, drawn by eight bullocks. He was like an angry Destroyer, or like the Destroyer of the Destroyer. Almost
every one who saw him there lost his senses. The preceptor's son showered down arrows like rain on the soldiers,
like rain pouring on the earth, with its mountains and trees, at the end of summer. That shower of arrows released
by Drona's son, who was like a cloud, was extremely difficult to withstand. Pandya swiftly countered it with a
vayavya weapon[Divine weapon named after Vayu, the wind god.] and roared like a gale. His standard was smeared with sandalwood paste and aloe and he
looked like Mount Malaya. As he was roaring, Drona's son severed his standard and killed his four horses. He then
killed his charioteer with another arrow. With an arrow that was in the shape of a half-moon, he severed the bow
that thundered like a giant cloud and shattered the chariot into small fragments. Having countered his weapons
with his own weapons and having cut down all his weapons, Drona's son found the opportunity to kill him in the
battle. There was a supreme tusker that had been prepared well and its rider had been killed. As it was swiftly advancing towards him, as if against a rival, the powerful one[Pandya.] climbed onto it, roaring like a lion. Stationed on it,
the lord of Malaya looked like a mountain with two peaks[He being one of the peaks and the elephant, or its head, being the other.]. He swiftly urged the elephant forward. He picked
up a spear that was as radiant as the rays of the sun and hurled that weapon with supreme force, care and anger.
The lord of the mountains hurled this towards the preceptor's son and roared. The head of Drona's son was decorated with a diadem. It was decorated with supreme gems, jewels and diamonds and adorned with excellent cloth,
garlands and pearls. It was as dazzling as the sun, the moon, the planets and the fire. Being severely struck[By the spear.], it
was shattered into fragments and fell down, like a large forest when it is struck by the great Indra's vajra, or when
the summit of a mountain falls down on the ground. At this, he[Ashvatthama.] blazed with great rage, like a king of the serpents that has been struck by the foot. He picked up fourteen arrows that were capable of killing the enemy and
each of these was like Yama's staff. With five, he served the feet and trunk of the elephant and with three, the
king's arms and head. With six, he killed the six splendid maharathas who were following the king of Pandya. The
king's arms were long and smeared with the best of sandalwood paste. They were adorned with gold, pearls, gems
and diamonds. Those arms of the king fell down on the ground and writhed around like serpents that had been
killed by Tarkshya[Tarkshya is Garuda's name.]. His head possessed a face with the complexion of the full moon. His eyes were coppery red
with rage and his nose was excellent. With its earrings, the head fell down on the ground and was as resplendent as
the moon between two Vishakhas[Vishakha is the sixteenth of the twenty-seven nakshatras, but is being used here as
a general term for a nakshatra. That is, he was as resplendent as the moon between
two nakshatras.]. The preceptor's son was accomplished in learning and when he completed
this task, your son, the king, was delighted and surrounded by his well-wishers, honoured him, like the lord of the
immortals honouring Vishnu after he had vanquished Bali." '202