Janamejaya said, 'O, great Brahmana! Please tell me about Kripa. How was he born from a clump of reeds? How
did he get his weapons[There is a break of continuity in the critical edition and Kripa appears out of the blue. In other editions, we
are told that Dhritarashtra wanted to find a teacher for the princes, since they were getting out of control. Kripa,
descended from Goutama, was chosen to teach the art of fighting.]?'
Vaishampayana said, "Maharshi Goutama had a son named Sharadvat. O king! This son was so named because
he was born armed with arrows[The word shara means arrow and Sharadvat is one with arrows.]. O destroyer of enemies! His intelligence was not attracted to the study of the
Vedas. Instead, his intelligence was more attracted to the study of Dhanur Veda[The science or knowledge of weapons.]. Just as those who know the
brahman acquire all their knowledge of the Vedas through austerities, he acquired all his weapons through austerities. Goutama's son worried the king of the gods because of his austerities and because of his expertise in Dhanur
Veda. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! The lord of the gods summoned a daughter of the gods named Janapadi
and told her, "Create impediments in his austerities." She went to Sharadvat's beautiful hermitage. The young
woman began to tempt Goutama's son, who had a bow and arrows in his hand. The apsara was only clad in a single piece of cloth. On seeing her wandering around in the forest alone, with a form that was unparalleled in the
worlds, Goutama's son's eyes became wide open. The bow and arrows slipped down from his hands onto the
ground. On seeing her, his body went numb. But he still possessed his knowledge and the power of his austerities.
The immensely wise one used his patience to resist temptation. O king! However, a sudden fever overcame him
and though he did not notice it, his semen issued forth. The sage left the hermitage and the apsara. His semen fell
on a clump of reeds and having fallen there, divided itself into two. From this, a pair of twins was born to Goutama's son Sharadvat.

'King Shantanu had gone on a hunt and one of his soldiers happened to notice the twins. He saw a bow and arrows around them and also a black deerskin. He therefore deduced that they were the sons of a Brahmana who was
learned in DhanurVeda. He showed the twins and the arrows to the king. Out of compassion, the king adopted the
twins. He took them home, saying that they were like his children. He performed the usual rites and began to rear
them. Goutama's son, who had left, became an expert in Dhanur Veda. Because the children had been reared out of
compassion, the lord of the earth decided to name them accordingly[The word kripa means compassion. One of the twins was a boy and he was named Kripa. The other one was
a girl and she was named Kripi.]. Through the power of his austerities,
Goutama's son got to know where they were, though no one knew the secret. He went there and told everything,
including his lineage. He taught him[Kripa.] the four parts of Dhanur Veda[There are four upavedas or minor vedas, of which, dhanurveda is one. Each upaveda is attached to one of
the main vedas. The other three upavedas are ayurveda (medicine), gandharvaveda (music) and sthapatyaveda
(architecture).] and the usage of many different kinds
of weapons, including all the secrets associated with them. He soon became a great teacher. All the maharathas
learnt Dhanur Veda from him. This included Dhritarashtra's sons, the immensely powerful Pandavas, the Vrishnis
and other kings who assembled from many countries.'
