Vaishampayana said, 'Shakuni's brave son, the maharatha among the Gandharas, attacked Gudakesha and surrounded him with a large army of soldiers that was full of elephants, horses and chariots and was decorated
with flags and standards. Those warriors were unable to tolerate the death of King Shakuni and with their bows
and arrows, attacked Partha. The unvanquished Bibhatsu, with dharma in his soul, spoke to them, but they were
not prepared to accept Yudhishthira's beneficial words. Partha first tried to restrain them with words of assurance,
but they were intolerant. They surrounded the horse and Pandava became enraged. Pandava severed their blazing
heads. Arjuna incessantly shot razor-sharp arrows from Gandiva. Slaughtered by Partha, they were terrified and
released the horse. O great king! Afflicted severely by that shower of arrows, they retreated. The heads of  the
Gandharas were radiant. The energetic bull among the Pandavas aimed towards these and brought down those
heads. When the Gandharas were being slain in every direction, the king who was Shakuni's son countered Panda-
va. Established in the dharma of kshatriyas, the king fought. Partha said, "Because of the king's instructions, I do
not wish to kill these kings. O brave one! Desist from fighting. You should not be defeated by me today." However,
he was confounded by ignorance and did not accept the words that had been spoken. With arrows, he enveloped
the one who was like Shakra in his deeds. With an arrow that was in the shape of a half-moon, Partha fearlessly
severed his helmet and conveyed it like Jayadratha's head[The incident of Arjuna conveying Jayadratha's head some distance away, using an arrow, has been described in
Section 69 (Volume 6). Arjuna did not kill Shakuni's son. He severed the helmet.]. On seeing this, all the Gandharas were astounded.
They knew that he did not kill their king deliberately. The prince of Gandhara decided that it was time to run away.
All of them were frightened and fled, like small animals. Partha swiftly chased them. He severed their heads with
broad-headed arrows with drooping tufts. Arrows were released from Gandiva and some of the arrows shot by
Partha were thick. They were struck by these arrows and sometimes did not understand that their arms had been
sliced off. That army of men, elephants and horses was terrified and routed. Slain and annihilated, it repeatedly circled around. Among those brave ones, there was no one who could stand in front of the performer of fierce deeds.
The enemy was brought down and could not withstand those large arrows. At this, the terrified mother of the king
of Gandhara came out. The aged minister led the way and they bore a supreme gift before them. Her son was indomitable in battle, but she anxiously restrained him. She sought the favours of Jishnu, unblemished in his deeds.
Kounteya  honoured  her  and  showed  her  his  favours.  He  comforted  Shakuni's  son  and  spoke  these  words.  "O
mighty-armed one! Your intelligence has not made you do what is agreeable to me. O slayer of enemies! O unblemished one! I am your brother, but you fought against me[Shakuni was Duryodhana's maternal uncle. By extension, he was Arjuna's uncle too and Shakuni's son was Arjuna's brother, understood as cousin.]. O king! Remembering the mother, Gandhari, and
what Dhritarashtra has done, I have spared your life, though I have slain your followers. Let this not occur again.
Let the enmity be pacified. May you not show this kind of intelligence again. In the next month of Chaitra, you
should come to the king's horse sacrifice."'
