'Vasudeva said, "O Indra among kings! But Shalva, the lord of Soubha, came to the city with many men, elephants
and forces. The army controlled by King Shalva had four kinds of forces[Chariots, elephants, cavalry and infantry.]. The army settled itself on plain
ground, where there were plenty of sources of water. But the army avoided cremation grounds, temples of the
gods, anthills and chaityas[Anthills have snakes in them. The word chaitya has several meanings-sacrificial shed, temple, altar, sanctuary and a tree that grows along the road.]. O king! The army formations were divided such that all the roads were covered and
Shalva's troops encompassed all the nine slopes[The number nine can't be explained, unless there were nine mountains around Dvaraka.]. There was every kind of weapon and the soldiers were skilled
in use of every kind of weapon. There were masses of chariots, elephants and horses, with infantry and flags. The
army was well paid and well fed and bore all the marks of courage. There were colourful pennants and colourful
chariots and bows. O Kouravya! O bull among men! He settled in Dvaraka, and like the king of the birds, attacked
with great strength.

'"On seeing King Shalva's strength, all the young descendants[The word used is nandana.] of the Vrishni lineage emerged, to do battle
with him. O Kourava! They were unable to bear the invasion of King Shalva-Charudeshna, Samba and maharatha Pradyumna. They emerged in their chariots, all adorned in colourful attire and flags. They fought with
King Shalva's warriors, who were like bulls. Samba took up his bow and in a happy frame of mind, fought with
Kshemavriddhi, Shalva's adviser and the general of his army. O best of the Bharata lineage! Just as the one with
one thousand eyes[Indra has one thousand eyes.] unleashes rain, Jambavati's son[Samba was Jambavati's son. Jambavati was one of Krishna's wives.] unleashed a great volley of arrows. O great king! Stationary like the Himalayas, the general Kshemavriddhi withstood that terrible shower of arrows. O Indra among kings!
Then, using his powers of maya, Kshemavriddhi unleashed a greater net of arrows on Samba. But Samba tore apart
that net of maya with his own maya and showered one thousand arrows on his[Kshemavriddhi's.] chariot. Samba pierced the general Kshemavriddhi and oppressed by Samba's arrows, he fled on his swift horses. When Shalva's cruel general fled,
a powerful daitya named Vegavan attacked my son. O Indra among kings! O king! But Samba is the extender of
the Vrishni lineage. Though Vegavan attacked him with force, the brave one withstood it. O Kounteya! The brave
Samba, whose valour is based on truth, swiftly hurled a fast club at Vegavan. O king! Struck by it, Vegavan fell
down on the ground, like a giant tree, rotten at the roots, collapses when struck by the wind. When that brave and
giant asura was killed by the club, my son entered the enemy's large army and began to fight. O great king! The
danava Vivindhya was a maharatha and a great archer. O king! He then began to fight with Charudeshna and a terrible duel ensued between Charudeshna and Vivindhya, like that between Vritra and Vasava[Indra.] in ancient times. O
great king! Enraged with each other, they shot arrows at each other and roared like mighty lions. Rukmini's son[Charudeshna.]
then fixed a great weapon to his bow and chanted mantras over it. Its radiance was like that of the sun and it was
capable of destroying the enemy. O king! In great rage, my son, the maharatha, challenged Vivindhya and let loose
his weapon. The asura fell down dead.

'"On seeing Vivindhya dead and his army agitated, Shalva returned again on Soubha, which could go anywhere
at will. Then the entire army of the residents of Dvaraka was alarmed, when they saw the mighty-armed Shalva arrive on earth in Soubha[Soubha flew in the sky.]. O Kounteya! O great king! Then Pradyumna came out and reassembled the army. He
told the inhabitants of Anarta, 'All of you stay where you are and all of you watch me fight. In this battle, I will repel with force Soubha and its king. O Yadavas! Today I will destroy the soldiers of the lord of Soubha, using my
hands to let loose iron weapons, that are like serpents, from my bow. Be reassured and do not be scared. Soubha's
king will be destroyed. Attacked by me, the evil-souled one will be destroyed, together with Soubha.' O descendant of the Pandu lineage[The word used is nandana.]! When Pradyumna thus spoke with a happy heart, the brave warriors stood where they
were and happily, began to fight again."'
