Vaishampayana said, 'The inhabitants of Khandava were frightened at the fall of the mountain-danavas, rakshasas, serpents, hyenas, bears, elephants in rut, tigers, lions with manes, deer, buffaloes, hundreds of birds and
other forest-dwellers. In great alarm, they and many other beings slithered away. They saw the raging fire and the
two Krishnas, their weapons ready and the terrible roar scared them. Janardana let fly his chakra, radiant with its
own energy, and small creatures, danavas and nishacharas[Literally, those who move about (chara) in the night (nisha), but the term is also specifically used for goblins, jackals, owls and snakes.] were instantly cut down in hundreds and hurled into
the fire. Mangled by Krishna's chakra and covered with fat and blood, the rakshasas then seemed to be like twilight
clouds. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Varshneya was like destiny, killing pishachas, birds, serpents and animals in their thousands. Released from the hand of Krishna, the slayer of enemies, the chakra repeatedly killed
many beings and returned to his hand. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As he went about killing all the beings, the form of he, who is the soul of all beings, became dreadful.

'All the assembled gods and danavas could not vanquish Krishna and Pandava in battle. Nor could the gods save
the forest with their strength or quench the fire, so they retreated. On seeing how the masses of gods had been
turned away, Shatakratu was extremely pleased and praised Krishna and Pandava. When the gods were repulsed, a
disembodied voice spoke to Shatakratu in a loud and deep tone. "Your friend Takshaka, supreme among serpents,
is not here. At the time of Khandava's burning, he had gone to Kurukshetra. O Shakra! Listen to my words. You
cannot defeat Vasudeva and Arjuna when they are steadfast in battle. They are the gods Nara and Narayana, famous in heaven. You yourself know their bravery and their valour. These two supreme and ancient sages are invincible in battle and cannot be conquered in any of the worlds. They deserve the worship of all the gods, asuras, yak-
shas, rakshas, gandharvas, humans, kinnaras[Kinnaras are mythical and semi-divine species, with human bodies and heads of horses. They are the companions of Kubera.] and serpents. O, Vasava[Indra.]! Therefore, depart from here with the
gods. The destruction of Khandava is destined." Having heard these words and knowing them to be true, the lord
of the immortals gave up his anger and jealousy and returned to heaven. O king! On seeing the great-souled
Shatakratu leave, all the other dwellers of heaven also departed. When the two warriors, Vasudeva and Arjuna, saw
the king of the gods leave with the other gods, they roared like lions.

'O king! Krishna and Pandava were delighted that the king of the gods had left. Fearlessly, they continued with
burning the forest. Having vanquished the gods the way the wind scatters the clouds, Arjuna used showers of arrows to kill the beings who lived in Khandava. Not a single being could escape from there, they were cut down by
Savyasachi's arrows. Even the greatest of beings could not look upon the invincible Arjuna in battle, not to speak
of engaging him in a fight. Like the god of death himself, he pierced one with a hundred arrows and a hundred
with one, and dead, they descended into the flames. They found no refuge along the banks, or in the uneven plains,
or in the abodes of the ancestors and the gods. The heat increased and thousands of herds of beings cried out loudly in pain. Elephants, deer and birds cried out and the sound scared those who lived in the Ganga and the ocean.
No one dared gaze at the mighty-armed Arjuna and the immensely strong Krishna, let alone fighting with them.
With his chakra, Hari slew rakshasas, danavas and nagas and those who ventured along solitary paths. The heads
and trunks sliced with the force of the chakra, the giant bodies fell into the mouth of the blazing fire. Aided by the
flesh, torrents of blood and fat, the flames rose up into the sky, without a trace of smoke. Agni's eyes blazed, his
tongue blazed and his wide-open mouth also blazed. The hair stood up, drinking up the fat of life, the eyes were
tawny. The fire fed on the nectar that Krishna and Arjuna had provided and was extremely happy, satiated and
contented.

'Then Madhusudana saw an asura named Maya suddenly attempting to escape from Takshaka's abode. The
fire's charioteer was the wind and assuming the form of a hermit with matted hair and roaring like clouds, he pursued him with the intention of consuming him. Vasudeva stood with his chakra raised, ready to kill. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! On seeing the raised chakra and the fire ready to consume him, Maya cried out, "O Arjuna!
Save me." Hearing these scared words, Arjuna replied, "Do not be frightened." O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Partha's words seemed to instil new life into Maya. Maya was Namuchi's[A demon killed by Indra.] brother. When Partha told Maya
he need not fear, Dasharha no longer desired to kill him and the fire did not burn him either. In that flaming forest,
Agni did not burn six beings-Ashvasena, Maya and the four Sharngakas[The chataka birds, but also peacocks.].'