Vaishampayana said, 'Having heard the words of Jamadagni's son, the illustrious rishi Kanva addressed these
words to Duryodhana, in the midst of the assembly of the Kurus. "Brahma, the grandfather of the world, is eternal
and without decay. The illustrious rishis Nara and Narayana are like that. Among all the Adityas, Vishnu alone is
eternal, without birth, without end and the eternal lord and god. The others-the moon, the sun, the earth, the water, the wind, the fire, the sky, the planet and the stars-are subject to death. When there is the final dissolution of
the universe, all of them give up the three worlds and are created again and again. There are others who die in an
instant-men, animals, birds and those which are born in inferior species[Such as insects.], inhabiting the world of the living.
Having enjoyed their great prosperity, kings are destroyed by age. They confront death and enjoy their good deeds
and bad deeds. Therefore, you should have peace with Dharma's son. Let the Pandavas and the Kurus rule the
earth. O Suyodhana! You should not think that you are strong. O bull among men! It is the strong who decide that
others are strong. O Kourava! Among those who are strong, it is not strength alone that makes them strong. All the
Pandavas are strong because of the valour of the gods. In this context, an ancient story is told about Matali, when
he searched for a suitor to whom he could give his daughter away. The lord of the three worlds[Indra.] has a charioteer
named Matali. A single daughter was born in his lineage. She was famous in the worlds because of her beauty. She
was as beautiful as a goddess and was famous by the name of Gunakeshi. She surpassed all other women in her
beauty and form. O king! Knowing that the time had arrived, together with his wife, Matali decided to give her
away and worried, thought about the matter. 'In families of men who are weighty, virtuous, prosperous, famous,
gentle and spirited, the growing up of a daughter is deplorable. The mother's family, the father's family and the
one into which the daughter is given-these three families are afflicted. I have used the eye of my mind to search
in the two worlds of gods and men. But there is no one who satisfies me as a suitor-among gods, daityas, gandharvas, men and the many rishis. No one is suitable as a groom[These are Matali's thoughts.].' In the night, Matali discussed this with his wife
Sudharma and decided to travel to the world of the serpents[Nagas.]. 'As a groom, I do not see anyone in the worlds of
gods and men who is equal to Gunakeshi in beauty. But there is certain to be one among the serpents[These are Matali's words.].' Having
discussed in this way with Sudharma, he circumambulated her and having inhaled the fragrance of his daughter's
head, entered the earth."'
