Sanjaya said, "The soldiers slaughtered each other and were agitated. The warriors were driven away and the
tuskers shrieked. In the great battle, the foot soldiers lamented loudly. O great king! The horses ran away in many
directions. For all living beings, there was terrible destruction and carnage. Many weapons descended and chariots
and elephants were mangled. Those who found joy in battle were delighted. The fear of cowards increased. Wishing to kill each other, the warriors immersed themselves in this. They gave up their lives in that extremely terrible
gambling match. The fierce battle extended Yama's kingdom. The Pandavas slaughtered your soldiers with sharp
arrows. In that way, your warriors killed the Pandava soldiers. The battle continued and terrified cowards. It was
the morning, after the sun had arisen. Unwavering in their aim, the great-souled Pandavas protected the king[Yudhishthira.] and
killed the enemy. They were powerful and proud strikers and did not miss their objective. They fought against your
soldiers, preferring death to retreat. O Kouravya! Your forces weakened, like deer when there is a fire.

' "The army was weakened, like a cow submerged in mud. On seeing this, Shalya wished to rescue it and advanced towards the Pandu army. The king of Madra was angry and picked up a supreme bow. In the battle, he
rushed against the Pandava assassins. O great king! The Pandavas desired victory in the encounter. They attacked
the king of Madra and pierced him with sharp arrows. While Dharmaraja looked on, the immensely strong king of
Madra afflicted those soldiers with hundreds of sharp arrows. O king! At that time, many different kinds of portents manifested themselves. The earth, with its mountains, moved and made a noise. From the solar disc in the firmament, meteors descended on the earth in every direction. They were fierce at the tip, like spears with handles. O
lord of the earth! O king! Many deer, buffaloes and birds kept your soldiers to the right[That is, they were to the left of the army, an inauspicious omen, because
the left is inauspicious.]. O lord of men! As large
numbers descended on each other and attacked with all their divisions, there was a fierce encounter. The Kouravas
attacked the Pandava divisions.

' "Spirited in his soul, Shalya attacked Yudhishthira, Kunti's son, showering down arrows, like the one with one
thousand eyes[Indra.] pouring down rain. The immensely strong one used gold-tufted arrows that were sharpened on
stone to pierce Bhimasena, all of Droupadi's sons, the two Pandavas who were Madri's sons, Dhrishtadyumna,
Shini's descendant and Shikhandi, striking each of them with ten arrows. He rained down arrows, like Maghavan
showering rain at the end of summer. O king! Because of Shalya's arrows, thousands of Prabhadrakas and Somakas were seen to fall down, or falling down. They were like flights of bees or locusts, driven by the wind.
Shalya's arrows descended, like lightning from clouds. Elephants, horses, foot soldiers and rathas were distressed.
Because of Shalya's arrows, they fell down, or wandered around, shrieking. They were afflicted by the lord of
Madra's anger and manliness. In the battle, he enveloped the enemy, like Yama bestirred by destiny. The immensely strong lord of Madra roared, like lightning in the clouds. The Pandava soldiers were slaughtered by Shalya, with
his dexterity and his sharp arrows, and ran towards Kounteya, Ajatashatru Yudhishthira. In the battle, they were
oppressed by that great shower of arrows and sought refuge with Yudhishthira. On seeing that he[Shalya.] was angrily
descending with foot soldiers and horses, King Yudhishthira countered him with sharp arrows, like a crazy elephant checked with a goad. Shalya released a terrible arrow that was like a venomous serpent. It pierced the great-
souled one with force and fell down on the ground. At this, Vrikodara wrathfully pierced him with seven arrows,
Sahadeva with five and Nakula with ten arrows. Droupadi's sons showered down arrows on Artayani, the immensely fortunate slayer of enemies, like clouds pouring down on a mountain. On seeing that Shalya was assailed
from every side by the Parthas, Kritavarma and Kripa attacked angrily. Uluka attacked like a bird[The text says patatri, bird. This may be a typo.] and so did
Shakuni Soubala. Maharatha Ashvatthama smiled gently. All your sons protected Shalya in the battle.

' "Kritavarma used three arrows with iron heads to pierce Bhimasena. Assuming an angry form, he repulsed him
with a great shower of arrows. Kripa angrily afflicted Dhrishtadyumna with a shower of arrows. Shakuni attacked
Droupadi's son and Drona's son attacked the twins. Duryodhana, best of warriors, was fierce in his energy and
strong. In the battle, he advanced against Keshava and Arjuna and attacked them with arrows. There were hundreds of duels between those on your side and the enemy at various spots. O lord of the earth! It was fierce in form
and wonderful. In the battle, Bhoja slew Bhima's brown horses. When the horses were slain, Pandu's descendant
descended from his chariot and fought with a club in his hand, like Yama with an upraised staff. In his sight, the
king of Madra slew Sahadeva's horses. At this, Sahadeva killed Shalya's son with his sword. The preceptor,
Goutama, again fought with Dhrishtadyumna. Both of them were fearless and made efforts against each other. The
preceptor's son[Ashvatthama.] wasn't very angry. He smiled and pierced each of Droupadi's brave sons with ten arrows. O
king! Shalya angrily slaughtered the Somakas and the Pandavas. He again afflicted Yudhishthira with sharp
arrows.

' "The valiant Bhima was angry in the battle and bit his lower lips in rage. To destroy him[Shalya.], he hurled a club. It
was like Yama's staff and was raised, like the night of destruction. It was capable of destroying the lives of elephants, horses and men. It was bound in golden cloth and blazed like a meteor. It was like the vajra to the touch
and was completely made out of iron. It was as fierce as a she-serpent and was slung in a noose. It was smeared
with sandalwood paste and unguents, like a desired woman. It was smeared with fat and marrow and it was like
Yama's tongue. There were bells attached to it and it was like Vasava's vajra. It was smeared with the fat of elephants and it was like a snake that had cast off its skin. It frightened the enemy soldiers and delighted the soldiers
on one's own side. It was famous in the world of men and was capable of shattering the summit of a mountain. It
was one with which powerful Kounteya had challenged the lord of Alaka, Maheshvara's friend, in his abode in
Kailasa[The lord of the yakshas is Kubera and his capital is Alaka, in Kailasa.
Kubera is Maheshavara's (Shiva's) friend. Bhima fought with the yak-
shas. The incident has been described in Section 35 (Volume 3). Bhima
went in search of a flower, because Droupadi wanted it.]. For the sake of the mandara flower, the immensely strong one had proudly killed many guhyakas, who
used their powers of maya, in the abode of the lord of the riches. To ensure Droupadi's pleasure, he had countered
many. It[The club.] was famous as the vajra and possessing eight sides, it was embellished with diamonds, gems and jewels. Raising it, the mighty-armed one attacked Shalya in the battle. He was skilled in fighting and grasped that fearful club. He brought down Shalya's four horses, which were extremely fast. At this, Shalya became angry in the
battle. He hurled a javelin towards his broad chest and roared. It pierced the brave one's armour and penetrated.
However, Vrikodara wasn't frightened. He plucked the javelin out and pierced the king of Madra's charioteer in
the heart with it. With the armour penetrated, he was distressed in his mind and began to vomit blood. He fell
downwards and the king of Madra looked on, in sorrow. On seeing that his own deed had been countered, Shalya
wondered in his mind. Serene in his soul, he grasped a club and glanced towards his opponent. On beholding his
deed in the battle, the Parthas were delighted in their minds and honoured Bhimasena, the performer of terrible and
unblemished deeds." '
