'Markandeya said, "When Skanda had done all this, to please the mothers, Svaha appeared before him and said,
'You are the son born from my womb. I wish that you should give me happiness that is extremely difficult to obtain.' Skanda replied to her, 'What kind of bliss do you wish for?' Svaha said, 'O mighty-armed one! I am Dak-
sha's beloved daughter and my name is Svaha. Ever since I was a child, I have always desired Agni. O son! But
the fire does not completely know how much I love him. O son! I wish to reside eternally with Agni.' Skanda
replied, 'O goddess! Whatever oblations are properly offered to gods and ancestors by brahmanas, with the recital
of mantras and through Agni, will henceforth be rendered with the utterance of the word "svaha". O beautiful one!
Thus, you will always reside with Agni.' Having been thus addressed and worshipped by Skanda, Svaha was satisfied. She was united with her husband Agni and offered homage to Skanda.

'"Then Prajapati Brahma told Mahasena, 'Go to your father Mahadeva, the destroyer of Tripura. For the welfare
of the worlds, you have been born invincible, with Rudra entering Agni and Uma entering Svaha. The great-souled
Rudra moistened Uma's vagina with his semen. This was thrown on the mountain and created Minjika and Minjika[Two beings. The first is masculine and Minjika, and the latter is feminine and Minjikaa. They are worshipped by those who wish to ensure the welfare of children.]. The remaining semen flowed into the red river[Alternatively, as a proper name, the river Lohita or Brahmaputra.]. Other parts ascended into the rays of the sun and others
fell on the earth. Still others adhered to the trees. Thus, it fell in five ways[Mountain, river, sun, earth and trees.]. The wise ones know your terrible
companions of many different forms, the eaters of flesh, as ganas.' Mahasena agreed and the one whose soul was
immeasurable, worshipped his father Maheshvara, and he in turn was affectionate towards his son. Those who
wish to acquire riches should worship the five ganas with arka flowers and worship them if they wish diseases to
be cured[The arka tree is the sun-plant, a small tree with medicinal uses. In the Skanda Purana, the five ganas are
named Dharma, Gyana, Vairagya, Aishvarya and Adharma.]. Those who wish to ensure welfare for children should always worship Minjika and Minjika[Minjikaa.], generated from Rudra. Those who wish to obtain offspring should bow in obeisance before the divine women named
Vriddhikas, who were born from trees and eat human flesh. Thus is known the innumerable masses of pishachas. O
king! Now learn from me about the origins of the bells and the pennants. Airavata[Indra's elephant.] had two bells known as Vai-
jayanti. The intelligent Shakra brought them himself and gave them to Guha. One of those bells was for Vishakha
and the other for Skanda. The pennants of both Kartikeya and Vishakha are red. The immensely strong god Mahasena played happily with these toys, given to him by the gods. Surrounded by the masses of pishachas and the
masses of gods, he was radiant on that golden mountain, blazing with prosperity. With that brave one, the mountain and its pure groves was radiant, like the beautiful caverns of Mandara with the rays of the sun. Mount Shveta
was radiant with groves blossoming with samtanaka flowers[Samtanaka is one of the five trees in Indra's celestial pleasure garden. Parijata is another.], groves of karaviras[Kind of tree.], groves of parijatas,
japas[The China rose.], groves of ashokas, clusters of kadamba trees, masses of divine animals and masses of divine birds. All
the masses of gods and all the devarshis were there. The clouds thundered like drums, like the sound of the turbulent ocean. The celestial gandharvas danced there, together with the apsaras. The great sound of happy beings was
heard there. Thus the entire universe, together with Indra, gathered on Mount Shveta and happily beheld Skanda,
not tired of looking."'
