'Sanjaya said, "The great-souled and infinitely energetic one was lying down on his bed of arrows. He was like an
ocean that had been dried up by a mighty wind. Savyasachi had used his divine weapons to bring down the great
archer and shattered the hopes your sons entertained for victory and their armour and their peace. He was like an
island for those who wish to cross an ocean that cannot be traversed. He was covered in a mass of arrows, like
flows in the river Yamuna. He was like the intolerable and giant Mount Mainaka, brought down on the ground, like
the sun which has been dislodged from the firmament and has fallen down on earth. This was as unthinkable as
Shatakratu being vanquished by Vritra in earlier times. All the soldiers were confounded at Bhishma having been
brought down in the battle. He was the bull among all the soldiers. He was the objective of all archers. Your father,
great in his vows, was covered with Dhananjaya's arrows. The brave one, bull among men, was lying down on a
bed meant for heroes.

'"On seeing Bhishma, the middle one of the Bharata lineage, Adhiratha's son descended from his chariot. He
was tormented and his voice was choked with tears. He joined his hands in salutation. Having worshipped him, he
spoke these words. 'O fortunate one! I am Karna. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Speak sacred and auspicious words to me today. Open your eyes and look at me. No man can ever enjoy the fruits of his good deeds on
earth, since you, aged and devoted to dharma, are lying down on the ground. O supreme among the Kurus! In filling the treasury, in counsel, in constructing vyuhas, in using weapons, I do not think I can see anyone like you
among the Kurus. You are united with intelligence and purity. You have saved the Kurus from danger. Having deluged the warriors, you are now proceeding to the world of the ancestors. O best of the Bharata lineage! The Pandavas will now cause a destruction of the Kurus, like enraged tigers destroying deer. The brave Kurus are acquainted with Gandiva's roar and will be terrified by Savyasachi now, like the asuras by the wielder of the vajra. In today's battle, the Kurus and the other kings will be frightened by the sound released from Gandiva, like the clap of
thunder. The brave one[Arjuna.] will be like a fire before kindling and will be like a great conflagration that burns down
trees. Kiriti's arrows will destroy the sons of Dhritarashtra in this way. O illustrious one! Wherever the wind and
the fire advance together in a forest, they burn down as they wish. There is no doubt that Partha is like fire before
kindling. O tiger among men! There is no doubt that Krishna is like the wind. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
On hearing Panchajanya's roar and Gandiva's sound, all the soldiers will be overcome by terror. The destroyer of
enemies will advance on a chariot with a monkey on the banner. O brave one! Without you, the kings will not be
able to withstand that sound. Other than you, who among the kings is capable of fighting with Arjuna on the field
of battle? The learned ones speak about his celestial deeds. The encounter between the intelligent one and Tryambaka[The one with three eyes, Mahadeva. This encounter has been described in Section 31 (Volume 2).] was superhuman. As a result of this, he obtained a boon that is difficult for those with unclean souls to get.
If you permit me, I will fight with that excellent Pandava today. I am incapable of tolerating him. He is like an extremely terrible and poisonous snake which kills with its glances alone. I have placed death, or victory, at the forefront.'"'
