'Yudhishthira asked, "O Vasudeva! O mighty-armed one! O immensely intelligent one! Tell me in detail about the
destruction of Soubha, because I am not satisfied with what you have said."

'Vasudeva replied, "O best of the Bharata lineage! When he heard that the mighty-armed King Shroutashrava[One of Shishupala's names.]
had been killed by me, Shalva marched on the city of Dvaravati. O Pandu's son[The word used is nandana.]! The evil-minded Shalva laid
siege to the city from every side, arranged his battle formations and stationed himself in the air[Soubha was airborne.]. That lord of the
earth fought with the city from there. He attacked from everywhere and the battle began. O best of the Bharata lineage! O king! The city was ready everywhere, with flags, gates, troops, fences, machines, miners, barricaded
streets, turrets, towers, hair-graspers[The word used is kachagrahani, meaning catchers or graspers (grahani) of hair (kacha) and it is difficult to
make sense of this, though it is possible to visualize war instruments that grasped enemy soldiers by the hair. The
word might very well be chakragrahani, in which case one means instruments that grasp enemy soldiers. That
would make better sense.], catapults that hurled flaming missiles, water vessels[The word used is ushtrika, which means she-camel, as well as a vessel for storing wine or water and made in
the shape of a she-camel. Given the context, water vessel seems more appropriate. Since elephants and horses are
not being mentioned here, why should she-camels be specifically mentioned?], kettledrums, musical instruments, army drums, kindling, straw, grass, shataghnis[It is impossible to precisely determine what this weapon was, except that it could kill a hundred people at one
time.], ploughs, bhushundis, rocks, clubs, weapons,
battleaxes, iron shields and machines that hurled fire and iron. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Everything was
in accordance with what is laid down in the sacred texts. There was a stock of many types of objects and it was
guarded by Gada, Samba, Uddhava and the like. O tiger among the Kuru lineage! They were men capable of repulsing attacks. There were warriors from famous lineages, their valour having been witnessed in battle. The middle and upper parts of the fortifications were protected well and the upper parts had cavalry and infantry. Ugrasena,
Uddhava and the others announced in the city that no one should drink, so that there should not be carelessness in
protection. Knowing that they would be killed by King Shalva if they were intoxicated, all the Vrishnis and the
Andhakas remained sober. The guards entrusted with the treasuries of Anarta swiftly drove out all the actors,
dancers and singers. O Kouravya! The bridges were destroyed. All the boats were forbidden to ply. The moats
were fortified with spikes. O best of the Kuru lineage! Because of the impending war, the reservoirs were destroyed. For a krosha[Measure of distance equal to one-fourth of a yojana.] on every side, the ground was made uneven[To make it difficult for the invading army.]. O unblemished one! Our fortress is naturally difficult to access. It is guarded well by nature. Nature has equipped it with special types of weapons. O best of
the Bharata lineage! It was protected well. That city was stocked with every kind of weapon, like Indra's abode. O
king! At the time when Soubha advanced, the city of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas was such that nothing could
come out or go in without a seal[That is, permission.]. O Kourava! O Indra among kings! Everywhere, along the roads and the open
spaces where the roads meet, there were forces and many elephants and horses. O mighty-armed one! The soldiers
had been paid wages and rations. They had been given weapons and armour. Nothing was pending. No one was
given too little pay. No one was paid in excess. No one was shown preference. There was no one whose valour had
not been tested. O king! Thus Dvaraka was prepared well. The soldiers had been paid a lot. O lotus-eyed one! It
was defended by King Ahuka[Ugrasena's name.]."'