Sanjaya said, "Those on your side placed Karna at the forefront. They were invincible in battle and the encounter
commenced again, like that between the gods and the asuras. There was the sound of elephants, chariots, men,
horses and conch shells and that of many weapons descending. Elephants, rathas and foot soldiers, with their leaders, were cheered by this and descended and struck each other. The riders used arrows, battleaxes, supreme swords,
spikes and many different kinds of arrows. In that great battle, there were elephants, chariots, horses, the best of
men and the vehicles of the men. The ground was beautiful, strewn with the heads of men. The faces possessed the
complexion of the lotus, the sun or the moon. The teeth were white. The mouths, eyes and noses were excellent.
They were adorned with beautiful crowns and earrings. Thousands of elephants, men and horses were killed with
hundreds of clubs, maces, spears, javelins, nails, catapults and bludgeons. A river of blood began to flow. The slain
and wounded men, rathas, horses and elephants were terrible to look at. Because that large army was destroyed in
the cause, it was like the kingdom of the lord of the ancestors[Yama is the lord of the ancestors.] when there is a destruction of beings.

' "O god among men! Your soldiers and your sons looked like the sons of the gods, when, in the forefront of the
battle, those bulls among the Kurus advanced against Shini's descendant[Satyaki.]. That army was extremely beautiful
and was fierce in its sentiments. It was full of the best of men, horses, chariots and elephants. It was like the soldiers of the immortals or the asuras and made a sound like the salty ocean. The son of the sun[Karna.] was like the lord
of the gods in his valour. As a warrior, he was equal to the best among the thirty gods. He attacked the foremost
among the Shini lineage with arrows that blazed like the rays of the sun. In that encounter, the bull among the Shini lineage quickly used many kinds of arrows, which were as resplendent as venomous snakes, and enveloped the
supreme among men[Karna.], with his chariot, his horses and his charioteer. Vasusena[Karna's name.] was oppressed because of the
arrows of the bull among the Shinis, and the atirathas and well-wishers on your side quickly advanced towards that
bull among rathas[Karna.], together with their elephants, chariots, horses and foot soldiers. That force was as large as
the ocean. But it was quickly driven away by the enemy, the friends of Drupada's son[This is a roundabout away of referring to the Pandavas, Drupada's son
presumably meaning Dhrishtadyumna.], and there was a great
destruction of men, rathas, horses and elephants.

' "The best of men, Arjuna and Keshava, performed their religious ceremonies and worshipped Lord Bhava[Shiva.]
in accordance with the proper rites. They set their minds on killing the enemy and swiftly rushed against your
army. The chariot roared like a cloud and the flags and standard fluttered in the wind. It was drawn by white horses. On seeing it advance towards them, like Death, they[The Kourava soldiers.] were distressed in their minds. Arjuna stretched Gandi-
va and seemed to dance around in the battle. He showered arrows and covered the sky, the directions and the sub-
directions. There were chariots that were like celestial vehicles, equipped with machines, weapons and standards.
Using his arrows, he destroyed these, together with their charioteers, like a wind driving away clouds. There were
elephants with triumphant standards and weapons and those who controlled these elephants. There were horse riders, horses and foot soldiers. Using his arrows, he conveyed them to Yama's eternal abode. The maharatha was angry and unassailable, like Yama. Duryodhana advanced against him alone and struck him with his arrows. However, Arjuna used seven arrows to strike his bow, his charioteer, his standard and his horses[With four horses, there is a total of seven targets.]. With another arrow,
he then brought down his umbrella. He then affixed a ninth arrow, with the desire of killing Duryodhana. However,
Drona's son shattered that supreme arrow into seven fragments. Pandava then used supreme arrows to destroy the
bow of Drona's son and also killed his horses. He then severed Kripa's fierce bow. Having severed Hardikya's bow
and standard and killed his horses, he cut down Duhshasana's supreme bow and attacked Radheya. At this, Karna
abandoned Satyaki and struck Arjuna with three arrows. He then pierced Krishna with twenty arrows and struck
Partha with three more. However, Satyaki advanced against Karna and pierced him with sharp arrows, first with
ninety-nine fierce arrows and yet again with one hundred. All the foremost among the Pandus oppressed Karna-
Yudhamanyu, Shikhandi, Droupadi's sons, the Prabhadrakas, Uttamouja, Yuyutsu, the twins and Parshata[Parshata means Dhrishtadyumna.]. The
Chedis, Karushas, Matsyas, Kekayas and their armies, the powerful Chekitana and Dharmaraja, excellent in his
vows-these rathas, horses, elephants and foot soldiers who were fierce in their valour-surrounded Karna in that
battle and released many kinds of weapons. All of them devoted themselves to killing Karna and addressed him in
fierce and eloquent words. Karna used his sharp arrows to cut down those numerous showers of weapons. He destroyed all of them, like a wind breaks down trees. One saw Karna angrily use his storm of arrows to destroy
rathas, elephants and their riders, horses and their riders. The Pandu forces were slaughtered by Karna's energy.
Most of them lost their weapons and their bodies were wounded. They retreated. Then, Arjuna himself countered
Karna's weapons with his own weapons. He enveloped the directions, the sky and the earth with his showers of arrows. Those arrows descended like clubs and bludgeons. Some were like shataghnis and others were as fierce as
the vajra. The soldiers, the foot soldiers, horses, rathas and elephants, were destroyed. They closed their eyes, uttered woes of lamentation and fled distractedly in different directions. In that battle, horses, men and elephants
were destroyed. The soldiers were killed by the arrows and terrified, fled.

' "Thus did they engage in battle, desiring victory. The sun approached Mount Asta[The mountain behind which the sun sets.]. O great king! In particular, there was darkness and dust. We could not see anything, favourable or unfavourable. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! The great archers were frightened of fighting in the night. With all their horses, they therefore
withdrew[That is, the Kouravas withdrew.]. O king! When the Kouravas departed at the end of the day, the Parthas were delighted in their minds
at having obtained victory and also left for their own camps. They showed contempt for the enemy by sounding
many kinds of musical instruments, roaring like lions, dancing and praising Achyuta and Arjuna. When the brave
ones and all the soldiers retreated, all the lords of men pronounced benedictions on the Pandaveyas. Having retreated, the Kurus and the Pandavas were cheerful. The lords of men went to their camps in the night and rested.
Large numbers of yakshas, rakshas, pishachas and carnivorous beasts went to that terrible field of battle, which
was like Rudra's dancing arena." '
