'Yudhishthira said, "O mighty-armed one! You have counselled to the effect that the enemy must never be trusted.
But if he trusts nobody, how will the king conduct himself? O king! If he trusts, there is a great danger to the king.
O king! But if he does not trust, how will a king triumph over his enemies? I have a doubt about this. O grandfather! Dispel this confusion in my mind, which has arisen after you have told me the account about distrust."

'Bhishma replied, "O Kounteya! O king! Listen to the account of the conversation that took place in Brahmadatta's abode between Brahmadatta and Pujani. In the inner quarters of Brahmadatta's palace in Kampilya, a bird
named Pujani dwelt for a long time. Like the jivajivaka bird, she knew about the cries of all beings[The jivajivaka bird is a pheasant. Pujani could probably mimic the cries of all beings.]. She knew
everything. Even though she had been born in an inferior species, she knew about all forms of dharma. There, she
gave birth to an immensely radiant son. At the same time, through the queen, the king had a son. Every day, she[Pujani.]
would go to the shores of the ocean and bring back two fruits to nourish her son and the prince. She would give
one fruit to her son and the other to the prince. The fruits tasted like amrita and increased strength and energy.
Having eaten the fruit, the prince grew very fast. Once, he got away from the hands of the nurse and began to play
with the bird. O Indra among kings! Having taken the bird[The baby bird.], which had been born at the same time, to a deserted
place, he killed it and returned to his nurse's arms. After having returned from collecting fruit, the bird saw her
dead son lying down on the ground, killed by the child. She was distressed on seeing her slain son and her face became full of tears. Pujani was tormented by grief and spoke these words. 'There is no affection or friendship in association with kshatriyas. They serve you for a purpose. Having accomplished the objective, they abandon you.
Kshatriyas should never be trusted. They injure everyone. Having caused the injury, they always seek to pointlessly placate. I will now act in the same way and exact vengeance. He is ungrateful. He is violent. He has destroyed
my trust. He has committed a triple sin by killing someone who was born and reared with him, someone who ate
with him and someone who sought refuge with him.' Having said this, she used her talons to tear out the eyes of
the king's son. Once she had torn these out, Pujani was comforted and again spoke these words. 'If a sin is perpetrated voluntarily, it immediately devolves on the doer. However, if a deed is done in reaction to another deed, it
doesn't destroy good or bad merit. Even if such a wicked deed is perpetrated, it doesn't descend on the doer. Instead, it descends on the sons, the sons' sons and the daughters' sons.'

'"Brahmadatta said, 'We committed an injury against you and you have taken a counteraction. Both of us are
now equal. O Pujani! Stay with me and do not go.'

'"Pujani replied, 'When one has injured someone else, the learned do not praise remaining there. It is better to
withdraw from there. O king! Even if there are words of conciliation, one cannot trust someone with whom there
has been an act of enmity. A foolish person will soon comprehend that enmity is never pacified. Once there is enmity towards each other, sons and grandsons are dragged into it. Once the sons and grandsons are destroyed, it carries over to the world after death. Under every circumstance, distrust of those towards whom there is enmity brings
happiness. One must never act so as to trust such a person. Otherwise, trust itself will be destroyed. One should not
trust someone who should not be trusted. One should not even trust someone who should be trusted. If you so desire, you can make others trust you. But you must not trust others. The mother and the father are the best among
relatives. The wife is wear and tear[The text uses the word jara, meaning old age, as well as wear and tear. In this context, wear and tear
fits better.] and the son is nothing but a seed. The brother is an enemy and the friend possesses a moist hand[The friend has to be bribed.]. One's atman alone knows happiness and unhappiness. If there has been enmity towards each
other, an alliance is not possible. The purpose behind my staying here has been transgressed. If a person who was
earlier terrified by strength has committed an injury, and is now worshipped with riches and honour, he will always
be distrustful. A spirited person who was earlier respected and is now dishonoured should no longer dwell in a
place where he was first respected and subsequently dishonoured. For a long time, I dwelt in your abode without
suffering any injury. But an enmity has arisen now. May you be happy. I will go elsewhere.'

'"Brahmadatta said, 'If one acts as a reaction to an act that has been committed, that is not reckoned as a crime.
You have freed yourself of a debt. O Pujani! Stay with me and do not go.'

'"Pujani replied, 'An alliance can never again be forged between someone who has been injured and someone
who has caused the injury. The hearts of the one who has been injured and the one who has done the injury know
this.'

'"Brahmadatta said, 'There can again be friendship between someone who has been injured and someone who
has caused the injury. It has been seen that the enmity has been pacified and there has been no further wicked act.'

'"Pujani replied, 'Enmity can never be overcome. One must not be assured because there has been conciliation.
It is childish to believe in trust. Therefore, it is better that I should not be seen. There are those who cannot quickly
be seized through extremely sharp weapons, but are captured through conciliation, like elephants with other
elephants.'

'"Brahmadatta said, 'Dwelling together leads to affection, even towards someone who may cause one's death.
They trust each other, like the shvapacha and the dog. Even among those who have been enemies, dwelling together leads to gentleness. Like water on the leaf of a lotus, that enmity does not linger.'

'"Pujani replied, 'The learned ones know that enmity arises from five causes-resulting from women, resulting
from dwelling places, resulting from words, resulting from rivalries and resulting from injuries. In particular, the
kshatriya must kill a person who causes any of these. Considering the place, the strength and other such things, he
does this covertly or overtly. Therefore, one must never trust someone against whom an injury has been committed, even if he used to be a well-wisher. The enmity will remain concealed, like fire hidden inside wood. O king!
Like Ourva's fire in the ocean[This story has been recounted in Section 11 (Volume 1). The sage Ourva belonged to the Bhargava
lineage and the fire of his rage was cast into the ocean.], the fire of an enmity is never pacified, be it through riches, punishment, conciliation or teaching. O king! Once the fire of enmity has been ignited and there has been an act of injury, it is not pacified without burning down one of the two parties. If a person has earlier committed an injurious act, even if he is
worshipped with riches and honour, he will not find peace or trust. His act gives force to his fear. I have never
committed an injurious act towards you, nor you towards me. The trust was earlier unblemished. I no longer have
that trust.'

'"Brahmadatta said, 'Every act is done by time and so are all the different kinds of action. Since everything is
undertaken by time, who has injured whom? Birth and death occur in the same way. All deeds are undertaken by
time and the one who is alive is only an instrument. Some are killed at the same time, others one after another.
Time consumes beings, like a fire that has received kindling. O beautiful one! In what we do towards each other, I,
nor you, are the principal agents. Time always determines the happiness and unhappiness of living beings. Following time, dwell here with affection. You will not be injured. O Pujani! I have forgiven what you have done. Pardon
me.'

'"Pujani replied, 'If time is the principal agent, then there would never have been any enmity. When a relative
has been killed, why do other relatives seek vengeance? In earlier times, why did the gods and the asuras strike
each other? If time determines happiness and unhappiness, existence and non-existence, then, when someone is ill,
why do physicians use medicines? If time does the healing, what is the need for medication? If one is senseless
with great sorrow, why does one lament? If time is the principal agent, why does dharma accrue to a doer? Your
son slew my son and was injured by me. O lord of the earth! After that, I deserve to be captured by you. Because
of sorrow over my son, I committed a sin towards your son. Listen to the truth from me. I deserve to be struck by
you. Men seek out birds to kill or to sport. There is no third association, other than killing and capture. Because of
fear of being slain or being captured, there are those who try to escape. Those who are learned about dharma say
that there is unhappiness in death and calamity. Everyone loves his life. Everyone loves his sons. Everyone wishes
to avoid misery and calamity. Everyone desires happiness. O Brahmadatta! Old age is misery. The destruction of
riches is misery. Misery is dwelling with someone who is injurious. Misery is separation from something one
wants. There is misery in enmity and captivity, or in violence and acts caused by women. People are always
whirled around between unhappiness and happiness. Some foolish people say that there is no misery in another
person's sorrow. But there will be such speculation only among gentlemen who have experienced no grief. How
can someone who has sorrowed and has been afflicted with grief speak in this way? A person who knows about the
essence of all misery knows that one's own self is no different from another person. O king! O scorcher of enemies! What I have done towards you and what you have done towards me are incapable of being expiated over one
hundred years. Because of what we have done towards each other, there cannot be an alliance. Whenever you repeatedly remember your son, there will be a new enmity. Having performed an injurious act, if someone wishes to
act affectionately, there can be no alliance with him. It is like an earthen pot that has been shattered. Those who
know the purport of the sacred texts have determined that distrust leads to the rise of happiness. In earlier times,
Ushanas chanted two verses to Prahrada. "He who trusts the words, true or false, of an enemy, is slain, like those
who believe in honey are snared by dry grass[There are pits covered with dry grass. In pursuit of honey, people don't notice these and fall into
them.]. The enmity in a family is not pacified for ten yugas. Even if one
man remains in the family, this is spoken about." Kings may hide their enmity and resort to conciliation. But later,
they crush the enemy, like a full pot against a rock[There is an implicit image of the king as the rock, the enemy as the pot and the objects in the pot as
the temporary blandishments.]. O king! One must never trust a person against whom one has
committed an evil act. Having injured the other person, one only reaps misery from the trust.'

'"Brahmadatta said, 'Without trusting others, one can never accomplish the objectives. If one is always terrified,
it is like being dead.'

'"Pujani replied, 'When there are wounds in the feet, one can only creep along on those feet. Even if those feet
are guarded well, one cannot run on them, even for a brief moment. If a person has sore eyes and looks at the wind,
it is certain that his eyes will be wounded even more by the wind. If, because of confusion, a person has resorted to
a bad path and does not know his own strength, his life will come to an end. If a man ploughs the field without
knowing about the rain, his endeavour will be inferior and no crops will be reaped. If a person always eats food
that is beneficial, regardless of whether it is bitter, astringent, tasty or devoid of taste, he will be like one who is
immortal. If a man does not know the consequences and ignoring wholesome food greedily eats something else,
that is the end of his life. Destiny and human endeavour exist and depend on each other. Deeds are resorted to by
the enterprising and destiny by the impotent. One must do deeds that are good for one's own self, regardless of
whether they are harsh or mild. He who is not devoted to action will always be devoured by some disaster. Therefore, whenever there is doubt over an act, one must exhibit one's valour. Men must give up everything and perform
acts that are good for their own selves. Those who are learned say that knowledge, bravery, skill, strength and patience are five natural friends and make things happen in this world. It is said that men can obtain residences, metals[Kupya, that is, metals other than silver and gold.], fields, wives and well-wishers everywhere. A wise person is always delighted and is always radiant. He does
not frighten anyone. Even when there is an attempt to terrify him, he is not scared. If a person is intelligent, his
wealth always increases, bit by bit. He bases himself in self-control and undertakes his tasks through skill. Men of
limited intelligence are tied to their houses by bonds of affection. They have bad wives who devour their flesh, like
female crabs and young crabs[There is nothing in the text to suggest that these young crabs are offspring. Therefore, this is probably nothing more than some crabs eating smaller crabs.]. Other men are deficient in intelligence and think of homes, fields, friends and
their own country as belonging to them. But one must flee from a country that is afflicted, or is plagued by disease
and famine. One must always go and dwell elsewhere and live there, always respected. Therefore, I will go elsewhere. I do not wish to dwell with you. O king! What has been done by your son cannot be accepted. One must
keep a bad wife, a bad son, a bad king, a bad relative and a bad country a great distance away. There is no trust in a
bad friend. How can there be pleasure in a bad wife? There can be no growth in a bad kingdom. There can be no
livelihood in a bad country. There can be no association with a bad friend, because that friendship will always be
fickle. When there is a monetary disaster, a bad relative becomes disrespectful. One who speaks pleasantly is truly
a wife. One who provides growth is truly a son. If there is trust, one is truly a friend. If there is a livelihood, that is
truly a country. Though the king is fierce in his rule, there is no exercise of force. He[The king.] cherishes the poor and does
not avoid an association with them. The wife, the country, friends, sons, allies and relatives-all these possess
qualities, and the king has the eye of dharma. A king who is careful and rules is the foundation of the three objectives[Dharma, artha and kama.]. The subjects who do not know about dharma are restrained and head towards their destruction. A tax can
be imposed and one-sixth can be collected as tax. However, a king who does not protect the subjects well is nothing but a thief. If a king himself grants assurance but does not act according to that norm, he is wicked. He will
collect the adharma of all the people and go to hell. If a king grants assurance and acts according to that norm, he
is known as one who protects the subjects according to dharma and grants every kind of happiness. Prajapati Manu
said that a king possesses seven attributes-father, mother, preceptor, protector, Agni, Vaishravana[Kubera.] and Yama. By
exhibiting compassion towards the subjects, the king is the father of the kingdom. A man who behaves falsely towards him is reborn as inferior species. By nourishing those who are distressed, he is like a mother. Like Agni, he
consumes wicked ones. By controlling, he is like Yama. By releasing objects of desire, he is like Kubera, the one
who grants wishes. Like a preceptor, he instructs about dharma. He protects like a protector. When the king delights the residents of the city and the countryside with his qualities, he protects with his attributes and with dharma and is not dislodged from his kingdom. He himself knows about the rites followed in the city and the countryside. That king enjoys happiness, in this world and in the next. If the subjects are always anxious and oppressed by
the burden of taxes, or overcome by various calamities, then he[The king.] will head towards destruction. When his subjects
prosper, like large lotuses in a pond, he attains greatness in the worlds and enjoys a share in the fruits of all sacrifices. O king! Strife with a strong person is not praised. If one is seized by a stronger person, how can there be a
kingdom? How can there be happiness?'"

'Bhishma said, "The bird spoke these words to King Brahmadatta. With the king's permission, she then headed
for her desired direction. This was the conversation between Brahmadatta and Pujani. O best among the Bharata
lineage! I have recounted it to you. What else do you wish to hear?"'
