'Dhritarashtra asked, "When the Pandavas were routed by Bharadvaja's son in that great battle, did anyone among
all the Panchalas advance against him? Was there no noble one who wished to earn fame, as befits a kshatriya, and
set his mind on fighting? He should not have been served by cowards. He should have been served by bulls among
men. It must have been a brave man and charioteer who returned from that rout. On seeing that Drona was stationed, was there no such man? He was like a tiger with a yawning mouth. He was like an elephant with a shattered temple. He was prepared to give up his life in battle. He was armoured and was wonderful in fighting. He
was a great archer. He was a tiger among men. He increased fear among his enemies. He was grateful and devoted
to the truth. He was engaged in Duryodhana's welfare. O Sanjaya! On seeing that Bharadvaja's brave son was stationed in that army, which brave ones advanced against him? Tell me."

'Sanjaya replied, "On seeing that the Panchalas, Pandavas, Matsyas, Srinjayas, Chedis and Kekayas were driven
away from the battle by Drona's arrows, the Kouravas roared like lions and sounded many musical instruments.
Large numbers of arrows were swiftly released from Drona's bow and they[The Pandavas.] were like shattered boats tossed
around on the giant waves of the ocean. They surrounded the chariots, elephants and men from all directions[The Kouravas surrounded the Pandavas.].
King Duryodhana was stationed in the midst of his soldiers, surrounded by his relatives. On seeing them, he
laughed and spoke these words of joy to Karna. 'O Radheya! Behold! The Panchalas have been shattered by
Drona's arrows. They have been terrified by the wielder of the firm bow, like wild deer by a lion. It is my view that
they will never return to fight again. They have been broken by Drona, like giant trees by a tempest. They have
been consumed by the gold-tufted arrows of the great-souled one. They are fleeing through multiple routes and
seemed to be whirled around. They have been confined by the Kouravas and the great-souled Drona. They are like
elephants huddled together, because of a fire. Because of Drona's sharp arrows, they are like a cluster of bees.
They are huddling together and are trying to run away. Bhima is firm in his anger. But he has been abandoned by
the Pandavas and the Srinjayas. O Karna! Surrounded by those on my side, he seeks to threaten us. The evil-minded one now sees the entire world as if it is full of Drona. Pandava has now lost all hope of remaining alive and of
regaining the kingdom.'

'"Karna said, 'As long as there is life left in him, this mighty-armed one will never give up the battle. O tiger
among men! Nor will he tolerate these roars like lions. It is my view that the Pandavas have not been defeated in
battle. They are brave and powerful. They are skilled in the use of weapons and are invincible in war. The Pandavas will remember the hardships from poisoning, arson, gambling and dwelling in the forest[Before the gambling match, Duryodhana had tried poisoning and arson.]. It is my view
that they will not retreat from the battle. The mighty-armed and infinitely energetic Vrikodara has already returned.
This Kounteya is supreme among the best and he will kill the best of our rathas. With a sword, bow, javelin, horses, elephants, men, chariots[Bhima will also use horses, elephants, men and chariots as implements of war.] and an iron staff, he will slay large numbers. Other rathas, Satyaki and the others,
are also returning after him-the Panchalas, Kekayas and Matsyas, and particularly the Pandavas. Those maharathas are brave, powerful and valiant. They are enraged and are being specially urged by Bhima. The bulls
among the Kurus[Meaning the Pandavas.] have surrounded Drona from all sides. Wishing to protect Vrikodara, they are like clouds
around the sun. They are united in their purpose and will oppress the one who is rigid in his vows and is unprotected. They are like insects on the point of death, around a lamp. There is no doubt that they are skilled in the use of
weapons and are capable of countering him. I think that the burden on Bharadvaja's son will be too much to bear.
Let us quickly go to the spot where Drona is stationed. They are seeking to slay the one who is rigid in his vows,
like wolves around a mighty elephant.'"

'Sanjaya said, "O king! On hearing Radheya's words, King Duryodhana left towards Drona's chariot, together
with his brothers. A great uproar was created there by the Pandavas who had returned, wishing to kill Drona. They
were on supreme horses with diverse hues."'
