'Dhritarashtra asked, "When they[The Pandavas.] had returned and engaged in different divisions, how did the spirited ones on
the side of the Parthas, and on mine, fight? How did Arjuna act towards the army of the samshaptakas? O Sanjaya!
What did the samshaptakas do to Arjuna?"

'Sanjaya replied, "When they had returned and engaged themselves in different divisions, your son himself attacked Bhima with an army of elephants. It was like an elephant encountering an elephant, or a bull encountering a
bull. He[Bhima.] was himself summoned and attacked by the king with that army of elephants. Partha was skilled in
fighting and possessed the strength of his arms. O venerable one! He swiftly shattered that army of elephants.
Those elephants were like mountains and exuded musth everywhere. They were mangled and forced to retreat by
Bhimasena's iron arrows. It was like winds driving away a mass of clouds in every direction. That maddened army
was thus slaughtered by Pavana's son. Bhima released arrows at those elephants and was as radiant as the rising
sun in the sky, striking everything in the world with his rays. Hundreds of Bhima's arrows wounded the elephants
and they were as beautiful as masses of clouds in the sky, streaked with the rays of the sun[Because they were wounded, the elephants were streaked with blood.]. The son of the wind
thus afflicted the elephants. Duryodhana was enraged at this and pierced him with sharp arrows. Bhima's eyes became red with rage and he wished to destroy the king in a short instant. So he pierced him with arrows. With arrows wounding all his limbs, he became angry and smilingly, pierced Pandava Bhimasena back with iron arrows
that were as bright as the sun's rays. The sign of a bejewelled elephant was on his[Duryodhana's.] standard, embellished with
gems. Pandava used broad-headed arrows to swiftly sever this, together with his bow. O venerable one! On seeing
that Duryodhana was thus afflicted by Bhima, the lord of Anga arrived there on an elephant, wishing to attack him.
On seeing that the elephant was advancing, with a roar like the rumbling of the clouds, Bhimasena used iron arrows to severely strike it between its two frontal lobes. It passed through the body and penetrated the ground. The
elephant fell down, like a mountain struck by lightning. As the elephant fell, the lord of the mlecchas[Meaning, the lord of Anga.] also began
to fall down. But the swift-acting Vrikodara sliced off his head with a broad-headed arrow. On seeing that the
brave one had been brought down, his army fled. Horses, elephants and charioteers were terrified and crushed infantry as they fled.

'"As that army was scattered and routed in every direction, Pragjyotisha attacked Bhima, astride an elephant. It
was like Maghavan astride an elephant, victorious against the daityas and the danavas. That supreme of elephants
suddenly descended on Bhima. Its ears were drawn back. Its forelegs and trunk were contracted. Its eyes were dilated in rage and it seemed about to consume Pandava. O venerable one! All the soldiers let out a great roar. 'Alas!
Bhima has been killed by the elephant.' O king! The Pandava soldiers were terrified by this roar and quickly ran
away to the spot where Vrikodara was. King Yudhishthira thought that Vrikodara had been slain. With the Pancha-
las, he attacked and surrounded Bhagadatta. Having surrounded the best of rathas with chariots from every direction, he covered him with hundreds and thousands of sharp arrows. The lord of the mountains countered all these
arrows with his goad and slaughtered the Pandus and Panchalas with his elephant. O lord of the earth! In that battle, we witnessed the aged Bhagadatta's extraordinary conduct, using his elephant. At this, the king of Dasharna
attacked Pragjyotisha on a swift elephant that advanced from the flank. Both elephants were terrible in form and
the battle between them was like that between two winged mountains in ancient times, both covered with trees[In ancient times, mountains are believed to have possessed wings.].
Pragjyotisha's elephant circled around and struck the elephant of the king of Dasharna on the side, bringing it
down. Bhagadatta used seven javelins that were as bright as the rays of the sun. As his enemy was dislodged from
his seat on the falling elephant, he slew him.

'"Yudhishthira attacked King Bhagadatta and surrounded him from every direction with a great army of chariots. Astride his elephant and surrounded by all these rathas in every direction, he was resplendent, like a flaming
fire on a mountain, in the midst of the forest. He was astride his elephant, inside a circle formed in every direction
by fierce rathas who were archers and showered arrows at him from every side. The king of Pragjyotisha urged his
bull among elephants and made it swiftly advance towards Yuyudhana's chariot. The mighty elephant grasped the
chariot of Shini's grandson and used great force to fling it away. However, Yuyudhana escaped. The charioteer
abandoned the large Saindhava horses that were yoked to the chariot and hurried to the spot where Satyaki was.
The elephant swiftly emerged from that circle of chariots. Having emerged, it began to fling away all those kings.
Those bulls among men were frightened at its speed. In that battle, the kings thought that a single elephant had
multiplied into hundreds. At that time, Bhagadatta on his elephant crushed the Pandavas, like the king of the gods
on Airavata, acting against the danavas. There was a terrible roar as the Panchalas fled. A great noise was made by
the elephants and the horses. In that battle, Bhagadatta was like death before the Pandus. Bhima became angry and
attacked Pragjyotisha again. The elephant sprinkled water from its trunk and frightened his horses, which then bore
Partha away from the field. Kriti's son, Ruchiparva, swiftly attacked then. Stationed on his chariot, he showered
arrows, like death personified. The lord of the mountains used a well-crafted arrow with drooping tufts to dispatch
Ruchiparva to Vaivasvata's eternal abode. When that brave one fell, Subhadra's son, Droupadi's sons, Chekitana,
Dhrishtaketu and Yuyutsu attacked the elephant. They wished to kill it. Roaring, they showered down arrows on it.
The skilled rider urged the elephant with heels, toes and goad. It swiftly advanced, with its trunk extended and its
eyes and ears immobile. It killed Yuyutsu's horses and charioteer with its feet. At this time, your son angrily
rushed against the chariot of Subhadra's son. Astride his elephant, the king[Back to Bhagadatta.] showered arrows on his enemies. He
was as dazzling as a sun that has arisen, scattering rays on the world. Arjuna's son pierced him with twelve arrows
and Yuyutsu with ten. Each of Droupadi's sons pierced him with three arrows and so did Dhrishtaketu. Those well-
released arrows stuck to the body and the elephant looked resplendent, like a large cloud streaked with the rays of
the sun. It was afflicted by arrows released by the enemy.

'"But the elephant was controlled by the skill and enterprise of the rider. It began to fling away enemies, to the
left and to the right. Like a herd of animals controlled in the forest by a cowherd with a staff, the soldiers were repeatedly afflicted by Bhagadatta. A grievous sound of lamentation arose among the fleeing Pandaveyas, like the
cawing of crows when they are quickly attacked by a hawk. O king! When goaded by the hook, the king of elephants looked like a winged mountain in ancient times. It afflicted the enemy with great fear, like a group of
traders at the sight of a turbulent ocean. As they ran away in fright, the elephants, charioteers, horses and kings
made a terrible noise. O king! In that battle, it filled the earth, the directions and the sub-directions. The king was
astride that supreme of elephants and severely oppressed the army of the enemy. This was like Virochana against
the army of the gods in ancient times, when it was well-protected in battle by the gods. The friend of the fire[The wind is the friend of the fire.] began to blow violently and created dust. This covered the sky and the soldiers in a short instant. The people thought
that a single elephant had become hundreds of elephants and began to run away in every direction."'
