Vaishampayana said, 'When the great-souled Pandavas were seated, Satyavati's son, Vyasa, invited the king to
speak. "O Dhritarashtra! O mighty-armed one! Are your austerities progressing? O lord of men! Is your mind
pleased with residing in the forest? O king! Has the sorrow on account of the destruction of your sons diminished?
O unblemished one! Are all your senses of knowledge clear? Is your intelligence firmly fixed on observing the
rites of the forest? I hope my daughter-in-law, Gandhari, is not overcome by grief. The queen is immensely wise
and intelligent and has knowledge of dharma and artha. She knows the truth about prosperity and adversity. I hope
she is not sorrowing. O king! I hope Kunti is serving you without any sense of ego. She has given up the kingdom
and devoted herself to serving her seniors. Did the king who is Dharma's son, Bhima, Arjuna and the twins greet
you happily? Have they been comforted? Were you happy at seeing them? Has your mind been cleansed of sin? O
lord of men! Do you possess pure sentiments and has knowledge been generated in you? O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! O great king! In all creatures, there are three things that are superior-lack of enmity, truth and
lack of violence. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I hope you are not suffering from residing in the forest. O
lord! What about eating forest fare and wearing the garments of sages? O king! I know about the departure, following the proper rites, of the great-souled Vidura. He was born from Dharma and was extremely great-souled. It
was because of Mandavya's curse that Dharma was born as Vidura[Described in Section 7 (Volume 1). Dharma imposed too heavy a punishment on the sage Mandavya and was
cursed.]. He was immensely intelligent. He was a
great yogi. He was great-souled and extremely great-minded. Brihaspati among the gods and Sukra among the
asuras did not possess as much of intelligence as that bull among men did. Over a long period of time, the rishi
Mandavya accumulated the strength of his austerities and used this to overwhelm eternal Dharma. Through his
strength,  Brahma's  command  and  my  employment,  that  extremely  intelligent  one  was  born  in  Vichitravirya's
field[Vidura was Vedavyasa's son.]. O great king! He was your brother. But he was also the eternal god of the gods. Through the techniques of
dharana and dhyana, the wise and the learned known him now as Dharma. The eternal one prospers through truth,
self-control, rituals, non-violence, generosity and austerities. Yudhishthira, king of the Kurus, was born through the
strength of his yoga. O king! That is the reason that wise and extremely intelligent one is also known as Dharma.
Both here and in the hereafter, Dharma exists, like the fire, like the wind, like the water, like the earth and like the
sky. O Kouravya! He can go everywhere. He pervades everything, mobile and immobile. That god of the gods can
be seen by the siddhas, those who have cleansed their sins. Dharma is Vidura. Vidura is the Pandava[Yudhishthira.
 
 
 ]. O king!
You can see Pandava, who is standing before you and is obedient to you. Your brother, the supremely intelligent
one, has entered him with his soul. It is good fortune that the great-souled one, immensely strong in yoga, now pervades Kounteya. O bull among the Bharata lineage! You will also be united with the greatest benefit. O son! Know
that I have come here to dispel your doubts. There is a deed that none of the maharshis in this world have ever accomplished earlier. It is marvelous. Through the fruits of my austerities, I will show it to you. O lord of the earth!
What do you desire? What do you seek to obtain from me? Tell me clearly what you wish to see or hear. I will act
in accordance with that."'

This ends Ashrama-Vasa Parva.