'Sanjaya said, "The great-souled Kounteya created the water. Having repulsed the enemy soldiers, he then created
a pavilion made out of arrows. The immensely radiant Vasudeva quickly descended from the chariot. He freed the
horses and removed the arrows tufted with the feathers of herons. On seeing a sight that had never been seen before, a giant roar, like that of lions, arose from the masses of siddhas and charanas and all the soldiers. Though
Kounteya fought on foot, the bulls among men who fought against him could not counter him and it was wonderful. Large numbers of chariots and many elephants and horses descended on him. But Partha did not exhibit the
slightest bit of fear towards these men. The kings released large numbers of arrows towards Pandava. But these did
not afflict Vasava's son. He had dharma in his soul and was the destroyer of enemy heroes. The valiant Partha received those nets of arrows, clubs and lances, like the ocean receiving rivers. With the great force of his weapons
and the strength of his arms, Partha countered the supreme arrows shot by all those Indras among kings. O great
king! The Kouravas worshipped the supremely wonderful valour of Partha and Vasudeva. 'Has there ever been
anything more wonderful in this world, or will there ever be, than the way in which Partha and Govinda freed their
horses in this battle? Those supreme among men displayed great energy and great assurance in the forefront of the
battle. They generated great fear in us[The Kouravas said this.].' O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Hrishikesha began to smile, as if
he was amidst women[And not in a field of battle.], after Arjuna had crated a pavilion made out of arrows in that field of battle. O lord of
the earth! While all the soldiers on your side looked on, the lotus-eyed one led the horses inside. Krishna was
skilled in all acts connected with horses. He removed all their exhaustion, pain, trembling, nausea and wounds. He
removed the stakes with his hands and rubbed the horses down. Having comforted them in due fashion, he made
them drink the water. Having obtained water and having bathed, they were free of pain and exhaustion. He again
cheerfully yoked them to that supreme of chariots. Shouri, supreme among those who wield all weapons, then
mounted the chariot, together with the immensely energetic Arjuna, and they departed swiftly.

'"On seeing that the supreme of chariots had been yoked to horses that had obtained water, the best among the
Kuru army again became distressed. O king! They sighed, like snakes that had been defanged. They separately
said, 'Shame! Shame on us! While all the kshatriyas looked on, the armoured Partha and Krishna have passed us,
on a single chariot. They have shattered our forces, like children playing with a toy. All the kings displayed their
own valour. They shouted and made their best endeavours. But those scorchers of enemies have passed us, while
we looked on.' On seeing that they had departed, other soldiers again said, 'O Kouravas! Let all of us make haste,
so that we can kill Krishna and Kiriti. Dasharha has yoked his chariot while all the archers have looked on. Repulsing us in the battle, he is proceeding towards Jayadratha.' O king! There were some other lords of the earth who
had seen a sight that had never before been seen in battle. On beholding that extraordinary wonder, they spoke to
each other. 'All these soldiers of King Dhritarashtra, the kshatriyas and the entire earth are in distress because of
Duryodhana's crime. They are confronting destruction. But the king[Duryodhana.] does not understand this.' O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Thus did the kshatriyas speak there. Others said, 'The king of Sindhu has gone to Yama's
abode. Let Dhritarashtra's weak-sighted son decide on what should be done now.' Meanwhile, the one with the
sharp rays was on a downward course and Pandava headed towards Saindhava with greater speed. The horses were
cheerful, now that they had drunk water. As the mighty-armed one, supreme among the wielders of all weapons,
proceeded angrily, like Death, none of the warriors were capable of resisting him. Pandava, the scorcher of enemies, drove away those soldiers, like a lion agitating a mass of deer, for the sake of Saindhava. Dasharha goaded
the horses and swiftly penetrated the array. He blew on Panchajanya, which possessed the complexion of cranes.
The arrows shot earlier by Kounteya began to fall behind him, so fast did those horses, with the speed of the wind,
proceed. The chariot roared like the clouds and the standard fluttered in the wind. On seeing that terrible standard,
with the monkey on it, the rathas were distressed. The sun was covered everywhere with dust. The warriors were
severely afflicted with arrows in that battle and no one was capable of glancing at the two Krishnas[Krishna and Arjuna.]. Dhananjaya wished to kill Jayadratha. Many enraged kings and many other kshatriyas surrounded him. In that great battle,
when Partha, bull among men, stopped to remove the arrows, Duryodhana swiftly followed him."'
