'Yudhishthira said, "I wish to hear what has been determined about dharma, artha and kama. All the advancements
in the world are based on these three. What are the foundations of dharma, artha and kama and what is their power? They are sometimes connected with each other and sometimes, they exist separately."

'Bhishma replied, "When people are cheerful in their minds, having determined to pursue their objectives, these
three originate in time and are united with each other. The foundation of the body is dharma, and artha is based on
dharma. Kama is said to be the fruit of artha. Resolution is the foundation of everything and resolution is based on
material objects. All the material objects find success in their being procured. These form the basis for the three
objectives[The three objectives of dharma, artha and kama are based on the acquisition of material objects.]. Withdrawal is said to be moksha. Dharma protects the body and artha is desired for the sake of
dharma. Kama leads to sexual pleasure. But all of these are nothing but dust[The text uses the word rajasvala, meaning a menstruating woman. That
imagery implicitly exists. Beyond that, rajas is dust and there is also the
rajas quality of passion.]. One should pursue whichever of
these is nearby and not discard them in one's mind. These begin with dharma and end with kama[An indirect way of referring to dharma, artha and kama.] and one
should renounce them only when one has freed oneself from the tamas quality. A man who is superior in his intelligence can obtain as much of these three objectives in an instant as a person of inferior intelligence can in an entire day. Dharma is stained by jealousy. Artha is stained by secrecy. Kama is stained by excessive addiction. Each
quality can be excessively pursued. In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about a conversation between Kamanda and Angarishtha. King Angarishtha greeted the rishi Kamanda when he was seated. Having observed the prescribed norms, Angarishtha asked him, 'A king may be confounded by the force of kama and act sinfully. O rishi! When he repents those, how can the sins be destroyed? In ignorance, one may follow adharma, taking it to be dharma. How can a king restrain that which is practised among men?'

'"Kamanda said, 'A man who disregards dharma and artha and follows kama destroys his own wisdom, because
he has abandoned dharma and artha. The confusion that destroys wisdom also destroys dharma and artha. From
this is created bad conduct and the trait of not believing[The word used for such a person is nastika.]. When the king does not restrain wicked people of bad
conduct, people think that this is as if a snake has entered the house[The king is being compared to a snake.]. The subjects do not follow him. Nor do
brahmanas and virtuous people. He confronts danger and may even be killed. When one is disrespected, even if
one remains alive, the misery is like being dead. Remaining alive with dishonour is pure death. On this, the preceptors have talked about means of destroying sin. He must serve the three forms of knowledge[The three Vedas.] and treat brahmanas well. He must be great-minded and follow dharma. He must marry into a great lineage. He must serve brahmanas who are spiritied and forgiving. Having performed ablutions with water, he must meditate. He must be
cheerful and not act in a contrary way. He must seek the companionship of those who follow dharma and avoid association with those who perform wicked deeds. He must placate them[The virtuous people.] with sweet words and deeds and tell
them, "I belong to you." He must recount the good qualities of others. If his conduct is devoid of sin, he will
quickly obtain great respect. There is no doubt that he will be able to negate all the wicked deeds that he has committed. What is stated by the seniors is supreme dharma. Act as they say. If you obtain the favours of the seniors,
you will obtain the best and supreme objective.'"'
