'Sanjaya said, "O lord of men! That army of yours had large numbers of horses and elephants. It fought everywhere, attacking the soldiers of the Pandus. The Panchalas and the Kurus fought against each other, having decided to go to the afterworld, the great kingdom of Yama. Brave ones clashed against brave ones and struck with arrows, lances and spears. They quickly sent each other to Yama's abode. Rathas fought against rathas and caused
fierce flowing of blood. There was a great battle and they killed each other. O great king! Crazy and intoxicated
elephants clashed against each other and gored each other with tusks. In that tumultuous battle, horse riders desired
great fame and killed horse riders with javelins, spears and battleaxes. O mighty-armed one! There were hundreds
of foot soldiers, with weapons in their hands. O king! They dashed against each other, always enterprising in their
valour. O venerable one! The lineages, names and families of the Panchalas and the Kurus could only be deciphered through hearing[So confused was the melee.]. In that battle, the warriors attacked each other with arrows, spears and battleaxes. Wishing to send others to the afterworld, they roamed around fearlessly. O king! They released thousands of arrows in
the ten directions, which were no longer illuminated, because the sun had set. O great king! When the Pandaveyas
were fearlessly fighting, Duryodhana penetrated into their army. Because of Saindhava's death, he was overcome
by supreme grief. Thinking that life was mortal, he penetrated into the army of the enemy. Making the earth tremble with the roar of his chariot, your son attacked the Pandava army. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! That tumultuous clash between them and him caused a great destruction among all the soldiers. Just as the midday sun
scorches with its rays, in their midst, your son tormented them with his shower of arrows. In that battle, the Pandavas were incapable of glancing at him. They were only interested in running away and lost all enthusiasm about
defeating the enemy. Your great-souled and archer son used gold-tufted arrows that were dazzling at the tip. The
Panchalas were slaughtered and fled. Afflicted by those arrows, the Pandu soldiers quickly began to fall down. O
lord of the earth! In the battle, those on their side were incapable of performing deeds like those done by the king
who was your son. In the encounter, the Pandava soldiers were crushed by your son, like lotuses by an elephant.
They were like blooming lotuses destroyed by an elephant, ones that had lost their sheen because of the wind and
the sun, once the water had dried up. Because of your son's energy, the Pandava soldiers were like that.

'"O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing that the Pandava soldiers were being killed by your son, the
Panchalas attacked him, with Bhimasena at the forefront. He[Duryodhana.] pierced Bhimasena with ten arrows, each of
Madri's sons with three arrows, Virata and Drupada with six each, Shikhandi with one hundred, Dhrishtadyumna
with seventy, Dharma's son with seven and the Kekayas and the Chedis with many sharp arrows. He pierced Sat-
vata with five, each of Droupadi's sons with three and also piercing Ghatotkacha in that battle, roared like a lion.
With arrows that were fierce at the tip, he brought down hundreds of other warriors, elephants, horses and chariots
in that battle, like an angry Destroyer slaughtering beings. His large bow had a golden back. O venerable one! As
he was striking down enemies with this, the eldest of the Pandavas[Yudhishthira.] severed it into three fragments with two
broad-headed arrows. He then pierced him with ten powerful and sharp arrows. These passed through all his inner
organs and having mangled him, entered the ground. The warriors who were around Yudhishthira were delighted,
like the gods surrounding Purandara after Vritra had been killed. O venerable one! Then, King Yudhishthira, who
is supremely difficult to repulse, dispatched an arrow towards your son in that battle. Severely wounded by this, he
sat down on his supreme chariot. O Indra among kings! At this, a great noise arose from the Panchala soldiers.

'The king has been killed,' they shouted in delight. O venerable one! The fierce sound of arrows was heard there.
In that battle, Drona quickly showed himself. Cheerfully, Duryodhana grasped his bow firmly and asking the Pan-
dava king to wait, attacked him. Wishing to seize the king[Duryodhana.], the Panchalas swiftly attacked back. Wishing to save
the supreme among the Kurus, Drona received them, like the one with the rays destroys clouds that have been
raised by a violent wind. O king! A great battle commenced between those on your side and the enemy, as they
clashed in their desire to fight, and it increased the carnage."'
