'Akritavarna said, "The immensely austere Jamadagni devoted himself to the study of the Vedas. Through his austerities, he brought the gods under his control. O king! He went to King Prasenjit and asked for Renuka, and the
king gave her to him. When he obtained Renuka as his wife, the descendant of the Bhargava lineage returned to his
hermitage and with her aid, engaged in austerities again. Four sons were born from her and Rama was the fifth. But
though he was the youngest, Rama was superior to the others.

'"Once, when her sons had gone to gather fruit, Renuka, rigid in her vows, went to have a bath. She saw the
king of Marttikavata there, Chitraratha by name. On seeing the prosperous king, garlanded with lotuses, sporting in
the water with his wives, Renuka was filled with desire. Because of this unchaste behaviour, she lost her senses
and moistened herself. Frightened, she returned to the hermitage. But her husband got to know. He saw that she
had been dislodged from her constancy and that she had lost the beauty of purity. The immensely energetic and
valorous one reproached her with words of 'Shame!' Then Jamadagni's eldest son, with the name of Rumanvat,
arrived-and then Sushena, Vasu and Vishvavasu, one by one. One after another, the illustrious one asked them to
kill their mother. But because they were deluded and had lost their senses, they said nothing in reply. He then
cursed them in great anger. As a result of the curse, they swiftly lost their minds and began to follow the conduct
of animals or birds, or that of inanimate objects.

'"Rama, the destroyer of enemy warriors, entered the hermitage last. The great ascetic Jamadagni told him in
great anger, 'O son! Kill your evil mother, without any compassion.' At that, Rama grasped his axe and sliced off
his mother's head. O great king! The anger of the great-souled Jamadagni was suddenly appeased. He said in a
pleasant voice, 'O son! At my words, you have performed a difficult feat. O one learned in dharma! Ask for anything you desire, as many wishes as may be there in your heart.' Thereupon, he asked that his mother might live
again, that he should not retain any memory of the slaying, that he should not be touched by the sin, that his brothers might return to their natural state, that he might be unrivalled in battle and that he should have a long life. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! The great ascetic Jamadagni granted him everything that he wished for.

'"O lord! One day, when the sons had gone out as before, the brave Kartavirya, the king of the region along the
shore, arrived. When he came to the hermitage, he was shown homage by the rishi's wife. But insolent from the
madness of battle, he did not accept this homage. He destroyed the hermitage. Through force, he carried off the
sacrificial cow's calf, though it kept crying. He tore down all the large trees. When Rama returned, his father himself told him what had happened. On seeing the cow weeping, Rama was overcome with great anger. In great
wrath, he rushed towards Kartavirya. Bhargava, the destroyer of enemy warriors, bravely engaged him in battle. O
king! He grasped his beautiful bow and with his sharp arrows, sliced off his one thousand arms[Kartavirya had one thousand arms. Kartavirya also had the name of Arjuna.], each of which
was like a club. Arjuna's heirs[Meaning sons.] became very angry at Rama. When Rama was not in the hermitage, they rushed
at Jamadagni. They killed the immensely valorous ascetic, who refused to fight and unprotected, kept calling out
for Rama. O Yudhishthira! Having pierced Jamadagni with their arrows, Kartavirya's sons, the destroyers of enemies, departed. When they had gone away and Jamadagni had died, the descendant of the Bhargava lineage returned to the hermitage with firewood. The brave one saw that his father had been overcome by death. He was miserable and lamented the one who had not deserved to meet this fate."'
