Janamejaya asked, 'When the enemies were slain, those great-souled ones, Keshava and Arjuna, dwelt in the assembly hall. O brahmana! What was the conversation between them?'

Vaishampayana replied, 'Having regained his own kingdom, Partha resided in that beautiful assembly hall with
Krishna and sported, filled with delight. O king! That region was like a spot in heaven. Surrounded by their relatives, they cheerfully roamed around, as they willed. With Krishna, Pandava Arjuna looked at that beautiful assembly hall and spoke these words. "O mighty-armed one! O son of Devaki! When the battle presented itself, I got to
know about your greatness, the truth about your lordship and your form. O Keshava! Out of affection towards me,
you spoke to me then. O tiger among men! However, my intelligence has been destroyed and I have forgotten
everything. O lord! However, my curiosity about that truth has again been ignited. O Madhava! You will soon go
away to Dvaraka." Having been thus addressed, the greatly energetic Krishna, supreme among eloquent ones, embraced Phalguna and replied in these words. "I made you listen to something that is eternal and secret. O Partha!
That was about the nature of eternal dharma for all the worlds. I am greatly displeased that you have ignorantly not
grasped what I told you. O Pandava! It is evident that you have not been faithful, or your intelligence is not adequate. That dharma is sufficient to obtain the state of the brahman. However, I am incapable of telling you everything in detail again. I immersed myself in yoga and told you about the supreme brahman[This is a reference to the Bhagavadgita.]. But I will tell you
about an ancient history with the same purport. Using that, if you use your intelligence, you will reach the ultimate
destination. O best among those who uphold dharma! Hear everything attentively. O scorcher of enemies! On one
occasion, a brahmana came to the world of heaven. He was unassailable and arrived from Brahma's world. He was
worshipped by us. O bull among the Bharata lineage! When he was asked by us, he followed the divine rites and
answered us. Without any hesitation, listen to that.

'"The brahmana said, 'O Krishna! What you have asked me concerns the adoption of the dharma of moksha. O
lord! This is driven by compassion for creatures and is meant to sever delusion. O Madhusudana! I will tell you
about it accurately. O Madhava! Listen attentively to me. There was a brahmana named Kashyapa. He was full of
austerities and rich in dharma. He went to another brahmana who knew everything about the sacred texts of dharma. He[The second brahmana.] was accomplished in jnana and vijnana and knew the past and the future in great detail. He was skilled in
the truth about the worlds and knew about misery and joy. He knew the truth about birth and death. He was wise
about virtue and sin. He knew about the superior and inferior ends that embodied beings obtained, depending on
their deeds. He roamed around, emancipated and successful. He was tranquil and in control over his senses. He
blazed in the prosperity of the brahman and could go everywhere. He knew how to disappear. Thus, he would vanish with the siddhas and the lords of the world. He would sit down with them and converse alone. Unattached, he
would roam around as he willed, like the wind. The intelligent Kashyapa heard the truth about him. The supreme
among brahmanas went and met him. Desiring dharma, he controlled himself well and fell down at the feet of the
ascetic. He met him in the appropriate way, filled with great devotion. Kashyapa was astounded on seeing that extraordinary person, who was supreme among brahmanas. To satisfy him and obtain learning, he served his preceptor with great devotion. He[The teacher.] possessed learning and character. O scorcher of enemies! By following the conduct
and sentiments due to a preceptor, he pleased him. Having been pleased with the disciple, the preceptor considered
supreme success and spoke to the disciple. O Janardana! Listen to those words from me. "O son[The word used is tata.]! Through different kinds of deeds and also by resorting to auspicious yoga, those who are mortal can obtain a place in the world of
the gods. However, there is no happiness that is extreme. There is no status that is eternal. When one is dislodged
from a great state, one repeatedly has to face misery again. Because I practised sin, I obtained inauspicious ends
and suffered misery. I was overcome by desire, anger, thirst and delusion. I have repeatedly gone through death
and birth. I have eaten many kinds of food. I have suckled at many kinds of breasts. I have seen many kinds of
mothers and fathers who are different from each other. O unblemished one! I have faced diverse kinds of happiness
and unhappiness. There are many occasions when I have been separated from what I love and united with what I
do not love. I have confronted the destruction of riches. I have faced misery on account of those riches. I have suffered disrespect and great hardships on account of relatives and those who are not related. I have suffered from extreme and terrible physical and mental pain. I have faced extreme dishonour and the terrible death of my relatives.
I have descended into hell and suffered hardships in Yama's abode. There have always been old age, disease and
many kinds of hardship. In this world, I have experienced extreme opposite sentiments. After a time, I became indifferent, beyond the opposites and without a desire to do  anything. Afflicted  by  great  grief,  I  abandoned  this
world. Through the tranquility in the atman, I then obtained this success. I will not come to this world again, nor
will I go to any other world. Amidst this creation of subjects, I have tasted success and my atman obtained an auspicious end. O best among brahmanas! That is the reason I have experienced excellent success. From here, I will
go to the supreme. From there, I will go to what is superior still. There is no doubt that I will obtain the foremost
state of being merged with the brahman. O scorcher of enemies! I will not return to the mortal world again. O immensely wise one! I am pleased with you. Tell me what I can do for you. The time for your desires to be satisfied
has arrived. Indeed, I know the reason why you have come here. I will soon leave this place. That is the reason I
have told you this. I am extremely pleased with you, at your character and your discernment. Ask what you want
and I will tell you what you want to hear. Since you have shown me this great honour, I deeply respect your intelligence. O Kashyapa! You clearly possess intelligence and understanding."'"'
