'Bhishma said, "Jamadagni's son Rama[Parashurama.] was angry when his father was killed and in his anger, the immensely
illustrious one killed the king of the Haihayas[The king of the Haihayas was Kartavirya Arjuna.]. He sliced off Arjuna's 1000 arms. Then he again took up his
bow to conquer the world. Using his wonderful weapons, the great-souled descendant of Bhargava used his arrows
to exterminate Kshatriyas from the world twenty-one times. Then Kshatriya women everywhere had offspring
through Brahmanas who were self-controlled. The Vedas clearly say that a son so born belongs to the one who accepted the hand[That is, the person who married the mother, not the one who begot the son.]. With dharma in their minds, they united with the Brahmanas. The world has thus seen the
resurgence of the Kshatriyas.

'"In earlier times, there was a famous and wise rishi named Utathya. His wife was named Mamata and he loved
her dearly. Utathya's younger brother was the immensely energetic Brihaspati, the priest of the gods. He desired
Mamata and sought to unite with her. Mamata told her brother-in-law, who was most eloquent in speech, 'I am
pregnant through your older brother. Therefore, desist. O illustrious Brihaspati! Utathya's son is in my womb and
has studied the Vedas and the Vedangas there. Your semen is infallible and, therefore, this is not possible. Do not
desire me today.' At these words, the immensely energetic Brihaspati could not suppress his desire, though he had
achieved self-control. The desiring one united with her, though she did not desire him in return. When he spilt his
semen, the embryo inside the womb said, 'O father! There is no room inside for two of us. I was here first and you
have unnecessarily wasted your semen.' At this, the illustrious rishi Brihaspati was angry and cursed Utathya's
son, who was in the womb. 'You have spoken at a time that all beings crave for. Therefore, you will enter a long
period of darkness.' From this curse was born the rishi Dirghatama[The critical edition has eliminated shlokas that tell us Dirghatama was born blind. Hence, the long period of
darkness is left unexplained.]. He was Brihaspati's equal in great deeds
and great energy. To extend Utathya's lineage, the famous rishi had sons like Goutama and others, all immensely
famous.

'"But Goutama and the other sons were overcome by greed and delusion. They tied him to wood and threw him
into the waters of the Ganga. 'This man[Dirghatama. One now knows that Dirghatama was blind.] is blind and old. Why should we support him?' Thinking in this way,
the cruel ones returned home. O king! The rishi then floated along the river, blindly passing many kingdoms on the
raft. One day, a king named Bali, who was learned in all aspects of dharma, had come to the water and saw him
floating along in the current. O bull among men[This bull among men is Janamejaya. Although Bhishma is now telling the story to Satyavati, it is being retold by Vaishampayana. However, this reference to Janamejaya shouldn't have been here, since it is Bhishma who
is speaking.]! The righteous Bali found his strength in truth. He knew who
he was and grasped him, so that he could obtain sons. He said, 'O illustrious one! Honour me. I have to obtain sons
through my wife. Therefore, father sons who are knowledgeable in dharma and artha.' Thus addressed, the energetic rishi agreed. The king then sent his wife Sudeshna to him. But knowing that he was old and blind, the queen
did not go to him. Instead, she demeaned him and sent her ignorant Shudra nurse. The righteous rishi then fathered
eleven sons on the Shudra woman, the first of whom was named Kakshivat. When he saw Kakshivat and all the
other sons studying, the valorous king was delighted and told the rishi, 'These are mine.' 'No,' said the maharshi
and continued, 'I have fathered Kakshivat and the others on a Shudra woman. Your queen Sudeshna discovered
that I was blind and old. In her folly, she insulted me and sent her Shudra nurse to me.' Bali then pacified that
supreme of rishis and again sent his wife Sudeshna to him. Dirghatama felt the queen's limbs and told her, 'You
will have a powerful son who will be devoted to the truth.' Thus the rajarshi Anga was born from Sudeshna. In this
way, many Kshatriyas who were great archers were born from Brahmanas. They were supremely learned in dharma, valorous and had great strength. O mother! Having heard this, you should do as you desire."'
