Vyasa said, 'For the second quarter of his life, he will dwell in a house, in the state of a householder. Desiring to pursue dharma, he will follow good vows, ignite a fire and accept a wife. Wise and learned ones
have laid down four kinds of conduct for a householder. The first of these is to maintain a store of grain, the second
to maintain a pot of grain, the third is not to provide for tomorrow, while the last is to follow the conduct of pigeons[Feeding on whatever is available on the ground.]. If one desires to follow dharma and conquer the worlds, in progressive order, the succeeding one is superior to the preceding one[That is, not saving grain is superior to saving grain.]. A person who follows the first must undertake six tasks[A person who maintains a store of grain must perform the six tasks of performing sacrifices for himself, officiating at sacrifices of others, teaching, studying, making gifts and receiving gifts.]. A person who follows the
second must undertake three[A person who maintains a pot of grain must perform the three tasks of studying, making gifts and receiving
gifts.]. A person who follows the third must undertake two[A person who does not provide for tomorrow must perform the two tasks of studying and making gifts.]. The fourth will only base
himself on sacrifices to Brahma[Interpreted as studying.]. The dharma of a householder is said to be great. However, one must not cook
only for one's own self. Nor should animals pointlessly be slaughtered[Other than at sacrifices.]. If an animal or an inanimate being[Like a tree.] is
to be brought down, the ordinances of a sacrifice must be observed. He must not sleep during the day, or during the
first part of the night and the last part. He must not eat in between[The recommended meals are in the morning and in the evening.]. When it is not her season, he must not summon his wife. In his house, there must never be a brahmana who is not fed or not worshipped. Guests who convey
oblations at sacrifices, those who are learned in the Vedas and have bathed themselves in the vows, those who are
accomplished and learned in the Vedas, those who are generous and live according to their own dharma, those who
observe the rites and those who are ascetics must always be honoured. It is recommended that offerings meant for
the gods and the ancestors are for people like these. It is instructed that a share should be given to all beings, even
if they sport long nails and hair, even if they have been dislodged from dharma despite knowing it, even if they
have deviated from agnihotra sacrifices and even if they have injured the old and the young. A person who is a
householder must give food to all of them. The eating of leftovers is always like eating amrita. It is like eating the
oblations that are left at the end of a sacrifice, like amrita. A person who eats after the servants have eaten is said to
subsist on leftovers. He must be content with his own wife. He must be self-controlled. He must conquer his senses
and be devoid of malice. He must not get into debates with officiating priests, priests, preceptors, maternal uncles,
guests, dependants, the aged, the young, the distressed, physicians, kin, matrimonial allies, relatives, mothers, fathers, daughters-in-law, brothers, sons, wives, daughters and the category of servants. Having been freed from such
conversations, he is freed from all sins. If he can conquer this, there is no doubt that he wins all the worlds. The
preceptor is the lord of Brahma's world, the father is the lord of Prajapati's world[If these are pleased, those respective worlds can be won.]. Guests are the lords of Indra's
world, the officiating priest of the world of the gods. Daughters-in-law hold sway over the world of apsaras, kin
over that of the Vishvadevas. Matrimonial allies and relatives control the directions and mothers and maternal uncles control the earth. The old, the young, the distressed and the weak hold sway over the sky and have a power
like Vishnu. The elder brother is like a father. The wife and the son are like one's own body. The class of servants
represents one's own shadow. The daughter is most loved. Therefore, one must always tolerate them, without any
anxiety, and must never reprimand these. A person devoted to the dharma of a householder must be learned. He
must always be devoted to dharma and must be free of exhaustion. He must perform any task because of considerations of artha. He must act in conformity with dharma. There are three kinds of conduct for a householder and in
progressive order, each subsequent one is superior to the preceding one[This probably means kama, artha and dharma, in that order.]. This is also said to be true of the four
ashramas[Sannyasa is superior to vanaprastha, vanaprastha is superior to garhasthya and garhasthya is superior to
brahmacharya.]. These are said to be the rules that ensure prosperity in all tasks. A kingdom prospers when those who
dwell in it follow the conduct of those who store grain in pots, or glean them like pigeons from the ground[It is not obvious why these two modes have been singled out.]. If a
person cheerfully follows the vows of a householder, ten generations of his ancestors and ten generations of his descendants attain the supreme objective. Acting in this way, he obtains worlds obtained by universal emperors. This
is also the objective ordained for those who control their senses. The world of heaven is ordained for householders
who are generous in their minds and engaged in welfare. That heaven is full of excellent blossoming flowers and
has celestial vehicles. It has been spoken about in the Vedas. Householders who control their souls find a place in
the world of heaven. The brahman is the ladder that frees them. By following this second mode[The householder stage is the second ashrama.], one obtains
greatness in the world of heaven. After this, there is the supremely great ashrama that is the third, spoken about for
those who are ready to cast aside their bodies. Residing in the forest is superior to being a householder. They waste
away their bodies there. Listen to this.'"'
