'Ashvatthama said, "The cattle have not been conquered yet. They have not crossed the boundary. Nor have they
reached Hastinapura. O Karna! Why are you boasting? Even after having won many battles, obtaining a great deal
of riches and winning many enemy lands, there is no manliness in boasting. The fire burns without a word. The sun
shines in silence. The earth bears its beings, mobile and immobile, in silence. The deeds of the four varnas have
been laid down by the learned ones, so that they may achieve the objective of wealth without committing a sin.
Having studied the Vedas, brahmanas must sacrifice and officiate at sacrifices. Kshatriyas must use the bow and
sacrifice, but officiate at the sacrifices of others. Having acquired objects, vaishyas must perform deeds for the
brahman[The supreme soul, brahman or paramatman.]. Having obtained the earth in accordance with the sacred texts, those immensely fortunate ones behaved well towards their preceptors, even if they were devoid of qualities. What kshatriya should be satisfied at
having obtained a kingdom through gambling? That is cruel and should be for other ordinary men. Having obtained riches through deceit and fraud, what wise man will boast of it, like a vendor of flesh? In which duel in battle have you vanquished Dhananjaya, Nakula or Sahadeva? Whose riches have you robbed? Has Yudhishthira, or
Bhima, supreme among strong ones, ever been defeated by you? And in which battle did you win over Krishna[Droupadi.]?
O performer of evil deeds! She was dragged into the assembly hall in a single garment, when she was in season. In
search of gain, you have severed the great root of a sandalwood tree[The sense seems to be that one was myopic and didn't allow the sandalwood tree to grow.]. O brave one! You made them perform
tasks and what did Vidura have to say then[This is a reference to Vidura's censure, described in Section 27 (Volume 2).]? We have seen that men exhibit conciliation, to the best of their ability. So do other beings, even insects and ants. The Pandavas are incapable of pardoning Droupadi's molestation.
Dhananjaya has appeared for the destruction of the sons of Dhritarashtra. Appearing as a learned one, you speak
your words repeatedly. But will Jishnu not end this enmity, leaving no vestiges left[Leaving none of us alive.]? Kunti's son Dhananjaya is
not frightened of fighting the gods, the gandharvas, the asuras or the rakshasas. When he is enraged and descends
on anyone in battle, he destroys him, like a tree is brought down through Garuda's force. He is superior to you in
valour. He is equal to the king of the gods[Indra.] in archery. He is Vasudeva's[Krishna's.] equal in battle. Who will not show
homage to Partha? He will fight and destroy divine[Divine and human weapons respectively.] with divine, human with human, weapons with other
weapons. What man is Arjuna's equal? Those who know about dharma know that a student comes only after a son.
That is the reason why Drona loves Pandava. Will you fight with Pandava the way you gambled and won Indraprastha and the way you dragged Krishna to the assembly hall? This wise uncle of yours, Shakuni of
Gandhara[Though spoken to Karna, Ashvatthama is indirectly addressing Duryodhana.], is a deceitful gambler and is learned about the dharma of kshatriyas. Let him fight here now. Gandiva
does not cast dice, not krita, nor dvapara[Other than yugas or eras, krita, treta, dvapara and kali are also the names of the number of spots when a die is
thrown. Krita is when four spots show up on top, treta is three, dvapara is two and kali is one.]. Gandiva releases flaming, sharp and pointed arrows. When released
from Gandiva, dreadful, extremely energetic and tufted with vulture feathers, they can even pierce the interiors of
mountains. Antaka, Shamana, death[Antaka and Shamana are both names of Yama, the god of death.] and the fire with the mare's head[The subterranean fire, vadava.] leave something behind, but not an enraged Dhananjaya. Let the preceptor[Drona.] fight with Dhananjaya if he wishes. I will not fight with him. Our purpose
is to fight with Matsya, if he comes here, following the footprints of the cattle."'
