'Sanjaya said, "O lord of the earth! On seeing that his own army was being slaughtered by those great-souled ones,
your son was overcome by great rage. He swiftly went to Karna and Drona, supreme among victorious ones. Overcome by feelings of intolerance, the one who was eloquent with words spoke these words. 'Incited by your anger,
the two of you started this battle[Referring to the battle that is taking place during the night.], on seeing that Saindhava had been killed by Savyasachi in the battle. My
army is being slaughtered by the Pandus. Though you are capable of obtaining victory, you are looking on, as if
you are incapable. If you are going to abandon me today, you should not have spoken to me in that way earlier.

"We will defeat the sons of Pandu in the battle." O those who grant honours! On hearing your words, I allowed this
to happen. Otherwise, I would not have provoked an enmity with the Pandavas, so destructive of warriors. O bulls
among men! O ones who are great in valour! If I should not be abandoned by the two of you, then fight in accordance with the valour you possess.' Thus goaded by the words of your son, those two brave ones returned again to
the battle, like snakes that have been driven with sticks. They were the foremost among rathas. They were the best
archers in all the worlds. In that battle, they advanced against the Parthas, with Shini's descendant at the forefront.
The Parthas also united, surrounded by their own soldiers and advanced against those two brave ones, who were
roaring repeatedly.

'"The great archer Drona, supreme among those who wielded all weapons, angrily and spiritedly pierced the
bull among the Shini lineage with ten arrows. Karna pierced him with ten arrows and your son with seven, Vrishasena with ten and Soubala with seven. A mass of Kouravas surrounded Shini's descendant. On seeing that
Drona was slaughtering the Pandava army in the battle, the Somakas quickly pierced him from every side and
showered arrows on him. O lord of the earth! O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Drona began to rob the
kshatriyas of their lives, like the sun destroys darkness with its rays. O lord of the earth! The Panchalas were
slaughtered by Drona and we heard a tremendous uproar as they called out to each other. Some abandoned their
sons, others their fathers, others their brothers and maternal uncles, others their sisters' sons, friends and kin, as
they quickly ran away, seeking to save their lives. Others were confused and because of delusion, ran towards
him[They ran towards Drona, instead of running away from him.]. In the battle, other Pandava warriors were sent to the world of the hereafter. Thus the Pandava soldiers
were killed by the great-souled ones[Drona and Karna.]. O king! They fled in the night, throwing away thousands of blazing torches, while the warriors Bhimasena, Vijaya[Arjuna.], Achyuta, the twins, Dharma's son and Parshata looked on. With the
world covered in darkness, nothing could be seen. But because of the light that existed among the Kouravas, it
could be seen that the enemy was running away. O king! As the soldiers ran away, maharatha Drona and Karna followed them from the rear and showered many arrows.

'"On seeing that the Panchalas were shattered and routed in every way, Janardana was distressed and addressed
Phalguna. 'Parshata and Satyaki, together with the Panchalas, advanced against the great archers, Drona and Karna, and are being killed through fierce arrows. Those maharathas have shattered them with their shower of arrows.
O Kounteya! The army should be restrained. It is still capable of taking a stand. Let us array all the soldiers in a
battle formation and rallying them, let us raise our weapons and advance against Drona and the son of a suta. They
are powerful and brave. They are skilled in the use of weapons and desire to obtain victory. They are angrily casting aside our army and destroying it in the night.' O king! On seeing that Vrikodara was advancing, Janardana
again spoke to Pandava, as if to cheer him. 'With the fierce Bhima advancing in front, the soldiers are returning
again. This Bhima prides himself in battle and is surrounded by the Somakas and the Pandavas. They are angry
and are powerfully advancing against the immensely strong Drona and Karna. O descendant of the Pandu lineage!
For the sake of assuring all the soldiers, fight against them, together with the maharatha Panchalas.' Those tigers
among men, Madhava and Pandava, then approached Drona and Karna and stationed themselves at the forefront of
the battle.

'"Yudhishthira's large army returned again and went to the spot where Drona and Karna were crushing the enemy in the battle. In the night, there was a great and tumultuous encounter. O king! It was like that of two rising
oceans, when the moon has arisen. Your soldiers threw away the lamps from their hands and fought with the Pandavas, as if they were maddened at the destruction. There was an extremely terrible darkness, with dust. Desiring
victory, they fought on the basis of names and family names[By calling these out to each other.]. The names uttered by the kings were heard. O
great king! That hour of the battle was like a svayamvara[In the sense that the combatants chose who to fight with.]. There was sudden silence for a while and then a
great uproar arose again, from the angry warriors who were victorious and those who were defeated. O supreme
among the Kuru lineage! Like insects, the brave ones were drawn to the spots where there were lamps. O Indra
among kings! As all the Pandavas and the Kouravas fought, the great darkness of the night gathered around
them."'
