'"Bhishma said, 'Both brothers, Achala and Vrishaka, are invincible rathas. They will destroy your enemies. They
are strong. They are tigers among men. They are firm in their anger. They are ones who can strike. They are foremost among those from Gandhara. They are young and handsome. They are extremely strong. This friend of yours
is always devoted to you and is always harsh about wanting war. O king! He incites you in this war with the Pandavas. Karna Vaikartana is harsh, boastful and inferior. He is your adviser, leader and friend. He is insolent and has
been extremely uplifted by you. O king! He is not a full ratha. Nor is he an atiratha. Because he is always generous, he has been separated from the divine earrings he was born with. Because of Rama's curse, the words of the
brahmana and because he will be separated from his implements[Karna studied under Parashurama under the false pretence of being a brahmana. When he was discovered,
Parashurama cursed him that he would not be able to remember the weapons at the time of battle.], it is my view that he is only half a ratha. When
he meets Phalguna, he will not be able to escape with his life.'"

'Sanjaya said, "The mighty-armed Drona, supreme among the wielders of weapons, then spoke. 'It is exactly as
you have said and there is no falsehood in this at all. In battle after battle, I have seen him retreat. Karna is generous. But he is also distracted. It is my view that he is half a ratha.' When he heard this, Radheya's eyes widened in
anger. O Indra among kings! He spoke to Bhishma, lashing him with his words. 'O grandfather! As you wish, you
pierce me with the arrows of your words. I am innocent, but you have hated me at every step. For Duryodhana's
sake, I have tolerated all of this. You now think that I am incapable and am a coward. There is no doubt that I think
that you are half a ratha. O Gangeya! I do not lie when I say that you always wish ill to the Kurus and the entire
universe. But the king does not realize this. These kings are equal in their names and deeds. Who else but you will
reduce their energy just before the battle, by creating dissension among them? In describing their qualities, you are
highlighting their demerits. O Kourava! Age, grey hair, wealth and relatives cannot make a kshatriya a maharatha.
Kshatriyas are known to be foremost because of their strength, brahmanas are known to be foremost because of
their mantras, vaishyas are known to be foremost because of their riches and shudras are known to be foremost because of their years. You have differentiated between rathas and atirathas according to your own inclinations, because of your own desires and enmity. You are deluded. O Duryodhana! O mighty-armed one! Consider this in the
proper way. Discard Bhishma, whose sentiments are evil. He will bring about dissension. O king! Once there is
discord within the army, it will be difficult to bring it together again. O tiger among men! This is true if the source
of the army is one, it is even more so when it comes from different origins. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In
this war, this division has already penetrated our warriors. He is sapping our energy, in front of our very eyes.
What does the dim-witted Bhishma know about the science of rathas? I will repluse the armies of the Pandavas.
When they encounter my invincible arrows, the Pandavas and the Panchalas will be dispersed in the ten directions,
like bulls before a tiger. Where is the turmoil of battle and the counsel of good advice and where is the aged and
evil-souled Bhishma, driven by destiny? He always boasts that he can alone fight the entire universe. With his deluded vision, he does not think that any other man exists. The sacred texts certainly say that we must listen to the
aged. But it is also the view that one should not listen to the extremely old. They are like children. O tiger among
kings! In an excellent fight, there is no doubt that I will kill the Pandavas alone, though the fame for this will accrue to Bhishma. O lord of men! You have appointed Bhishma your commander and the commander is credited
with qualities, never the warriors. O king! I will never fight as long as Gangeya is alive. But once Bhishma has
been slain, I will fight with all the maharathas.'"'
