Shounaka said, 'O Souti! Tell us once again, in detail, the account of the holy and wise Astika. You listen most
obediently to what we say. O son! You speak in gentle tones, with the right words and metres. We are very pleased.
You speak like your father. Your father was always ready to please us. Therefore, tell us this account, as your father narrated it.'

Souti said, 'O long-lived ones! I shall tell you the story of Astika exactly as I heard it from my father. O Brahmana without sin! Many years ago, in the era of the gods, Prajapati[Daksha.] had two fair daughters and these sisters had
great beauty. Their names were Kadru and Vinata and they were the wives of Kashyapa. Their husband was like
Prajapati and obtaining great happiness from his wives, gave each of them a boon. Hearing that their husband
Kashyapa was willing to grant boons, these two beautiful women were transformed from happiness to great joy.
Kadru wished to have one thousand nagas as her sons, equal to one another in splendour. Vinata asked for two
sons, greater than Kadru's sons in strength, form, energy and valour. Then, her husband granted her the boon of
sons she wanted and Kashyapa told Vinata that it would be as she wished. Having got the boon she desired of two
greatly powerful sons, Vinata was satisfied and happy. So was Kadru at having obtained the boon of one thousand
sons, equal in splendour. "Nurture the embryos with care." Saying this, the great ascetic Kashyapa went away to
the forest, leaving his two wives satisfied with their boons.'

Souti said, 'O lord of the Brahmanas! After a long time, Kadru gave birth to one thousand eggs. Vinata gave
birth to two eggs. Their happy maidservants kept these separately in steaming vessels and 500 years passed. After
500 years, Kadru's sons emerged from the eggs. But nothing was seen to emerge from Vinata's two eggs. Thereupon, that ascetic lady Vinata, impatient to have a son but ashamed and sorry, broke open one of the eggs and saw
her son, with the upper part of the body formed, but the lower part yet unformed. It was then heard that the enraged
son cursed his mother. "O mother! Since out of avarice, you broke open this egg and didn't allow my body to be
completely developed, you will be enslaved for 500 years by the woman you sought to equal. O mother! Your other illustrious son will set you free from slavery, if you wait patiently and do not break open the egg prematurely
and deform his body like you have done mine. If you wish to have a son of unrivalled strength, you must patiently
wait for his time of birth, for 500 years." Thus cursing his mother Vinata, the son arose into the sky. O Brahmana!
Aruna[The son. Aruna is the red sky of dawn and is also the sun's charioteer.] can be seen in the morning. At the right time, Garuda, the enemy of the nagas, was born. As soon as he
was born, he deserted his mother. O tiger of the Bhrigu lineage! Being hungry, the king of the birds rose into the
sky to search for the food earmarked for him by the creator.'
