Vaishampayana said, 'Anxious on Dhananjaya's account, the immensely fortunate and maharatha[A maharatha is in general a mighty warrior. More specifically, a maharatha is skilled in the use of all weapons
and can take on ten thousand warriors single-handedly.] Pandavas lived
in the forest with Droupadi. Then they saw there the great-souled devarshi[Divine sage.] Narada. He was radiant with the resplendence of the brahman[The supreme soul or paramatman.] and his energy was like that of the blazing fire. The supreme one among the Kurus[Yudhishthira.]
was surrounded by his illustrious brothers and shone brilliantly, like Shatakratu[Shatakratu is one of Indra's names, meaning the performer of one hundred (shata) sacrifices (kratu).] surrounded by the gods. Just as
savitri[The sacred savitri mantra from the Rig Veda, also known as the gayatri mantra. This is an incantation to the
sun.] does not forsake the Vedas and the sun's rays do not forsake Meru[Mount Meru, mythical mountain that is the centre of the earth.], the faithful Yajnaseni[Droupadi's name.] followed dharma and did not abandon the Parthas[Sons of Pritha or Kunti, that is, the Pandavas.]. O unblemished one[Vaishampayana is speaking to Janamejaya and telling him the story.]! The illustrious rishi[Sage.] Narada accepted their homage
and appropriately comforted Dharma's son[Yudhishthira is Dharma's son.]. He spoke these words to great-souled Dharmaraja[Yudhishthira's name.] Yudhishthira.

"O supreme among those who uphold dharma! Tell me what will accomplish your purpose. What will I give you?"

Then Dharma's son, the king, bowed in obeisance with his brothers, and with hands joined in salutation, told the
divine Narada, "O immensely fortunate one! O one who is worshipped by all the worlds! O one whose vows are
great! If you are satisfied, I think everything has been accomplished through your grace. O unblemished one! O
supreme among sages! But if you wish to show a favour to me and my brothers, please dispel a doubt that has
arisen in my heart. Tell me what merits are obtained by someone who circles the earth[The word used is pradakshina, which is much more specific than a mere act of circling. This circling or circumambulation has to be done in a specific way, so that the right side (dakshina) always faces what is being circled. If one is undertaking a tour of pilgrimage, this must begin with the south, then move to the west, then the
north and finally the east. The right side, so to speak, then always faces the centre of the earth.] and visits all the tirthas?
O brahmana! Please tell me this in detail."

'Narada replied, "O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Listen attentively to what Bhishma heard from
Pulastya[One of the seven great sages.]. Hear it in detail. In earlier times, Bhishma, supreme among those who uphold dharma, was observing
a vow for his father[Bhishma was Shantanu's son. It never becomes clear what vow Bhishma observed for Shantanu. However,
Shantanu fell in love with Satyavati and Bhishma took the vow that he would never marry. This vow could have
had something to do with that.] on the banks of the Bhagirathi[Bhagirathi is one of Ganga's names and the river is so named because King Bhagiratha brought Ganga down
from heaven.], like a hermit. O great king! This was a pure and sacred
region and was frequented by the devarshis. The immensely energetic one was at the mouth of the Ganga, in a
place frequented by gods and gandharvas[Gandharvas are celestial musicians and semi-divine.]. The immensely radiant one made offerings to the ancestors and the
gods and satisfied the rishis in accordance with the prescribed rituals. After some time, when the immensely famous one was meditating, he saw the supreme rishi Pulastya, whose appearance was extraordinary. On seeing that
terrible ascetic, blazing in fortune, he was extremely delighted and overcome by wonder. O great king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Bhishma, best among those who uphold dharma, worshipped him in accordance with
the prescribed rituals. He purified himself and concentrated his mind. He placed the arghya[Arghya (or argha) is an offering made to a guest as a sign of veneration.] on his head and announced his name to the supreme among brahmarshis. 'O fortunate one whose vows are great! I am your slave
Bhishma. At the mere sight of you, I have been cleansed of all my sins.' O great king! O Yudhishthira! Having
said this, Bhishma, supreme among those who uphold dharma, became silent and controlled his speech. He joined
his hands in salutation. On seeing that Bhishma, best among those of the Kuru lineage, had become emaciated because of the rituals and the studying, the sage was pleased in his mind.

'"Pulastya said, 'O one who is knowledgeable about dharma! O immensely fortunate one! I am entirely satisfied
with your humility, self-control and devotion to the truth. O unblemished one! O son! It is because of your dharma
and because of your devotion to your father that you have been able to see me. I am extremely pleased with you. O
Bhishma! My vision is unrestricted. Tell me what I can do for you. O best of the Kurus! O unblemished one! I will
give you whatever you ask for.'

'"Bhishma replied, 'O immensely fortunate one! O one who is worshipped by all the worlds! O lord! If you are
pleased with me and I have been able to see you, I think that all my tasks have been accomplished. O supreme
among those who uphold dharma! If I have obtained your favour, I will tell you about a doubt in my heart. Please
dispel it. O illustrious one! A doubt exists about the dharma that comes from the tirthas. I wish to hear about this
from you, separately for each of them. Please tell me. O brahmana rishi! O infinitely valorous one! O one blessed
with the riches of austerities! Tell me what merits are obtained by circling the earth.'

'"Pulastya said, 'O son! Listen to me with an attentive mind. I will recount to you the fruits from the tirthas, the
ultimate goal of all the rishis. He who has controlled his hands, feet and mind and he who has learning, asceticism
and deeds, obtains the fruits of the tirthas. He who is satisfied, controlled and pure, does not receive gifts[Because there is no desire for material possessions.] and
has restrained his ego, obtains the fruits of the tirthas. He who is without deceit, without undertakings[Because there is no desire for the fruits of undertakings.], eats lightly, controls his senses and is freed from all sins, obtains the fruits of the tirthas. O Indra among kings! He who is
without anger, truthful in conduct and firm in his vows and who regards all beings as his own self, obtains the
fruits of the tirthas. In due order, the rishis have recounted in the Vedas all the fruits from sacrifices, exactly as they
occur, in this life and the afterlife. O lord of the earth! The poor cannot perform these sacrifices. Sacrifices require
many objects and a lot of ingredients in large quantities. Kings can attain them and so can some rich men. They
cannot be attained by those without riches, without objects, without means and those who are alone. O lord of
men! But listen to what the poor can obtain, the supreme equal of the fruits of sacred sacrifices. O supreme among
those of the Bharata lineage! This is the supreme mystery of the rishis, the pure merit from visiting tirthas, superior
even to sacrifices. He who has not fasted for three nights, not visited tirthas and not donated gold and cattle, is
known as poor. The fruits obtained from agnishtoma[Agnishtoma is more than a sacrifice performed with fire (agni). There was a class of soma sacrifices known
as jyotishtoma and agnishtoma was part of this, performed for several days during the spring.] and other sacrifices, with large quantities of donations, are
inferior to those obtained from visiting tirthas.'

'"There is in the world of men a tirtha of the god of the gods. It is famous in the three worlds and is known by
the name of Pushkara[Pushkara is near Ajmer and there is a temple to Brahma there. There are several other temples too. However,
there is also a Pushkara in the village of Ponkar Kheri in Jind district (Haryana).]. Those who are immensely fortunate go there. O lord of the earth! At the time of the three
sandhyas[Sandhya means union and is used for morning (dawn) and evening (dusk) twilights, when night unites with
day. That makes it two sandhyas. The third one is midday (noon), uniting forenoon with afternoon.], ten thousand crores of tirthas can be found in Pushkara. O lord! Adityas[The Adityas are the sons of Aditi and the expression is used for gods in general. More specifically, there are
twelve Adityas who are manifestations of the sun and shine together at the time of destruction. The names of these
twelve Adityas vary, but the most common list is Mitra, Varuna, Aryaman, Daksha, Bhaga, Amsha, Tvashtra, Savita, Pusha, Shakra, Vivasvat and Vishnu. Sometimes, Varuna, Daksha and Amsha are replaced by Dhata, Rudra and
Surya.], Vasus[There are eight Vasus. According to the Mahabharata, they are descended from Brahma. The names of the
eight Vasus vary from one text to another. According to the Mahabharata, the names are Anala (alternatively
Agni), Dhara (Prithvi elsewhere), Anila (alternatively Vayu), Aha (Antariksha elsewhere), Pratyusha (Aditya elsewhere), Prabhasa (Dyaus elsewhere), Soma (alternatively Chandrama) and Dhruva.], Rudras[By the time of the Mahabharata, the god Rudra was identified with Shiva. In the plural, the Rudras are slightly inferior companions of Shiva and there are eleven of them. The names of the eleven Rudras vary from one list to
another and one such list has Mrigavyadha, Sarva, Nirriti, Ajaekapada, Ahirbudhnya, Pinaki, Dahana, Ishvara, Kapali, Sthanu and Bhava.], the
Sadhyas[Relatively minor gods.], with the Maruts[Gods of storm and wind, companions of Indra. The number of Maruts varies.] and gandharvas and apsaras[Apsaras are celestial dancers who serve Indra, sometimes regarded as wives of gandharvas.] are always present there. O great king! It was there
that the gods, demons and brahmarshis performed austerities and attained great merits and celestial yoga[Literally, union. Stands for the union between the human soul and the supreme one.]. Even
if one only desires Pushkara in one's mind, all the sins of that intelligent one are cleansed and he is revered in the
vault of heaven. The immensely fortunate grandfather[Brahma.] always dwells there, happily worshipped by the gods and
the demons. O immensely fortunate one! It was in Pushkara that the gods, with the rishis at the forefront, attained
salvation and great merits. The learned ones say that he who bathes there and worships the gods and the ancestors,
obtains ten times the merits of an ashvamedha[A horse sacrifice.]. O Bhishma! He who goes to Pushkara forest and feeds only a
single brahmana, obtains through that deed happiness in this life and the afterlife. If he himself survives on vegetables, roots and fruits and faithfully and respectfully offers that to a brahmana, that wise man obtains the fruits of a
horse sacrifice. O supreme among kings! Great-souled brahmanas, kshatriyas, vaishyas and shudras who bathe in
this tirtha are not reborn as inferior species. O bull among the Bharata lineage! A man who specially goes to
Pushkara at the time of the full moon in the month of Kartika extends his merits and they become inexhaustible. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! He who joins his hands in salutation and remembers Pushkara in the morning
and the evening attains the fruits of bathing in all the tirthas. That man obtains Brahma's eternal world, without decay. Whatever sins a woman or a man has committed since birth are all instantly destroyed from bathing in
Pushkara. O king! Just as Madhusudana[Vishnu's name, because Vishnu killed a demon named Madhu.] is the origin of all the gods, Pushkara is known as the origin of all the
tirthas. He who lives constantly and purely in Pushkara for twelve years obtains all the sacrifices[Obtains the fruits of all the sacrifices.] and attains
Brahma's world. He who performs agnihotra[Maintenance of the sacred fire and the offering of oblations to it.] for one hundred years and he who lives in Pushkara on the night
of the full moon in Kartika are like equals. It is difficult to go to Pushkara. It is difficult to perform austerities in
Pushkara. It is difficult to donate in Pushkara. It is extremely difficult to live there.

'"Having lived in Pushkara for twelve nights, restrained and with a controlled diet, one should circumambulate
it and go to Jambumarga[It is impossible to identify this. Jambudvipa is one of the seven continents (dvipa) that surround Mount Meru
and Jambumarga is probably a road (marga) leading to Jambudvipa.]. Jambumarga is frequented by the gods, the rishis and the ancestors and once one has
entered, one obtains the fruits of a horse sacrifice and goes to Vishnu's world. A man who lives there for five
nights and eats once in three days never confronts calamity and achieves supreme success. Having left Jambumarga, one goes to Tandulikashrama and never confronts calamity, being worshipped in heaven. O king! He who goes
to Agastya's[Famous sage.] lake and engages himself in worshipping the ancestors and the gods, residing there for three nights,
obtains the merits of an agnishtoma[Merits of a fire sacrifice.]. He lives there on vegetables and fruits and obtains the supreme abode of
Kumara[Kartikeya's name.]. He then reaches Kanva's[Famous sage.] hermitage, full of prosperity and worshipped in the world. O bull among
the Bharata lineage! From the beginning, that has been a sacred forest, full of dharma. As soon as one enters there,
one is freed from all sins. He who restrains himself and controls his diet there, worshipping the ancestors and the
gods, obtains all the objects of desire and the fruits of all sacrifices. Having circumambulated it, one should go to
the place where Yayati fell[The story of Yayati's fall from heaven has been described in Section 1 (Volume 1).]. This gives one the merits from a horse sacrifice. Restrained and controlled in diet,
one should then go to Mahakala[Mahakala is Shiva's name and Mahakala can be the name of any place where there is a temple to Shiva.
However, the most famous of Mahakala temples is in Ujjain (Ujjayini).]. Having bathed in Kotitirtha[A place of pilgrimage in the vicinity of Ujjain, impossible to identify. Koti not only means crore, but also
highest point. So this could be a nearby tirtha that was at a high altitude.], one obtains the fruits of a horse sacrifice. One
who is learned in dharma should then go to the sacred place of Uma's consort[Uma is Parvati and Uma's consort is Shiva.]. This is famous in the three
worlds by the name of Bhadravata[Today's Barwaha in Madhya Pradesh, on the banks of the river Narmada.]. Having gone there and seen Ishana[Shiva's name.], he obtains the fruits of donating one
thousand cows. Through Mahadeva's[Shiva's name.] grace, he obtains the status of a ganapatya[Ganapati is Ganesha's name and means the lord (pati) of ganas (companions of Shiva). The status of ganapatya can mean that one becomes devoted to Ganapati. Alternatively, it can mean that one becomes a chief among
men.].

'"One then goes on to the river named Narmada, famous in the three worlds. Having offered oblations to the ancestors and the gods, one obtains the fruits of agnishtoma. The brahmachari[Usually interpreted as a celibate person. One who is observing brahmacharya, the stage of celibacy, when
one is studying. However, brahmacharya means worship of the brahman or following the path of the brahman.] who is in control of his senses goes
on to the southern waters, attains agnishtoma[Attains the fruits of agnishtoma.] and ascends a celestial chariot. Controlling himself and controlling
his diet, he then goes to Charmanvati[Charmanvati is the river Chambal. King Rantideva was born in the Bharata lineage. He performed many sacrifices and slaughtered animals, both for sacrifices and for food. Thus, a river of blood issued from the hides (char-
ma) of the animals he killed and came to be known as Charmanvati.], and obtaining Rantideva's permission, attains the fruits of agnishtoma. O
Yudhishthira[There is a minor internal inconsistency, because Pulastya is actually speaking to Bhishma, and Narada is repeating the conversation to Yudhishthira.]! O one learned in dharma! He then goes on to Arbuda, the son of the Himalayas. In earlier times,
there used to be a hole in the earth here[Arbuda is Mount Abu in Rajasthan. Arbuda is also the name of a naga and the sage Vasishtha had his hermitage in Arbuda. There are many myths connected with the hole in the earth in Arbuda. One of these is the Utan-
ka story, recounted in Section 1 (Volume 1). The hole in the earth that Utanka followed in search of the earrings is
the one in Arbuda. In other stories, Indra created the hole in the earth there.]. Vasishtha's hermitage, famous in the three worlds, is there. He who
spends a single night there, obtains the fruits of one thousand cows[The fruits of donating one thousand cows.]. O tiger among men! As a brahmachari in
control of one's senses, one should bathe in Pingatirtha and obtain the fruits from one hundred tawny cows[Obtain the fruits from donating one hundred tawny cows. The word pinga also means reddish-brown or
tawny.]. O
one learned in dharma! One then goes to Prabhasa, famous in the worlds[Prabhasa is near Dvaraka or Dvaravati.]. The fire-god is himself always present
there. The brave Anala[The god of fire. The fire-god is the mouth of the gods because oblations to the gods are offered to the fire.] is the mouth of the gods and has the wind for his chariot. A man who bathes in that
supreme tirtha, pure and restrained in mind, obtains the fruits of both agnishtoma and atiratra[Atiratra is another sacrifice that was part of jyotishtoma.]. One then goes to
the place where Sarasvati unites with the ocean. O bull among the Bharata lineage! He obtains the fruits of one
thousand cows[Donating one thousand cows.] and attains the world of heaven, blazing in resplendence like the fire. One should stay there for
three nights and offer oblations to the ancestors and the gods. One then shines like the moon and attains ashvamedha[The fruits of ashvamedha.]. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! One then goes to the tirtha where a boon was granted. O Yudhishthira[There is a minor internal inconsistency, because Pulastya is actually speaking to Bhishma, and Narada is repeating the conversation to Yudhishthira.]! Durvasa granted a boon to Vishnu there. A man who bathes where the boon was granted obtains the fruits of
one thousand cows[The fruits of donating one thousand cows.]. Then, restrained and controlled in one's diet, one goes to Dvaravati. A man who bathes in
Pindaraka[In Gujarat.] obtains a lot of gold. O immensely fortunate one! O destroyer of enemies! O descendant of the Kuru
lineage! It is extraordinary that in that tirtha[Pindaraka.], even today, coins can be seen, marked with the signs of the lotus
and signs of the trident. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Mahadeva is always present there.

'"O descendant of the Bharata lineage! One goes on to where the Sindhu[The river Indus.] unites with the ocean. With a restrained mind, one bathes in the waters of that king among tirthas. O bull among the Bharata lineage! One offers
oblations to the ancestors, the gods and the sages. One obtains the world of Varuna and becomes resplendent in
one's own energy. O Yudhishthira[There is a minor internal inconsistency, because Pulastya is actually speaking to Bhishma, and Narada is repeating the conversation to Yudhishthira.]! The wise ones say that by worshipping the god who is the lord of Shankukarna, one obtains ten times an ashamedha[Ten times the fruits of an ashvamedha. Lord of Shankukarna can be interpreted in more than one way.
Shanku is a spike and karna means an ear. Shankukarna means spike-eared and means an ass. However, there is no
god identifiable as the lord of asses. Shankukarna was one of Brahma's servants. Therefore, lord of Shankukarna
might mean Brahma. However, this Shankukarna was born as Prahlada, devoted to Vishnu. Hence, lord of
Shankukarna might also mean Vishnu.]. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O supreme among the best of the
Kuru lineage! After circumambulating it, one goes to the tirtha that is famous in the three worlds. This is renowned
by the name of Drimi and is the cleanser of all sins. It is there that Brahma and the other gods worshipped Mahesh-
vara[Mahadeva or Shiva.]. A man who bathes there and worships Rudra, surrounded by the masses of the gods, removes all the sins
he has committed since birth. It was there that Drimi, supreme among men, was honoured by all the gods. O best
of men! Bathing there, one obtains a horse sacrifice[The fruits of a horse sacrifice.]. O immensely intelligent one! O king! In earlier times, it
was there that the lord Vishnu purified himself after slaying the thorns of the gods[That is, the demons.]. O one learned in dharma!
One should then go to Vasudhara, universally worshipped. From merely going there, one obtains a horse
sacrifice[The fruits of a horse sacrifice.]. O best among the supreme of the Kurus! By bathing there, controlling his soul and worshipping the
gods and the ancestors, one is glorified in Vishnu's world. O bull among the Bharata lineage! In that tirtha, there is
a sacred lake of the Vasus. Bathing there and drinking its water, one is favoured by the Vasus. O best of men!
There is the famous Sindhuttama, the cleanser of all sins. Bathing there, one obtains a lot of gold. Having gone to
Brahmatunga, pure and controlled in mind, a man who performs good deeds without any passion, attains the world
of Brahma. There is Shakra's[Indra's.] tirtha named Kumarika, frequented by the siddhas[Siddhi means accomplishment. Siddhas are semi-divine species who have attained these superhuman accomplishments or faculties.]. Having bathed there, a man
swiftly attains Shakra's world. There is another tirtha named Renuka there, frequented by the gods. On bathing
there, a brahmana becomes as unblemished as the moon.

'"Controlled and restrained in diet, one should then go to Panchanada[The land of the five (pancha) rivers (nada), Punjab. The five rivers are Shatadru, Vipasha, Iravati, Chandrabhaga and Vitasta.]. As has been extolled, in due order, one
obtains the five sacrifices[The fruits of the five sacrifices. The five sacrifices are those required to be performed every day by householders-studying and offering oblations to brahmanas, ancestors, gods and all other beings.]. O one learned in dharma! One then goes to the supreme place known as
Bhimasthana[This has been identified with Kapildhara (or Kapiladhara) in Madhya Pradesh, near Amarkantaka. But this is
contrived, since one is in the region around Punjab. Bhimasthana is more likely to be Uddiyana or Oddiyana, in the
Swat Valley.]. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! O king! Bathing in Yoni[Yoni means womb, but this is a reference to a geographical place. It is probably Shahbaz Garhi in Mardan division in Pakistan. This was an important place in Gandhara, was known as Varshapura, and there used to be a
temple of Parvati there.], a man becomes the son of a
goddess and has a body adorned with golden earrings. He obtains the fruits of one hundred thousand cows[Donating one hundred thousand cows.]. Going to Girimunja and worshipping the grandfather[Brahma.], one obtains the fruits of a thousand cows[Donating one thousand cows.]. O one learned in
dharma! Then one goes to the supreme tirtha known as Vimala[Vimala is identified with Baramula in Kashmir, on the banks of the Jhelum. Baramula is derived from varaha
(boar) and mula (origin or source), a reference to Vishnu's boar incarnation. There was a lake there and Vishnu
drained it in the form of his boar incarnation. Vimala tirtha is thus also known as Varaha tirtha.]. Even today, golden and silver fish can be seen
there. O best of men! Having bathed there, one obtains a horse sacrifice[The fruits of a horse sacrifice.]. Cleansed of all sins and pure in soul,
one attains the supreme goal. Then one should go to Malada, famous in the three worlds. At the time of the western[That is, in the evening.] sandhya, one should perform ablutions in the ritual fashion. One should then offer charu[An oblation made of rice, barley and pulses and boiled in milk and butter.] to the seven-
flamed fire in accordance with one's powers. The learned say that such offerings to the ancestors become inexhaustible. Charu offered to the seven-flamed fire is superior to a hundred thousand cows[Donating a hundred thousand cows.], a hundred royal sacrifices and one thousand horse sacrifices. O Indra among men! From there, one should specifically go to Vastrapada.
Having gone to Mahadeva there, one obtains the fruits of a horse sacrifice. O king! One then goes to Manimat.
Practising brahmacharya, controlling one's mind and living there for one night, one obtains the fruits of
agnishtoma.

'"O Indra among kings! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Then one should go to Devika[Udhampur in Jammu and Kashmir. Udhampur was once known as Devika nagari (city) on the banks of the
Devaka or Devika river. There is an ancient Devika temple in Udhampur.], famous in the
world. It has been heard that brahmanas were created there. This is the place of the wielder of the trident, famous
in the three worlds[The wielder of the trident is Shiva. There is a famous Shiva temple in Udhampur.]. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Bathing in Devika and worshipping Maheshvara, and offering charu in accordance with one's capacity, a man obtains the fruits of a sacrifice that yields all desires. Rudra's
tirtha Kamakhya[Not to be confused with the famous Kamakhya temple in Guwahati in Assam.], frequented by the divine sages, is also there. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having
bathed there, a man swiftly obtains success. Moving on to Yajana, Yajana[This is Yaajana, while the earlier one is Yajana.] and Brahmavaluka and touching the
waters of Pushpam, one overcomes sorrow and death. It is said that the sacred Devika, frequented by devarshis, is
five yojanas[A yojana is between 8 to 9 miles.] long and half a yojana wide. O one learned in dharma! Then in due order, one should go to
Dirghasatra[Other than being a specific geographical place, dirghasatra means a long or prolonged (dirgha) sacrifice
(satra).]. With Brahma at the forefront, the gods, the siddhas and the supreme rishis performed a long sacrifice there, rigid in their vows and donating dakshina[The stipend or fee paid to brahmanas and thus, gifts given at sacrifices.]. O Indra among kings! O destroyer of enemies! By going to
Dirghasatra, a man obtains the fruits of a royal sacrifice and a horse sacrifice. Then, controlled and restrained in
one's diet, one should go to Vinasana[Vinasana is also known as Adarshana and was probably near Jaisalmer in Rajasthan.]. The Sarasvati disappeared there in the midst of the desert and could again
be seen in Chamasa, Shivodbheda and Nagodbheda. Bathing in Chamasodbheda[The same as Chamasa.], one obtains the fruits of agnishtoma. Bathing in Shivodbheda, a man obtains the fruits of one thousand cows[Donating one thousand cows.]. Bathing in Nagodbheda, a
man obtains the world of the nagas[Nagas aren't snakes. In this translation, they have throughout been translated as serpents, rather than snakes.
Nagas live in a distinct geographical region of their own and possess semi-divine attributes. For instance, they can
assume any form at will.].

'"O Indra among kings! One moves on to Shashayana[Shashayana literally means the abode or path (ayana) of rabbits (shasha). This tirtha was on the banks of the
Sarasvati.], a difficult tirtha to attain. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! Lotuses assume the form of rabbits there for an entire year. O Indra among kings! O best of the Bharata
lineage! O tiger among men! Bathing in the waters there, at the time of the full moon in the month of Kartika, one
is always radiant like the moon. O bull among the Bharata lineage! One obtains the fruits of one thousand cows[Donating one thousand cows.].
O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Restrained, one should go on to Kumarakoti. Having bathed there, one should
worship the ancestors and the gods. Thus one obtains the fruits of infinite cows[Donating infinite cows.] and uplifts one's lineage. O one
learned in dharma! Restrained in soul, one then goes to Rudrakoti. O great king! In ancient times, one crore self-
controlled sages assemble there, filled with great joy and desiring to see Rudra. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! 'I will be the first one to see Vrishadhvaja[Shiva's epithet. Literally, the one with the bull (vrisha) on his banner (dhvaja).].' 'I am the first to see him.' O king! It is said that thus did the
sages speak. O lord of the earth! In an attempt to prevent those self-controlled sages from becoming angry, the lord
of yoga[Shiva.] resorted to yoga and created one crore Rudras, one before every sage. Each one separately thought, 'I
have seen him first.' O king! Having been satisfied with the terrible energy of the sages and their supreme devotion, Mahadeva granted them a boon. 'Your dharma will increase from today.' O tiger among men! A pure man
who bathes in Rudrakoti obtains the fruits of a horse sacrifice and rescues his lineage. O Indra among kings! From
there, one should go to the confluence of Sarasvati, famous in the world and extremely sacred[Sangama means union or confluence and this is the confluence of the Sarasvati with the ocean.]. O Indra among
kings! There the gods, the rishis, the siddhas and the charanas[Celestial singers.], with Brahma at the forefront, go on the fourteenth day of shuklapaksha[The bright half of the lunar month.] in the month of Chaitra and worship Janardana[Vishnu or Krishna.]. Having bathed there, one obtains a lot of gold, is freed from all one's sins and one's soul is purified. One goes to the world of Brahma. O lord
of men! On going to Satravasana, one obtains the fruits of one thousand cows[Donating one thousand cows.]. It is there that the sages completed their sacrifices."'
