Vasishtha said, 'Thus, because of his ignorance and because of association with those who are ignorant, he
faces downfall and goes through millions of births. He goes through thousands of abodes, but each of those
ends in death. He is born as inferior species, as human, or in the world of the gods. Like the encasement of the
moon, he waxes and wanes thousands of times. It is known that the moon always has kalas[The moon's diameter is divided into sixteen kalas. The moon waxes and wanes by one kala each day and the sixteenth one is the one that remains on the night of the new moon.]. Fifteen of these increase and decrease, but the sixteenth is always there. That is the way with the atman too, with abodes increasing
and decreasing. But like the moon, the sixteenth is always subtle and sustained[The five senses, the five organs of action, mind, intelligence, ego, ignorance and prakriti (or consciousness influenced by prakriti) are probably the fifteen which are modified. Pure consciousness (not influenced by prakriti) is
the sixteenth.]. It is not united with anything.
Nor is it used up in the course of anything that happens. O supreme among kings! These[The fifteen.] are the ones which are
destroyed and take birth again. These are seen as Prakriti and their destruction is said to be emancipation. The sixteenth kala in the body is not manifest. But because of the sense of ownership, it circles around. One is ignorant
about the twenty-fifth[Vishnu.] that is there in the atman. It is sparkling and pure and is fanned by an auspicious breeze. O
king! Though the atman is pure, because of the taint, it is rendered impure. Though one knows, one serves ignorance and roams around, like an ignorant person. O supreme among kings! That is the one who should be known.
However, because of serving the three qualities of Prakriti, one is rendered ordinary.'

'"Karalajanaka said, 'O illustrious one! It is said that the relationship between that which is not destroyed and
that which is destroyed is like the relationship between a woman and a man. Without a man, a woman can never
conceive. Without a woman, a man can also not create a form[Have offspring.]. They have a relationship with each other and depend on the qualities of each other. That is the way forms are created among all kinds of beings. For the sake of
desire, they have intercourse with each other at the right season and resort to each other's qualities. That is the way
forms result. Let me tell you about these signs. There are qualities for a man and there are qualities for a mother. O
brahmana! We know that bones, sinews and marrow come from the father. We have heard that skin, flesh and
blood comes from the mother. O best among brahmanas! This is what has been laid down in the sacred texts of the
Vedas. Since it has been laid down in the Vedas and in the sacred texts, it can be taken as proof. The proofs of the
Vedas and the sacred texts represent eternal proof. This is the eternal relationship between Prakriti and Purusha. O
illustrious one! But I cannot see any signs about the dharma of emancipation. I can see no signs of this inside me.
Therefore, if there is anything evident about the truth, please tell me about it. I desire emancipation. I desire that
which grants freedom from fear. It[The atman.] is without a body. It is without decay. It is divine and is beyond the senses. It
is the ultimate lord.'

'"Vasishtha replied, 'What you have said about the proofs of the Vedas and the sacred texts is indeed true and
you have accepted them. O lord of men! O one who knows about the truth! But though you have accepted both
those types of books, the Vedas and the sacred texts, you have not grasped the truth that is there in those two sets
of books. If a person is eager to accept books like the Vedas and the sacred texts, but does not know the truth about
the purport of those books, his acceptance is fruitless. A person who does not understand the purport of those
books only bears a burden. If a person does not understand the truth about the purport of a book, his study of that
book is fruitless. If a person is asked about the purport of a book, he should explain what he has grasped by studying the truth carefully. If a person is gross in his intelligence and cannot explain the meaning of a book in an assembly, it is evident that his knowledge is limited and he cannot speak about its meaning. A person whose soul is
imperfect cannot speak about the truth. He is laughed at. This is also true of those who know about the atman. O
Indra  among  kings!  Therefore,  listen  to  what  has  been  instructed  by  the  great-souled  ones  who  know  about
sankhya and yoga. What is seen by those who practise yoga is exactly that which is followed by those who practise
sankhya. A person who sees that sankhya and yoga are identical is intelligent. O son! Skin, flesh, fat, bile, marrow
and sinews-these belong to the senses and you have spoken to me about them. Objects result from objects and
senses from the senses. Like seeds from seeds, bodies originate from bodies. The atman is beyond senses, without
seed and without objects. How can that great-souled one, who possesses no qualities, give rise to qualities? Qualities result from qualities and are destroyed. They are born from Prakriti and do not exist otherwise. Skin, flesh,
blood, fat, bile, marrow, bones and sinews-know that these eight are created from the seed and Prakriti. Male and
non-male-these three[Non-male includes female and neuter.] genders are said to result from Prakriti. Those that are not male are said to be non-male
genders. Prakriti has no gender. But her offspring obtain gender and form. For example, flowers and fruit have
form, though they result from what is formless. It is inferred that gender is obtained in this way. O son! It is the
twenty-fifth one who determines the gender of the atman. He is without beginning and without end. He is infinite.
He sees everything. He is without disease. It is because of ego that qualities are said to result from qualities. Qualities can result in qualities. How can qualities result from one who possesses no qualities? People who have insight
about qualities know this. That is the reason all those qualities are seen to originate with Prakriti. A person who
goes beyond the qualities, sees the supreme. All those who are intelligent in the schools of sankhya and yoga speak
about the supreme. Those immensely wise ones are intelligent and have abandoned ignorance. Those who are ignorant speak of a manifest Ishvara who possesses qualities. Ishvara is always established as someone who is devoid of qualities. Those who are accomplished in sankhya and yoga understand about the supreme. They know
about a twenty-fifth who is beyond Prakriti's qualities. Those who know about the unmanifest can overcome the
fear of birth. Those who know go there, just as the intelligent ones do[This is expressed in a convoluted way. Intelligent ones know about Vishnu. Those who know are those who
know about the unmanifest. But since Vishnu and the unmanifest one are identical, the two destinations are also
identical. Intelligent is an expression being applied to the practitioners of sankhya, while those who know is a
label that is being applied to the practitioners of yoga.]. O scorcher of enemies! These are the indications that have been properly instructed, though the paths of those who are intelligent and those who know are
separate. They respectively speak about the signs of what is destroyed and what is not destroyed. There is a single
one who is not destroyed and everything else is said to be subject to destruction. When a person has studied the
twenty-five attributes properly, he realizes that all philosophy leads to the single one and many kinds of philosophy
are irrelevant. There is a truth that is over and above individual indications. In the twenty-five categories that are
created, the learned speak of this as the truth. The supreme truth is said to be what is beyond the twenty-five. There
are categories and there is conduct according to the categories. While this is true, the eternal truth is above this.'"'
