'Lomasha said, "That great king and emperor, a maharatha and a great archer, was the delight of the minds and
eyes of all the worlds. That mighty-armed one heard about the terrible destruction of his fathers from the great-
souled Kapila and how they had failed to attain heaven. With misery in his heart, the lord of men handed over the
kingdom to his advisers and went to the slopes of the Himalayas to torment himself with austerities. Cleansed of
sins, he performed austerities to worship Ganga. O best of men! He saw the Himalayas, supreme among mountains. It was adorned with peaks of many forms, decorated with minerals. It was embraced on all sides by clouds
floating on the wind. It was adorned with rivers, groves and ridges. It was infested by lions and tigers in its caves
and caverns. There were birds of diverse forms that sung diverse tunes-bhringarajas[Shrike or thrush.], swans, datyuhas[Gallinules.],
waterhens, peacocks, shatapatras[Woodpeckers.], cuckoos, jivajivakas[Chakora birds. However, chakoras are also mentioned separately.], chakoras with black-tinged eyes and those that
love their young. The waterbodies were beautiful and decorated with lotuses. They were ornamented with the
sweet notes of cranes. The flat plains were frequented by kinnaras and apsaras. In all directions, the trees had been
marked by the sharp tusks of the elephants of the directions[Eight elephants guard the eight cardinal directions.]. The place was frequented by vidyadharas[Semi-divine species.] and
adorned with diverse gems. It was infested by snakes with virulent poison, their tongues flaming. Some parts were
like gold, others glittered like silver. Some places were like a mass of collyrium. He reached these Himalayas.

'"The best of men engaged in terrible austerities there. He lived for a thousand years on fruits, roots and water.
After one thousand celestial years had passed, the great river Ganga showed herself in personified form. Ganga
asked, 'O great king! What do you wish from me? What can I give you? O best of men! Tell me and I will do as
you say.' Having been thus addressed, the king replied to the daughter of the Himalayas[Ganga.]. 'O granter of boons!
O great river! My grandfathers, the sixty thousand great-souled sons of Sagara, were taken to Vaivasvata's eternal
world by Kapila, while they were searching for the horse. They confronted Kapila's energy and were instantly destroyed. Having been destroyed, they cannot reside in heaven until their bodies are sprinkled with your water. O
immensely fortunate one! Take my fathers, Sagara's sons, to heaven. O great river! I am praying to you for their
sake.' Having heard the king's words, Ganga, worshipped by all the worlds, was extremely delighted with Bhagiratha's words and replied, 'O great king! There is no doubt that I will do what you say. But when I descend from
the sky to the earth, my force will be difficult to bear. O king! There is no one in the three worlds who can withstand it, other than Nilakantha[Nilakantha is Mahadeva's name. His name is Nilakantha, because his throat (kantha) became blue (nila) after swallowing the poison that emerged from the churning of the ocean.] Maheshvara, foremost among the gods. O mighty-armed one! Satisfy Hara, the
granter of boons, through your austerities. The god will sustain my fall on his head. He will do what you desire for
the welfare of your fathers.' O king! On hearing these words, the great king Bhagiratha went to Mount Kailasa and
satisfied Shankara[Mahadeva.] through austerities. O king! After some time had passed, the supreme of men obtained from
him the boon that he would bear Ganga, so that his fathers might be entitled to reside in heaven."'
