Bhishma said, "When that great kalpa was over, the descendant of Angiras was born and all the gods were delighted that a priest had been born for the gods[A kalpa or period of creation lasts for one thousand divine years. Brihaspati is the priest of the gods.]. O king! The words Brihat, Brahma and Mahat progressively convey the same meaning and he came to be known as Brihaspati because he possessed all these qualities[Literally, Brihaspati means the protector or lord of Brihat.].
The  foremost  king,  Uparichara  Vasu,  became  his  disciple.  He  properly  studied  the  sacred  texts  of  the  Chitrashikhandins. The gods had earlier thought of the birth of King Vasu and he protected the earth, like Akhandala
in heaven. The great-souled one performed a gigantic horse sacrifice. His preceptor, Brihaspati, was the officiating
priest there. Prajapati's three sons, the maharshis Ekata, Dvita and Trita, acted as assistant priests at the sacrifice.
Dhanushaksha; Raibhya; Arvavasu; Paravasu; the rishi Medhatithi; the great rishi Tandya; the immensely fortunate
rishi Shakti, also known as Vedashira; Kapila, the foremost rishi who was the grandfather of Shalihotra; the first
Katha; Taittira, the elder brother of Vaishampayana; Kanva; and Devahotra-all these sixteen were famous[It becomes sixteen after including Brihaspati, Ekata, Dvita and Trita.]. O
king! The great sacrifice had all the ingredients. On the instructions of the king, no animals were slain. He was not
violent, pure, not inferior, without desire and devoted to the rites. The shares offered in the sacrifice were all products of the forest. The ancient and illustrious god of the gods[Narayana.] was delighted at this. Though he was incapable of
being seen by anyone else, he manifested himself. Though he was not seen by anyone, the god Hari himself seized
and took away his share of the sacrificial cake. At this, Brihaspati was enraged. He forcefully picked up the ladle
and flung it up into the sky. Shedding tears of rage, he told Uparichara, 'I have placed a share[For Narayana.] in front. While I
see, there is no doubt that the god will accept it himself. The other gods are seen to have appeared in person and
have accepted the shares offered to them. Why should the lord Hari not manifest himself?' When he arose in this
way, the great King Vasu and all the assistant priests sought to satisfy the sage. Without displaying any fright, they
told him, 'You should not be enraged. In krita yuga, it is not dharma for anyone to display wrath. The god who accepted the share does not also yield to anger. O Brihaspati! He is incapable of being seen by you or us. He can only
be seen by those towards whom he exhibits his favours.'

'"Ekata, Dvita and Trita said, 'We are named as Brahma's sons, those who have been born through his mental
powers. To ensure our benefit, we once went to the northern direction. For four thousand years, we tormented ourselves through excellent austerities. We controlled ourselves and stood on one foot, like wooden pillars. This was
to the north of Meru and on the shores of the ocean of milk. That is the spot where we tormented ourselves through
extremely terrible austerities. "How can we see the god Narayana?" This is the vow that we resorted to. When we
bathed ourselves at the end, we heard an invisible voice. "O brahmanas! Cheerful in your souls, you have tormented yourselves through austerities. With devotion, you have asked how you can see the lord. To the north of the
ocean of milk, there is the immensely radiant Shvetadvipa. The men there are as radiant as the moon and are devoted to Narayana. They worship Purushottama with single-minded devotion. They enter the eternal god, who possesses one thousand rays. They are devoid of senses. They do not eat. Their eyes do not blink and they emit fragrant scents. Those men, who live in Shvetadvipa, worship one person alone. O sages! Go there. That is the place
where I have revealed myself." On hearing these invisible words, all of us followed the path that had been indicated and went to that country. Our hearts were full of the desire to see him and went to the great Shvetadvipa. However, when we went there, our sight was blinded by his energy and we could not see that being. At this, we decided
that we had not undertaken enough yoga to see the god. Without further austerities, we wouldn't be able to see the
energetic being. At that time, we again performed great austerities for another one hundred years. When we bathed
at the end of the vow, we saw some extremely auspicious men. They were as fair as the moon and they possessed
all the auspicious signs. Facing the northern and the eastern direction, with hands joined in salutation, they were
silently meditating on Brahma. Those great-souled ones were thus engaged in mental chanting. Hari was pleased
because of their single-minded devotion. O tiger among men! The radiance and resplendence of each of those men
was like that of the sun that arises at the end of a yuga. We thought that energy alone resided in that region. No one
was superior or inferior. All of them were equal in energy. O Brihaspati! We suddenly saw another mass of blazing
energy, as if one thousand suns had simultaneously arisen. Together, those men quickly ran towards this. Cheerfully, they joined their hands in salutation and said, "We bow down." A great collective shout arose from them, as if
those men were offering a sacrifice to the god. Suddenly, that energy robbed us of our senses. Bereft of  sight,
strength and senses, we could not see anything. We only heard a single sound, uttered incessantly. "O Pundarikaksha! O creator of the universe! We bow down to you. Victory is yours. O Hrishikesha! We bow down before you.
You are the great being and you are the one who was born first." We heard these sounds, the syllables articulated
properly. At that time, an auspicious wind began to blow and it bore all the fragrant scents. There were the fragrances of celestial flowers and herbs that had been used in the rites. Those men knew about the beneficial rituals
of pancharatra. They single-mindedly worshipped Hari. There is no doubt that, invoked by those words, the god
arrived there. However, because we were confounded by his maya, we could not see him. O supreme among those
of the Angiras lineage! When the wind retreated and the sacrifice was over, our minds became full of anxious
thoughts. Those thousands of men were born in pure lineages. But they did not honour us with their thoughts or
their sight. Those large numbers of sages were single-minded in their vows. They were based on the brahman and
paid no attention to us. We were exhausted and afflicted by the austerities. An invisible voice addressed us. "Are
you well? These men from Shveta are bereft of all the senses and are capable of seeing the being. Only those who
are given sight by these best among brahmanas are capable of seeing him. O sages! All of you should quickly
leave this place and go where you have come from. Those without devotion are incapable of ever seeing the god.
The illustrious one's circle of radiance is difficult to see. It can only be witnessed by those who desire to, and have
single-mindedly spent a long period of time in worshipping him. O supreme among brahmanas! You have a great
task to perform. There will be a catastrophe at the end of this krita yuga. O brahmanas! At the time of Vaivasvat
Manu, there will be a treta yuga. You will then become aides in performing a task for the gods." O drinker of
soma! We heard these wonderful words. Having obtained this favour, we returned from that radiant region. In this
way,  despite  austerities  and  offering  of  havya  and  kavya,  we  could  not  see  that  god.  How  can  you  see  him?
Narayana is extremely wonderful. He is the unmanifest creator of the universe. He is the devourer of oblations.'"

'Bhishma said, "The intelligent Brihaspati was entreated by these words of Ekata, Dvita and Trita and also by
the assistant priests. He honoured the gods and completed the sacrifice. When the sacrifice was over, King Vasu
protected the subjects. Because of the curse of brahmanas, he was dislodged and submerged in the ground[King Uparichara Vasu ascended to heaven, but was dislodged from there.]. He
was always devoted to dharma, but was submerged inside the earth. He was devoted to Narayana and attained the
objective of Narayana. It is through his favours that he arose again from the nether regions of the earth and obtained the abode of the brahman. Because of this devotion to the highest one, he attained a supreme end."'
