'"The lord said, 'O mighty-armed one! Listen once more to my supreme words. These are pleasing you and for
your welfare, I am saying this. The host of gods does not know of my origin. 358 Nor do the maharshis. Because,
in every way, I am the original cause of the gods and the great sages. He who knows me as without origin and
without birth and as the greatest lord of the worlds, is freed from delusion among men 359 and freed from all sins.
Intellect, knowledge, freedom from delusion, forgiveness, truthfulness, control over the senses, control over
thoughts, happiness, unhappiness, creation, destruction, fear and freedom from fear, non-violence, equality, 360
satisfaction, austerity, donations, fame and lack of fame-all these states of beings indeed owe their origin to me.
The seven great sages, 361 the four who came before them 362 and the Manus 363 owe their origin to me and
were created from my resolution. In this world, everything is descended from them. There is no doubt that he who
truly knows my divine yoga 364 is united with unwavering yoga. 365 I am the origin of everything. From me is
everything instituted. Knowing this, the wise, immersed in devotion, worship me. Minds on me, lives in me, explaining my nature to each other, and always conversing, 366 they 367 attain satisfaction and happiness. I provide
that kind of yoga of intellect to those who are always immersed in me and lovingly worship me. Using that, they
attain me. With compassion towards them, I am always established inside them as the bright lamp of knowledge,
destroying the darkness born out of ignorance.'

'"Arjuna said, 'You are the supreme brahman, the supreme abode and supreme sacredness. You are the eternal
purusha, self-resplendent, the predecessor of the gods, without birth and omnipresent. All the sages and Devarshi
Narada 368 and Asita-Devala 369 and Vyasa 370 describe you thus. You have yourself also told me this. O Kesha-
va! I accept all that you are telling me as true. Because, O Lord, even the gods and the demons do not know your
manifestations. 371 O supreme being! O creator of beings! O lord of beings! O lord of the gods! O lord of the universe! You alone know your own self through your own self. Whatever divine powers you use to pervade these
worlds, you alone are capable of relating to me in detail those self-resplendent divine powers. O yogi! How can I
always think of you and know you? O illustrious one! In what objects can you be thought of by me? O Janardana!
Tell me once again, in detail, about the power of your yoga. Because, hearing your immortal words, I am not
satisfied.'

'"The lord said, 'O foremost among the Kuru lineage! All right. I will tell you about my main divine manifestations. Because there is no end to the detail of my powers. 372 O Gudakesha! I am the atman established in the
heart of all beings. It is I who am the origin, the middle and also the end of all beings. 373 I am Vishnu among the
adityas. 374 I am the radiant sun among the shining bodies. I am Marichi among the maruts. 375 I am the moon
among the stars. 376 I am the Sama Veda among the Vedas. 377 Among the gods, I am Vasava. I am the mind
among the senses. And in beings, I am the consciousness. I am Shankara among the rudras. 378 I am Kubera
among the yakshas and the rakshas. 379 I am fire among the vasus. 380 I am Meru. 381 O Partha! Know me to be
Brihaspati, 382 foremost among the priests. Among generals, I am Skanda. 383 Among waterbodies, I am the
ocean. Among great sages, I am Bhrigu. 384 Among words, I am the single syllable. 385 Among yajnas, I am japa
yajna. 386 Among immovable objects, I am the Himalayas. Among all trees, I am the fig tree. 387 And among divine sages, I am Narada. Among gandharvas I am Chitraratha. 388 And among those who have attained liberation,
I am the sage Kapila. 389 Among horses, know me to be Ucchaishrava, arising from the immortal nectar. 390
Among great elephants Airavata and among men, the king. Among weapons I am vajra. 391 Among cows I become kamadhenu. 392 I become Kandarpa for procreation. 393 And among snakes I am Vasuki. 394 Among serpents I am Ananta. Among those who inhabit the water, I am Varuna. 395 Among the ancestors I am Aryama. 396
Among those who control, 397 I am Yama. Among demons I am Prahlada. 398 Among those wh devour, 399 I am
time. And I am the lion 400 among animals. Among birds, I am the son of Vinata. 401 Among those that purify, I
am the wind. Among those who bear weapons, I am Rama. Among fish, I am the shark. 402 And among rivers, I
am Jahnavi. 403 O Arjuna! I alone am the beginning, the end and the middle of all created objects. Among all
forms of knowledge, I am knowledge of the self. Among debaters, vada. 404 Among letters, I am the letter 'A'.
Among different forms of samasa, I am dvanda. 405 Indeed I am indestructible time. My face is in every direction.
I am the controller of destiny. I am death that robs everything. And I am the origin of the future. Among women, I
am fame, prosperity, speech, memory, intellect, fortitude and forgiveness. In the Sama Veda, I am brihat sama. 406
Among metres, I am gayatri. Among months, I am Margashirsha. 407 Among seasons, I am kusumakara. 408 I am
gambling among those who wish to cheat. 409 I am energy in the energetic. I am victory, perseverance, I am the
sattva quality in the righteous. I am Vasudeva among the Vrishnis. I am Dhananjaya among those of the Pandu
clan. I am Vyasa among the sages. Among the wise, I am the wise Ushanasa. 410 I am danda among those who
rule. 411 I am strategy for those who wish to win. Among secret subjects, I am silence. I am knowledge among the
wise. O Arjuna! Whatever is the seed of origin of every being, that is me alone. There is nothing moveable or immovable that can come into being without me. O scorcher of foes! There is no end to my divine glory. Whatever I
have stated of this expanse of glory is only a brief indication. Know that whatever object is glorious, prosperous or
indeed extremely powerful, that has originated from a part of my energy. O Arjuna! But what is the need to know
all these details? I am established, holding up this entire universe with only a part of me.'"'
