Vaishampayana said, 'When the supreme among the Kuru lineage heard the words that Vidura had spoken, he was
tormented by grief on account of his sons. He lost his senses and fell down on the ground. His relatives, Krishna
Dvaipayana and Kshatta Vidura, saw that he had fallen down on the ground, unconscious. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Sanjaya, other well-wishers and trusted gate keepers sprinkled him with cold and pleasant water
and fanned him with palm leaves. They carefully rubbed his body with their hands. Dhritarashtra remained in this
state for a very long period of time. After a long period of time, the lord of the earth regained his senses. Overcome
by thoughts of his sons, he lamented for a very long period of time. "Indeed, shame on being a man and on everything that man receives. The roots of perennial unhappiness result from this. O lord! This great misery that one obtains from the destruction of one's sons and from the destruction of prosperity, kin and relatives is like poison, or
the fire. It is scorching my limbs and destroying my wisdom. O supreme among brahmanas! Overcome by this, a
man thinks that death is superior. Confronted by this calamity and faced with this misfortune, this is what I will do
now[End his life. Dhritarashtra is addressing Krishna Dvaipayana Vedavyasa.
Dhritarashtra was Vedavyasa's son.]." Having spoken these words to his great-souled father, supreme among those who know about the brahman, Dhritarashtra was overcome by great grief and was stupefied. O lord of the earth! The king was silent and
was immersed in thought.

'On hearing his words, the lord Krishna Dvaipayana, spoke these words to his son, who was tormented by misery on account of his sons. "O Dhritarashtra! O mighty-armed one! Listen to what I am telling you. You are
learned. You are intelligent. You are skilled about dharma and artha. O scorcher of enemies! There is nothing that
should be known that is not known to you. There is no doubt that you know that everything mortal is temporary.
Everything in the world of the living is temporary and there is no state that is eternal. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! Since life ends in death, why are you grieving? O Indra among kings! You were a witness to the creation
of this enmity. Your son was the cause, but the working of destiny made him act in that way. O king! It is certain
that the destruction of the Kurus was destined. Why are you sorrowing over brave ones who have headed towards
the ultimate objective? O mighty-armed one! The great-souled Vidura knew about this. O lord of men! That is the
reason he made every effort towards peace. But it is my view that even if one tries for a long period of time, no being is capable of deviating from a path that destiny has laid down. I have myself heard what the gods wanted done.
I will tell you about this. How will you regain your composure[This is a literal translation, the sense being that Vedavyasa will tell Dhritarashtra once he has regained his composure.]? In the past, I had swiftly gone to Indra's assembly hall. Having recovered from exhaustion, I saw the assembled residents of heaven there. The foremost of devarshis, with Narada at their head, were there. O lord of the earth! I saw the Earth there too. She had gone before
the gods because she wanted a task to be accomplished. Having approached the assembled gods, the Earth said, 'In
Brahma's abode, you had promised to accomplish a task for me[In Section 6 (Volume 1), Earth went to Brahma, requesting that she
should be saved from the depredations of the asuras on earth.]. O immensely fortunate ones! You should quickly act accordingly.' On hearing her words, Vishnu, revered by the worlds, laughed and in that assembly of the
gods, spoke these words to the Earth. 'The eldest of Dhritarashtra's one hundred sons is known by the name of
Duryodhana. He will accomplish your task. Once he becomes the king, your task will be done. Because of him, all
the lords of the earth will assemble in Kurukshetra. Wielding firm weapons, those strikers will kill each other. O
goddess! Your burden will be destroyed in that clash. O beautiful one! Swiftly go to your own place and bear up
the world.' O king! This was your son, born in Gandhari's womb as a part of kali[The word kali has different meanings, including connotations of kali
yuga. Here, it is best understood as the personification of strife, dissension, discord.], to become the cause of the destruction of the worlds. He was intolerant, fickle, wrathful and difficult to control. Because of the work of destiny,
his brothers were created and they were similar. His maternal uncle, Shakuni, his beloved friend, Karna, and all the
kings who allied with him were also generated on earth to ensure destruction. O mighty-armed one! Narada knew
the true reason behind all this. O lord of the earth! Your sons were destroyed because of their own crimes. O Indra
among kings! You should not sorrow. There is no reason to grieve. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The Pandavas have not committed the smallest of crimes. Your evil-minded sons brought injury to earth. O fortunate one!
There is no doubt that Narada recounted all this earlier, in Yudhishthira's assembly at the time of the rajasuya sacrifice[The rajasuya sacrifice has been described in Section 24 (Volume 2). In
Section 25 (Volume 2), Narada remembers these events, but does not actually recount them.]. 'The Pandavas and the Kouravas will clash against each other. O Kounteya! Since that will happen, do
what you must[This is Vedavyasa quoting Narada.].' On hearing Narada's words then, the Pandavas sorrowed. This is the entire truth and eternal
mystery about the gods. O lord! How can your sorrow be dispelled? How can you be compassionate towards your
own life[And not give it up.]? Knowing what has been ordained by fate, you should be affectionate towards the sons of Pandu. O
mighty-armed one! This is what I had heard earlier. It was recounted at Dharmaraja's rajasuya, supreme among
sacrifices. When I told Dharma's son this secret, he tried to avoid the battle with the Kouravas. However, destiny
was stronger. O king! Destiny can never be crossed and no being, mobile or stationary, can cross Yama. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You are devoted to tasks and possess the best of intelligence. You know that beings
come and go. Nevertheless, you are confounded. You are tormented by grief and are repeatedly losing your senses.
If King Yudhishthira knows about this, he will cast aside his life. The brave one is always compassionate, even towards inferior species. O Indra among kings! How will he not feel compassionate towards you? O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Retain your life out of compassion towards the Pandavas. I am instructing you to refrain from
your proposed course of action. If you act in this way, you will attain fame in this world. O son! The dharma that
you will gain will be like what can be got by tormenting with austerities for a long time. Because of sorrow on account of your sons, the flames are blazing. O great king! Every time they do so, use the water of your wisdom to
quench them." Hearing these words of the infinitely energetic Vyasa, Dhritarashtra thought for some time.

'He then replied, "O supreme among brahmanas! I am overcome by a great net of grief. I no longer know myself and am repeatedly losing my senses. Having heard your words about this being ordained by destiny, I will retain my life and no longer sorrow." O Indra among kings! On hearing Dhritarashtra's words, Vyasa, Satyavati's
son, instantly disappeared.'
