Shounaka said, 'O son of a suta! I wish to know why the great-souled rishi, whom you have referred to as
Jaratkaru, came to be famous by that name on earth. What is the origin of the name Jaratkaru?'

Souti said, 'Jara means decay and karu means gigantic. The sage had a gigantic body, but he decayed it slowly
through severe austerities. O Brahmana! It was because of this that he was known as Jaratkaru and Vasuki's sister
had the name for similar reasons.'

When he heard this, the virtuous Shounaka smiled and told Ugrashrava[Souti's name.] that the names were appropriate.
Souti said, 'A great deal of time passed. But the sage of rigid vows, deeply engaged in devout austerities, exhibited no desire for a wife. The great-souled sage roamed the entire earth, engaged in deep studies and controlling his
senses, holding back his seed without any signs of fear. Even in his thoughts, he showed no desire for a wife.

'O Brahmana! Once upon a time, there was a king named Parikshit. He was born in the Kuru lineage. Like Pandu, he was mighty-armed and the supreme of archers in battle. He was devoted to hunting, like his great-grandfather[The great-grandfather was Pandu.] in ancient times. That lord of the earth roamed around, hunting deer, wild boar, hyenas, buffaloes and various other wild animals. One day, he pierced a deer with an arrow that had stooping tufts, and slinging his bow over
his back, entered the dense forest. Like Lord Rudra searching in heaven for the sacrificial deer that had been
pierced, he searched everywhere in the forest, bow in hand. Never had a deer pierced by Pariskhit escaped in the
forest alive. However, though wounded by the lord of the earth and the king of men, this deer was soon lost,
demonstrating Parikshit's own proximity to heaven. He went far in pursuit. Tired and thirsty, he came upon a hermit in the forest. He was seated in a cowshed and drank the froth that issued from the mouths of calves when they
sucked milk[From their mothers.]. Swiftly hurrying to that sage of rigid vows, the king said, his bow raised, "O Brahmana! I am
King Parikshit, the son of Abhimanyu. Have you seen where the deer pierced by me has gone?" Since the sage was
under a vow of silence then, he did not reply. At this, the king became angry. He picked up a dead snake with the
end of his bow and placed it around his[The hermit's.] neck. The hermit looked at him, but did not utter a word, good or bad.
On seeing him in that state, the king's anger cooled and he was sorry. Thereupon, he returned to his city and the
rishi remained the way he was.

'He[The hermit.] had a young son who was blessed with the power of austerities and was extremely powerful. His name
was Shringi and he was great in his vows, but given to great anger and difficult to appease. He sometimes worshipped, with great devotion, the supreme god Lord Brahma, engaged in ensuring the welfare of all beings. Once
commanded by Brahma, he was returning home. A friend of his jestingly told him about his father. On hearing
what had happened, the rishi's son, easily prone to anger and like poison itself, was enraged. O best of the Brahmanas! The friend, Krisha, was also a rishi's son and the two often spent time together. Krisha said, "O Shringi!
Do not be too proud. You are an ascetic of great powers. But your father has got a carcass around his shoulders.
Sons of rishis like us are successful, have knowledge of the brahman and are immersed in asceticism. But you
should keep quiet. Where are your powers, your proud words and your arrogance when you see your father carrying a carcass?"'
