'Mandapala said, "I kept the fire informed about your protection and Agni had earlier given me his word. On account of Agni's promise, the devotion to dharma that is there in your mother and the great energy that is there in
you, I had not come here earlier. O sons! You had no reason to worry about your death. All of you are rishis,
learned in the knowledge of the brahman. The fire knows that well enough."'

Vaishampayana said, 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having thus reassured his sons, Mandapala took his
wife with him and leaving that region, went to another region. The illustrious lord with the piercing rays consumed
the kindling Khandava forest, with the assistance of the two Krishnas and brought terror to beings and the world.
The fire drank up rivers of fat and marrow. Agni was extremely satisfied and appeared before Arjuna.

'Then, surrounded by masses of Maruts, the illustrious lord of the gods descended from the sky and spoke these
words to Partha and Madhava, "You have accomplished a feat that is difficult, even for the immortals. I am
pleased. Choose boons that are difficult to obtain and beyond what humans can get." Partha asked for the boon that
he might get all of Shakra's weapons. Then Shakra fixed the time for the receiving. "O Pandava! When the illustrious Mahadeva will be pleased with you, that is when I will give you all the weapons. O descendant of the Kuru
lineage! O Dhananjaya! I will myself know when that time has arrived. Because of your great asceticism, I will
then bestow on you all my agneya[Agneya and vayavya are divine weapons, respectively associated with the gods of fire and the wind. The former causes flames, while the latter causes wind.] and all my vayavya weapons and all my other weapons and you will accept
them." Vasudeva asked for the boon that he might always be loving towards Partha. The lord of the gods happily
granted this boon. Having done so, the god who was the lord of the Maruts, took his leave of the fire and returned
to heaven with the thirty gods.

'Having consumed the forest with its animals and birds for five days and one, the fire was extremely satiated and
ceased. He had eaten flesh and drunk fat and blood. O lord of the world! He was filled with extreme joy and spoke
to them. "O warriors! O tigers among men! You have gratified me to the point of extreme bliss. You now have my
leave to go where you want." O bull among the Bharata lineage! Having been thus granted leave by the great-
souled fire, the threesome of Arjuna, Vasudeva and the danava Maya wandered around for some time. They then
seated themselves on the banks of the beautiful river.'

This ends the Adi Parva of the Mahabharata.