'The gandharva said, "Having said this, the unblemished one swiftly rose up into the sky. The king once more fell
down on the ground. Searching for that supreme among kings, his minister and attendants found him in that state
in the great forest, prone on the ground like Shakra's flag when the season is right[This can mean different things. It can mean a rainbow, described as Indra's bow (Shakra is another name for
Indra), when the time is right for a rainbow. Alternatively, it can mean a flag erected when the time is right for Indra's festival.]. On seeing the great archer
prone on the ground and without a horse, the minister was burnt, as if by a fire. Drawing quickly near, the minister
raised the king, who was lying senseless on the ground in the affliction of desire, affectionately and reverently, just
as a father raises a fallen son. This minister was old in age, wisdom, fame and deeds. When he had raised him and
senses were recovered, the minister addressed him in sweet and benevolent words, 'O tiger among men! Do not be
frightened. O unblemished one! You will be blessed.' The minister thought that the king, the destroyer of hostile
armies in battle, had been lying down on the ground because he had been overcome with hunger, thirst and exhaustion. He sprinkled cold water, fragrant with the scent of lotuses, on the king's head, but without touching the
crown. Thereupon, the powerful king regained his consciousness. He then sent away all his attendants, except the
minister.

'"When that large retinue had gone away on the king's instructions, the king again sat down on that mountain
plain. Then, on that great mountain, the king purified himself and joined his palms. He raised his arms up and worshipped the sun. King Samvarana, destroyer of enemies, also mentally thought of his priest Vashishtha, supreme
among rishis. Without a break, the ruler of men remained there for days and nights. Then, on the twelfth day, the
brahmarshi[Vashishtha.] came to him. Through his power of austerities, the great rishi who was self-controlled knew that, as
decreed by destiny, the king's heart had been stolen by Tapati. Then the best of sages, who was rigid in his vows,
wished to bring good fortune to the virtuous king and assured him. As the ruler of men watched, the illustrious
rishi ascended the sky to meet the sun, as radiant himself as that blazing one. With his palms joined, the Brahmana
joyfully introduced himself to the one with a thousand rays and said, 'I am Vashishtha.' Then the immensely radiant Vivasvat[The sun.] said to the best of sages, 'O maharshi! You are welcome. Tell me what you desire.'"'
