Dhritarashtra said, "Shantanu ruled this entire earth. In that way, protected by Bhishma, so did Vichitravirya.
There is no doubt that you know about that protection. I loved my brother Pandu. It is known to you that he
also protected you in that way. O unblemished ones! I have also sought to serve you well. O immensely fortunate
ones! If I have failed to do it properly, or if I have been distracted in this, you should forgive me. After all, without
any thorns, Duryodhana also enjoyed this kingdom. He was foolish and evil in intelligence. However, he also protected you. Because of the crimes of that evil-minded one and his insolence, and because of what I myself did,
there has been this great carnage of kings. Whether I have done something good or whether I have done something
bad, you should not bear it in your heart and you should grant me permission. This king is aged and miserable. His
sons have been slain. He is the son of your earlier kings. Because of these reasons, you should grant me permission. This aged ascetic is miserable. Her sons have been slain. Gandhari is afflicted on account of her sons. Like
me, she is also asking you. You know that our sons have been killed. We are aged and unhappy. O fortunate ones!
We have sought refuge with you. Grant us leave. This Kourava king, Yudhishthira, is Kunti's son. You must look
after him, in prosperity and in adversity. However, he will never face any adversity. His four brothers are greatly
energetic and are his advisers. All of them know about dharma and artha and are like the guardians of the world.
The illustrious Brahma is the lord of all creatures in the universe. The greatly energetic Yudhishthira will protect
you, like him. I have now said what I should certainly have said. I am handing all of you over to Yudhishthira as a
trust. I have handed you over to this brave one as a trust. If there is anything disagreeable that my sons have done,
or anything else by anyone on our side, you should forgive that. Earlier, you have never harboured any anger towards me. Your devotion towards me is exceedingly great. I join my hands in salutation and bow down before you.
Their[Duryodhana's and his brothers'.] intelligence was fickle. They were greedy and acted as they willed. O unblemished ones! With Gandhari, I
seek forgiveness for everything."'

Vaishampayana continued, 'The king spoke in this way to the inhabitants of the city and the countryside. Their
voices were choked with tears. They looked at each other and said nothing.'
