'Karna said, "I am Karna, the son of Radha and Adhiratha, and I salute you. Tell me. Why have you come here?
What can I do for you?"

'Kunti replied, "You are the son of Kunti, not of Radha. And Adhiratha is not your father. O Karna! You have
not been born in a lineage of sutas. Know these words of mine to be true. While I was still a maiden, I gave birth to
you. In Kuntibhoja's abode, you were the first one I carried in my womb. O Partha! You are my son. The duty of
the god Tapana Virochana[Tapana and Virochana are names of the sun god.] is to produce light. O Karna, supreme among those who wield weapons! He gave birth
to you through me. You were born with earrings and armour. You were born as the son of a god, surrounded in radiance. You were born as my invincible son, in my father's house. Because of your ignorance, you do not know
your true brothers. Since you are my son, you should not serve the sons of Dhritarashtra. O son! It is the determination of dharma that the fruits of dharma accrue to men who satisfy their fathers, or their one-eyed mother[Kunti does not mean that she is literally one-eyed. The one-eyed is probably a reference to her being partial towards her son, Karna.]. Earlier, Arjuna earned prosperity for Yudhishthira and the sons of Dhritarashtra robbed it because of their greed. Separate yourself from them and enjoy it. Today, let the Kurus witness the fraternal union between Karna and Arjuna.
Let those who are evil bow down. Let Karna and Arjuna be like Rama[Balarama.] and Janardana. If the two of you are united in your minds, what can you not achieve in this world? O Karna! Surrounded by your five brothers, you will
shine, like Brahma surrounded by the Vedas and the five Vedangas[There are six Vedangas-shiksha (articulation and pronunciation), chhanda (prosody), vyakarana (grammar),
nirukta (etymology), jyotisha (astronomy) and kalpa (rituals). The number five is used because there are five
Parthas.]. You have all the qualities. You are the eldest
and the best among all the relatives. The words 'son of a suta' will no longer be used for you. You will be a valiant
Partha."'
