Bhishma said, "Thus addressed, he was silent and Vayu spoke again. 'O king! Listen to the greatness of the
brahmana Agastya. Once, defeated by the asuras, the gods lost all their enthusiasm. All their sacrifices were
appropriated and also the svadha that was due to the ancestors. O bull among the Haihaya lineage! The danavas
stopped rites performed by men. We have heard that the gods were dislodged from their prosperity and began to
wander around on earth. O king! While doing this, they saw Agastya. He was full of energy and was engaged in
great vows. He blazed like the sun in his radiance. On seeing him, surrounded by his fame, the gods worshipped
him. O lord of men! At that time, they spoke these words to the great-souled one. "We have been shattered by the
danavas in the battle. We have been dislodged from our prosperity. Therefore, we are suffering from great fear. O
bull among sages! Save us." Thus addressed by the gods, Agastya became angry. The energetic one blazed, like the
fire at the time of the destruction of a yuga. The danavas were burnt down by the net of his flaming rays. O great
king! In thousands, they fell down from the firmament. The daityas were burnt down by Agastya's energy. They
abandoned both the worlds[Heaven and earth.] and sought refuge in the inauspicious southern direction. At that time, Bali was performing a horse sacrifice in the nether regions of the earth. He and the other great asuras who were in the bowels of
the earth were saved and were not burnt down. The gods again got the worlds back, tranquil and without any dust.
The gods said, "Slay the asuras who are hidden inside the earth." O king! Addressed by the gods, he replied, "I am
capable of using my austerities to burn down those who are inside the earth. However, if I burn them down, my
austerities will be diminished." Nevertheless, the illustrious one used his own energy to burn down the danavas. O
king! Thus did Agastya, cleansed in soul, use his austerities. O unblemished one! I have told you about Agastya's
powers. I have spoken about him to you. Tell me is there is a kshatriya superior to him.' Thus addressed, he was
silent.

'"Vayu spoke again. 'O king! Listen to the great deeds performed by the illustrious Vasishtha. Once, the gods
performed a sacrifice near Lake Manasa. Because of Vasishtha's learning, they mentally approached him and made
him the officiating priest. They were anxious about initiating themselves into that sacrifice and became lean in the
process. There were danavas named Khalinas, with complexions like those of mountains, and they wanted to slay
the gods. However, they were repeatedly slain, from a distance. But they had been granted a boon by Brahma.
Therefore, as soon as they were killed, they immersed themselves in the waters of the lake and came back to life
again. They seized extremely terrible mountains and used trees as clubs. With these, they arose from the waters
and agitated them so much that it extended for hundreds of yojanas. They attacked the tens of thousands of gods.
Oppressed by them, the gods sought refuge with Vasava. However, Shakra was also afflicted and sought refuge
with Vasishtha. The illustrious rishi, Vasishtha, granted them freedom from fear. The sage wasn't cruel. But he also
knew about their misery. Almost carelessly, he used his own energy to burn down all the Khalinas. The river Ganga had left for Kailasa. But the greatly ascetic one brought the divine river to the lake and she penetrated the waters of the lake. When the water was penetrated, the river began to flow as Sarayu. The region where the Khalinas
were killed came to be known as Khalina. Thus did Vasishtha protect Indra and the residents of heaven. Despite
the supreme boon they had received from Brahma, the daityas were killed by the great-souled one. O unblemished
one! I have thus spoken to you about Vasishtha's deeds. I have told you about them. Tell me if there is a kshatriya
who is superior to Vasishtha.'"'
