'Shalya said, "On seeing that the goddess[Shachi.] was endowed with youth and beauty, thus did Upashruti appear before
the beautiful and virtuous one. Indrani was delighted and showing her homage, said, 'O one with the beautiful
face! I wish to know who you are. Tell me.' Upashruti replied, 'O goddess! I am Upashruti. Since I am satisfied
with your truthfulness, I have shown myself before you. You are devoted to your husband. You have restraint and
are self-controlled. I will show you Shakra, the god who killed Vritra. O fortunate one! Follow me quickly and you
will be able to see that supreme among gods.' As the goddess[Upashruti.] went on ahead, Indrani followed her. Having traversed many forests of the gods and many mountains, she crossed the Himalayas and went to its northern slopes.
She came to an ocean that was many yojanas wide. She then went to a large island that was covered with many
trees and creepers. She saw a divine lake there, populated by many kinds of birds. It was pure and a hundred yo-
janas broad, with a similar length. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thousands of divine lotuses bloomed
there, with five colours, and bees buzzed around. She broke the stalk of a lotus and entered with her[With Upashruti.]. She saw
Shatakratu, who had also entered there. On seeing her lord in that extremely tiny form, the goddess and Upashruti
also assumed extremely tiny forms.

'"Indrani praised Indra for the famous deeds he had performed earlier. Having been thus praised, the god Puran-
dara told Shachi, 'Why have you come here and how did you get to know that I was here?' She then told him
about what Nahusha had tried to do. 'When he became the Indra of the three worlds, he became insolent because
of his valour. O Shatakratu! Having become insolent, the evil-souled one asked me to serve him. That evil one has
granted me some time. O lord! If you do not save me, he will bring me under his powers. O Shakra! I am tormented because of this and have come to you. O mighty-armed one! Destroy that terrible Nahusha. His mind is set on
evil. You are the destroyer of daityas and danavas. Reveal your own self. O lord! Regain your own energy. Rule
the kingdom of the gods.'"'
