Yudhishthira said, "You know the ordinances of all the sacred texts. You know the purport of the dharma of
kings. You are famous on earth as someone who can dispel grave doubts. O grandfather! I have a doubt. Explain this to me. When we confront a difficulty, whom shall we ask, other than you? The task of men is to follow
eternal dharma. O mighty-armed one! You should explain all of this. O grandfather! Four wives have been recommended for a brahmana-a brahmana, a kshatriya, a vaishya and a shudra, if one desires sexual gratification. O
supreme among the Kuru lineage! Sons may be born through all of them. In due order, which of these deserves to
inherit the father's property? O grandfather! Which of them obtains the father's riches? I wish to hear what has
been said about their shares in the sacred texts."

'Bhishma replied, "O Yudhishthira! Brahmanas, kshatriyas and vaishyas-these are the three varnas that are
born twice[The sacred thread ceremony is regarded as a second birth.]. It is recommended dharma that a brahmana should marry these. O scorcher of enemies! Through
error, greed and desire, a brahmana may marry a shudra, but this is not sanctioned in the sacred texts. If a brahmana lies down in a shudra's bed, he will be afflicted. That is the reason rites of atonement have been laid down
for situations like this. O Yudhishthira! If offspring results from this, the penance is doubled. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! I will now tell you about the rules for distributing riches. The son who is born through a brahmana mother will obtain the best auspicious bull and the best vehicle from his father's riches as his share. O Yudhishthira! What is left of the brahmana's property must then be divided into ten parts. From this, the son born
through a brahmana mother will obtain four parts as his share of the father's riches. There is no doubt that the son
who is born through a kshatriya mother has the same status as a brahmana. However, because the mother is different, he deserves to be given three parts. Though the son born through the vaishya has been born from the third varna, the father was a brahmana. O Yudhishthira! He should be given two parts of the brahmana's property. It has
been said that the son born through a brahmana father and a shudra mother should never be given any riches. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! However, a little bit can be given to the son born through the shudra mother[That is, the remaining part.]. In
this order, the riches are thus divided into ten parts. There may be several sons who have been born through the
same varna and they will obtain an equal share in the portion recommended for them. The son who has been born
through a shudra mother should not be regarded as a brahmana. Those born through the other three varnas, with a
brahmana father, are regarded as brahmanas. It has been said that there are only four varnas and there is no fifth
one. The son born through a shudra will obtain a tenth share in the father's riches. But that share will be given to
him if his father has given him the share. If his father has not given it, he will not get it. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Subject to this, riches must certainly be given to the son of a shudra. Lack of cruelty is supreme
dharma and that is the reason he must be given. Whenever there is compassion, it gives rise to good qualities. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! However, irrespective of whether one has sons or does not have sons[Through wives who are not shudras.], under
no circumstances should more than a tenth share be given to the son of a shudra wife. If a brahmana possesses
more riches than are required to sustain him for three years, he should faithfully use these to perform sacrifices.
Riches must not be acquired without reason. Out of the riches, three thousand coins must be given to the wife.
When riches are given to her by her husband, she should enjoy them, without giving them away. When the husband dies without an heir, it has been said that the wife is entitled to enjoy all his riches. However, without asking
him, a wife must never take her husband's riches. O Yudhishthira! If a brahmana lady possesses any riches that
have been given to her by her father, these are inherited by her daughter, since a daughter is like a son. O king! O
descendant of the Kuru lineage! It has been decreed that she is equal to a son. O bull among the Bharata lineage!
These are the instructions of dharma. If these instructions of dharma are remembered, any exercise in obtaining
riches will not be rendered futile."

'Yudhishthira said, "It has been said that the son of a brahmana father and a shudra mother must be given riches.
However, why must a tenth share be specifically given? There is no doubt that a son born through a brahmana father  and  a  brahmana  mother  is  a  brahmana.  That  is  also  true  of  a  kshatriya  mother  and  a  vaishya  mother.  O
supreme among kings! In that case, why is there a differential in shares? After all, the sons of all three varnas have
been said to be brahmanas."

'Bhishma replied, "O scorcher of enemies! All wives in the world are known by the single name of dara[The word dara means wife.]. But
though they are addressed by the same name, there are great differences between them. Even if a brahmana marries
a brahmana wife after having already married three other wives, she is honoured as the eldest and is regarded as
the seniormost. Objects for her husband's bath, cosmetics, washing the teeth, collyrium, havya, kavya and everything that is connected with dharma will be kept in her room. When she is present, no one else should think of performing those acts. O Yudhishthira! In the rites, the brahmana wife alone should aid the brahmana. Because she is
the foremost, food, drink, garlands, garments and ornaments should be given by the brahmana wife to the husband.
O descendant of the Kuru lineage! This has been instructed by Manu in the sacred texts. O great king! Therefore,
this has been seen as eternal dharma. O Yudhishthira! Out of desire, if a brahmana acts in a contrary way, it has already been said that he is like a chandala. The son born through a kshatriya wife is equal to the son born through a
brahmana wife. O king! But even then, there is a difference in the varnas of the mothers. In this world, that is the
reason why sons born through brahmana and kshatriya mothers are unequal. O supreme among kings! The son
born through the brahmana mother is the foremost. O Yudhishthira! That is the reason he is regarded as the first in
inheriting his father's riches. The sons born through a brahmana mother and a kshatriya mother are not equal. In
that way, the sons born through a kshatriya mother and a vaishya mother are not equal. O Yudhishthira! Prosperity,
kingdoms and stores of riches have been recommended for kshatriyas. O king! The earth, up to the frontiers of the
ocean, are seen to belong to them. If a kshatriya is established in his own dharma, he obtains a great deal of prosperity. The king is the wielder of the rod. O king! There can be no protection without the kshatriya. Brahmanas are
extremely fortunate and are like gods among the gods. That is the reason, following the proper way, kings must
worship them. Know that this is the eternal and undecaying dharma laid down by the rishis. When it decays, by adhering to their own dharma, kshatriyas protect subjects. Riches, wives and all the possessions of all the varnas
would have been seized by bandits, had the king not existed as a protector. Thus, there is no doubt that the son of a
kshatriya wife is superior to the son of a vaishya wife. O Yudhishthira! That is also the reason he deserves to have
a greater share in the father's riches."

'Yudhishthira asked, "O king! O grandfather! You have talked about the rules laid down for brahmanas. What
are the rules that have been laid down for the other varnas?"

'Bhishma  replied,  "O  descendant  of  the  Kuru  lineage!  Two  wives  have  been  recommended  for  a  kshatriya.
There are instances of a third and shudra wife, but this is not sanctioned by the sacred texts. O Yudhishthira! This
is the order that has been laid down for kshatriyas. O Yudhishthira! The property of a kshatriya must be divided
into eight parts. The son of a kshatriya wife will obtain four of those parts from the father's riches. He should also
take that much from the father's possessions as is required for engaging in warfare. The son of a vaishya will obtain three parts and the son of a shudra will obtain the eighth part. But the son of a shudra should only take what
has been given by the father. He should not take what he has not been given. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! A
vaishya should only have a single wife. Sometimes, a second shudra wife is seen. But this is not sanctioned by the
sacred texts. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O Kounteya! When a vaishya has both a vaishya and a shudra
wife, rules have been laid down for a division between the two. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The property of
a vaishya must be divided into five parts. O lord of men! I will tell you how this must be divided among the offspring. The son of the vaishya should take four parts from his father's riches. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
The fifth part is the share for the son of the shudra. But the son of a shudra should only take what has been given
by the father. He should not take what he has not been given. If the other three varnas have a son through a shudra
wife, riches must be given to the son. A shudra can only have a wife from his own varna and not from any other.
Even if he has one hundred sons, all of them will have an equal share in the shudra's property. It has also specifically been said that if sons are born through the same varna, irrespective of the varna, all of them will have an
equal share in the riches. However, the eldest son is the foremost and the eldest will therefore have one share more
than the others. O Partha! This is the law of inheritance, as has been stated by Svayambhu earlier. O king! There is
another difference in sons who have been born through the same varna. Especially at the time of marriage, the ones
who have been born first must be married first. When the sons are equal, the eldest will obtain one share more. The
son in the middle will obtain a medium share and the youngest a smaller share[What's probably intended is the following. There are special shares for the eldest, the son in the middle and the
youngest. After these have been taken away, the rest of the property is divided equally.]. Among wives of different varnas, the one who has the same varna as her husband is regarded as the foremost. This is what was stated by maharshi Maricha, the son of Kashyapa."'
