'Brihadashva said, "When the happy city had quietened down and a great festival had started, the king sent a large
army to bring Damayanti. Damayanti's father Bhima, terrible in valour, the destroyer of enemy heroes and indomitable in his soul, sent her with due honours. After the arrival of Vidarbha's daughter with her children, King
Nala spent his days in happiness, like the king of the gods in Nandana. The immensely famous king, having regained his kingdom, began to live there once more and became famous among all the kings of Jambudvipa[One of the seven continents (dvipa) that surround Mount Meru. Bharatavarsha is part of Jambudvipa.]. As
is prescribed, he performed many sacrifices and gave away a lot of dakshina. O Indra among kings! Soon, together
with your well-wishers, you will also spend this time. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O best of men! Thus did
Nala, the destroyer of enemy cities, confront this kind of unhappiness, together with his wife, because of gambling.
O lord of the earth! Nala, who was alone, suffered this terrible and great grief. But he regained his prosperity. O
Pandava! But you are accompanied by your brothers and Krishna[Droupadi.]. Thinking about dharma, you are enjoying
yourself in this great forest. O king! The immensely fortunate brahmanas, learned in the Vedas and the Vedangas,
are always with you. Where is the cause for sorrow? It is said that this account brings about the destruction of Kali.
O lord of the earth! On hearing it, a person like you is capable of being consoled. Thinking that human prosperity
is always transient, you should not sorrow over its coming and going. Those who recount Nala's great tale and
those who listen to it often, are never confronted by calamity. He obtains riches and prosperity flows towards him.
He who hears this eternal, supreme and ancient history, obtains sons, grandsons, animals and an exalted position
among men. There is no doubt that he is without disease and finds happiness. O king! I will destroy the fear that
you see, that you may be challenged again by someone skilled with dice. O king! I know the heart of dice. Truth is
your valour and I am pleased with you. O Kounteya! I will tell you. Learn it from me."'

Vaishampayana said, 'The king[Yudhishthira.] was extremely happy and told Brihadashva, "O illustrious one! I wish to
know the secrets about the heart of the dice from you." Then the great-souled one gave the Pandava the secrets of
the dice. Having given it, the immensely ascetic one went to Ashvashira[A sacred tirtha.] to bathe. When Brihadashva had left,
he[Yudhishthira.] heard from wise ones, brahmanas and ascetics that Savyasachi Partha was engaged in terrible austerities,
surviving only on air. Those ones, who were rigid in their vows, had assembled there from large mountains and
tirthas. They said, "The mighty-armed Partha is engaged in fearful austerities and so terrible are these austerities
that the likes of them have not been witnessed before. Partha Dhananjaya is eternally engaged in the vows of an
ascetic. The fortunate one is living alone like a hermit and is like the god Dharma personified." O king! On hearing
that his beloved brother Jaya[Jaya is one of Arjuna's names and means victory. Jaya is also one of Yudhishthira's names.] was tormenting himself in the great forest through austerities, Pandava Kounteya
suffered on his account. Tormented in his heart, Yudhishthira sought refuge in the great forest and questioned brahmanas who were versed in different kinds of knowledge.'
