Sanjaya said, "All those kings left for their abodes. With arms that were like clubs, they cheerfully blew on their
conch shells. O lord of the earth! The Pandavas proceeded towards our camp. The great archer, Yuyutsu Satyaki,
followed them. Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi, all of Droupadi's sons and all the other great archers also proceeded
towards our camp. The Parthas entered Duryodhana's camp, bereft of its radiance and with its lord slain. It looked
like an arena devoid of men. It looked like a city deprived of life and like a lake without elephants. There were
only a large number of women, eunuchs and aged advisers. O king! Earlier, with clean garments dyed in ochre,
Duryodhana and the others used to wait on them[The aged advisers.], with hands joined in salutation. The Pandavas reached the
camp of the king of the Kurus. O great king! Those supreme of rathas descended from their chariots.

' "O bull among the Bharata lineage! Keshava was always engaged in bringing pleasure to the wielder of Gandi-
va and spoke to him. 'Take down Gandiva and the two great and inexhaustible quivers. O supreme among the
Bharata lineage! I will get down after you have dismounted. O unblemished one! Descend. It is for your own
good.' Dhananjaya, Pandu's brave son, did as he had been asked. Thereafter, the intelligent Krishna discarded the
reins of the horses and got down from the chariot that belonged to the wielder of Gandiva. The extremely great-
souled one, the lord of all beings, descended. The celestial ape, stationed on the standard of the wielder of Gandi-
va, disappeared. Earlier, it[The chariot.] had been burnt by the divine weapons of the maharathas, Drona and Karna. O lord of
the earth! It blazed amidst a fire and was swiftly burnt. The chariot of the wielder of Gandiva was burnt, with its
yokes, its harnesses, its horses and its lovely joints. O lord! On seeing that it had been reduced to ashes, Pandu's
sons were astounded. O king! Arjuna joined his hands in salutation and bowing down affectionately, asked, 'O
Govinda! O illustrious one! Why has the chariot been burnt down by the fire? O descendant of the Yadu lineage!
What is this extremely wonderful thing that has occurred? O mighty-armed one! If you think that I deserve to hear
it, tell me.' Vasudeva replied, 'O Arjuna! This has earlier been burnt by many different kinds of weapons. O
scorcher of enemies! It is because I was seated that it was not destroyed in the battle. It has now been destroyed,
consumed by the energy of brahmastra. O Kounteya! Now that you have accomplished your objective, I have
abandoned it.' The illustrious Keshava, the destroyer of enemies, smiled a little, in pride.

' "He embraced King Yudhishthira and said, 'O Kounteya! It is through good fortune that you have become victorious. It is through good fortune that you have defeated your enemies. O king! It is through good fortune that the
wielder of Gandiva, Pandava Bhimasena, you and the Pandavas who are Madri's sons are hale. You have slain
your enemies and have escaped from a battle that has been destructive of heroes. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Swiftly do the tasks that must be done next. When I earlier arrived in Upaplavya, with the wielder of Gandi-
va, you approached me and greeted me with madhuparka[A mixture of honey and milk, offered to a guest.]. You spoke these words to me. "O Krishna! Dhananjaya is your brother and friend too. O mighty-armed one! O lord! You must therefore protect him from all
dangers." When you spoke those words to me, I replied in words of assent. O lord of men! Savyasachi has been
protected and you have become victorious. O Indra among kings! He is brave and truth is his valour. With his
brothers, he has escaped from this battle that led to the destruction of brave ones and made the body hair stand up.'

O great king! Having been thus addressed by Krishna, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira replied to Janardana, with his
body hair standing up. 'O crusher of enemies! Who other than you, and Purandara, the wielder of the vajra himself,
could have escaped from the brahmastras of Drona and Karna? It is through your many favours that we have triumphed in this battle and Partha never had to retreat, even from the greatest of battles. O mighty-armed one! In
that fashion, it is through your favours and instructions that I have performed many deeds and attained objectives
with auspicious energy. In Upaplavya, maharshi Krishna Dvaipayana told me, "Where there is dharma, Krishna is
there. Where there is Krishna, victory is there." ' O descendant of the Bharata lineage! These were the words the
brave ones spoke in your camp.

' "They then entered and obtained the treasure chests, with many kinds of riches and gems-silver, gold, jewels,
pearls, the best of ornaments, blankets, hides-many female and male slaves and other objects required for kingship. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O Indra among men! Having obtained access to your inexhaustible riches,
those great archers roared in delight, having defeated their enemies. Those brave ones approached their mounts
and unyoked them. All the Pandavas, with Satyaki, remained there for some time. O great king! The immensely
illustrious Vasudeva then said, 'To ensure that everything is auspicious, we should dwell outside this camp.' All
the Pandavas and Satyaki agreed to this. For the sake of ensuring the auspicious, with Vasudeva, they went outside.
O king! They approached the sacred river Oghavati[Oghavati is that part of Sarasvati that flows through Kurukshetra.]. Having slain their enemies, the Pandavas spent the night
there. When the sun arose, they[The Pandavas.] quickly sent the powerful Vasudeva to Nagasahvya. Daruka[Krishna's charioteer.] ascended the
chariot. The king who was Ambika's son[Dhritarashtra.] was there. When he was about to leave, with Sainya and Sugriva[The names of Krishna's horses.]
yoked, they told him, 'Comfort the illustrious Gandhari, whose sons have been slain.' Thus spoken to by the Pandavas, the best of the Satvata lineage set out for that city. He quickly approached Gandhari, whose sons had been
killed." '
