'Sanjaya said, "Susharma[The king of Trigarta.] retreated from the battle. The brave ones were routed by the great-souled Pandava.
However, the battle continued. Your army, which was like the ocean, had been agitated. Gangeya swiftly advanced
towards Vijaya. O king! On witnessing Partha's valour in battle, Duryodhana hastened towards all those kings and
spoke to them. The brave and immensely strong Susharma was at the forefront and was stationed in the midst of all
the soldiers. These words delighted them. 'This Bhishma, Shantanu's son, wishes to fight with Dhananjaya with all
his heart. He is the best of the Kurus and is willing to give up his own life. With all the soldiers of the Bharata
army, he will advance against the army of the enemy. All of you unite in the battle and protect the grandfather.' O
great king! Having been thus urged, all the divisions of all those kings of men followed the grandfather. Bhishma,
Shantanu's son, swiftly went to where Arjuna was and the immensely strong one of the Bharata lineage had also
been advancing towards him. He was resplendent on a great chariot that roared like the clouds. Large white horses
were yoked to it and the terrible ape was on the standard. On seeing Dhananjaya Kiriti advance in battle, all the
soldiers in your army were frightened and let out a tumultuous roar. Krishna held the reins in that battle and looked
as dazzling as the sun in midday. They were unable of glancing at him. Like that, the Pandavas were incapable of
glancing at Bhishma, Shantanu's son. His horses were white and he held a white bow. He looked like the white
planet when it has risen[White planet probably means Venus, but it can also signify the moon.]. He was surrounded on every side by the extremely great-souled Trigarta and his
brothers, your sons and many other maharathas.

'"Bharadvaja's son pierced Matsya with an arrow in that encounter. He brought his standard down with one arrow and sliced down his bow with another. Discarding his broken bow, Virata, the leader of an army, quickly took
up another bow that was powerful and could bear a great burden. He used venomous arrows that were like flaming
serpents. He pierced Drona with three of these and his horses with four. He pierced his standard with one and his
charioteer with five. With a single arrow, he pierced his bow. Drona, bull among brahmanas, became angry. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! Using eight straight-tufted arrows, he killed his horses and his charioteer with a
single one. With his horses slain and his charioteer also slain, the best of charioteers jumped down from his chariot
and swiftly ascended Shankha's chariot[Shankha was Virata's son.]. The father and the son were on the same chariot and powerfully countered Bharadvaja's son with a great shower of arrows. O lord of men! Bharadvaja's son became enraged in that
battle. He despatched an arrow that was like a venomous serpent towards Shankha. In that encounter, it pierced his
heart and drank up his blood. Then the arrow fell down on the ground, smeared in blood. Killed by the arrow released by Bharadvaja's son, he fell down from the chariot. While his father looked on, the bow and arrows dropped
from his grasp. On seeing that his son had been killed, Virata gave up the fight and fled in fear. Drona was like
death with a gaping mouth. Bharadvaja's son swiftly attacked the great army of the Pandavas. In that battle, he
scattered hundreds and thousands of them.

'"O great king! Shikhandi confronted Drona's son in battle and struck him between the brows with three swift
and iron arrows. With those three adhering to his forehead, that tiger among men looked like Mount Meru with
three golden peaks. O king! Ashvatthama became angry. In that encounter, in an instant, he showered down many
arrows at Shikhandi's charioteer, standard, horses and weapon and brought them down. With his horses slain, the
supreme of rathas descended from his chariot. He grasped a sharp sword and a polished shield. O great king!
Shikhandi, the scorcher of enemies, strode around in the field of battle with a sword, like an angry hawk. Drona's
son did not find an opportunity to strike him and it was extraordinary. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Supremely enraged, Drona's son unleashed many thousand arrows in that battle. But when that extremely terrible shower of
arrows descended in that encounter, the supreme among strong ones struck them down with his sharp sword. The
shield was polished and was decorated with a hundred moons on it. In that encounter, Drona's son shattered his
shield and his sword. O king! He pierced him with many sharp arrows. Though pierced and wounded, Shikhandi
whirled the fragment of the sword that had been shattered by the arrows and swiftly hurled it, like a blazing serpent. It suddenly descended, as radiant as the fire of destruction. But in that encounter, Drona's son displayed the
dexterity of his hands. He sliced it down and pierced Shikhandi with many iron arrows. O king! Shikhandi was severely wounded by those sharp arrows. He quickly ascended the chariot of the great-souled Madhava[Meaning Satyaki.].

'"The angry Satyaki, strongest among strong ones, attacked the cruel rakshasa Alambusa in that battle and
pierced him with many terrible arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! But in that encounter, the Indra
among rakshasas sliced his bow down with an arrow that was in the shape of a half-moon and pierced him with
many arrows. He used the maya of rakshasas and showered down arrows on him. We then witnessed the extraordinary valour of Shini's descendant. Despite being pierced by sharp arrows in that encounter, he disregarded
them. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Varshneya then invoked the aindra weapon, which the illustrious Madhava had obtained from Vijaya[Satyaki studied the art of war from Arjuna.]. Using that weapon, he reduced the maya of rakshasas to ashes. From every direction, he showered Alambusa with terrible arrows, like the slayer of Bala[Indra.] showering rain on mountains. He
was thus oppressed by the great-souled Madhava. Out of fear, the rakshasa gave up the fight with Satyaki and fled.
While your warriors looked on, Shini's descendant triumphed over the Indra among rakshasas, whom even Maghavan found difficult to defeat, and roared. Satyaki, with truth as his valour, killed your soldiers with many sharp arrows and they ran away in fear.

'"O great king! At that time, Dhrishtadyumna, Drupada's powerful son, encountered your son, lord among men,
and in that encounter, enveloped him with straight-tufted arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He was
shrouded by Dhrishtadyumna's arrows. But your son, lord of men and Indra among kings, was not perturbed. In
that encounter, he pierced Dhrishtadyumna back with ninety arrows and it was extremely wonderful. O venerable
one! The commander[Dhrishtadyumna was the overall commander of the Pandava army.] became angry and sliced his bow down. The maharatha swiftly killed his four horses and
quickly pierced him with seven extremely sharp arrows. When his horses were killed, the mighty-armed one,
strong among rathas, leapt down from his chariot. He advanced on foot towards Parshata, with a sword in his hand.
The immensely strong Shakuni, who was devoted to the king, arrived. He took the king of all the worlds up on his
own chariot. Having defeated the king, Parshata, the destroyer of enemy heroes, began to slaughter your troops,
like the wielder of the vajra against the asuras.

'"In that battle, Kritavarma attacked maharatha Bhima and covered him with arrows. He was enveloped, like the
sun with large clouds. But Bhimasena, scorcher of enemies, laughed in that battle. Extremely angry, he unleashed
arrows on Kritavarma. O great king! But the atiratha from the Satvata lineage, skilled in the use of weapons, did
not waver. He enveloped Bhima with sharp arrows. The immensely strong Bhimasena killed his four horses. He
brought down his charioteer and his beautiful standard. The destroyer of enemy heroes covered him with many arrows. He was wounded in every limb and looked like a porcupine. O great king! With his horses slain, he quickly
abandoned his chariot and went to the chariot of your brother-in-law Vrishaka, while your son looked on[Vrishaka and Achala were the sons of the king of Gandhara (Subala) and were thus brothers to Shakuni and
brothers-in-law to Dhritarashtra.]. Bhimasena angrily rushed to attack your soldiers. He began to slaughter them in great rage, like Death with a staff in
his hand."'
