The brahmana said, 'O unblemished one! Because of the weight of your words, I have become attached to
you[There is a break in continuity, because the guest hasn't said anything, beyond the expected words of salutation.]. You have become my friend. Listen to me. I will tell you something. O Indra among brahmanas! I
have handed over the dharma of garhasthya to my son. O brahmana! I now want to be established on the path of
supreme dharma. What should I do? I have based my atman on the atman[The jivatman and the paramatman respectively.] and wish to be established in the atman. I do not wish to do anything that leads to bondage to the ordinary qualities. So far, all of my life has been
spent on acquiring the fruit of a son. Therefore, I desire provisions for the world hereafter. The virtuous ones in
this world desire the supreme that will enable them to cross the hereafter. That resolution has been awakened in
me. Where will I obtain the raft of dharma? I have heard that people are confused in this world and even those with
sattva in their souls find it difficult to emerge. Above the heads of all subjects, I have seen the garlands, flags and
standards of dharma held aloft. My mind no longer finds delight in time spent on pleasure. I have seen that mendicants desire the hereafter. O guest! You possess the strength of intelligence and know the truth about the purport of
dharma. Engage me in that.'"

'Bhishma continued, "The guest heard the words of the one who desired to pursue dharma. The wise one replied
in gentle and sweet words. 'I am also confused and that is my wish too. I cannot make up my mind. There are
many doors to heaven. Some praise moksha, other brahmanas the fruits of sacrifices. Some resort to the dharma of
vanaprastha, others resort to garhasthya. Some resort to the dharma of kings, others to the fruits of the atman.
Some resort to serving preceptors, others speak words in favour of yama. Some have gone to heaven by serving
their mothers and fathers. Others have gone to heaven through non-violence, and still others through truth. Some
have advanced towards battle, were slain and have gone to heaven. Others became successful through the practice
of the vow of unchha[There are grains left after a crop has been harvested, or after grain has been milled. If one subsists on these leftovers, that is known as unchhavritti.] and have advanced along the path that leads to heaven. Some have been engaged in
studying and have been devoted to the auspicious vows of the Vedas. Intelligent ones have gone to heaven by being content and conquering their senses. There are others who were upright, but were killed by people who were
deceitful. There are upright ones, pure in their souls, who have been established in the vault of the sky[Meaning heaven.]. In this
way, in this world, there are many doors to heaven that have been opened. Thus, my mind is also anxious, like a
light cloud that is driven by the wind.'"'
