The gods said, 'O lord! The asura Taraka has obtained boons from you and is causing suffering to the gods
and the rishis. Determine a method for his death. O grandfather! A great fear has been generated in us. O
god! Save us. We have no other refuge.'

'"Brahma replied, 'I am impartial towards all beings, but adharma doesn't please me. Let Taraka, the impediment to large numbers of gods and rishis, be quickly destroyed. O supreme among gods! The dharma of the Vedas
must not be uprooted. I have already determined what must be done. Dispel your anxiety.'

'"The gods said, 'O illustrious one! Since you gave him a boon, that daitya is proud of his strength. The gods are
unable to slay him. How can he be pacified? O grandfather! The boon he obtained from you was that he couldn't
be killed by gods, asuras and rakshasas. O lord of the entire universe! Earlier, at the time of procreation, the gods
have also been cursed by Rudrani and they will not have offspring.'

'"Brahma replied, 'O best among gods! Agni was not present at the time. To kill the one who hates the gods, he
will have a son who will surpass all the gods, danavas, rakshasas, men, gandharvas, serpents and birds. He will kill
him with the invincible weapon of a spear. He will destroy the one who has led to your fear and all the other enemies of the gods. Resolution is eternal and is known as kama. Rudra's energy fell down into the fire. That energy is
like a second fire. For killing the enemies of the gods, Agni will fling it into the Ganga and a son will be born.
Since Agni wasn't present, that seed has not been affected by the curse. Thus, to remove the fears of the gods,
Pavaki will be born[Pavaka is Agni's name and Pavaki is Agni's son. Pavaki is thus a name for Skanda.]. Search out the fire god and employ him for this task. O unblemished ones! I have told you
about the means for Taraka's death. The energy of the curse will have no effect on this energy. When strength encounters a greater strength, it is rendered weak. Ascetics are capable of slaying the granters of boons, ones who are
indestructible[Through the strength of asceticism and the granters of boons are the gods.]. Resolution, inclination and kama are eternal. Agni has been ordained as the lord of the universe.
He can go everywhere and is the creator of everything. He is in the hearts of all beings. The lord is older than even
Rudra. Swiftly search out Agni, the mass of energy. O gods! He will accomplish the desire that there is in your
hearts.'

'"Vasishtha continued, 'Hearing the words of the great-souled one, the gods thought that their wishes had been
accomplished and began to search for Agni. The gods and the rishis searched everywhere in the three worlds. Single-mindedly, all of them looked for Agni. O extender of the Bhrigu lineage[Vasishtha is telling Parashurama the story.]! They were supreme in austerities,
handsome and famous in the worlds. Those successful ones could roam around in all the worlds. But since Agni
had hidden himself in his own self, they couldn't search him out[Agni hid in the water. Since fire originates in water, water is like the fire's own self.]. There was a frog that dwelt in the water. Since
it was scorched by Agni's energy, the frog arose from the nether regions and spoke to the gods. "O gods! The lord
Agni is residing in the nether regions. I have come here, having been consumed by Agni's power. O gods! The illustrious bearer of oblations is sleeping in the water. The energy that has been released in the water has scorched
all of us. O gods! If you wish to see Agni and if you have anything to do with Agni, go there. O gods! Because of
our fear of Agni, we will try to leave this place." Having said this, the frog quickly entered the water again. The
bearer of oblations got to know about the frog's treachery and cursed it that it would no longer have any sense of
taste. Having thus cursed the frog, the lord Agni departed, so that he could reside elsewhere and would not have to
show himself to the gods. O extender of the Bhrigu lineage! But the gods showed their compassion towards frogs.
O mighty-armed one! I will tell you everything. Listen.'

'"The gods said, 'Because of Agni's curse, your tongues will no longer have any sensation of taste. But you will
be able to utter many kinds of sound. You will dwell in holes, without food and without any sensation. When the
ground is dry and without any sign of life, you will still be able to sustain yourselves. You will roam around in the
night, when darkness has enveloped everything.'

'"Vasishtha continued, 'After saying this, the gods wandered around the earth again, looking for Agni. But they
couldn't find Agni. O extender of the Bhrigu lineage! There was an elephant that was like the elephant that belonged to Indra of the gods. It told the gods, "Agni is inside an ashvattha tree." Senseless with rage, Agni cursed
all the elephants. "Your tongues will bend backwards." O extender of the Bhrigu lineage! Having said this, since
he had been singled out by the elephant, Agni left the ashvattha tree. Wishing to sleep, Agni entered inside a shami
tree. O lord! O best among the Bhrigu lineage! However, the gods, with truth as their valour, were pleased with
elephants and showed them their compassion. Listen.'

'"The gods said, 'Though your tongues will bend backwards, you will be able to eat everything. And you will
still be able to utter words, though the syllables will be indistinct.'

'"Vasishtha continued, 'After saying this, the residents of heaven began to search for Agni again. Agni had left
the ashvattha tree and was now inside a shami tree. O brahmana! A parrot told the gods about this and they went
there. Agni cursed parrots, "You will no longer have the power of speech." Because of what the bearer of oblations
had said, their tongues became that way. The gods saw Agni at the place that the parrot had indicated and did not
wish that the bird should be completely destroyed. They said, "Though your tongue is concealed, you will utter
beautiful words. Though indistinct, they will be wonderful, like those spoken by old people and children." Having
said this, the gods saw Agni inside the shami tree and ordained that the shami tree would be regarded as an abode
for the gods, with its sacred wood used in all the rites. Since then, Agni has always been found inside a shami tree
and men have used it to ignite a fire[By rubbing two pieces of shami wood together, the wood is easily ignited.]. The water in the nether regions came into contact with Agni. O Bhargava!
Those  heated  waters  are  released  through  mountain  springs.  Since  Agni  resided  in  them,  they  became  heated
through his energy. On  seeing  the  gods,  Agni  was  distressed.  Agni  asked,  "Why  have  you  come  here?"  They
replied, "O illustrious one! You should accomplish a task for us. You possess extremely great qualities and you
should do this for us." Agni said, "O gods! Tell me what the task is and I shall do everything for you. You should
not think about it. Employ me for the purpose." The gods replied, "There is an asura named Taraka. Because of a
boon received from Brahma, he has become insolent. He counters us through his energy. You must arrange for his
destruction. O father[The word used is tata.]! O immensely fortunate one! O Pavaka! Save this large number of gods, large number of
Prajapatis and the rishis. O lord! Give birth to a brave son who is full of energy. O bearer of oblations! He will destroy our fear from the asura. We have been cursed by the great goddess and no one else can be a refuge. Barring
your energy, there is nothing else that can save us now." Thus addressed, the illustrious devourer of havya and
kavya agreed.

'"'The invincible one went to Ganga Bhagirathi. He united with her and caused the conception[Through Shiva's seed, which Agni was carrying.]. The embryo
began to grow, just as the one with the black trails[The fire.] grows in the presence of deadwood. Because of the energy in
the womb, Ganga was bereft of her senses. She suffered from terrible torment and was incapable of bearing it.
When the lord Agni placed the energy in Ganga's womb, there was an asura who emitted a terrible roar. Because
of that loud roar, she lost her senses. Ganga was terrified and her eyes rolled in fear. She looked around in agitation. Bereft of her senses, she was no longer capable of bearing herself or the embryo. With the energy pervading
all her limbs, Jahnavi trembled. O brahmana! Struck by the strength of the embryo, she told Agni, "O illustrious
one! I am incapable of bearing this energy any longer. I am confounded and am suffering from great ill health. O
illustrious one! O unblemished one! I am distracted and your energy has destroyed me. O supreme among those
who heat! I am no longer capable of bearing this embryo. Though I do not desire it, because of the misery, I will
have to cast it off. O god! O Vibhavasu! I did not voluntarily wish this union with you. O immensely radiant one!
Our extremely subtle relationship arose because of the disaster. O Agni! Any qualities that result from this relationship are because of you. The dharma and adharma belong to you alone. That is what I think." However, Agni
replied, "Bear what must be borne. The embryo is the outcome of my energy and it will lead to great qualities and
fruits. You are capable of bearing the entire earth. There is nothing that you will gain by not holding onto this
seed." The best among rivers was restrained by Agni and also by the gods.

'"'However, she released the embryo on Meru, best among mountains. Though she was capable of bearing it,
she suffered from Rudra's energy. Therefore, she was incapable of bearing the embryo and the associated energy.
Overcome by misery, she released it and it blazed, like the fire in complexion. O extender of the Bhrigu lineage!
Agni saw Ganga and asked the best among rivers, "Is the embryo well? O goddess! What is its complexion? What
is seen to be its form? What kind of energy does it possess? Tell me everything." Ganga replied, "O Agni! With
your energy, the embryo has the complexion of gold. It is golden, sparkling and blazing and has illuminated the
mountain. O supreme among the ones who heat! Its fragrance is like that of the kadamba flower, mixed with that
of lotuses from the cool lakes. Every object that has been touched by the energy of the embryo, on earth and in the
mountains, is like the rays of the sun. In every direction, everything is seen to have turned into gold. That energy
has descended on mountains, rivers, streams and the mobile and immobile objects in the three worlds and illuminated them. O illustrious one! O bearer of oblations! This is the form of that son. His beauty is like that of the sun
or the fire, or like that of the moon." Having said this, the goddess vanished. The energetic Pavaka had also accomplished the task of the residents of heaven. O descendant of the Bhargava lineage! Therefore, he also left the spot.
It is because of the qualities of his deeds that the rishis and the gods conferred a name on Agni and it is recited in
the worlds. This is Hiranyareta[The one with the golden seed.]. The goddess earth came to be known as Vasumati[The one with riches or wealth, because the embryo, associated with gold, was deposited on the earth.]. Ganga's immensely energetic embryo was generated through Agni. It fell on a divine clump of reeds and began to grow there, assuming a
wonderful form. The Krittikas[The Pleiades.]  saw  it there and it was  like the young  sun  in radiance. Their affection being
stirred, they nourished the child at their own breasts. That is how the extremely radiant one came to be known as
Kartikeya. Since the seed had fallen down, he came to be known as Skanda[Skanna means to trickle down or fall down. Guha means to be reared secretly.]. Since he resided in secrecy, he came
to be known as Guha. This was the way gold was born from Agni. That is the reason gold is the best ornament for
the gods. That is the reason it is spoken of as jatarupa[A name for gold, something that assumes a form after it has been born.]. Gold is nothing but the illustrious Girisha and Prajapati.
O supreme among brahmanas! Gold is the most sacred among everything that is sacred. Jatarupa is said to possess
the essence of Agni and Soma. It is the best jewel among all jewels. It is the supreme ornament. It is the most sacred among all things sacred. It is the most auspicious among all things that are auspicious.'"'
