'Dhritarashtra asked, "O Sanjaya! How did Shikhandi fight with Gangeya in that battle? How did Bhishma advance against the Pandavas? Tell me this."

'Sanjaya replied, "The morning was clear and it was time for the sun to rise. Many drums, kettledrums and tambourines were sounded. Conch shells with the complexion of curds were blown in every direction. The Pandava
warriors placed Shikhandi at the forefront and marched out. O great king! They constructed a vyuha that was capable of destroying all enemies. O lord of the earth! Shikhandi was stationed at the forefront of all the soldiers. Bhimasena and Dhananjaya protected his wheels. Droupadi's sons and Subhadra's valiant son were behind him. Satya-
ki and maharatha Chekitana protected them. Dhrishtadyumna was behind them, protected by the Panchalas. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! The lord, King Yudhishthira, marched out, together with the twins, roaring like lions.
Virata was behind him, surrounded by his soldiers. O great king! Drupada advanced behind him. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! The five brothers from Kekaya and the valiant Dhrishtaketu protected the Pandu soldiers from
the rear. The Pandavas arranged the large army of soldiers in the form of this vyuha. They advanced in the battle,
ready to give up their lives. O king! In that fashion, the Kurus placed the immensely strong Bhishma at the forefront of all their soldiers and advanced against the Pandavas. He was protected by your invincible and extremely
strong sons. The great archer, Drona, was behind them, together with his maharatha son. Bhagadatta was behind
him, surrounded by a large army of elephants. Kripa and Kritavarma followed Bhagadatta. Sudakshina, the powerful king of Kamboja, was behind them, as were Jayatsena from Magadha, Soubala and Brihadbala. There were
many other great archers and kings, with Susharma at the forefront. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They
protected your army's rear. From one day to another, Bhishma, Shantanu's son, created a different kind of vyuha
for the battle-sometimes it was asura, sometimes it was pishacha, sometimes it was rakshasa.

'"O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The battle between those on your side and those of the enemy commenced. O king! They struck each other and extended Yama's kingdom. The Parthas, with Arjuna at their head,
placed Shikhandi at the forefront. They advanced against Bhishma in the battle and released many kinds of arrows.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Those on your side were oppressed by Bhima's arrows. They were covered in
blood and left for the next world. Nakula, Sahadeva and maharatha Satyaki advanced against your soldiers and afflicted them with energy. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Those on your side were being slain in that battle.
They were incapable of resisting the great army of the Pandavas. Your soldiers were slaughtered in every direction.
O king! They were oppressed by those maharathas and were seen to run away in different directions. O bull among
the Bharata lineage! Those on your side could not find a protector. They were slaughtered by the sharp arrows of
the Pandavas, together with the Srinjayas."

'Dhritarashtra said, "On seeing that the army was thus oppressed by the Parthas, what did the valiant Bhishma
do, when he became enraged in that battle? O Sanjaya! How did the scorcher of enemies advance against the Pandavas in battle? O Sanjaya! How did he kill the brave Somakas? Tell me this."

'Sanjaya replied, "O great king! When the soldiers of your sons were oppressed by the Pandavas and the Srinjayas, I will tell you what the grandfather did. O Pandu's elder brother! The brave Pandavas were delighted. They
advanced and began to slaughter your son's army. O Indra among men! There was a destruction of men, elephants
and horses. Bhishma could not tolerate that the enemy was slaying the soldiers in the battle. The great archer attacked the Pandavas, the Panchalas and the Srinjayas. He was invincible and was prepared to give up his own life.
O king! He attacked the five supreme maharathas among the Pandavas[It is not clear which of the five are meant, unless it means the five Pandava brothers.]. These were the ones who were exerting
themselves in the battle and he checked them with his arrows. He used iron arrows, vatsadantas[A vatsadanta is an arrow that has a head like the tooth of a calf.] and sharp anjalikas. He was angry and killed many elephants and horses in that battle. O king! That bull among men brought
down charioteers from their chariots, horse-riders from the backs of horses, assembled foot soldiers and elephant-
riders from the backs of elephants. He terrified the enemy. In that battle, the maharatha Pandavas quickly attacked
Bhishma together, like the wielder of the vajra assailed by asuras. He released sharp arrows that were like Shakra's
vajra to the touch. He was seen in every direction, having assumed a terrible form. As he fought in that battle, his
bow was always seen whirling around in a circular motion, like Shakra's giant bow. O lord of the earth! On witnessing his deeds in that battle, your sons were filled with supreme wonder and honoured the grandfather. The
Parthas were dispirited at the way your brave father was fighting in the battle. They glanced towards him, like the
immortals towards Viprachitti. They could not resist the one who was like death with a gaping mouth.

'"On the tenth day of the battle, he began to consume Shikhandi's array of chariots with his sharp arrows, like
the one with the black trails[A fire.] burns a forest. Shikhandi pierced him between the breasts with three arrows.
Bhishma was like an angry and virulent serpent, like the Destroyer who had been created by Death. Having been
thus severely pierced, he glanced towards Shikhandi. He was enraged, but was unwilling[Unwilling to fight.]. He smiled and said,
'Whether you desire it or not, I will never fight with you. You are still the Shikhandini[That is, the lady.] that the creator made.'

On hearing these words, Shikhandi became senseless with anger. In the battle, he licked the corners of his mouth
and spoke to Bhishma. 'O mighty-armed one! I know you to be the destroyer of the kshatriyas. I have heard about
your battle with Jamadagni's son. I have also heard many things about your divine powers. Knowing of your prowess, I wish to fight with you today. O supreme among men! I wish to do what is pleasant for the Pandavas and for
my own self. O supreme among men! I wish to fight against you in the battle today. It is certain that I will kill you.
I am swearing this truthfully, in front of you. Having heard these words of mine, do what you must do. Whether
you wish to strike me or whether you do not, you will not escape with your life. O Bhishma! O victorious one!
Take a final look at this world.' O king! Having said this, he pierced Bhishma with five straight-tufted arrows, having already wounded him with the arrows of his words. On hearing his words, Savyasachi, the scorcher of enemies, thought that the time had come and incited Shikhandi. 'I will now fight behind you and destroy the enemy
with my arrows. Ignited with rage, attack Bhishma, whose valour is terrible. The immensely strong one will not be
able to cause you any pain in the battle. O brave one! O mighty-armed one! Therefore, attack Bhishma. O venerable one! If you return without killing Bhishma in battle, the worlds will look at you, and at me, with disrespect. O
brave one! Exert yourself in this great battle so that we are not ridiculed. Make endeavours in the battle and repulse
the grandfather. Drona, Drona's son, Kripa, Suyodhana, Chitrasena, Vikarna, Saindhava Jayadratha, Vinda and
Anuvinda from Avanti, Sudakshina from Kamboja, the brave Bhagadatta, the maharatha from Magadha, Somadatta's son, the rakshasa who is Rishyashringa's son and is brave in battle, the king of Trigarta and all the other maharathas-I will restrain them in battle, like the shoreline holds back the dwelling place of makaras. I will hold
back in battle all the Kurus, together with their soldiers. You strive against the grandfather.'"'
