Yudhishthira asked, "The Vedas say that a man possesses valour that lasts for one hundred years and has a lifespan of one hundred years. O grandfather! In that case, why do men die when they are children? Despite possessing a long lifespan, why does a man's lifespan become short? How does one obtain fame? How does one obtain prosperity? Is it austerities, brahmacharya, meditation, oblations, herbs, birth or conduct? O grandfather! Tell
me this."

'Bhishma replied, "I will now tell you about what you have asked, the reason why a man has a short life or a
long life. How does he obtain fame and how does he obtain prosperity? How should a man act so as to obtain benefit? Conduct ensures a long lifespan. Prosperity is obtained through conduct. It is through conduct that a man obtains fame, in this world and in the next. A man who is wicked in conduct does not obtain a long lifespan. Creatures are terrified of him and suffer on his account. Therefore, a person who desires his own prosperity must act in
accordance with good conduct. Good conduct destroys the wickedness of the body and removes everything that is
inauspicious. Good conduct is the sign of dharma. Good conduct is the sign of the virtuous. The conduct of virtuous people is a sign of good conduct. Even if people hear of a person who follows dharma and undertakes appropriate tasks, without actually having seen him, they repeatedly act so as to bring him pleasure. There are people
who are non-believers, devoid of rites, those who cross their preceptors and the sacred texts. They are evil in conduct and only know about adharma. Their lifespans are destroyed. They don't follow good behaviour and violate
the ordinances. They are always indiscriminate about sexual intercourse. Such men have short lives and go to hell.
If a man doesn't possess any auspicious signs, but is nevertheless faithful and without malice, following good conduct, then he lives for one hundred years. A person without anger, truthful in speech, non-injurious towards creatures, without jealousy and without deceit-lives for one hundred years. A man who crushes lumps of earth or
tears up grass[Both of these when seated on the ground.], bites his nails, eats food tasted by others and is restless-does not obtain greatness.

'"A person must wake up at brahma muhurta[This is a period of roughly one and a half hours, just before dawn, when the sun is still below the horizon.] and think about dharma and artha. After waking, he must perform the ablutions and joining the hands in salutation, recite the morning prayers, facing the east. In the same way,
restraining conversation with others, the evening prayers must be recited. One must never look at the rising sun or
the setting sun. During the two sandhyas[Dawn and dusk.], the rishis worship for a long time. That is the reason they obtain long
lifespans. Therefore, restraining speech at the time, one must respectively face the east and the west. There are
brahmanas who do not worship during the eastern and the western sandhya. All of them follow adharma and the
king must make them undertake the tasks of shudras. For all the varnas, one must never have sexual intercourse
with another person's wife. For a man, there is nothing on earth that shortens a lifespan as much as having intercourse with another person's wife. The application of cosmetics, dressing the hair, applying of collyrium, brushing
the teeth and worshipping the gods must be done in the forenoon. One must never look at urine or excrement, or
stand on these. One must not speak when passing urine. One must not release excrement in a field or near a village.
Both urine and excrement must never be released in water. One must not speak while eating and must face the east.
One should not criticize the food. Having finished eating, one must mentally touch the fire. If one eats facing the
east, one obtains a long lifespan. If one eats facing the south, one obtains fame. If one eats facing the west one obtains wealth. If one eats facing the north, one speaks the truth. One must never sit on anything like chaff, hair, ash
or bones. From a distance, one must avoid the water that someone else has used for bathing. One must offer obla-
tions for peace and recite the savitri mantra. One must be seated while eating and not walk around. One must not
pass urine while standing, or on ashes or inside a pen for cows. One must wash one's feet before eating. But one
must not go to sleep with wet feet. A person who washes his feet before eating lives for one hundred years. Three
things of energy must never be touched with a hand that has not been washed after eating-a fire, a cow and a
brahmana. If one does this, the lifespan is not diminished. When one is impure, one must never look at three objects of energy-the sun, the moon and all the nakshatras. When an aged person arrives, a young person's breath of
life ascends upwards. By standing up and greeting him, it is got back again. After greeting an aged person, a seat
must be offered to him. When he is seated, one must remain standing, hands joined in salutation. When the aged
person walks, one must follow him from the rear[A younger person must not walk ahead of an older person.]. One must not sit on a broken seat. A broken brass vessel must
also be thrown away. One must never eat while clad in a single garment[The upper garment for the upper part of the body must be worn.]. One should not bathe naked. One
should not sleep naked. One should not touch food that someone else has partly eaten. In an impure state, one must
not touch another person's head, since all the breath of life is concentrated there. One must not grasp another person's hair or strike him on the head. One must not join one's hands together and use them for scratching one's own
head. While bathing, one must not repeatedly dip one's head in the water. Then, the lifespan will not be shortened.
After having washed the head, one should not apply oil to the limbs or touch the water again. Before eating, one
should eat some crushed sesamum. One will then obtain greatness. One should never teach or study in an impure
state. Nor should one mentally think of these when a bad stench is borne along by the wind. In this connection,
those who know about the ancient accounts recount a chant that Yama sung. 'If a person speaks about studying or
studies during an impure state, then he reduces his lifespan and that of his offspring[The text doesn't clearly indicate which part is a Yama quote and the quotation marks are thus arbitrary.].' Therefore, one must never
prepare to teach or study at such times. If a person passes urine or excrement towards the sun, towards a fire, towards a cow, towards a brahmana or along a road-then his lifespan is destroyed. During the day, urine and excrement must be released while facing the north. At night, they must be released while facing the south. If this is followed, the lifespan will not be diminished. A person who desires to live for a long time must not show disrespect
towards three creatures, regardless of how weak they are-a brahmana, a kshatriya and a snake. All three possess
virulent poison. When angry, a virulent serpent can burn down with its sight. An angry kshatriya can also burn
down in that way, through the touch of his energy. A brahmana can destroy the entire lineage, through his sight, as
well as through his meditation. Therefore, a learned person makes efforts to worship all three. One must never engage in enmity against one's preceptor. O Yudhishthira! If the preceptor is enraged, he must be pacified through
entreaties. Even if he does something improper, the preceptor must always be followed. There is no doubt that the
criticism of the preceptor burns down a man. One must always pass urine at a spot that is far from a habitation.
After this, one must always wash one's feet at a distance. Those who desire benefit must throw away food that has
been partially eaten by others far away.

'"One should not set out on a journey in the morning, in the evening, when it is midday, with someone one does
not know, alone, or with a vrishala. One must always yield right of way to a brahmana, cattle, the king, old people,
those who bear burdens, those who are pregnant and those who are weak. When one comes upon a large tree that
one knows about, one must circumambulate it. One must always circumambulate a crossroads that is along the
path. One must never frequent crossroads at midday, in the evening and in the middle of the night. This is also true
of both the sandhyas. One must never wear footwear or garments that have been worn by another person. One
must always be a brahmachari and one must never cross one's legs. One must always be a brahmachari on the
night of the new moon, the night of the full moon, the fourth lunar tithi and the eighth lunar tithi of both the pak-
shas[This sentence is about a person who follows the norm of permissible sexual intercourse. The earlier sentence is
about a person who is always strictly celibate.]. One must not pointlessly eat meat, nor should one eat meat from the backbone. One must avoid censure,
calumny and slander. One  should  not  utter  cruel  words  and  those  that  make  another  person  feel  inferior.  One
should not agitate others with words and say that people are wicked. When they descend from the mouth, such
words are like arrows. They strike and cause sorrow, night and day. They descend on the inner organs of the other
person. Therefore, a learned person does not release these on others. When a forest is struck with arrows or cut
down with an axe, it grows again. But words spoken badly are terrible. The wounds caused by words are never
healed. One should not quarrel with, and strike, those who have a limb missing, have an excessive limb, are lacking in knowledge, are deficient in beauty and riches and lacking in spirit. If a person is a non-believer, criticizes the
Vedas, slanders the gods, or is hateful, insolent and harsh-he must be shunned. One must not angrily pick up
someone else's rod and use it to strike[The text does not talk about striking another person with a rod. Translated literally, it is about using someone
else's rod to strike.]. That apart, it has been said that for purposes of imparting instruction,
only the son or the disciple can be struck. One must not cause suffering to brahmanas. One must not point a finger
at nakshatras. One must not mention the names of tithis and pakshas. If this is done, the lifespan will not be diminished. After having passed urine or excrement or having walked along a road, one must wash one's feet. One must
also do this before studying and eating. The gods have thought of three things that are pure and recommended for
the use of brahmanas-something that is invisible, something that has been washed and something that has been
praised in words. Samyava[A kind of cake.], krisara, meat, shashkuli[Large, round cake.]and payasam must never be cooked for one's own self.
They must be offered to the gods. One should always tend to the sacrificial fire. One should always give alms. One
should always use a dantakashtha[A stick or piece of wood used to clean the teeth, like a toothbrush.], refraining from speaking at the time. One should not be in bed when the sun
has arisen. If this happens, one must atone for this. After waking, one must first greet the mother, the father, the
preceptor and other seniors. That is the way to attain greatness. The dantakashtha must always be thrown away and
a new one used. One must always eat according to the injunctions of the sacred texts, fasting on auspicious occasions. When one passes urine or excrement, one must control one's mind and always face the north when doing
this. Without worshipping the gods first, one should never set out. Elsewhere, it has been said that this also applies
to preceptors, the aged, those who know about dharma and those who are learned. An extremely intelligent person
never looks at a mirror that is dirty. He never has intercourse with a woman he does not know, or with one who is
pregnant. One should not sleep with the head facing the north or the west. One should sleep with one's head facing
the east or the south. One should not sleep on a bed that is broken or weak. One should not sleep on a bed without
a cover, or lie down diagonally. One must not bathe naked and never in the night. After bathing, a learned person
doesn't allow his body to be massaged. One should not smear unguents without having had a bath first. After having bathed, the garment must not be waved around[The wet garment, in an attempt to dry it.]. A man must never wear wet garments. One should not take
off the garlands. Nor should one wear them outside[Outside the garments.]. One should not wear garlands of red flowers. The learned
person only uses white flowers. O lord! Avoid the lotus and the water lily. However, a red flower can be worn on
the head, even if it is wild. A garland made of kanchana flowers is never censured. O lord of the earth! After
bathing, one must always use wet unguents[In the form of a paste and not those that are dry.]. An intelligent man does not mix up his garments[Use the upper garment as a lower one, or the other way around.]. One should not
wear a garment worn by another person. Nor should one wear a garment without a fringe[The fringe has a lower thread count.]. O best among men!
One must wear a different garment when one goes to bed. One must wear a different garment when making a journey. One must also wear a different garment when worshipping the gods. Otherwise, the gods are dishonoured.

'"An intelligent person uses separate unguents made out of priyangu, sandalwood, bilva, tagara and kesara[Priyangu is a medicinal plant and perfume, bilva is the wood apple, tagara is a fragrant powder and kesara is saffron, or anything made out of the filament of a flower.].
When fasting, one must purify oneself through a bath and wear ornaments. On the days of the new moon and the
full moon, one must always be a brahmachari. One must never eat food cooked by a woman who is going through
her monthly period. One should not eat food that has lost its essence. Nor should one eat food, without first offering it to someone who is looking towards it. An intelligent person does not sit close to someone who is inferior or
impure. Food that is forbidden by dharma should not even be eaten subsequently[After the festive occasion is over.]. An excellent person who desires prosperity on earth does not eat pippala, vata, shanashaka and udumbara[With the exception of shanashaka, the others are varieties of the fig tree. Shanashaka is hemp.]. The meat of goats, cows and
peacocks must be avoided. One must not eat dried meat, or meat that is stale. A learned person does not eat salt
picked up with his hand[This clearly means adding salt over and above what has been used in the cooking.]. In the night, curds and saktu must not be eaten and pointless meat[Other than from the flesh of animals killed at sacrifices.] must also be
avoided. One should not eat food with hair in it. Nor should one eat at the funeral ceremony of an enemy. One
must be controlled. One must eat in the morning and in the evening and never in between. One must not talk while
eating. While eating, one must not be clad in a single garment. One should never eat without being seated. One
should never eat food off the bare ground. When one is seated and one is eating, one must not make a sound. O
lord of the earth! Water and food must first be offered to a guest. An intelligent man who is not distracted only eats
later. O lord of men! A person who eats food without first offering it to well-wishers, and to those who are entitled
to eat in the same row[As the person, that is, they are equal in status.], is said to partake of virulent poison. After having water, payasam, ghee, curds, saktu and
honey, the leftovers must never be offered to anyone. O tiger among men! One should never be suspicious of the
food one is having. A person who desires his benefit must never drink curds after a meal. When one has finished
eating, one must wash oneself, using water and the hand. One should sprinkle one's right toe with some water. One
should then touch the head with the hand and controlled, touch fire. A man who is skilled in these techniques becomes superior to all his relatives. After eating, noticing where the breath of life is established, one should touch
the navel with the palm of the hand. However, the hand must not be wet. The space between the base and the tip of
the thumb is said to be brahma tirtha. The back of the little finger is said to be deva tirtha. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! The space between the thumb and the middle finger is used in offering oblations of water to the
ancestors, following the ordinances.

'"One should not speak ill of others. One should never say anything that is disagreeable. A person who desires
his own well-being is not enraged, even when he is provoked. One should not converse with outcasts. One should
avoid their sight. One should not have any association with them. That is the way to attain greatness. One should
not have sexual intercourse during the day. Nor should one have intercourse with a maiden or a harlot. One should
not have intercourse with a woman who has not bathed. That is the way to attain greatness. Different parts of the
body must be washed after different tasks. After doing this, one must drink water thrice and wash one's lips with
water twice. That is the way for a man to be purified. After all the organs of action have been washed, a man must
sprinkle himself with water thrice. After this, he can undertake the rites mentioned in the Vedas for ancestors and
gods. O Kourava! Listen to the purification recommended for a brahmana. This is said to be beneficial before and
after eating, and for everything else. In all kinds of purification, the brahma tirtha must be touched first. Aftere releasing excrement or after spitting, one must touch water and be purified. An aged relative or a friend who is poor
must be invited to reside in one's own house. One will be praised and obtain a long lifespan. One is praised if pigeons, or male or female parrots, are kept in the house. They remove difficulties from the house and so do cockroaches. If fire-flies, vultures, wood pigeons and bees enter a house and seek shelter in it, an act of pacification
must be performed. These are inauspicious signs and great-souled ones must seek to counter them. One must never
reveal the secrets of great-souled people. One should not have intercourse with a woman who is prohibited, or with
a king's wife or her friends. O Yudhishthira! One should not be intimate with physicians, children, the aged and
servants. O Indra among kings! One must always take care of friends, brahmanas, those who have sought refuge
and relatives. That is the way to obtain greatness. O lord of men! If a wise person desires his own benefit, he must
always dwell in a house that has been constructed in consultation with architects and brahmanas. O  king! One
should not sleep during the two sandhyas. Nor should one attend to learning at those times. An intelligent person
does not eat at these times. That is the way to obtain greatness. Rites for the ancestors should not be performed at
night. Nor should one indulge in cosmetics after having taken food. If one desires one's own prosperity, one should
not render offerings of water in the night. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! At night, saktu must always be
avoided. Leftovers of food and drink must not be taken. At night, one should not eat in excess. One should not kill
birds, especially after having fed them[This is probably a prohibition for the night.]. An immensely wise person must marry a maiden who has been born in
an extremely good lineage, has all the praiseworthy signs and has attained the right age. So that the lineage is established, one should have offspring. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The sons must be imparted learning and
knowledge about the dharma of the family. The daughters who are born must be bestowed on sons born from good
families. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The sons must be established, so that they can earn subsistence
from what the family owns. Before worshipping the ancestors and the gods, the head must be washed. A man's funeral ceremony must not be performed during the nakshatra he has been born under. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! Rites with a fire must not be performed during Proshthapada[Under the nakshatras Purva Bhadrapada and Uttara Bhadrapada.]. One must always avoid nakshatras that
are said to be fierce. All of them must be shunned. O Indra among kings! When being shaved, one must be controlled and must face the east. One can also face the north. That is the way to obtain greatness. One must never
criticize others, or even one's own self. O bull among the Bharata lineage! It has been said that censure is not in
conformity with dharma.

'"O supreme among men! One should avoid a woman who is deficient in limb or is a maiden. One must avoid a
woman who is descended from the same rishi's lineage[That is, gotra.]. One must avoid a woman who comes from the same lineage as one's mother[That is, sapinda.]. One must also avoid an aged woman, one who has become an ascetic, or one who is devoted to her husband. One must avoid one who is excessively dark, or one who has a bad complexion. A learned
person will not have intercourse with a woman whose birth is unknown, or with one who has inferior birth. One
should also avoid marriage with a woman whose complexion is yellow, or one who has leprosy. O lord of men!
Three kinds of women must be avoided-those with a family history of epilepsy, those who are inferior and those
born in a family that has white leprosy. One should only marry a woman who possesses the auspicious marks, has
all the praiseworthy signs and is pleasant and beautiful. O Yudhishthira! One should marry into a family that is superior or equal. If a person desires prosperity, he should not marry a woman who is inferior or an outcast. The fire
must be carefully lit. All the rites spoken about in the Vedas and the Brahmana texts must be carefully observed.
One must not injure women and one must always protect the wife. Jealousy reduces the lifespan. Therefore, jealousy must be avoided. Sleeping during the day reduces the lifespan. Sleeping after the sun has arisen also does
that. Those who sleep in the morning and the evening are as impure as those who eat leftovers. Intercourse with
someone else's wife reduces the lifespan. After having been shaved, one must not remain impure[One must wash.]. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! One must make efforts not to do what is prohibited. One must not eat during the sandhyas.
Nor should one eat food in which there is excrement. Before undertaking any rite, there are some tasks that must
carefully be done. O lord of men! One must bathe and worship the brahmanas. One should also bathe before worshipping the gods and saluting the preceptor. Unless invited, one should not turn up at a sacrifice as a spectator. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! If one goes there without an invitation, this reduces the lifespan. One should not
travel alone, nor should one travel during the night. Before the western sandhya arrives, one must find shelter inside a house. O bull among men! One must always follow the commands of the mother, the father and the preceptor, without thinking about whether these are desirable or undesirable.

'"O lord of men! One must pay attention to Dhanurveda and to the Vedas. O Indra among kings! Pay attention to
riding on elephants, riding on horses and riding on chariots. A person who pays attention to these, and to sacrifices,
obtains happiness. He is invincible towards his enemies, his servants and his relatives. If he is engaged in protecting the subjects, he will never suffer a loss. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You should know about the sacred texts of logic and about the sacred texts of sound. O lord of men! You should know about the sacred texts of
the gandharvas and about the different kinds of arts. You should always hear about the Puranas, itihasa, different
stories and about the conduct of great-souled ones. If the wife is not in the right season, one should not have intercourse with her, or invite her. A learned person has intercourse with her on the fourth day, after she has bathed, and
in the night. Intercourse on the fifth day gives birth to a daughter. Intercourse on the sixth day gives birth to a son.
A learned person follows these rules in having intercourse with the wife. Relatives, matrimonial allies and friends
must always be honoured. To the best of one's capacity, sacrifices must be performed and many kinds of dakshina
must be offered at these sacrifices. O lord of men! After this period is over, one moves on to the next period, leading up to death[After the householder stage is over, one moves on to subsequent stages of life.]. I have briefly recounted the techniques that lead to a long life. O Yudhishthira! Anything that
remains, which I have refrained from stating, must be learnt from aged ones. Conduct leads to prosperity. Conduct
enhances fame. Conduct increases the lifespan. Conduct destroys anything that is inauspicious. Conduct is said to
be superior to all the different kinds of knowledge. Conduct is said to be the power of dharma. Conduct increases
the lifespan. I have thus told you about conduct. This is great in attaining heaven and obtaining benedictions. Brahma has said that one must exhibit compassion towards all the varnas."'
