'Bhishma said, "O king! It is the king's duty to appoint as a royal priest someone who can protect the
virtuous and punish the wicked. On this, the ancient account of the conversation between Aila Pururava and Matarishvana is recounted[Pururava was the son of Ila and was the founder of the lunar dynasty.
Matarishvana is Vayu, the wind god.].

'"Aila asked, 'Where have brahmanas been born from and where have the other three varnas come
from? Which of the two is superior? Tell me that.'

'"Vayu replied, 'O supreme among kings! The brahmana was created from Brahma's mouth. It is
said that the kshatriya was created from his arms and the vaishya from his thighs. O bull among men!
The fourth varna, the shudra, was created later from the feet, for the sake of serving the three varnas.
The brahmana was born immediately after the earth was born. For the sake of protecting the store of
dharma, he is the lord of all beings. The second varna, the kshatriya, was then made the wielder of the
rod for the sake of protecting the earth and protecting beings. The vaishya was created to support the
three varnas with wealth and grain and the shudra should serve them. These were Brahma's
instructions.'

'"Aila asked, 'O Vayu! According to dharma, tell me whom the earth belongs to. Is it the brahmana,
or is it properly the kshatriya, because of his wealth?'

'"Vayu replied, 'Everything that exists in the universe belongs to the brahmana. Those who are
learned say that this is because he is the firstborn and because he is accomplished in dharma. The brahmana enjoys only what is his, wears what is his and gives away what is his. The brahmana is the preceptor of all the varnas. He is the eldest and the best. In the absence of the husband, the woman makes
his younger brother her husband. In that way, because he is the immediate next, the earth makes the
kshatriya her husband[There is an implied refusal by the brahmana to rule the earth.]. If you desire to obtain a supreme status in heaven and wish to follow the path
of dharma, this is the first rule for you, though there is an exception for times of distress. Whoever conquers the earth should offer it to a brahmana who is learned, of good conduct, knowledgeable about
dharma, an ascetic, who is satisified with his own dharma and not desirous of the riches of others. Conversant with everything, he will intelligently advise the king about policy. A brahmana born in a noble
lineage, accomplished in wisdom, humble in speech and wonderful in his choice of words, will tell the
king about the best policy. If a king observes the dharma indicated by the brahmana, listens and is not
egoistic and adheres to the dharma and vows of kshatriyas, he will be firm in his wisdom and will be
established in fame for a long period. The royal priest has a share in all this dharma. As long as all the
subjects seek refuge with the king and follow their own dharma properly, they have nothing to fear.
When a king protects virtuously, out of all the dharma that is practised within the kingdom, the king
enjoys a fourth share of that dharma. Gods, humans, ancestors, gandharvas, serpents and rakshasas survive on what is offered in sacrifices. However, when there is no king, there is nothing. In this way, gods
and ancestors survive on what is given to them. And the yoga and kshema of dharma is established in
kingship. When it is hot, one seeks happiness in shade, water or breeze. When it is cold, one seeks happiness in fire, the sun or inside a house. The mind is delighted with sound, touch, taste, form and smell.
But in all these objects of pleasure, happiness is obtained by a person who is not frightened. One who
grants freedom from fear obtains great fruits. In the three worlds, there is no gift that is equal to granting life. The king is Indra. The king is Yama. The king is Dharma. The king has different forms. The
king upholds everything.'"'
