'Yudhishthira said, "O Bhima! This bull among rakshasas is learned in dharma. He is always brave and strong.
This son born from you is devoted to us. Let him immediately carry his mother[Meaning Droupadi.]. O Bhima! With the strength of
your arms and your terrifying valour, I will remain unhurt and will journey to Gandhamadana with Panchali."'

Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing his brother's words, Bhimasena, tiger among men, commanded his son Ghatotkacha, the destroyer of enemies. "O Hidimba's son! Your unvanquished mother is exhausted. O son! You are capable of going anywhere at will. You are strong. Take her up into the sky. O fortunate one! Carry her on your
shoulders. Follow us in the sky. But travel low, so that she does not feel oppressed." Ghatotkacha replied, "I am
alone capable of carrying Dharmaraja, Dhoumya, the princess and the twins. It shouldn't be surprising that I can
do it now, when I have help[As will be clear, other rakshasas had come to help Ghatotkacha.]." Having said this, Ghatotkacha carried Krishna in the midst of the brave Pandavas. Others[Other rakshasas.] carried the Pandavas. Lomasha, whose splendour was unrivalled, travelled along the path followed by the siddhas through his own powers, like a second sun. Commanded by the Indra among the rakshasas,
other immensely powerful rakshasas took up all the brahmanas and travelled. They glanced at the extremely beautiful forests and groves and travelled towards the extensive Badari. Carried by those swift rakshasas whose
strength was immense, the brave ones quickly covered a long distance in a short span of time.

'They saw many regions infested by mlecchas[Barbarians, those who do not speak Sanskrit.], full of many stores of jewels. They saw mountains and
foothills, the stores of many minerals. They were populated by vidyadharas and had large numbers of monkeys and
kinnaras, in addition to kimpurushas and gandharvas. There were networks of rivers, frequented by many different
kinds of birds. They were visited by many different kinds of animals. They were adorned by monkeys. Having
passed over many regions and over northern Kuru, they saw the supreme and extraordinary Mount Kailasa. Near
it, they saw the hermitage of Nara and Narayana. It was full of celestial trees that always bore flowers and fruit.
They saw the beautiful Badari, with a circular trunk[Badari is a jujube tree. The hermitage of Badari is so named because a giant badari tree stood there.]. It was always tender and offered unfettered shade. It was
supremely beautiful. It had tender leaves and was smooth and radiant. Its branches were large. They were expansive and were limitless in lustre. It was full of fruit that was tasty and divine. They dripped honey and were always
celestial, beloved of the masses of maharshis. It was always populated by masses of different kinds of birds that
frolicked madly. It grew in a region where there were no mosquitoes or gnats. There were many roots and fruits
and a lot of water there. It was covered with blue grass and frequented by the gods and the gandharvas. It stood on
a flat stretch of ground that was naturally beautiful. It was gentle from the touch of snow and was a beautiful region bereft of thorns.

'Having reached the spot with the bulls among the brahmanas, all the great-souled ones descended slowly from
the shoulders of the rakshasas. O king! Together with the bulls among the brahmanas, the Pandavas saw the beautiful hermitage, the refuge of Nara and Narayana. The sacred place was devoid of darkness, though it was untouched
by the sun's rays. It was free from afflictions like hunger, thirst, coldness and heat. It was the destroyer of all sorrow. It was crowded by masses of maharshis and complete with the attainment of the brahman. O great king! It
was difficult of access to men who were outside the pale of dharma. It was celestial with the homage of offerings
and oblations. It was maintained well and fragrant. There were offerings of celestial flowers and it was radiant
everywhere. There were large stores for fire. It had lovely ladles. It was adorned with large and firm pots full of
water. It was a place of refuge for all beings and resounded with the sound of the brahman. That hermitage destroyed all exhaustion and was a celestial hermitage. It was full of beauty and produced immeasurable merit. It was
frequented by those who worshipped the gods. They lived on roots and fruit. They were in control of their senses
and were attired in bark and black antelope skins. They were like the sun and the fire in their austerities and were
controlled in their souls. Those maharshis had restrained their senses and were in search of salvation. Those immensely fortunate ones were learned in the brahman and were immersed in the brahman.

'The intelligent Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, approached those immensely energetic rishis with his brothers,
with restraint and purity. All the maharshis had divine sight. When they saw Yudhishthira, they welcomed him
with great delight. Those who were always devoted to studies, pronounced their blessings over him. They were the
equal of the fire and they happily welcomed him in accordance with the prescribed rites. They offered him pure
water, flowers, roots and fruit. Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, was restrained and happily accepted the offerings of
the maharshis. That beautiful place was divinely scented and was like Shakra's abode. O unblemished one! Together with Krishna and his brothers, and the brahmanas who were learned in the Vedas and the Vedangas, the Pan-
dava happily entered the pure place that was like heaven itself. The one with dharma in his soul saw Nara and
Narayana's spot, worshipped by the gods and the devarshis. It was rendered beautiful by the Bhagirathi. The divine
fruit dripped with honey and it was frequented by masses of brahmarshis. The great-souled ones approached and
dwelt there with the brahmanas. They saw Mount Mainaka with its golden peak, frequented by masses of brahmanas, the auspicious Bindusara and the sacred and great tirtha of Bhagirathi, with its cool and clear water, with
gems, corals and stones and adorned with beautiful trees. There were divine blossoms that heightened the pleasure
of the mind. The great-souled Pandavas saw and roamed around there. They repeatedly made offerings to the gods
and the ancestors. The brave bulls among men dwelt there with the brahmanas. The Pandavas, tigers among men,
who were the equals of the immortals, took great pleasure in watching Krishna sport there in various ways.'
