The preceptor said, 'One must always desire to follow unblemished brahmacharya. Considering the sins that
arise from dreaming, one must wholeheartedly try to give up sleep[Svapnadosha, in general, refers to sins that arise from dreaming. But more specifically, it means seminal discharge in sleep.]. In sleep, the embodied being is overcome by rajas and tamas. Having lost its memory, it wanders around outside the body. Practising knowledge and
thereafter enquiring about objectives, one must remain awake. Concentrating on vijnana, one must always remain
awake at night. On this, there are feelings whereby one thinks about material objects during dreams. While the
senses are suspended, the being behaves as if it still possesses a body. It has been said that Hari, the lord of yoga,
knows how this occurs. The maharshis have said that what he has described is the truth. The learned say that when
the senses are exhausted, everyone sees dreams. The mind has not been exhausted and it is said that is the reason.
The mind is addicted to action and resolution is awake. That is the reason mental desire for prosperity surfaces in
the mind during dreams. In this cycle, there are innumerable desires a being faces[The cycle of life. This is thus not just about desires in this life, but about desires in earlier lives too.]. They may seem to have disappeared from the mind, but the supreme being inside knows them all. The qualities of those deeds become known
and present themselves[The qualities of sattva, rajas and tamas and earlier deeds.]. They affect the minds of beings and influence them. Those qualities of rajas, sattva and
tamas present themselves. This is even if one has engaged in virtuous deeds that yield infinite fruits. The ignorant
see images that excite wind, bile and phlegm. It has been said that sentiments of rajas and tamas are difficult to cast
aside. Even when one's senses are tranquil, there are resolutions in the mind. In the course of dreams, the mind
perceives these through its sight. The mind is pervasive and unrestrained in all beings. The mind is based in the
body. The door that is the mind does disappear[It disappears in some cases. This is known as sushupti, as opposed to ordinary sleep. Sushupti is deep slumber.
The body sleeps. But though the mind is awake, there are no dreams.]. Everything that exists and does not exist becomes manifest in that
state of sleep. But the learned person becomes acquainted with the quality of adhyatma[The spiritual, concerning the supreme spirit.], which is inside all beings. At that time, the mind only has the resolution to be attached to the qualities of the supreme god and objective.
Through the powers of his own atman, he knows everything and knows himself to be divinity. He is engaged in
austerities. He is as radiant as the sun and is beyond darkness. Because of the austerities, the being becomes like
Maheshvara and like the prakriti of the three worlds. These are the kinds of austerities the gods engaged in. The
asuras represented tamas and destroyed those austerities. This is what was respectively protected by the gods and
the asuras. This is said to be the signs of ignorance[The conduct of the asuras.]. Know that the qualities of sattva, rajas and tamas also characterize the gods and the asuras. Know that sattva is the quality of the gods and that the other two[Rajas and tamas.] represent the
qualities of the asuras. Know that Brahma is beyond all this. He is immortal, radiant and Akshara. Those who are
learned and have cleansed their souls go to that supreme objective. With the sight of knowledge, one is capable of
recounting reasons about this. It is only through withdrawal that one is capable of knowing the brahman, which is
not manifest.""
