'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! There were many resplendent standards of diverse forms, belonging to the Parthas
and those on our side. Describe those to me."

'Sanjaya replied, "Those great-souled ones possessed many different standards, of diverse forms. They had different forms, colours and names. Listen to me. The chariots of those foremost among rathas had many different
kinds of standards. O Indra among kings! They were seen to blaze like fire. They were golden, decorated with
gold, or garlanded with gold. They were like golden summits and like giant mountains made out of gold. Those
standards were surrounded by pennants in every direction. These were of many different colours and hues and surrounded them everywhere. Those pennants were stirred by the wind. They were seen to be dancing around, like
female dancers in an arena. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Those pennants had the complexion of Indra's
weapon[That is, Indra's bow, the rainbow.]. They stirred above the chariots and adorned the maharathas. There was a standard with the sign of an
ape, as fierce as the face and tail of a lion[The sense is not very clear. Presumably, the fierce ape had the face and tail of a lion.]. This belonged to Dhananjaya and was seen to cause terror in battle.
O king! The flag was adorned with the supreme of apes. Your soldiers were terrified by the standard of the wielder
of Gandiva. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that way, the top of the standard of Drona's son had the mark
of a lion's tail and was seen to be as radiant as the rising sun. It was golden and fluttered in the wind. It was as resplendent as Shakra's standard. The standard of Drona's son arose high and delighted the Indras among the
Kouravas. The standard of Adhiratha's son[Karna.] had the mark of an elephant's housing that was fashioned in gold. O
great king! It dazzled and in the battle, seemed to fill up the sky. In the battle, golden pennants and garlands were
attached to Karna's standard. Stirred by the wind, they seemed to dance around on top of the chariot. The preceptor
of the Pandus was the illustrious brahmana. Kripa, the son of Goutama, had a well-crafted bull on his[Before Drona, Kripa was the preceptor of the Kouravas and the Pandavas.]. O king!
With the mark of the bull, the maharatha was resplendent, like the destroyer of Tripura is dazzling with the mark of
the bull[Shiva destroyed a city of the demons named Tripura and Shiva has the bull on his standard.]. Vrishasena had a golden peacock, adorned with gems and jewels. Stationed there, it seemed to crow
and adorn the front of the army. The great-souled one's chariot was dazzling with the peacock. O Indra among
kings! It was like the resplendent Skanda aloft his peacock. Shalya, the king of Madra, possessed a beautiful golden image of a plough on the top of his standard and it was like the flame of a fire. O venerable one! The plough
was luminescent on the top of his chariot. The plough was surrounded by prosperity, with every kind of seed
sprouting from it. A silver boar adorned the top of the king of Sindhu's standard. It was decorated with golden nets
and had the complexion of a bloodless crystal[Bloodless probably means white.]. With that silver standard, Jayadratha looked beautiful, like
Pusha was radiant in ancient times in the battle between the gods and the asuras[Pusha means the sun god.]. Somadatta's intelligent son
was devoted to sacrifices and his standard had the mark of a sacrificial stake and was seen to be as radiant as the
sun or the moon. O king! Somadatta's son was dazzling with that golden sacrificial stake. It was like a sacrificial
stake raised in rajasuya, the best of all sacrifices. O great king! Shala had a large silver elephant. The pennant was
golden and colourful and was adorned with the sign of peacocks. O bull among the Bharata lineage! That pennant
adorned your troops, like the giant white elephant adorns the army of the king of the gods[This is a reference to Indra's elephant, Airavata.]. There was a bejewelled elephant on the king's standard, which was decorated with gold[The king means Duryodhana.]. It tinkled with the sound of one hundred
bells and colourfully blazed on the supreme of chariots. O king! O lord of the earth! Your son, a bull among the
Kurus, looked extremely resplendent with that large standard in the battle. These nine supreme standards arose in
your army. They blazed amidst the forces, like the sun at the time of the destruction of a yuga.

'"The tenth standard was Arjuna's, marked with a giant ape. Arjuna blazed, like a fire on the Himalayas. The
maharathas, scorchers of enemies, grasped colourful, bright and extremely large bows and swiftly advanced
against Arjuna. Partha, the destroyer of enemies, also grasped the bow Gandiva, the performer of divine deeds. O
king! All this happened because of your evil counsel. Because of your crimes, many men and many warriors were
killed. They had been summoned from many directions, with horses, chariots and elephants. With Duryodhana at
the forefront, there were these on one side and that bull among Pandus on the other. They roared at each other and
the encounter began. Kounteya had Krishna as his charioteer and performed supreme and extraordinary deeds.
Fearlessly, the single one advanced against the many. The mighty-armed one was resplendent when he stretched
the bow Gandiva. The tiger among men wished to kill Jayadratha. O great king! Arjuna released thousands of arrows. That scorcher of enemies made the warriors on your side invisible. In that battle, all those maharathas, tigers
among men, also showered down a cloud of arrows and made Partha invisible. On seeing that Arjuna, bull among
the Kuru lineage, was thus covered through the hands of those lions among men, a great sound arose among the
soldiers."'
