'Dhritarashtra said, "The great-souled one had studied the Vedas and their branches in the proper way. The complete mastery of Dhanurveda and humility were vested in him. The wicked, violent and evil-souled one, the slayer
of his preceptor, injured such a Drona, the son of a maharshi. In that battle, it was through his favours that those
bulls among men performed superhuman deeds, difficult for the gods and the asuras[Because Drona had been their preceptor.]. The evil-acting one injured
Drona while they looked on. Were there no kshatriyas who were enraged? Did they not shame him because of this
wrath? All the Parthas were there and all the kings of the earth who were archers. O Sanjaya! On hearing this, what
did they tell Panchala? Tell me that."

'Sanjaya replied, "O lord of the earth! On hearing the words of the evil-acting son of Drupada, all the kings of
the earth were silent. They glanced at Arjuna and censured Parshata with their sight. With tears and sighs, they
said, 'Shame! Shame!' Yudhishthira, Bhima, the twins, Krishna and the others were shame-faced. O king! But
Satyaki spoke. 'Is there no man here who will quickly kill this wicked man, the worst of men? He is speaking unpleasant words. How are his tongue and head not shattering into a hundred fragments? When the inferior one committed the act of adharma by injuring his preceptor, why was he not brought down? Having performed this evil
deed, he deserves the censure of the Parthas and all the Andhakas and Vrishnis. But he is praising himself in this
assembly of men. Having performed a deed that should not have been performed, you are again showing hatred
towards your preceptor. Because of that, you should be killed by us. You should not remain alive for a single instant. Who other than this wretch among men would kill a virtuous preceptor, who had dharma in his soul, and
then seize him by the hair? O defiler of the lineage! You have degraded seven generations of your ancestors and
seven generations of your descendants and deprived them of all their fame. You have spoken to Partha, bull among
men, about Bhishma, but that great-souled one himself decided the means of his death. It was your evil-acting
brother[Shikhandi.] who killed him. There is no one on earth who is as wicked as these two sons of Panchala. Your father
truly created Shikhandi for Bhishma's destruction and the great-souled one only protected him from his death[That is, Arjuna protected Shikhandi.].
The Panchalas are inferior and have deviated from dharma. They hate their friends and their preceptors. You and
your brother have only obtained censure from virtuous people. If you again speak such words in my presence, I
will bring down your head with this club, which is like the vajra.' Thus addressed by Satvata Satyaki, Parshata became angry.

'"He laughed and addressed the enraged one in these harsh words. 'O Madhava! I have heard you. I have heard
you. But I forgive you. You are yourself ignoble and evil, but are censuring men who are righteous. In this world,
forgiveness is praised. But the wicked should not be forgiven. Evil-souled ones think that forgiving people are
powerless. You are inferior in conduct. You are inferior in your soul. You are wicked in your resolution, from the
tips of your hair to your toes. You wish to censure others. But Bhurishrava's arm had been severed and he was fasting to death. You were restrained from striking him. What can be more evil than that? In the battle, Drona used his
divine weapons and cornered me in a vyuha. I killed him when he had cast aside his weapons. O cruel one! What
was wicked about that deed? He[Bhurishrava.] was not fighting. He had cast aside his weapons and was fasting to death, like a
sage. O Satyaki! His arm was severed and he was killed by someone else[In the sense that it was Arjuna who had severed Bhurishrava's arm, but Satyaki killed him.]. What about that? The valiant one exhibited his prowess and forced you down on the ground then. Why did you not kill that supreme among men then?
The noble one had already been vanquished by Partha. You then killed Somadatta's powerful and valiant son.
Wherever Drona scattered the Pandu soldiers, those were the places I ventured to and shot thousands of arrows.
However, you yourself performed an act that is worthy of a chandala[Chandala has different nuances and a chandala is not necessarily a shudra. A chandala is also of mixed parentage, with a shudra father and a brahmana mother. More generally, chandalas are outcastes, while shudras are
within the caste fold.]. You should be reproached. Why are you
censuring me with these harsh words? O worst of the Vrishni lineage! You are the one who has performed a terrible deed, not I. You are the abode of wicked deeds. Do not speak to me again. Hold your tongue. You should not
speak to me after this. This is what I am telling you with my lips. If you again speak to me foolishly in harsh
words, I will fight against you and dispatch you to Vaivasvata's eternal abode with arrows. O foolish one! One cannot triumph only with dharma. Listen to the acts of adharma they[The Kouravas.] have performed. They have earlier deprived
Pandava Yudhishthira through adharma. O Satyaki! They have oppressed Droupadi through adharma. They have
exiled all the Pandavas, with Krishna[Krishnaa, Droupadi.], to the forest. O foolish one! All their possessions were robbed through adharma. It was through adharma that the enemy deprived us of the king of Madra[Shalya, the king of Madra, wished to join the Pandavas, but was weaned away by Duryodhana. This has been
described in Section 49 (Volume 4).]. On this side, Bhishma, the
grandfather of the Kuru lineage, was brought down through adharma. O one acquainted with dharma! Bhurishrava
was slain by you through adharma. O Satvata! This is the way the enemy and the Pandaveyas have conducted
themselves in this battle. Though they are brave and knowledgeable about dharma, they wished to ensure victory.
Supreme dharma is difficult to discern. In that way, adharma is extremely difficult to determine. Fight with the
Kouravas. Do not return to your father's abode.' Having heard these harsh and cruel words, the handsome Satyaki
seemed to tremble. When he heard these words, Satyaki's eyes became coppery red with anger. He grasped his
club and sighed like a serpent.

'"He laid his bow down on his chariot and advanced towards Panchala. In great anger he said, 'I will not speak
harsh words to you. You deserve to be killed and I will slay you.' The immensely strong one descended violently,
in rage, on Panchala. His wrath was like that of an enraged Yama. Urged by Vasudeva, the immensely strong Bhimasena leapt down from his chariot and quickly seized him by the arms. The angry and powerful Satyaki was advancing and dragged the powerful Pandava with him, as he tried to hold him back. Bhima, supreme among strong
ones, planted his feet firmly on the ground and used force to stop the bull among the Shini lineage at the sixth step.
O lord of the earth! As he was seized by the strong one[Bhima.], Sahadeva descended from his chariot and spoke these
gentle words. 'O tiger among men! O Madhava! Among our friends, there are none who are superior to the Andhakas, Vrishnis and Panchalas. The Andhakas and the Vrishnis, especially you and Krishna, do not have any
friends who are superior to us. O Varshneya! Even if they look till the frontiers of the ocean, the Panchalas will not
find any friends who are superior to the Pandavas and the Vrishnis. He[Dhrishtadyumna.] cannot think of a friend who is like you
and you of someone like him. You are to us, as we are to you. You know everything about dharma. Remember the
dharma that one must show towards friends. O bull among the Shini lineage! Control your anger towards Panchala
and be pacified. You should forgive Parshata and let Parshata forgive you. We will also practise forgiveness. There
is nothing superior to forgiveness.' O venerable one! Shini's descendant was pacified by Sahadeva. The son of the
king of Panchala laughed and spoke these words. 'O Bhima! Release Shini's grandson. Free him. He prides himself in fighting. Let him advance against me, like the wind against mountains. I will destroy his pride with my
sharp arrows. O Kounteya! In the encounter, I will rob him of his love for fighting and of his life. The Kouravas
are advancing. I am alone capable of performing the grave task that has arisen, one that the sons of Pandu have
taken up. Else, let Phalguna counter all of them in battle and I use my arrows to bring down his[Satyaki's.] head. He thinks
that I am like the armless Bhurishrava in the battle. Release him. Let him kill me, or let me kill him.' On hearing
Panchala's words, the powerful Satyaki sighed like a serpent and trembled, seized by Bhima's arms. O venerable
one! Vasudeva and Dharmaraja swiftly made great efforts to restrain those two brave ones. Though their eyes were
red with rage, they were restrained by those two great archers. Wishing to fight, those bulls among kshatriyas then
advanced against the enemy in the battle."'
