'Dhritarashtra asked, "Vaikartana Karna and the rakshasa Ghatotkacha clashed against each other in the night. Tell
me about that wonderful event. What kind of terrible fight did the rakshasa resort to? What kind of chariot did he
create with his maya and what were his weapons? What were the sizes of his horses, chariot, standard and bow?
What was his armour like and the guard around his neck? O Sanjaya! You are skilled in narrating. I am asking you.
Tell me all this."

'Sanjaya replied, "His eyes were red. His form was gigantic. He had the complexion of copper. His stomach
hung low. His body hair stood up. His hair was green. His eyes were like cones. His jaw was large. His gaping jaw
was wide, extending from one ear to another. His teeth were pointed and looked deadly. His tongue and lips were
extremely long, with the hue of copper. His eyebrows were long. His nose was thick. His body was blue. His neck
was red. He was as tall as a mountain and was a terrible sight. His form was gigantic. He was mighty-armed, with
a large head, and immensely strong. His body was harsh to the touch. The hair was tied into a fierce bun on his
head. His hips were broad. His navel was deep. But though he was gigantic, his waist was thin. The ornaments on
his arms were also appropriate. He wore armlets and possessed great powers of maya. He wore a breastplate that
was like a garland of fire on a mountain. A dazzling crown adorned his head. It was as large as a gate. It was golden and colourful and it had many beautiful segments. His earrings were like the rising sun. His golden garland
sparkled. His gigantic body was bedecked in extremely radiant armour made of brass. The giant chariot, which
was as large as a nalva[A nalva is a measure of distance, equal to 400 hastas or cubits.], roared with a hundred bells. It was covered with bear skins. The standard and flags
were red. It possessed a standard and garlands and was stocked with all the supreme weapons. It possessed eight
wheels and rumbled deeply, like a cloud. It was borne by powerful horses. They were fierce, with red eyes, and
looked like elephants. They were swift and adopted whatever complexion one wished. The rakshasa Virupaksha
was the charioteer and he was resplendent, with earrings. The reins were like the rays of the sun and he grasped
these and controlled the horses in battle. He arrived with him, like the sun god with Varuna. A giant standard was
raised aloft the chariot. It looked like a giant mountain, encircled by giant clouds. It seemed to stretch up into the
sky. An extremely fierce and carnivorous vulture was perched on it and its head was red. The chariot roared like
Vasava's vajra. The bejewelled bow could slay the enemy and was twelve kishkus long[Kishku is a measure of length. It is variously described as forty-two angulas (the length of a finger) or four has-
tas (the length of an arm).]. The bowstring was
firm when stretched. The arrows were as long as a chariot's axle and he enveloped all the directions with these. In
the night that was destructive of brave ones, he advanced towards Karna. He was stationed on that chariot and
stretched his bow. The roar of the bow, when stretched, was heard to be like the sound of thunder. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! This terrified your soldiers. All of them trembled, like giant waves on the ocean.

'"On seeing the fierce one with the malformed eyes advance, Radheya seemed to smile and quickly countered
him. Karna approached the smiling one[Ghatotkacha.] and struck him from a close distance. He was like an elephant against
another elephant, like the bull who leads a herd against another bull. O lord of the earth! O king! There was a tumultuous clash between Karna and the rakshasa, like that between Indra and Shambara. They grasped immensely
powerful bows that made a fierce noise. They enveloped and struck each other with giant arrows. They drew their
bows all the way back and released straight-tufted arrows. They countered each other and pierced the brass armour.
They were like tigers fighting with their claws, or giant elephants with their tusks. They flung spears[Rathashakti.] at each
other and wounded each other with their arrows. They mangled each other's limbs and struck each other with arrows. They scorched each other with storms of arrows and it was impossible to look at either of them. They were
wounded all over their limbs and they were covered with streams of blood. They looked beautiful, like mountains
covered with red ore, with streams flowing down them. Their limbs were pierced with the tips of arrows and they
mangled each other. But though those immensely radiant ones struggled, neither could make the other tremble. O
king! For a long time, that duel in the night seemed to be equal. Karna and the rakshasa gambled in that battle,
with their lives as stakes. They affixed sharp arrows and shot them. They terrified those on their own side, and on
the side of the enemy, with the roars of their bows. O king! Karna could not get the better of Ghatotkacha.

'"The supreme among those who have knowledge of weapons then invoked a divine weapon. On seeing that
Karna had invoked a divine weapon, the rakshasa Ghatotkacha, the descendant of the Pandu lineage, created a
great maya. He was surrounded by a large army of rakshasas, fierce in visage. They wielded spears and clubs and
held mountains and trees in their hands. On seeing that he[Ghatotkacha.] had raised his great bow, all the kings were distressed. He advanced like the destroyer of all beings, like Yama wielding a staff. Ghatotkacha emitted terrible roars
like a lion. The elephants passed urine and the men were severely distressed. A large and fierce shower of stones
rained down in every direction. It was midnight and the powerful rakshasas released these with their enhanced
strength. Iron chakras, catapults, lances, javelins, spears, shataghnis and battleaxes rained down incessantly. The
kings saw that the battle had become extremely fierce and terrible. Your sons and the warriors were distressed and
fled. There was only a single proud one who was not distressed. This was Karna, who prided himself on the
strength of his weapons. Using his arrows, he destroyed the maya that had been created by Ghatotkacha. When that
maya was dispelled, Ghatokacha became intolerant. He released a terrible shower of deadly arrows towards the
son of the suta. In the great battle, these arrows penetrated Karna and covered with blood, entered the ground, like
angry snakes. The powerful son of the suta was enraged and using the dexterity of his hands, surpassed Ghatotkacha and pierced him with ten arrows. Ghatotkacha was pierced in his inner organs by the son of the suta. Severely wounded, he picked up a divine chakra with one thousand spokes. The edges were as sharp as a razor and it
was decorated with gems and jewels. Its complexion was like that of the rising sun. Wishing to kill him, Bhimasena's son angrily hurled this towards Adhiratha's son. It was hurled with great force. However, Karna struck it with
his arrows and rendered it unsuccessful, like the wishes of an unfortunate person. It fell down on the ground. On
seeing that the chakra had been brought down, Ghatotkacha became extremely angry. He shrouded Karna with arrows, like Svarbhanu eclipsing the sun. The son of the suta possessed the valour of Indra and Upendra[Vishnu.] and was
not frightened. He swiftly enveloped Ghatotkacha's chariot with arrows. Enraged, Ghatotkacha grasped a club decorated with gold and hurled it. While it was still traversing, Karna shattered it with his arrows and made it fall
down.

'"Bhimasena's son, gigantic in form, rose up into the sky. He roared like a dark cloud. He brought down a shower of trees from the sky, using his powers of maya. Karna pierced him with his arrows, like the rays of the sun
passing through a mass of clouds. Karna killed all his horses and shattered his chariot into a hundred fragments. He
showered down arrows, like a cloud pouring down rain. There wasn't a stretch of two fingers on his[Ghatotkacha's.] body that
was not pierced. In a short while, he seemed to be like a porcupine with its quills erect. In that encounter, he was
enveloped with a storm of arrows and we could not see his horses, his chariot, his standard, or even Ghatotkacha.
He then used his own weapons to destroy Karna's divine weapon. The one who knew about maya resorted to fighting with maya in the battle with the son of the suta. Showing his dexterity, he used maya to fight with Karna. Invisible in the sky, he brought down a net of arrows. O supreme among the Kuru lineage! Bhimasena's son was great
in the use of maya and resorted to maya. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Using his great maya, he caused
confusion. Using maya, he assumed many inauspicious faces with distorted mouths and these devoured the divine
weapons of the son of the suta. In that battle, the one with the gigantic form again seemed to be shattered into a
hundred fragments. He was seen to lie down, deprived of his life and deprived of his endeavour. On thinking that
he had been slain, the bulls among the Kurus roared in delight. However, he was then seen in all the directions, assuming new bodies. He again assumed a giant form, with one hundred heads and one hundred stomachs. The
mighty-armed one looked like Mount Mainaka. However, the rakshasa again assumed a form that was as small as a
finger. He rose up, like the waves of the ocean. He executed diagonal motions. He seemed to shatter the earth and
immerse himself in the waters. He became invisible and was then seen in a different place. He descended from his
chariot, decorated in gold, and again ascended it. Covered in maya, the armoured one was seen on earth, in the sky
and in all the directions.

'"O lord of the earth! He fearlessly approached Karna's chariot, earrings adorning his face and waving around,
and spoke these words to the son of the suta. 'O son of a suta! Wait. With your life, you will not be able to go away
from me. On this field of battle today, I will destroy all the affection that you have for fighting.' Having spoken
these words, the rakshasa, whose eyes were coppery red with anger and whose valour was cruel, rose up into the
sky and laughed loudly. He struck Karna, like a lion striking a king of elephants. He showered down arrows on
Karna, bull among rathas, like a cloud pouring down rain. These arrows were as long as a chariot's axle, and Ghatotkacha showered them down. But Karna destroyed this from a distance. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On
seeing that his maya had been destroyed by Karna, Ghatotkacha used his maya and disappeared again. He became
a lofty mountain with many peaks full of trees. From that, a large stream of lances, spears, swords and clubs issued
forth like water. On seeing that mountain, which was like a mass of collyrium and from which many kinds of fierce
weapons showered down, Karna was not agitated. He seemed to smile as he invoked a divine weapon. Because of
that weapon, that large mountain was flung away and destroyed. He[Ghatotkacha.] became a blue cloud in the sky, with Indra's weapon[The rainbow.] in it. He showered down fierce stones on the son of a suta. However, Karna Vaikartana
Vrisha[Vrisha was one of Karna's names.], supreme among those who have knowledge of all weapons, affixed a vayavya weapon and destroyed
that dark cloud. Using a large number of arrows, Karna scattered it in all the directions. O great king! He destroyed
the weapon that had been used by Ghatotkacha. In that battle, Bhimasena's immensely strong son laughed. He
used his great maya against maharatha Karna. Ghatotkacha, supreme among rathas, again advanced towards him
on a chariot. He was not frightened and was surrounded by many rakshasas. They were like lions and tigers and
like crazy elephants in their valour. Some were astride elephants, others were astride chariots. And there were others who were on the backs of horses. They wielded many kinds of terrible weapons. They were adorned with diverse armour and ornaments. Those cruel ones surrounded Ghatotkacha, like the Maruts around Vasava.

'"On seeing this, Karna, the great archer, began to fight with the rakshasa. Ghatotkacha pierced Karna with five
swift arrows. He roared loudly and terrified all the kings. Ghatotkacha again used an anjalika arrow and quickly
severed the bow in Karna's hand, with many large arrows still affixed to it. Karna picked up another firm and large
bow, capable of bearing a burden. It was as large as Indra's weapon[Indra's bow, the rainbow.] and he drew it back powerfully. O great
king! Karna shot gold-tufted arrows that were capable of killing the enemy towards the rakshasas who were in the
sky. The rakshasas were broad in the chest and those arrows shattered their herd. It was as if a herd of wild elephants were being oppressed by a lion. The rakshasas were destroyed by those arrows of the lord, together with
their horses, charioteers and elephants. The illustrious one consumed them, like the fire consumes all beings at the
time of the destruction of a yuga. Having killed the rakshasa soldiers, the son of a suta was resplendent. It was like
the city of Tripura, being burnt in earlier times in the sky, by the god Maheshvara.

'"O venerable one! O king! Among the thousands of kings on the side of the Pandaveyas, there was not a single
one who was capable of glancing at him. O king! The sole exception was the immensely strong Ghatotkacha, Indra
among the rakshasas. He possessed terrible valour and strength. Enraged, he looked like Vaivasvata[Yama.]. Fire was
generated from his angry eyes. O king! They were like flaming drops of oil in giant torches. He struck one palm
with another palm. He gnashed his lower lips. He ascended his chariot, generated again through maya. It was
yoked to mounts that were actually asses. But they looked like elephants and had the faces of pishachas. He angrily
instructed his charioteer, 'Take me to the son of a suta.' The supreme of rathas advanced on a chariot that was terrible in form. O lord of the earth! There was again a duel with the son of a suta. The rakshasa was again enraged. He
hurled a vajra towards the son of a suta. That vajra was extremely terrible and possessed eight wheels. It had been
constructed by Rudra. As it descended, Karna placed his bow on his chariot and seized it. He hurled it back. But
he[Ghatotkacha.] descended from his chariot. That immensely radiant weapon reduced his[Ghatotkacha's.] chariot to ashes, with his horses, charioteer and standard. It then shattered the earth and entered, astounding the gods who were there. Karna had
descended and had seized the great vajra, which had been created by a god. All the beings and gods applauded this.
Having performed this deed in the battle, Karna again ascended his chariot. The son of a suta, the scorcher of enemies, released iron arrows. O granter of honours! I do not think that there is anyone among all the beings who can
perform the terrible deed accomplished by Karna in the battle there. He[Ghatotkacha.] was struck by those iron arrows, which
were like rain pouring down on a mountain. He possessed the form of a city of the gandharvas and disappeared
again. He was a scorcher of enemies and was great in the use of maya. Using his maya and his dexterity, he destroyed all those divine weapons. The weapons were destroyed by the maya of the rakshasa. However, without any
fear, Karna continued to fight with the rakshasa.

'"O great king! Bhimasena's immensely strong son became angry. He divided himself into many different forms
and frightened the kings. Lions, tigers and hyenas arrived on the field of battle. There were snakes with fire in their
tongues. There were birds with iron beaks. He[Ghatotkacha.] was himself struck with the sharp arrows released by Karna. As
large as a king of mountains, he disappeared from the spot. The rakshasas, pishachas, yatudhanas, leopards and
wolves advanced from all the directions, wishing to devour Karna. They uttered fierce howls, so as to terrify him.
They wielded many terrible weapons. Karna pierced each of them with swift arrows that drank up their blood. He
used a divine weapon to destroy the maya of the rakshasa. He killed his horses with straight-tufted arrows. While
the rakshasa looked on, they were shattered and their limbs were mangled. Their backs were broken by the arrows
and they fell down on the ground. When the maya was destroyed, Hidimba's son told Karna Vaikartana, 'I will
bring about your death soon.' Having said this, he disappeared."'
