Vaishampayana said, 'At the time of her season, when her daughter-in-law had purified herself through a bath,
Satyavati led her to the bed and softly told her, "O Kousalya! Your brother-in-law will come to you in the middle
of the night and enter you. Wait for him and do not fall asleep." Having heard her mother-in-law's words, the beautiful one lay on the bed in her bedroom and began to think that it would be Bhishma or one of the other chiefs of
the Kuru lineage. The rishi who was devoted to the truth had first been appointed for Ambika. He entered her bed
while the light from the lamps was still burning. On seeing Krishna's dark visage, matted hair that was the colour
of copper, fiery eyes and tawny-brown beard, the queen closed her eyes. But in order to do what his mother desired, he united with her. However, because of fear, the daughter of the king of Kashi was unable to open her eyes.
When he emerged, the mother asked the son, "Will she give birth to a son with all the qualities?" Hearing his
mother's words, the supremely intelligent and self-controlled Vyasa replied, following what was destined, "The
son will have the strength of 10,000 elephants. He will be learned and supreme among rajarshis. He will be immensely fortunate, immensely brave and immensely wise. He will have 100 powerful sons. But because of lack of
quality on the part of his mother, he will be blind." Hearing these words, the mother told the son, "O one blessed
with the power of austerities! How can a blind one be worthy to be king of the Kuru dynasty? How can he protect
the lineage of your relatives and extend the lineage of his ancestors? Therefore, grant a second son to the Kuru lineage." Having promised this, the powerful ascetic departed. In due course, Kousalya gave birth to a son who was
blind.

'Once again, the queen spoke to the other daughter-in-law. As before, the unblemished Satya[Satyavati.] summoned the
rishi. In accordance with what he had promised, the maharshi went to Ambalika in the same way. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! On seeing him, she was distressed and turned pale. O king! On seeing her frightened, and pale
of complexion, Satyavati's son Vyasa told her, "Since you turned pale on seeing my ugliness, you will have a son
who will be pale in complexion. O one with the beautiful face. His name will also be Pandu[The word pandu means pale or white.]." Having uttered
these words, the illustrious and supreme rishi emerged. On seeing him emerge, Satya spoke to her son and he again
told her that the son would be pale. On hearing this, the mother asked for another son and the maharshi agreed to
his mother's request. When the time came, the queen gave birth to a son who was pale in complexion. But he was
handsome and radiant and bore all the auspicious marks. Later, this son gave birth to the five Pandavas, who were
great archers.

'When the eldest daughter-in-law was again in season, she[Satyavati.] again asked her to go. But the one who was as
beautiful as a goddess, remembered the form and odour of the maharshi and out of fear did not do what the queen
asked her to do. With her ornaments, the daughter of the king of Kashi bedecked a maid servant, making her look
like a beautiful apsara and sent her to Krishna. When the rishi arrived, she arose and paid him her respects. Having
respectfully served him, she united with him with his permission. His desire satisfied, the rishi was greatly pleased
with her. Having spent all night with her and found pleasure, the maharshi arose to leave and told her, "O fortunate
one! You will no longer be a servant. The child in your womb will be devoted to dharma and in all the worlds, he
will be supreme among those who are intelligent." This son of Krishna Dvaipayana was known by the name of
Vidura, the extremely wise brother of Dhritarashtra and Pandu. As a consequence of the curse imposed by the
great-souled Mandavya, Dharma himself was born as Vidura and he was learned in all principles and free from
anger and desire. Freed from the debt he had contracted because of dharma, when he met his mother, he again told
her that the woman had conceived. He then vanished. Thus sons were born in Vichitravirya's field through Dvaipayana. They were as radiant as children of the gods and extended the Kuru lineage.'
