'Dhritarashtra asked, "O Sanjaya! When Arjuna reached Saindhava and the Panchalas were enveloped by Bharadvaja's son and clashed against the Kurus, what did they do?"

'Sanjaya said, "O great king! There was a battle in the afternoon and it made the body hair stand up. Drona was
like the stake in the clash between the Panchalas and the Kurus. O venerable one! The Panchalas were cheerful in
their minds and wished to kill Drona. They roared and showered down arrows. A tumultuous and terrible battle
commenced between the Panchalas and the Kurus and it was like that between the gods and the asuras. With the
Pandavas, all the Panchalas reached Drona's chariot. Wishing to penetrate his array, they displayed great weapons.
There were rathas stationed on their chariots and with medium speed[They probably didn't require greater speed, because they were already close.], they caused a tremor and reached up to
Drona's chariot. Brihatkshatra, the maharatha from the Kekayas, showered sharp arrows that were like the great
Indra's vajra and advanced. He was swiftly countered by the immensely illustrious Kshemadhurti, who showered
hundreds and thousands of sharp arrows. Dhrishtaketu, bull among the Chedis and possessing great strength,
quickly attacked Drona, like the great Indra against Shambara. On seeing him suddenly descend, like death with a
gaping mouth, Viradhanva, the great archer, quickly countered him. O great king! Yudhishthira was stationed
there, desiring victory, and he and his soldiers were repulsed by the valiant Drona. Nakula was skilled in battle and
was valiant. O lord! As he advanced, your valorous son, Vikarna, countered him. Durmukha, the afflicter of enemies, repulsed the advancing Sahadeva with many thousand swift arrows. Vyaghradatta used extremely sharp and
pointed arrows to repeatedly make Satyaki, tiger among men, tremble. Droupadi's sons, tigers among men, angrily
released supreme arrows. But those best of rathas were repulsed by Somadatta's son. Bhimasena advanced wrath-
fully. But he was countered by Rishyashringa's maharatha son, who was fierce and terrible of form[The rakshasa Alambusa.]. O king! In
the battle, the encounter that took place between the man and the rakshasa was like that between Rama and Ravana
in ancient times.

'"O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Yudhishthira, foremost among the Bharata lineage, struck Drona with
ninety arrows with drooping tufts and these penetrated all the inner organs. At this, Drona became angry and struck
the illustrious Kounteya, foremost among the Bharata lineage, between the breasts with twenty-five arrows. While
all the archers looked on, Drona again struck him, his horses, his charioteer and his standard with twenty arrows.
However, Pandava, with dharma in his soul, showed the dexterity of his hands and countered Drona's arrows with
a shower of arrows of his own. The archer Drona became extremely enraged in that battle. He suddenly severed
the bow of the great-souled Dharmaraja. Having severed the bow, the maharatha swiftly covered him everywhere
with many thousands of arrows. All those there saw that King Yudhishthira had been rendered invisible because of
the arrows of Bharadvaja's son and thought that he had been killed. Some others thought that he had run away. O
Indra among kings! They said, 'The king has been slain by the illustrious brahmana.' Dharmaraja Yudhishthira
thus confronted a great hardship. He cast aside the bow that had been severed by Bharadvaja's son in the battle and
grasped another divine bow that was capable of bearing a great burden and was more forceful. In that encounter,
the brave one sliced down all the thousands of arrows that had been released by Drona and it was extraordinary.
Having severed the arrows, the king's eyes became red with rage. In that battle, he grasped a lance that was capable of shattering the mountains. It was extremely terrible and fierce. It possessed a golden handle and was decorated with eight bells. The extremely powerful one roared cheerfully and hurled it. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the beings screamed in terror. On seeing the lance raised by Dharmaraja in that battle, all the beings suddenly exclaimed, 'May all be well with Drona.' Hurled from the king's arms, it was like a snake that had cast off
its skin. It blazed in the sky and in the directions and the sub-directions. It was like a she-serpent with a flaming
mouth and it was as if Drona confronted death. O lord of the earth! On seeing it suddenly descend, Drona, supreme
among those who knew about weapons, released the brahmastra. That weapon reduced the terrible-looking lance to
ashes and then quickly advanced towards the chariot of the illustrious Pandava. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When Drona's weapon advanced, the immensely wise King Yudhishthira used a brahmastra to pacify it. In
that battle, he then pierced Drona with five arrows with drooping tufts and used a sharp kshurapra arrow to severe
his great bow. O venerable one! Drona, the destroyer of kshatriyas, cast aside the severed bow and suddenly hurled
a club at Dharma's son. On seeing that the club was powerfully descending, Yudhishthira, the scorcher of enemies,
became angry and grasped a club. Those two clubs were powerfully hurled towards each other. They countered
each other and emitted sparks because of the collision. They then fell down on the ground. O venerable one! Drona
became extremely angry with Dharmaraja. He used four extremely sharp and supreme arrows to kill his horses.
With another arrow, he severed his bow, which was like Indra's standard. He severed Pandava's standard and
struck him with three arrows. With the horse slain, Yudhishthira quickly descended from the chariot. O bull among
the Bharata lineage! The king stood there, with his arms raised and without any weapons. O lord! On seeing that
he was without a chariot, and specifically without any weapons, Drona confounded the enemy and all the soldiers.
Displaying the dexterity of his hands, the one who was firm in his vows released large numbers of sharp arrows
and advanced against the king, like an angry lion towards a deer[Drona wished to capture Yudhishthira alive.]. On seeing that Drona, the destroyer of enemies, was advancing, sudden sounds of lamentation arose from the assembled Pandavas. O venerable one! 'The
king has been slain. The king has been slain by Bharadvaja's son.' These and other loud noises arose from all the
Pandu soldiers. But the king ascended Sahadeva's chariot. Those swift horses bore Yudhishthira, Kunti's son,
away."'
