Brahma said, "O son! Hear about the eternal and undecaying Purusha. He is said to be without destruction and immeasurable. He goes everywhere. O virtuous one! I, you, nor anyone else, can see him. He is this universe,
with qualities and without qualities. It is said that he can be seen through wisdom. He is without a body. But
he also dwells in every body. Though he dwells in bodies, he is not touched by any of the acts committed by
them. He is in my atman, in yours and in that of others, conscious of the bodies. He is a witness to everything, but
cannot be grasped by anyone. The universe is his head. The universe is his arms. The universe is his feed, his eyes
and his nose. As he wills, he alone cheerfully wanders among all the kshetras[Bodies.]. The kshetras are the bodies, the
seeds of everything, good or bad[Acts are seeds.]. Since he knows them through the yoga of his atman, he is known as kshetrajna. No creature can discern his coming and going, though this progress is indicated in the ordinances of sankhya
and yoga. Even if I think about his progress, I will be unable to comprehend that supreme progress. According to
my knowledge, I will tell you about that eternal Purusha. His alone is the greatness. There is said to be only one
Purusha. That single and eternal one should be praised by the words of Mahapurusha[The great Purusha.]. There is one fire, but it
blazes in different kinds of kindling. There is one sun. There are many austerities, but their origins are the same.
There is one wind, but it blows in many ways in the world. There is one great ocean, though there are many
sources of water. There is one Purusha, devoid of qualities. The universe is his form and it also enters Purusha, devoid of qualities. One should abandon all the qualities. One should discard all acts, good and bad. One should give
up both truth and falsehood. In this way, one should be divested of qualities. One can then know the one who is unthinkable. He has four subtle forms[Aniruddha, Pradyumna, Samkarshana and Vasudeva.]. An ascetic who roams around in this way can advance towards the lord,
Purusha. There are some learned ones who desire him as the paramatman. There are others who  have thought
about adhyatma and think of him as the single atman within their own selves. The paramatman is always spoken of
as one who is devoid of qualities. He is known as Narayana. He is the Purusha who is inside all atmans. Like water
on the leaf of a lotus, he is not touched by any acts. He is sometimes engaged in acts[In bodies.]. He is sometimes freed
from bonds and united with moksha. He is sometimes united with the accumulation of the seventeen[In bodies. The seventeen are the five senses, the five organs of action, five kinds of breaths of life, mind and
intelligence.]. In this
way, in due order, Purusha is spoken of in many ways. Everything in the worlds has a refuge in him. He is the
supreme object of knowledge. He is the one who knows and he is also what is to be known. He is the thinker and
the object of thought. He is the eater and the object that is eaten. He is the one who smells and the object that is
smelt. He is the one who touches and the object that is touched. He is the seer and the object that is seen. He is the
hearer and the object that is heard. He is the one who learns and he is the object of learning. He is with qualities
and without qualities. He has been spoken of as Pradhana, the accumulation of qualities. He is always eternal and
immutable. He is the foundation and the prime cause behind Dhatri[In tne sense of the creator.]. Brahmanas speak of him as Aniruddha[Literally, the one who is without obstruction or restraint.].
There are virtuous and beneficial acts in the world, sanctioned by the Vedas. All these flow from him. All the gods
and sages, righteous and controlled, take their places on the altar and offer him a share in the sacrifices. I am Brahma. I am the first lord of subjects. I have been generated from him and all of you have been generated from me. O
son! I am the origin of all mobile and immobile objects in the universe, and all the Vedas and their mysteries. Purusha is divided into four parts and sports as he wishes. The illustrious one is awakened through his own knowledge. O son! I have thus told you exactly what you have asked. I have described to you the knowledge of sankhya
and yoga."'
