Vaishampayana said, 'Kunti's son, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira, did not speak, while his brothers spoke many things
about what the Vedas had said. Droupadi, supreme among women, was beautiful. She had large eyes and was descended from an extremely noble family. She addressed the Indra among kings. The king was seated like a bull,
surrounded by his brothers. They were like lions and tigers and he was like the leader of a herd of elephants. She
knew about dharma and could discern the nature of dharma. Though she was always cherished by the king, she
was always somewhat haughty, especially towards Yudhishthira. Having been invited, the wide-hipped and extremely beautiful one glanced towards her husband[Yudhishthira.] and spoke these gentle words. "O Partha! These brothers of
yours are as parched as stoka birds[Stoka is another name for the chataka bird, which waits for the rains and is believed to
survive on drops of water.]. They are stationed here and are warbling, but you do not pay them any attention. O great king! They are like crazy and large elephants. Gladden them with appropriate words. They have always suffered from sorrows. O king! Earlier, you were with your brothers in Dvaitavana and they were oppressed
by the cold, the wind and the heat. Why did you speak such words to them? 'Desiring victory in the encounter, we
will slay Duryodhana in the battle and enjoy the entire earth, which is capable of granting every object of desire. O
scorchers of enemies! We will deprive the rathas of their chariots and kill the mighty elephants. We will strew the
field of battle with chariots. We will perform many grand sacrifices, at which a lot of gifts will be given away. Our
sorrow of dwelling in the forest will become happiness.' O supreme among those who uphold dharma! These were
the words you yourself spoke then. O brave one! How can you then shatter their minds now? A eunuch cannot enjoy the earth. A eunuch cannot obtain wealth. There cannot be sons in a eunuch's house, just as fish cannot exist in
mud[Deprived of water.]. A kshatriya without the staff of punishment does not shine. There is no prosperity without the staff of punishment. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Without the staff of punishment, a king's subjects do not obtain happiness. O supreme among kings! Friendship towards all beings, donations, studying and austerities are dharma for
a brahmana, not for a king. The wicked must be countered. The virtuous must be protected. Together with not running away from a battle, this is the supreme dharma for kings. A person who possesses both forgiveness and anger,
who gives and also takes, who frightens and also grants freedom from fear and who chastises and also rewards-
such a person is said to know dharma. You have not obtained the earth through learning, donations, conciliation,
sacrifices or bribery[The Critical edition says utkocha, meaning bribery. Many non-Critical versions say
samkocha, meaning fear or cowering down. Given the context, samkocha fits better.]. The forces of the enemy had brave ones who were ready to strike, with elephants, horses
and chariots. It was larger in three parts[This is difficult to figure out. The traditional interpretation has been that the Kourava
army was superior in three ways-leadership, policy and energy. It was also larger than
the Pandava army by four akshouhinis.]. It was protected by Drona, Karna, Ashvatthama and Kripa. O brave one!
It has been destroyed by you. Therefore, enjoy the earth. O great king! O tiger among men! O lord! You used a rod
to crush Jambudvipa, with its many countries[This is a reference to the conquest by the Pandavas, described in Section 23
A dvipa is a continent. In the cosmology described in the epics and the Puranas,
there are seven dvipas. Jambudvipa is in the centre and Mount Meru is at the centre of
Jambudvipa. The other six dvipas are Plakshadvipa, Kushadvipa, Shalmalidvipa,
Krounchadvipa, Shakadvipa and Pushkaradvipa. Each dvipa is divided into nine var-
shas or subcontinents. For example, Bharatavarsha is part of Jambudvipa. While there
are some variations in nomenclature across texts, the description given in the text here
doesn't fit the standard cosmology.]. O lord of men! You also used a rod to crush Krounchadvipa,
equal to Jambudvipa and to the west of the great Meru. O lord of men! You used a rod to crush Shakadvipa, equal
to Krounchadvipa and to the east of the great Meru. O tiger among men! To the north of the great Meru is
Bhadrashva, equal to Shakadvipa. You crushed it with your rod. There were many countries between one dvipa
and another dvipa. O brave one! You immersed yourself in the ocean and crushed them with your rod. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! These were the immeasurable deeds that were performed by you. O great king! The
brahmanas honoured you. But despite that, you are not pleased. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Look at your
brothers and delight them. They are like proud bulls and proud kings of elephants. All of you are like the immortals. All of you are scorchers of enemies and are capable of withstanding enemies. It is my view that even a single
one of you would have been enough to bring me happiness, not to speak of when all of you tigers and men and
bulls among men are my husbands, like the senses enervating the body[To state the obvious, there are five senses.]. My mother-in-law knows everything
and can see everything. Her words cannot be false. She told me, 'O Panchali! O excellent one! Yudhishthira will
maintain you in happiness, after he has killed many thousands of kings through his valour.' O lord of men! Now,
because of your confusion, I see that you will make this futile. O Indra among kings! If the eldest brother is mad,
all the others follow him. Because you are mad, all the Pandavas will become mad. O lord of men! If these brothers of yours were not mad, they should have bound you up with the non-believers and ruled the earth. A person
who acts stupidly does not obtain anything that is superior. A person who is on the path towards madness should
be treated with incense, collyrium, treatment through the nose[Inhalation of fumes through the nose.], medicines and medical remedies. O supreme
among the Bharata lineage! I am the worst of all women in the world. Though I have been oppressed by the enemy, I still wish to remain alive. They[The other Pandava brothers.] have struggled and have obtained this prosperity. But after having obtained
the entire earth, you are acting so as to bring a disaster on yourself. O king! The kings Mandhata and Ambarisha
were supreme among kings and were honoured by all the kings on earth. Be as radiant as them. In accordance with
dharma, rule the goddess earth, with its mountains, forests and islands, and protect the subjects. O king! Do not be
distressed in your mind. Perform many sacrifices and offer oblations into the fire. O supreme among kings! Give
the brahmanas cities, objects of pleasure and garments."'
