'"The lord said, 'I instructed this eternal yoga 174 to Vivasvat 175 and Vivasvat told it to Manu. Manu told it to
Ikshaku. In this way, handed down by tradition, the royal sages 176 knew this. 177
O scorcher of foes! In this world, because of the long passage of time, this yoga has been destroyed. 178 You are
my follower and friend. 179 Therefore, today, I will tell you that old yoga, because this is excellent and secret
knowledge.'

'"Arjuna said, 'Your birth was later and Vivasvat's birth was earlier. How will I understand that you instructed
this earlier?'

'"The lord said, 'O Arjuna! Many are the births that you and I have been through. I know them all. O scorcher
of foes! You know not. I have no birth. I am indestructible. I am the lord of all beings. But even then, though existing in my own nature, I come into existence through my own resolution. 180 O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Whenever dharma goes into a decline and adharma is on the ascendance, then I create myself. To protect the righteous and to destroy the sinners and to establish dharma, I manifest myself from yuga to yuga. 181 O Arjuna! He
who thus knows the nature of my divine 182 birth and action, he is not born again when he dies, but attains me.
Many, purified through the meditation of knowledge, have immersed themselves in me and sought refuge in me,
discarding attachment, fear and anger. O Partha! Whoever worships me, in whatever way, I entertain them in that
way. Everywhere, men follow along my path. In this world, people who desire success in their action, worship
gods. Because in the world of men, success through action occurs quickly. 183 In accordance with gunas and action, the four varnas were created by me. 184 But despite being the creator of these, know me to be constant 185
and not the agent. 186 Actions do not touch me, nor do I desire the fruits of action. He who knows me in this fashion, is not tied down by action. Knowing this, those who sought liberation in the past, performed action. Therefore,
you perform action alone, the path followed by predecessors in earlier times. Even the wise are confused about
what is action and what is inaction. 187 Therefore, I will tell you what action 188 is. Knowing this, you will be
freed from evil. Action itself has to be understood and prohibited action must also be understood. Inaction must
also be understood. Because the path of action is difficult to comprehend. He who perceives inaction in action and
perceives action in inaction, he is wise among men, has yoga and has the right to all action. 189 He whose efforts
are always devoid of desire for fruit and ego, 190 he whose actions have been burnt by the fire of knowledge, the
learned call him wise. He who has given up attachment to action and its fruit is always content and without refuge.
191 Even when he is immersed in action, he does nothing. Without attachment, controlled in mind and senses, having discarded all ownership 192 and performing action only through the body, 193 he does not attain the bondage
of sin. Satisfied with unsought gains, 194 beyond opposites, 195 bereft of envy and regarding success and failure
equally, even if he performs action, he is not bound down. Beyond attachment, free 196 and with a mind established in knowledge, when he performs action for a yajna alone, 197 everything is destroyed. 198 The receptacles
used for offerings 199 are the brahman. The oblations are the brahman. In the fire that is the brahman, the offerer,
who is the brahman, performs the sacrifice. He who sees thus and is immersed in the brahman in all action attains
the brahman alone as a destination.

'"'Other yogis perform divine yajnas. 200 Others use the yajna as an offering to the fire that is the brahman. 201
Others offer senses like hearing as offerings to the fire that is self-control. 202 Others offer sounds and other objects to the fire that is the senses. 203 Others offer all action of the senses 204 and action of the breath of life 205
as offerings to the fire of self-control, 206 lit up through knowledge. Some use the yajna of offering gifts, others
use the yajna of penance. Some use the yajna of yoga and still others, firm in their resolve and careful, use the yajna of knowledge. 207 Others offer the prana breath in the apana breath 208 and the apana breath in the prana
breath. 209
Others restrain the flow of the prana and apana breath and practise pranayama. 210 Others control their food and
offer the senses to the breath of life. 211 All these, learned in the yajnas, become sinless through yajnas. The leftovers 212 of sacrifices are like amrita and those who partake of these attain the eternal brahman. O best of the
Kuru lineage! Those who don't perform yajnas have no existence in this world, forget other worlds. Many yajnas
of this type are prescribed in the brahman's mouth. 213 Know them all to be the outcome of action. Knowing this,
you will attain liberation. O scorcher of foes! A yajna performed with knowledge is superior to a yajna full of objects. 214 O Partha! All actions and their fruit end in knowledge. Attain that knowledge by prostrating, questioning
and serving. The wise, those who are versed with the truth, will instruct you in wisdom. O Pandava! Knowing that,
you will never fall prey to this kind of delusion again. Through this, you will see all the beings in your atman and
then in me. Even if you are a greater sinner than all the other sinners, you will cross all oceans of sin with the boat
of knowledge alone. O Arjuna! Like a raging fire burns to ashes pieces of wood, like that, the fire of knowledge
burns all action to ashes. In this world, there is nothing as pure as knowledge. With the passage of time, he who is
accomplished in yoga, himself attains that 215 within his heart. Knowledge is attained by the faithful, the unwavering and those who control their senses. Having attained knowledge, they quickly achieve supreme peace. The
ignorant, the faithless and the doubting are destroyed. For the doubting person, this world, other worlds and happiness don't exist. O Dhananjaya! He who has offered up all action through yoga and he who has used knowledge to
slice away doubt, actions cannot bind such a person-who is focused on the atman. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! Therefore, use the sword of knowledge to slice away this doubt in your heart, resulting from your own ignorance. Follow yoga! Arise!'"'
