'Bhishma said, "All the ascetics saw that she was firm in her resolution to perform austerities. O son[The word used is tata.]! They tried
to stop her and asked, 'What do you wish to accomplish?' The rishis were aged in their austerities and the maiden
replied to them, 'I have been abandoned by Bhishma and have been dislodged from the dharma I would have obtained through a husband. O ones rich in austerities! I have consecrated myself for his death and not for the sake of
any world[Obtained through austerities.]. I have resolved that I will achieve peace only through Bhishma's death. It is because of his deeds that
I have obtained this eternal and infinite misery. I have been deprived of the world of a husband. I am neither a
woman, nor a man. O ones rich in austerities! I will not desist until I have slain Gangeya in battle. This is the resolution in my heart and I am engaged for this purpose. I am disgusted with my state as a woman and I have made up
my mind to become a man. I wish to exact vengeance on Bhishma. I should not be dissuaded again.' The god who
wields the trident, Uma's consort, manifested himself. In the midst of the maharshis, he showed his own form to
the beautiful one. He satisfied her with a boon and she asked for my defeat. The god replied to the intelligent one,
'You will kill him.' At this, the maiden spoke to Rudra. 'O god! How can a woman like me be victorious in battle?
O Uma's consort! Since I am a woman, my mind is deep[Probably signifying that the mind is calm and is not agitated or angry.]. O lord of beings! You have promised Bhishma's defeat. O one with the bull on the banner[Shiva has a bull on his banner.]! Act so that your promise comes true, so that I can kill Bhishma, Shantanu's son, in battle.' The Mahadeva, with the bull on his banner, spoke truthfully to the maiden. 'O fortunate one!
I do not utter false words. What I have said will come true. You will attain manhood and will kill Bhishma in battle. When you enter another body, you will remember everything. You will be born as a maharatha in Drupada's
lineage. You will be an extremely honoured warrior who is swift in the use of weapons. O fortunate one! Everything will be exactly as I have said it will be. You will become a man after some time has passed.' Having thus
spoken, Mahadeva Kapardi Vrishadhvaja[Mahadeva, Kapardi and Vrishadhvaja are Shiva's names. Mahadeva means the great god. Kapardi means the
one with matted hair and Vrishadhvaja means the one with the bull on his banner.] disappeared, while all the brahmanas looked on. In the sight of those
maharshis, the unblemished one, the one with the beautiful complexion, gathered wood from the forest. She constructed an extremely large funeral pyre and set fire to it. O great king! When the fire was blazing, with rage igniting her senses, she said, 'This is for Bhishma's destruction.' O king! On the banks of the Yamuna, the eldest
daughter of Kashi entered the fire."'
