'Sanjaya said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When night had passed, the great-souled Bhishma was full of
anger. Placing himself at the head of the Bharata army and surrounded by a large number of troops, he advanced
against the enemy. Drona, Duryodhana, Bahlika, Durmarshana, Chitrasena and the extremely strong Jayadratha,
and many other powerful kings with their armies, surrounded him on all sides. O king! Surrounded by these great
maharathas, all of whom possessed energy and valour, that supreme of kings was radiant at the forefront of those
kings, like the wielder of the vajra when he is surrounded by the gods. Giant standards fluttered on the backs of
mighty elephants stationed in front of the troops. They were beautiful and colourful-red, yellow, black and
brown. That army had the king who was Shantanu's son, maharathas, elephants and horses. It was as dazzling as
clouds tinged with lightning, or the sky when clouds gather at the onset of the monsoon. Protected by Shantanu's
son, that great and large army of the Kurus suddenly rushed towards Arjuna to do battle, like a terrible and flowing
river. It possessed diverse kinds of powerful forces, with innumerable elephants, horses, infantry and chariots
along the sides. The vyuha was like a giant cloud. From a distance, the great-souled one with the king of apes on
his standard saw it[Arjuna had an ape on his standard.]. The brave bull among men, with the white horses, was stationed on his chariot with the tall
standard. The great-souled one was at the head of a large army and advanced against all the forces of the enemy.
He possessed excellent equipment and the shaft of the chariot was supreme. In that battle, he was aided by the bull
among the Yadus. On seeing the ape on the standard, all the Kouravas, together with your sons, were dejected.

'"They saw that the king of vyuhas was protected by Kiriti, the maharatha of this world, with his weapons upraised. There were four thousand elephants at each of its four corners. This vyuha was like the one that had been
prepared the preceding day by Dharmaraja, the descendant of the Kourava lineage. The foremost among the Panchalas and the foremost among the Chedis advanced towards the spot. A great roar arose from every direction and
thousands of drums were sounded. There was the blowing of conch shells, mixed with the sounds of drums. All the
soldiers roared like lions. As the brave ones twanged their bows, there was the great sound of arrows. In an instant,
the sky was filled with the loud sound of drums, kettledrums and cymbals and the great noise of conch shells being
blown. Enveloped in that sound, the sky was also covered by fine dust that arose from the ground. On seeing that
canopy spread all over, the brave warriors dashed forwards to battle each other. Rathas were brought down by
rathas, together with their charioteers, horses, chariots and standards. Elephants were struck and brought down by
elephants. Infantry was brought down by infantry. Those who advanced were brought down by others who advanced. The wounds from the arrows were wonderful to behold. Lances and swords fell down. Well-trained horses
clashed against well-trained horses. The brave ones held excellent shields marked with the signs of golden stars
and used them against excellent arrows. These were shattered by battleaxes, lances and swords and fell down on
the ground. Some rathas and their charioteers were mangled by the tusks and mighty trunks of elephants and fell
down. Bulls among elephant-riders clashed against bulls among rathas and killed by arrows, fell down on the
ground. Having heard the wails of horse-riders struck by the force of elephants or the lamentations of horse-riders
and infantry whose limbs were crushed by the tusks of elephants, many men were distressed and fell down.

'"Many elephants, horses and chariots were running away and there was a great terror among the horse-riders
and infantry. Bhishma, surrounded by maharathas, saw the one who had the king of apes on his standard. Shantanu's son had a palm tree on his standard, embellished with the marks of five palm trees. He rushed against the
valiant Kiriti, who possessed well-trained and swift horses and great weapons and arrows with the resplendence of
the vajra. O king! Many other warriors, with Drona, Kripa, Shalya, Vivimshati, Duryodhana and Somadatta's son
at the forefront, advanced against Indra's son, who was like Shakra himself. Arjuna's brave son, Abhimanyu, was
skilled in the knowledge of all weapons and was clad in golden and colourful armour. He rushed out from the mass
of rathas and attacked. He confounded the great weapons of all those maharathas. Karshni[Karshni means a descendant of Krishna. This is Abhimanyu. Hence, the Krishna in question is Arjuna.] performed deeds
that were incapable of being countered. He was like the illustrious fire on a sacrificial altar, when the one with the
flames has been invoked with great mantras. In that battle, the spirited Bhishma swiftly created a river, with the
blood of enemies as the foam. But he avoided Subhadra's son and attacked maharatha Partha. Kiriti grasped Gan-
diva, extraordinary to behold. Its roar was exceedingly loud. He cast out a net of arrows and repulsed the net of
great weapons[Released by Bhishma.]. The supreme among all wielders of the bow, with the king of apes on his standard, then showered down a net of arrows and polished and broad-headed arrows on the great-souled Bhishma. All the worlds, the
Kurus and the Srinjayas, witnessed the duel between Bhishma and Dhananjaya, the two spirited ones who were the
foremost among virtuous men, accompanied by the terrible roars of the bows."'
