Vaishampayana said, 'One evening, the Pandavas who had gone to the forest were seated with Krishna and were
talking to each other, afflicted with grief and sorrow.

'The beloved, beautiful, learned and devoted Krishna spoke these words to Dharmaraja, "There is no sorrow
over us in the mind of that evil, cruel and evil-minded son of Dhritarashtra[Duryodhana.]. O king! When you were banished
to the forest with me and your brothers, attired in deerskins, the evil-hearted and evil-minded one felt no torment.
The heart of that performer of evil deeds is made of iron. Thus it was that he could address harsh words to his superior, who is supreme among those who follow dharma[Meaning Yudhishthira.]. Having reduced you, always used to comforts and undeserving of hardship, to this misfortune, that evil-souled one, that performer of evil deeds, rejoices with his well-
wishers. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing you leave for the forest in your deerskins, there were four
among all the Kurus who did not shed any tears-Duryodhana, Karna, the evil-souled Shakuni and the cruel and
evil brother Duhshasana. O supreme among those of the Kuru lineage! All the others were overcome with grief
and tears rolled down from their eyes. O great king! On seeing your bed now and remembering your earlier one, I
sorrow for you. You are used to comforts and do not deserve this misery. Thinking of that jewelled seat, inlaid with
ivory, in the middle of that sabha and seeing this one made of kusha grass, I am consumed with grief. I have seen
you in the sabha, surrounded by kings. O king! On no longer seeing that, how can there be peace in my heart? O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! I have seen you anointed with sandalwood paste, as radiant as the sun. On seeing you now anointed with mud, I am losing my senses. O Indra among kings! Earlier, I have seen you attired in
white and expensive silk garments. I now see you dressed in tattered rags[The word used is chira, which also means bark.]. Earlier, food that catered to every
kind of taste used to be taken from your house for thousands of brahmanas, on plates made out of gold. O king! O
lord with all the qualities! From your house you provided food to the ascetics and the homeless. O king! Now that
I can no longer see that, how can there be peace in my heart? O great king! Young cooks who wore polished earrings used to prepare and serve the best of tasty food for your brothers. I now see them in the forest, surviving on
the fare of the forest. O Indra among men! They do not deserve this discomfort. My mind can find no peace. I see
Bhimasena, unhappily living in the forest, immersed in thought. As time passes, are you not suffused with anger?
Are you not angered to see that Bhimasena has to perform all these tasks himself? How can your anger not increase on seeing that one who is used to happiness is now in misery? He was served in many ways, the high and
the low, with vehicles and garments. How can your anger not increase on seeing him in the forest thus? That powerful lord could have killed all the Kurus, but honouring your promise, Vrikodara tolerated everything. This two-
armed Arjuna is the equal of the many-armed Arjuna[The many-armed Arjuna is Kartaviryarjuna, king of the Haihayas. He had a thousand arms because of a
boon obtained from Dattatreya. He was Ravana's contemporary and was eventually killed by Parashurama.]. In the speed with which he discharges arrows, he is like
Yama, the destroyer. O great king! Through the power of his weapons, all the lords of the earth were forced to bow
down at your sacrifice, tended to by brahmanas. This tiger among men has been worshipped by the gods and the
demons. Look at Arjuna, immersed in thought. O king! How can your anger not increase? Partha is used to comforts and does not deserve this unhappiness. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing him in the forest thus,
I am confounded that your anger does not increase. On a single chariot, he defeated gods, men and serpents. On
seeing him in the forest thus, how can your anger not increase? Through force, this scorcher of enemies obtained
tribute from all the lords of the earth-extraordinarily constructed vehicles, horses and elephants. Shooting one
swift arrow, he created five hundred arrows. On seeing him in the forest thus, how can your anger not increase?
Nakula is tall, dark and young and wields the best of shields in battle. On seeing him in the forest thus, how can
your anger not increase? O Yudhishthira! You have seen Madri's handsome and brave son, Sahadeva, in the forest.
How can your anger not increase? I have been born in the lineage of Drupada. I am the daughter-in-law of the
great-souled Pandu. On seeing me in the forest thus, how can your anger not increase? O supreme among those of
the Bharata lineage! It is certain that there is no anger left in you. Despite seeing your brothers and me, your mind
is not miserable. But the sacred texts say that there is no kshatriya in the world without anger. But in you, today, I
see that which is contrary to kshatriyas. O Partha! A kshatriya who does not display his energy when the time is
right is always despised by all beings. Therefore, under no circumstances should you show and forgiveness towards your enemies. There is no doubt that you are capable of destroying all of them through your energy. But it is
also true that a kshatriya who is not pacified when the time of forgiving arrives, is not loved by all beings and is
destroyed here, and in the hereafter."'
