'Markandeya said, "After exterminating the rakshasas, he will hand over the earth to the brahmanas at a great
horse sacrifice. Having established the sacred limits decreed by the self-creating one[Brahma.], the performer of holy and
famous deeds will retire to the forest when he attains old age. The men who live in the world will follow his good
conduct. When thieves and rakshasas have been exterminated by the brahmanas, there will be safety again. When
all the countries have been conquered, that tiger among brahmanas will establish black antelope skins, spears and
tridents and other weapons there[As signs of order having been restored. The black antelope skins are symbolic of brahmanas, while the
weapons are symbolic of kshatriyas.]. He will be praised by the Indras among brahmanas and will honour them in
return. Kalki, supreme among brahmanas will roam around the earth, always engaged in the killing of dasyus[Dasyus are outcasts, bandits, evil demons and the enemies of gods and men.].
When he exterminates dasyus, terrible lamentations of 'Alas, father!' and 'Alas, son!' will be heard. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! When krita has arrived, adharma will thus be destroyed and dharma will flourish. People
will again follow rituals. There will be groves, sanctuaries, large ponds, temples and many sacrifices and rituals on
the arrival of krita yuga. Brahmanas will be righteous and hermits will be ascetics. Hermitages, earlier occupied by
wretches, will have subjects engaged in truth. All the seeds sown will begin to grow. O Indra among kings! Every
crop will grow in every season. Men will be devoted to donations, vows and rites. Brahmanas will happily be engaged in meditation and sacrifices and will desire dharma. Kings will govern the earth in accordance with the principles of dharma. In krita yuga, vaishyas will be engaged in trade, brahmanas in their six tasks[Teaching, studying, sacrifices, acting as priests at sacrifices, donating and receiving gifts.] and kshatriyas
in offering protection. Shudras will devote themselves to servitude of the three varnas. This will be the nature of
dharma in krita yuga, treta and dvapara and in the last period of the yuga. I have recounted this to you. O Pandava!
The numbers of the yugas are known to all the worlds. Thus have I told you everything about the past and the future, as I remember it. This is the Purana recounted by Vayu, lauded by the rishis[Purana is any old account. But specifically, there are sacred texts known as the Puranas. Vayu is the wind-
god. While this may be a reference to any old account told by Vayu, it is more likely to be a specific reference to
the Vayu Purana, one of those sacred texts.]. Though I am immortal, I
have witnessed and experienced many courses of life in the world[Though not explicit, this may mean that Markandeya, though an immortal, has been through the cycle of
death and rebirth several times.]. I have told you about them.

'"O one without decay! Now, with your brothers, listen to these other words of mine. They will free you from
your doubts about dharma. O supreme among those who uphold dharma! Always unite your soul with dharma. O
king! Those who have dharma in their soul enjoy bliss, here and in the hereafter. O unblemished one! Listen to the
auspicious words that I will now tell you. In the course of your acts, you should never oppress a brahmana. If angered, a brahmana can destroy the world through his oath."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having heard Markandeya's words, the king, supreme among Kurus, replied in these
words to the immensely wise and immensely radiant one. "O sage! If I wish to protect my subjects, what dharma
should I follow? How should I act, so that I do not deviate from my own dharma?"

'Markandeya replied, "Be compassionate towards all beings and try to ensure their welfare, without hatred. Be
engaged in the protection of your subjects, as if they are your own children. Practise dharma and avoid adharma.
Worship the ancestors and the gods. If you act out of ignorance, neutralize it by offering the right donations. Discard vanity and always be humble. Conquer the entire earth and remain in joy and happiness. This is dharma as it
was, and as it will be. There is nothing in the past or the future that is not known to you. O son[The word used is tata.]! Therefore, do
not suffer because of your present misfortune. O mighty-armed one! Destiny is superior to all the gods too. Prodded by destiny, all beings are afflicted. O unblemished one! Do not have any doubts about what I have told you. If
you doubt my words, your dharma will be destroyed. O bull among the Bharata lineage! You have been born in the
famous lineage of the Kurus. You should practise everything in deed, thought and speech."

'Yudhishthira said, "O best of brahmanas! The words that you have uttered are pleasant to hear. O lord! I will
endeavour to act according to your instructions. O Indra among brahmanas! I have no greed, no fear and no envy.
O lord! I will do everything that you have told me."'

Vaishampayana said, 'O king! Having heard the words of the great-souled Pandava, all the Pandavas, together
with the wielder of the Sharnga bow, were delighted[That is, the other Pandavas. Sharnga is the name of Krishna's bow.]. Having heard the words of the intelligent Markandeya
about the ancient accounts, they were struck with great wonder.'
