The guest said, 'O brahmana! I will instruct you in accordance with the sacred texts. I will tell you the purport of what I have learned from my preceptor. Listen. In an earlier cycle of creation, the wheel of dharma
was set in motion in Naimisha, on the banks of the Gomati. There is a city of the serpents there. O bull among
brahmanas! All the residents of heaven had assembled there and had performed a sacrifice. There, the supreme
king, Mandhata, had surpassed Indra. The great Padmanabha dwells there. He has dharma in his soul and follows it
in deeds, sight and words. The immensely fortunate resident is famous by the name of Padma. O bull among brahmanas! He pleases creatures in three different ways-words, deeds and thoughts. He protects everything through
his insight and controls wicked people through the four techniques of conciliation, gifts, dissension and chastisement. You should go and ask him about the desired techniques. When you bow down before him, he will show you
what supreme dharma is. The intelligent serpent is accomplished in all the sacred texts and is attentive towards
guests.  He  possesses  the  rare  and  desired  nine  qualities[The nine qualities of rajas are faith, generosity, enjoyment, enterprise, desire, anger, pride, malice and calumny.
It is not obvious what the nine qualities mentioned in the text are. But it could be a reference to the nine qualities
of rajas, some of which exist and some of which are absent in the serpent.].  His  nature  is  such  that  he  is  always  immersed  in
water[This is also difficult to understand. Perhaps it means that he performs rites in the water. Perhaps it is a reference
to serpents dwelling in the water.]. He is always engaged in studying. His conduct is excellent and he practises austerities and self-control.
His inclinations are towards performing sacrifices and donations. He is forgiving and his conduct is supreme. He is
truthful in speech and without malice. He always resorts to good conduct. He eats what is left[After gods, ancestors, guests and servants have eaten.]. He is pleasant in
speech. He has discarded deceit. He does what is best and is grateful. He is without enmity and is engaged in the
welfare  of  beings.  He  has  been  born  in  a  lineage  that  is  as  noble  as  the  waters  in  a  lake  in  the  midst  of  the
Ganga.'"'
