'Yudhishthira asked, "O grandfather! O immensely wise one! I have a great doubt about policy. You must dispel it. You are one who has advanced our lineage. O father! You have spoken
and educated me about evil-souled ones of wicked conduct and the words that they speak.
What is beneficial for royal policy? What brings happiness to the family? Now, and in the future, what ensures acquisition and preservation? What is good for the sons and grandsons and
what brings prosperity to the kingdom? In terms of food and drink, what is good for the body?
Tell me that. When a king is instated in the kingdom and is surrounded by friends, how does
he delight the subjects? What happens if he encounters ill-wishers? The forces of love and affection may lead to his being seized by the wicked. Though he should adorn the righteous, he
may become subject to his senses. Even if all of his servants have been born in good lineages,
they may exhibit bad qualities. The king may not realize the fruits from the appointment of
good servants. These are the kinds of doubts I have about the extremely difficult end of rajadharma. You are like Brihaspati in your intelligence and you should instruct me. O tiger among
men! You are engaged in the welfare of the lineage. Instruct us. Kshatta[Vidura.] is accomplished
and wise and instructs us about these things all the time. I will hear beneficial words about the
welfare of the family and the welfare of the kingdom. This is like undecaying amrita. Having
heard this, I will sleep happily. What kind of servants should one have? What are their attributes and qualities? What are the recommendations about the families of those one entrusts
with tasks? Without servants, the king cannot carry out the task of protection alone. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All those born in good lineages blame the kingdom and one is incapable of ruling the kingdom alone. O father! Without aides, no objectives can be attained. O
bull among the Bharata lineage! Having obtained them, one must always protect them."

'Bhishma replied, "If all the servants are learned about jnana and vijnana, if they seek welfare, if they are born in good lineages and if they are gentle, then that kingdom obtains the
fruits. If the ministers are born in good lineages, cannot be corrupted and dwell with him, if
they are learned about the science of relationships, if they offer advice to the king, if they
know about what will happen in the future and can act accordingly, if they are skilled in their
knowledge of time and if they do not sorrow over what is already past, then that kingdom obtains the fruits. If the aides are truthful in deeds, looking upon happiness and unhappiness
equally and if they are devoted to thinking about prosperity, then that kingdom obtains the
fruits. If citizens of the country are never afflicted and never suffer, if they are superior and
devote themselves to righteous paths, then that kingdom obtains the fruits. If people in charge
of maintaining accounts are always learned and satisfied, if they are engaged in extending the
treasury, then that king is a supreme one. If the stores are maintained by learned aides who are
engaged in accumulation, if these officers are not avaricious and are protected because of their
qualities, if the judicial proceedings in the city give rise to good fruits, if the practices of
Shankha and Likhita[The story of these two sages has been recounted earlier.] are observed, then a share in the fruits of dharma is obtained. A king
who knows about rajadharma will collect such men and ensure the six aspects of policy. He
obtains a share in the fruits of dharma."'
