Yudhishthira asked, "O supreme among rajarshis of the Kuru lineage! Without abandoning garhasthya, has
anyone obtained emancipation and been conveyed to wisdom? Tell me the truth about this. How can the atman be discarded? How can the atman be discarded[This is repeated twice, because the reference is to both the subtle and the gross forms of the atman.]? What is supreme emancipation? O grandfather! Tell me
about this."

'Bhishma  replied,  "O  descendant  of  the  Bharata  lineage!  In  this connection, an ancient history is recounted
about a conversation between Janaka and Sulabha. It has been heard that in ancient times, there was a king of
Mithila who was descended from Janaka and was named Dharmadhvaja. He determined to obtain success through
renunciation. He was learned about the sacred texts on emancipation. He was also accomplished in his own sacred
texts[Presumably, those meant for kshatriyas.]. He restrained his senses and ruled the earth. O lord of men! He was knowledgable about the Vedas. He
was wise and learned. His conduct was virtuous and other men in this world wished to emulate him. In that yuga
when dharma prevailed, there was a mendicant[A female mendicant.] named Sulabha. She followed the dharma of yoga and wandered
around the earth. As she roamed around the entire earth, she heard from various tridandis[A tridandi carries three staffs (tridanda) tied together. This is the sign of a mendicant.] about the lord of Mith-
ila, who was pursuing emancipation. On hearing these accounts, she had doubts about the truth of these and wished
to ascertain the subtleties. Therefore, she formed a resolution that she should see Janaka. Through the powers of
yoga, she discarded her earlier form and assumed a supremely beautiful appearance, flawless in her limbs. Her
eyebrows were excellent and her eyes were like the petals of lotuses. In the twinkling of an eye and with great
speed, she went to the city of Videha[The capital of Videha, Mithila.]. She reached the beautiful city of Mithila, inhabited by a large number of
people. Assuming the form of a mendicant, she presented herself before the lord of Mithila. The king saw her
supremely delicate form. He was astounded and asked her who she was, who did she belong to, and where she had
come from. Having welcomed her, he instructed that an excellent seat should be given to her. He honoured her by
offering her water to clean her feet and satisfied her with wonderful food. Having eaten this, she was gratified. The
king was surrounded by his advisers and was in the midst of an assortment of learned people. But the mendicant
Sulabha still had her doubts about whether he had understood the dharma of emancipation and wished to test him.
She used her powers of yoga to penetrate the king's spirit with her own spirit. She restrained the rays that emanated from his eyes with the rays that emanated from her eyes. Wishing to test him, she tied him up in the bonds of
yoga, determined to make him dumb. But King Janaka, supreme among kings, prided himself on his own invincibility. He countered her resolution with his own. They were both situated thus. He was without his umbrella and
she was without her three staffs[The king and Sulabha were in their subtle forms and the conversation took place between the subtle forms.]. Listen to the conversation that took place between them.

'"The lord of the earth asked, 'O illustrious one! What conduct do you follow? Who are you? Having accomplished your purpose, where will you go? Whom do you belong to? Where have you come from? Learning, age,
birth and good conduct cannot be ascertained without asking. Therefore, having arrived here, you should answer
me truthfully. In particular, know that I have rid myself of my umbrella and other signs. I wish to know who you
truly are. I think that you are deserving of my respect. In earlier times, I have obtained knowledge about vaisheshika[This may refer to the school of philosophy known as vaisheshika, or to some special aspects of sankhya.]. There is no one else who can speak to you about emancipation. Listen to me. There was an aged and extremely great-souled mendicant named Panchashikha, from the Parashara gotra. As a pupil, he regarded me greatly. All my doubts have been severed about the three kinds of moksha dharma-knowledge of sankhya, yoga and
the rites that are followed by kings. When he[Panchashikha.] roamed around as a mendicant, as instructed in the sacred texts, in
ancient times, he happily dwelt in my city for four months during the monsoon. He instructed me well and told me
the truth about the three modes of emancipation, with sankhya as the foremost. But he didn't ask me to give up the
kingdom. I completely follow the three kinds of conduct that lead to emancipation. I am without attachment. In
solitude, I have based myself on the supreme. Renunciation is the foremost conduct for emancipation. Renunciation results from knowledge and that leads to liberation. One must endeavour for knowledge. It is through endeavour that one can obtain Mahat. Mahat frees one from opposite sentiments. That is the success that transcends death.
I am devoid of opposite sentiments and have obtained that supreme intelligence. I am free from attachment and
roam around in this world, bereft of delusion. When a field is flooded with water and softened, it leads to seeds
sprouting. In that way, the deeds of men lead to rebirth. If a seed is heated in a dish, though the inherent strength
for sprouting remains in it, the seed no longer sprouts. The illustrious mendicant Panchashikha spoke to me about
knowledge and I no longer have the seed that creates attachment towards material objects. I do not hate anyone.
Nor do I love my wife. Since both kinds of attachment are futile sins, I do not find pleasure in either. If a person
smears my right hand with sandalwood paste and if another person wounds my left hand, I regard both equally. I
am happy at having accomplished my objectives and a lump of earth, a stone and gold are the same for me. I am
established in my kingdom, but am free from attachments. Therefore, I am superior to tridandis. Maharshis have
earlier instructed that there are three kinds of devotion that lead to emancipation[This probably means knowledge, yoga and rites.]. Some hold knowledge to be the
best, others the renunciation of all acts. There are people who know about the sacred texts of moksha and say that
knowledge is the best. However, there are other ascetics, subtle in their sight, who hold that acts are the best. The
great-souled one held that knowledge or deeds alone would not suffice and that the third mode was best[Panchashikha held yoga to be superior.].  A
householder can be the equal of a tridandi in yama, niyama, hatred, desire, receiving, pride, insolence and affection. If emancipation results from knowledge, then there is nothing to prevent the possessor of an umbrella[A king, an umbrella being part of royal insignia.] from
obtaining it either. Because of different objectives and reasons, one becomes associated with different objects and
receives them. One may perceive taints in garhasthya and advance towards a subsequent ashrama. But despite giving up the objects, one may not be freed from attachment. Lordship means that one must chastise and reward.
However, rajarshis and mendicants are equal in this and why should they alone be liberated? Irrespective of lordship, one is freed through knowledge alone. If one establishes oneself in the supreme objective, why should one
not be freed? The wearing of ochre robes, shaving the head, carrying the three sticks and the kamandalu[Water pot used by ascetics.]-these
are only signs. It is my view that these do not lead to emancipation. Whether these signs exist or not, knowledge
alone is the cause for emancipation and freedom from sorrow. The signs alone are futile. Therefore, despite the
umbrella, why should it not be found? Freedom is not found in possessing nothing. Nor does possessing something
lead to bondage. Irrespective of whether a creature possesses or does not, knowledge results in emancipation. One
receives a kingdom for the sake of dharma, artha and kama and if one is not careful, this can lead to bondage. But
though I am in that state, I am without bondage. There is a noose from the kingdom's prosperity. There are the
bonds of affection. But I have used the sword of renunciation, severed on the stone of emancipation, to sever those.
O female mendicant! I have thus been freed. However, I have a liking for you. Therefore, let me tell you that your
conduct does not befit your vocation. Your form is delicate. Your body possesses beauty. You are extremely young.
I have doubts that you follow niyama. The signs do not suggest it. To test whether I am emancipated, you have assailed and seized me, rendering me immobile. A tridandi wishing to be emancipated should not fall prey to desire.
If you cannot protect yourself from this, you will not be able to preserve the liberation you have obtained. You
have entered my body. Listen to the transgression you have committed. I have been married earlier. Why have you
used your nature to enter me? Why have you entered my kingdom and my city? Have there been any signs suggesting that you are entitled to enter my heart? You are a brahmana, chief and foremost among all varnas. I am a
kshatriya. There can be no union between us. Do not cause a mixture of varnas. You follow the dharma of moksha.
I  am  in  the  ashrama  of  a  householder.  This  will  lead  to  a  second  evil,  a  mixture  of  ashramas.  I  do  not  know
whether we have the same gotra or different gotras, and neither do you[Union within the same gotra is prohibited.]. If I belong to the same gotra, by entering
me, you have confused gotras and caused a third evil. If your husband is alive and lives in a distant place, you are
someone else's wife and cannot be approached. Therefore, by causing a confusion of dharma, there has been a
fourth evil. Have you committed these evil acts with some specific objective in mind? Has it been caused by ignorance or false knowledge? Perhaps it is your own evil nature that leads to such independence. If you possess any
learning, you should know that all these acts have been wicked. There is a third sin that comes from the touch of
an unchaste woman[Ignorance/false knowledge and evil nature are probably the first two.]. This sign of sin is evident in what you have expounded. In your desire for victory, it is not
me alone that you wish to defeat. You also desire to defeat all my advisers. You are repeatedly glancing towards
them and then towards your own self, as if you wish to defeat those on my side and establish the superiority of
your own side. You have been confused by the delusion of your powers and intolerance. Therefore, you have invoked the weapon of yoga and have mixed poison with amrita. The mutual desire between a man and a woman,
when they seek to obtain each other, is like amrita. However, when one doesn't obtain the person one desires, that
is a sin that is like poison. Do not touch me. Know that I am virtuous. Follow the instructions of your own sacred
texts. You wished to know whether I am emancipated or not, and that enquiry has been accomplished. You should
not have concealed all your secret motives. Perhaps you are doing this at the instigation of some other king[A hostile king.]. The
truth about those secret motives shouldn't have been hidden from me. One must never be deceitful before a king or
a brahmana. Nor must one approach a wife with deceit, as long as that wife possesses all the qualities. Prosperity is
a king's strength. Knowledge of the brahman is a brahmana's strength. Beauty, youth and good fortune are the
greatest strength for a woman. Those who are strong in this way can accomplish their objectives and must be approached with sincerity[A strong king must be approached with sincerity.]. Deceit leads to destruction. You should tell me the truth about your birth, learning, conduct, character, natural inclination and the reason why you have come here.'

'"She was addressed in these unpleasant and inappropriate words by that Indra among men[This is Bhishma speaking.]. However, Sulabha did not tremble. When the king had spoken those words, the beautiful Sulabha replied in words that were more
beautiful than her person. 'There are nine taints associated with speech and nine taints associated with intelligence.
Meaningful words must possess eighteen qualities. O king! It has been said that meaningful words must possess
five characteristics-subtlety, judging the pros, judging the cons, final determination and ascertaining necessity. I
will progressively explain the meaning and characteristics of each of these, beginning with subtlety. Listen to how
meanings of words and words should be combined to form sentences. There are differences between knowledge
and the object of knowledge. Subtlety consists of using great intelligence to bring out these differences. Before using intended words, one must enumerate and think about their meanings and the various good and bad qualities
these words possess. Having examined this progressively, one must then use them in speech. People who are accomplished in framing sentences say that words must thus be progressively used in a sentence. One must specially
examine the ends of dharma, artha, kama and moksha and having determined this, then use the instructions to formulate a sentence. O king! When desire and hatred are intense, hardships multiply. O king! Therefore, conduct[In the choice of words.]
must be in accordance with necessity. O lord of men! When subtlety and the other mentioned characteristics are
combined together, the sentence is perceived to be intelligible. The words I speak to you will be full of meaning,
consistent in meaning, restrained, to the point, smooth, without any doubt and excellent. They will not have long
syllables. They will not be unkind and harsh. They will not be false. They will be refined and will not be against
the three objectives[Dharma, artha and kama.]. There will not be words that are difficult to understand, ones that go in different directions.
There will be nothing with alternative meanings, nor anything without a reason or an objective. I will not tell you
anything because of desire, anger, fear, avarice, misery, destitution, lack of nobility, shame, compassion or pride. O
king! When the speaker, the listener and the words are in harmony, the meaning of what is spoken becomes clear.
When the speaker disrespects the listener, irrespective of whether it is for his own or someone else's objective, the
words spoken have no impact. Even if a man gives up his own objective and accepts the objective of someone else,
those words are sinful, because they are capable of giving rise to doubt. O king! If a person speaks words that are
incapable of double meaning and are comprehensible to the listener, then he is an excellent speaker, not anyone
else. I will speak words that are full of meaning and rich in purport. O king! You should listen to them with singleminded attention. Who am I? Whom do I belong to? Where have I come from? This is what you asked me. I will
speak words in reply. O king! Listen attentively. O king! All beings created are combinations, like lac and wood,
dust and drops of water[Everything is made out of the elements. So is Sulabha. There is no point in asking who she is.]. Sound, touch, taste, form and scent are the five senses. They may seem to be different,
but are actually together, like lac and wood. It has thus been determined that no one should ask who someone else
is. No one knows about his own self, not to speak of someone else. The eye cannot see itself. The ear cannot hear
itself. Nor can they undertake each other's tasks. Like dust and water, even when they combine, they cannot know
their own selves. Listen to me. Even for the sake of obtaining their qualities, they have to resort to external objects.
Form, eye and light-these three are required for seeing. This is also the case with the other senses of knowledge
and the objects of the senses. Between a sense of knowledge and the object of that sense, there is the quality of
what is known as the mind. It reflects and arrives at its own determination about what exists and what does not exist. It has been said that the quality known as intelligence is the twelfth[The five senses of knowledge, the five organs of action and the mind are the other eleven.]. When the others have a doubt, it is intelligence that settles matters. The thirteenth quality that is beyond this is known as sattva[We have deliberately not translated this. It means the spirit or essence of life.]. It is inferred that creatures may possess  a lot of  sattva or  a limited quantity of  sattva. There is yet another attribute, the fourteenth,
known as kshetrajna. This helps one think-"I am this. I am not that." O king! There is yet another quality, said to
be the fifteenth[This has not been named in the text, but is interpreted as desire.]. O king! There is said to be a sixteenth that is attached to this collection[The text uses the word kala. In this context, this means the sixteenth. The sixteenth has also not been named in
the text, but is interpreted as ignorance. Ignorance adheres to the collection of the other fifteen.]. There is an interaction between these sixteen qualities. The qualities of akriti and vyakti are attached to these[These are the seventeenth and the eighteenth. Akriti means form. It is possible that there is a typo in the Critical
edition, since some non-critical versions say prakriti. Vyakti means manifestation.]. Happiness and unhappiness, old age and death, gain and loss, pleasant and unpleasant-the union of these opposite sentiments are
said to constitute the nineteenth. Beyond these, there is the twentieth characteristic, known as time. Know that the
creation and destruction of all beings is because of this twentieth. There is interaction between these twenty characteristics and the five great elements. Existence and non-existence are the other characteristics of manifestation[With the addition of the five great elements, the list numbers twenty-seven.].
It is thus said that there are twenty-seven characteristics. Know that there are three characteristics beyond these-
Vidhi, Shukra and Bala[Respectively, destiny, seed and exertion. By seed, one probably means the consequences of past deeds.]. It has been said that the number of characteristics is thirty-one[Including prakriti.]. It has been said that
all of them circle around in the body. There are those who hold that the unmanifest prakriti is the cause behind all
the characertistics[They do not believe that there is anything higher than prakriti.]. There are others who are gross in their vision and think that the manifest is the cause[They do not even believe in prakriti.].
Whether it is the unmanifest, the manifest, the combination of the two[purusjla and prakriti.] or all four taken together[Purusha, prakriti, the jivatman and ignorance.], those who
have thought about adhyatma hold that prakriti creates all beings. Prakriti is unmanifest, but becomes manifest in
the form of these characteristics. O Indra among kings! I, you and everything that possesses a body are the outcome of this. There is a point at which creation results from the mixture of semen with blood. Because of this
union, a kalala[Embryo, just after conception.] is generated. A budbuda[Embryo that is five days old.] results from the kalala and a peshi[Embryo that has flesh and muscles.] results from the budbuda. The
limbs manifest themselves in the peshi, and nails and hair are attached to the limbs. O lord of Mithila! When nine
months are over, the creature is born. When it has been born, on ascertaining whether it is a boy or a girl, a name is
given. Immediately after birth, the nails and fingers are seen to have the complexion of copper. When that person
becomes an infant, that earlier form is no longer discerned. Infancy becomes youth and youth becomes old age. In
this way, from one stage to another, the earlier form is no longer seen. The separate characteristics change from
one instant to another. These transformations occur in all creatures, but are so subtle that they are not noticed. O
king! The beginning and the end of these minute changes cannot be seen, just as one cannot discern the movement
in the flame of a lamp. This is the state of all creation, rushing along like a well-trained horse. Among these numerous people, is it possible to answer who has come from where and who has not come from where? Whom does
someone belong to? Whom does someone not belong to? How does one know where someone has come from, or
where someone has not come from? What is the connection between beings and their physical forms? Just as fire
results when sticks are rubbed together, all creatures are generated from the characteristics mentioned earlier. You
see your atman in your own self. In that fashion, why don't you see your atman in other people? But perhaps you
do regard yourself and others as identical. In that event, why did you ask me who I am and whom I belong to? O
lord of Mithila! If it is true that you have been freed from opposite sentiments, what was the need for expressions
like "Who are you?" and "Whom do you belong to?"-At times of peace and war, if a king's action towards enemies, friends and neutrals are no different from that of others, where are the signs that he has become free? The
three objectives exist in seven combinations[Dharma, artha, kama, taken singly; then dharma and artha, dharma and kama, artha and kama, taken two at a
time; and finally, dharma, artha and kama, all three taken together.]. If one does not know this and does not show it in his deeds and if
one is attached to the three objectives, where are the signs of emancipation in him? If one does not cast an impartial sight towards the pleasant and the unpleasant and the weak and the strong, where are the signs of emancipation
in him? O  king! You  pride  yourself  on  having  become  emancipated.  This  is  without  basis.  Your  well-wishers
should restrain you and treat you with medication. O scorcher of enemies! You should think of other similar things
that you are attached to. Glance towards the atman inside your own self. That is a sign of emancipation. There are
other subtle signs of having resorted to liberation, such as not being attached to the four pursuits[Excessive addiction for sleep, desire, food and clothes.]. Listen to me. A
person who brings the entire earth under a single umbrella[Becomes a universal emperor.] is praised. That king then lives in a single city. In that
city, he lives in a single house. In that house, there is a single bed, on which, he lies down at night. Half of that bed
has earlier been occupied by his wife. In this context, this is the kind of fruits he enjoys[Very little 0f what the king ostensibly owns is actually enjoyed by him.]. This is true of all objects of pleasure, food and garments. The qualities he enjoys are limited. He also has to apportion out reward and
chastisement. The king is always engaged in the tasks of others. There is little that he directly enjoys. Whether
there is peace or whether there is war, how is the king independent? In sporting with women and other kinds of
pleasure, the king's independence is always circumscribed. With all those ministers and advisers, where does he
have independence? When he instructs others, he is said to be independent. However, he is incapable of personally
checking whether they undertake those tasks. He cannot sleep when he wishes. People who have work with him
prevent his sleep. He can only lie down after taking their permission. When he is asleep, he is unable to prevent his
being awakened. Bathing, obtaining, drinking, eating, offering oblations into the fire, performing sacrifices, speaking, hearing-in all of these, he is helpless and is driven by the objectives of others. Groups of men always come
to him and solicit things. However, because he is also the supervisor of the treasury, he is incapable of giving, even
if he wishes to. If he gives, the treasury is exhausted. If he does not give, there is enmity. These kinds of taints
swiftly generate detachment in him. If wise, brave and rich men gather together in one place, he is suspicious.
Even when there is no reason for fear, the king is always frightened of those who serve him. The ones I have mentioned also blame the king. Behold. A similar kind of fear is also generated in them. In their own houses, all men
are kings. In their own houses, all men are householders. O Janaka! Like kings, they too chastise and reward. They
also possess sons, wives, their own selves, stores, friends and treasuries. Because of these reasons, he[The king.] is not really different from other people. The country has been destroyed, the city has been burnt down, the best of elephants
is dead-in all of these, he is tormented like others. He has a false sense of knowledge. The king is not freed from
mental grief that results from desire, hatred, love and fear. He is also afflicted by headaches and other diseases.
Opposite sentiments prey on him and he is always alarmed. There are many kinds of hardships in the kingdom and
he counts the nights[He cannot sleep.]. There is only a little bit of happiness and there is a great deal of misery. How can there be
peace if one has obtained a kingdom? You think that this capital and kingdom are yours. O king! But these soldiers, this treasury and these advisers aren't really yours. Whom do they belong to? O king! Allies, advisers, the
capital, the country, the staff, the treasury and the king-these seven limbs of the kingdom depend on one another.
These seven limbs hold up the kingdom, like three staffs tied together. They depend on  each other's  qualities.
There is none that is superior to the others in qualities. At particular points in time, when a specific task has to be
accomplished by it, one of these limbs may be thought to be superior to the rest. O supreme among kings! However, those seven limbs and three others[Extending the kingdom, decay and maintenance of the status quo.] come together. These ten categories enjoy the kingdom, as if they are the
king himself. If a king has great enterprise and is devoted to the dharma of kshatriyas, then he should be satisfied
with one-tenth share[As share obtained through taxes.]. There are others who are satisfied with less than one-tenth. There is no extraordinary king
and there is no kingdom without a king. If there is no kingdom, how can there be dharma? If there is no dharma,
how can the supreme objective be attained? The supreme and sacred dharma depends on a king and a kingdom. O
lord of Mithila! The earth can be offered as dakshina, but there are those who do not even perform a horse sacrifice. There are many who act so as to cause hardships to their kingdoms, though they are capable. I can mention
hundreds and thousands. I am not even attached to my own body. How  can I  then seize someone else's? You
should not therefore say that I have caused an obstruction in your emancipation in this way. From Panchashikha,
there is no doubt that you have heard a complete account of what is known as moksha, with techniques, modes,
practices and conclusions. O king! However, if you have been freed from all attachment and have overcome all
your bonds, specifically, why are you still attached to the umbrella and other objects? I think that you have not
heard the sacred texts. Or perhaps you have heard some false sacred texts. Perhaps you came close to the sacred
texts, but heard some other texts instead. It is only the consciousness of the material world that is established in
you. Therefore, like an ordinary person, you are tied down by these excellent possessions. If you are emancipated
in every way, how have I harmed you by penetrating your spirit? It is the ritual and dharma of ascetics to dwell
alone. Had you tried to dwell alone, how could I have caused any harm to you? O unblemished one! I have not
touched you with my hands, my arms, my feet or my thighs. O lord of men! Nor have I touched your body in any
other way. You have been born in a great lineage. You are humble. You are far-sighted. Whether my entering you
was good or bad, surely it was bad and futile to speak about it[And thus reveal a private affair before the court.]. These brahmanas are superior. They are the foremost among advisers. They are your seniors. You treat each other with reverence. That being the case, you should
have thought about what should be said and what should not be said. In an assembly, you should not have spoken
about the union between a woman and a man. The water rests on the leaf of a lotus without really touching the leaf
of the lotus. O lord of Mithila! I am dwelling with you in that way, without touching you. You have felt my touch,
even though I have not touched you. What is the seed of knowledge that you then obtained from the mendicant?
You have not been able to give up garhasthya. Nor have you obtained moksha, which is so difficult to understand.
Though you desire moksha, you are stuck in between the two. If an emancipated person mingles with another
emancipated person, that union does not lead to a mixing of varnas, like the mingling between the existent and the
non-existent[Respectively, prakriti and purusha.]. Those who regard the varnas and the ashramas to be distinct are those who do not perceive that
this is different from that[This is cryptic. They suffer from an error in judgement because they think this (the body) is the same as that (the
atman).]. Because they do not know that this is different from that, they think that this acts differently from that. There is a pot in the hand. There is milk in the pot. There is a fly in the milk. Though they mingle and coexist with each other, they are distinct from each other. The pot does not assume the characteristics of
milk. Nor does the milk assume the characteristics of a fly. They each possess their own characteristics and not
those of something else. The different varnas and ashramas are just like that. Since they are different from each
other, how can there be a mixture of varnas? I have not been born in a varna that is superior to yours. Nor am I a
vaishya or something worse than that. O king! I belong to the same varna as you and have been born in a pure lineage. There was a rajarshi named Pradhana and it is evident that you have heard of him. Know that I was born in
his  lineage  and  my  name  is  Sulabha.  In  the  sacrifices  performed  by  my  ancestors,  Drona[This Drona is not to be confused with the Drona who taught the Kouravas and the Pandavas. These are the
names of mountains.],  Shatashringa  and
Mount Vakradvara came to the altars, accompanied by Maghavan. Since I had been born in such a lineage, a husband could not be found for me. Humbly, I adopted the vow of a sage and roamed around alone, observing the
dharma of moksha. There is no deceit in my rites. Nor do I desire the possessions of others. I will not cause confusion in dharma. I am firm in my vows and follow my own dharma. I will not be dislodged from my own resolve.
Nor do I speak without thinking about it first. O lord of men! I have not come to you and approached you without
having thought about it first. I had heard that your intelligence had turned towards moksha and had thought that
coming here would be beneficial. I came here, wishing to ask you about moksha. I am not saying this to boast
about my side and denigrate another side. A person is not liberated and freed until he is peaceful and tranquil. A
mendicant spends only a single night in an empty house. In that way, I will not dwell in your body for more than
one night[There is a suggestion that the king's body is also empty, because there is no knowledge there.]. You have honoured me by treating me like a guest and giving me a seat and speaking pleasant words.
O lord of Mithila! I will happily sleep inside you tonight and leave tomorrow.' These sentences were full of reason
and purport. On hearing these, the king could not say anything after that."'
