Vasudeva said, "There are two kinds of diseases, physical and mental. They are never generated without a conflict between these two[The mind and the body.]. There is no doubt that a disease produced in the body is physical. It has been determined that a disease produced in the mind is mental. O king! Cold, heat and wind are physical qualities[In Ayurveda, diseases arise from imbalances in vata (wind), pitta (bile) and kapha (phlegm). Kapha is identified
with water/cold and pitta with fire/heat.]. When
these qualities are in balance, it is then said that one exhibits the signs of being healthy. Heat obstructs the cold and
cold obstructs the heat. Sattva, rajas and tamas are said to be the three qualities[Mental qualities.]. When these qualities are in balance, it is then said that one exhibits the signs of being healthy[That is, mentally healthy.]. If there is an excess of any of these, antidotes
have been prescribed. Joy counters misery. Joy is countered by misery. When misery is present, some desire to remember joy[Past joy.]. When joy is present, some desire to remember misery[Past misery.]. O Kounteya! That is the nature of unhappiness in misery and the happiness in joy. What do you wish to remember? Destiny is most powerful. O Partha! Is it
the case that your innate nature is afflicting you? You saw Krishna[Krishnaa, Droupadi.] brought to the assembly hall in a single garment, when she was in season. All the Pandaveyas looked on. Do you not remember that? You were banished from
the city, attired in hides and bereft of garments. You were exiled to the great forest. You do not wish to remember
that. You were afflicted by Jatasura, there was a battle with Chitrasena and you were oppressed by Saindhava. You
do not wish to remember that. O Partha! You again dwelt in disguise and Kichaka struck Yajnaseni with his foot[The Jatasura incident has been described in Section 34 (Volume 3), Chitrasena in Section 39 (Volume 3), Saindhava in Section 42 (Volume 3) and Kichaka in Section 46 (Volume 4).].
You do not wish to remember that. O destroyer of enemies! There was an encounter with Bhishma and Drona.
However, there is a battle that has presented itself now and you must fight it in your mind, alone. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! Therefore, you must prepare yourself for that encounter. This is supremely unmanifest in form.
You must free yourself and reach the other side through your own deeds. There are no arrows, no tasks, no servants and no relatives. In the battle that has presented itself, you must fight your soul alone. If you win this battle,
you will obtain the state that you desire. O Kounteya! Knowing this, do what needs to be done. Use your intelligence to determine the coming and going of all creatures. Follow the conduct of your fathers and grandfathers and
rule the kingdom appropriately."'
