Janamejaya asked, 'When that great charioteer, skilled in weapons, returned from the abode of Vritra's slayer, what
did the Parthas accomplish next, now that they had been rejoined by the brave Dhananjaya?'

Vaishampayana said, 'Those Indras among men lived in that forest. The brave ones sported there on that beautiful mountain, the lovely pleasure ground of the lord of riches, with Arjuna, equal to Indra himself. On seeing those
unmatched houses and pleasure grounds covered with many trees, Kiriti[Arjuna's name, literally the one with a diadem on his head.], Indra among men, always immersed in
his weapons and with the bow in his hand, roamed around a lot. Through the favours of King Vaishravana, those
sons of a king had found an abode and no longer desired what beings want[That is, they were comfortable and lacked nothing.]. That time was a blessing for them.
They were united with Partha and lived for four years there and these years they spent there seemed like a single
night. With the earlier six, it was now ten years that the Pandavas had peacefully dwelt in the forest.

'Once, Vayu's intrepid son was seated near the king, together with Jishnu and the twins, the equals of the king of
the gods[The king is Yudhishthira, Vayu's intrepid son is Bhima, Jishnu is Arjuna and the twins are Nakula and Sahadeva. Bhima is doing the speaking.]. In private, he gently spoke these beneficial words. "O king of the Kurus! In order to ensure that your
oath remained true and to do that which would make you happy, we followed you into the forest and did not kill
Suyodhana, together with his followers. We have lived here for eleven years. We are deserving of happiness, but
Suyodhana has grasped that happiness. We should now deceive that scoundrel, lacking in intelligence and conduct.
Let us happily resort to a life that will be incognito[The Pandavas were exiled for twelve years in the forest and one year of life incognito. Only eleven years have
passed, so there is no need to resort yet to a life that is incognito. That happens in Virata Parva. Essentially, Bhima
wants them to move elsewhere. However, there is also a mention of one more year of life incognito and the numbers don't add up. If only one year of incognito life is left, we should immediately jump to Virata Parva. But in that
case, there is no time for the incidents that occur between now and Virata Parva.]. O king! On your instructions, we lived without anxiety and
spent this time roaming in the forest. He will be deluded because we have lived nearby and will not get to know if
we move to a distant region. Having spent one year in hiding, we will easily uproot that worst of men. O Indra
among kings! On that scoundrel among men, Suyodhana, surrounded by all his followers, we will reap the enmity,
with all its fruits and flowers. O Dharmaraja! Accept the world as your own. O god among men! Kill this grief. We
are capable of roaming this mountain that is like heaven. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Your fragrant deeds
may be destroyed in this world of the mobile and the immobile. But by regaining the kingdom of the bulls among
the Kurus, you are capable of performing great deeds and great rituals. O Indra among men! You are always capable of obtaining whatever you want from Kubera. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Set your heart on the slaying of those who hate you and on punishing them, because they have oppressed you. O king! The wielder of the
vajra is himself incapable of withstanding your terrible energy. O Dharmaraja! Nor will any pain be caused to you
even if you confront all the gods. The one with Suparna on his banner and Shini's grandson are both engaged in
that which ensures your welfare[Suparna is Garuda and Vishnu (Krishna) has Garuda on his banner. Shini's grandson is Balarama, though this
is not to be interpreted in the narrow sense of a grandson. Shini was a common ancestor of the Yadavas, further up
the line than a grandfather.]. O god among kings! The foremost among the Shinis, the equal of Krishna in
strength, is engaged likewise[Foremost among the Shinis is probably a reference to Satyaki.]. Krishna, together with the Yadavas, is engaged in that which will ensure your welfare. O god among men! So are these brave and skilled twins. Our prime objective is an increase in your influence.
Encountering the enemies, we will pacify them." On ascertaining what was in their mind, the great-souled son of
Dharma circumambulated Vaishravana's abode[Kubera is Vaishravana.].

'The energetic one was knowledgeable about dharma and artha. Dharmaraja bid adieu to the houses, the rivers,
the lakes and all the rakshasas. He glanced down at the path through which he had ascended and looked again at
the mountain and said, "O Indra among mountains! When my deeds are done, when my well-wishers and I have
triumphed over the enemies and have won the kingdom, I will behold you again, for performing austerities with a
restrained soul." Surrounded by all his brothers and the brahmanas, the lord of the Kurus was again carried along a
similar path, with all the others, by Ghatotkacha-over mountains and waterfalls. On seeing them ready to leave,
the maharshi[Lomasha.] cheerfully instructed them, like a father to his sons. Together with Lomasha, they happily went to
the sacred abode of the dwellers of heaven. Similarly instructed by Arshtishena, the Parthas, foremost among men,
went and saw the beautiful tirthas, hermitages and many other great ponds.'
