'Bhisma said, "A brahmana's supreme tasks are to draw the bowstring, the destruction of enemies, agriculture,
trade, animal husbandry and tending to others. But he must never do these for reasons of artha[From the point of view of earning a living, these are forbidden occupations for brahmanas, if money is received from these occupations.]. As long as he is
in garhasthya, a brahmana must perform the six tasks. When these tasks have been accomplished, a brahmana's
residence in the forest is applauded. However, he must avoid serving a king, wealth obtained through agriculture,
sustaining himself through trade, deceit, intercourse with unchaste women and usury. O king! A wicked brahmana
of evil conduct who deviates from dharma becomes a shudra. Becoming the husband of a shudra woman, being
slanderous and treacherous, becoming a dancer and becoming a servant in a village are wicked acts. O king!
Whether he meditates and studies the Vedas or not, he is equal to a shudra and a slave and should be seated with
them at the time of eating. O king! All of them are equal to shudras and should be avoided in all duties that are for
the gods. They are like barbarians who are cruel in their conduct and deserve no honour. By abandoning their own
dharma, they cause injury to their own selves. O king! Giving them oblations meant for the gods and the ancestors
is tantamount to not giving these at all. O king! Dharma has thus been recommended for brahmanas as well as selfcontrol, purity and truthfulness. O king! In earlier times, Brahma decreed that all the ashramas were recommended
for brahmanas. One who is self-controlled, drinks soma, is noble in conduct, is compassionate, tolerates everything, is without desires and upright, and is mild, non-violent and forgiving is a brahmana. One who performs
wicked deeds is not that. O king! All those in the world who desire dharma resort to shudras, vaishyas and princes.
O son of Pandu! Therefore, Vishnu is not affectionate towards those who do not follow the dharma of their jati and
varna. In such a world, there will not be the four varnas among all the people, or talk about the Vedas, or all the
different sacrifices, or all the rites amongst people and no one will follow the ashramas.

'"O Pandava! If the three varnas[Other than the brahmanas.] wish to follow the ashramas and act according to what should be done in
those ashramas, listen to the dharma that they must follow. O lord of the earth! A shudra must perform acts of
servitude, have offspring and follow the instructions of the king. All the ashramas are recommended for him. However, even if he has a little bit of life left or follows dashadharma, he must not give up desire[This is a difficult shloka to translate, primarily because of dashadharma.
This has been interpreted as a shudra being in the tenth (dasha) decade of
his life. It is much more likely that this refers to the dashadharma or ten
principles of Jainism. In any event, the sense seems to be that a shudra
should not give up desire and resort to a life of begging.]. O Indra among
kings! For one who follows this kind of dharma, subsistence through begging is not talked about. Nor is it for a
vaishya or a prince. A vaishya may have completed all the appointed tasks and may have attained an advanced age.
He may have laboured hard. In that case, with the permission of the king, he may pass through the circle of ashramas[Under these circumstances, the vaishya may pass beyond the householder stage, abandon desire and live a life of begging.]. O unblemished one! O supreme among eloquent ones! O Pandava! O bull among kshatriyas! There may be
a kshatriya who has studied the Vedas, ruled in accordance with the policy for kings, produced offspring and performed similar deeds, drunk soma, protected all the subjects in accordance with dharma, performed royal sacrifices, horse sacrifices and other recommended sacrifices, got brahmanas to recite the texts and given them dakshina, obtained victory in battle, whether few or many, and established his son (or someone else from a different lineage who is permitted) in the kingdom, to rule over the subjects, worshipped the ancestors properly in accordance
with the sacrifices recommended for ancestors, worshipped the gods with sacrifices and made efforts to honour the
rishis with the Vedas. When his death is near, he may wish to enter the next ashrama. O king! Having been passed
through the ashramas in due order, he may obtain success. O Indra among kings! Having gone beyond the dharma
of a householder, he may become a rajarshi and adopt a life of begging, wandering around as long as he wishes to
live. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O tiger among kings! For these three, dwelling in this fourth ashrama is
not said to an essential task[Kshatriyas, vaishyas and shudras need not adopt sannyasa.].

'"Among men, the best dharma to be observed is that followed by kshatriyas. All the dharma and the minor bits
of dharma for the other three[Brahmanas, vaishyas and shudras.] follow from the dharma of kings. I have heard this in the Vedas. O king! Just as all
footprints are lost in that of an elephant, it is said that all the tasks dissolve in this[The dharma of kings.]. Listen. All the dharmas can
be seen to be based on rajadharma. Men who know about dharma say every other kind of dharma offers little
refuge and few fruits. The noble ones say that the dharma of kshatriyas is the great refuge and has many beneficial
forms. There is no other. Of all the dharmas, rajadharma is the most important and it protects all the other dharmas.
O king! Every kind of renunciation is there in rajadharma and renunciation is said to be ancient and the foremost
kind of dharma. If dandaniti is destroyed, the three[The three Vedas.] will be submerged and all the dharmas will be resisted. If
kshatriyas abandon the ancient rajadharma, all the dharma of the ashramas will disappear. All kinds of renunciation are seen in rajadharma. All kinds of diksha are said to be in rajadharma. All kinds of yoga are said to be in rajadharma. All the worlds are based on rajadharma. Beings are naturally slaughtered. This causes affliction to those
who resort to dharma[This is clearly directed against votaries of non-violence and hangs loose.]. In that way, if dharma is delinked from rajadharma, one's own dharma will not be followed in any situation."'
