Yudhishthira said, "You have spoken about the subtle signs of dharma, which have been instructed by the virtuous. I have the power to differentiate between some of the things you have spoken about. There were several questions in my heart and you have answered them. O king! Without disputing what you have said, there is
something else I want to say. But the beings that are created come and go. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
This is incapable of being understood by studying about dharma[Dharma has been interpreted as good deeds and their fruits. But birth and death seem to have an element of nature, or destiny.]. The dharma of those who flourish is of one
kind. But it is different for those who face a hardship. In a time of adversity, how is a person capable of knowing
through studies alone? It is the view that good conduct constitutes dharma. Conduct is the sign of the virtuous. But
there is capability and there is incapability. How can good conduct then be taken to be a sign? It is seen that an ordinary person acts in accordance with adharma, though it is in the form of dharma. And an extraordinary person
acts in accordance with dharma, though it is in the form of adharma. Those who are knowledgeable about the sacred texts have also laid down standards of proof. We have heard that the words of the Vedas decline from one
yuga to another. There is one kind of dharma in krita yuga and another kind in treta and dvapara. There is another
kind of dharma in kali yuga. So it seems to depend on capacity. The true words of the Vedas are for the sake of
propagation of the worlds. The supreme words of the Vedas have extended in all the directions. They are said to
constitute the proof, but the proof is not to be seen[The sense seems to be that the words of the Vedas are differentially applied across the yugas. So what is the
truth?]. When one proof contradicts another proof, where does the
sacred text come from? When dharma goes into a decline, evil-souled ones become powerful. Whatever they act
against is destroyed and never obtains a foundation again. Whether we know it or not, whether we are capable of
knowing it or not, this[The path of dharma.] is finer than a razor's edge and larger than a mountain. At first, it seems to be as large as a
city of the gandharvas. But then, when it is minutely scrutinized by the wise, it seems to become invisible. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Cattle drink from small puddles in fields, which then dry up. Like that, when the
eternal dharma of the sacred texts decays, it cannot be seen. There are some who follow desire. There are others
who follow decay. There are others who follow other objectives. There are many others who are wicked and follow fruitless conduct. Even among virtuous people, dharma is seen to swiftly go into a decline. There are others
who call it[Dharma.] madness and laugh at it. There are great ones who withdraw and follow the dharma of kings[Implying that brahmanas behave like kshatriyas.]. They
are not seen to engage in conduct that ensures the welfare of everyone. Some become powerful through such conduct. Others are again seen to be constrained by it. There are others who do as they wish, but their status remains
unchanged. Something increases the power of one person. But the same thing restrains another person. There are
many kinds of conduct that are discerned among everyone, not always pursued single-mindedly. There are things
that wise people have spoken about for a long time, as illustrative of eternal dharma. Their earlier conduct is the
eternal foundation[This is an argument in favour of absolute norms of dharma, as opposed to relative ones.]."'