'Yudhishthira asked, "O immensely wise one! O grandfather! If a king is capable and wishes to extend his treasury,
how should he behave? Tell me this."

'Bhishma replied, "A king who desires dharma should rule so that he is engaged in the welfare of his subjects
and consider the time, the place and the strength. Since he thinks of welfare for them and for his own self, the king
should ensure that dharma prevails in the kingdom in every way. He must milk the kingdom like a bee sucks honey
and flies away[Without destroying the flower and the plant.]. He must milk the cow bearing the calf in mind, without causing damage to the udders. The lord
of men must drink mildly from the kingdom, like a leech. He must treat it the way a tigress carries her cub, not letting it fall, but not biting it. As the kingdom prospers, the taxes can progressively become less and less. Or, if he so
desires, he can make them increase progressively. The burden on a young bull is gradually increased. The initial
efforts are mild and the halter comes later. If the halter is imposed after good treatment, it does not become intractable. If one makes efforts with care, one is then able to enjoy. It is extremely difficult to behave in the same
way towards all men. Having comforted the ones who are the foremost, one can then make the inferior one subservient. Dissension must be engineered among those who are likely to support each other. Having comforted
them, he can cheerfully make efforts to use them. Taxes must not be imposed on them at the wrong place, or at the
wrong time. Having comforted them in advance, these must be at the right time and follow the proper norms. I
have told you about legitimate means. I don't wish to talk about techniques of deceit.

'"Drinking houses, prostitutes, pimps, actors, gamblers and others who are like them must all be controlled[The word used is niyamya. This is best interpreted as regulation, not as a
ban.].
They can cause injury to the kingdom. If they are situated within the kingdom, they hamper gentle subjects. Unless
there is a disaster, no one should ever beg. Manu had earlier laid down this dictum for all beings. If no one did any
work, nothing would be able to survive. There is no doubt that the three worlds would then be destroyed. The lord
and king who does not restrain these people[Wicked ones in general, not just beggars.] reaps one-fourth of their sins. That is what the sacred texts say. He
also obtains one-fourth of all dharma they observe. If one frequents these places[The drinking houses and brothels.], one's prosperity is destroyed.
A man who is addicted to desire is incapable of giving up undesirable acts. However, if there is a disaster, one can
beg from others. Compassionate people who wish to show pity can then follow dharma and give. But in general,
there should not be beggars in the kingdom. Nor should there be bandits. They seize what is good and do not think
of anyone's prosperity. Those who favour beings and encourage the prosperity of the subjects, those are the ones
who should remain in the kingdom, not those who do not think about prosperity. O great king! Those who take excessive riches must be punished. Those who charge usurious rates must be forced to repay, through fines and taxes.
Men must be employed, with many workers, to take care of agriculture, animal husbandry, trade and everything
else that is like that. If a man who is engaged in agriculture, animal husbandry or trade suffers even the slightest bit
of hardship, the king is to blame. The wealthy must always be honoured with vehicles, garments and food and be
told, 'Accept these honours and also accept me.' O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The wealthy are referred to
as a great limb of the kingdom. There is no doubt that those who are wealthy are foremost among all people. The
intelligent person[An intelligent king.] must protect the wise, the brave, the rich, the powerful, those who follow dharma, the ascetics
and the truthful. O king! Therefore, be pleasant towards everyone. Protect them through truth, rectitude, lack of
anger and non-violence. You will then obtain the army, the treasury, the friends and the earth. Truth and uprightness are supreme. O king! You will then obtain friends and a treasury."'
