Vaishampayana said, 'O king! On seeing that Kounteya was about to leave, the brahmanas who still resided in the
forest went to him and spoke to him. "O king! You are going to the sacred tirthas with your brothers and with the
great-souled devarshi Lomasha. O great king! O Pandava! O Kourava! Please take us with you. Without you, we
will never be able to visit them. O lord of men! They are uneven and difficult of access and are frequented by
predatory beasts. Men in small groups cannot go to those tirthas. Your brothers are brave and are always skilled in
the use of bows. Under the protection of you valiant ones, we will be able to go there. O protector of the earth! O
lord of the earth! Through your favours, we will also obtain the auspicious fruits of tirthas and vows. O king! Protected by your prowess, we will become pure by bathing in those tirthas and cleansed of sin by visiting those
tirthas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! By bathing in those tirthas, you will also obtain the rare worlds obtained by King Kartavirya, rajarshi Ashtaka, Lomapada and the brave king and emperor, Bharata. O lord of the
earth! We wish to go with you and see Prabhasa and the other tirthas, mountains like Mahendra, rivers like Ganga
and giant trees like Plaksha. O lord of men! If you have any love for brahmanas, then swiftly do what we are asking you to. This will bring about your welfare. O mighty-armed one! The tirthas are infested by rakshasas, who always bring impediments in the way of austerities. Protect us from them. O lord of men! Visit the tirthas that have
been described by Dhoumya, the wise Narada and the great ascetic devarshi Lomasha. Visit them all in the prescribed way. Protected by Lomasha and accompanied by us, be cleansed of all sin." Having been thus worshipped
by them, his eyes filled with tears of joy.

'The bull among the Pandavas was surrounded by Bhimasena and his other brothers. He told all the rishis, "So
shall it be." With Lomasha's permission and that of the priest Dhoumya's, the best of the Pandavas, self-controlled,
made up his mind to leave, with his brothers and with Droupadi, unblemished of form. At that time, the immensely
fortunate Vyasa, Narada and Parvata, all of them extremely intelligent, appeared before the Pandava in Kamyaka,
desirious of seeing him. King Yudhishthira worshipped them in accordance with the proper rites. When they had
been worshipped, the immensely fortunate ones spoke to Yudhishthira. "O Yudhishthira! O twins! O Bhima! Banish all that is evil from your minds. Be clean and pure and go to the tirthas. The brahmanas have said that control
of the body is the vow for humans. The brahmanas say that purification of the mind and the intelligence is the vow
for gods. O lord of men! A mind that is clean is enough for brave ones. Therefore, bear friendship in your minds
and purified, go to the tirthas. Use your mental powers to purify and control your bodies through vows. Resort to
the vows of the gods and you will obtain the fruits that have been recounted." The Pandavas and Krishna promised
that it would be this way. Their journey was blessed by all the sages, divine and human. O Indra among kings!
They then touched Lomasha's feet and those of Dvaipayana, Narada and devarshi Parvata. Accompanied by
Dhoumya and other denizens of the forest, the brave ones departed when the full moon night of Margashirsha[The ninth month in the calendar, alternatively, Agrahayana. Roughly end November to end December. The
month is named after the constellation (nakshatra) Mrigashira.]
was over and Pushya[The eighth of the twenty-seven nakshatras.] was in the ascendant. They were attired in tough bark and deerskin. Their hair was matted. Clad in impenetrable armour, they set out to visit the tirthas. They were accompanied by Indrasena and the
other servants and had fourteen chariots. There were other attendants in charge of the food. O Janamejaya! With
weapons, with swords tied and with quivers and arrows, the brave Pandavas set out, their faces towards the east.'
