Vaishampayana said, 'Dhritarashtra's son was insolent with pride. He said, "Kshatta be damned." In the midst of
all the revered ones in the assembly hall, he looked at the attendant and said, "O Pratikamin[The attendant, usher.]! Go and bring
Droupadi here. You have no reason to fear the Pandavas. It is only Kshatta who is scared and speaks to the contrary. But he never wishes that our prosperity should increase." Having heard the words of the king, the suta attendant[The attendant was of the suta class, that is, a charioteer and bard.] swiftly departed and went to the queen of the Pandavas, like a dog entering a lion's lair.

'The attendant said, "O Droupadi! Yudhishthira was intoxicated by gambling and has lost you to Duryodhana. O
Yajnaseni! Now come to Dhritarashtra's house. I must take you for the tasks you have to perform." Droupadi
replied, "O Pratikamin! How can you speak like this? Can any prince stake his wife in a gamble? The king must
have been deluded in his intoxication for the game. Could he not find anything else for the stake?" The attendant
said, "Pandava Ajatashatru offered you as stake when there was nothing left as stake. The king had earlier staked
his brothers and then himself. O Princess! He next staked you." Droupadi replied, "O son of a suta! Go back to the
assembly hall and ask that gambler from the Bharata lineage whether he first lost himself or me. O son of a suta!
After having found this out, come back to me." He went to the assembly hall and repeated Droupadi's words.

"Droupadi wants to know, 'Whose lord were you when you lost me? Did you lose yourself first or me?'" Yudhishthira sat there unmoved, like one who has lost his senses. He did not reply to the suta, in words that were either
good or bad. Duryodhana said, "Let Panchali Krishna come here and ask the question herself. Let everyone in the
sabha hear what they have to say to each other." The attendant was in Duryodhana's service and went to the king's
house[Yudhishthira's house. Since he was in Duryodhana's service, the attendant had no choice.]. Though miserable, the suta told Droupadi, "O Princess! Those in the assembly hall are summoning you.
It seems to me that the destruction of the Kurus is near. O Princess! Since that weak-minded one[A reference to Duryodhana.] wants you in
the sabha, he will no longer be able to protect our prosperity." Droupadi replied, "The one who determines everything has destined thus. Both the young and the old are touched thus. It has been said that dharma is supreme in the
worlds. If it is sustained, peace will be brought." O bull among the Bharata lineage! On hearing of Duryodhana's
intentions, Yudhishthira sent a trusted messenger to Droupadi[There seems to be a break in continuity in the text. The Pratikamin was Duryodhana's servant and Yudhishthira sent one of his own instead. As a result of this summons, Droupadi came to the assembly hall.]. Panchali was going through her menses then.
She was weeping and clad in a single garment tied below the navel, she went to the sabha and stood before her father-in-law[Meaning Dhritarashtra.]. Looking at the faces of the assembly, King Duryodhana delightedly told the suta[The Pratikamin.], "O
Pratikamin! Bring her here. Let her be in front of us, so that the Kouravas can speak to her." The suta was in
his[Duryodhana's.] servitude, but was scared of the wrath of Drupada's daughter. Giving up his pride, he told the assembly,
"How can I speak to Krishna?" Duryodhana said, "O Duhshasana! This son of a suta has limited intelligence. He is
frightened of Vrikodara. Go and bring Yajnaseni here yourself. Our rivals are now under our control. They can do
nothing." Having heard his brother, the prince[Duhshasana. There is a logical incoherence in the text. In what follows, Duhshasana brings Droupadi to the
assembly hall. In that case, she couldn't already have been in the assembly hall, as a result of the summons sent by
Yudhishthira through his trusted messenger. Different versions and different interpolations no doubt lead to this
inconsistency.] arose. His eyes were red with anger. He entered the house of
those maharathas and told Princess Droupadi, "O Panchali! O Krishna! You have been won by us. Look upon
Duryodhana without any shame. O one with eyes like long lotus petals! You will now love the Kurus. You have
been won in accordance with dharma. Come to the sabha." She arose in great distress and wiped her pale face with
her hands. In distress, she ran to where the aged king's[Dhritarashtra.], who was a bull among the Kurus, women were. Swiftly
the angry Duhshasana rushed at her, letting out a great roar. The long, blue and flowing hair belonged to the wife
of a lord of men and was now grabbed by him. At the time of the great rajasuya sacrifice, the hair had been sprinkled with auspicious waters. The valour of the Pandavas was vanquished and Dhritarashtra's son[Duhshasana.] grabbed it
with force. She had protectors, but was without a protector. Grabbing her by her long hair, Duhshasana pulled and
dragged her to the sabha, like a plantain tree buffeted by the wind. When she was thus dragged, she bent down her
body and softly whispered, "It is the period of my menses now. O evil-minded one! I am only clad in a single garment. O you who are not an arya! Do not take me to the sabha thus." But he forcibly grabbed her by her black hair
and told Krishna, "Pray to Krishna and Jishnu and Hari and Nara[Jishnu means the victorious one and is a name for Indra, Vishnu and also Arjuna. Hari is Vishnu's name.
Nara is an ancient sage, and also means a man. The words Nara and Narayana are often used for Arjuna and
Krishna respectively.]. Cry out for help, but I will take you. O Yajnaseni! This may be the time of your menses. But whether you are clad in a single garment or in no garments at all,
you have been won at the game and are now a slave. One can sport with a slave as one desires." Her hair was dishevelled. As she was pulled around by Duhshasana, her half-garment had come loose. She burnt with shame and
mortification. In a soft voice, Krishna whispered again, "There are those in the assembly hall who are learned in
the sacred texts. They follow all the righteous rites and are all like Indra. All of them are my preceptors or like
them. I cannot stand before them in this fashion. O performer of evil deeds! O you who act as if you are not an
arya! Do not strip me and do not debase me in this fashion. Even if all the gods with Indra become your allies,
these princes[The Pandavas.] will not pardon you. The great-souled son of Dharma[Yudhishthira.] always bases himself in dharma. The
ways of dharma are subtle and only the skilled can discern this. But despite the words of my lord[Yudhishthira.], I will not
commit even a tiny offence or deviate from my own qualities. You are performing a most unworthy act by dragging me among the Kuru warriors when I am in my menses. There is no one here who will praise you for that,
though there is no doubt that they have the same inclinations as you. Shame! The descendants of the Bharata lineage have lost their dharma and their knowledge of the ways of kshatriyas. All the Kurus in this sabha have witnessed the transgression of the dharma of the Kurus. There is certainly no longer substance in Drona, Bhishma and
in this great-souled one[This probably means Dhritarashtra, though Vidura could also have been intended.]. The foremost among the elders of the Kuru lineage have chosen to ignore this terrible
transgression of dharma by the king." The slender-waisted one thus piteously cried out and cast a scornful and
sidelong glance at her angry husbands. The Pandavas were inflamed by that sidelong glance and their bodies were
filled with wrath. They didn't suffer that much from the loss of the kingdom, or the riches, or the chief jewels, as
they did from Krishna's sidelong, angry and miserable glance. On seeing Krishna look at her miserable husbands,
Duhshasana dragged her with even greater force, so that she almost lost her senses. He repeatedly called her
"slave" and laughed uproariously. Karna was delighted at these words and approved of them by laughing out loudly. In similar fashion, Soubala, the king of Gandhara, applauded Duhshasana's deed. Among all those who were
present in the assembly hall, with the exception of these and Dhritarashtra's son[Duryodhana.], everyone was extremely miserable on seeing Krishna thus dragged into the sabha. Bhishma said, "O fortunate one! Since the ways of dharma
are subtle, I cannot properly resolve the question you have posed. One without property cannot stake the property
of others. But women are always the property of their husbands. Yudhishthira will abandon the entire earth with its
riches before he gives up truth. The Pandava has himself said he has been won. Therefore, I cannot resolve this issue. Shakuni has no equal in dice. Kunti's son has voluntarily played with him. The great-souled one does not
think he[Shakuni.] has resorted to deceit. Therefore, I cannot answer the question." Droupadi replied, "Though he is himself unskilled, the king was challenged in this sabha by those who are skilled, evil-minded and deceitful, those who
love the game of dice. How can it be said he chose voluntarily? The pure-hearted and foremost one among the Kurus and the Pandavas was robbed of his senses by inclinations towards deceit. He has understood everything only
after he has been won and after the gambling is over. In this assembly hall are Kurus who are the lords of their
sons and daughters-in-law. Let all of them examine my words and answer my question in the appropriate way."

Thus spoke the one who was miserable and weeping, while glancing at her miserable husbands. Duhshasana spoke
many harsh, unpleasant and rude words to her. Vrikodara watched her being dragged, while she was in her menses
and with her upper garments dishevelled. She did not deserve this. In extreme distress, he uttered words of anger to
Yudhishthira.'
