Vaishampayana said, 'On Dhritarashtra's command, Pandu offered the riches he had won to Bhishma, Satyavati
and their mothers[Ambika and Ambalika.]. Pandu also sent a part of the riches to Vidura. The one with dharma in his soul also pleased
his relatives by giving them riches. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Then Satyavati, Bhishma and the illustrious Kousalya were given sparkling gems Pandu had won. His mother Kousalya[Ambalika.] embraced that bull among
men, unequalled in his energy, the way Poulomi embraces Jayanta[Jayanta is the son of Indra and Shachi.]. With the wealth won by that brave warrior,
Dhritarashtra performed great sacrifices equivalent to 100 horse sacrifices, in terms of the hundreds and thousands
of alms that were given.

'O bull among the Bharata lineage! After some time, having won control over his senses, Pandu retired to the
forest with Kunti and Madri. He left his excellent palace and its beautiful beds. He permanently lived in the forest,
always hunting. He roamed on the southern slopes of the beautiful Himalaya Mountains and lived on mountain
plains, and in forests with gigantic shala trees. With Kunti and Madri, Pandu lived in the forest, like Purandara's
handsome elephant[Purandara is Indra and Indra's elephant is Airavata.] between two cow elephants. As the descendant of the Bharata lineage roamed around with
his wives, with swords, arrows and bows and clad in wonderful armour, the king who was brave and skilled in the
use of all weapons seemed like a god to the forest-dwellers. On Dhritarashtra's command, these men always gave
him every object of desire and pleasure in the forest.

'The river's son[Bhishma.] heard that King Devaka had a daughter born from a Shudra woman[The word used is parashava. This means offspring born of a Brahmana father and a Shudra mother. While
the word also means bastard, it couldn't have been used in that sense. Because in that sense of bastard or mixed
breed, Dhritarashtra and Pandu were no different.] and that she was
young and beautiful. O bull among men! He asked for her hand, brought her and married her off to the immensely
wise Vidura. Through her, Vidura had many sons. They were humble, of good conduct and were equal to him in all
the qualities.'
