Souti said, 'Vasuki, best among snakes, heard about the curse from his mother and wondered about how it might
be aborted. He held a consultation with Airavata and all his other brothers, those who were devoted to dharma. Va-
suki said, "O unblemished ones! As you know, a curse has been pronounced on all of us. We should have consultations to free ourselves from this curse. There is no curse that does not have a remedy. O snakes! But he who has
been cursed by his mother has no remedy. My heart trembles on hearing that this curse was uttered before the immutable, immeasurable and truthful one[A reference to Brahma.]. Without a doubt, our annihilation is imminent. Otherwise, the immutable lord would have prevented our mother from imposing the curse. Therefore, let us consult now to see how
the health of the snakes can be preserved. Let us not waste time. Through our consultations, we may be able to find
a means of escape, like in ancient times the gods regained the lost Agni who had hidden himself inside a cave, so
that Janamejaya's sacrifice for the destruction of the snakes does not take place or is overcome." Thus addressed,
all of Kadru's offspring assembled. They were wise in counsels and put forward their views.

'Some snakes present said, "Let us assume the form of bulls among Brahmanas and beg Janamejaya to call off
the sacrifice." Other snakes who believed themselves to be wise said, "All of us will become his best advisers.
Without a doubt, he will then ask for our considered opinion on all the rituals and we will render him advice that
the sacrifice should be stopped. Thinking us to be extremely wise, the wise king will certainly ask us about the sacrifice and we will give reasons why it should not be held. We will point out many serious evils, in this world and
the next, that will result and show causes and reasons why the sacrifice should not be held. Or if a preceptor, who
is known to be devoted to the king's welfare and is well-versed in the rites of a snake-sacrifice, is appointed as the
priest, one of us can bite and kill him so that he is dispatched to the land of Yama. If the sacrificial priest is killed,
there will be no sacrifice. If other experts in snake-sacrifices are appointed as officiating priests, we will bite them
too and our objective will be attained." Some other snakes who were devoted to dharma said, "This advice is not
good. It is not proper to kill Brahmanas. Confronted with any danger, ultimate pacification is only possible when
the remedy is based on dharma. As we know, adharma only destroys the entire world." Other snakes said, "Let us
become clouds luminescent with lightning and rain down showers so as to extinguish the sacrificial fire." Other superior snakes said, "Let us go in the night, unobserved by anyone, and steal the ladles for the sacrifice. That will
bring an obstruction. Or let the snakes go in their hundreds and thousands to the sacrifice and bite everyone and
create a terror. Or let the snakes defile the pure food with their dung and urine, so that all the food is destroyed."

Others said, "Let us become officiating priests at the sacrifice and obstruct it by demanding our dakshina[The fee.] at the
beginning. Let us overpower the king, so that he does that which we ask him to." Others said, "When the king is
sporting in the water, let us carry him home and tie him up, so that the sacrifice is not held." Others, thinking themselves to be virtuous, said, "Let us go to the king and bite him at once, so that our objective is attained. Through
his death, the root of all our afflictions will be severed. This is the final result of our wisdom and consultations. O
king! If you approve of this, let us proceed immediately."

'Having said all this, they looked at Vasuki, the lord of the snakes. After thinking for a while, Vasuki told the
snakes, "O snakes! This final advice of yours is not fit to be carried out. Not a single one of the plans given by the
snakes seems right to me. What can I suggest that will be for our welfare? That is the reason I am worried. The
credit and the blame for the act will rest on me alone.'
