Bhishma said, "One day, Indra of the gods assumed a divine form. Sensing an opportunity, he arrived at the
hermitage. O lord of men! He assumed a form that was attractive and handsome and in that disguise, he entered the hermitage. He saw that Vipula's body was seated immobile. His eyes were visionless, as if he was a portrait. Ruchi was beautiful in her limbs. Her hips and breasts were full. Her eyes were as large as lotus petals. Her
face was like the full moon. She was also seated. On seeing him, she wished to stand up. She was astounded at his
form and wished to ask him who he was. O Indra among men! But though she wished to rise, she was restrained
by Vipula, who was inside her. She was incapable of movement. In extremely sweet and gentle words, Indra of the
gods addressed her. 'O one with the beautiful smiles! Know that I am Indra of the gods and I have come here for
you. I am afflicted by the god of love and desire you. O one with the beautiful brows! Therefore, accept me. A
long period of time has already elapsed[Since Devasharma's departure.].' The sage, Vipula, heard Shakra's words. From inside the body of his
preceptor's wife, he saw the lord of the gods. O king! However, the unblemished one was incapable of rising. O
king! Since Vipula had penetrated her, she was also incapable of speaking. Through the signs, the extender of the
Bhrigu lineage understood what his preceptor's wife intended[That she was kindly disposed towards Indra.]. O lord! Using his powers of yoga, the immensely energetic one restrained her. Using the bonds of yoga, he tied down all her senses.

'"Seeing that she was indifferent, Shachi's consort addressed her again. O king! Restrained by the strength of
yoga, she was ashamed that she couldn't speak. She wished to reply, 'Come to me. Welcome.' However, Vipula
restrained the words his preceptor's wife desired to speak. Instead, the words that emerged were, 'Hello. Why have
you come here?' From a mouth that was as beautiful as the moon, these refined words emerged[Refined words probably means Sanskrit, the implication being that women didn't customarily speak in Sanskrit.]. Under someone
else's subjugation, she shame-facedly spoke these words. Purandara was terrified at this and became distracted. O
lord of the earth! The king of the gods glanced at her again. The one with the one thousand eyes glanced at her
with his divine sight. He thus saw the sage inside her body. Inside the body of the preceptor's wife, he was like an
image in a mirror. Purandara saw that he was terrible in his austerities. O lord! Scared of being cursed, he trembled. The immensely great ascetic, Vipula, released his preceptor's wife. He entered his own body and addressed
the terrified Shakra. 'O Purandara! You have not conquered your senses. You are wicked in your soul. Gods and
men will not worship you for long. O Shakra! Have you forgotten? Is that incident no longer in your mind? You
were marked with the signs of vaginas and freed from those because of Goutama. I know that you are foolish in
understanding and that you have not cleansed your soul. You are fickle. O stupid one! She is protected by me. O
wicked one! Go wherever you have come from. O foolish one! If you do not, I will instantly burn you down with
my own energy. O Vasava! It is only out of pity towards you that I am not burning you down. O evil-minded one!
My preceptor is intelligent and terrible in his austerities. If he sees you, his eyes will blaze in rage and he will burn
you down. O Shakra! Never again, should you disrespect brahmanas in this way. If you do not depart, through the
power of brahmanas, your sons and your advisers will be destroyed. You think yourself to be immortal and conduct yourself in this way. But that is not true and there is nothing that cannot be obtained through austerities.'

Hearing  the  great-souled  Vipula's  words,  Shakra  did  not  say  anything  in  reply.  Overcome  by  shame,  he
disappeared.

'"Soon after Shakra had departed, the great ascetic, Devasharma, returned to his hermitage, having completed
the sacrifice he had desired to undertake. O king! Vipula was engaged in doing what brought his preceptor pleasure. As soon as he returned, he handed over his preceptor's unblemished wife, whom he had protected, to him.
Devoted to his preceptor and tranquil in his soul, he greeted his preceptor. Without any fear, Vipula greeted him
and stood there. When he had rested and was seated with his wife, Vipula told him what Shakra had done. Hearing
Vipula's words, the powerful sage was satisfied with his good conduct, austerities and control. The lord saw the
Vipula was devoted to his preceptor and was virtuous. On seeing that he was devoted to dharma, he uttered words
of praise. The one with dharma in his soul applauded his disciple, who was devoted to dharma. He wished to grant
a boon to the one who was devoted to his preceptor. Having obtained his preceptor's permission, he asked that he
might be able to perform supreme austerities. From that day, Devasharma, the great ascetic, dwelt there with his
wife. In that desolate forest, he no longer had any fear from the slayer of Bala and Vritra."'
