Yudhishthira asked, "O grandfather! O immensely wise one! O one who is accomplished in all the sacred texts!
Which is stronger, destiny or human endeavour?"

'Bhishma replied, "O Yudhishthira! In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about a conversation between Vasishtha and Brahma. In ancient times, Vasishtha asked the illustrious grandfather, 'Which is superior, destiny or the deeds of men?' O king! At this, the grandfather, born from the lotus and the god of the gods, replied in
pleasant words that were full of purport and reason. 'Nothing is born without a seed. There are no fruits without a
seed. It is said that seeds result from seeds and fruits result from seeds. The tiller of a field may sow good or bad
seeds. The fruits obtained are in accordance with that. Without seeds, a ploughed field does not yield fruits. But in
that way, without human enterprise, destiny doesn't become successful. The field is said to be like human enterprise, the seed is like destiny. Crops are harvested from a union of the field and the seed. The fruits of deeds are not
destroyed. The doer reaps them himself. The consequences of good and evil deeds are evident in the world. There
is happiness through good deeds and misery through wicked deeds. What is done is enjoyed. What is not done is
never enjoyed. A person who does deeds[Good deeds.] obtains prosperity in every way and his good fortune is not destroyed.
A person who does not do deeds is destroyed, like caustic matter being poured into a wound. Austerities, beauty,
good fortune and many kinds of jewels-all these are obtained through deeds, not through deeds coupled with individual inaction. In a similar way, heaven, objects of enjoyment and everything that one wishes for-all these are
obtained through human endeavour, not through lack of action. The stellar bodies, the gods, the serpents, the yak-
shas, the moon, the sun, the Maruts-all these have been elevated from humanity to divinity through enterprise.
Riches, categories of friends, prosperity, good lineage, beauty and objects of pleasure are extremely difficult to obtain, unless one has embarked on action. A brahmana obtains prosperity through purity, a kshatriya through valour,
a vaishya through exertion and a shudra through servitude. It is not obtained by someone who is not generous and
not brave, someone who is impotent and does not act, someone who does not engage in good deeds, someone who
is not valiant and someone who does not resort to austerities. The illustrious Vishnu created the three worlds, the
daityas and all the gods. But even he tormented himself through austerities in the ocean. Had there not been fruits
from deeds, all these fruits would not have materialized. The worlds would only have looked towards destiny and
become indifferent. If a man does not undertake deeds and only follows destiny, all his exertions will be futile, like
a woman with an impotent husband. In the world of men, one should not be that frightened of good and bad deeds.
More important is the slightest bit of fear in the world of the gods[This shloka isn't very clear. It probably means that good and bad deeds lead to greater fear in the world hereafter
than in the present world.]. Deeds and human enterprise follow destiny.
However, when there is inaction, destiny cannot provide anything. The status of the gods is also seen to be temporary. Without deeds, how can the gods remain established in their states? The gods never approved of good conduct in this world, since they fear that such fierce deeds might lead to their being dislodged. That is the reason
there is always conflict between the rishis and the gods. Therefore, if the gods have themselves determined it, how
can one speak of destiny? How is destiny itself supposed to have arisen? There are many kinds of deceit that are
practised in the world of the thirty gods[The gods don't want people to perform deeds and dislodge them. Therefore, they practise deceit and speak of
destiny.]. One's own atman is one's friend. One's own atman is also one's enemy.
The atman is a witness to one's own self and to the deeds that have been performed and the ones that have not been
performed. Between good deeds and perverse deeds, it is the good deeds that lead to success. Sometimes, good and
bad deeds do not lead to consequences[Immediate consequences in this world.]. Divinity has the auspicious as a foundation. Everything is based on what
is auspicious. A man with auspicious deeds will obtain everything. What can the gods do? In ancient times, Yayati
was dislodged from heaven and fell down on the ground[Yayati's story has been recounted in Section 7 (Volume 1).]. He was again restored to heaven through the auspicious
deeds of his grandsons. In ancient times, the rajarshi, King Pururava, descended from Ila's lineage, obtained heaven, but was restrained by the brahmanas[Pururava's story has been recounted in Section 7 (Volume 1).]. Soudasa, the lord of Kosala, performed a horse sacrifice and other sacrifices. However, cursed by a maharshi, he became a maneater[Soudasa's story has been recounted in Section 7 (Volume 1).]. Ashvatthama and Rama[Parashurama.] were the sons of sages
and great archers. However, despite their good deeds in this world, they could not go to heaven. Like a second
Vasava, Vasu[Uparichara Vasu. The story has been recounted in Section 6 (Volume 1).] performed one hundred sacrifices. However, because of a single act of falsehood, he was dispatched
to the nether regions. Destiny bound down Bali, Virochana's son, in the noose of dharma. But it was Vishnu's enterprise that made him lie down in the nether regions. Janamejaya followed in the footsteps of Shakra. He killed
brahmana women[Which Janamejaya is this? Is this Janamejaya, the son of Parikshit? There is a story about this Janamejaya. When
he wanted to perform a sacrifice, his queen arrived, wearing transparent clothes. When the brahmanas laughed at
this, Janamejaya killed them. Cursed, he became a leper. However, according to this story, he killed the brahmanas, not brahmana women. Assuming this is the right Janamejaya, since Bhishma is recounting this to Yudhishthira, the story doesn't belong. A speculative and symbolic interpretation has also been applied to this.
Parikshit had a brahmana wife too and she was bypassed. In that symbolic sense, Janamejaya killed his brahmana stepmother.]. Could destiny prevent this? The brahmana rishi, Vaishampayana, killed a brahmana child in
his ignorance and was tainted by this[Vaishampayana didn't actually kill a brahmana. The sages had decided to assemble on Mount Meru. There was
an agreement that any sage who absented himself would incur the sin of killing a brahmana. Engaged in the funeral ceremonies of his father, Vaishampayana absented himself and thus incurred the sin of killing a brahmana.]. Could destiny prevent this? In ancient times, in a great sacrifice, rajarshi
Nriga made the false promise of giving cattle to a brahmana. Because of this, he became a lizard[The generous King Nriga had promised to give a brahmana a herd of cattle. But when a beggar turned up, Nriga
gave the cattle to the beggar and was cursed by the brahmana that he would become a lizard in a well. The lizard
was subsequently saved by Krishna.]. While performing a sacrifice, rajarshi Dhundumara was overcome by old age[Dhundumara's story has been recounted in Section 37 (Volume 2).]. Abandoning all these delights, he fell asleep in
Girivraja. The immensely strong sons of Dhritarashtra seized the kingdom of the Pandavas. They obtained it back
by resorting to their arms, not through destiny. The sages are devoted to their vows and are engaged in austerities
and rituals. Are they able to levy curses because of their deeds or because of destiny? If one abandons wickedness
in this world, one can obtain everything that is difficult to get. If a man is overcome by avarice and delusion, destiny cannot save him. Even if a fire is small, when it is fanned by the wind, it becomes large. When united with
deeds, a virtuous person thus prospers, aided by destiny. When the oil in a lamp is exhausted, it is extinguished. In
that way, if deeds are exhausted, a person is also extinguished. Even if a man obtains a great store of riches and
women to be enjoyed, devoid of acts, he will not be able to enjoy them in this world. If a person resorts to the qualities of virtuous deeds, protected by destiny, he will find riches, even if those are well hidden. The world of men is
superior to the world of the gods, because the houses of men are full of many riches. In contrast, that of the immortals is seen to be like that of the dead. Devoid of deed, destiny cannot bring success in the world of the living. Destiny can exert no power over someone who has deviated from the path. The performance of great deeds is superior.
It drives destiny. The uninterrupted and generous desire to perform deeds conveys enterprise towards the store of
destiny. O supreme among sages! I have told you everything about this. It is true that the fruits of enterprise are always seen. Destiny arises because of being engaged in action. By performing the prescribed tasks, one obtains the
road to heaven."'
