Narada said, "The king did not suffer a futile death from the fire. That is what I heard there. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! This is what happened to the king who was Vichitravirya's son. The intelligent one entered the forest and subsisted on air. He kindled the sacrificial fires. In that desolate forest, the officiating priests
then cast those sacrificial fires away and the supreme among Bharatas left, as he wished. That fire began to rage in
the forest[The sacrificial fire that had been carelessly cast away.]. It is this fire that blazed in the forest. That is what the ascetics told me. O bull among the Bharata lineage! As I have told you earlier, the king voluntarily allowed himself to be burnt down in a marshy area around the
Jahnavi. O unblemished one! O Yudhishthira! This is what I got to know from the sages whom I met on the banks
of the Bhagirathi. O lord of the earth! The king was thus consumed by his own fire[It was a sacred sacrificial fire sanctified through mantras and wasn't
inauspicious.]. Since the king has gone to the
supreme objective, you should not sorrow. O Pandava! There is no doubt that your mother was devoted to serving
her seniors and has obtained an extremely great success. O Kouravya! You should perform the water rites for them.
With your brothers, arrange for all the prescribed rites."'

Vaishampayana continued, 'O bull among the Bharata lineage! The lord of the earth, the bearer of the burden of
the Pandava lineage, departed with his brothers and his wives. Because of their devotion towards the king, so did
the inhabitants of the city and the countryside. Clad in a single piece of garment, they went towards the Ganga. All
the bulls among the Kurus immersed themselves in the waters there. With Yuyutsu at the forefront[Since Yuyutsu was the only surviving son.], they offered
water to the great-souled one. They also did this for Gandhari and Pritha in the prescribed way, pronouncing their
names and their gotras. Having performed the rites of purification, they returned, but remained outside the city[Because it was still a time of impurity.].
They sent men who knew the ordinances about the funeral rites. O best among the Kuru lineage! They went to
Gangadvara, where the king had been consumed. The lord of the earth[Yudhishthira.] had given those men riches to perform the
cremation rites in Gangadvara. On the twelfth day, the lord of men purified himself. For the funeral ceremony, Pan-
dava gave away many types of dakshina. In Dhritarashtra's name, the lord of the earth gave away gold, silver, cattle and extremely expensive beds. Naming them separately, the king also gave away different gifts in the names of
the energetic Gandhari and Pritha. Every brahmana received whatever he wanted and as much as he wanted. There
were beds, food, vehicles, gems, jewels and riches. In the names of the lord of the earth and his mothers, the king
gave away vehicles, spreads,  objects of  pleasure, female slaves and female servants. Having given away large
quantities at the funeral ceremony, the intelligent lord of the earth again entered Varanasahvya[Hastinapura.
 
 ]. The men who had
gone, following the king's commands, also completed the cremation rites and returned with the remains. As is prescribed, these remains were worshipped with many kinds of garlands and fragrances. The king placed these remains in the proper places and performed the rites. O king! Narada comforted King Yudhishthira, the one with
dharma in his soul. The supreme rishi then took his leave and went away wherever he wished. In this way, the intelligent Dhritarashtra spent fifteen years in the city and three years in the forest. He always gave away gifts in the
names of his sons, kin, matrimonial allies, friends, brothers and relatives who had been slain in the war. With his
kin and relatives dead, King Yudhishthira was distressed in his mind, but bore the burden of the kingdom.'

This ends Naradagamana Parva and also ends Ashrama-Vasika Parva.