Vaishampayana said, 'On seeing that the great sage was willing to speak, Pandava, the king of the Kurus[Yudhishthira.], asked
him to begin his accounts. "You know everything about the eternal exploits of the gods, the daityas, the great-
souled rishis and the rajarshis. We are of the view that you are worthy of our servitude and attendance. We have
wished to meet you for a long time. Devaki's son has also come here to see us. I see that I have been dislodged
from happiness. I see all the evil sons of Dhritarashtra prospering. Then the thought strikes me that man is the
agent for all his deeds, be they good or evil, and reaps the fruits. How can god then be the agent? O supreme
among those who know about the brahman! Why is there happiness and unhappiness for men? Are those fruits in
this body? Or in another body later? O supreme among brahmanas! How can the good and evil fruits of an embodied being follow him in this body and how are they united with him after death? Do we reap the fruits in this world
or in another world after death? O Bhargava[Markandeya was descended from Bhrigu's lineage and is therefore addressed as Bhargava.]! When an animal is dead, where do his deeds remain?"

'Markandeya replied, "O supreme among eloquent ones! What you have spoken is a question that is worthy of
you. You know everything that there is to be known. But you are asking me so that the theory can be established. I
will now narrate to you how men undergo happiness and unhappiness here, and in the hereafter. Listen with undivided attention. In the beginning, Prajapati[Brahma.] created pure embodied beings with unblemished bodies. They were
all devoted to dharma. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! These ancient and sacred men were evolved from the
brahman. Their strength and resolution did not waver. They were good in their vows and truthful. As they desired,
they could all soar up to the sky to meet with the gods. Then they all descended again and roamed as they willed.
These men could die when they willed. They lived when they willed. They faced few difficulties and had no fear.
They were accomplished in their objectives and free from difficulties. They could see the masses of gods and the
great-souled rishis. They could see everything about dharma. They were self-controlled and were devoid of envy.
They lived for thousands of years and had thousands of sons. But over a period of time, they were restricted to
walking on the earth alone. They were overcome by desire and anger. They began to thrive on duplicity and deceit.
These men were overcome by greed and delusion and the gods abandoned them. They performed evil and impure
deeds and were reborn as inferior species, or went to hell. They were repeatedly cooked in this world in different
ways[Metaphorically. One had to go through the cycle of rebirth.]. Their desires were in vain. Their resolutions were in vain. Their knowledge was in vain. They lost their
senses. They were afraid of everything. They reaped the fruits of misery. Since they were often distinguished by
their impure deeds, they were born in inferior families. They suffered from many forms of disease. They were evil
in soul and became oppressive. Their lives became short and wicked. They suffered from their terrible deeds. They
became dependent on every kind of desire. They were atheists and destroyed all institutions.

'"O Kounteya! After death, any animal's outcome is determined by his own deeds. But you asked about where
learned and evil-minded deeds are stored. How are the fruits of evil and good deeds recovered? Listen to the understanding on this matter. In the original subtle body created by the gods, man accumulates a great store of good
and evil deeds. When his life is over, he gives up the body that is almost destroyed and is immediately reborn in a
different womb, without any gap. In that[The new form.], his good deeds follow him like a shadow. The fruits give birth to happiness or unhappiness. Those who lack the insight of knowledge think that an animal is governed by rules of death
and is not affected by good or evil marks. O Yudhishthira! But this is the fate of those who are without intelligence. Beyond this, listen to the supreme fate of those who are wise. These men have tormented themselves with
austerities. They are devoted to all the sacred texts. They are unwavering in their vows and are established in truth.
They are always engaged in serving their preceptors. They are good in conduct and noble in birth. They are forgiving, self-controlled and extremely energetic. They are often born in pure wombs and are marked with auspicious
signs. They are in control of their senses and have mastered them. Since they are pure, they do not suffer from disease. Because they suffer from few difficulties, they are without obstacles. Whether born prematurely, or in time,
or even in the womb, they know everything through the sight of knowledge and about the relationship between
their own souls and the supreme one. After having been born in this world of deeds, they regain heaven. Some
things are due to destiny. Some things are due to chance. And some things are due to one's own action. O king!
That is how men come by their fate. Do not think otherwise. O supreme among eloquent ones! O Yudhishthira!
Hear an account about what I think to be the supreme good in this world of men. Some find greatness here, and not
in the hereafter. Others find greatness here, but not in the hereafter. Others find it in both and still others find it in
neither. Those who have a great deal of riches always adorn their bodies and find pleasure. O slayer of enemies!
But since they are addicted to bodily pleasures, they find enjoyment in this world, but not in the next. There are
those who are united with yoga and austerities. While their bodies decay, they are addicted to studying. They are in
control of their senses and devoted to the welfare of beings. O destroyer of enemies! They find enjoyment in that
world, and not in this. There are those who first lead a life of dharma. In course of time, they obtain prosperity
through dharma. They obtain a wife and perform sacrifices. They enjoy this world and the next. There are the ignorant ones who ignore learning, austerities and donations and do not have offspring. They do not find happiness in
this world, nor in the next. But all of you are extremely valorous and powerful. You are divine in your energy. You
have obtained learning. Your bodies are capable. To accomplish the task of the gods, you have been born in this
world from the one hereafter. O brave ones! Having performed great deeds and having satisfied the gods, the rishis
and the masses of ancestors with austerities, rituals and conduct, in due course, later attain heaven, the habitation
of those who perform sacred deeds, through your own deeds. O Indra among Kouravas! Do not suffer from anxiety. Do not trouble your mind because of these difficulties. You are deserving of happiness."'
