Vaishampayana said, 'After some time, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira remembered the sage's words. He spoke privately to Arjuna, bull among the Bharata lineage and whose wisdom was known. He smiled at him and gently took
him by the hand. After thinking for an instant about their abode in the forest, Dharmaraja, the destroyer of enemies, secretly spoke to Dhananjaya. O king! The intelligent one thought about it there and said, "O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! The four parts of dhanurveda[Dhanu means bow and veda means knowledge. But dhanurveda means the science of war. There are two
reasons why dhanurveda has four parts, the first being the fourfold division of the army into elephants, infantry,
chariots and horses. The second concerns four types of weapons-mukta, amukta, muktamukta and yantramukta.
Mukta weapons like a chakra were released from the hand. Amukta weapons like swords were never released from
the hand. Muktamukta weapons like spears could either be released or held in the hand. And yantramukta weapons
like arrows were released from an implement (yantra).] are today established in Bhishma, Drona, Kripa and Drona's
son[Ashvatthama.]. They know all types of brahma, divine and asura weapons, how to release them and how to counter them.
They know the use of all weapons and how to counter them. All of them have been pacified by Dhirtarashtra's son.
He has gratified them with gifts and treats them like preceptors. He always exhibits the best of conduct towards all
the warriors. Thus revered by him, they will not fail to show their power when the time comes. Today, the entire
earth is under Duryodhana's suzerainty. You are our last refuge and a great burden is vested in you. O destroyer of
enemies! I see that the time has come for you to perform a task. O son[The word used is tata, which can be used in the sense, among others, of any junior.]! I obtained secret knowledge from
Krishna Dvaipayana. If you use it, the entire universe will become visible to you. O son! Having attentively received this brahman, when the time is right, you must seek the favour of the gods. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Devote yourself to terrible austerities. Armed with a bow, armour and sword, be like a revered sage. O son!
Without allowing anyone to pass you, traverse a path towards the northern direction. O Dhananjaya! Indra possesses all the divine weapons. Out of their fear from Vritra, the gods gave all their powers to Indra. They are all accumulated in one place. Go to Shakra and he will give all the weapons to you. Be consecrated and set out immediately for the god Purandara[Indra's name. Literally, the destroyer of cities.]." Having uttered these words, the lord Dharmaraja imparted the knowledge to him,
after he was consecrated according to the rites and controlled in speech, body and mind. The elder brother then
gave the warrior brother the permission to leave.

'On Dharmaraja's instructions that he should meet the god Purandara, he grasped the bow Gandiva and the great
inexhaustible quivers. He clad himself in armour, leather gloves, leather arm-guards and finger-guards. The
mighty-armed one offered oblations into the fire and having received gold coins, the brahmanas pronounced their
blessings. Having grasped his bow and arrows, sighing and casting a glance upwards, the mighty-armed one then
left, for the sake of the destruction of Dhritarashtra's sons. On seeing Kounteya grasp his bow and arrows, the
brahmanas, the siddhas and the invisible beings said, "O Kounteya! May you swiftly obtain the desire in your
heart." Arjuna's gait was like that of a lion and his thighs were like the trunks of shala trees. The hearts of everyone went with him and Krishna[Droupadi.] told him, "O mighty-armed Dhananjaya! O Kounteya! All that Kunti wished
for you at the time of your birth and all that you desire for yourself must come true. Let none of us ever be born in
the lineage of kshatriyas again. I always salute the brahmanas, who never have to make a living out of war. All
your brothers will spend their waking hours in repeatedly praising and recounting your valorous deeds. O Partha!
But if your sojourn proves to be a long one, we will find no satisfaction in our minds in our comforts, riches and
even in our lives. O Partha! All our happiness and unhappiness is now established in you, our life and death, our
kingdom and our prosperity. O Kounteya! I take leave of you. O Pandava! May all be well with you. I bow down
before Dhata and Vidhata. May all be well along your path and may you be healthy. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! May you be safe from all beings in the sky, the earth and heaven and may all other beings not create obstructions in your path." The mighty-armed Pandava then circumambulated his brothers and Dhoumya, and grasping his beautiful bow, departed.

'All the beings left the path the lustrous and valorous one traversed, resorting to yoga so as to be united with Indra. The great-souled one reached the sacred mountain in just one day. Having resorted to yoga[This is what he had been taught by Yudhishthira, who had in turn been taught by Vyasadeva.], he was as fast
as thought and like the wind. Having crossed the Himalayas and Gandhamadana and traversing unwearied over inaccessible terrain during night and day, Dhananjaya reached Indrakila[Literally, Indra's mountain.] and stopped there. He heard a voice
from the sky asking him to stop. Then Savyasachi saw an ascetic seated under a tree. He was thin and yellow and
his hair was matted. He blazed with the radiance of the brahman.

'On seeing that he had stopped, the great ascetic spoke to Arjuna, "O son! Who are you? You have come here,
clad in armour and with bow and arrows. You have girded on a sword and have leather gloves. You are following
the dharma of kshatriyas. But there is no use for weapons here. This is a peaceful region populated by ascetic brahmanas who have controlled anger and delight. The bow has no use here, nor is there any fighting. Therefore, throw
down your bow. You have reached your supreme objective." Thus the brahmana repeatedly spoke to Arjuna, the
brave one of infinite energy, as if he was an ordinary man. But so firm was he that he could not dislodge him from
his resolution. Then the brahmana was extremely pleased and smilingly told him, "O fortunate one! O destroyer of
enemies! I am Shakra. Choose a boon." Having been thus addressed by the one with the thousand eyes[Indra has a thousand eyes.],
Dhananjaya, the brave extender of the Kuru lineage, joined his hands in salutation and bowed and replied, "O illustrious one! This is the object of my desire. Please grant it to me as a boon. I wish to obtain from you today the
knowledge of all weapons." The great Indra was extremely pleased and smilingly replied, "O Dhananjaya! You
have attained this place. What use will weapons be to you? Ask for desires and worlds. You have attained the
supreme objective." Having been thus addressed, Dhananjaya replied to the one with a thousand eyes, "I do not
wish for worlds, desires or divinity, not to speak of happiness. O lord of the thirty gods! I do not wish for lordship
over the gods. If I forsake my brothers in the wilderness and do not avenge the enmity, I will attain infamy in all
the worlds for an eternity." Having been thus addressed, the slayer of Vritra, worshipped in all the worlds, told
Pandu's son in consoling words, "O son! When you have seen the lord of all beings, the three-eyed Shiva who
wields the trident, I will then give you all the divine weapons. O Kounteya! Act so that you are able to see the
supreme god. When you have seen him, you will be successful and will go to heaven." Having thus spoken to
Phalguna, Shakra disappeared. Resorting to yoga, Arjuna remained there.'
