'Yudhishthira said, "O Sanjaya! You have undoubtedly spoken the truth. As you have said, dharma is supreme
among all deeds. O Sanjaya! But you should not censure me before you know whether I am following dharma or
adharma. Adharma sometimes adopts the guise of dharma. And dharma sometimes appears as adharma. According
to their intelligence, the learned ones distinguish between the two. When there is a calamity, depending on one's
livelihood, dharma and adharma should be followed accordingly[In times of calamity, something that is normally adharma, may actually turn out to be dharma.]. O Sanjaya! Know from me that in times of
calamity, the pursuit of dharma often implies the first[The first principle, that is, adharma sometimes adopts the guise of dharma.]. When one's natural means of livelihood has gone, one
should strive to perform the duties that have been laid down. O Sanjaya! When the natural means of livelihood are
present, both should be censured[When the natural means of livelihood are present, and there is no calamity, non-observance of dharma and observance of adharma should both be censured. However, this doesn't apply to a calamity, when the natural means
of livelihood are absent.]. The creator has laid down a course of action for brahmanas who wish to remedy wrongs. O Sanjaya! When there is a time of calamity, those who do not act, or those who do not act correctly,
are both reprehensible. According to livelihood, the right course of action has always been laid down, including for
those who are not brahmanas and for those who do not follow the Vedas. It is only those righteous ones who can
tell us what is best. This is the path that has been followed by our fathers earlier, and by our grandfathers and those
who have preceded them. Those who are wise undertake these tasks and I do not think that this is the way of the
unrighteous. O Sanjaya! Through the path of adharma, I do not crave whatever riches exist on this earth, whatever
is with the thirty gods and beyond them, in Prajapati's world, in heaven, or in Brahma's world. The learned
Krishna is the lord of dharma. He is skilled and knows about the right policy. He is honoured by the brahmanas. In
many ways, he has instructed many powerful kings like the Bhojas. The immensely famous Keshava must tell me
whether I should be censured for giving up peace and following my own dharma of embarking on a fight[The dharma of kshatriyas.]. Vasudeva wishes for the welfare of both sides. The Shinis, the Chaitrakas[This is probably a reference to the Chedis.], the Andhakas, the Varshneyas, the Bho-
jas, the Kukkuras[Those who lived in the Dasharha region.] and the Srinjayas resort to Vasudeva's intelligence to subdue their enemies and delight their
well-wishers. Led by Krishna, Ugrasena and all the others among the Vrishnis and the Andhakas are like the
equals of Indra. They are intelligent and have truth as their valour. The immensely strong Yadavas are prosperous.
Babhru, the king of Kashi, has obtained supreme prosperity after having obtained Krishna as a brother and an instructor[The identification of this Babhru is unclear. There was more than one Yadava named Babhru. One of them was a
contemporary and relative of Krishna's, since Babhru's wife was abducted by Shishupala. But none of these
Babhrus had anything to do with Kashi.]. Vasudeva satisfies all his desires, like a showering cloud brings satisfaction to beings after the summer.
O son! This is the kind of person Keshava is. We know that he knows how to decide on a course of action. We are
devoted to the virtuous Krishna. We will not transgress Keshava's words."'
