Vaishampayana said, 'Having instated his beloved son as the king, Nahusha's son King Yayati was happy and became a sage in the forest. He lived in the forest with Brahmanas, rigid in his vows and living on roots and fruit.
After a life of self-control, he ascended to heaven. Having attained heaven, he lived there in bliss and happiness.
But after a long time, he was again thrown out by Shakra. I have heard that when he was hurled down from heaven, he remained suspended in the sky and did not reach the surface of the earth. It has been said that he later again
went to heaven, together with the kings Vasumana, Ashtaka, the valorous Pratardana and Shibi.'

Janamejaya asked, 'Through what deeds did the lord of the earth again attain heaven? O Brahmana! Before all
these Brahmanas who are rishis, I wish to hear all the details. Yayati was like the king of the gods and lord of the
earth. He extended the Puru lineage. He was as resplendent as the sun. The great-souled one's fame was extensive
and his deeds based on truth. I wish to hear his complete story, in heaven and here.'

Vaishampayana said, 'I will recount for you the excellent account of Yayati's exploits, in heaven and here. This
is sacred and destroys sins for all those who hear it. Having instated his youngest son Puru on the throne,
Nahusha's son, King Yayati, happily retired to the forest. He cast aside to the farthest corners his other sons, with
Yadu at their head. The king lived in the forest for a long time, surviving on roots and fruit. He paid homage to the
gods and the ancestors, conquered his rage and controlled his senses. He poured offerings into the fire, as prescribed for those who retire to the forest. The lord worshipped his guests by offering forest food and ghee. He sustained himself through gleanings of corn and remnants of food from others. In this way, the king passed a full
thousand years. For thirty autumns he lived on water alone, controlling his mind and speech. For one year he lived
on air, without sleeping. For another year, he performed austerities amid the five sacred fires[Usually there is reference to three sacrificial fires-ahavaniya, garhapatya and dakshina. The other two sacred fires are samya and avasadhya.]. For six months,
he stood immobile on one leg. The performer of sacred deeds then ascended heaven.'
