'Bhishma said, "Then all the ascetics engaged themselves in their respective tasks. The ones who followed dharma
wondered about the maiden and thought, 'What will we do?' A few among those ascetics said, 'We should take her
back to her father's residence.' Others thought that I[Meaning Bhishma.] should be censured. Some others thought of going to the lord
of Shalva and asking him to take her back. Others said no to this, because she had been rejected by him. All the
ascetics, rigid in their vows, again said, 'O fortunate one! This having occurred, what can we learned ones do? O
fortunate one! Listen to these beneficial words. There is no need for you to wander around. O fortunate one! Depart from here and go to your father's residence. The king, your father, will know what should be done next. You
possess all the qualities. O fortunate one! Go and dwell there happily. O fortunate one! You have no refuge other
than your father. O one with the beautiful complexion! For any arya lady, the husband or the father is the refuge. A
husband is the refuge when things are smooth. A father is the refuge when things are rough. Roaming around is
extremely difficult, especially for someone who is delicate. O beautiful one! Being a princess, you are naturally
delicate. O fortunate one! O one with the beautiful complexion! There are many taints associated with dwelling in
a hermitage. There will be none in your father's residence.' The brahmanas spoke these words to the ascetic lady.

'On seeing you alone in this deserted and dense forest, kings will solicit you. Therefore, do not set your mind on
this.'

'"Amba replied, 'I cannot go again to my father's residence in the city of Kashi. There is no doubt that I will be
disrespected by my relatives. O ascetics! It was different when I dwelt in my father's residence as a child. O fortunate ones! I will not go where my father is now. O foremost among brahmanas! I wish to practise austerities under
the protection of ascetics, so that I do not confront great ill fortune, in this world or the next.'"

'Bhishma said, "When those brahmanas were reflecting on this, the ascetic rajarshi Hotravahana arrived in that
forest. All the ascetics honoured the king. They worshipped and welcomed him and offered him a seat and water.
After he had seated himself and had rested, in his hearing, those residents of the forest again spoke to the maiden.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing the story of Amba, the daughter of the king of Kashi, her mother's father[Hotravahana was Amba's maternal grandfather.] trembled and arose. O lord! He placed the maiden on his lap and comforted her. He asked her about
the entire story of the reasons behind her hardships. In detail, she told him exactly what had happened. Then the
rajarshi was overcome by great grief and misery. The extremely great ascetic thought in his mind about what
should be done next. He trembled and in great grief, told the distressed maiden, 'O fortunate one! Do not go to
your father's residence. I am your mother's father. O daughter! Depend on me. I will dispel your sorrows. O
daughter! You have become desiccated. I think you have had enough. Listen to my words and go to the ascetic
Rama[Parashurama.], Jamadagni's son. Rama will remove your extremely great unhappiness and sorrow. If he does not listen to
his words[If Bhishma does not listen to Parashurama that he should take Amba back.], he will kill Bhishma in battle. Go to the foremost among the Bhargavas, whose energy is like that of
the fire of destruction. That great ascetic will establish you on a smooth path.' She repeatedly shed many tears. She
lowered her head before Hotravahana, her mother's father, and said, 'I will follow your instructions and will go.
But will I be able to see that arya, famous in the world? How will Bhargava destroy my terrible misery? I wish to
learn about this and I will go there after that.'"'
