Vaishampayana said, 'Having arisen next morning, Krishna performed all his morning rites. He took leave of the
brahmanas and left for the city. O king! Having taken leave of the mighty-armed one, who was about to leave, all
the residents of Vrikasthala returned. Adorned, Dhritarashtra's sons, with the exception of Duryodhana, Bhishma,
Drona and Kripa advanced to meet him when he arrived. O king! There were many inhabitants of the city too, desiring to see Hrishikesha. They came in many different kinds of vehicles and others were on foot. He met them
along the road. Surrounded by Bhishma of the unsullied deeds, Drona and the sons of Dhritarashtra, he entered the
city. The city was adorned in Krishna's honour. The royal roads were decorated with many different kinds of gems.
O king! O bull among the Bharata lineage! There was no one who stayed at home-woman, aged or child. They
all wished to see Vasudeva. O great king! At the time when Hrishikesha entered, no men stood along the royal
road. They prostrated themselves in his honour. The great mansions were full of beautiful women and seemed to
sway on the ground, because of that great weight. Because the royal road was full of men, the speed of Vasudeva's
swift horses was restrained.

'Pundarikaksha, the destroyer of enemies, entered Dhritarashtra's white house. It was adorned with many pavilions. After passing through three rooms in the royal abode, the destroyer of enemies went to the king who was Vichitravirya's son. When Dasharha approached him, the immensely famous lord of men, who possessed the sight of
wisdom, stood up, together with Drona, Bhishma, Kripa, Somadatta and the great king of Bahlika. All of them
arose from their seats and honoured Janardana. Having approached the famous King Dhritarashtra and Bhishma,
Varshneya swiftly honoured them with eloquent words. Madhusudana first honoured them in accordance with
dharma. In accordance with age, Madhava then greeted the other kings. Janardana then met Drona and his famous
son and Bahlika, Kripa and Somadatta. There was a large and golden throne there, exquisite in workmanship. On
Dhritarashtra's instructions, Achyuta seated himself there. As is the custom, Dhritarashtra's priests offered Janardana a cow, madhuparka and water. With the rites due to a guest having been observed, Govinda, surrounded by
the Kurus, stayed with all the Kurus for some time joking with them and asking all the relatives about their welfare. The immensely fortunate one was thus honoured and worshipped by Dhritarashtra. Having taken his leave of
the king, the destroyer of enemies then left.

'Having met the Kurus in the appropriate way in that assembly of the Kurus, Madhava then went to Vidura's
beautiful house. Vidura received Janardana with every kind of benediction and honoured Dasharha with every object of desire. After having greeted Govinda as a guest, Vidura, who was knowledgeable about every kind of dharma, asked Madusudana about the welfare of the sons of Pandu. Vidura was his beloved well-wisher, wise and always established in dharma, and bereft of any sins. Dasharha, supreme among wise ones, could always see everything and told Kshatta everything about the Pandavas in detail, and their endeavours.'
