Vaishampayana said, 'Maya then spoke to Partha Arjuna, supreme among victorious ones. "With your permission,
I will now go away. But I will be back soon. To the north of Kailasha and near Mount Mainaka, where all the
danavas perform sacrifices near the beautiful lake Bindu, I have collected jewels and treasure[The word used in the text is bhanda, which means a vessel, as well as treasure. If the word is translated as
vessel, the jewels have been kept in a vessel. But the word transalted as treasure, seems more appropriate given the
context.]. Vrishaparva[Vrishaparva is the king of the danavas. Since he is faithful to his promises, he would not have appropriated
the treasure.] is
always faithful to his promises and I have kept it in his sabha. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If it is still
there, I will go and bring it. I will then build a sabha for the Pandavas that will be famous, beautiful, pleasing to the
heart and adorned with all the gems. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! There is a supreme club in lake Bindu,
kept there by King Youvanashva[Yuvanashva's son. His name was Mandhatri and he was born from Yuvanashva's belly.] after he slew his enemies in battle. It is heavy and firm and is embellished with
golden knobs, equal to one hundred thousand clubs and is capable of killing everything. That will be for Bhima
what the Gandiva is for you. There is also Varuna's great conch shell, with an excellent sound, and named Deva-
datta. There is no doubt that I shall give you all these." Having told Partha this, the asura left towards the northeast.

'To the north of Kailasa, near Mount Mainaka, there is an illustrious peak named Hiranyashringa, filled with
great gems. There is the beautiful lake Bindu, where King Bhagiratha lived for a long time, in his desire to see the
Ganga, since known as Bhagirathi[Bhagiratha was King Sagara's great grandson and needed to bring the celestial river Ganga down to earth, so
that his 60,000 ancestors, Sagara's sons, might be freed. Accordingly, he performed penances.]. O supreme among those of the Bharata lineage! The great-souled one, lord
of all beings, performed one hundred great sacrifices. There were many golden sacrificial stakes at the spot, encrusted with gems. This was for the sake of beauty and not to set an example[That is, the sacrificial stakes need not have been thus ornamented.]. It was there that the thousand-
eyed one, Shachi's husband, attained success. It was there that the eternal lord of all beings, whose energy is piercing, was worshipped by thousands of beings after creating all the worlds. It is there that Nara, Narayana, Brahma,
Yama and Sthanu, as the fifth, perform sacrifices after the end of one thousand yugas. It is there that Vasudeva always faithfully performed sacrifices for one thousand years, for the sake of those who are good. It was there that
Keshava placed thousands and tens of thousands of splendid sacrificial stakes and altars, garlanded in gold.

'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Arriving there, he took the club and the conch shell and the crystal objects
that were with Vrishaparva and were required for the sabha. He brought all this with the assistance of the servant
rakshasas. Bringing all this back, the asura built a matchless sabha. It was beautiful, divine, encrusted with jewels
and famous in the three worlds. He gave the supreme club to Bhimasena and the supreme conch shell Devadatta to
Partha. O great king! The supreme assembly hall had golden pillars and a circumference of ten thousand kishku.
Its beautiful form was radiant and divine, like the fire, the sun or the moon. Its splendour seemed to challenge the
blazing splendour of the sun. Its radiance was divine, as if it was on fire with divine energy. It was like the sky covered with a mountain or a cloud-spacious, large, smooth, without blemish; a remover of fatigue. It had the best
objects in it and its walls were garlanded with gems. It had many jewels, many treasures and had been built well by
Vishvakarma[Meaning, Maya.]. The unrivalled beauty Maya gave it was such that Sudharma of the Dasharhas or Brahma's palace
was no match. On Maya's instruction, eight thousand rakshasas, known as kimkaras[The word kimkara means servant. Literally, a kimkara is someone who asks what (kim) he should do (kara).], guarded and protected the
sabha. They could travel in the sky, were terrible and had large forms and great strength. Their eyes were red and
yellow, their ears were like conch shells and they were armed.

'Inside the sabha, Maya built a matchless tank full of lotuses. Their leaves were made of vaidurya[Lapis lazuli.], and their
stalks were made out of brilliant gems. There was the fragrance of lotuses and there were many fish[This may not be what is meant. The text uses the word dvija, which means any oviparous animal and can refer to fish, snakes or birds. Most translators have interpreted the word as bird (aquatic). But fish seems more
plausible.] in the water.
There were flowering lotuses and it was adorned with fish and turtles. Gentle steps led down into clear and pure
water that was always present and was stirred by the wind. It was decorated as with dots of pearls[This may also be a metaphor. The water on the lotus leaves may have been compared with dots of pearls.]. On seeing the
tank decorated with gems and precious stones, some kings did not recognize and fell into it, out of ignorance[They mistook it for land.].
Around the sabha, there were giant trees that were always flowering. They were beautiful and dark, and cast cool
shade. All the gardens were fragrant. All the ponds were adorned with swans, karandavas[Ducks.] and chakravakas[Geese.].
The wind carried the fragrance of the flowers in the water and those on land everywhere and pleased the Pandavas.
Such was the sabha that Maya built in fourteen months. When it was completed, he informed King Dharmaraja.'
