Sanjaya said, "In the battle, hearing the clatter of chariots and roars of lions, Arjuna asked Govinda to drive the
horses quickly. On hearing Arjuna's words, Govinda told Arjuna, 'I am proceeding extremely swiftly to the spot
where Bhima is stationed.' The horses that were as white as snow, or conch shells, advanced. The harnesses were
decorated with golds, pearls and jewels. It was as if the lord of the gods was advancing in great anger, grasping the
vajra, desiring victory and wishing to kill Jambha[Jambha was a demon killed by Indra.]. There was a large number of chariots, horses, elephants and
foot soldiers, accompanied by the whizzing sound of arrows and the clatter of hooves. The earth and the directions
echoed with the sound. Angrily, they advanced against Jaya, lion among men. There was a great clash between
them and Partha. That great encounter brought destruction to bodies and lives. It was like that between the asuras
and the god Vishnu, supreme among victorious ones, fighting over the lordship of the three worlds. The diademed
and garlanded one was alone. But he severed all their superior and inferior weapons. With sharp arrows that were
like the razor and in the shape of a half-moon, he severed many of their heads and arms and also their umbrellas,
whisks, fans and standards. Large numbers of horses, rathas, foot soldiers and elephants shrieked and fell down in
diverse ways, assuming mutilated forms. They were like a forest shattered by a storm. There were giant elephants
decorated with golden nets. They had been prepared for war, with standards signifying victory. They were mangled
by gold-tufted arrows and looked like blazing mountains. With supreme arrows that were like Vasava's vajra, he
shattered elephants, chariots and horses. He then advanced swiftly, wishing to kill Karna, just as in ancient times,
the lord of the Maruts had advanced to shatter Bala[Bala was a demon killed by Indra (lord of the Maruts).]. O scorcher of enemies! That mighty-armed tiger among
men penetrated the army of the son of a suta, like a makara entering the ocean. O king! On seeing this, those on
your side attacked Pandava, with chariots and foot soldiers and a large number of elephant riders and horse riders.
As they advanced against Partha, they created an extremely loud noise, like the sound made by the waters of a turbulent ocean. In the battle, those maharathas were like tigers. Ready to give up their lives and abandoning fear,
they attacked that tiger among men. They descended there, showering down arrows. However, Arjuna scattered
those soldiers, like clouds dispelled by a strong storm. Those large numbers of rathas were great archers and strikers. They advanced against Arjuna and pierced him with sharp arrows. However, using his arrows, Arjuna dispatched thousands of rathas, elephants and horses towards Yama's abode. In that battle, they were slaughtered by
arrows released from Partha's bow. As fear was generated in the maharathas, they started to melt away. Using his
sharp arrows, Arjuna conveyed four hundred brave maharathas, who were endeavouring, to Yama's abode. In the
battle, they were slain by arrows of many different forms. In their fear, they abandoned Arjuna and fled in different
directions. As they fled, a great uproar arose in the vanguard of the army. O fortunate one! It was like that made by
the giant ocean when it dashes against a mountain. That army was severely routed and driven away by Arjuna's
arrows. O venerable one! Partha then advanced in the direction of the army of the son of a suta. There was a great
noise when he advanced against the enemy. It was like that made in ancient times, when Garuda descended in
search of serpents.

' "On hearing that sound, the immensely strong Bhimasena was extremely delighted, because he desired to catch
sight of Partha. O great king! On hearing that Partha was advancing, the powerful Bhimasena became ready to
give up his life and crushed your soldiers. He was like the force of the wind. He was like the force of the wind in
speed. Bhima, the powerful son of the wind god, roamed around like the wind. O Indra among kings! O lord of the
earth! Your soldiers were afflicted. O great king! They were whirled around, like a shattered boat on the ocean.
Bhima showed those soldiers the dexterity of his hands. He released sharp arrows and conveyed them to Yama's
eternal abode. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In the battle there, the warriors witnessed Bhima's superhuman strength. He was like the Destroyer at the time of the destruction of a yuga. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They were afflicted by Bhimasena's terrible strength. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On seeing this,
King Duryodhana spoke these words, addressing the soldiers, the great archers and the warriors. 'All of you unite
in this battle and kill Bhima. Once he has been slain, I think that all the remaining soldiers will have been killed.'

Accepting the instructions of your son, the kings enveloped Bhima with a shower of arrows from every direction.
O king! There were many elephants and men, desiring victory. O Indra among kings! There were also chariots and
horses that surrounded Vrikodara. O king! O foremost among Bharatas! Having been thus surrounded by valiant
ones from every direction, the brave one was as beautiful as the moon surrounded by stars. O great king! That
supreme of men looked radiant and handsome in the battle, in particular, as beautiful as Vijaya was. All those
kings released showers of arrows at him. They were cruel and their eyes were red in anger. They wished to kill
Vrikodara. In that battle, Bhima drove away that large army with straight-tufted arrows and emerged, like a fish in
the water coming out of a net. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He killed ten thousand elephants that refused
to retreat, two hundred thousand and two hundred men, five thousand horses and one hundred rathas. Having killed
them, Bhima created a river made out of blood and mire. Blood constituted the water and chariots were the eddies.
It was full of crocodiles in the form of elephants. The men were the fish and horses were the sharks. Hair constituted the moss and the weeds. The trunks of the best of elephants were severed and many jewels were borne along.
Thighs were alligators. The fat was the mud. It was full of many heads that were the rocks. The bows and arrows
were like rafts. Clubs and maces were the flags. In the battle, a current of warriors were borne along to Yama's
abode. In an instant, the tiger among men created a river that flowed downwards[To the nether regions. The river Vaitarani flows in the nether regions
and one has to cross it to reach Yama's world.]. It was like the fierce
Vaitarani, difficult for those who have not perfected their souls to cross. Wherever the spot where Pandaveya,
supreme among rathas, advanced, in that spot he brought down hundreds and thousands of warriors.

' "O great king! Having seen the deeds performed by Bhimasena in the battle, Duryodhana spoke these words to
Shakuni. 'O maternal uncle! Defeat the immensely strong Bhimasena in the encounter. If the immensely strong
Pandaveya is vanquished, I think that our victory is ensured.' O great king! At this, the powerful Soubala advanced, surrounded by his brothers, to engage in that great battle. In the battle, he rushed against Bhimasena,
whose valour was terrible. He countered the brave one, like the shoreline against the abode of makaras. Though he
was restrained by sharp arrows, Bhima did not retreat. O Indra among kings! Shakuni struck him on the left flank
and between the breasts with iron arrows that were gold-tufted and had been sharpened on stone. O great king!
Those golden arrows, tufted with the feathers of herons and peacocks, penetrated the great-souled one's armour
and sank in. In the battle, Bhima was severely pierced by those gold-decorated arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He violently shot an arrow towards Soubala. O king! As the terrible arrow arrived, the immensely
strong Shakuni, the scorcher of enemies, displayed the dexterity of his hands and shattered it into one hundred
fragments. O lord of the earth! When it fell down on the ground, Bhima was enraged. He laughed and severed
Soubala's bow with a broad-headed arrow. The powerful Soubala cast aside that severed bow and picked up another bow and sixteen broad-headed arrows. O great king! With four of those broad-headed and straight-tufted arrows,
he struck Bhima's horses and his charioteer with a fifth. O lord of the earth! He severed his standard with one and
his umbrella with two. With four more, Subala's son struck his four horses[This doesn't add up to a count of sixteen. That's because the Critical
edition excises some shlokas. In these, the missing arrows are used to
strike Bhima.]. O great king! At this, the powerful
Bhimasena became wrathful. In that battle, he hurled a javelin that was completely made out of iron, but had a
golden handle. Released from Bhima's arm, it was like the flickering tongue of a serpent. It swiftly descended on
the great-souled Soubala's chariot. O lord of the earth! The javelin had been hurled by the enraged Bhimasena and
was decorated with gold. But he[Shakuni.] seized it and hurled it back and it penetrated the great-souled Pandava's left
arm. It then fell down on the ground, like lightning descending from the sky. O great king! In every direction, the
sons of Dhritarashtra let out a loud cry. However, Bhima was not prepared to tolerate those spirited roars, like
those of lions. In haste, the maharatha grasped a bow and strung it. O Indra among kings! In a short while, in that
battle, the immensely strong one enveloped Soubala's soldiers, who were prepared to give up their lives, with arrows. O lord of the earth! He killed his[Shakuni's.] four horses and his charioteer. The valiant one swiftly severed his standard with a broad-headed arrow. With the horses slain, the supreme among men abandoned his chariot. His eyes
were red with rage and he stretched his bow, sighing deeply. O king! He covered Bhima from every direction with
many arrows. However, the powerful Bhimasena countered him with force. He angrily severed his bow and
pierced him with sharp arrows. O lord of men! Powerfully and extremely severely pierced by the enemy, the afflicter of enemies fell down on the ground, with only a little bit of life left in him. O lord of the earth! On discerning that he had lost his senses, your son bore him away on his own chariot, while Bhimasena looked on. On seeing
that the tiger among men was taken away on the chariot, the sons of Dhritarashtra retreated. They suffered from
great fear on account of Bhima and, terrified, fled in different directions. O king! When the archer Bhimasena had
defeated Soubala, your son, Duryodhana, was shattered by great fear. Thinking about his maternal uncle, he fled on
swift horses. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing that the king had retreated, the troops withdrew,
abandoning the duels that were going on in different directions. On seeing this, all the atirathas among the sons of
Dhritarashtra also retreated. Bhima quickly rushed at them, showering down many hundreds of arrows. Slaughtered by Bhima, the sons of Dhritarashtra withdrew.

' "O king! From every direction, they sought refuge with Karna, who was stationed in the battle. That greatly
valiant and immensely strong one became like an island to them. O king! O tiger among men! It was as if mariners
who suffered from a calamity and had a shattered boat found comfort on reaching an island. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! In that way, those on your side sought refuge with Karna. O king! Having stationed themselves
there, they cheered each other. They advanced to fight again, preferring to die rather than retreat." '
