'Markandeya said, "O Yudhishthira! When all this about the dharma of salvation had been told to the brahmana, he
was extremely pleased. He spoke to the hunter who knew about dharma. 'You have told me everything, with all the
arguments. It seems that there is nothing about dharma that you do not know.'

'"The hunter replied, 'O supreme among brahmanas! With your own eyes, behold my dharma. O bull among
brahmanas! It is through this that I have achieved success. O illustrious one! Arise and swiftly enter my house. O
one learned in dharma! You should see my mother and my father.'"

'Markandeya said, "At these words, he[Koushika.] entered and saw an extremely beautiful house. It was lovely and
whitewashed and was divided into four parts. It was like a house of the gods and was worshipped by the gods. It
had excellent seats and beds and was fragrant with perfumes. After having eaten, his adored parents were comfortably seated on excellent seats. They were dressed in white. On seeing them, the hunter who knew about dharma
prostrated himself, with his head at their feet. The old ones said, 'O one who is learned about dharma! Arise. Arise.
May dharma always protect you. We are extremely pleased with your purity. May you have a long life. O son! You
have always been a good son. You have worshipped us for a long time. You have not acknowledged a god even
among the gods themselves. Through self-control, you have attained the self-control of the brahmanas. O son!
Your fathers, grandfathers and great grandfathers have always been satisfied with you, because of your self-control
and your worshipping of us. In thought, deed and words, you have never deviated from servitude. It seems to us
that you have no other thought in your mind. O son! Like Jamadagni's son Rama[Parashurama.], you have done everything to
serve your aged parents. Indeed, you have done more.' Then the hunter who knew about dharma introduced the
brahmana to them and they welcomed the brahmana with honours.

'"The brahmana accepted the honours and asked them, 'Is everything well in your household, with your sons
and your servants? Are you physically well, without any disease?' The old couple replied, 'O brahmana! Everything is well at home and the servants are fine too. O illustrious one! Did you confront any impediments in coming
here?' The brahmana happily said that he hadn't faced any problems. The hunter who knew about dharma then
spoke these words of great import to the brahmana. 'O illustrious one! These two, my father and my mother, are
the supreme gods for me and I do for them what is undertaken for the gods. There are thirty-three gods, with
Shakra at the forefront. Just as they are worshipped by all the worlds, so do I tend to my aged parents. Just as brahmanas collect offerings for the gods, so do I unceasingly act for these two. O brahmana! My father and my mother
are my supreme gods. O brahmana! I continuously satisfy them with flowers, fruits and gems. They are like the
fires the learned ones speak about. O brahmana! They are everything to me, like sacrifices and the four Vedas. My
life, my wife, my sons and my well-wishers are for them. With my sons and my wife, I always serve them. I bathe
them myself and wash their feet. O supreme among brahmanas! I give them food myself. I only speak pleasant
things to them, avoiding the unpleasant. So as to bring pleasure to them, I even do that which is adharma. O
supreme among brahmanas! O brahmana! Knowing dharma to be my preceptor, I tirelessly serve them. O brahmana! It has been said that a man prospers through five gurus-the father, the mother, the fire, he himself and the
preceptor. O supreme among brahmanas! If they are served properly, they always remain for him, like well-tended
fires. That is the eternal dharma for those who are in the householder stage.'"'
