Dhritarashtra asked, "O Yudhishthira! O mighty-armed one! O son! Are you well? What about your sons and
all the residents of the city and the countryside? What about those who depend on you? Are they well? O
lord! What about your advisers, large number of servants and seniors? Are the citizens served by the rajarshi so
that they can obtain their subsistence? Is the treasury filled through revenue that does not violate any norms? Do
you behave in the proper way towards enemies, neutrals and friends? Do you look after brahmanas properly and
show them favours? O bull among the Bharata lineage! Are they satisfied with your good conduct? What about enemies, seniors,  citizens, servants and relatives? O  Indra among kings! Are  you  devoted  towards  ancestors  and
gods? O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Do you worship guests with food and drink? Are the brahmanas in
your dominion engaged in their own tasks? What about kshatriyas, large numbers of vaishyas, shudras and householders? Do the women, the young and the aged have to grieve or beg for anything? O bull among men! Are
women honoured in your household? This lineage of rajarshis has obtained you as a king. O great king! I hope you
are acting in the proper way and its fame is not diminishing."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having been thus addressed, he[Yudhishthira.] replied in the proper way. Those questions were about
his welfare and deeds and he also asked questions about welfare. "O king! Are your austerities prospering? I hope
exhaustion is not slowing you down. Without getting tired, is my mother able to serve you? O king! I hope her sojourn in the forest becomes successful. This is my elder mother[Meaning Gandhari.] and she is afflicted and worn out through excessive exposure to the wind. She has been engaged in fierce austerities. I hope the queen is not suffering on account
of this. Her immensely valorous sons have followed the dharma of kshatriyas and have been slain. I hope she does
not censure us or regard us as sinners. O king! How is Vidura? We do not see him here. Is Sanjaya well and is he
established in austerities?"

'Thus addressed, King Dhritarashtra replied. "O son! Vidura is well. He has resorted to fierce austerities. He
does not eat anything and subsists only on air. He is emaciated and consists only of veins. Sometimes, brahmanas
catch sight of him, alone in this forest." While he was speaking in this way, Kshatta was seen from a distance. His
hair was matted and there were small pieces of wood in his mouth. He was emaciated and naked. He was covered
in filth and smeared with pollen from wild flowers. The lord of the earth called out to him. However, on seeing
such a large number of people in the hermitage, he suddenly began to run away. Alone, King Yudhishthira followed him. He entered that terrible forest, sometimes seeing him and sometimes unable to see him. The king pursued him carefully and called out, "Listen. O Vidura! I am your beloved King Yudhishthira." Vidura, supreme
among intelligent ones, entered another solitary part of the forest and stood there alone, clinging to a tree. The king
saw that he was extremely emaciated and his form alone could be discerned. That is the way the immensely intelligent Yudhishthira could make out the immensely wise one. Standing before him, he said, "I am Yudhishthira." The
king said this in Vidura's hearing and he received them only with his consciousness. He glanced at the king with
unblinking eyes. Vidura fixed his gaze on his eyes. The intelligent Vidura penetrated his body with his body, his
breath of life with his breath of life and his senses with his senses. Thus, using the strength of yoga, he entered the
king's  body. Vidura  ignited  Dharmaraja's  energy.  Vidura's  body  still  remained  there,  with  unmoving  eyes  and
clinging to the tree. The king saw that he had lost his senses. But he also realized that his many qualities had become more powerful. Pandava Dharmaraja remembered his own great energy[Both Vidura and Yudhishthira had been born from Dharma.]. O lord of the earth! He thus got to
know everything about his earlier self. Vyasa had told him about the great energy that comes from the dharma of
yoga. The learned Dharmaraja wished to perform the rites and perform the acts of cremation there. But an invisible
voice was heard. "O king! What was known as Vidura should not be cremated. Your body is also in him and he is
nothing but eternal Dharma. O king! He will obtain the worlds known as Santanaka[Literally, something that spreads and is pervasive.]. O scorcher of enemies! He
followed the dharma of mendicants and you should not grieve about him." Having been thus addressed, Dharmaraja returned from that spot. He told the king who was Vichitravirya's son everything that had happened. The radiant
king, all the people and Bhimasena and the others were filled with great wonder. Hearing this, the king was delighted and spoke to Dharma's son. "Accept this water, roots and fruits from me. O king! It has been said that a
guest should be offered whatever one partakes oneself." The king who was Dharma's son agreed to this. They ate
under trees. All of them accepted the fruits, the roots and the water. They spent the night under trees.'
