'Sanjaya said, "The vyuha of the Pandavas was thus being agitated in every direction. The Parthas, the Panchalas
and the Somakas retreated a great distance away. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A terrible encounter commenced and it made the body hair stand up, like the fierce one that causes the destruction of the universe at the end
of a yuga. The powerful Drona roared repeatedly in that battle. When the Panchalas and the Pandus were being
slaughtered and decimated in that encounter, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira could not see what should be done. O Indra
among kings! He began to think about what might transpire. He looked in all the directions, in the hope of seeing
Savyasachi. But Yudhishthira could not see either Partha or Madhava. He could not see that tiger among men, the
one with the bull among apes on his banner. Nor could he hear Gandiva's roar and his senses were overcome with
dejection. Nor did he see Satyaki, the foremost of rathas among the Vrishnis. Because of these thoughts, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira's limbs became weak. Not being able to see those two bulls among men[Arjuna and Satyaki.], he could not find
any peace. The immensely illustrious Dharmaraja was afraid that the world would censure him. The mighty-armed
one began to think about the chariot of Shini's descendant. 'In the battle, I sent him to follow Phalguna's footsteps.
Satyaki, Shini's descendant, is truly someone who dispels the fears of his friends. Earlier, I only had one reason for
anxiety and now there are two. I should have news about both Satyaki and Pandava Dhananjaya. I sent Satyaki to
follow Pandava's footsteps. In this battle, whom will I send to follow in Satvata's footsteps? If I make efforts to
only obtain tidings of my brother and ignore Yuyudhana, the worlds will censure me and say that Dharmaraja Yudhishthira acted only to search for his brother and abandoned Varshneya Satyaki, for whom truth is valour. I am
scared of the censure of the world. Therefore, I will send Partha Vrikodara in the footsteps of the great-souled
Madhava. The love that I have for Arjuna, the destroyer of enemies, is the same as the one I bear towards Satvata,
the brave one from the Vrishni lineage, who is invincible in battle. I have imposed an extremely heavy burden on
Shini's descendant. Because of a friend's request, and to enhance his glory, the immensely strong one has penetrated the army of the Bharatas, like a makara in an ocean. I hear a loud noise from the brave ones, who have not retreated and have united to fight against the intelligent and brave one from the Vrishni lineage. It is certain that they
are too many and too strong. It seems to me that the time has come for the archer, Pandava Bhimasena, to go to the
spot where those two maharathas are. There is nothing on this earth that Bhima cannot withstand. In a battle, he
can make efforts and stand up to all the archers on earth. Resorting to the strength of his own arms, he can stand up
to all enemies. All of us have resorted to that great-souled one's strength of arms and have returned from the exile
in the forest, without being vanquished in a battle. If Bhimasena goes towards Satvata and Pandava, both Satvata
and Phalguna will find a protector in the battle. They have Vasudeva himself as a protector and are skilled in the
use of weapons. However, I must be certain and dispel the anxiety. Therefore, I will appoint Bhimasena to follow
in Satvata's footsteps. Having done this, I think that I will have made arrangements for Satyaki's protection.' O
king! Having thus made up his mind, Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, asked his charioteer to take him to Bhima.

'"On hearing Dharmaraja's words, the charioteer, who was skilled in the handling of horses, drove the chariot,
which was decorated with gold, towards Bhima. Having reached Bhimasena, the king remembered the occasion
and overcome by dejection, entreated him in many ways. 'He conquered the gods, the gandharvas and the daityas
on a single chariot. O Bhimasena! But I do not see the standard of your younger brother.' Bhimasena spoke to
Dharmaraja, who had arrived there. 'Never before have I seen, or heard, you overcome by such grief. In earlier
times, when we were afflicted by dejection, you were the one who assured us. O Indra among king! Arise! Arise
and instruct me about what should be done. O one who gives honours! There is no task that I cannot accomplish. O
foremost among the Kuru lineage! Command me and do not have this sorrow in your mind.' The king's face was
cheerless.

'"He sighed like a cobra and spoke these words to Bhimasena, his voice choking with tears. 'The blare of the
conch shell Panchajanya can be heard, as it is being sounded by an angry and illustrious Vasudeva. It is certain that
Dhananjaya, your brother, has now been killed and is lying down. With him slain, it is certain that Janardana is
fighting now. The Pandavas obtain their lives on his spirit and his valour[This is a reference to Arjuna, not Krishna.]. When we are in fear, we turn towards
him, like the immortals towards the one with the thousand eyes[Indra.]. The brave one has gone in search of Saindhava
and has penetrated the army of the Bharatas. O Bhima! We know about his going and he will not return. Gudakesha is dark and youthful. He is handsome and mighty-armed. He has a broad chest and giant shoulders. He is like a
crazy elephant in his valour. His eyes are coppery, like those of a partridge[The chakora bird.], and extend the fear of the enemies.
O fortunate one! O destroyer of enemies! That is the reason for my sorrow. O mighty-armed one! It is because of
Arjuna and because of Satvata that my anxiety increases, like a blazing fire into which oblations are repeatedly
poured. I cannot see his standard and that is the reason I am afflicted by misery. Know maharatha Satvata to be a
tiger among men. That maharatha has followed in the footsteps of your younger brother. O mighty-armed one! I
cannot see him and that is the reason I am afflicted by misery. That is the reason Krishna, skilled in fighting, is certainly fighting in this encounter, because that brave one and the valiant Pandava, are no longer alive. O Kounteya!
Therefore, if you think this to be your duty, go where Dhananjaya and the immensely valorous Satyaki have gone.
O one who knows about dharma! These are my words and I am your elder brother. Know what should be known,
that Satyaki is just like Arjuna to you. O Partha! To do that which will bring me pleasure, he has followed
Savyasachi. Those tracks are difficult to traverse and terrible. They cannot be followed by those who have not
cleansed their souls.'

'"Bhimasena replied, 'There is a chariot that bore Brahma, Ishana[Shiva.], Indra and Varuna earlier. The two Krishnas have departed on that and they have no reason for fear. But I will bear your words on my head and go. Do not
grieve. I will meet those tigers among men and give them your message.'"

'Sanjaya said, "Having spoken those words, he prepared to depart. He repeatedly handed over Yudhishthira to
Dhrishtadyumna and the other powerful well-wishers. The greatly powerful Bhimasena spoke to Dhrishtadyumna.

'O mighty-armed one! You know that maharatha Drona will use every means at his disposal to seize Dharmaraja.
O Parshata! Once I am gone, there is no task as important to you, and to all of us, as that of protecting the king.
Partha has spoken to me in this way and I cannot venture to contradict him. I will therefore go to the spot where
Saindhava, who is about to face death, is stationed. It is my duty to unhesitatingly follow Dharmaraja's words. In
the battle today, make every effort to protect Partha Yudhishthira. In the encounter, this is the most important of all
your tasks.' O great king! Thus addressed by Vrikodara, Dhrishtadyumna replied, 'O Partha! I will do as you desire. Go without any hesitation. Without killing Dhrishtadyumna in the battle, Drona will not be able to seize Dharmaraja, regardless of what efforts he makes in the encounter.' Pandava thus handed over the king to Dhrishtadyumna. He showed his obeisance to his elder and his senior and went towards Phalguna. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Kounteya was embraced by Dharmaraja, who inhaled the fragrance of his head and pronounced
sacred benedictions over him. The mighty-armed Bhimasena was attired in armour and beautiful earrings. The
supreme of rathas had armlets and body-armour and arrows. The immensely intelligent one had armour that was
made out of black iron and was decorated with gold. He was as beautiful as a cloud tinged with lightning, adorning
a mountain. He was well decorated in garments that were yellow, red and white. There was armour around his
neck. He was as beautiful as a cloud adorned with Indra's weapon[Indra's bow, that is, a rainbow.]. O lord of the earth! As Bhimasena was
about to set out, to fight with your soldiers, Panchajanya's terrible blare was heard again. On hearing that terrible
roar, the three worlds were struck with great fear. Dharma's mighty-armed son again spoke to Bhima. 'The foremost one from the Vrishni lineage is blowing fiercely on his conch shell. The king of conch shells is resounding on
earth and in heaven. There is no doubt that Savyasachi confronts a great hardship and the wielder of the chakra and
the club[Vishnu, hence Krishna.] is fighting with all the Kurus. There is no doubt that the immensely noble Kunti, Droupadi and Subhadra, together with their relatives, are witnessing evil omens now. O Bhima! Swiftly go to the spot where
Dhananjaya is. O Partha! I wish to see Dhananjaya and all the directions and the sub-directions are benumbed because of that, and on Satvata's account. Go. Leave!' Thus did he again address Bhimasena. Severely urged by the
brother, the brother who always had the brother's welfare in mind[Bhima and Yudhishthira respectively.], caused battle drums to be sounded. Bhima
blew on his conch shell. He roared like a lion and repeatedly stretched his bow. He displayed his terrible self and
suddenly dashed against the enemy.

'"The supreme horses were obedient and fast. They were controlled by Vishoka[Bhima's charioteer.] and possessed the speed of
the mind and the wind. They bore him instantly. With his hands, Partha rubbed the string of his bow and stretched
it. He crushed and agitated the head of that army. As the mighty-armed one advanced, the brave Panchalas and the
Somakas followed him with their soldiers, like the immortals after Maghavan. O great king! The brothers Duhshala, Chitrasena, Kundabhedi, Vivimshati, Durmukha, Duhsaha, Vikarna, Shala, Vinda, Anuvinda[Not to be confused with Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti.], Sumukha,
Dirghabahu, Sudarshana, Vrindaraka, Suhasta, Sushena, Dirghalochana, Abhaya, Roudrakarma, Suvarma, Durvimochana and many foremost among rathas, with their soldiers and followers, united and attacked the brave Bhimasena in that battle. On seeing them, the powerful Kounteya Bhimasena forcefully advanced against them, like a
lion against small animals. The brave ones there exhibited great and divine weapons and countered Bhima with
their arrows, like clouds shrouding a sun that has arisen. But he forcefully passed through them and attacked
Drona's array. He showered down arrows on the array of elephants that was in front of him. In a short while, the
son of the wind god swiftly drove away that army of elephants in all the directions and pierced them. Terrified by
those arrows, they roared, like deer in a forest. All the elephants fled, shrieking in fierce tones. He forcefully
passed through them, and again attacked Drona's array.

'"The preceptor checked him, like the shoreline against an advancing ocean. He smiled and struck him on the
forehead with an iron arrow. Pandava was resplendent there, like the sun when it casts its rays upwards. The preceptor thought that Bhima would show him reverence and worship him, as Phalguna had done earlier and spoke to
Vrikodara. 'O Bhimasena! O immensely strong one! In the midst of the enemy, without vanquishing me in battle,
you are incapable of penetrating into the hostile forces. With my permission, your younger brother and Krishna
penetrated earlier. But you are incapable of penetrating into this array.' On hearing the words of his preceptor, Bhi-
ma was not scared and sighing, spoke to Drona, his eyes coppery red with anger. 'O blind brahmana! In this field
of battle, it cannot be that Arjuna has penetrated with your permission. He is invincible, even against one of
Shakra's special army. If he showed you supreme worship, that was only for the sake of honouring you. But I am
not Arjuna. O Drona! I am the angry Bhimasena, your enemy. We look upon you as our father, our preceptor and
our relative, and ourselves as your sons. Thinking in this way, all of us have always bowed down before you. But it
is evident that you have uttered contrary words against us today. If you think of yourself as our enemy, let it be that
way. If you are like an enemy, Bhima will perform the task that he has to do.' O king! Saying this, Bhima whirled
a club that was like Yama's staff and hurled it towards Drona, who leapt down from his chariot. It uprooted
Drona's horses, charioteer, standard and chariot and crushed many other warriors with its energy, like the wind
among the trees. The supreme ratha was again surrounded by your sons. Drona, supreme among warriors, ascended another chariot. O great king! The powerful Bhimasena became angry and enveloped the array of chariots that
was in front of him with a shower of arrows. Your maharatha sons were struck in that battle. Bhima, whose
strength was terrible, fought with the warriors who were desirous of victory.

'"Wishing to kill the descendant of the Pandu lineage, Duhshasana angrily grasped a javelin and hurled it[Javelin is only partly correct. The text uses the word rathashakti. While shakti is a javelin, rathashakti is the
pole that holds up the standard in a chariot. However, Duhshasana seems to have hurled a javelin, rather than
such a pole.]. It
was sharp and was completely made out of iron. Thus released by your son, that giant javelin descended. Bhima
sliced it into two fragments and it was wonderful. The angry and powerful one then used three arrows to kill Kundabhedi, Sushena and Dirghanetra. Among your brave sons who were fighting, he again slew the valiant Vrindaraka,
the extender of the deeds of the Kuru lineage. Bhima again killed three of your sons with three arrows, Abhaya,
Roudrakarma and Durvimochana. O great king! Your sons were thus slaughtered by the powerful Bhima, supreme
among strikers, and surrounded him from all sides. Kounteya laughed and used other arrows to send your sons,
Vinda, Anuvinda and Survarmana to Yama's abode. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Your valiant son, Sudarshana, was quickly pierced in that battle and fell down dead. Within a short period of time, the descendant of the
Pandu lineage quickly shattered that army of chariots and drove it away in all the directions. O lord of the earth!
They were like deer frightened at the roar of the chariot. Your sons were slaughtered in that battle. All those rathas
were afflicted by their fear of Bhimasena and ran away. Kounteya followed that large army of your sons. O king!
In that encounter, he pierced the Kouravas from every direction. O great king! Those on your side were killed by
Bhimasena. They abandoned Bhima and urging their supreme horses, fled from the battle. The immensely strong
Bhimasena vanquished them in that encounter. Pandava roared like a lion and slapped his arms. The immensely
strong Bhima made a loud noise with his palms. He passed through those rathas and attacked Drona's array."'
