'Sanjaya said, "Alambusa fearlessly roamed around in the field of battle[Obviously in another part of the field and away from Bhima.]. Hidimba's son[Ghatotkacha.] attacked him and
powerfully struck him with sharp arrows. The battle that commenced between those lions among rakshasas caused
great terror. They invoked many different kinds of maya, like Shakra and Shambara. Alambusa was extremely angry and struck Ghatotkacha. Ghatotkacha pierced Alambusa between the breasts with twenty iron arrows and repeatedly roared like a lion. O king! In that way, Alambusa also repeatedly pierced Hidimba's son, who was invincible in battle and filled the sky with his roars. Those two immensely strong Indras among the rakshasas were extremely enraged. They fought and used maya against each other, but neither surpassed the other. They insolently
created a hundred different kinds of maya and confounded each other. They were extremely skilled in fighting with
maya and one's maya was countered by the other one's. O king! Whatever maya was used by Ghatotkacha in that
battle, was destroyed by Alambusa's maya. O king! On seeing Alambusa, skilled in fighting with maya, fight in
this way, the Pandavas were extremely enraged. O king! Having been thus greatly enraged, all those supreme
rathas, Bhimasena and the others, attacked and surrounded him. O venerable one! They penned him in with a large
number of chariots. They surrounded him with arrows from every direction, like torches against an elephant[The image is that of men with torches surrounding an elephant.].
He countered their weapons with the maya of his own weapons. He freed himself from those roaming rathas, like
an elephant from a forest fire. He stretched his terrible bow, which had a roar like that of Indra's vajra. He pierced
the son of the wind god with twenty-five arrows and Bhimasena's son with five. He pierced Yudhishthira with
three arrows, Sahadeva with seven and Nakula with seventy-three. O venerable one! He pierced each of Droupadi's five sons with five arrows and roared terribly. Bhimsena pierced the rakshasa back with nine arrows, Sahadeva
with five, Yudhishthira with one hundred, Nakula with sixty-four and each of Droupadi's sons with three arrows.
In that encounter, Hidimba's son pierced the rakshasa with five hundred arrows. The immensely strong one pierced
him back with seventy and roared like a lion. Having been pierced from every direction by those maharathas, the
great archer pierced each of them back with five arrows.

'"O foremost among the Bharata lineage! In that battle, the rakshasa who was Hidimba's son became enraged
with the other wrathful rakshasa and pierced him with seventy arrows. Severely and powerfully pierced, the immensely strong Indra among the rakshasas swiftly showered arrows that were gold-tufted and had been sharpened
on stone. Those straight-tufted arrows penetrated the rakshasa[Ghatotkacha.], like angry and immensely strong serpents penetrating a mountain top. O king! The Pandavas released sharp arrows from every direction. In that battle, Ghatotkacha, Hidimba's son, desired the victory of the Pandavas and became anxious. He[Alambusa.] was like a burnt mountain summit, or like a broken mass of collyrium. He raised him up in his arms and whirled him around
repeatedly[That is, Ghatotkacha picked up Alambusa.]. He crused him powerfully down on the ground, like an earthen pot dashed against a rock. He[Ghatotkacha.]
possessed strength and dexterity. He also possessed valour. In that battle, Bhimasena's enraged son terrified all the
soldiers. All his[Alambusa's.] limbs were mangled. His bones and ornaments were shattered. He was slain by the brave Ghatotkacha, like the twisted wood of a shala tree. On seeing that the traveller of the night had been killed, the Parthas
were delighted. They roared like lions and waved their garments around. O bull among Bharatas! On seeing that
Alambusa, terrible in form and the immensely strong Indra among the rakshasas had been killed and shattered like
a mountain, the soldiers on your side uttered sounds of lamentation. Curious people assembled to see the rakshasa's body, which was lying on the ground, like a lump of charcoal. Having killed the supremely strong one, the
rakshasa Ghatotkacha roared loudly, like Vasava after slaying Bala. Having performed this extremely difficult
deed, Ghatotkacha was honoured by his fathers and their relatives. He was delighted that the enemy Alambusa had
been slain, like a ripe alambusa fruit[Since alambusa is only a medicinal plant or herb, with small berries, this is only for the sake of the pun.]. A great sound arose[In the Pandava camp.]. There was the sound of many different kinds of
conch shells and the noise of arrows. Having heard this, the Kouravas roared back in return and this fierce sound
seemed to touch the entire earth."'
