Vasishtha said, 'Hear about awakening and the unmanifest one, from whom all qualities are created. He sustains these qualities and creates and withdraws them. O lord of men! For the sake of sport, he[The brahman. Throughout this chapter, the shlokas are very difficult to understand and several liberties have
been taken.] divides his
own self into many parts and collects them again. The one who can understand this action[The jivatman.] does not understand.
Because he is capable of understanding the one who is not manifest, he is spoken of as budhyamana[Budhyamana means the one who comprehends and is being used for the jivatman, which can understand the nature of the paramatman.]. Nevertheless, he cannot understand the one who is not manifest, whether it is with qualities or without qualities. Therefore,
rare is the case when he is awakened. The learned texts have said that whenever budhyamana gets to know the unmanifest and twenty-fifth one, he becomes united with it. That is the reason the one who is not manifest is spoken
of as ignorant[This seems to be a reference to the jivatman, but can mean prakriti too.]. Budhyamana is spoken of as being both unmanifest and ignorant. Nothing with life can comprehend the great-souled and twenty-fifth. The twenty-sixth is sparkling, immeasurable and eternal and it can understand[The jivatman seems to be the twenty-fourth, prakriti the twenty-fifth and the paramatman the twenty-sixth.]. It can always understand the twenty-fourth and the twenty-fifth. The immensely radiant one[Prakriti.] follows her
nature, vis-a-vis both what is seen and is not seen. O son! Those who truly understand can not only see the twenty-
fourth and the twenty-fifth, but also the unmanifest brahman. When a person knows the atman, he thinks himself to
be it[Thinks that the jivatman is no different from the paramatman.]. He uses that sight to look at prakriti and the unmanifest. With that pure and unsullied knowledge, he comprehends the supreme. O tiger among kings! He is then established in knowledge about the twenty-sixth. He then
casts aside the unmanifest[Prakriti.], which is subject to the rules of creation and destruction. Though because of consciousness, prakriti is invested with qualities, he knows the one without qualities. Having seen the unmanifest, he
is only full of dharma. Having approached the whole, he is freed and obtains the atman. This is said to have form
and also not have form[Because of ignorance, the brahman is perceived to have form.]. It is immortal and without decay. O one who grants honours! Though it resorts to what
has form, it has no form. The learned ones talk about twenty five principles. O son! But the intelligent one[The atman.] has
no form and is beyond these principles. The swift freeing from principles is a sign of intelligence. A wise person
knows himself to be the twenty-sixth and accepts himself to be the immortal one, without decay. Through the
strength of the absolute, he has no doubt that he is identical to it[The jivatman being equated with the paramatman.]. However, though awakened by the intelligent
twenty-sixth, there is still ignorance. The sacred texts of sankhya have spoken about the signs of this. When one is
united with consciousness and the twenty-fifth[Prakriti.], because of that consciousness, one does not comprehend the
sense of unity. O lord of Mithila! O lord of men! Because of the rules of attachment, one is not awakened. However, when one is awakened and loses attachment, one realizes unity. Without any sense of attachment, a learned person approaches the twenty-sixth. Abandoning the unmanifest[Prakriti.],  he obtains powers  and comprehends the truth.
With knowledge about the twenty-sixth awakened, he realizes that the twenty four are valueless. As indicated in
the sacred texts of sankhya, I have spoken to you about the true nature of knowledge. It is with the sight of the sacred texts that one must consider the many and the one. One must understand the difference between the gnat and
the fig[Gnats are found inside ripe figs.], the fish and the water and this and that[The jivatman and the paramatman.]. That is the one one must approach the one and the many. When
one has knowledge about ignorance and the unmanifest, that is said to be emancipation. This twenty-fifth resides in
bodies and is said to be freed through comprehension about the unmanifest. It has been determined that this is the
only method for emancipation and there is no other. Because it[The jivatman.] dwells in the body, it conveys the impression of
being different. By uniting with purity, one becomes pure. By uniting with intelligence, one becomes intelligent. O
bull among men! By uniting with the dharma of emancipation, one becomes emancipated. By following the dharma of becoming engaged in this way, the atman becomes engaged. By striving for emancipation, one unites with
emancipation. By peforming pure deeds, one becomes pure and resplendent. By uniting with the unblemished atman, one's own atman becomes unblemished[Respectively, the paramatman and the jivatman.]. By uniting with the absolute, one obtains the absolute in one's atman. By uniting with the one who is free, one uses that freedom to obtain freedom.

'"'O great king! I have told you the truth. I have accurately described the exact truth to you. This is about the
eternal, pure and original brahman, and accept the purport of this. O king! You can pass on this supreme knowledge to a person who does not follow the Vedas, as long as that person is free of malice. But he must seek this
knowledge, which leads to an awakening. As long as he bows down and follows instructions, you can pass this on,
for the sake of his awakening. However, it should not be passed on to a person who has falsehood in his soul, or is
deceitful, impotent or fraudulent in his intelligence. Nor must the knowledge be given to learned men who are jealous. Listen to the ones to whom it can be given. A person who is faithful, possesses qualities, one who always abstains from censuring others, one who performs pure yoga for the sake of knowledge, a forgiving person who performs rites for the sake of welfare, one who can discriminate about good conduct, a person who loves the rituals,
one who is extremely learned and does not engage in quarrels, one who is knowledgable and forgives those who
cause injury, one who possesses strength and self-control-these are the people to whom it can be given. It is said
that this pure and supreme knowledge of the brahman should not be given to those who are devoid of these qualities. Those who know about dharma have said that no benefits or fruits accrue from giving it to undeserving people. If a person does not observe the vows, it should not be given to him, even if one obtains the earth, full of riches, in exchange. O Indra among men! But there is no doubt that this supreme knowledge can be communicated to a
person who has conquered his senses. O Karala! Having heard about the supreme brahman now, you should not
have the slightest reason for fear. I have spoken about the pure and the supreme, the dispeller of sorrow, and without a beginning, a middle and an end. O king! This is deep and without birth and death. It is auspicious and free
from disease and fear. Having seen it, abandon all your delusion now. Know that this is the true nature of knowledge. O lord of men! In ancient times, I gratified the eternal Hiranyagarbha and obtained it from him. I made efforts to please the one who is fierce in his energy. Having obtained knowledge about the supreme brahman, I have
now passed it on to you. O Indra among men! Asked by you, I have now told you exactly what I learned. O Indra
among men! This is what I obtained from Brahma. This is great knowledge, the ancient wisdom about emancipation.'"

'Bhishma said, "O great king! I have told you about the instructions of the supreme rishi. I have spoken to you
about the twenty-fifth, the supreme brahman from whom one does not return. If one does not comprehend this
supreme knowledge, one has to return again. But if one knows the truth, there is no decay and no death. O son! O
king! I heard about this supreme and beneficial knowledge from the devarshi[Narada.] and have recounted it to you. The
great-souled Vasishtha obtained it from Hiranyagarbha. Narada obtained it from Vasishtha, tiger among rishis. I
got to know about the great and eternal brahman from Narada. O Indra among Kouravas! Do not grieve. You have
heard about this supreme objective. A person who knows about the destructible and the indestructible has no reason to fear. O lord of the earth! A person who does not know about it has reason to fear. Because of ignorance and
being foolish in the soul, a person has to repeatedly return. After death, he is born thousands of times and dies
again. He is sometimes born in the world of the gods, but is also born as inferior species. However, if he is purified
over time, he can cross that ocean of ignorance. That ocean of ignorance is terrible. It is said to be unmanifest and
fathomless. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Day after day, beings are submerged in it. O lord of the earth!
But you have crossed that eternal, unmanifest and fathomless ocean of ignorance. Therefore, you have been freed
from rajas and from tamas."'
