'Sanjaya said, "All the Pandavas placed Shikhandi at the head. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that encounter, they surrounded Bhishma from all sides and wounded him, using extremely terrible shataghnis, javelins,
battleaxes, clubs, maces, spears, many types of catapults, gold-tufted arrows, spikes, lances, kampanas, iron arrows, vatsadantas and slings. Together with all the Srinjayas, they assailed Bhishma. His armour was shattered and
he was oppressed everywhere, in many ways. But despite having been pierced in his inner organs, Gangeya was
not distressed. The radiant bow and arrows and weapons seemed to be like the flames of a fire, fanned by the wind.
The roar of the wheels of his chariot was the heat. His great weapons constituted the fire itself. His colourful bow
was extremely resplendent and the one with the great bow was the destroyer of brave ones. Bhishma was like the
fire at the end of a yuga, traversing through the enemy. He passed and brought down masses of chariots in that battle. He was again seen, roaming around in the midst of those kings among men. He ignored the king of Panchala
and Dhrishtaketu and forcibly penetrated into the midst of the Pandava army. He pierced Satyaki, Bhima, Pandava
Dhananjaya, Drupada, Virata and Parshata Dhrishtadyumna with extremely forceful arrows that could penetrate
the armour of enemies. These six were struck with arrows that made a terrible roar and were as radiant as the sun.
However, the maharathas repulsed those sharp arrows. Each of them struck Bhishma with great energy, using ten
arrows each. In that battle, Shikhandi released arrows towards the one who was great in his vows. These were
gold-tufted and sharpened on stone and swiftly penetrated Bhishma. Placing Shikhandi at the forefront, Kiriti impetuously attacked Bhishma and severed his bow. When Bhishma's bow was sliced down, the maharathas-Drona,
Kritavarma, Saindhava Jayadratha, Bhurishrava, Shala, Shalya and Bhagadatta could not tolerate this. Extremely
enraged, these seven attacked Kiriti. The maharathas displayed supreme and divine weapons. They attacked in
great anger and enveloped Pandava. As they advanced towards Phalguna, sounds could be heard. It was like the
sound being raised by the oceans at the time of the destruction of a yuga. 'Bring forward[The army.]. Grasp. Fight. Slice
off.' Such were the tumultuous sounds as they advanced towards Phalguna's chariot. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On hearing that dreadful sound, the Pandava maharathas attacked, so as to protect Phalguna. Satyaki, Bhimasena, Parshata Dhrishtadyumna, Virata, Drupada, rakshasa Ghatotkacha and Abhimanyu-these seven were enraged and became senseless with anger. They wielded colourful bows and swiftly advanced. The battle that commenced was dreadful and made the body hair stand up. O best of the Bharata lineage! It was like the battle between the gods and the danavas.

'"Kiriti, best among rathas, was protected by Krishna and in that battle, after Bhishma's bow had been severed,
pierced him with ten arrows. He struck down his charioteer with ten and his standard with one. Gangeya grasped a
bow that was more powerful. However, Phalguna sliced that down with a sharp and broad-headed arrow. Pandava
was enraged and one after another, Savyasachi, the scorcher of enemies, severed every bow that Bhishma took up.
When the bows were severed, he[Bhishma.] became wrathful and licked the corners of his mouth. In great wrath, he
grasped a javelin that was capable of shattering mountains. In anger, he hurled this towards Phalguna's chariot. On
seeing it descend, like the flaming vajra, the descendant of the Pandava lineage brought the javelin down with five
sharp and broad-headed arrows. O best of the Bharata lineage! When that javelin, hurled angrily by Bhishma's
powerful arms, was severed with five arrows by the enraged Kiriti, it was shattered and fell down on the ground,
like lightning[Shatahrada.] dislodged from a mass of clouds. On seeing that the javelin had fallen down, Bhishma was overcome with anger. In the battle, the brave and intelligent one, the destroyer of the cities of enemies, began to think.

'I am capable of slaying all the Pandavas with a single bow, had the immensely strong Vishvaksena[Krishna's name.] not been
their protector now. There are two reasons for me not to fight with the Pandavas-the Pandus cannot be killed[Because they are protected by Krishna.]
and Shikhandi's feminity. In earlier times, when my father married Kali[This Kali is Satyavati. When Shantanu married Satyavati, Bhishma took a vow that he would remain celibate
and would not marry. That is the reason Shantanu granted him a boon.], my father was satisfied and granted
me the boon that I would be invincible in battle, except when I decided to die myself. I think the time has come for
me to decide on my death.' On learning that this was the decision of the infinitely energetic Bhishma, the rishis
and the Vasus, who were stationed in the sky, spoke these words to Bhishma. 'O brave one! We are extremely delighted with the decision you have taken. O great archer! Act in accordance with your decision and withdraw from
the battle.' When those words were spoken, an auspicious and fragrant breeze began to blow. In all the directions,
it was moistened with drops of water that smelt nice. The drums of the gods were sounded with a great roar. O
king! A shower of flowers fell down on Bhishma. O king! But the words spoken were not heard by anyone there,
with the exception of the mighty-armed Bhishma and me, because of the energetic sage[Vyasadeva had conferred those powers on Sanjaya.]. O lord of the earth!
There was great agitation among the thirty gods, at the prospect of Bhishma, beloved of all the worlds, falling
down from his chariot.

'"Having heard the words of the masses of gods, the great-minded one, Bhishma, Shantanu's son, dashed towards Bibhatsu, though he had been pierced by sharp arrows that were capable of penetrating every kind of armour. O great king! Shikhandi angrily struck the grandfather of the Bharatas in the chest with nine sharp arrows. In
the battle, Bhishma, the grandfather of the Kurus, was wounded by him. O great king! But he did not tremble and
was like a mountain during an earthquake. Bibhatsu laughed and drew back the Gandiva bow. He pierced Gangeya
with twenty-five kshurapras. Dhananjaya was enraged and again swiftly struck him all over the body with one hundred arrows that penetrated all his inner organs. In the great battle, the others also wounded him severely. But these
gold-tufted arrows, sharpened on stone, did not cause him the slightest bit of pain. Placing Shikhandi at the forefront, the wrathful Kiriti attacked Bhishma and severed his bow once again[There is an anomaly here. The Critical edition excises some intervening shlokas, where Bhishma had counterattacked. Since he had decided to die, the counter-attack is incongruous. However, without the counter-attack,
there shouldn't have been a bow in Bhishma's hand. It had already been severed. The subsequent shlokas, with
Bhishma taking up more bows, should also be excised.]. He pierced him with ten arrows
and sliced down his standard with one. He struck his charioteer with ten arrows and made him tremble. Gangeya
took up another bow that was stronger still. In that great battle, in the twinkling of an eye and as soon as that other
bow was taken up, Dhananjaya severed it into three with sharp and broad-headed arrows. In this fashion, he severed many bows.

'"At this, Bhishma, Shantanu's son, determined that he would not fight with Bibhatsu any more. However, he
was pierced by twenty-five kshudrakas and thus pierced, the great archer spoke to Duhshasana. 'This maharatha
Pandava Partha is enraged in the battle. In this encounter, he has shot many thousands of arrows towards me. No
one is capable of vanquishing him in battle, not even the wielder of the vajra. No brave one is capable of defeating
me, the gods, the danavas and the rakshasas, not to speak of extremely weak mortals.' While he was speaking thus,
Phalguna placed Shikhandi in the forefront of the battle and pierced Bhishma with sharp arrows. Bhishma was severely pierced by the sharp arrows released by the wielder of Gandiva. He smiled and spoke to Duhshasana again.

'These are like vajra and thunder to the touch. They are sharp at the tip and have been released well. They have
been shot in a continuous stream. These cannot be Shikhandi's arrows. They have penetrated my firm armour and
have mangled my inner organs. They have struck me with the force of clubs. These cannot be Shikhandi's arrows.
They are like Brahma's staff to the touch. They possess the force of the vajra and are impossible to resist. They are
robbing me of my life. These cannot be Shikhandi's arrows. They are like angry serpents, full of virulent poison
and with their tongues protruding. They are penetrating my inner organs. These cannot be Shikhandi's arrows.
They are destroying my life, like messengers sent by Yama. They are like clubs and maces to the touch. These cannot be Shikhandi's arrows. They are slicing through my body, like the month of Magha distresses cattle[Magha spans January and February and is thus a wintry month.]. These
are Arjuna's arrows. These cannot be Shikhandi's arrows. All the kings together cannot cause me any grief. The
only exception is the brave Jishnu, the wielder of Gandiva and with the monkey on his banner.' O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Having spoken this, Shantanu's son hurled a javelin, as if he was going to burn up Pandava. It
was flaming at the tip and had sparks throughout. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! While all the brave ones
among the Kurus looked on, he[Arjuna.] used sharp arrows to sever it into three and made the three parts fall down. At
this, Gangeya grasped a shield that was made of gold and a sword. He was determined to obtain victory, or go to
the world of the hereafter. But before he could get down from his chariot, the armoured one[Arjuna.] shattered the shield
into a hundred pieces and it was extraordinary.

'"He roared like a lion and incited his soldiers. 'Attack Gangeya. Do not have the slightest bit of fear.' With
javelins, lances, masses of arrows from every direction, spears, swords, many other weapons, vatsadantas and
broad-headed arrows, all of them attacked the one who was fighting single-handed. The Pandavas let out terrible
roars, like lions. O king! Your sons wished to see that Bhishma was victorious. They surrounded him and roared
like lions. O Indra among kings! On the tenth day, when Bhishma and Arjuna clashed, there was a dreadful battle
between those on your side and those of the enemy. In a short while, there was a whirlpool, like when Ganga meets
the ocean. The soldiers fought, wishing to kill each other. Because it was covered with blood, the earth became difficult to cross. It was impossible to distinguish the plain ground from the uneven. On the tenth day, stationed in that
battle, though he was pierced in his vital organs, Bhishma killed ten thousand warriors. In a similar way, Partha
Dhananjaya was stationed at the forefront of the army and drove away the soldiers from the centre of the Kuru
army. We were scared of Dhananjaya, Kunti's son, who was carried on white horses. We were oppressed by his
sharp arrows and fled from the great battle. The Souviras, the Kitavas, those from the east, those from the west,
those from the north, the Malavas, the Abhishahas, the Shurasenas, the Shibis, the Vasatayas, the Shalvas, the
Shrayas, the Trigartas, the Ambashthas and the Kekayas-warriors from these twelve[The east, the west and the north are not being counted.] countries were wounded
and oppressed by the arrows, while Kiriti was fighting in that battle, wishing to kill Bhishma. The single one was
surrounded by many from all directions. They defeated all the other Kurus and showered him with arrows. 'Bring
down. Seize. Pierce. Tear.' O king! These and other tumultuous sounds were heard around Bhishma's chariot. Having slain hundreds and thousands with his shower of arrows, there wasn't even the span of a single finger on his
body that was not mangled.

'"While your sons looked on, thus the lord, your father, was wounded with sharp-tipped arrows released by
Phalguna and fell down from his chariot. There was a little bit of the day left. When Bhishma fell down from his
chariot, great sounds of lamentation were heard from the gods in heaven and the kings in every direction. On seeing that the great-souled grandfather had fallen down, together with Bhishma, all our hearts also fell down. When
the mighty-armed one fell down, the earth seemed to roar. The great archer fell down, like an uprooted pole that
has been erected in Indra's honour. Because he was covered with a large number of arrows, he did not touch the
ground. The great archer, bull among men, was supine on a bed of arrows. When he fell down from the chariot, a
divine essence permeated him. The clouds showered rain and the earth trembled.

'"When he fell down, it was seen that the sun was diminished. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The brave
one did not allow his senses to depart, but thought about the right time[For his death.]. He heard divine voices from everywhere in the sky. 'Why should the great-souled Gangeya, tiger among men and the supreme among those who
wield all weapons, decide on a time that is dakshinayana[Dakshinayana is when the sun follows its southern course, from mid-July to mid-January. Uttarayana is when
the sun follows its northern course, from mid-January to mid-July.]?' On hearing these words, Gangeya replied, 'I am still
here.' Though he had fallen down on the ground, he retained his life. Bhishma, the grandfather of the Kurus,
wished to wait till uttarayana. Knowing his decision, Ganga, the daughter of the Himalayas, sent maharshis to him,
in the form of swans. Adopting the forms of swans from Manasa[Sacred lake near Mount Kailasa (Kailasha), in Tibet.], they swifty arrived to see Bhishma, the
grandfather of the Kurus. The grandfather, the best of men, was lying down on his bed of arrows. In the form of
swans, the sages approached Bhishma. They saw Bhishma, the grandfather of the Kurus, on his bed of arrows. On
seeing him, the great-souled ones circumambulated Gangeya, the best of the Bharata lineage. The learned ones
spoke to each other. 'The sun is in the south now. Why should the great-souled Bhishma depart during dakshinayana?' Having spoken in this way, the swans started to leave for the southern direction. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! On seeing this, the immensely intelligent one began to think. Shantanu's son then said, 'I will
never depart when the sun remains in the south. This is my resolution. I will leave for my earlier abode when the
sun moves to the north. The swans have spoken the truth. I will retain my life, wishing for uttarayana. I have always had complete control about when I would give up my life. Therefore, I will retain my life, wishing to die during the northern course. This is the boon that my great-souled father granted me. His boon was that I could determine my time of death and let that come true. Since I possess control, I will retain my life.' Lying down on the bed
of arrows, he spoke these words to the swans.

'"When the immensely energetic Bhishma, the head of the Kurus, fell down, the Pandavas and the Srinjayas
roared like lions. O bull among the Bharata lineage! When that great spirit among the Bharatas was brought down,
your son did not know what to do. There was dreadful confusion among the Kurus then. With Duryodhana at the
head, the kings sighed and wept. For a very long time, they were immersed in sorrow and were deprived of their
senses. O great king! They were immobile and their minds were no longer on the fight. It was as if they had been
grabbed by the thighs. They did not advance against the Pandavas. The immensely energetic Bhishma, Shantanu's
son, who was incapable of being killed, had been brought down. O king! The great destruction of the Kurus
seemed certain. The foremost among our brave ones had been brought down, mangled by sharp arrows. He had
been vanquished by Savyasachi and we did not know what we should do. The Pandavas were victorious and obtained their supreme objective. All of those brave ones used arms like clubs to sound giant conch shells. O lord of
men! The Somakas and the Panchalas were delighted. Those extremely powerful ones sounded thousands of tambourines. Bhimasena slapped his arms and roared dreadfully. When Gangeya had been brought down, the brave
ones in both the armies laid down their weapons. Some lamented. Others ran around. And still others lost their
senses. Others censured the life of kshatriyas and honoured Bhishma. The rishis and the ancestors praised the one
who was great in his vows. The ancestors of the Bharatas also praised him. The valiant one resorted to the yoga
described in the great Upanishads. The intelligent one meditated and remained there, wishing for the right time."'
