Vaishampayana said, 'Later, the kshatta, the king, Bhishma and the relatives performed Pandu's shraddha, offering
the immortal cake. The Kurus and the chief Brahmanas were offered a feast in their thousands. A large number of
gems and the best of villages were given to the chief Brahmanas. When the period of uncleanliness was over, the
Pandavas, bulls among the Bharata lineage, were taken by the citizens to the city of Varanasahrya[This is yet another name for Hastinapura. The word varana means elephant.]. All the citizens of the town and the country still lamented for that bull of the Bharata lineage, as if they had lost a relative.
When the shraddha ceremony was over, Vyasa saw that the people were still immersed in grief. He spoke to his
mother, who was also immersed in grief. "Happy times are over. Terrible times lie ahead. The earth has lost her
youth and every day is more sinful than the preceding one. A terrible time is coming-full of many delusions,
thick with many vices and with the rituals of dharma destroyed. Give everything up and go and live in a hermitage.
You will not be able to witness the destruction of your sons and lineage." She agreed to this. She entered her
daughter-in-law's quarters and said, "O Ambika! O fortunate one! I hear that as a result of the evil acts committed
by your son, this Bharata lineage, along with all its relatives and grandsons, will be destroyed. I will take
Kousalya[Ambalika.], who is still grieving from the death of her son, and leave for the forest. Come if you want." O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Ambika consented. Taking Bhishma's permission, Satyavati, the one who was
rigid in her vows, went off to the forest with both her daughters-in-law. O supreme among those of the Bharata lineage! There the queens performed terrible austerities. O king! They gave up their bodies and went on their journey.

'After observing all the rites prescribed in the Vedas, the Pandavas then began to grow up in their father's house,
enjoying a life of pleasure. When they played childish games in their father's house with Dhritarashtra's sons, they
excelled over them-in running fast, in hitting targets, in eating and in raising dust. Bhimasena defeated all of
Dhritarashtra's sons. Playfully, he grabbed them by the hair above their ears. He caught them by the heads when
they fought with the Pandavas. Alone and with the least effort, Vrikodara oppressed those 101 sons, who possessed
great energy. The strongest of the strong would kick them with his feet. He would throw them down on the ground
and break their thighs, heads and shoulders. When playing in the water, he would sometimes catch ten of them in
his arms and hold them down in the water, letting them go only when they were about to drown. When they
climbed a tree to gather fruit, Bhima would kick the tree with his feet and make it shake. Shaken by the force, the
tree would whirl around and swiftly fall down on the ground with its fruit, frightening the princes. In fights, speed
and martial exercises, the princes were never able to get the better of Vrikodara in any competition. Thus, in any
competition, Dhritarashtra's sons began to hate Vrikodara, even though he bore no ill will towards them, since he
was only a child.

'Bhimasena's great strength became well known. On learning this, Dhritarashtra's powerful son[Duryodhana.] revealed the
evil side of his nature. He was wicked and inclined towards evil. Out of delusion and greed for riches, an evil
thought occurred to him. "Kunti's son Vrikodara, the second of the Pandavas, is the best in strength. I must find
some trick so as to kill him. Then I will overpower his younger brother and his elder brother Yudhishthira. I will tie
them up and reign as the sovereign of the earth." Having made his mind up about this evil act, Duryodhana was
always on the lookout for a chance to get at the great-souled Bhima.

'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! For the sake of water sports, he had a wonderful and large sports house
constructed, with cotton and wool. It was full of every object of desire. It was at a place known as Pramanakoti and
slightly above the waterline. When the games were over, they would dress themselves in fresh garments, wear ornaments and quickly eat. When day was over, the valorous Kuru princes would be exhausted from their games and
would rest in that sports house. The powerful Bhima always prevailed over the other princes in water sports. But
on one occasion, he was tired at there having been an excess of exercise. He wished to sleep in Pramanakoti and
climbed up the bank and found a spot. He was clad in a white garment. He was tired and he was under the influence of drink. O king! The Pandava was tired and slept like one who was dead. Then Duryodhana quietly tied him
up with thongs made of creepers. He rolled him down from the land into the swift and deep waters. Regaining his
consciousness, Kounteya[Kunti's son. In this case, Bhima.] tore apart all the bonds. Bhima, supreme among those who wield arms, arose from
the water. On another occasion when Bhima was again sleeping, he[Duryodhana.] brought many snakes-sharp in teeth, immensely poisonous, angry and virulent. He made them bite him[Bhima.] in all the soft spots of his body. But even when
they bit him in the soft spots, they could not bring him down. They could not penetrate his skin, because the broad-
chested one was too tough. When Bhima woke up, he killed all the snakes. He and his companions[The word used is sarathi, which usually means charioteer, but also means companion. Charioteer doesn't
make any sense here, companion makes more sense. The companions are Bhima's brothers.] became
very careful from that time onwards. He also had poison mixed in Bhimasena's food. This was freshly made
kalakuta poison, so virulent that it made the hair on the body stand up. On this occasion, the Vaishya's son[Vidura. It could also mean Yuyutsu.]
alerted Pritha's sons, so as to ensure their welfare. But though Vrikodara ate this, it had no effect on him. Though
the poison was extremely virulent and was meant to kill Bhima, Bhima digested and tolerated it.

'Then Duryodhana, Karna and Subala's son Shakuni tried many other means to kill the Pandavas. However, the
Pandavas, scorchers of their enemies, got to know about all of these. As advised by Vidura, they never revealed all
this.'
