'Narada said, "After conquering the earth, the two daityas had no other enemies or concerns. Having subjugated
the three worlds, their desire had been attained. They were delighted at having robbed the gods, the gandharvas[Semi-divine species, musicians of the gods.],
yakshas, nagas, kings and rakshas of all their gems and when they saw that they had not a single rival left, they
were supremely content. Like the immortals, they gave up all endeavours and spent their time in pleasures, with
women, garlands, fragrances, food, and delicacies in copious quantities, drink and various other objects that give
rise to enjoyment. Like the immortals, they sported in their inner quarters, gardens, mountains and groves and in
whatever region that struck their fancy.

'"One day, they went to sport in a rocky plain on the Vindhya Mountains that was dense with shala[Tall tree.] trees
crested with blossoming flowers. After every divine object of desire had been brought, the two contentedly sat on
supreme seats, with beautiful women around them. Wishing to please the two, the women danced to the sound of
music and delighted them with songs sung in their praise.

'"It was then that Tilottama appeared, plucking flowers in the forest. She was dressed in a single red garment, an
attire that was very seductive. Gathering karnikara flowers along the banks of the river, she slowly approached the
place where the two great asuras were. They had drunk the best of wine and their eyes were red. On seeing the one
with the beautiful hips, they were struck by desire. They instantly left their seats and went to where she was. Filled
with desire, they both asked for her favours. Sunda grasped the right hand of the one with the beautiful brows. Upasunda grasped Tilottama's left hand. They were intoxicated with the boon they had received, with their physical
strength, with the riches and gems they possessed and with the wine they had drunk. Intoxicated with this madness
and with the madness of desire, they contracted their brows and spoke to each other. 'She is my wife and your superior,' said Sunda. 'She is my wife and your sister-in-law,' replied Upasunda. In their anger, they shouted at each
other, 'She is mine, not yours.' Overcome by desire for her, they grasped their terrible clubs. Uttering the words, 'I
was the first[That is, first in grasping Tilottama's hand.],' they attacked each other. Struck by those terrible clubs, both of them fell down on the ground.
With blood streaming from their bodies, they looked like two suns dislodged from the sky. Then the women and
the masses of daityas fled. Miserable and shuddering with fright, all of them took refuge in the nether regions.

'"Then the pure-souled grandfather arrived, with the gods and the maharshis and praised Tilottama. Brahma was
pleased to grant her a boon. Delighted with her, the grandfather said, 'O, fortunate one! You will roam in the world
of the adityas[The word aditya has four different meanings. First, Aditya is the sun-god. Second, all the sons of Aditi are
known as adityas. Hence, aditya is a term for gods in general. Third, Aditya is also sometimes used as an epithet
for Vishnu. Fourth, there are twelve manifestations of the sun-god, known collectively as adityas. These shine together when the universe is destroyed. In this context, either the fourth or the second meaning is indicated, probably the fourth.]. Your energy will be so great that no one will be able to look at you for a long time.' Having
granted this boon to her, the grandfather of all the worlds, instated Indra in the three worlds. The illustrious one
then departed for Brahma's world.

'"Those two were always together, they were always united with the same objective. But in their anger, they
killed each other over Tilottama. O, supreme among the Bharata lineage! Out of my affection for you, I am telling
you, so that there is no dissension among you because of Droupadi. O, fortunate ones! If you wish to please me,
act accordingly."'

Vaishampayana said, 'O, king! Having been thus addressed by the great-souled maharshi Narada, they consulted
with each other and arrived at a rule, in the infinitely energetic devarshi Narada's presence. If any one of them set
eyes on Droupadi when she was lying with any one of the others, he would retire to the forest and live the life of a
brahmachari[Brahmacharya is the first of the four stages (ashramas) of life, the other three being garhasthya (householder
stage), vanaprastha (retirement to the forest) and sannyasa (renunciation). One who is in the brahmacharya stage
is a brahmachari. Brahmacharya is usually translated as celibacy, though anyone who follows the path of the brahman is a brahmachari.] for twelve years. After the Pandavas, who always followed dharma, had established this rule, the
great sage Narada was happy and went where he wished to go. O, descendant of the Bharata lineage! In earlier
times, thus requested by Narada, they established a rule and no dissension arose between them.'
