Vaishampayana said, 'Pritha was raised. On seeing her brother, Subhadra was stricken by grief. She lamented
loudly and said, "O Pundarikaksha! Behold the intelligent Partha's grandson. His life has been destroyed and
the lineage of the Kurus has decayed. Drona's son raised a blade of grass for the sake of Bhimasena. But it descended on Uttara, Vijaya and me. O Keshava! It blazed and is still impaled in my heart. O invincible one! O lord!
Behold my son's son. What will Dharmaraja Yudhishthira, with dharma in his soul, say? What about Bhimasena,
Arjuna and Madravati's sons? O Varshneya! On hearing that Abhimanyu's son has been born dead, the Pandavas
will think that they have been deceived by Drona's son. O Krishna! There is no doubt that Abhimanyu was loved
by his fathers. On hearing that they have been vanquished by the weapon of Drona's son, what will they say? They
will be overcome by supreme grief. O Janardana! What do you think? O Krishna! O scorcher of enemies! Abhimanyu's son has been born dead. O Krishna! I seek your favours. I am bowing down my head before you now. O
Purushottama! Look towards Pritha and Droupadi. O Madhava! O slayer of enemies! When Drona's son slew the
foetuses of the Pandava women, you wrathfully said, 'O worst of men! O one who does not deserve to be a brahmana! I will render your desire unsuccessful. I will bring back the son of Kiriti's son to life.' O invincible one!
Hearing these words and knowing your strength, I am seeking your favours. Let Abhimanyu's son be brought back
to life. O tiger of the Vrishni lineage! Having pledged, if you do not act in accordance with your auspicious words
and make them successful and listen to my entreaties, I will kill myself. O brave one! O invincible one! If Abhimanyu's son is not brought back to life while you are still alive and present, what have you done for us? O invincible one! Bring Abhimanyu's son back to life, like rain from the clouds revives crops. O brave one! His eyes are
like his[Parikshit's eyes are like Abhimanyu's.]. O Keshava! You have dharma in your soul. You are truthful. Truth is your valour. O scorcher of enemies! You should make your words true. If you so wish, you can make all the dead ones in the three worlds come
back to life, not to speak of the son of your beloved sister's son, who has been born dead. O Krishna! I know your
powers. That is the reason I am speaking to you. Perform this great favour for the sons of Pandu. O mighty-armed
one! I am your sister and my son has been killed. I have sought refuge with you. Knowing this, you should show
me this compassion."'
