Yajnavalkya said, 'I have enumerated the truth about the different types of creation and about the measurement of time. I have progressively described them. Now hear about destruction. Beings are repeatedly created and destroyed. The eternal and undecaying Brahma, without a beginning and without an end, does this. When
his day is over and he realizes that it is night, he makes up his mind to sleep. The illustrious and unmanifest one
urges the creation of a being from his consciousness and this manifests itself as a sun with a hundred thousand
rays. It then divides itself into twelve suns that blaze like fire. O lord of men! With this energy, the four kinds of
beings are swiftly consumed-those born from wombs, those born from eggs, those born from sweat[Worms and insects.] and herbs.
In a short instant, all mobile and immobile objects are destroyed and, in every direction, the earth becomes as plain
as the back of a tortoise. When everything in the universe has been destroyed with this great force, in every direction, it is filled up with the great force of water. At this, the fire of destruction dries up the water. O Indra among
kings! When the water has been destroyed, a great fire begins to rage. An immeasurable and extremely powerful
fire continues to blaze. The energy of those seven flames is infused with the heat from all creatures. But it is devoured by an extremely powerful wind that has its own inner strength. This courses upwards, downwards and diagonally. However, that extremely strong and terrible wind is devoured by space. But mind cheerfully and swiftly
swallows up space. Consciousness, the Prajapati and the atman of everything, devours mind. Consciousness is devoured by the soul of Mahat, who knows about the past, the present and the future. The soul of  the universe,
Shambhu Prajapati, swallows up Mahat. This is the radiant and undecaying Ishana, with the properties of anima,
laghima and prapti. His hands and feet extend in every direction. His eyes, head and face are everywhere. His ears
are everywhere. He is established, enveloping all the worlds. He is in the heart of all creatures and his size is only
that of a thumb. The infinite and great-souled lord of the universe devours everything. With everything swallowed,
what is left is the immutable and the undecaying. This is the unblemished one, the creator of the past and the future
of humans. O Indra among kings! I have thus described all this to you accurately. Now I will make you hear about
adhyatma, adbibbuta and adhidaiva.'"'
