Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing that the Pandavas were tormented by misery, the Bhojas, the Vrishnis and the
Andhakas assembled together and went to them in the great forest. The heirs of Panchala[Though the plural is used, this essentially means Dhrishtadyumna.], Dhrishtaketu the king
of Chedi and the extremely valorous Kekaya brothers, famous in the world, went to meet the Parthas in the forest,
full of anger and intolerance. They censured the sons of Dhritarashtra and asked, "What will we do?" All those
bulls among the kshatriyas placed Vasudeva at their forefront. They surrounded Dharmaraja Yudhishthira and seated themselves around him. Vasudeva said, "The earth will drink the blood of Duryodhana, Karna, the evil-souled
Shakuni and Duhshasana as the fourth. After that, all of us will instate Dharmaraja Yudhishthira. Those deceitful
ones deserve to be slain. This is eternal dharma." Out of his preference for the Parthas, Janardana was angered.
Since it seemed as though he would burn down all beings, Arjuna pacified him. On witnessing Keshava's[Krishna's.] rage,
Phalguna[Arjuna.] recited the deeds the great-souled one had performed in his earlier bodies[Meaning, earlier lives.].

'He is the one whose deeds are true, the man who cannot be measured, but whose energy is truly infinite. He is
the lord of the Prajapatis and the intelligent Vishnu, lord of the worlds. Arjuna said, "O Krishna! In ancient times,
you roamed in Mount Gandhamadana for ten thousand years, as a sage who had no abode[This is not a literal translation. The text uses the word yatrasayamgriha. This means a hermit who finds a
home (griha) wherever (yatra) evening (sayam) finds him. So that hermit has no home.]. O Krishna! In ancient
times, you lived in the region of Pushkara for eleven thousand years, surviving on water alone. O Madhusudana!
With your arms raised, standing on one leg and surviving only on air you spent one hundred years in the vast region of Badari[This is the hermitage (ashrama) of Badari, known also as Badarika and Badarikashrama. This is one of the
several sources of the Ganga and the hermitages of Nara and Narayana are located there.]. O Krishna! You took off your upper garments and you were so thin that you seemed to be held by
your veins. You lived on the banks of the Sarasvati for the sacrifice that went on for twelve years. O Krishna! O
immensely energetic one! You went to the sacred pilgrimage of Prabhasa, known to all pure ones, and stood there
on one leg for one thousand divine years, practising austerities and observing rites. O Keshava! You are the
supreme soul of all beings, their beginning and their end. O Krishna! You are the store of all austerities and sacrifices and you are the eternal one. O Krishna! You killed Naraka, famous as Bhoumya, the one with the earrings[Naraka or Narakasura was a demon who was born from the earth (bhumi) and known as Bhoumya. He ruled in
Pragjyotisha. He stole Aditi's earrings. Krishna killed Naraka and recovered these earrings. Krishna also freed the
Sixteen  Thousand ladies Naraka had imprisoned.].
You performed the first horse sacrifice. O bull among all the worlds! Having accomplished this deed, you became
victorious over all the worlds. When all the daityas and danavas assembled together, you killed them in battle. O
mighty-armed Keshava! You then gave lordship over everything to Shachi's husband[Indra. Shachi is Indra's wife.]. You then manifested yourself in the world of men. O scorcher of enemies! You were Narayana and then you became Hari[Both Narayana and Hari are Vishnu's names.]. You then became Brahma, Soma[The moon.], Surya, Dharma, Dhata[The creator. This is also a name used for Brahma and Vishnu.], Yama, Anala[The fire.], Vayu[The wind.], Vaishravana[Vaishravana is the son of Vishrava. Here, Kubera is meant.], Rudra, Kala[Destiny, or time.], the
sky, the earth and the directions. You are without birth. You are the preceptor of everything that moves and is still.
You are the creator. You are the supreme being. O Krishna! You are the original god. In the forest of Chitraratha,
you performed the turayana sacrifice[A sacrifice designed to ensure non-attachment.] and other sacrifices, donating large amounts of alms. You have great energy. O Janardana! At each sacrifice, you apportioned out one hundred times, according to the share, a hundred thousand gold pieces. O beloved of the Yadavas[Since the word used is nandana, this can also be translated as descendant of the Yadavas.]! You have been Aditi's son. O illustrious one! You are now famous
as Vishnu, Indra's younger brother[The twelve Adityas are sons of Aditi and in this list, Vishnu is younger than Indra.]. O scorcher of enemies! O Krishna! While you were only a child, you used
your energy to cover heaven, sky and earth in three steps[This is a reference to Vishnu's vamana or dwarf incarnation, explaining why the word child is used. Bali was
a generous demon and granted the dwarf incarnation a boon. Using the three steps, the dwarf covered the three
worlds and Bali had no option but to go to the underworld.]. You have attained heaven. You ride the sky seated in
the sun's chariot. You are the soul of all beings. Through your radiance, you are brighter than the sun. The
Mouravas and the Pashas have been destroyed[It is now impossible to know who the Mauravas and the Pashas were.]. Nisunda and Naraka have been killed and the road to the city of
Pragjyotisha has become safe again. Ahuti was killed at Jaruthi. Kratha, Shishupala and his followers,
Bhimasena[Not the Pandava Bhimasena.], Shaibya and Shatadhanva have been conquered. Your chariot is as resplendent as the sun and roars
like the cloud. Riding on that, you defeated Rukmi in battle and obtained your queen from the Bhojas[Rukmini was the daughter of King Bhishmaka of Vidarbha, Bhoja being another name for Vidarbha. Rukmini was to be married to Shishupala. But she loved Krishna and wrote him a letter. Krishna arrived with Balarama
and defeated Rukmini's brother Rukmi. Krishna then carried Rukmini away and married her.]. In your
anger, you killed Indradyumna and the yavana Kasheruman. You have killed Shalva, the lord of Soubha, and you
brought down Soubha itself. On the banks of the Iravati, you killed Bhoja, who was the equal of Kartavirya in battle. You also killed Gopati and Talaketu. O Janardana! You journeyed to the ocean and made Dvaraka, sacred,
prosperous and loved by the rishis, your own[The city of Dvaraka is on the ocean and the Yadavas moved from Mathura to Dvaraka.]. O Madhusudana! O Dasharha[The Dasharhas are the Yadavas.]! You show no anger, no jealousy
and no falsehood. No cruelty or crookedness is established in you. O Achyuta[The one without decay, Krishna's name.]! You are seated in the centre of
the mind, radiant in your own energy. The rishis come to you there and ask for freedom from fear[The rishis approach Krishna in their own hearts.]. O Madhusudana! You gather up all beings at the end of a yuga[When there is destruction.]. O scorcher of enemies! You withdraw the entire universe
into yourself and remain alone. No other one in the past has performed such deeds, nor will they in the future. O
immensely radiant god! Such are the deeds you performed even when a child. O Pundarikaksha! Such are the
deeds you performed with Baladeva's help. You lived in the abode of Vairaja[The word vairaja is used for anything belonging to the brahman.] with Brahma himself." Having
thus spoken, the great-souled Pandava, who was like Krishna's soul himself, fell silent.

'Janardana then spoke to Partha, "You are mine and I am yours. All that is mine is yours too. He who hates you
also hates me. He who follows you also follows me. O invincible one! You are Nara and I am Hari Narayana. We
are the rishis Nara and Narayana, born from that world in this world. O Partha! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You are no other than I. I am no other than you. O bull among the Bharata lineage! No one can know any
difference that exists between us." In that assembly of warriors, the kings became agitated. Panchali, surrounded
by her valiant brothers, with Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, went to Pundarikaksha, who was seated with the Yadavas. Krishna[Droupadi.] sought refuge with the one who is all refuge and uttered these words.

'"It has been said that when all the beings were first created, you were the only Prajapati[These words are being spoken by Droupadi.]. Asita-Devala have
said that you are the creator of all beings. O invincible one! O Madhusudana! You are Vishnu. You are the sacrifice. You are the sacrificer. You are the one for whom sacrifices are performed. Jamadagni's son[Parashurama.] has said this. O
supreme being! The rishis have said that you are forgiveness and the truth. Kashyapa has said that you are the sacrifice born from the truth. Narada has said that you are the supreme lord of the Sadhyas and the gods. O lord of
prosperity! You are the creator of the worlds and you are the lord of the worlds. O lord! The sky is covered with
your head and the earth with your feet. You are the stomach of all these worlds and you are the eternal being. You
are the supreme one among all the rishis who burn with learning and austerities, who have purified their souls with
asceticism and who have become content through contemplating their own souls. O supreme being! You are the
refuge of all the rajarshis, the performers of pure deeds who withdraw from the field of battle[Because these rajarshis have overcome the desire to fight.] and who have the
knowledge of every dharma. You are the lord. You are omnipresent. You are the soul of all beings. You are the
earth. You are eternal. The rulers of all the worlds, the stars, the ten directions, the sky, the moon, the sun and the
worlds are all established in you. O mighty-armed one! The mortality of all beings, the immortality of the dwellers
of heaven and all the deeds of the worlds are established in you. O Madhusudana! Because of my love for you, I
will tell you the account of my sorrows. You are the lord of all beings, be they divine or human. O Krishna! O
lord! I am a wife to the Parthas. I am your friend. I am Dhrishtadyumna's sister. How could someone like me be
dragged to the sabha? I was then in the dharma of women[She was in her menses.]. I was trembling. I was stained with blood. I was clad
in a single garment. I was miserable. But I was dragged into that assembly of Kurus. On seeing me in that sabha, in
the middle of all those kings, stained in my menses, those evil-minded sons of Dhritarashtra laughed at me. O
Madhusudana! They wished to enjoy me like a slave girl, when the sons of Pandu, the Panchalas and the Vrishnis
were still alive. O Krishna! According to dharma, am I not the daughter-in-law of both Bhishma and Dhritarashtra?
But I was forcibly made a slave. The Pandavas may be extremely strong and supreme in war. But I censure them.
They looked on when their famous wife, according to dharma, was molested. O Janardana! Shame on Bhimasena's
strength! Shame on Partha's Gandiva! Both of them allowed me to be oppressed by insignificant ones. The eternal
path of dharma is always followed by the righteous ones. The husband, however weak he may be, must protect his
wife. When the wife is protected, the offspring are protected. When the offspring are protected, one's own soul is
protected. One's own self is born in one's wife and that is the reason she is called jaya[Jaya is a synonym for wife and is derived from the root of being born.]. A wife should also protect her husband because he is born in her womb. The Pandavas never abandon someone who has sought refuge,
but they abandoned me when I sought refuge. Five immensely energetic sons have been born to me from my husbands. O Janardana! For their sake too, I should have been rescued. Prativindhya was born from Yudhishthira, Sutasoma was born from Vrikodara, Shrutakirti was born from Arjuna, Shatanika was born from Nakula and Shrutakarma was born from the youngest[The youngest is Sahadeva.]. All of them derive valour from the truth. O Krishna! They are maharathas
like Pradyumna and you. They are supreme archers. Enemies cannot vanquish them in battle. Why did they tolerate the weak sons of Dhritarashtra? Having been deprived of their kingdom in violation of dharma, all of them became slaves, when, in my menses, I was dragged into the sabha in a single garment. O Madhusudana! Even when
strung, the Gandiva cannot be handled by anyone other than Bhima, Arjuna and you. O Krishna! Shame on Bhimasena's strength and shame on Partha's Gandiva, if Duryodhana lives for more than an instant! O Madhusudana!
A long time ago, when they were but children engaged in studying and observance of rites, he threw the non-violent ones and their mother out of the kingdom. It was that evil one who mixed freshly collected, hair raising and
virulent poison in Bhimasena's food. O Janardana! O supreme being! O mighty-armed one! He digested it with his
food and without any effects, because his time had not ended. O Krishna! Vrikodara was safely asleep in Pramanakoti. It was he[Duryodhana.] who tied him up, flung him into the Ganga and went away. Though fettered, the mighty-
armed and immensely strong Kounteya Bhimasena tore off his bonds and arose from the water. O Krishna! It was
he[Duryodhana.] who caused virulent serpents to bite him[Bhimasena.] all over his body when he slept, but that destroyer of enemies did
not die. On waking up, Kounteya killed all the serpents and he killed his[Duryodhana's.] favourite charioteer with the back of
his hand. Once again, when they were asleep and unconscious with the arya lady[Kunti.] in Varanavata, he[Duryodhana.] tried to
burn them. Who could have acted in this way? It was then that the frightened and weeping arya lady, greatly oppressed and surrounded by flames, told the Pandavas, 'I am slain. How will we find peace from the flames today?
Without a protector, I will perish with my young sons.' The mighty-armed Bhima Vrikodara's valour is like the
force of the wind. He comforted the arya lady and his brothers. 'I will rise up like the bird Garuda, Vinata's son
and supreme among birds. I will fly up and we need not be afraid.' He took up the arya lady on his left lap and the
king[Yudhishthira.] on his right. He took the twins on his shoulder and Bibhatsu on his back. Grasping all of them, the valorous
one suddenly arose with force and the powerful one freed the arya lady and his brothers from the fire. Setting out
in the night with their mother, all those famous ones arrived in the great forest, near the forest that was Hidimba's.
They were tired and extremely unhappy and fell asleep with their mother. When they were asleep, a rakshasa
woman named Hidimba arrived[The rakshasa woman is Hidimbaa, though we have written it as Hidimba. Her brother is Hidimba. But despite the names being written in the same way, there should be no confusion, since the context makes it clear
whether brother or sister is meant.]. That fortunate one firmly placed Bhima's feet on her lap and happily caressed
them with her soft hands. The broad-souled and strong Bhima, whose valour is his truth, then woke up and asked,
'O unblemished one! What do you desire here?' Having heard this conversation, the worst of rakshasas arrived. He
was terrible to look at, his form was terrible and he let loose a loud roar. 'O Hidimba! Whom are you talking to?
Bring him to me and I will eat him up. Do not delay.' But she was moved by compassion in her heart. The intelligent and unblemished lady felt pity. Then the man-eating terrible rakshasa uttered fearful roars and with great
force, rushed at Bhimasena. Angered, the immensely strong rakshasa grasped Bhimasena's hand with his own
hand and with great force. Making his hand as firm as Indra's thunder, like the vajra, he suddenly struck Bhimasena with his hand. His hand having been seized by the rakshasa's hand, the mighty-armed Vrikodara could not bear
it and became angry. Then a terrible fight waged between Bhima and Hidimba. They were both skilled in the use
of all weapons and this was as terrible as that between Vritra and Vasava[Vasava is Indra and Vritra is a demon killed by Indra.]. Having killed Hidimba, Bhima left
with his brothers, placing Hidimba[The lady Hidimbaa.] at the forefront. Ghatotkacha was born from her. Then, accompanied by their
mother and surrounded by many brahmanas, those famous ones went towards Ekachakra. On this journey, Vyasa,
always devoted to their welfare, was their adviser. The Pandavas, rigid in their vows, arrived in Ekachakra. There
they killed an immensely strong maneater named Baka, who was as strong as Hidimba. Having killed him, Bhima,
supreme among warriors, went with his brothers to Drupada's capital. O Krishna! While he lived there, Savyasachi
won me, just as you yourself won Bhishmaka's daughter Rukmini. O Madhusudana! Partha won me at that
svayamvara, achieving a great deed that others found extremely difficult. O Krishna! We have thus suffered many
difficulties and are miserable and extremely unhappy. We have Dhoumya at the forefront, but we are without the
arya lady[Kunti.]. They have the valour of lions and are greater than others in courage. Why do they ignore me when I
am oppressed by inferiors? I have suffered such miseries at the hands of those who are weak, evil and the performers of evil deeds. I have burnt for a long time. I was born in a great lineage through divine destiny. I am the
beloved wife of the Pandavas. I am the daughter-in-law of the great-souled Pandu. O Krishna! O Madhusudana! I
am supreme among chaste ones. But I was seized by my hair, while the five who are like Indras looked on."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having uttered these words, the soft-spoken Krishna[Droupadi. Krishna is really Krishnaa, while Vasudeva is Krishna. But there is no danger of confusion, since
the context will make it clear whether it is Vasudeva or Droupadi.] wept and covered her face in her
hands, soft as the bud of a lotus. On her upraised, full and well-formed breasts, marked with all the auspicious
marks, Panchali showered teardrops of grief. She wiped her eyes and sighed repeatedly. In a voice choked with
tears, she uttered these angry words, "O Madhusudana! I have no husbands. I have no sons. I do not have a brother
or a father. Nor do I have any relatives. When I was oppressed by inferior ones, you ignored me, unmoved by sorrow. My grief that Karna laughed at me then will never be pacified." Then Krishna spoke to her in that assembly of
warriors, "O beautiful one! The wives of those who have angered you will weep like this. They will see the dead
bodies lying on the ground, bereft of life. Their bodies will be covered with Bibhatsu's arrows and will be
drenched with blood. Do not sorrow. I will do whatever the Pandavas can do. I will make you a promise. You will
be the queen of kings. The heavens may fall, the Himalayas may be rent asunder, the earth may splinter and the
ocean may dry up. O Krishna! But my words will not be falsified." Dhrishtadyumna said, "I will kill Drona.
Shikhandi will kill the grandfather. Bhimasena will kill Duryodhana. Dhananjaya will kill Karna. O sweet-smiling
one! With the aid of Rama[Balarama.] and Krishna, we are invincible in battle even with the slayer of Vritra[Indra is the slayer of Vritra.], not to speak
of Dhritarashtra's sons." When these words were uttered, all the warriors looked towards Vasudeva and in their
midst, the mighty-armed Keshava spoke these words.'
