'Sanjaya said, "When the sun reached the midpoint, King Yudhishthira saw Shrutayu and urged his horses towards
him. The king attacked Shrutayu, the scorcher of enemies and pierced him with nine sharp and straight-tufted arrows. But, in that encounter, the king, the great archer, countered the arrows shot by Dharma's son and struck
Kounteya with seven arrows. In that battle, these penetrated his armour and drank up his blood, as if all the vital
forces in the great-souled one's body had been sucked out. Pandava was severely wounded by the great-souled
king. However, in that encounter, he pierced the king in the heart with an arrow that was like a boar's ear. With another broad-headed arrow, Partha, foremost among rathas, quickly brought down the great-souled one's standard
from his chariot and made it fall down on the ground. O king! On seeing that his standard had been brought down,
King Shrutayu pierced Pandava with seven sharp arrows. At this, Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, blazed up in anger,
like the fire that burns at the end of a yuga and consumes all beings. O great king! On seeing Pandava enraged, the
gods, the gandharvas and the rakshasas were pained and anxious. All the beings thought that, thus enraged, the
king would destroy the three worlds then. O king! When Pandava was thus angered, the rishis and the gods uttered
great words of benediction so that there might be peace in the worlds. He was overcome with rage and licked the
corners of his mouth. His appearance was as terrible as that of the sun at the time of the destruction of a yuga. O
lord of the earth! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the soldiers in your army became distressed and thought
that they would no longer remain alive. But the immensely famous one controlled his anger through patience. He
sliced down Shrutayu's great bow from his hand. After the bow had been sliced down, while all the soldiers looked
on in that battle, the king used an iron arrow to pierce him between the breasts. O king! Nimble on his feet, the
great-souled and extremely strong one, then used sharp arrows to kill his mounts and his charioteer. On witnessing
the king's manliness and with his horses slain, Shrutayu gave up his chariot and swiftly fled from the field of battle. Dharma's son defeated the great archer in that encounter. O king! Because of this, all of Duryodhana's soldiers
became reluctant to do battle. O great king! Having accomplished this, Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, began to
slaughter your soldiers, like Death with a gaping mouth.

'"While all the soldiers looked on, Varshneya Chekitana enveloped Goutama, supreme among charioteers, with
arrows. In that encounter, Kripa, Sharadvat's son, countered all those arrows. O king! Fighting with care in that
battle, he pierced Chekitana with arrows. O venerable one! He used another broad-headed arrow to slice down his
bow. Displaying his lighteness of hand in that encounter, he brought down his charioteer. O king! He killed his
horses and the two charioteers who protected his flanks[Parshnis.]. Satvata[Chekitana.] swiftly leapt down from his chariot and
grabbed a club. With that club, capable of killing heroes, that supreme among wielders of clubs killed Goutama's
horses and brought down his charioteer. Goutama stood on the ground and shot sixteen arrows at him. Those arrows pierced Satvata and entered the ground. Chekitana became angry. Wishing to kill Goutama, like Purandara
against Vritra, he again hurled his club. That polished and great club was as hard as stone. On seeing it descend,
Goutama repulsed it with thousands of arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Chekitana drew his sword out
from its sheath. With supreme lightness, he attacked Goutama. Goutama discarded his bow and took up an extremely sharp sword. O king! He advanced with great speed towards Chekitana. Both of them were extremely
strong and both wielded supreme swords. They began to strike each other with those extremely sharp swords.
Those bulls among men were struck with the force of each other's swords and fell down on the ground, the abode
of all beings. Their limbs became unconscious and they were exhausted because of their exertions. Because of his
affectionate feelings, Karakarsha, invincible in battle, swiftly rushed to the spot. He saw that Chekitana was in that
state and while all the soldiers looked on, took him up on his own chariot. O lord of the earth! The brave Shakuni,
your brother-in-law, swiftly took Goutama, supreme among rathas, up on his chariot.

'"O king! In anger, the immensely strong Dhrishtaketu pierced Somadatta's son[Bhurishrava.] in the chest with ninety arrows. O great king! With those arrows on his chest, Somadatta's son looked resplendent, like the sun with its rays
at midday. However, in that battle, Bhurishrava killed maharatha Dhrishtaketu's horses and charioteers with
supreme arrows and he was deprived of his chariot. On seeing that he had been deprived of his chariot and that his
horses and his charioteer had been slain in that encounter, he enveloped him with a great shower of arrows. O venerable one! The great-minded Dhrishtaketu then abandoned his chariot and ascended Shatanika's vehicle.

'"O king! The rathas Chitrasena, Vikarna and Durmarshana were clad in golden armour and attacked Subhadra's
son. O king! A terrible encounter commenced between Abhimanyu and those armed ones, like that in the body between vata, pitta and kapha[These can be loosely translated as wind, bile and phlegm. In Ayurveda, these are the three doshas or humours
in the body and they are always striving against each other.]. O king! In that great battle, he deprived your sons of their chariots. But remembering Bhima's pledge, the tiger among men did not kill them[Bhima had taken an oath that he would kill Duryodhana and his brothers.]. Bhishma was unassailable, even to the gods. In
that battle, surrounded by many kings and hundreds of elephants, horses and chariots, he swiftly advanced to rescue your sons. On seeing this and on seeing that maharatha Abhimanyu, who was only a child, was alone,
Kounteya, the one borne on white steeds, told Vasudeva, 'O Hrishikesha! Drive the horses to the spot where those
numerous chariots are. There are many brave ones there, skilled in the use of weapons and invincible in battle. O
Madhava! Drive the horses so that they cannot slay our soldiers.' Thus urged by the infinitely energetic Kounteya,
in that encounter, Varshneya drove the chariot yoked to the white horses there. O venerable one! When Arjuna angrily advanced into battle, a great uproar was created by your troops. Kounteya advanced to the kings who were
protecting Bhishma. O king! He spoke these words to Susharma. 'I know that you are the foremost among warriors
and that you bear extreme enmity towards us from earlier times. You will now behold the extremely terrible fruits
of that. I will today show you your deceased ancestors.' Having heard these harsh words spoken by Bibhatsu, the
slayer of enemies, Susharma, the leader of a large number of charioteers, did not speak anything in reply, pleasant
or unpleasant. But he advanced against the brave Arjuna, surrounded by a large number of kings. O unblemished
one! In that battle, Arjuna was surrounded by your sons from every direction, to the front, the rear and the sides.
They enveloped him with arrows, like clouds covering the sun. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! An extremely
terrible battle commenced between those on your side and the Pandavas and in that encounter, blood flowed like
water."'
