'Vasudeva said, "After Bhishma had spoken, Drona, who was capable of speaking, addressed these words to Duryodhana, in the midst of the kings. 'O fortunate one! O son[The word used is tata.]! Just as Pratipa's son, Shantanu, was established for
the welfare of the lineage, Devavrata Bhishma is also established for the welfare of the lineage. Pandu, the lord of
men, was also like that. He was truthful and in control of his senses. He became the king of the Kurus. He had
dharma in his soul. He was good in his vows and was extremely controlled. Later, the extender of the Kuru lineage
gave the kingdom to his elder, the intelligent Dhritarashtra, and to the younger, Kshatta. O king! O Kouravya! O
unblemished one! After having established the one without decay[Dhritarashtra.] on the kingdom, he left for the forest with his
wife. Vidura, tiger among men, humbly accepted a position that was inferior to him[Dhritarashtra.] and served him, like one fanning him with a whisk. O son[The word used is tata.]! In the appropriate way, all the subjects accepted Dhritarashtra as the lord of men,
just as they had accepted Pandu, lord of men. After having handed over the kingdom to Dhritarashtra and Vidura,
Pandu, the destroyer of enemy cities, roamed around the entire earth. Vidura, devoted to the truth, was in charge of
building up the treasury, gifts, the superintendence of the servants and everyone's subsistence. Bhishma, the immensely energetic conqueror of enemy cities, was in charge of peace and war and the care of the king. While he
was on the throne, the immensely strong King Dhritarashtra was always followed by the great-souled Vidura. Having been born in this lineage, how can you decide to break up the lineage? O lord of men! Together with your
brothers, enjoy all the objects of desire. I am not saying this out of any weakness, or for any riches. O supreme
among kings! I eat what Bhishma gives me, not what you give. O lord of men! I do not wish to draw my sustenance from you. Drona goes where Bhishma goes. Do what Bhishma has asked you to. O destroyer of enemies!
Give the sons of Pandu half of the kingdom. O son[The word used is tata.]! I have always behaved equally as a teacher to both you and
them. The one with the white horses[Arjuna.] is the same to me as Ashvatthama. What is the need to speak a lot? Where
there is dharma, victory is there.' O great king! The infinitely energetic Drona spoke in this way.

'"Then Vidura, devoted to the truth and knowledgeable about dharma, glanced towards his father's[Meaning Bhishma.] face and
spoke these words. 'O Devavrata! Listen to the words that I am going to speak. This lineage of the Kouravas was
destroyed[Because there were no sons.] and you made it rise up again. Therefore, when I am lamenting, do not ignore my words. Who is the
one named Duryodhana, born in this lineage? He is a defiler of the lineage. He is overcome by greed and you are
following his inclination. He does not behave like an arya. He is ungrateful. He has lost his senses because of
avarice. His father can see dharma and artha, but he acts contrary to his instructions. The Kurus will be destroyed
because of Duryodhana's deeds. O great king! Act so that the destruction does not occur. O immensely radiant
one! Earlier, you created me and Dhritarashtra, like a painter fashions a painting. Do not destroy us now. O
mighty-armed one! Do not look at this destruction of the lineage and ignore it, like Prajapati, who creates beings in
order to destroy them. With the destruction imminent, if your intelligence has failed you, leave for the forest, with
me and Dhritarashtra. Or swiftly bind down the wicked and stupid son of Dhritarashtra, who is extremely evil in
his intelligence. Let the kingdom now be protected by the Pandavas. O tiger among kings! Show your favours. A
great destruction of the Pandavas, the Kurus and the infinitely energetic kings can be seen.' Having spoken in this
way, Vidura, distressed in his mind, stopped. He was immersed in his thoughts and sighed repeatedly. Then King
Subala's daughter[Gandhari.], scared for the lineage, angrily spoke words full of dharma and artha to her evil-minded and
violent son Duryodhana, while all the kings looked on. 'Let the kings who have entered the king's assembly hall,
the brahmarshis and the courtiers listen while I speak about your crimes and those of your evil advisers and followers. This kingdom of the Kurus is ruled through a continuous process of succession. That is the dharma of the lineage, as it has come down to us. With your wicked intelligence and violent deeds, you wish to cause injury to the
kingdom of the Kurus. The intelligent Dhritarashtra is established in the kingdom, with his younger brother, the
far-sighted Vidura. O Duryodhana! Because of your delusion and desiring to be king, how can you cross both of
them? As long as Bhishma is there, the king and the greatly fortunate Kshatta are subservient to him. Since he[Bhishma. Bhishma is Ganga's son, thus the son of the river.]
knows about dharma, the great-souled son of the river does not desire to be a king of men. The kingdom inalienably belonged to Pandu. His sons should now rule, and no one else. This entire kingdom belongs to the Pandavas,
because it has descended to them from their ancestors and they will leave it to their sons and grandsons. The intelligent Devavrata is devoted to the truth. He is great-souled and is foremost among the Kurus. We must accept
everything that he has said about dharma. We must act according to our own dharma. Let us follow the one whose
vow is great[Bhishma.]. Let the king and Vidura speak. Let us act in accordance with what our well-wishers say. For a very
long time, let us hold dharma up in front. Yudhishthira, the son of Dharma, should rule. He has rightfully obtained
the kingdom of the Kurus. This has been instructed by King Dhritarashtra and Shantanu's son has said that this is
the most important.'"'
