Yudhishthira asked, "How did he face a calamity and how was he brought down on the ground? How did he
lose his status of Indra? You should tell me about this."

'Bhishma replied, "Those two great-souled ones conversed about what they should do. I have told you everything about how humans go to heaven. In that way, the great-souled one became the king of the gods by giving
lamps and all the other required objects, observing all the rites for rendering offerings and performing all the other
separate tasks that are meant for auspicious days. O Indra among kings! The learned say that in the world of the
gods and in the world of men, a householder who practises good conduct obtains prosperity. This is through offering incense and lamps and prostrations. When food is cooked, the first share must be offered to brahmanas. When
offerings are rendered to gods who reside in the house, they are pleased. The householder obtains satisfaction by
rendering such offerings. However, through such an act, the gods are pleased a hundred times more. This is also
the way virtuous people give incense and lamps, prostrating themselves. Such acts are praised and possess many
qualities. After bowing down, learned people perform many acts of ablutions and these please the gods. When they
are worshipped in accordance with the rites, the gods accept the offerings and are delighted. This is the kind of intelligence Nahusha, lord of men, resorted to. Having performed these wonderful rites, he obtained the great status
of Indra of the gods. But after some time, his good fortune started to decline. He no longer followed all the rites
and started to ignore them. The Indra among the gods was negligent in observing the rendering of offerings and in
following the ordinances and giving incense, lamps and water. The rakshasas started to obstruct his sacrificial rites.

'"He yoked Agastya, foremost among rishis, to his vehicle. The immensely strong one smiled and instructed that
the vehicle should be swiftly conveyed from the banks of the Sarasvati. The immensely energetic Bhrigu spoke to
the son of Mitravaruna. 'Until I have entered your matted hair, do not shut your eyes.' While he entered the matted
hair, the undecaying one[Agastya.] stood immobile. The immensely energetic Bhrigu prepared to bring the king down. The
king of the gods approached the rishi and the vehicle. O lord of the earth! Agastya spoke these words to the lord of
the gods. 'O Indra! Yoke me swiftly. What region will I bear you to? O lord of the gods! I will convey you wherever you tell me to.' Thus addressed, Nahusha yoked the sage. Bhrigu, who was inside the matted hair, became extremely delighted. However, Bhrigu took care not to look at the great-souled Nahusha, since he knew about the
power that the boon had given him. Though he was yoked by Nahusha, Agastya did not display any rage. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The king struck him with a goad. But even then, the one with dharma in his soul
wasn't angered. The king of the gods then angrily kicked Agastya on the head with his left foot. Bhrigu was inside
the matted hair. When the head was thus struck, the powerful one angrily cursed Nahusha, evil in his intelligence.
Bhrigu said, 'In your rage, you have kicked the head of this great sage. O extremely evil-minded one! Therefore,
you will quickly fall down on earth and become a snake.' O bull among the Bharata lineage! As soon as he said
this, he[Nahusha.] became a snake and fell down on earth, on the surface of the ground. This was done by Bhrigu, who had
not looked at him. O lord of the earth! Had Nahusha been able to see Bhrigu, he wouldn't have been able to use his
energy to bring him down. O great king! However, because of his gifts, austerities and rituals, though he fell down
on the ground, he still retained his memory. To bring an end to the curse, he sought to pacify Bhrigu. O great king!
He[Bhrigu.] felt compassion and sought to bring an end to the curse. Bhrigu said, 'There will be a king named Yudhishthira, an extender of the Kuru lineage. He will free you from the curse.' Saying this, he vanished.

'"The immensely energetic Agastya thus accomplished Shatakratu's purpose. Worshipped by the brahmanas, he
returned to his own hermitage. O king! You have saved Nahusha from that curse. O lord of men! While you looked
on, he went to Brahma's abode. Bhrigu thus brought Nahusha down to earth and went to Brahma's abode and told
Brahma what had happened. The grandfather summoned Shakra and the gods. 'O gods! It is because of my boon
that Nahusha obtained this kingdom. However, because of Agastya's anger, he has been dislodged and has gone to
earth. The gods are incapable of continuing without a king. Therefore, again consecrate Shakra in the kingdom of
heaven.' O Partha! The gods were thus addressed by the grandfather. Cheerfully, they replied to the grandfather
that it would be that way. The illustrious Vasava was consecrated in the kingdom of heaven by Brahma and conducted himself as earlier. O tiger among kings! This is the ancient account about Nahusha's transgression. But because of his deeds, Nahusha regained his success. Therefore, in the evening, a householder must offer lamps. After
death, a person who gives lamps obtains divine eyesight. The donor of a lamp becomes like the full moon in his
resplendence. A man who gives a lamp obtains beauty and riches for as many years as the number of nimeshas[A small measure of time, an instant, a twinking, a minute, the time it takes to blink the eye.]
for which the lamp is ablaze."'
