Janamejaya asked, 'Devavrata was unmatched in spirit, energy, strength, bravery and valour. On hearing that he
had been killed[We will use the words killed or slain, though Bhishma had not yet died.] by Shikhandi of Panchala, what did King Dhritarashtra, with his senses overcome by sorrow, do?
O brahmana rishi! His valiant father was slain. O illustrious one! His son wished to obtain the kingdom after vanquishing the great archers, the Pandavas, with rathas like Bhishma and Drona. O illustrious one! When the
supreme among archers was killed, what did Kouravya[Duryodhana.] do? O supreme among brahmanas! Tell me all this.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'Hearing that his father had been killed, Dhritarashtra, the lord of men, could find no
peace. Kouravya[Dhritarashtra.] was overcome by anxiety and sorrow. The king continually reflected on his misery. Gavalgana's
son[Sanjaya.], pure in soul, again came before him. It was night and Sanjaya had returned to the city of Nagasahrya from
the camp. O great king! On hearing that Bhishma had been killed, Ambika's son was extremely distressed. Wishing for the victory of his sons, Dhritarashtra lamented in woe and asked...

'Dhritarashtra asked, "O son[The word used is tata.]! The Kurus were driven by destiny. After conquering the misery as a consequence
of Bhishma, whose valour was terrible, what did they do? The immensely energetic, brave and invincible one had
been killed. The Kurus were immersed in an ocean of grief. What did they do? O Sanjaya! The great army of the
great-souled Pandavas was capable of leading to the greatest fear in the three worlds. On Devavrata, the bull
among the Kurus, having been killed, what did the kings do? O Sanjaya! Tell me."

'Sanjaya said, "O king! Listen, with a concentrated mind, to my words. I will tell you what your sons did when
Devavrata was killed in battle. O king! Truth was Bhishma's valour. When he was killed, those on your side, and
the Pandavas, thought about this separately. Having thought about the dharma of kshatriyas, they were both astounded and delighted. Having censured their own dharma, they bowed down before that great-souled one. They
thought of the infinitely energetic Bhishma lying down on his bed of arrows. O tiger among men! His pillow was
made out of straight-tufted arrows. Having made arrangements for Bhishma's protection, they conversed with each
other. Having circumambulated Gangeya, they took his permission. Then they glanced towards each other, eyes
red in anger. Driven by destiny, the kshatriyas emerged again to do battle. Trumpets and drums made a loud noise.
Your soldiers, and those of the enemy, marched out. O Indra among kings! When Jahnavi's son fell down, the day
had passed. Destiny had robbed them of their senses and they had been overcome by anger. They disregarded the
beneficial words that the great-souled Gangeya had spoken. The best ones of the Bharata lineage marched out,
armed with weapons. Because of your delusion and that of your sons, and because of the death of Shantanu's son,
the Kouravas, together with the kings, seemed to have been summoned by death. They were like cattle without a
herdsman, in a forest that was full of carnivores. Without Devavrata, they were extremely anxious in their minds.
The best of the Bharata lineage had been brought down. The army of the Kurus looked like the firmament, devoid
of stars, or the sky without any air, or the earth with crops destroyed, or words without refinement, or the ancient
army of the asuras after Bali had been brought down, or a beautiful woman[Specifically, a woman with beautiful hips.] who is a widow, or a descending river
whose waters have dried, or a cow hemmed in by wolves in the forest when the leader of the herd has been killed,
or a large mountainous cavern rendered impotent because the lion has been killed. O foremost among the Bharata
lineage! After Jahnavi's son was brought down, the army of the Bharatas was like a feeble boat being tossed
around on the great ocean by a tempest striking it from all directions. It was sorely afflicted by the brave and powerful Pandavas, who did not waver in their aim. With its horses, chariots and elephants, that army was extremely
anxious. The men were seen to be distressed and dispirited. The kings and the soldiers were individually frightened. Without Devavrata, they were submerged in the nether regions.

'"The Kouravas then remembered Karna, who was like Devavrata himself. He was foremost among those who
wielded all weapons and he was as resplendent as a guest. They resorted to him, like a person confronting a
calamity turns to a friend. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the kings cried out, 'Karna. Karna. Radheya,
the son of a suta, is prepared to lay down his life for our welfare. Together with his advisers and relatives, the immensely illustrious one has not fought for ten days. Summon him quickly.' While all the kshatriyas looked on,
when Bhishma counted the rathas in accordance with their strength and valour, the mighty-armed one was counted
as only half a ratha[This incident has been recounted in Section 59 (Volume 4).]. Karna, bull among men, is twice that[Twice a ratha.]. Though he was thus enumerated among rathas and
atirathas, he is foremost and is revered by all brave ones. He is keen to fight with Yama, Kubera, Varuna and the
lord of the gods. O king! At that time, he angrily spoke to Gangeya. 'O Kouravya! As long as you are alive, I will
never fight. O Kourava! But if you manage to kill the Pandaveyas in the great battle, I will take Duryodhana's permission and leave for the forest. O Bhishma! But if you are slain by the Pandavas and ascend to heaven, I will kill
all those whom you think to be rathas on a single chariot.' O great king! Having thus spoken, the immensely illustrious Karna did not fight for ten days, with your son's permission. O king! Bhishma exhibited valour in the battle
and in the encounter, bravely killed innumerable warriors on the side of the Pandaveyas. The greatly energetic and
brave one, who never wavered in his aim, was then brought down. Like those wishing to cross with a boat, your
sons thought of Karna. Together with all the kings, your sons exclaimed and said, 'Karna! This is the time for you
to come.' He is unassailable in his manliness and he received instructions in weapons from Jamadagni's son[Parashurama.]. Our
minds turned towards Karna, as if towards a friend in times of hardship. O king! He is alone capable of saving us
from this great fear, like Govinda always saves the thirty gods from extremely grave calamities."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Thus did he[Sanjaya.] speak about Karna, supreme among warriors. Dhritarashtra sighed like a
serpent and spoke these words to him. "Your minds then turned towards Vaikartana Karna. You saw that Radheya,
the son of a suta, was ready to lay down his life. Did the warrior succeed in saving the distressed ones? Truth is his
valour. They were depressed and frightened and sought safety with him, having honoured him. That warrior is
foremost among all archers. But when Bhishma, the refuge of the Kouravas, was slain, did he succeed in filling the
breach and did he fill the enemy with fear? Did he bring success to my sons, who were wishing for victory?"'
