'The gandharva said, "O Partha! In the world, there was a king named Kalmashapada. He was born in the lineage
of Ikshvaku and he was unrivalled on earth in his prowess. One day, the king left his capital to go on a hunt in the
forest. That chastiser of enemies shot many deer and boars. Hungry and thirsty, the king followed a narrow path
and met Vashishtha's great-souled son on the way. The son was an illustrious sage and his name was Shakti. He
was the illustrious extender of Vashishtha's lineage and was the eldest of the great-souled Vashishtha's 100 sons.
As they came face to face in opposite directions on the narrow path, the king said, 'Move off from our path.' The
rishi then spoke to him in a soothing and kind voice, but did not yield the path, because he was following the path
of dharma[In the sense that the king should have yielded the way to a Brahmana.]. Out of pride and anger at the sage, the king did not yield the path either. When the sage refused to
give way, the best of kings, deluded like a rakshasa, struck the sage with his whip. Thus struck by the whip,
Vashishtha's son, the best of sages, was angered and cursed the best of kings. 'O worst of kings! Since you have
struck an ascetic like a rakshasa, from today you will become a maneater. O corrupt king! Go from here and wander around the earth, eating human flesh.' Thus, Shakti cursed him through the strength of his powers.

'"Vashishtha and Vishvamitra had had a quarrel over who should be the officiating priest[Officiating priest to King Kalmashapada.]. At that time, Vishvamitra, came to that place. O Partha! The immensely powerful Vishvamitra, the rishi with great austerities, neared
the place where the two were quarrelling. After the curse on the great king, the rishi[Vishvamitra.] recognized that the rishi[Shakti.]
was none other than Vashishtha's son, as powerful as Vashishtha himself. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Desiring to bring some benefit to himself, Vishamitra remained there, but concealed himself by making himself
invisible from them. Having been cursed by Shakti, that best of kings[Kalmashapada.] sought Shakti's mercy and worshipped
him, so as to pacify him. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Knowing the king's nature, Vishvamitra ordered a rakshasa to enter the king's body. Because of the Brahmana rishi's curse and because of Vishvamitra's instruction, a
rakshasa named Kimkara then entered the king's body. O chastiser of enemies! Knowing that the rakshasa had entered the king's body, Vishvamitra, the best of sages, went away.

'"Thereafter, the wise king was possessed and tormented by the rakshasa within him and found it difficult to
save himself. A certain Brahmana saw the king roaming in the forest. Being hungry, he begged for some food with
meat. Rajarshi Kalmashapada Mitrasaha[Mitrasaha can also be translated as 'with his friends'. However, no friends have been mentioned. So Mitrasaha is more likely to be one of Kalmashapada's names.] said, 'O Brahmana! Stay here for a while. When I return, I will give
you the food you desire to have.' Having said this, the king went away and that best of Brahmanas remained there.
But when he entered the inner quarters of his palace, the king forgot about his promise to the Brahmana and remembered it only at midnight. He told his cook, 'Go to the forest. A Brahmana is waiting for me there, hoping to
get some food. Take some meat to him.' Having been thus addressed, the cook could not find any meat anywhere
and came and sorrowfully informed the king about this. Possessed by the rakshasa, the king unhesitatingly told the
cook, 'Feed him human flesh,' and repeated his instructions. Agreeing, the cook quickly went to where executioners lived and took some human flesh from them. Washing it and cooking it properly, he mixed it with rice and
quickly took it to the hungry and ascetic Brahmana.

'"Through his ascetic sight, the best of Brahmanas immediately recognized the food to be forbidden. His eyes
red with anger, he said, 'That worst of kings has offered me food that is forbidden. Therefore, that deluded one will
himself become fond of such food. Becoming fond of human flesh, as Shakti had cursed him earlier, he will roam
the earth and persecute all beings.' Repeated for the second time, the curse on the king became very strong. Being
possessed by the rakshasa, the king soon lost all his senses. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing Shakti,
that best of kings, having been deprived of his senses by the rakshasa within him, said, 'Because you have imposed
this unparalleled curse on me, I shall begin my man-eating predicament by eating you first.' Having said this, the
king immediately separated Shakti from his life and ate him up, the way a tiger devours its favoured prey. Having
seen Shakti killed thus, Vishvamitra urged the rakshasa to kill Vashishtha's other sons. Like an angry lion devours
small animals, he ate up all the younger sons of the great-souled Vashishtha.

'"When Vashishtha learnt that Vishvamitra had conspired to get his sons killed, he bore his grief patiently, like a
great mountain bears the earth. That best of sages, chief among those who are intelligent, resolved to sacrifice himself rather than set his mind on extinguishing the Kushika lineage. The illustrious rishi threw himself down from
the peak of Mount Meru and his head struck the stones like a bale of cotton. O Pandava! When the illustrious one
found that the fall did not kill him, he lit a fire in that great forest and entered it. But though the flames blazed up
high, they did not kill him. O chastiser of enemies! Instead, the blazing flames cooled him. Seeing the ocean, the
grief-stricken and great sage tied a heavy stone around his neck and flung himself into the water. But the strong
waves brought the great sage back to the shore. With a sorrowful heart, he then returned to his hermitage."'
