'Markandeya said, "Mudita was the beloved wife of Saha Apa. The lord of bhuh and bhuvah begot an excellent
fire. This is known as the fire that is the lord of all beings. The brahmanas say that this fire is the lord of the earth
and is in the souls of all beings. This great fire is the lord of all beings. This immensely energetic and illustrious
fire always circulates. This fire is always worshipped at sacrifices by the name of garhapatya[The text actually says grihapati. Garhapatya is the fire that burns in the household and is the son of Saha
Apa and Mudita.]. This fire bears
the oblations that are made in this world. Saha's extremely extraordinary and immensely fortunate son is known as
Apamgarbha. He is known as the lord of bhuh, bhuvah and mahah. His son, Bharata, consumes the dead bodies of
all beings. At agnishtoma sacrifices, the Niyata is the best rite for sustenance[The Niyata or Kratu fire is the fire that burns the dead. Here, it is being equated with Bharata.].

'"On seeing Niyata arrive, he[Agni.] was frightened and hid in the ocean. The gods sought him along every road
and every direction, but could not find him. On seeing Atharva[Angiras.], Agni said, 'O brave one! I am extremely weak.
Please carry the oblations to the gods. O Atharva! Become one with sweetness in your eyes and perform this task
for my pleasure.' Having thus spoken to Atharva, he went somewhere else. But the fish revealed where he was
concealed, and angered, Agni told them, 'In your different forms, you will be the food of beings[The story of Agni's fleeing and curse on the fish isn't explained in the Mahabharata. But it occurs elsewhere
and there are various reasons why Agni fled-to perform austerities, and because Agni is a polluter, since Agni devours everything, including the dead.].' Then the
bearer of oblations spoke to Atharva again. Though the gods beseeched them, he paid no heed to their words and
refused to bear the oblations. He gave up his entire body. Having discarded his body, he entered the earth. Having
touched the earth, he created different types of minerals separately. From his mouth, he created fragrances and energy; from his bones, devadarus; from his phlegm, crystal; from his bile, emeralds; and from his liver, black iron.
All beings blaze with these three substances[Presumably, crystal, emeralds and black iron.]. His nails became mica and his arteries became coral. O king! Various other minerals were produced from his body. Having discarded his body, he remained established in supreme
austerities. He was roused through the austerities of Bhrigu, Angiras and the others. Gratified through the power of
austerities, the crested fire blazed forth in great resplendence. But on seeing the rishis, he was frightened and hid in
the great ocean. The universe was scared and sought refuge with Atharva. The asuras, gods and rishis worshipped
Atharva. On seeing Agni, Atharva himself created the worlds. While all the beings looked on, he churned the great
ocean and the illustrious Atharva restored Agni to the earlier position that he had lost. Since then, he has always
borne the oblations of all beings. While he roamed and travelled in many different countries, he[Atharva.] created the
many different sacrificial hearths that are mentioned in the Vedas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The five
rivers other than the Sindhu[The five rivers are Shatadru, Vipasha, Iravati, Chandrabhaga and Vitasta.], Devika, Sarasvati, Ganga, Shatakumba, Sarayu, Gandaki, Charmanvati, Mahi,
Medhya, Medhatithi, the three rivers Tamravati, Vetravati and Koushiki, Tamasa, Narmada, Godavari, Venna,
Praveni, Bhima, Medratha, Bharati, Suprayoga, Kaveri, Murmura, Krishna, Krishnavenna, Kapila and Shona-
these rivers are famous as the mothers of the sacrificial hearths.

'"Adbhuta had a wife named Priya and her son was Viduratha. There are as many soma rites as the number of
fires that have been mentioned. All these were born in Atri's lineage, but were Brahma's offspring through his
mental powers. Desiring offspring, Atri created them in his own body. However, all these fires originated from
Brahma's body. The account of the great-souled fires, and their origin, has thus been told by me. They are immeasurable and beautiful and are the dispellers of darkness. Know that they have the greatness of the fire Adbhuta[Adbhuta means extraordinary and wonderful. But here, Adbhuta is being used as a proper name for the
primeval fire.]
recounted in the Vedas. All these fires are really the same. There is only one illustrious fire that is to be known. It
issued first from Angiras's body, in many different forms, like the jyotishtoma sacrifice[Type of soma sacrifice.]. Thus, the extremely
great lineage of Agni has been recounted by me. When purified with different mantras, it bears the oblations of
embodied beings."'
