'Sanjaya said, "All of them were indomitable in battle and swiftly attacked. They were angry and intolerant and
advanced towards Yuyudhana's chariot. O king! They were on well-constructed chariots that were decorated with
gold and jewels. With horses and elephants, they surrounded Satvata. Those maharathas penned him in from all
directions. They roared like lions and challenged Satyaki. They showered down many sharp arrows on Satyaki, for
whom, truth was his valour. Those spirited and immensely valorous ones desired to kill Madhava. On seeing them
swiftly advance, Shini's mighty-armed descendant, the destroyer of enemy heroes, received them and shot many
swift arrows. Satyaki was a brave and great archer and invincible in battle. He severed heads with his fierce arrows
that had straight tufts. With his kshurapra arrows, Madhava severed the trunks of elephants, the necks of horses
and the arms of many on your side, still holding on to weapons. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Whisks and
white umbrellas fell down. O lord! The earth was beautiful, like the firmament full of stars. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! As they fought in that battle with Yuyudhana, there was a tremendous uproar, like that of dead
spirits wailing. The earth became full of that great sound. The night assumed a terrible form, giving rise to great
fear. Your army was shattered and afflicted by Yuyudhana's arrows. In the night, there was a tremendous roar and
it made the body hair stand up.

'"O king! On seeing this, your son, supreme among rathas, repeatedly spoke to his charioteer and urged him.
'Goad these supreme horses towards that spot.' The charioteer drove towards Yuyudhana's chariot. Duryodhana
was angry. He was firm in wielding the bow and had conquered exhaustion. He was swift in the use of his hands
and was a colourful fighter. He attacked Yuyudhana. Madhava drew his bow all the way back and pierced Duryodhana with twelve arrows that drank up blood. Despite being first afflicted by the arrows of Shini's descendant,
Duryodhana intolerantly pierced him back with ten arrows. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The battle between
the Panchalas and all the Bharatas became tumultuous and fierce. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Shini's descendant became angry in that battle. He pierced your maharatha son in the chest with eighty arrows. In that encounter, he used other arrows to convey his mounts to Yama's eternal abode. Using his arrows, he quickly brought
down the charioteer from his chariot. O lord of the earth! With his horses slain, your son remained stationed on the
chariot. He released many sharp arrows in the direction of the chariot of Shini's descendant. O king! In that encounter, Shini's descendant showed the dexterity of his hands. He sliced down the five hundred arrows that had
been released by your son. O venerable one! Violent in that battle, he used a broad-headed arrow to sever your
son's giant bow from his hand. Without a chariot and without a bow, the lord and master of all worlds quickly
climbed onto Kritavarma's radiant chariot. O lord of the earth! In the middle of the night, when Duryodhana had
retreated, Shini's descendant used his arrows to drive away your army.

'"O king! Meanwhile, Shakuni surrounded Arjuna from every direction. There were thousands of chariots and
thousands of elephants. There were thousands of horses and these created a tumult. They released large and divine
weapons towards Arjuna. Driven by destiny, those kshatriyas fought against Arjuna. Arjuna countered thousands
of chariots, elephants and horses and caused a great destruction. In that battle, the brave Shakuni Soubala pierced
Arjuna with sharp arrows and seemed to be smiling. He again shot one hundred arrows and checked the maharatha. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that battle, Arjuna pierced him with twenty arrows. He then
pierced each of those great archers with three arrows. O king! In the encounter, Dhananjaya repulsed them with his
innumerable arrows. He killed many warriors on your side, like the one with the vajra in his hand against the asuras. O great king! Arms and thousands of bodies were mangled. They were scattered around and the earth looked
beautiful, as if strewn with flowers. He severely pierced Shakuni with five arrows with drooping tufts. He then
struck both him and Uluka with three large and iron arrows each[Uluka was Shakuni's son.]. Urged by Vasudeva, he pierced Uluka and
roared loudly, filling the earth. Resorting to speed, Arjuna severed Shakuni's bow. He killed his four horses and
sent them to Yama's abode. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O lord of the earth! Soubala descended from his
chariot and quickly climbed onto Uluka's chariot. The maharatha father and son were astride the same chariot.
They showered arrows on Partha, like two clouds raining down on a mountain. O great king! Pandava then pierced
them with his sharp arrows. He drove away your army, striking them with hundreds of arrows. It was like clouds
being scattered by the wind in every direction. O king! O lord of the earth! That army was shattered. O foremost
among the Bharata lineage! Your army was slaughtered in the night. They fled in all the directions, glancing everywhere out of fear. Some abandoned their mounts in the battle. Others urged them[To run away.]. They were terrified and fled
in that terrible darkness. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The warriors on your side were defeated in that encounter. Delighted, Vasudeva and Dhananjaya blew on their conch shells.

'"O great king! Dhrishtadyumna pierced Drona with three arrows. With a sharp arrow, he quickly severed the
string of his bow. Drona, the brave crusher of kshatriyas, flung that bow down on the ground and picked up another
bow what was more powerful and more substantial. Drona pierced Dhrishtadyumna with seven swift arrows. O
king! In that encounter, he pierced his charioteer with five arrows. Maharatha Dhrishtadyumna swiftly countered
him with his arrows and killed the Kourava soldiers in hundreds and thousands. O venerable one! Your son's army
was slaughtered at that time. A terrible river, with waves made out of blood, began to flow between the two armies
and men, horses and elephants flowed in it. O king! It was like the river Vaitarani[River which flows in the nether world.] that flows towards the capital
of Yama's kingdom. The powerful Dhrishtadyumna drove away your soldiers and was resplendent, like the energetic Shakra amidst the masses of gods. Dhrishtadyumna and Shikhandi blew on their giant conch shells and so did
the twins, Yuyudhana and Pandava Vrikodara. They defeated thousands of rathas and maharathas on your side. O
lord of the earth! Hoping for victory, the Pandavas roared like lions, in the sight of your son and those of Karna,
who was insolent of his valour, the brave Drona and Drona's son."'
