Yudhishthira said, "O Krishna! I have heard your agreeable words. They are indeed words that you should
speak. O lord! They are like amrita and gladden my mind. Vijaya has indeed fought many battles with the
lords of men, here and there and repeatedly. O  Hrishikesha! I  have heard that. Vijaya is extremely intelligent.
However, it oppresses my mind that Partha is always separated from happiness. What is the mystery behind that?
O Varshneya! I always think about Kunti's son[Arjuna.]. O Krishna! His body possesses all the auspicious marks that are
revered. What is the inauspicious mark, because of which, he always suffers misery? That son of Kunti has always
borne a disproportionate share of sorrow. I do not see anything on Bibhatsu's body that can be censured. If you
think I deserve to hear this, you should explain it to me."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having been thus addressed, Hrishikesha reflected for a very long time. Vishnu, the extender of the king[Yudhishthira.] and the king of Bhoja, replied. "O king! No inauspicious marks can be seen in him, but for the
fact that the lion among men has cheekbones that are exceedingly large. That is the reason the tiger among men is
perpetually fighting. I do not see any other reason why Jaya should have his share of misery." O lord! Thus addressed by the intelligent Krishna, the foremost among the Kurus told the tiger among the Vrishnis that this was
indeed true. However, Krishnaa Droupadi cast a sidelong glance towards Krishna[We have used Krishnaa for Droupadi to avoid confusion with Krishna. The sidelong glance signified
disapproval.]. The slayer of Keshi accepted
this as a sign of affection. She was his friend. Dhananjaya was also his friend and like Hrishikesha himself.

'O  lord!  Bhima  and  the  others,  the  Kurus  and  the  Yadavas,  were  delighted  on  hearing  about  Dhananjaya's
colourful exploits. They began to talk about Arjuna and conversed about the great-souled Vijaya's immortal deeds.
At that time, an intelligent man arrived before the best among the Kurus. He bowed down and reported that Arjuna, tiger among men, had arrived. On hearing this, the king's eyes became full of tears of joy. On hearing this
agreegable news, he gave him copious amounts of riches. On the second day, a large roar resulted and increased,
when the tiger among men, the bearer of the burden of the Pandavas, arrived. A dust was raised from the hooves of
the resplendent horse. It had fearlessly returned, as if it was Uchchaihshrava[Indra's horse.]. As he advanced, Arjuna heard
many happy words spoken by the men. "It is good fortune that Partha is well. King Yudhishthira is blessed. As the
best among horses wandered around, who other than Arjuna could have followed it? The great-souled one has surpassed all the kings, Sagara and the others. We have not heard of any such deed. Nor will any of the lords of the
earth be able to accomplish this in the future. The foremost among the Kuru lineage has performed an extremely
difficult deed." These were the words, agreeable to the ear, spoken by those men. Hearing this, Phalguna, with
dharma in his soul, entered the sacrificial arena. The king and his advisers and Krishna, the descendant of the Yadu
lineage, went out to receive him, placing Dhritarashtra at their head. He honoured his father's feet and the intelligent Dharmaraja. He honoured Bhima and the others and embraced Keshava. Having met them and being worshipped duly by them, he worshipped them back. The one with dharma in his soul rested, like a person who has
crossed over to the shore. At this time, King Babhruvahana, accompanied by his mothers[Both Chitrangada and Ulupi.], came to the intelligent
Kuru. He met all the Kurus and was welcomed by all of them. He then entered his grandmother Kunti's supreme
residence.'
