'Sanjaya said, "Phalguna's son once again pierced Karna in the ear with a barbed arrow. Angering him even more,
he pierced him with fifty arrows. Radheya pierced the great warrior back in turn. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Covered with arrows all over his limbs, he[Abhimanyu.] looked extremely radiant. Extremely enraged, he caused Karna to be covered in blood. Covered with arrows and streaming blood, the brave Karna was also resplendent. Both
of them were beautiful with arrows on their bodies, and blood flowed from their wounds. Those great-souled ones
looked like flowering kimshuka trees[Tree with red blossoms.]. Subhadra's son destroyed six of Karna's advisers, who were brave and
wonderful in the art of fighting, together with their horses, charioteers, standards and chariots. Without showing
them any honour, he pierced all the other great archers back with ten arrows each and this was extraordinary. He
then slew and brought down Ashvaketu, the youthful son of the king of Magadha, with six arrows, together with
his horses and his charioteer. He used a kshurapra arrow to kill Martikavata of Bhoja, who bore the sign of an elephant on his standard. Having done this, he roared and released more arrows. Duhshasana's son then pierced his
four horses with four arrows, his charioteer with one and Arjuna's son himself with ten arrows. At this, Krishna's
son pierced Duhshasana's son with seven swift arrows. His eyes red with rage, he loudly spoke these words. 'Like
a coward, your father has fled from the field of battle. It is your good fortune that you know how to fight. But you
will not be able to escape today.' Having spoken these words, he released an iron arrow that had been polished by
an artisan. But Drona's son sliced this down with three arrows. Arjuna's son severed his standard and struck
Shalya with three arrows. He pierced Shalya again with nine arrows that were tufted with the feathers of vultures.
Arjuna's son severed his standard and killed the two charioteers who guarded his flanks[Parshnis.]. He then pierced him
with six iron arrows and he[Shalya.] climbed onto another chariot. He then killed five who were named Shatrunjaya,
Chandraketu, Mahavega, Suvarcha and Suryabhasa and pierced Soubala.

'"Soubala pierced him back with three arrows and spoke to Duryodhana. 'Let us unite and grind him down. Otherwise, he will kill all of us single-handed.' Vrisha Vaikartana Karna then spoke to Drona[Vrisha and Vaikartana are Karna's names.]. 'Before he destroys
all of us, tell us how we can swiftly kill him.' Drona, the great archer, told all of them, 'Have you been able to detect any weakness in this young one? He is roaming around in all the directions. You had better search out your
forefathers now. Behold this son of Pandava. He is quick and is a lion among men. The path followed by his chariot and the circle of his bow can be seen. He affixes and releases arrows extremely swiftly. His arrows confound me
and afflict my breath of life. But I am delighted with Subhadra's son, the destroyer of enemy heroes. When Subhadra's son roams around on the field of battle, I am extremely gratified. The angry maharathas cannot detect a
weakness in him. He is dexterous in the use of his hands and releases great arrows in all the directions. In the battle, I do not see any difference between him and the wielder of Gandiva[Arjuna.]. At this, oppressed by the arrows of
Arjuna's son, Karna again spoke to Drona. 'I am oppressed by the extremely terrible and energetic arrows of the
young Abhimanyu. Nevertheless, I remain stationed here. His arrows are terrible and possess the energy of the fire.
They are sapping my heart now.' The preceptor smiled and spoke gently to Karna. 'His armour is impenetrable. He
is young, swift and valiant. His father has been instructed by me on the art of donning armour. It is certain that this
destroyer of enemy cities knows everything about that[The art of donning armour, Abhimanyu having learnt it from Arjuna.]. But with well-aimed arrows, you are capable of slicing
down his bow, his bowstring, the reins of his horses and the two charioteers who guard his flanks[Parshnis.]. O great
archer! O Radheya! If you are capable, do this. Make him retreat and strike him subsequently. If he wields the bow,
the gods and the asuras are incapable of vanquishing him. If you so wish, deprive him of his chariot and his bow.'

Having heard the preceptor's words, Vaikartana Karna used his arrows to swiftly slice down the bow of the light-
handed one. Bhoja[Kritavarma.] killed his horses and Goutama[Kripa.] the charioteers who guarded his flanks. Once his bow had
been severed, the others enveloped him with a shower of arrows.

'"At that time, when he was bereft of his chariot, the six maharathas[However, Brihadbala (one of the original six) has already been killed.] quickly and ruthlessly showered him
with arrows, while the child fought single-handed. His bow had been severed and he was without a chariot. However, he was engaged in following his own dharma. The handsome one grasped a sword and a shield and leapt up
into the sky. Arjuna's son displayed his dexterity and strength and roamed around in the sky, like a terrible king of
the birds. He showed kaishika and other motions[There were prescribed motions for fighting with a sword, such as rishabha, gandhara, nishadha, madhyama,
kaishika and so on. The two common ones are kratha and kaishika, named after two princes from Vidarbha.]. The great archers pierced him in the battle, searching for a
weakness, glancing upwards and wondering, 'He might descend on me with the sword in his hand.' Drona severed
the sword, decorated with a bejewelled handle, from his hand. Radheya used sharp arrows to cut down his supreme
shield. Deprived of his sword and shield, but still whole in his limbs, he again descended from the sky onto the
ground. He picked up a chariot wheel and angrily rushed at Drona. His limbs blazed because of the dust raised by
the wheels. He was radiant, with the chariot wheel raised high in his arms. In that battle, for a short while, Abhimanyu looked beautiful and seemed to replicate the deeds of Vasudeva[The imagery being that of Krishna with a chakra in his hand.]. Blood flowed from his body. His face
was red. His eyebrows were wrinkled and he roared like a lion. In the midst of the best of kings, he looked exceedingly fierce."'
