Vaishampayana said, 'Bibhatsu, the scorcher of  enemies, was  thus addressed by  his maternal uncle. He  was
cheerless and distressed in his mind and replied to Vasudeva, "O maternal uncle! O lord! Without the foremost
among the Vrishnis and the Madhus, I am incapable of looking at the earth for a long period of time. The king[Yudhishthira.],
Bhimasena, Pandava Sahadeva, Nakula and Yajnaseni as the sixth, hold the same kind of view. It is certain that the
time has also come for the king to depart. O supreme among those who know about time! Know that the time has
also arrived for you. O scorcher of enemies! By all means possible, I will first take the women, the children and the
aged among the Vrishnis to Indraprastha." Having said this, Dhananjaya spoke these words to Daruka. "I wish to
quickly see the advisers and the brave ones among the Vrishnis." Having said this, the brave maharatha Arjuna,
who was sorrowing, entered the assembly hall of the Yadavas, known as Sudharma. When he arrived there, all the
ordinary people, the brahmanas and the citizens, surrounded him there. All of them were distressed in their minds
and were almost unconscious. Partha was himself distressed and spoke these words. "I will myself take the Vrishni
and Andhaka people to Shakraprastha[Indraprastha.]. Everything in this city will be flooded by the ocean. Arrange vehicles and
all kinds of jewels. This Vajra[Aniruddha's son and Krishna's great-grandson.] will be the king in Shakraprastha. Seven days from now, we will depart when the
sparkling sun rises. Make arrangements without delay and let all of us dwell outside[Outside the houses, because it was a time for observing the funeral rites.]." Thus addressed by Partha
of the unblemished deeds, the citizens anxiously made arrangements for saving themselves. Partha spent that night
in Keshava's house. He was suddenly overwhelmed by great grief and confusion. When it was next morning, the
powerful Shouri Vasudeva united himself in great energy and left for the supreme destination. A great sound was
heard in Vasudeva's house. The women shrieked terribly and wept. All of them had dishevelled hair and they cast
aside their ornaments and garlands. The women beat on their breasts with their hands and lamented piteously. Devaki, Bhadra, Rohini and Madira, supreme among women, seated themselves with their husband[Vasudeva's chief wives were Devaki (Krishna's mother) and Rohini (Balarama's mother), but he had others too.]. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! Shouri's body was covered with many garlands. Partha arranged for it to be drawn out of
the city, on a large vehicle dragged by men. O bull among men! All the citizens and residents of Dvaraka were
filled with grief and sorrow and followed it. The umbrella of a horse sacrifice[Because Vasudeva had performed a horse sacrifice.] was held aloft, ahead of the vehicle. The officiating priests advanced, with kindled fires. The ornamented wives followed the brave one. They were
surrounded by thousands of women and thousands of daughters-in-law. There was a spot that the great-souled one
had loved while he was alive. It was resolved that the funeral rites for the father would be performed there. The funeral pyre of the brave one from the Shura lineage was ignited by his son[This means Arjuna.]. The four beautiful women also ascended the fire, with the body of the husband who had departed. The four women also followed him. The descendant of
the Pandu lineage ignited it, with sandalwood and other diverse kinds of fragrant wood. A loud sound arose from
the kindling and the fire. There was the sound of chants from Sama hymns and men weeping. The brave children
from the Vrishni lineage, with Vajra as the foremost and all the women offered water to the great-souled one. Phal-
guna arranged for dharma where there was no longer any dharma possible[With Krishna dead, under dharma, who would have performed Vasudeva's funeral rites? That is what is probably
meant.]. O bull among the Bharata lineage! He
then went to the place where the Vrishnis had been destroyed. On seeing that they had been brought down in the
carnage, he was extremely miserable. However, Kourvaya did everything that was appropriate for the occasion.
All the rites were performed according to seniority, for all those who had been slain through the curse of the brahmanas and the generation of the clubs. He searched out the bodies of both Rama and Vasudeva[Krishna.] and had them cremated by men who were accomplished in such tasks. Following the ordinances, Pandava performed the funeral
rites.

'On the seventh day, he mounted a chariot and swiftly departed. There were other chariots yoked to horses and
vehicles drawn by bulls, mules and camels. The wives of the brave Vrishnis followed on these, afflicted by grief
and weeping. They followed the great-souled Dhananjaya, Pandu's son. On Partha's instructions, the servants of
the Andhakas and the Vrishnis, horse riders and chariot riders surrounded the women, the aged, the young and the
citizens, who were without any brave ones to defend them, and advanced. Elephant riders advanced on elephants
that were as large as mountains. There were foot soldiers for protection. They also raised their weapons and advanced. All the sons of the Andhakas and the Vrishnis followed Partha. There were prosperous brahmanas, kshatriyas, vaishyas and shudras. Ahead of them were Vasudeva's sixteen thousand wives, his great riches and the intelligent Krishna's grandson, Vajra. Bhoja, Vrishni and Andhaka women also advanced, with their husbands killed.
There were thousands of them, indeed tens of millions. That group of Vrishnis was like an ocean. Partha, foremost
among warriors, great in his knowledge of dharma and the conqueror of enemy cities, escorted it. After the people
departed, the ocean, the abode of makaras, flooded Dvaraka, which was still full of jewels, with its waters. The
people who were residents of Dvaraka looked at this extraordinary sight. They said that this was nothing but destiny and advanced faster and faster.

'Dhananjaya made the Vrishni women rest in beautiful groves, mountains and near rivers. The intelligent one
arrived at the prosperous land of the five rivers. The lord arranged for them to dwell there, in a region that was full
of cattle, other animals and grain. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Some bandits saw that the husbands of
these women had been killed and that they were being led by Partha alone. They became greedy. Greed robbed
those evildoers of their senses. Those abhiras[Cowherds.] saw the opportunity to do something wicked and consulted each
other. "Arjuna is the only warrior. There are the aged and the young. The husbands have been killed. The other
warriors are without energy and are passing through our territory." Thousands of bandits descended and began to
strike them with sticks. Desiring to steal the property, those people attacked the Vrishnis. As if goaded by the
progress of time and desiring the riches, they attacked. With his followers, Kounteya swiftly returned. The mighty-
armed Arjuna laughed and said, "O wicked ones who do not know about dharma! If you wish to be safe and do not
wish to die, retreat. Otherwise, you will have to sorrow when my arrows mangle your bodies and you are killed by
me." When the brave one spoke in this way, they paid no attention to his words. Arjuna repeatedly tried to restrain
the foolish ones who had attacked.

'Arjuna then tried to string the giant, undecaying and divine bow, Gandiva. To be able to string it, he had to
make a great deal of effort. While that tumultuous engagement was going on, he struggled and finally strung it. He
then thought of his weapons, but couldn't remember them. In the engagement, he witnessed this great calamity of
the strength of his arms having disappeared. The great and divine weapons no longer manifested themselves and
he was ashamed. All the Vrishni warriors, those who were fighting on elephants, horses and chariots, were unable
to prevent those men from stealing their possessions. As they attacked from different directions, they abducted
many women. Though Partha made great efforts, he couldn't protect the people. While all the warriors looked on,
in every direction, the best of women were seized. There were other women who voluntarily went with the robbers. Supported by the servants of the Vrishnis, the lord Partha Dhananjaya, forcefully shot arrows from Gandiva
and struck the bandits. O king! However, in a short while, his arrows were exhausted. Earlier, his quivers used to
be inexhaustible. But now, the arrows were exhausted. Seeing that his arrows were exhausted, he was filled with
sorrow and grief. The son of Paka's chastiser used the ends of the bow to kill bandits. O Janamejaya! However, in
every direction, while Partha looked on, the mlechchhas seized the best of the Vrishni and Andhaka women. The
lord Dhananjaya thought that this could be nothing other than destiny. He was full of sorrow and grief and sighed
deeply. The weapons had disappeared and the valour of his arms had been destroyed. The bow was no longer under his control and his arrows had been exhausted. Partha was cheerless and thought.

'O king! He started to retreat and said, "This is nothing but destiny." The immensely intelligent one collected
the remaining wives and the remaining jewels and went to Kurukshetra. Kouravya Dhananjaya arranged for the
wives of the Vrishnis, with the remaining possessions, to reside there. There was a city named Martikavat. Partha,
supreme among men, instated Hardikya's son[Hardikya is Kritavarma.] there and left the remaining wives of the king of Bhoja there. Pan-
dava collected all the other old, young and women, those who were without brave ones to protect them, and made
them reside in Shakraprastha. The one with dharma in his soul honoured the aged and the young and made the
beloved son of Satyaki Yuyudhana reside along the banks of the Sarasvati. The slayer of enemy heroes gave the
kingdom of Indraprastha to Vajra. Though Vajra tried to restrain them, Akrura's wives left for the forest. O king!
Rukmini Gandhari[These sections aren't particularly consistent. Rukmini was from Vidarbha and had nothing to do with Gandhara.
Shakraprastha and Indraprastha are the same place.], Shaibya Haimavati and the queen Jambavati entered the fire. O king! Satyabhama and the
other queens, honoured by Krishna, made up their minds to perform austerities and entered the forest. There were
the men who had resided in Dvaravati and had followed Partha. Jaya divided them into different groups and handed them over to Vajra. The time having arrived, his eyes overflowing with tears, Arjuna did all this. O king! He
then went and visited Krishna Dvaipayana in his hermitage.'
