Vaishampayana said, 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When night had passed, King Duryodhana deployed
his eleven akshouhinis. The lord of the earth divided all his men, elephants, chariots and horses into different battalions, depending on whether they were superior, average or inferior. There were axles[Presumably spare ones.], quivers, fenders[Varuthas. These were attached to chariots to guard against collisions. These must have been spare ones too.],
javelins, holders for arrows[As distinct from quivers, upasanga may have been a different kind of quiver.], spears, cases for arrows[As distinct from quivers, nishanga may have been a different kind of quiver.], assault poles[Pothika. This is a loose translation. Pothika is anything that is used for knocking down.], standards, flags, javelins, many kinds of
ropes, nooses, carpets, kachagrahavikshepas[Something used to grasp (graha) the enemy by the hair (kacha) and fling away (vikshepa).], oil, molasses, sands, pots filled with poisonous snakes, resin, dirt,
wooden spikes with bells, coverlets of tiger skins, coverlets of leopard skins, syringes[Vastis.], horns, missiles[Prasas.], different
kinds of weapons, axes, spades, sesame oil, linseed oil and butter. With all these, the colourful form of the army
blazed like fire. There were warriors clad in armour, firm in their knowledge of weapons. There were those who
were born in noble lineages and knew about horses. They were engaged as charioteers. The chariots were stocked
with herbs and minerals and were decorated with flags and banners. Each chariot was yoked to four horses and
each was stocked with weapons and hundreds of bows. The horses were happy. One charioteer was in charge of
the two horses in front, and another for the two horses at the side. They were foremost among charioteers and each
charioteer knew about horses. Each was protected by a city and was incapable of being attacked by the enemy.
There were thousands of chariots with seats and golden garlands. Like the chariots, the elephants were decorated
and stocked with minerals. There were seven men on each elephant, making it look like a mountain full of jewels.
O king! There were two who held goads[Ankusha, goad for driving an elephant.]. There were two who were excellent archers. There were two who were
supreme in fighting with swords. One held a spear and the flag. O king! Kouravya's entire army was full of thousands of crazy elephants and all of them were stocked with weapons and stores of treasure. There were tens of
thousands of horses clad in colourful armour. They bore ornaments and flags. They were trained well and controlled well. Each was harnessed in gold. There were hundreds and thousands of them, all controlled by the riders.
There were the foot soldiers, with many different kinds of forms and nature. They had different kinds of armour
and weapons. Those men were adorned with golden garlands.

'There were ten elephants for every chariot. There were ten horses for every elephant. There were ten foot soldiers for every horse, guarding its legs in every direction. For every chariot, fifty elephants were kept in reserve.
For every elephant, there were one hundred horses. For every horse, there were seven men. A sena[Unit of the army.] consisted of
five hundred elephants and the same number of chariots. Ten senas constituted a pritana and ten pritanas constituted a vahini. However, vahini, pritana, sena, dhvajini, sadini, chamu, akshouhini and varuthini are also used to
mean the same thing. In this way, the battle formations of the intelligent Kourava numbered eleven akshouhinis,
while the army of the Pandavas had seven akshouhinis. For men, five times fifty is said to constitute a patti. Three
pattis constitute a senamukha, which is also known as a gulma. Ten gulmas make up a gana and there were tens of
thousands of ganas in Duryodhana's army. These were armed ones who were eager to fight. The mighty-armed
King Duryodhana examined many intelligent warriors and appointed those men as his senapatis[Senapati is used in the sense of an overall general. However, sena is also a small unit of the army and senapati
has now been used in that limited commander sense, far short of an overall general.]. In proper form
and with honours, the best of men who were in charge of his separate akshouhinis were brought before him. These
kings were consecrated-Kripa, Drona, Shalya, maharatha Saindhava[Jayadratha.], Sudakshina from Kamboja, Kritavarma,
Drona's son, Karna, Bhurishrava, Shakuni Soubala and maharatha Bahlika. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
From one day to another, and at different times of the day, he himself met them and gave them different kinds of
instructions. All of them were instructed in this way. They, and the soldiers who followed them, were happy and
wished to please the king and do what the king desired.'
