Vaishampayana said, 'At the yaksha's words, the Pandavas stood up. All their hunger and thirst disappeared in an
instant.

'Yudhishthira said, "Unvanquished, you are standing on one leg in the lake. I am asking you. Which god are
you. I do not think that you are a yaksha. Are you one of the Vasus or one of the Rudras? Are you the foremost
among the Maruts? Are you the wielder of the vajra, the lord of the thirty gods? Each of my brothers is capable of
fighting hundreds and thousands. I do not see a means whereby all of them can be killed. I see that their senses
have been restored and they have awakened pleasantly. Are you our well-wisher or are you our father?"

'The yaksha replied, "O son! O one whose valour is mild! I am your father Dharma. O bull among the Bharata
lineage! Know that I arrived with a desire to see you. Fame, truth, self-control, purity, uprightness, humility, steadfastness, charity, austerities and brahmacharya are my body. Know that non-violence, impartiality, peacefulness,
austerities, purity and lack of envy are gates towards me. You have always been dear to me. It is fortunate that you
are devoted to the five[The five qualities of equanimity, self-control, abstinence, control of the senses and yoga.]. It is fortunate that you have conquered the six states[Hunger, thirst, sorrow, delusion, fear and death. Hunger and thirst occur early in life, sorrow and delusion later and fear and death right at the end.]. Two occur early, two in the middle and two at the end, leading to the hereafter. I am Dharma. O fortunate one! I came here to test you and am satisfied with your non-violence. O unblemished one! I will grant you a boon. O Indra among kings! Ask for a boon.
O unblemished one! I will grant it to you. Men who are devoted to me never suffer from misfortune."

'Yudhishthira said, "The deer ran away with his[The brahmana's.] kindling. May his fires not be destroyed. That is the first boon
I ask for."

'Dharma replied, "O lord! O Kounteya! In order to test you, I robbed the brahmana of his kindling in the form of
a deer."'

Vaishampayana said, 'The illustrious one granted him that boon. Then he asked the fortunate one, who was like
an immortal, to ask for another boon.

'Yudhishthira said, "The twelve years of dwelling in the forest have passed and the thirteenth has arrived. Wherever we may live, may people not be able to recognize us."'

Vaishampayana said, 'The illustrious one granted him that boon. He again comforted Kounteya, for whom truth
was his valour. "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Even if you travel the earth in your own forms, no one in the
three worlds will be able to recognize you. O extender of the Kuru lineage! Through my favours, you will spend
the thirteenth year, hidden and undetected, in the city of Virata. Whatever form each of you desires to assume in
your mind, that will be the disguise you will adopt according to your wishes. Return the kindling to the brahmana,
because I stole it in the form of a deer to test you. O son! Ask for a third boon that is great and unmatched. O king!
You have been born from me and Vidura has also been born from a part of me." Yudhishthira replied, "O eternal
god of the gods! It is sufficient that I have set my eyes on your person. O father! I will happily accept whatever
boon you are satisfied to grant me. O lord! May I always be able to conquer avarice, delusion and anger. May my
mind always be inclined towards generosity, austerity and truth." Dharma said, "O Pandava! You are naturally endowed with all the qualities. You are dharma yourself. But you will obtain what you ask for." Having said this, the
illustrious Dharma, who sustains the worlds, disappeared. The intelligent Pandavas were reunited and slept happily. Freed from exhaustion, all the brave ones returned to the hermitage and gave the kindling to the ascetic brahmana. A self-controlled man who restrains his senses and reads this great account of the restoration and meeting of
the father and the son[The restoration to life of the four Pandavas and the encounter between the father (Dharma) and the son
(Yudhishthira).], an account that extends fame, lives for a hundred years with sons and grandsons. Men
who know of this good account are never inclined towards adharma and are not separated from their well-wishers.
They do not steal the possessions of others or violate other people's wives. They never find pleasure in vile
sentiments.'
