Vaishampayana said, 'Janardana lived happily in Khandavaprastha, beloved by the sons of Pritha and honoured by
them. Wishing to see his father, he then made up his mind to leave. The one with the large eyes paid his homage to
Dharmaraja and Pritha[Kunti was his aunt on his father's side. Krishna's father was in Dvaraka.]. The one who is worshipped by the world worshipped his father's sister by touching her
feet with his head. She inhaled the fragrance of Keshava's head and embraced him. Then the immensely famous
Hrishikesha[Krishna, also used for Vishnu, meaning the lord of the senses.] Krishna went to see his sister and spoke to the soft-spoken and gentle Subhadra with tears in his
voice. The illustrious one's words were brief, appropriate and loaded with goodness. She too worshipped him with
her head bowed down and gave him messages for her relatives. Taking his leave from the beautiful one, Varshneya
then went to see Krishna[Droupadi.] and Dhoumya. The supreme among men worshipped Dhoumya in the appropriate way
and consoling Droupadi, Janardana took her leave. The learned and strong one then went to the other brothers with
Partha. Surrounded by the five brothers, Krishna looked like Shakra surrounded by the immortals. The bull among
the Yadus then worshipped the gods and the brahmanas with garlands, chanting, obeisance and many kinds of
fragrances.

'Having performed all these acts, the best of those who are supreme gave the brahmanas vessels full of curds,
fruit, akshata[This can mean grain of any kind. But it is specifically used for threshed and winnowed rice that has not been
dehusked.] and riches and circumambulated them. They uttered their blessings and he set out, ascending his
swift and golden chariot that had Tarkshya[A name for Garuda, as well as for his elder brother Aruna.] on its banner. Carrying his club, chakra, Sharnga[The name of Krishna and Vishnu's bow, the word signifying that it was made of horn.] and other weapons
the lotus-eyed one left at an auspicious and excellent muhurta[A brief instant of time.], tithi[Lunar day.] and nakshatra, pulled by his horses Sainya
and Sugriva[They were yoked to the chariot.]. King Yudhishthira, lord of the Kurus, ascended after him and out of love for him, made the charioteer Daruka, supreme among charioteers, stand aside and himself grasped the reins. Arjuna also mounted and
waved a golden-handled and white chamara[A whisk or fan made out of a yak's tail and a sign of royalty.] all around his head. The powerful Bhimasena and the twins followed Krishna, surrounded by the priests and the citizens. Keshava, the destroyer of enemy warriors was thus followed by the brothers and shone like a preceptor followed by his beloved disciples. Bidding the lamenting Partha
farewell, Govinda embraced him. He then paid his homage to Yudhishthira, Bhimasena and the twins. The twins
embraced him firmly in their arms and paid him homage. After making an agreement[About the time of return.] with the Pandavas and persuading them and their followers to turn back, Madhusudana Krishna then left for his own city, in glory like Puran-
dara. Out of affection, their eyes lovingly followed Krishna for as long as they could see, because their minds were
still unsatisfied at the sight of Keshava. The handsome Shouri[Name for Vishnu or Krishna, meaning the brave one. Also a name for Balarama.] swiftly disappeared from their sight. Their desires
unsatisfied, since their hearts had left with Govinda, Pritha's sons turned back and those bulls among men returned
to their city. Riding his chariot, Krishna reached Dvaraka in time.'
