'Brihadashva said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Nala gave his promise to do so. He then joined his hands
in salutation and asked them, 'Who are you? Who desires that I should be his messenger? What is the task that I
am required to perform? Tell me in detail.' Thus addressed by Nishadha, Maghavan replied, 'Know that we are the
immortals and that we have come here for Damayanti's sake. I am Indra. This is Agni. This is the lord of the waters[Varuna.]. O king! This is Yama, who brings an end to human bodies. Go and tell Damayanti that the lokapalas, together with Indra, are arriving with a desire to see her. The gods Shakra, Agni, Varuna and Yama wish to obtain
her. She should choose one of these gods for her husband.' Thus addressed by Shakra, Nala joined his hands in
salutation and requested them not to send him for this purpose, as he had the same objective. The gods replied, 'O
Nishadha! You have already promised to do our bidding. O Nishadha! How can you then fail to do what we ask.
Go immediately.' Thus addressed by the gods, Nishadha again replied, 'How can I enter a palace that is guarded so
well?' Shakra again told him that he would be able to enter. Having been thus addressed, he went to Damayanti's
residence.

'"There he saw the daughter of Vidarbha, surrounded by a crowd of friends. She was radiant in her form and
fortune and was supremely beautiful. Her limbs were extremely delicate. Her waist was slender and her eyes were
beautiful. In her radiance, she seemed to dim the light of the moon. On seeing the sweet-smiling one, his desire increased. But bearing in mind the promise that he had given, he restrained his wishes. The beautiful ladies were bewildered on seeing Nishadha. They arose from their seats, overcome by his energy. Astounded, but extremely delighted, they praised Nala. But they did not say anything to him. They only thought about it in their own minds.
What beauty, what radiance, what fortitude exist in this great-souled one! Who is he? Is he a god, a yaksha or a
gandharva? The beautiful ladies were overcome by his energy and were bashful. They were not able to speak a single word to him. Damayanti was also struck with wonder. But she smilingly spoke to the brave Nala, who was also
smiling. 'Who are you? All your limbs are flawless and you are increasing my desire. O brave one! O unblemished
one! You have arrived like an immortal. I wish to know how you have entered. How is it that you have not been
noticed? On the strict instructions of the king, my palace is guarded well.' Having been thus addressed by the
daughter of Vidarbha, Nala replied, 'O fortunate one! Know me to be Nala. I have come here as a messenger of the
gods. The gods Shakra, Agni, Varuna and Yama wish to obtain you. O beautiful one! Choose one of those gods as
your husband. It is through their influence that I have been able to enter unnoticed. When I entered, no one saw me
and no one restrained me. O fortunate one! It is for this purpose that I have been sent by the supreme among the
gods. O beautiful one! Having heard this, make up your mind about what you wish to do.'"'
