'"Vasudeva said, 'O Dhananjaya! Behold. Suyodhana has overtaken us. I think that this is marvellous and there is
no ratha like him. The great archer can shoot up to a great distance. He is skilled in the use of weapons and is invincible in battle. He is firm in wielding weapons and is colourful in fighting. Dhritrarashtra's son is extremely
strong. He has been reared in great happiness, but is honoured by the maharathas. O Partha! He has always been
accomplished, but he has always hated the Pandavas. O unblemished one! Therefore, I think that the time has
come for you to fight with him. Like the stake in a gambling match, on him rests victory, or its reverse. O Partha!
Release the venom of your anger here, which you have bottled up for a long time. This maharatha is the main
source of the injury to the Pandavas. He is now within striking distance. See that you are successful. This king desires the kingdom. That is why he has come to fight with you. It is through good fortune that he has now arrived
within the reach of your arrows. O Dhananjaya! Act so that he is deprived of his life. He is intoxicated and deluded
because of his prosperity. He has never suffered from unhappiness. O bull among men! Nor does he know your
valour in battle. O Partha! There is no one in the three worlds, gods, asuras or men, who can withstand you and
vanquish you in battle, not to speak of Suyodhana alone. O Partha! It is through good fortune that he has come
near your chariot. O mighty-armed one! Kill him, like Purandara against Vritra. O unblemished one! This powerful
one has always sought to cause you injury. Through deceit, he cheated Dharmaraja in the gambling match. O one
who grants honours! He has performed many extremely cruel deeds towards him. Fight with this evil-minded one.
You have never set your mind on evil. You have always been noble. This inferior man has been addicted to kama.
O Partha! Set your mind on fighting nobly and without reflecting on it, kill him. O Pandava! He deceitfully robbed
the kingdom and sent you on an exile to the forest. He caused oppression to Krishna[Krishnaa, Droupadi.]. Remember those in your
heart and act valorously. It is through good fortune that he is circling around, within the range of your arrows. It is
through good fortune that he is in front of you and is trying to act against you. He knows that it is through good
fortune that he has to fight against you in the battle. O Partha! It is through good fortune that you will be successful
in everything that is desired by you. O Partha! Therefore, in this battle, kill Dhritarashtra's son, the wretch of the
lineage, just as in earlier times, in the battle between the gods and the asuras, Indra killed Jambha. If you kill him,
the soldiers[The Kourava soldiers.] will be without a protector and you can penetrate them. Sever the root of these evil-souled ones
and let the avabhritha of this enmity be completed[Avabhritha is the most important final component of a sacrifice, characterized by the taking of a bath. As the
last bath of life, avabhritha also signifies death. The battle is thus being compared to a sacrifice.].'"
'Sanjaya said, "Having been thus addressed, Partha replied, 'I will do everything accordingly. Ignore everything
else and go to the spot where Suyodhana is. He has enjoyed the kingdom for a very long time, without any thorns.
Exhibiting my valour in fighting, I will slice off his head in the battle. O Madhava! Though she did not deserve it,
he caused oppression to Krishna. She was dragged by the hair. Will I now be successful in avenging this?' The two
Krishnas talked to each other in this way. Borne on the best of white horses, they urged them in the battle, looking
for the wicked one. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O venerable one! Having approached them, your son was
not the least bit frightened, though there was reason for great fear. At this, all the kshatriyas on your side honoured
him, because he advanced against Arjuna and Hrishikesha, desiring to repulse them. O lord of the earth! On seeing
the king in that battle, a great sound arose from all the soldiers on your side. As that great and terrible sound arose,
your son countered and checked them. Obstructed by your son, Kounteya became extremely angry and so did that
scorcher of enemies[Meaning Duryodhana.]. On seeing that Duryodhana and Dhananjaya were angry with each other, all the kings, terrible in form, surrounded them from all sides. O venerable one! On seeing that Partha and Vasudeva were enraged,
your son laughed and wishing to fight, challenged them. Dasharha was delighted at this and so was Pandava
Dhananjaya. They let out loud roars and blew on their excellent conch shells[As the next sentence makes clear, this refers to Krishna and Arjuna alone.]. On seeing that the two of them
were so cheerful, all the Kouravas gave up any hope of your son remaining alive. All the Kurus, and some among
the enemy, began to sorrow. They thought that your son had already been offered as an oblation into the fire. The
warriors saw that Krishna and Pandava were delighted. Afflicted with fear, they exclaimed, 'The king has been
slain. The king has been slain.' On hearing the roars of the men, Duryodhana said, 'Dispel your fears. I will send
the two Krishnas to the land of the dead.' Having spoken thus to all the soldiers, the king expected to be victorious.
He angrily addressed Partha and spoke these words. 'O Partha! If you have actually been born from Pandu, quickly
show me your weapons, divine and human. Show me your strength and your valour, and also that of Keshava. Act
swiftly against me and show me your manliness. They have spoken about deeds you have done, but we have not
seen them. They have been regarded as deeds of valour. Show them to me.'"'
