'Sanjaya said, "O foremost amongst the Bharata lineage! Gangeya saw that your son was still immersed in
thought. He then again spoke these pleasing words to him. 'O king! I, Drona, Shalya, Satvata Kritavarma, Ashvatthama, Vikarna, Somadatta's son, Saindhava, Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti, Bahlika and the Bahlika forces,
the powerful king of Trigarta, the invincible king of Magadha, Brihadbala from Kosala, Chitrasena, Vivimshati,
many thousand rathas with radiant and giant standards, horses from many countries and horse-riders astride them,
crazy kings of elephants with musth issuing from their shattered temples and mouths, brave infantry armed with
many different kinds of weapons, warriors with raised weapons who have assembled in your cause from many
countries- these and many others have assembled in your cause, ready to give up their lives. It is my view that
they are capable of defeating even the gods in battle. O king! But I must always tell you words that are for your
own welfare. The Pandavas are incapable of being vanquished, even by the gods, with Vasava. They have Vasudeva as their aide and are like the great Indra in their valour. O Indra among kings! In every way, I will act according
to your words. I will defeat the Pandavas in battle, or they will defeat me.' Having thus spoken, he gave him the
sacred vishalyakarani[A herb with wonderful healing properties. Literally, something that removes pain.]. This herb possessed great efficacy and he[Duryodhana.] used it to heal his wounds.

'"When it was morning and the sky was clear, the valiant Bhishma, skilled about vyuhas, himself arranged his
soldiers in an array that was in the form of the mandala vyuha[Mandala means circular.]. O foremost among men! It abounded in many
different kinds of weapons. It was full of the foremost warriors, tuskers and infantry. There were many thousands
of chariots in every direction. There were large numbers of horse-riders, wielding swords and lances. There were
seven chariots near every elephant and there were seven horses near every chariot. There were ten archers near
every horse-rider and there were seven with shields near every archer. O great king! Such was the vyuha in which
your maharatha soldiers were arrayed. Protected by Bhishma, they were stationed, ready for the great battle. Ten
thousand horses, as many elephants, ten thousand chariots and your armoured sons, the brave Chitrasena and the
others, protected the grandfather. He was seen to be protected by those brave ones and those immensely strong
kings were themselves armoured. In that battle, Duryodhana was armoured and was stationed on his chariot. He
blazed in prosperity, like Shakra in heaven. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A great roar arose from the army
of your sons. There was the tumultuous sound of chariot wheels and the noise made by musical instruments. Arrayed by Bhishma, the battle formation of the sons of Dhritarashtra advanced towards the west. It was in the form
of a giant vyuha known as mandala, impenetrable and the destroyer of the enemy. O king! It was beautiful in every
direction and was incapable of being assailed by the enemy.

'"On seeing the extremely terrible vyuha known as mandala, King Yudhishthira himself created the vyuha
known as vajra. The different divisions were stationed in the form of this array. The charioteers and horse-riders
roared like lions. Desiring to do battle, the warriors wished to break each other's vyuhas. Here and there, with their
soldiers, the brave ones began to strike. Bharadvaja's son advanced against Matsya and Drona's son against
Shikhandi. King Duryodhana attacked Parshata himself. O king! Nakula and Sahadeva advanced against the lord
of Madra. Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti attacked Iravat[Iravat or Iravan was the son of Arjuna and the naga princess Ulupi.]. In that encounter, all the kings fought against
Dhananjaya. Bhimasena strove in that battle and countered Hardikya[Kritavarma.]. O king! In that battle, Arjuna's illustrious
son[Abhimanyu.] fought with your sons Chitrasena, Vikarna and Durmarshana. Hidimba's son, supreme among rakshasas,
advanced forcefully against the great archer from Pragjyotisha and it was like a crazy elephant encountering another crazy elephant[Ghatotkacha and Bhagadatta respectively.]. O king! The rakshasa Alambusa was enraged in that war. He attacked Satyaki, invincible in
battle, together with his soldiers. Bhurishrava made every effort in that battle and fought against Dhrishtaketu.
Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, confronted King Shrutayu[Equivalently, Shrutayush.]. In that battle, Chekitana fought against Kripa. The remaining ones fought against maharatha Bhima.

'"Thousands of kings surrounded Dhananjaya, with spears, lances, iron arrows, maces and clubs in their hands.
Arjuna became extremely angry and told Varshneya, 'O Madhava! Look at the soldiers of the sons of Dhritarashtra, arrayed for battle. They have been arranged in this formation by the great-souled Gangeya, knowledgeable
about vyuhas. O Madhava! Look at these armoured and brave ones, wishing to do battle. O Keshava! Behold the
king of Trigarta, together with his brothers. O Janardana! While you look on, I will kill all of them today. O foremost among the Yadu lineage! They are wishing to fight against me in this field of battle.' Having spoken thus,
Kounteya touched the string of his bow and showered arrows towards the masses of kings. Those supreme archers
also showered back arrows in return and it was like clouds pouring down onto a lake during the monsoon season.
O lord of the earth! In that great battle, the two Krishnas were seen to be completely covered through those showers of arrows and a great lamentation arose amidst the soldiers. The gods, the devarshis, the gandharvas and the
giant serpents were struck with great wonder, when they saw the two Krishnas in that state. O king! At this, Arjuna
was enraged and unleashed the aindra[Divine missile named after Indra.] weapon. We witnessed Vijaya's extraordinary valour. The showers of
weapons released by his enemies were repulsed by his innumerable arrows. O lord of the earth! Among those thousands of kings, horses and elephants, there was not a single one who was not wounded. O venerable one! Partha
pierced others with two or three arrows each. Having been thus killed by Partha, they sought refuge with Bhishma,
Shantanu's son. At that time, they seemed to be immersed in fathomless waters and Bhishma became their protector. Your soldiers confronted a calamity there and were scattered. O great king! They were agitated, like the great
ocean in a storm."'
