'Kunti said, "O scorcher of enemies! In this connection, an ancient history is recounted, about a conversation between Vidula[The name is actually Vidura (Viduraa). However, some non-Critical versions say Vidula and 'l' and 'r' are often interchangeable in proper names. Though the name is Vidura, we have used Vidula, so that there is no confusion with the other Vidura.] and her son. She told him about what he should do for his welfare. She was famous and was born
in a noble lineage. She was radiant and was also wrathful. Vidula was far-sighted, fortunate and devoted to the
dharma of kshatriyas. She was renowned in the assemblies of kings because of her learned words and great erudition. The lady named Vidula was truthful. She once censured the son who was born from her womb, when he was
defeated by the king of Sindhu and was lying down, dejected in his intelligence. He was miserable and ignorant
about dharma. He increased the delight of his enemies.

'"'Where did you come from[This is Vidula speaking.]? You were not born from me or your father. You are such a coward that you
have no anger. You are like a lowly branch. You are a man, but are acting like a eunuch. You can remain hopeless
for the rest of your life. But for your own welfare, bear the burden. Do not think of yourself as inferior. Do not be
satisfied with trifles. Set your mind on great welfare. Do not be afraid. Show some spirit. Arise. You are a coward.
Don't lie there in this defeated state. You are the delight of all your enemies. You are causing grief to all your relatives. An inferior[In the sense of small.] river is soon filled, the paws of a mouse are soon filled, a coward is greatly satisfied and content with little. Without uprooting the fangs of a snake, are you going to die like a dog? Or will you exhibit some
valour, even at the expense of your life? Will you be seen circling silently and unafraid in the sky like a hawk,
waiting for a weakness in the enemy? Why are you lying down like a corpse, as if you have been struck by lightning? Arise, you coward! Do not lie down, defeated. Do not vanish in your misery. Make yourself famous through
your own deeds. Do not be medium, inferior, or the worst. Be strong. Blaze up, even if it is only for an instant, like
a kindling of tinduka[Medicinal tree, Diospyros peregrina. It is easily inflammable and the fruit yields a resin.]. Do not burn like the flame of husk. Do not lead the fugitive life of a crow. It is better to
blaze for an instant, than to only yield smoke for a long time. Let no son be born in a royal house who is as mild as
a she-mule. As long as a person performs manly deeds and achieves the greatest objective, he acts according to
dharma and triumphs and there is no need for him to censure himself. Whether he is unsuccessful, or whether he is
successful, a learned person does not lament. He moves on to the next task, without setting store by his life. Either
display your valour, or head towards an objective that is certain[The uncertain path will bring fame, but the certain path will bring ill fame.]. O son! When you have placed dharma first,
why should you remain alive[Remain alive without trying.]? O eunuch! Your sacrifices, your donations and all your deeds have been destroyed. The roots of your enjoyment have been severed. Why should you remain alive? If one is sinking and is
about to fall, one should grasp the enemy by the thigh[The image is of a wrestling bout.]. Even if one has been destroyed by the roots, one should
never sorrow. One should remember the achievements of well-bred horses. One should arise, lift the burden and
excel. Know your own manliness and achieve spirit and honour. The lineage has been immersed because of your
own deeds. Raise it up. If men do not talk about a person's feats as greatly extraordinary, he only increases the
ranks of the ordinary. He is neither a woman, nor a man. A man whose generosity, austerities, valour, learning,
riches and gains are not famously spoken about, is his mother's excrement[Uchchara, more generally, discharge.]. One becomes a man through deeds
of learning, austerities, prosperity and valour. A man who surpasses others in deeds, has truly been born. Do not
resort to the livelihood of one with a begging bowl. This is wicked, reprehensible, cruel and vile and leads to misery. It is followed by cowards. Enemies welcome such a feeble man. The worlds despise him. He is inferior in his
food and garments. He gains nothing and is inferior. He lives on nothing and he is himself only nothing. His relatives obtain no happiness from having got such a person as a relative. We have been banished from our kingdom.
We have no means of livelihood. We have fallen in status. We have been deprived of all the objects of desire. We
have been dislodged from our positions. We are nothing. O Sanjaya[The name of Vidula's son.]! I have given birth to Kali in the form of a
son. He is not virtuous and acts contrary to the norms of his varna. You are the destroyer of the lineage and you
have nothing in you. You have no anger. You have no enterprise. You have no valour. You are the delight of your
enemies. Let no woman give birth to a son like this. Do not only produce smoke. Blaze up. Attack and conquer the
enemies. Even if it is for an instant, blaze up over the heads of the enemies. One is a man to the extent one is intolerant and unforgiving. One who is forgiving and does not have anger, is neither a woman, nor a man. Satisfaction
destroys prosperity and so do lack of anger, lack of enterprise and fear. Nothing great can be obtained without enterprise. Liberate yourself from these evil traits. Liberate yourself from your own self. Have steel in your heart and
hunt again for what belongs to you. A man is called purusha because he vanquishes a city[Purusha means man and there is a pun on the word pura (city).]. If one lives like a
woman, one falsifies one's name. There are brave and spirited ones who roam around with the valour of lions.
Their fate may be determined by destiny, but the subjects rejoice. He who hunts for prosperity, giving up his own
self and his beloved happiness, soon brings delight to his advisers.'

'"The son replied, 'If you do not behold me[That is, if the son is killed.], what is the use of this entire earth to you? What will ornaments,
objects of desire and life itself mean to you?'

'"The mother said, 'Let your enemies obtain the worlds of those who lament, "What should be done now?" Let
your well-wishers travel to the worlds meant for those who have great souls. Do not follow the conduct of those
who are deserted by their servants and live on alms given by others, those who are miserable and without spirit. O
son! May brahmanas and our well-wishers obtain their sustenance through you, just as all beings obtain lives
through rain and the gods through Shatakratu. O Sanjaya! A man on whom all living beings depend, like a tree
with ripe fruit, is one whose life has meaning. A brave and valiant one, who sustains the happiness of his relatives,
like the thirty gods by Shakra, leads a virtuous life. A man who lives on the strength of his arms obtains fame in
this world and an auspicious objective in the hereafter.'"'
