Vaishampayana said, 'O bull among the Bharata lineage! That battle between Arjuna and the Indra among men
raged for three nights, like that between Vritra and Shatakratu. On the fourth day, the immensely strong Vajra-
datta laughed loudly and spoke these words. "O Arjuna! O Arjuna! Wait. You will not escape from me with your
life. I will slay you and following the proper rites, offer water to my father. My aged father, Bhagadatta, was your
father's friend[In the Kurukshetra war, Bhagadatta was killed by Arjuna. Bhagadatta was Indra's friend. Thus, he was the friend
of Arjuna's father.]. He was aged and was killed. Though I am not an adult and am still a child, fight with me now."

O Kouravya! The angry King Vajradatta spoke these words and urged the elephant towards Pandava. The Indra
among elephants was urged in this way by the intelligent Vajradatta and as it attacked Pandava, it seemed to descend from the sky. O great king! From its trunk, it sprayed Phalguna with water, like a blue cloud showering
down on a mountain. Like a cloud, it thundered repeatedly. Goaded by the king, it trumpeted loudly and rushed towards Phalguna. Urged by Vajradatta, that Indra among elephants seemed to be dancing. O king! It quickly advanced against the maharatha of the Kouravas. On seeing that Vajradatta's elephant was descending on him, the
powerful one, the slayer of enemies, did not waver. He resorted to Gandiva. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Pandava remembered the earlier enmity and the obstruction the powerful king had proved to be in accomplishing
his tasks and was angry[This means Bhagadatta and not Vajradatta.]. Enraged, Pandava enveloped the elephant with a net of arrows and restrained it, like the
shoreline holds back the abode of makaras[The ocean.]. The foremost of elephants was checked by Arjuna's valour. Its limbs
were pierced by arrows and it looked like a porcupine. On seeing that the elephant had been restrained, the king
who was Bhagadatta's son became senseless with rage and released sharp arrows towards Arjuna. O great king!
Arjuna repulsed these arrows with a storm of arrows and it was extraordinary. The king, the lord of Pragjyotisha,
became angry again. He again urged that powerful Indra among elephants, which was like a mountain. On seeing
that it was descending, the powerful son of the chastiser of Paka shot an arrow that was like a fire towards the elephant. O king! This severely wounded the elephant in its inner organs and it violently fell down on the ground, like
a mountain shattered by the vajra. The elephant was struck by Dhananjaya's arrows. When it fell down, it was as
beautiful as the shattered summit of a large mountain that had been struck by the vajra and had fallen down on the
ground. When  Vajradatta's  elephant  fell  down,  Pandava  spoke  to  the  king,  who  had  also  fallen  down  on  the
ground. "Do not be frightened. This is what the immensely energetic Yudhishthira told me when I left. 'O Dhananjaya! You must never slay the kings. O tiger among men! It is only then that you will be successful in every way. O
Dhananjaya! In the battle, you must not slay any of the warriors. This is what you should tell all the kings, along
with their well-wishers. They should all come to Yudhishthira's horse sacrifice.' O lord of men! Having heard my
brother's words, I will not kill you. Get up. Do not be afraid. O king! May you be well. O great king! Later, when
it is the month of Chaitra, you should come to the intelligent Dharmaraja's horse sacrifice." The king who was
Bhagadatta's son was addressed in this way. Having been vanquished by Pandava, he agreed to these words.'
