'Yudhishthira asked, "O grandfather! What answer was given then by the brahmana or the king? Tell me this. In
accordance with what you have described, what were their ends? What was the conversation between them? What
transpired and what did they do there?"

'Bhishma replied, "He[The brahmana.] accepted the agreement and worshipped Dharma, Yama, Time, Death and Heaven, as
they deserved to be honoured. He worshipped all the other bulls among brahmanas who had assembled there. He
bowed his head down and honoured all of them. He then spoke to the king in these words. 'O rajarshi! United with
the fruits, go to the sacred regions. With your permission, I will devote myself to japa once again. O immensely
strong one! O lord of the earth! The goddess[Savitri.] granted me a boon earlier-that my devotion to japa would always
remain.' The king replied, 'O brahmana! If you are devoted to japa and if your success has been rendered futile,
then go with my half and let the fruits of japa remain with you[The brahmana has given away his fruits of japa to the king. The king offers that the brahmana should retain these fruits of his japa and also take
half of the king's fruits.].' The brahmana said, 'In the presence of all these
people, you have made great efforts[To give me your fruits.]. Therefore, let us be equal and go wherever our ends take us.'

'"Knowing what they had decided, the lord of the thirty gods came there, with all those who had forms of gods,
the guardians of the worlds, the Sadhyas, the Vishvadevas, the Maruts, the large stellar bodies, the rivers, the
mountains, the oceans, the many tirthas, the austerities, the various rites of the Vedas, the hymns, Sarasvati, Narada, Parvata, Vishvavasu, the Hahas, the Huhus[Narada and Parvata are sages. Vishvavasu is a gandharva and the Hahas
and the Huhus are gandharvas.], the gandharva Chitrasena with a large number of his family
members, the serpents, the successful sages, Prajapati, the god of the gods and the unfathomable and thousand-
headed Vishnu. Musical instruments like drums and trumpets were sounded in the sky. Celestial flowers were
showered down on those great-souled ones. Large numbers of apsaras danced around in every direction.

'"Heaven appeared there in personified form and spoke these words. 'O brahmana! You are immensely fortunate
and have become successful. O king! You have also become successful.' O king! Having done what was proper
towards each other, those two[The brahmana and the king.] prepared to withdraw themselves from all material objects. They established
prana, apana, udana, samana and vyana in their minds and turned their minds towards prana and apana. They concentrated these at the tips of their noses and below their eyebrows. Using their minds, they gently held them there.
They rendered their bodies immobile and were fixed and controlled in their looks. Having seated and controlled
themselves in that way, they sent their atmans upwards. A great and blazing mass of energy penetrated the crown
of the great-souled brahmana's head and went up to heaven. Great sounds of lamentation arose in all the directions.
Worshipped by everyone, that energy entered the brahman. O lord of the earth! The grandfather advanced and welcomed that mass of energy, which was as tall as a man. He again spoke these supreme and sweet words. 'There is
no doubt that japakas obtain the same fruits as yogis. The fruits of yoga are directly evident. However, japakas are
superior, because I advance to welcome them. Dwell with me.' Having said this, he again imparted
consciousness[Into the mass of energy.] and without any anxiety, the brahmana entered into his[Brahma's.] mouth. Like that tiger among brahmanas, the king, following the prescribed rites, also entered into the illustrious grandfather.

'"The gods worshipped Svayambhu and spoke these words. 'We have made exertions to come to accomplish the
objectives of the japaka. You have made them[Japakas and yogis.] equal in honour and equal in obtaining the fruits. We have witnessed the great fruits obtained by yogis and japakas. They can go wherever they wish, passing over all the
worlds.' Brahma replied, 'If a person follows the rites and reads the great sacred texts, or the auspicious ones that
follow the sacred texts, he also goes to my world[The text uses the word smriti. The reference is thus to the original smriti
texts and the ones that followed.]. If someone follows yoga in accordance with the prescribed
rites, there is no doubt that, after death, he will obtain my worlds. I will now go. To accomplish your objectives, all
of you also return to your places.' Having said this, the god disappeared. Having taken his leave earlier, all the
gods also returned to their own abodes. O king! All those great-souled ones honoured Dharma and, delighted in
their minds, followed him at the rear. These are said to be the fruits and ends obtained by japakas. O great king!
This is what I have heard. What else do you wish to hear?"'
