The serpent asked, 'O one with the beautiful smiles! In the form of a brahmana, whom did you see? Was that
brahmana only a human, or was he a god? O illustrious one! Among men, who is capable of seeing me, or
would desire that? Would anyone like that speak and leave words of instruction that I should go and see him? O
beautiful one! Among the number of gods, asuras and devarshis, the serpents are certainly immensely valorous.
They are the descendants of Surasa and are swift[Daksha's daughters, Kadru and Surasa, were married to the sage Kashyapa. While accounts vary, usually Kadru
is described as the mother of serpents (nagas) and Surasa as the mother of snakes (sarpas).]. They deserve to be honoured and are the granters of boons.
We deserve to be followed by others. In particular, it has been heard that men follow us for riches.'

'"The serpent's wife replied, 'O one who subsists on air! From his uprightness, I know that he is not a god. O
one  who  is  extremely  wrathful!  I  know  that  he  is  devoted  to  you  alone.  He  desires  to  accomplish  some  task
through you and is waiting, like the chataka bird for water[The chataka bird waits for rain.]. Like the bird which loves the monsoon, he desires to
meet you. He should be protected against any misfortune and anxiety. A person like you, with noble birth, should
not disregard someone who has come before you. You should cast aside your natural anger and go and see him.
You should not cause torment to yourself by destroying his hopes. If a king or a prince does not wipe away the
tears of someone who has come with hope, he commits the sin of having killed a foetus. Knowledge is the fruit of
silence. Great fame results from giving. Through eloquence and truthful words, one obtains greatness in the hereafter. Through donating land, one obtains an end that is lauded by all the ashramas. Even if the riches obtained
have been destroyed in this way, one gets fruits. If one desires benefit, one must perform all the desirable acts. One
will then never go to hell. Those who are learned about dharma say this.'

'"The serpent said, 'O virtuous one! Because of the great pride associated with the sinful species that I have
been born into, I possessed insolence and resolved to yield to anger. But that has been burnt down by the fire of
your words. O virtuous one! I do not see any darkness that is greater than being consumed by anger. Serpents are
said to be especially prone to this. This is the sin that the powerful Dashagriva[Ravana.] fell prey to. He rivalled Shakra
and was slain by Rama in the battle. On hearing that Rama had entered the inner quarters of the palace to seize the
calf, the sons of Kartavirya were also afflicted by this sin and were slain[Kartavirya Arjuna was a king of the Haihaya kingdom. Parashurama's father was Jamadagni. In one version of
the story, Kartavirya Arjuna visited Jamadagni's hermitage and stole a calf. He and his sons were then killed by
Parashurama.]. The immensely strong Kartavirya was
like the thousand-eyed one[Indra.].  However,  he was  slain in a battle by  Rama, Jamadagni's  son. Because of  your
words, I have controlled my anger, which is the enemy of austerities and destroys all benefit. You are large-eyed
and possess all the qualities. I am indeed praiseworthy, since I have someone like you as my wife. I will therefore
go where that brahmana is waiting. In every way, I will speak appropriate words to him. He will not depart as one
unsuccessful.'"'
