Vyasa said, 'This is the conduct for brahmanas, as laid down earlier. If a learned person performs these tasks, h
successful in everything. He has no doubt in determining what acts should be undertaken. What are tasks
that are mandatory and what are tasks that lead to knowledge[These are the kinds of questions that lead to doubts. Knowledge can be obtained other than through acts. Therefore, are acts mandatory?]? For tasks that lead to knowledge in men,
this is what I have deduced and experienced. I will describe this. Listen. Some say that tasks are undertaken by
men because of enterprise. There are other people who praise natural destiny. There are also some who draw a distinction between the three-human enterprise, destiny and the natural fruits of conduct. Some pick on a single reason, others on their combination. In this way, people established in acts say that there is existence, or that there is
non-existence, or that existence cannot be established, or that non-existence cannot be established, thus treating
them differently. But there are those who know the truth and regard all these as equal[They know that everything results from the brahman.]. Treta, dvapara and kali
yugas are full of doubts. The ascetics of krita yuga were tranquil and knew the truth. They did not look upon all the
Rig, Sama and Yajur hymns differently[In treta, dvapara and kali yugas, people regarded one or the other of the Vedas as superior. But no such artificial
differences were drawn during krita yuga.]. They examined desire and hatred and only worshipped austerities. They
were engaged in the dharma of austerities. They were firm in their observance and always devoted to austerities.
They obtained everything, all that they desired and wished for in their minds. Through austerities, one becomes
like the one who created the universe. One becomes like the lord who is the creator of all beings. He[The brahman.] has been
spoken about in the words of the Vedas. He is difficult to fathom, even by those who have the sight of the Vedas.
He has again been spoken about in Vedanta. He can be discerned through the yoga of tasks. It has been said that
slaughter represents sacrifice for kshatriyas and oblations for vaishyas[The interpretation is that kshatriyas slaughter animals at sacrifices and vaishyas grow crops that are offered as
oblations.]. Servitude represents sacrifice for shudras
and meditation represents sacrifice for brahmanas. One becomes a brahmana by diligently performing the tasks
and studying. However, whether one performs the tasks or does not perform the tasks, by exhibiting friendliness[Towards all beings.],
one is said to be a brahmana. At the beginning of treta, all the Vedas, sacrifices and varnashrama existed. But as
lifespans decreased, they went into a decline in dvapara yuga. The Vedas suffered during dvapara. It was like that
in kali yuga too. At the end of kali, though they could be seen, yet they could not be seen[A roundabout way of stating that they became invisible.]. One's own dharma
went into a decline and dharma suffered. The juices disappeared from cows, the earth, water and herbs. Because of
adharma, the Vedas vanished, and so did the dharma of the Vedas and the ashramas. All mobile and immobile objects deviated from their own  dharma. Just  as  all the beings are sustained by  the rain showering  down  on  the
ground, from one yuga to another, the Vedas and their angas[The Vedan gas.] are created afresh. Time does this and it has no beginning and no end. I have recounted this to you earlier, about creation and destruction. Dhata is the creator of all
beings and Yama controls them. Nature drives them into many kinds of opposite sentiments. O son[The word used is tata.]! Creation,
time, the upholding of the Vedas, the doer, tasks, rites and fruits-I have told you about these. This is what you had
asked me.'"'
