'Bhishma said, "Announced to the king, he entered that supreme house. He was honoured by the Indra among rakshasas and seated himself on an excellent seat. He was asked about his gotra, his code of behaviour, his studies and
the nature of his brahmacharya. However, the brahmana told him nothing, other than his gotra. He no longer observed brahmacharya and had stopped studying. The king only got to know about his gotra and asked him where
he lived. 'O fortunate one! Where do you dwell? What is the gotra of your brahmana wife? Tell me everything. Do
not be frightened. You should happily rest.' Goutama replied, 'I have been born in the central regions. I dwell in
Shabara's house. My wife is a shudra who has married again. I am telling you this truthfully.' At this, the king
thought, 'How is this possible? What should I do now? How can I obtain merit?' He used his intelligence to think
about this. 'This one has been born as a brahmana. He was sent here to me by my great-souled well-wisher,
Kashyapa. Since he has always sought refuge with him, I must do what pleases him. He is my brother and
relative[The rakshasas are descended from the sage Kashyapa.]. He is also a friend who is dear to my heart. This is full moon in the month of Kartika[October-November.] and one thousand excellent brahmanas will eat in my house. He will also eat here and I will give him some of my riches.' One
thousand learned and ornamented brahmanas arrived there. They had bathed and prepared themselves. They were
attired in long linen garments. O lord of the earth! Those best among brahmanas came to Virupaksha from many
directions. He received them as they deserved, following the prescribed rites.

'"On the instructions of the Indra among the rakshasas, blankets were spread out on the ground. O supreme
among the Bharata lineage! The servants spread out cushions on these. Seated there, the best among brahmanas
were worshipped by the king. O great king! They were as radiant as the lord of the nakshatras[The moon.]. There were
sparkling, pure and golden vessels, decorated with diamonds. These were filled with excellent rice, flowing with
honey and ghee, and offered to the brahmanas. Many brahmanas always received this, in the months of Ashadha
and Magha[Respectively, June-July and January-February.]. Honoured well, they always received the excellent food that they desired. But it has been heard that
the full moon in Kartika, after autumn is over, was special and brahmanas were given jewels-gold, silver, gems,
pearls, extremely expensive diamonds, lapis lazuli, skins of black antelope and skins of ranku deer. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! The immensely illustrious Virupaksha threw away a large pile of jewels as dakshina and
told the foremost among the brahmanas, 'Take these jewels, as much as you can, and as much as you wish. O best
among brahmanas! Whatever be the vessels you have eaten from, take those too, and go to your own homes.'

When addressed by the great-souled Indra among rakshasas in these words, the bulls among brahmanas accepted a
sufficient quantity of jewels. All of them were worshipped with those sparkling and extremely expensive jewels.
Attired in excellent garments, the brahmanas were delighted. O king! The Indra among rakshasas restrained the
rakshasas and again spoke to the brahmanas, who had arrived from many directions. 'O brahmanas! This is one
day when you need have no fear from the rakshasas. Amuse yourselves, as you like, and leave quickly.' At this, all
the large numbers of brahmanas fled in different directions.

'"Goutama also swiftly grasped a load of gold. O brave one! He bore this with difficulty and approached the
banyan tree. He was exhausted and sat down. He was tired and hungry. O king! At that time, Rajadharma, supreme
among birds, who was devoted to his friend, arrived and welcomed Goutama. The bird fanned him with his wings
and removed his exhaustion. He honoured him and made arrangements for his food. Having eaten and having rested well, Goutama began to think. 'Because of both my greed and my confusion, I have seized this extremely large
burden of gold. I have a long distance to travel. There will be no food on the way, whereby I can stay alive. How
will I be able to sustain my life?' He thought in this way. He could not see any food that would be available along
the route. O tiger among men! The ingrate thought in his mind, 'This lord of the cranes is by my side and he is a
heap of flesh. I will kill him and take him with me. I will then swiftly depart.'"'
