Vaishampayana said, 'O Janamejaya! Then the Pandava left Koushiki and one after another, went to all the other
sacred places. O king! He went to the ocean, to the confluence of the Ganga. He performed his ablutions in the
middle of the five hundred rivers. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Then, together with his brothers, the brave
lord of the earth travelled along the shores of the ocean towards Kalinga.

'Lomasha said, "O Kounteya! This is Kalinga, where the river Vaitarani flows. Here, under the refuge of the
gods, Dharma performed sacrifices. This is the northern bank, always frequented by brahmanas and inhabited by
rishis. It is a sacrificial ground that has been made beautiful by a mountain. In ancient times, other rishis have also
performed sacrifices here and gone to heaven along the route followed by the gods. O Indra among kings! This is
the place where Rudra grasped the sacrificial animal[There are stories about Rudra (Shiva) not being offered a share in the sacrifices and about how this was altered later.]. O Indra among men! Rudra grasped the animal and said,
'This is my share.' O bull among the Bharata lineage! When the animal was stolen, the gods told him, 'Do not
covet the property of others. Do not destroy all dharma.' Later, they praised Rudra with sweet words. They satisfied him with a sacrifice and showed him honour. Then, discarding the animal, he followed the path traversed by
the gods. O Yudhishthira! Listen to what is said about Rudra. 'As a result of their fear of Rudra, the gods resolved
that the supreme share of everything that was not stale would always be set apart for him. A man who touches the
water here, while reciting this verse, has the route of the gods as his path and sees it with his eyes.'"'

Vaishampayana said, 'Then all the immensely fortunate Pandavas, together with Droupadi, descended into
Vaitarani and offered oblations to the ancestors. Yudhishthira said, "O Lomasha! O illustrious one! O one rich in
austerities! Behold. As soon as I have bathed in this river, I have gone beyond what is human. O follower of good
vows! Through your grace, I can see all the worlds. This is the sound of the great-souled hermits, as they recite
their prayers."

'Lomasha replied, "O Yudhishthira! O lord of the earth! Keep quiet. The sound that you hear is at a distance of
three hundred thousand yojanas. O king! The beautiful forest that manifests itself here belongs to the one who created himself[Brahma.]. O Kounteya! The powerful Vishvakarma performed a sacrifice here. At that sacrifice, the one
who created himself gave the earth, with all its mountains, forests and regions, as a stipend to the great-souled
Kashyapa. O Kounteya! As soon as she had been given away, the earth became dejected. In anger, she spoke to the
illustrious lord of the worlds. 'O illustrious one! You should not have given me away to a mere mortal. Your giving
me away will be unsuccessful. I will go to rasatala[As has been mentioned earlier, rasatala is one of the seven nether regions.].' O lord of the earth! On seeing that the earth was dejected,
the illustrious rishi Kashyapa pacified her. O Pandava! She was satisfied by his austerities and once again emerged
from the water, establishing herself as an altar. O king! You can see it there, with all the signs of an altar. O great
king! Ascend it, and you will be extremely valorous. As you ascend it today, I will myself pronounce the benediction. O Ajamidha! As soon as it is touched by a mortal, this altar immerses itself in the ocean again. 'Agni, Mitra,
the womb, the water, the goddess, Vishnu's seed, the navel of amrita[The celestial drink, ambrosia.].' O Pandava! Having recited these truthful
words, swiftly climb up onto the altar."'

Vaishampayana said, 'When the benediction had been pronounced on him, the great-souled Yudhishthira went
into the ocean. When he had done all that he had been asked, he went to Mahendra and spent the night there.'
