Yudhishthira said, "O grandfather! O immensely wise one! You are accomplished in all the sacred texts. From
this account about the slaying of Vritra, a question has arisen in my mind. O lord of men! You have said that
Vritra was confused by a fever. O unblemished one! He was then slain by Vasava with the vajra. O immensely
wise one! Where did this fever manifest itself from? O lord! I wish to hear the details about the origin of this
fever."

'Bhishma replied, "O king! Listen to the origins of this fever. It is an account that is famous in the worlds. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I will tell you in detail about how this came about. O great king! In ancient times,
there was a summit in Meru that was famous in the three worlds. It was named Savitra. It was resplendent and was
decorated with every kind of jewel. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It was immeasurable and no one in the
worlds could approach it. There was a bed on the slope of that mountain, adorned with gold and minerals. The dazzling god[Shiva.] was seated there. The shining daughter of the king of the mountains[Uma or Parvati.] was always seated by his side.
The great-souled and immensely energetic gods, the Vasus, were also there and so were the great-souled Ashvins,
supreme among physicians. King Vaishravana[Kubera.] was also there, served by the guhyakas[Guhyakas are semi-divine species, companions of Kubera.]. He was the prosperous
master and lord of the yakshas and Kailasa was his abode. There were the devarshis, with Angiras as the foremost.
The gandharva Vishvavasu was there and Narada and Parvata. A large number of apsaras gathered there. An auspicious, sacred and pleasant breeze blew there, with many kinds of scents. In every direction, there were giant and
blossoming trees. There were vidyadharas and ascetics who were stores of austerities. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! All of them worshipped Mahadeva Pashupati. O great king! There were many kinds of creatures, with diverse forms. There were extremely terrible rakshasas and immensely powerful pishachas. They were cheerful, with
many kinds of forms, and they wielded diverse kinds of weapons. There were the companions of the god there,
like the fire in their forms. The illustrious Nandi was there, ready to follow the instructions of the god. He wielded
a flaming and blazing spear, resplendent in its own energy. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Ganga, supreme
among rivers, was there, the source of all the waters in the tirthas. In that form, she worshipped the god. Thus worshipped by the gods and the rishis, the illustrious and extremely fortunate god, Mahadeva, was established there.

'"After some time passed, Prajapati Daksha[Sati was originally born as Daksha's daughter, married to Shiva. She self-immolated herself at Daksha's sacrifice and was reborn as Uma or Parvati, the daughter of the Himalayas.] followed the ancient rites and decided to perform a sacrifice. All
the gods, with Shakra at the forefront, made up their minds to go to the sacrifice. Those great-souled ones ascended
blazing celestial vehicles that were like the fire in complexion. It has been heard that they took the god's permission and went to Gangadvara[Thus, the gods took Shiva's permission before going to the sacrifice. Daksha's sacrifice is believed to have taken
place in Kankhal in Haridwar. Gangadvara is literally the gate of the Ganga, that is, the point from which the
Ganga emerges. This is usually understood as Gomukh or Gomukha, where the Ganga becomes visible. However, the Ganga actually emerges unseen, 20 km away, on the Gangotri glacier.]. On seeing that the gods had left, the virtuous daughter of the Himalayas spoke
these words to her husband, the god Pashupati. 'O illustrious one! Where are the gods, with Shakra at the forefront,
going? O one who knows about the truth! Tell me the truth about this. I have a great doubt on this account.'

'"Maheshvara replied, 'O immensely fortunate one! Daksha is the supreme lord of beings. He is performing a
horse sacrifice and the residents of heaven are going there.'

'"Uma asked, 'O immensely fortunate one! Why are you not going to the sacrifice? Is there any reason preventing you from going there?'

'"Maheshvara replied, 'O immensely fortunate one! All the gods determined that I should not have a share in
any of the sacrifices. O supreme among beautiful ones! That is the method that they had decided on earlier. And
following that dharma, the gods do not give me a share in sacrifices.'

'"Uma said, 'O illustrious one! Among all beings, you are the supreme in qualities. In your energy, fame and
prosperity, you cannot be vanquished and cannot be assailed. O immensely fortunate one! I am extremely miserable at this obstruction to you obtaining a share. O unblemished one! I am trembling.'"

'Bhishma said, "Having been thus addressed by the goddess, the god Pashupati, her husband, was silent. O king!
His senses began to burn. He realized what was in the mind of the goddess and the desire of her heart. He summoned Nandi and asked him to wait there. The lord of all the lords of yoga resorted to the strength of his yoga. The
god of the gods, the wielder of Pinaka, went to the sacrifice with his extremely energetic and terrible followers and
destroyed it. Some of them[The followers.] roared, others laughed. O king! Others extinguished the fire with blood. Some, with
malformed faces, uprooted the sacrificial stakes and whirled them around. There were others who devoured the attendants with their mouths. O king! In every direction, the sacrifice was destroyed. It assumed the form of a deer
and fled through the sky. But realizing that the sacrifice was running away in that form, the lord seized a bow and
arrow and pursued it. The infinitely energetic lord of the gods was overcome by rage and a terrible drop of sweat
manifested itself on his forehead and fell down on the ground. From that, an extremely large fire resulted and it
was like the fire of destruction. O bull among men! A man was born from that. He was short and his eyes were extremely red. He was dreadful and his beard was green. His hair stood up. He was covered with hair, like a hawk or
an owl. He was horrible and dark in complexion. He was attired in red garments. That greatly spirited being destroyed the sacrifice, like a fire consuming deadwood. All the gods were terrified and fled in the ten directions. O
lord of the earth! That man began to roam around everywhere on earth. O king! O bull among the Bharata lineage!
Woes of lamentation, frightful to the worlds, arose. The grandfather manifested himself before Mahadeva and said,
'O lord! From now on, all the gods will give you a share in the sacrifices. O lord of all the gods! Withdraw the destruction that you have wrought. O scorcher of enemies! O Mahadeva! Because of your rage, all the gods and the
rishis are finding it impossible to obtain peace. O supreme among gods! There is this man who has been born from
your sweat. O one who knows about dharma! In the form of fever, let him wander around the worlds. O lord! If all
of this energy is concentrated, the entire earth will not be able to bear it. Let it be divided into fragments and let
there be safety.' The god was thus addressed by Brahma, who also decreed shares for him. He agreed to what the
illustrious and infinitely energetic Brahma had said. The wielder of Pinaka was filled with great delight and smiled.
Bhava accepted the share that Brahma had spoken about.

'"For the sake of peace for all beings, the one who knew about all forms of dharma divided the fever into many
parts. O son! Listen to how he did this. O one who knows about dharma! The heat that is in the heads of elephants,
in the bitumen in mountains, in the hornwort plants that float around in the water, in the cast-off skins of snakes, in
diseases in the hooves of cattle, in sterile spots on the surface of the earth, in the dullness of sight of animals, in
diseases that are in the throats of horses, in the crests of peacocks and in the eye diseases of cuckoos-the great-
souled one decreed all these to be fever. We have heard all this and about the diseases that goats have in their livers
and the hiccups that parrots suffer from. All of these are said to be fever. O one who knows about dharma! The exhaustion in tigers is said to be fever. O one who knows about dharma! There is also something known as fever
among men. It penetrates men at the time of birth, death, and in the middle. This is Maheshvara's energy, known as
extremely terrible fever. The lord of all beings must be worshipped and revered. When Vritra yawned, it is he who
penetrated that supreme among the upholders of dharma. It was thus that Shakra could release his vajra at him. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! The vajra penetrated Vritra and shattered him. The great asura and great yogi
was splintered by the vajra. He went to the infinitely energetic Vishnu's supreme region. Earlier, it was because of
his devotion to Vishnu that he obtained the entire universe. Having been slain in the battle, he obtained Vishnu's
region. O son! I have told you in detail about the great fever that Vritra was overwhelmed by. What else do you
wish me to tell you? A man who is extremely controlled and reads this account about the origin of the fever with a
cheerful mind, is freed from all disease. He is happy and full of delight. He obtains all the desires that are there in
his mind."'
