'Dhritarashtra said, "If the unfathomable path of dharma is difficult to understand, tell me everything
in detail about the path of intelligence."

'Vidura replied, "After bowing to the one who created himself[Brahma.], I will tell you this. This is what
the supreme rishis said about the unfathomable mysteries of life. There was a brahmana in this great
world. He reached an impenetrable forest that was full of large and carnivorous beasts. Terrible, large
and hungry beasts were scattered in every direction, in the form of lions, tigers and elephants. They
led to a fear that was like that of death. On seeing them, his heart began to beat faster. O scorcher of
enemies! His body hair stood up and he didn't know what to do. He swiftly ran around that forest,
here and there. He glanced in all the directions, wondering where he could find refuge. Afflicted by
fear, he searched for an opening through which he might run away. The brahmana could not go very
far and could not disassociate himself[From those beasts.]. He saw that the terrible forest was surrounded by a net on
every side and that an extremely terrible-looking woman was embracing it with her arms. Five-headed serpents rose up, like mountains. The giant forest was covered by large trees that touched the sky.
In the midst of that forest, there was a well that was covered. It was strewn with creepers and the
mouth was hidden under a covering of grass. The brahmana fell into that hidden store of water. He
was entwined in that net of creepers and hung there. He was like a giant jackfruit, hanging from its
stalk. He hung there, with his feet facing upwards and his head facing downwards. At that time, he
faced another difficulty there. He saw a giant elephant at the edge of the well. It possessed six faces
and moved on twelve feet. It was dark and speckled. It was gradually advancing, through those creepers and trees. As he hung from the branches of the tree, the branches were also covered by many
kinds of bees. They were terrible in form and fearful. They had collected honey earlier and were returning to their hive. O bull among the Bharata lineage! They repeatedly went out to collect honey.
Beings find it tasty. However, a fool is not satisfied with it. Many streams of honey always flowed
there. The man who was hanging there, continuously drank from these flows. But though he was in
this difficulty and though he drank, his thirst was not satisfied. He kept desiring it and repeatedly satisfied himself by drinking it. O king! His hopes of remaining alive were ignited. Black and white rats
gnawed through the tree, on which, the hopes of the man remaining alive were based. That desolate
forest was full of carnivorous beasts and an extremely terrible woman. There were serpents at the bottom of the well and an elephant at the edge. Because of the rats, there was the fifth fear of falling
from the tree[Carnivorous beasts, serpents, the elephant and the terrible woman being
the other four.]. Because of his greed for the honey, the bees represented the sixth great fear. Thus did
he dwell, having been flung into this ocean of life. Without approaching knowledge, he did not abandon his hope of remaining alive."'
