Souti said, 'O best of the twice born! When this turmoil was going on, Garuda, the king of the birds, swiftly came
to where the gods were. Having seen his great strength, the gods began to tremble in fear. They even began to attack each other with their weapons. Among those guarding the soma, was Bhouvana[Vishvakarma is the architect of the gods and Bhouvana (or Bhoumana) is one of his names.], as radiant as the lightning
and fire and unparalleled in his great valour. But after an instant's great fight, he lay dead, ripped apart by the
beaks, talons and wings of the Indra among birds. Darkening the worlds with a great storm of dust created by his
wings, the giant bird overwhelmed the gods, and overcome with that dust, the gods were deluded. Those who were
guarding the amrita could not see it because of that dust. Thus, Garuda brought complete turmoil to the world of
the gods. He ripped the gods apart with his wings and beak. Then, the god with the thousand eyes[Indra has a thousand eyes.] commanded
Vayu[The wind-god.], "O Marut! It is your duty to drive the dust away." Then the mighty Vayu drove the dust away.

'When the darkness had disappeared, the gods attacked the bird. He roared in the sky, like a giant cloud, terrifying all beings. Attacked by the army of the gods, the immensely valorous king of the birds, the destroyer of enemies, rose into the sky, above the heads of the gods. Led by Indra and armoured, they attacked him with many
weapons like lances, iron clubs, spears, maces, many sharp swords and chakras as radiant as the sun. Attacked
from every side, the king of birds didn't even tremble. Vinata's powerful son fought a tremendous battle, showing
no signs of tiring out. Like the roar of thunder in the sky, Vinata's powerful son attacked the gods from all sides
with his wings and breast and scattered them in all directions. Oppressed and mangled by Garuda's beak and
talons, a lot of blood flowed from the bodies of the gods and they fled. The saddhyas and gandharvas fled to the
east, the vasus and rudras to the south, the adityas to the west and the Nasatyas[The Ashvins.] to the north. They retreated
while fighting and looked back repeatedly at the immensely energetic enemy. He fought with the brave Ashvakranda, the bird Renuka, the brave Krathana, the bird Tapana, Uluka, Shvasana, the bird Nimesha, Praruja and Pulina.
Vinata's son tore them into pieces with his wings, talons and sharp beak, like the wrathful and enemy-destroying
Pinaki[Shiva.] at the end of a yuga. Those immensely powerful and energetic warriors, draining showers of blood from
their many wounds, looked like dark clouds.

'Thus rendering the gods almost dead, the best of the birds went to where the amrita was and found it surrounded from all sides by fire. The flames of that great raging fire covered up by the entire sky and moved by violent
winds seemed to burn up the hot and sharp rays of the sun. The great-souled Garuda thereupon assumed ninety
times ninety mouths and drank up with these mouths water from rivers. Returning with great speed and using his
wings as a chariot, he quenched the blazing fires with the rivers. Putting out the fires, he adopted a very small
form, wishing to enter[That is, enter the place where the amrita was.].'