Sanjaya said, "At this time, a loud uproar arose towards the northern side of the Pandu soldiers. The rathas, elephants, horses and foot soldiers were being slaughtered by Dandadhara. Keshava reversed the direction of the
chariot, but did not stop the swift horses, which were as fast as Garuda or the wind. He told Arjuna, 'Magadha is
extremely powerful and is on an elephant that can crush. He is like Bhagadatta in training and strength. Having
killed him, you will then slay the samshaptakas again.' Having completed these words, he bore Partha towards
Dandadhara[Dandadhara was a king from Magadha and he and his brother, Danda,
fought on the side of the Kouravas. The Magadhas were divided in the
war. Sahadeva, Jarasandha's son, fought on the side of the Pandavas. Jayatsena is also described as a son of Jarasandha. While he is usually described as having fought on the side of the Kouravas, there are also
places where he is described as belonging to the Pandava side.]. The foremost among Magadhas was foremost in wielding the goad, just as the brilliant planet is
foremost among planets[The text uses the word vikacha, which has several meanings, including
brilliant. The word also means a kind of comet. Finally, the word can
mean a hairless or headless person. Using the headless angle, this part of
the text has sometimes been interpreted as a reference to Ketu, who does
not possess a head. In that event, this is one of the rare instances where
Ketu is mentioned, Rahu having been frequently mentioned.]. He was fiercely destroying the enemy soldiers, like a brilliant planet destroying the
earth[Vikacha again.]. His elephant was the crusher of enemy soldiers and was like an elephant of the danavas. It had been prepared well and it roared like a giant cloud. He killed thousands of rathas, horses and large numbers of elephants
with his arrows. The elephant also stood on chariots and quickly crushed horses, charioteers, rathas and foot soldiers. With its front legs and its trunk, it killed elephants, like a wheel of death. Men with armour made out of
steel[Literally, black iron, interpreted as steel.] and adorned in ornaments were brought down, with their horses and foot soldiers. As those supreme ones
were crushed and killed, a sound arose, like that of reeds being crushed by the wind. There were the sounds of
drums, kettledrums and many conch shells at the spot, mixed with the noise of bowstrings slapping against palms.
There were the roars of thousands of men, horses and elephants.

' "On his supreme chariot, Arjuna advanced against that supreme of elephants. Dandadhara struck Arjuna with
twelve supreme arrows, Janardana with sixteen and each of the horses with three. He then roared and laughed. At
this, Partha used broad-headed arrows to slice off his bow, with the bowstring and arrows attached, and brought
down his ornamented standard. He next struck those who were protecting his feet and this enraged the lord of
Girivraja[Girivraja (or Rajagriha or Rajgir) was the capital of Magadha.]. His tusker's temples were shattered and it was as dark as a mass of clouds. But it was also as swift as
the wind and he wished to crush Arjuna with this. He shot arrows and hurled spears at Janardana and Dhananjaya.
Pandava simultaneously shot three razor-sharp arrows and severed his two arms, which were like the trunks of elephants, and his head, which had the complexion of the full moon. He then struck the elephant with one hundred
arrows. Partha's arrows were decorated with gold. They struck the elephant, which was clad in golden armour. It
looked like a mountain in the night, when herbs and trees burn because of a fire. Afflicted with pain, it roared like a
cloud. It roamed aimlessly and then, with trembling steps, it tottered as it tried to run away. It was weakened and
fell down, together with the driver. It was as if a mountain had been shattered by thunder and had fallen down.

' "When his brother was killed in the battle, Danda advanced, wishing to kill Indra's younger brother[Indra's younger brother, referred to as Upendra, is Vishnu or Krishna.] and
Dhananjaya. He was astride a tusker that possessed the complexion of snow and was garlanded in gold. It looked
like a summit of the Himalayas[The elephant was white.]. He hurled three lances that were as bright as the rays of the sun towards Janardana and five towards Arjuna. Having struck them, he roared. Pandava severed his arms with extremely fierce
kshurapra arrows, while they still held lances, were adorned with armlets and were smeared with sandalwood
paste. They simultaneously fell down from the elephant's back and looked as beautiful as two serpents that had
fallen off a mountain's peak. With an arrow that was in the shape of a half-moon, Kiriti severed Danda's head and
it fell down from the elephant onto the ground. It was covered with blood and looked beautiful as it fell down, like
the sun setting in the western direction. The supreme elephant possessed a white complexion and Partha pierced it
with supreme arrows that blazed like the rays of the sun. It shrieked as it fell down, as if the summit of a mountain
had been struck down by thunder. There were other supreme elephants that were their equals[Equal to the two elephants that had been brought down.] and wished to obtain victory. Like those two elephants, Savyasachi carefully brought them down and that extremely large army of
elephants was routed. Elephants, chariots, horses and large numbers of men dashed against each other and fell
down in that battle. They were wounded and struck each other. They anxiously lamented and were killed. Arjuna
was then surrounded by his own soldiers, like Purandara by the masses of gods. They said, 'O brave one! We were
frightened of the enemy, who seemed to us to be like Death before beings. It is good fortune that you have killed
him. We were immersed in terror and had you not rescued us, we would have been afflicted by the forces of the enemy. The enemy would have rejoiced. You have killed the enemy and we are now rejoicing.' Hearing these and
many other conciliatory words spoken by his well-wishers, Arjuna was delighted in his mind. He then honoured
the men, in accordance with what they deserved, and again headed towards the mass of samshaptakas." '
