Vaishampayana said, 'When the two descendants of Kuru went towards the potter's house, Panchala Dhrishtadyumna followed them. Having sent his attendants away, he hid himself near the potter's house, unknown to
those men.

'In the evening, Bhima, the crusher of enemies, and Jishnu returned with the twins, after begging for alms. They
happily handed over to Yudhishthira what they had got. Thereupon, the soft-spoken Kunti spoke to Drupada's
daughter. "O fortunate one! First, take a portion and offer it to the gods. Then give some alms to a Brahmana. Feed
some to those who are needy and give some to men who are around. Then, divide the rest into two parts. O fortunate one! Give half to Bhima, because that dark youth with a strong body is like a mad bull and is a warrior who
always eats a lot." Hearing these excellent words, the chaste princess cheerfully did what she was asked to do,
without any doubts. All of them ate the food.

'Madri's son, the ascetic Sahadeva, quickly spread out a bed of kusha grass on the ground. Thereafter, each of
those brave warriors spread out his own deerskin and lay down to sleep on the ground. Those foremost among the
Kurus lay down, with their heads facing the direction blessed by Agastya[Meaning, the south. This is a reference to the sage Agastya's journey to the south.]. Kunti lay herself down along their
heads and Krishna lay down along their feet. Though she lay on the ground on kusha grass with Pandu's sons, like
a foot pillow, she felt no grief. Nor did she feel disrespect for those bulls among the Kurus.

'Then those warriors began to talk to each other-wonderful stories about wars, celestial weapons, chariots, elephants, swords, clubs and battleaxes. The Panchala king's son heard all that they told each other during their conversation. His men saw how Krishna was lying there in that humble state. Prince Dhrishtadyumna set out[In the morning.] in
great haste to tell King Drupada in detail everything that he had heard during the night. The Panchala king was
sad, because he did not know where the Pandavas had gone. The great-souled one asked Dhrishtadyumna, "Where
has Krishna gone? Who has taken her away? Is it a Shudra or one of low birth? Has a Vaishya who pays taxes
placed his feet on my head? Has a garland been thrown away on a cremation ground? O son! Or is it a foremost
man from our own varna, or is it one from a higher varna[The own varna means a Kshatriya. The higher varna means a Brahmana.]? Or has a lower being[The word used is vama, which means left, as well as lower being. In this context, lower being seems best.] placed his foot on my head
and defiled Krishna? I will be happy in my sacrifices if she has been united with Partha, that bull among men. Tell
me truthfully. Which illustrious one has won my daughter today? Is there any chance that Vichitravirya's sons[The word 'sons' is used here in the sense of descendants.],
foremost among the Kurus, are still alive? Is it perhaps Partha who took up the bow and shot the target today?"'
