Vaishampayana said, 'Pandava then spoke to Markandeya. "Tell me about the greatness of brahmanas."

Markandeya replied[The text doesn't mention this explicitly. But the quotes that follow are clearly in Markandeya's words.].

'"There was a king in Ayodhya, from the Ikshvaku lineage. His name was Parikshit and he went out hunting.
Pursuing a deer alone on a horse, he travelled a long distance. On the way, he became exhausted, hungry and
thirsty. In that part of the country, he saw a dark and dense cluster of trees. He entered the cluster of trees and in
the middle, saw an extremely beautiful pond. He and his horse bathed there. He flung some lotus stalks in front of
the horse[As fodder.]. Then, refreshed, he sat down on the banks of the pond. While he was lying there, he heard the sweet
sound of singing. On hearing this, he began to wonder. 'I do not see the marks of any humans here. What singing
is this then?' He then saw an extremely beautiful maiden, worthy of looking at. She was picking flowers and
singing and wandered around to where the king was. The king said, 'O fortunate one! Whose are you?' The maiden replied, 'I am a virgin.' The king said, 'I wish that you should be mine.' The maiden replied, 'I can only be
yours if you take an oath.' The king wanted to know what the condition was and the maiden replied, 'You must
never show me water.' The king agreed to these words and having agreed, won her and sat down with her. While
the king was thus seated, his soldiers arrived there. They had followed his footsteps. On seeing the king, they established themselves around him. Having fully recovered, the king mounted a palanquin with her and returned to
his city. He pleasured there with her privately, out of sight of anyone.

'"The prime minister then asked the women who waited on the king. 'What is happening?' The women replied,
'We have seen something that we have not seen before. No water is brought here.' Having heard this, the minister
constructed a grove. It had beautiful trees, with many roots, flowers and fruit. But it had no water. He went to the
king in private and said, 'There is a beautiful grove without any water. Pleasure yourself happily there.' On hearing
these words, the king entered the grove with the queen. One day, he was roaming in that wonderful grove with his
beloved and became exhausted, hungry and thirsty. He saw a wonderful cluster of atimuktas[A kind of creeper that wraps itself around mango trees. Known as madhavi, kusari or kasturamogara.]. On entering it
with his beloved, the king saw a pond with clear water, covered by the creepers. As soon as he saw it, he sat down
on its banks with his queen. The king told the queen, 'Let us descend into the water of this pond.' On hearing these
words, she got down and immersed herself in the pond. But she did not surface again. The king searched for her,
but could not find her. He had the water taken out and found a frog seated near the mouth of a hole. The angry king
passed an order. 'Kill all frogs. Whoever wishes to see me, has to come with a dead frog as a tribute.' When this
terrible destruction of the frogs continued, all the frightened frogs went to the king of the frogs and told him what
was happening. Then the king of the frogs adopted the disguise of an ascetic and went to the king. Having approached, he said, 'O king! Do not be overcome by anger. Have mercy and do not destroy the innocent frogs.
There are two shlokas on this. "Do not wish to kill all frogs. O unblemished one! Control your anger. People who
are ignorant, destroy their extensive prosperity. Promise that when you meet them, you will control your wrath.
Why must you continue with this adharma? What purpose will dead frogs serve?"' But the king's soul was overcome with grief for his beloved and he told the frog, 'I cannot forgive. I will kill those evil-souled ones who have
devoured my beloved. The frogs deserve to be killed by me. O learned one! Do not try to obstruct me.' On hearing
these words, his senses and mind were pained and he replied, 'O king! Show mercy. I am the king of the frogs and
my name is Ayu. She was my daughter, named Sushobhana. She has this bad character and she has deceived many
kings earlier.' The king replied, 'I desire her. Give her to me.' The father bestowed her on the king, with the words,
'Serve the king.' He also told his daughter, 'Since you have deceived many kings and have committed falsehood,
your sons will be the haters of brahmanas.' Having obtained her, the king's heart was set on the pleasures of making love. It was as if he had won the wealth of the three worlds. He prostrated himself before the king of the frogs
and in a voice choking with tears of joy, said, 'You have favoured me a lot.' Having bid farewell to his son-in-law,
the king of frogs went away, to where he had come from.

'"After some time, the king had three sons through her. Their names were Shala, Dala and Bala. After some
time, since his soul was set on austerities, the king instated the eldest Shala on the throne and left for the forest.
One day, Shala went out hunting. He saw a deer and pursued it on his chariot. He told the charioteer, 'Drive me
faster.' The charioteer replied to the king, 'Do not insist on this course of action. You would have been able to
catch the deer only if Vamya horses had been yoked to the chariot.' The king then told the charioteer, 'Tell me
about Vamya horses. Otherwise, I will kill you.' Having been thus addressed by the king, he was frightened of the
king's anger, as well as of Vamadeva's curse, and said, 'Vamya horses are those that belong to Vamadeva. They are
as swift as the mind.' On hearing this, the king told him, 'Go to Vamadeva's hermitage.' Having gone to Vamadeva's hermitage, he told the rishi, 'O illustrious one! I pierced a deer and it has run away. You should give me a couple of Vamya horses so that I can catch it.' The rishi replied, 'I will give you the Vamyas. But when you have finished, you must return them immediately.' Having accepted the horses and having taken the rishi's permission, he
yoked the Vamya horses to his chariot and pursued the deer. But when he was travelling, he told the charioteer,
'These horses are gems. They do not deserve to be possessed by a brahmana. I am not going to return them to Vamadeva.' Having thus spoken, he caught the deer. He returned to his city and lodged the horses in the inner quarters of the palace. The rishi thought, 'This prince is young. Having obtained these excellent horses, he is enjoying
them. He will not return them to me. What a nuisance!' Having thought this, when a month had passed, he told his
disciple. 'O Atreya! Go to the king and tell him that if he is through with the horses, he should return the Vamyas
to your preceptor.' He went and told the king. But the king replied, 'These horses deserve to be possessed by
kings. Brahmanas do not deserve such gems. What will brahmanas do with horses? Return.' Returning, he told this
to the preceptor.

'"On hearing these unpleasant words, Vamadeva was filled with anger. He himself went to the king and asked
for his horses. But the king refused. Vamadeva said, 'O king! Return the Vamya horses to me. You have undertaken a deed that others cannot accomplish. Varuna will kill you with his terrible noose. You are trying to create a
split between brahmanas and kshatriyas.' The king replied, 'O Vamadeva! These two bulls have been trained well
and are docile. They are the appropriate mount for a brahmana. O maharshi! Take them and go wherever you want.
The chants themselves bear someone like you[Vedic chants, the implication being that a brahmana has no need of a mount.].' Vamadeva said, 'O king! The chants indeed bear someone like
me, but that is in the next world. O king! In this world, these are my mounts, and for others who are like me.' The
king replied, 'Then let four donkeys bear you. They are excellent. Or there are fleet horses. Use those. But these
Vamyas deserve to be possessed by a kshatriya like me. Behold. They cannot belong to you.' Vamadeva said, 'It
has been said that a brahmana's vow is terrible. O king! If I have lived by such vows, then terrible giants with bodies made of iron and holding sharp spears will slice you into four parts.' The king replied, 'O Vamadeva! Let those
who bear sharp spears know that you, a brahmana, are willing to kill in speech, thought and deeds. On my instructions, let them kill you, with your disciple.' Vamadeva said, 'O king! A brahmana can never be chastised, in
speech, thought and deeds. But one who is learned in the brahman and has practised austerities, can prove superior
to the best in this world.' O king! When Vamadeva spoke these words, rakshasas arose, terrible in form. With
raised spears, they rushed towards the king, so as to kill him. In a loud voice, he cried out, 'O brahmana! Even if
all the Ikshvakus, Dala and the vaishyas who are ruled by me tell me, I will not give up the Vamyas. O Vamadeva!
They are not ones who follow dharma.' While he was still speaking, the yatudhanas[Evil spirit, kind of demon,] struck the lord of the earth
and he fell down on the ground.

'"On learning that the king had been killed, the Ikshvakus instated Dala on the throne. Brahmana Vamadeva
then went to the kingdom and spoke these words to King Dala. 'O king! It has been said in all dharma that gifts
must be given to brahmanas. O Indra among kings! If you fear to transgress dharma, immediately give the Vamyas
to me.' Having heard these words of Vamadeva, the king was angered and spoke to his charioteer. 'Bring me one
of those beautiful and poisonous arrows that have been carefully kept. Pierced by it, Vamadeva will lie down prone
on the ground in pain and dogs will tear him apart.' Vamadeva said, 'I know that you have a son who is ten years
old. O Indra among kings! He has been born from your queen Shyenajit. Urged by my words, you will soon kill
that beloved son with your terrible arrows.' O king! Thus instructed by Vamadeva, that arrow, fiery in power,
killed the prince in the inner quarters of the palace, as soon as it had been released by Dala. On hearing this, the
king said, 'O Ikshvakus! I will perform a pleasant task for you. I will kill this brahmana today. Bring me another of
my fiery arrows. O lords of the earth! Witness my valour now.' Vamadeva replied, 'O Indra among men! This is a
terrible and poisonous arrow. You have aimed it at me. But you will not be able to aim or shoot.' The king said, 'O
Ikshvakus! Behold. I am unable to release the arrow that I have grasped. I will not be able to perform the task of
killing him. Let Vamadeva live and may he have a long life.' Vamadeva said, 'Touch the queen with this arrow and
you will be freed from your sin.' The king did as he had been asked to and the princess spoke to the sage. 'O Vamadeva! O brahmana! If I have honoured my husband and have lain down with him day after day, let me be able to
serve brahmanas and attain the sacred worlds after death.' Vamadeva said, 'O one with the beautiful eyes! You
have saved the king's lineage. Ask for an unequalled boon and I will give it to you. O princess! O unblemished
one! Rule over your relatives and this extensive kingdom of the Ikshvakus.' The princess said, 'O illustrious one! I
ask for the boon that my husband should now be freed from his sin. May you bless him, with his sons and relatives. O foremost among brahmanas! This is the boon that I want.' On hearing the princess's words, the sage said
that it would be that way. At that, the king was extremely happy. He bowed in obeisance and returned the
Vamyas."'
