'Arjuna said, "Then a mighty shower of rocks appeared in all the directions. Those terrible rocks, as large as
mountain, oppressed me grievously. But in that battle, with swift arrows that were like the vajra and were discharged from Indra's weapon, I shattered them into a hundred splinters. When the rocks were shattered, there was
a fire and those splintered rocks fell into it like sparks. When that shower of rocks was dissipated, there was a great
shower of water. It poured down on me in flows that were as large as axles[Of chariots or carts.]. The shower descending from the
sky, in thousands of powerful streams, enveloped the sky and the directions everywhere. Nothing could be seen
because of the downpour of water, the roar of the wind and the roars of the daityas. The water covered everything
between heaven and earth. Descending continuously on earth, that torrent confounded me. At that, I discharged the
terrible, flaming and divine weapon named vishoshana[Vishoshana means something that dries up.], obtained from Indra, and this dried the water up. O one
who is deserving of honour! When the shower of rocks was destroyed by me and the shower of water dried up, the
danavas used maya to unleash wind and fire. I destroyed all the fire with a weapon named salila[Salila means water.]. I countered
the force of the wind through a great weapon named shaila[Shaila is something that is made out of rock.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When that
had been countered, the danavas, indomitable in battle, resorted to many types of maya and yoga. There was a
great shower that made one's body hair stand up, consisting of terrible weapons, fire, wind and rocks. That shower,
created through maya, oppressed me in battle. A terrible darkness then manifested itself in every direction.

'"When the world was completely immersed in that terrible and dense darkness, the horses drew back and
Matali tumbled forward. The golden whip fell down from his hand, onto the ground. O bull among the Bharata lineage! He repeatedly cried out, 'Where are you?' When he had lost his senses in this way, a terrible fear overcame
me. Trembling and bereft of his senses, he told me, 'O Partha! O unblemished one! In earlier times, there was a
terrible war between the gods and the demons for the sake of amrita. I witnessed it. There was a terrible and great
battle for the slaying of Shambara[There were several demons named Shambara. One of them was killed by Indra.] and I was the charioteer of the king of the gods then too. Like that, I drove
the steeds at the killing of Vritra. I also witnessed the terrible and great battle for Virochana's son[For the killing of Virochana's son. Virochana's son was the demon named Bali.]. O Pandava!
I have seen those terrible and great battles. But never before have I lost my senses. It must certainly have been determined by the grandfather[Brahma.] that all beings will be destroyed. But for the destruction of the universe, I can find
no other reason for this battle.' On hearing these words of his, and pacifying myself in my own mind, I got ready
to confound this great strength of maya of the danavas.

'"I told the terrified Matali, 'Behold the strength of my arms, the might of my weapons and those of this bow
Gandiva. O charioteer! Do not be scared. Be steady. With the maya of my weapons, I will now counter this terrible
maya and repulse this terrible darkness.' O lord of men! Having said this, I unleashed the maya of my weapons for
the welfare of the thirty gods, capable of deluding all beings. That maya having been dispelled, the lords of the
asuras, infinitely energetic, again unleashed many different types of maya. It was suddenly light. Suddenly everything was immersed in darkness. The world could sometimes not be seen. Sometimes it was immersed in the water.
When it was light, in that battle which made one's body hair stand up, Matali drove the chariot, yoked to horses
that were handled well. Then the terrible nivatakavachas rushed towards me. Whenever I saw an opening, I sent
them to Yama's abode. In that battle, for the destruction of the nivatakavachas, suddenly I could not see any of the
danavas. They had covered themselves with maya."'
