Vaishampayana said, 'Summoning his splendid weapons, Pandava Bibhatsu, repulsed the shower of rain with a
shower of arrows. Pandava covered every side of Khandava with his arrows and drove away that rain from that
forest. When the sky was covered with Savyasachi's arrows, not a single being could escape from there.

'Takshaka, the immensely powerful king of the serpents, wasn't in the flaming forest then. He had gone to Kurukshetra. But Takshaka's powerful son Ashvasena was there. He made great efforts to escape from the fire. However, oppressed by Kounteya's arrows, he didn't succeed in getting out. But his mother, daughter of the serpents,
tried to save him. She first swallowed his head. Then she began to swallow his tail and in her haste to save her son,
the serpent lady rose up. When Pandava saw this, he sliced off her head with a sharp arrow[The word used is bhalla. The word is used for an arrow, as well as for a missile that is like a small spear.]. The lord of the gods
saw this. Acting as saviour, the wielder of the vajra unleashed a shower of rain on Pandava and when this dazed
him, Ashvasena instantly escaped. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing this terrible power of maya and
having been deprived by the serpent, he cut down all the serpents into two and three pieces. Angrily, Bibhatsu
cursed the serpent that had escaped and so did the fire and Vasudeva, to the effect that he would never attain fame.

'Then Jishnu remembered the deception that had been played on him. He was angered and seeking to fight with
the thousand-eyed one, covered the sky with his sharp arrows. On seeing Phalguna's[Phalguna or Phalguni is Arjuna's name. He was thus named because he was born when the nakshatra Phalguni was in the ascendant.] wrath, the king of the gods
unleashed his own blazing missile and it flashed across the entire sky. Then winds with terrible roars churned all
the oceans. Masses of clouds, mingled with torrents of rain, were created. To counter them, Arjuna unleashed his
own supreme weapon. The one who had the knowledge used a mantra to invoke the vayavya weapon. In an instant,
it destroyed the energy and might of Indra's clouds, rain and thunder. The clouds dried, the lightning died and the
dark sky was pacified. Cool and pleasant winds began to blow and the sun's orbit returned to normal. Delighted
that there was no opposition any more and with the many offerings being made, the fire blazed up again and filled
the world with its roar.

'On seeing that the fire was protected by the two Krishnas, many feathered beings of the Suparna[Suparna is Garuda's mother.] lineage, including Garuda, rose up into the sky, eager to attack the warriors Krishna and Pandava with their wings, beaks and
claws, as tough as the vajra. Many serpents also descended near Pandava, spewing terrible and flaming venom
from their mouths. As soon as he saw these sky-dwelling creatures, Partha angrily cut them down with his arrows.
Benumbed, their bodies fell into the flaming fire. At that, the gods, the gandharvas, the yakshas, the rakshasas and
the serpents rose up, uttering loud roars and desiring to fight. They were armed with iron clubs, chakras and
bhushundis[It isn't clear from the Mahabharata what kind of a weapon a bhushundi was. It was a weapon that was hurled
and could have been a simple rock. However, in descriptions of the Kurukshetra War, it seems to have been more
sophisticated than a simple rock.], with lightning in them. They were intent on killing Krishna and Partha, their great energy be-
numbed by their anger. Though they unleashed a fearful shower of weapons, Bibhatsu churned their upper limbs
with his sharp arrows. The immensely energetic Krishna, destroyer of enemies, then wrought a great slaughter of
daityas and danavas with his chakra. Pierced by arrows and struck with the force of the chakra, many powerful
ones were pacified, like waves that reach a shore.

'Then Shakra, the great lord of the thirty gods[The gods number thirty or thirty-three.], was angered. Riding a white elephant, he charged at them.
Grasping lightning, he hurled his vajra weapon with great force and the slayer of demons announced to the gods
that the two had been killed. On seeing that the king of the gods was about to hurl the great lightning, the gods
grasped all their respective weapons-King Yama his kaladanda[The staff of death.], the god of wealth his shibika[A shibika is a palanquin, the god of wealth or Kubera's weapon.], Varuna his
pasha[Noose.], Shiva his vichakra[This seems to be a special kind of chakra, though Shiva's weapon is actually a trident. However, the word
Shiva is also used generically for any god.], the two Ashvins luminiscent oshadhi[Herbs.], Dhata his dhanu[Bow.], Jaya his musala[Club.],
the immensely strong Tvashta a mountain, Amsha his shakti[Spear.] and the god of death[Yama.] his parashva[Battleaxe.]. Aryaman
grasped a fearful parigha[Mace.] and walked around. Mitra stood there, grasping a chakra that was as sharp as a razor.
O lord of the earth! Pusha, Bhaga and Savita grabbed bows and swords and rushed at Krishna and Partha. O
supreme among men! The Rudras, the powerful Maruts, the Vishvadevas, the Sadhyas resplendent in their energy,
and many other gods armed with diverse weapons advanced towards Krishna and Partha, in a desire to kill them. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that great battle, wonderful omens were witnessed, equal to those seen when
all beings were exterminated at the end of a yuga.'

'The two Achyutas[Krishna and Arjuna. Achyuta means one who does not decay and is usually used for Krishna.] saw the angry Shakra and the assemblage of the other gods. Those fearless and invincible
warriors stood there, their bows ready. When they saw the gods advancing from every direction, they angrily repulsed them with arrows that were like the vajra. Repeatedly, the resolutions of the gods were shattered. In fear,
they gave up the battle and sought refuge with Shakra. On seeing the gods repulsed by Madhava and Arjuna, the
sages who dwell in heaven were astonished. Shakra was also extremely pleased at witnessing their constant prowess in battle and engaged in fighting them once again. In an attempt to question Savyasachi's valour, the chastiser
of Paka[Paka was a demon killed by Indra.] then cast down a gigantic shower of rocks. But intolerantly, Arjuna countered that shower. On seeing
that his act was unsuccessful, Shatakratu, the king of the gods, increased the strength of his shower. But the son of
the chastiser of Paka brought great pleasure to his father by destroying that shower of rocks with his swift arrows.
Wishing to kill Pandu's son, Shakra then uprooted with his bare hands a giant peak of Mandara, with all its trees,
and flung it. But Arjuna immediately splintered that peak of the mountain into a thousand pieces with his swift and
straight, fire-tipped arrows. The sight of that mountain splintering was like that of the sky breaking, with the sun,
the moon and the planets. Pieces of that giant mountain fell on the forest and killed many beings who lived in
Khandava.'
