'Sanjaya said, "Drona's son was invincible in a battle. Thus addressed by Duryodhana, the mighty-armed one
replied, 'O Kourava! What you have said is true. The Pandavas have always been dear to me and my father. And
we are also dear to them. O extender of the Kuru lineage! But that does not apply to a battle. O son[The word used is tata. Duryodhana was junior to Ashvatthama.]! We will
fight to the best of our capacity and without any fear, are prepared to give up our lives in battle. O supreme among
kings! In an instant, Karna, Shalya, Kripa, Hardikya and I are capable of destroying the Pandava army. O extender
of the Kuru lineage! If we were not present in this battle, the mighty-armed one[Arjuna.] is also capable of destroying
the army of the Kouravas in an instant. We are fighting with the Pandavas to the best of our capacity. In a similar
way, they are fighting with us. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Energy has clashed against energy and is being pacified. As long as Pandu's son[Arjuna.] is alive, the Pandava army is incapable of being quickly defeated. I tell
you this truthfully. The sons of Pandu are capable and are fighting for their own interests. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Why should they not be able to slaughter your soldiers? O king! You are extremely avaricious. O
Kourava! You have resorted to deceit. You are insolent and are suspicious of everything. That is the reason you
suspect those on your own side. For your sake, I am making the best of efforts and am prepared to give up my own
life. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! For your sake, I will advance to fight. I will fight against the enemy and defeat the best of the best. O destroyer of enemies! To bring you pleasure in this battle, I will fight with the Pancha-
las, Somakas, Kekayas and Pandaveyas. The Panchalas and Somakas will be consumed by my arrows. They will
be like cattle afflicted by a lion and will run away in different directions. The king who is Dharma's son will witness my valour today. Against the Somakas, the world will be full of Ashvatthama, and Yudhishthira, Dharma's
son, will be severely distressed. In the battle, he will see that the Panchalas and the Somakas have been killed. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! I will kill whoever advances to do battle with me. O brave one! Having encountered me, no one will be able to escape with his life.' Having spoken thus to your son, Duryodhana, the mighty-
armed one advanced to fight and to drive away all the archers. The supreme of all beings wished to do that which
would bring pleasure to your sons.

'"Goutami's son then spoke to the Kekayas and the Panchalas. 'O maharathas! All of you strike at my body. Remain stationed in this battle and show me the dexterity of your weapons.' O great king! Thus addressed, all of
them showered down weapons towards Drona's son, like water pouring down from the clouds. Having destroyed
those arrows, Drona's son brought down eight heroes, in front of the sons of Pandu and the lord Dhrishtadyumna.
In that battle, the Panchalas and Srinjayas were killed and abandoning the fight with Drona's son, fled in the ten
directions.

'"O great king! On seeing that the brave Panchalas and Somakas were running away in that battle, Dhrishtadyumna attacked Drona's son. He was surrounded by one hundred brave rathas who did not retreat. They were
on golden and colourful chariots that roared, like clouds full of rain. On seeing that warriors had been brought
down, maharatha Dhrishtadyumna, the son of the king of Panchala, spoke these words to Drona's son. 'O son of
the preceptor! O evil-minded one! Why are you killing these? If you are brave in a battle, fight against me. If you
are stationed in front of me, I will kill you.' O bull among the Bharata lineage! The powerful Dhrishtadyumna
pierced the son of the preceptor with sharp arrows that penetrated the inner organs. Drona's son was struck by a
continuous line of swift arrows. They were gold-tufted, pointed at the tip, fierce and capable of piercing all bodies.
He looked like a flowering tree, with bees in search of honey hovering around it. Thus pierced, he became extremely angry, like a snake that has been struck with a foot. Drona's proud son was not frightened. With the bow in
his hand, he spoke these words. 'O Dhrishtadyumna! Wait for an instant, without going away. I will shoot sharp
arrows and send you to Yama's abode.' Saying this, Drona's son, the destroyer of enemy heroes, showed the dexterity of his hands and enveloped Parshata in every direction with a torrent of arrows. The one who was invincible
in battle was thus shrouded in that encounter by Drona's son. The eloquent son of Panchala roared and spoke to
Drona's son. 'O brahmana! You do not know about my origin or my vow. O extremely evil-minded one! I will not
kill you, without killing Drona first. In this battle today, I will kill your father, and then you. I will convey you to
the world of the dead. That is my resolution. You have hatred towards the Parthas and are devoted to the Kouravas.
As long as I see you stationed before me, you will not escape with your life. As for that brahmana[Drona.], he has abandoned the conduct of brahmanas and is devoted to the dharma of kshatriyas. That wicked of men should be slain
by all the worlds, just as you should be.' Having been thus harshly addressed by Parshata, the supreme among
brahmanas was overcome by great rage and asked him to wait. He glanced at Parshata and seemed to burn him
down with his eyes.

'"He sighed like a serpent and showered him with arrows. O supreme among kings! In that battle, he was enveloped by Drona's son, though that supreme among rathas was surrounded by all the Panchala soldiers. However,
the mighty-armed one did not tremble and resorting to his own fortitude, shot many kinds of arrows at Ashvatthama. In that battle, they countered each other, as if they were in a gambling match in which their lives were
the stakes. They could not tolerate each other and countered those torrents of arrows. The great archers created
showers of arrows in every direction. The clash between Drona's son and Parshata was terrible in form and fierce.
On beholding this, the siddhas and charanas worshipped them. The torrents of arrows filled the sky and the directions and as they fought, they created a great darkness with those arrows, so that they could not be seen. They
seemed to be dancing around in that encounter, with the bows drawn in circles. They sought to kill each other and
wished to defeat each other. Those mighty-armed ones fought wonderfully, showing their dexterity and skills. In
that encounter, thousands of foremost among warriors applauded them. They were seen to fight in that battle, like
wild elephants in the forest. Both the armies were filled with great delight. O venerable one! Roars like lions' were
heard and conch shells were blown. The fierce battle increased the terror of cowards. For a short instant, that tumultuous battle seemed to be equal. O great king! Then Drona's son severed the standard, bow, the umbrella, the
two parshni charioteers, the charioteer and the four horses of great-souled Parshata. He killed them in the battle
and brought them down on the ground. The one with an immeasurable soul then used straight-tufted arrows to
drive away hundreds and thousands of Panchalas. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The Pandava soldiers were
distressed on seeing the great deeds, which were like those of Vasava, of Drona's son in the battle. He killed a hundred maharatha Panchalas with a hundred arrows. With three sharp arrows, Drona's son killed three other maharathas, while Drupada's son[Dhrishtadyumna.] and Phalguna looked on. He killed many Panchalas who were stationed before
him. In that encounter, the Panchalas and the Srinjayas were slaughtered. Their chariots and standards were strewn
around. They dared not approach Drona's son and abandoned him. Thus did Drona's maharatha son defeat the enemies in that battle. He let out a mighty roar, like clouds at the end of summer. Having killed many brave ones, Ashvatthama was resplendent. He was like the fire that consumes all beings at the end of a yuga. Having defeated
thousands of enemies in the battle, he was honoured by the Kouraveyas. Drona's powerful son was resplendent,
like Indra of the gods, after having killed large numbers of the enemy."'
