'Karna said, "There are three who can own no property-a slave, a student and a woman. O fortunate one! You are
the wife of a slave and have nothing of your own. You have no lord and are like the property of slaves. Enter[Dhritarashtra's household.]
and serve us. That is the task for you in this household. O Princess! All the sons of Dhritarashtra are now your
masters and not the sons of Pritha. O beautiful one! Choose another one for your husband, one who will not make
you a slave through gambling. Remember the eternal rule among slaves. Sexual acts with one's masters are never
censured. Nakula, Bhimasena, Yudhishthira, Sahadeva and Arjuna have been won over. O Yajnaseni! Enter as a
slave. The ones who have been won over can no longer be your husbands. Valour and virility are of no use to
Partha[Meaning Yudhishthira.] now. In the middle of the sabha, he has gambled away the daughter of Drupada, the king of Panchala."'

Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing these words, Bhimasena couldn't bear it any more. Like a man tormented, he
breathed deeply. But he was devoted to the king[Yudhishthira.] and tied down in the noose of dharma. He tried to burn
him[Karna.] down with the anger in his eye. Bhima said, "I cannot be angry at the words of the son of a suta[Karna was brought up by a suta, though he was Kunti's son.]. It is
truly the case that the dharma of slaves is upon us. O lord of men[Yudhishthira.]! Our enemies would not have dared hold me
down, had you not staked her." Hearing Radheya's words, King Duryodhana then spoke to Yudhishthira, who sat
silent, as if he had lost his senses. "O king! Bhima, Arjuna and the twins always follow your instructions. Answer
the question as to whether you think Krishna has been won." Having thus spoken to Kounteya, he became insolent
with arrogance. He looked invitingly at Panchali and grasped his garment. Smiling at Radheya and tormenting
Bhima, he exposed his left thigh to Droupadi, who was looking at him[Duryodhana was inviting Droupadi to come and sit on his left thigh, since the left thigh is the seat of the
wife. The right thigh is the seat of daughters and daughters-in-law.]. It was like the stem of a plantain tree,
like the trunk of an elephant, as proud as the vajra and was marked with all the auspicious signs. On witnessing
this, Vrikodara enlarged his red eyes. Among all the kings in the sabha, he spoke to them in compelling words. "If
he fails to break that thigh with a club in a great battle, let Vrikodara not go to the worlds where his ancestors have
gone." When he was thus enraged, sparks of fire issued out of every opening in his body, as if from the hollow of a
tree that is on fire.

'Vidura said, "O kings! Look out for the extreme danger that emanates from Bhimasena. Watch, for this is like
Varuna's noose. The great calamity that the gods had destined for the descendants of the Bharata lineage in ancient
times, has come to pass. Dhritarashtra's sons have transgressed in gambling. They are now quarrelling about a lady
in a sabha. There is great danger to what you have already obtained and what you wish to obtain[The expression used is yogakshema. Both these words have diverse meanings. However, kshema means preserving what has already been acquired and yoga means obtaining that which has not yet been acquired.]. The counsel
of the Kurus is now based on evil advice. O Kurus! Know this to be dharma. If it is wrongly diagnosed, this entire
assembly will be tainted. If this gambler had staked her before, he would not have been won and would have still
been her master. But if a man puts up a stake when he is not the lord of anything, winning that stake is like obtaining riches in a dream. O Kurus! You have listened to Gandhari's son[Duryodhana.]! But do not deviate from the path of
dharma."

'Duryodhana responded, "I am willing to abide by Bhima's words, Arjuna's words and the words of the twins. O
Yanjanseni! If they say that Yudhishthira wasn't their lord, then you will be freed from slavery."

'Arjuna said, "This great-souled King Dharmaraja, Kunti's son, was certainly our master when he first played
with us as stake. But whose lord was he, once he had lost himself? O assembled Kurus! All of you should decide
that."'

Vaishampayana said, 'At that time, in King Dhritarashtra's house, a jackal cried at the agnihotra[As an ill omen. The agnihotra is the maintenance of the sacred fire in a house.]. O king!
Donkeys brayed in response and from every direction, terrible birds joined in. Vidura, who was knowledgeable in
everything, heard these terrible sounds, and so did Subala's daughter[Gandhari is Subala's daughter.]. Bhishma, Drona and the learned Goutama[Kripacharya, who was descended from Goutama.] heard and said, "Peace! Peace!" On hearing those terrible omens, Gandhari and the learned Vidura became
miserable and told the king[Dhritarashtra. Clearly, only Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Vidura and Gandhari understood these to be ill omens.]. Then the king spoke these words. "O evil-minded Duryodhana! You have been destroyed. In this assembly hall of the bulls among the Kurus, in this sabha, you have used insolent words against a
woman, especially a lawfully wedded wife like Droupadi." Having spoken these words, the intelligent Dhritarashtra stopped, for he was concerned about the welfare of his relatives. Using his knowledge and intelligence, he
spoke these words, so as to pacify Krishna Panchali.

'Dhritarashtra said, "O Panchali! Choose from me whatever boon you desire. You are a chaste lady who follows
supreme dharma and you are the most special of my daughters-in-law."

'Droupadi replied, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! If you wish to grant me a boon, I will choose this. The
illustrious Yudhishthira, who follows all the ways of dharma, should not be a slave. Let these young boys, who do
not know of Prativindhya's[Yudhishthira and Droupadi's son.] intelligence, refer to him as the son of a slave when he arrives. He has been the son
of a king earlier, like no man anywhere and ever. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He will die if he is brought
up as the son of a slave."

'Dhritarashtra said, "O fortunate one! Ask for a second boon from me and I will grant it to you. My heart has
convinced me that you do not deserve to obtain only a single boon."

'Droupadi replied, "With my second boon, I desire that Bhimasena, Dhananjaya, Nakula and Sahadeva, together
with their chariots and their bows, should not be slaves."

'Dhritarashtra said, "O one who always follows the path of righteousness! Two boons do not honour you
enough. Ask for a third. You are the best among all my daughters-in-law."

'Droupadi replied, "O illustrious one! Avarice destroys dharma and I am disinclined. O supreme among kings! I
am not deserving of a third boon from you. It is said that the vaishya has one boon and a kshatriya and his wife can
have two. O Indra among kings! A king can have three boons and a brahmana one hundred. O king! My husbands
were reduced to an evil state, but have been rescued. They will obtain riches and prosperity through their own sacred deeds."'
