Vaishampayana said, 'The extremely energetic and aged king, the extender of the Kuru lineage, could not see
anything unpleasant in Pandu's descendant. The great-souled Pandava always followed virtuous conduct and
King Dhritarashtra, Ambika's son, was pleased with him. Gandhari, Subala's daughter, forgot all sorrow on account of her sons. She was always pleased with them, as if they were her own sons. O extender of the Kuru lineage! Kouravya always acted in an agreeable way towards the king who was Vichitravirya's son and never did
anything disagreeable. O great king! Whatever King Dhritarashtra said that he wanted done and whatever the illustrious Gandhari desired, small or large, was done by the Pandava king, the bearer of burdens. The destroyer of enemy heroes honoured those words and acted in accordance with those wishes. Therefore, the king was pleased at
this conduct and was tormented by memories of his evil-minded son. The king always arose at dawn, meditated
and purified himself. He then blessed the sons of Pandu that they might be invincible in battle. As instructed by
brahmanas, he offered oblations into the fire. The king pronounced benedictions that the sons of Pandu might live
for a long time. The king had never obtained such great delight from his own sons, nothing like the joy the king
got from the sons of Pandu. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The state of brahmanas, the aged, kshatriyas and
large numbers of vaishyas and shudras was extremely agreeable. Following the king[Dhritarashtra.], the king acted so that his
heart no longer bore the evil acts that the sons of Dhritarashtra had done towards him earlier. If a man did anything
unpleasant towards Ambika's son, the intelligent Kounteya acted against him. Scared of Yudhishthira, no man said
anything  about  the  wicked  deeds  done  by  King  Dhritarashtra  or  Duryodhana.  O  slayer  of  enemies!  The Indra
among men[Dhritarashtra.], Gandhari and Vidura were pleased with Ajatashatru's fortitude and purity, but not with Bhima. Bhi-
ma did follow the instructions of the king, Dharma's son. However, he became cheerless whenever he saw Dhritarashtra. Kouravya[Bhima.] saw that Dharma's son followed the extremely intelligent king and also followed him, but his
heart was not in it.'
