Brahma said, "The five great elements were generated from Ahamkara-earth, air, space, water and light as
the fifth. All beings are confused because of these five great elements, through the action of sound, touch,
form, taste and smell. When the five great elements are destroyed, there is universal destruction. O patient ones!
There is great fear to all those who sustain life. Every creature is dissolved into its source of origin. That dissolution occurs in an order that is the reverse of the progress of creation. All mobile and immobile objects face destruction. However, those who are learned and patient are never destroyed. Sound, touch, form, taste and smell as the
fifth are the effects. Because of confusion, they are thought of as the cause. They are not different from each other.
But they are created in that way because of greed. In the mixture of flesh and blood, they draw sustenance from
each  other.  They  are  external  to  the  atman.  They  cause  distress  and  miserable  conduct.  Prana,  apana,  udana,
samana and vyana are also like that. These five kinds of breaths of life are always attached to the inner atman. Together with speech, mind and intelligence, these eight are the soul of the universe. There may be a person who is
controlled in skin, nose, ears, eyes, tongue and speech. His mind is pure and his intelligence does not stray from
the course. His mind is never consumed by these eight fires. Such a person obtains the auspicious brahman and
nothing is superior to that. In particular, there are said to be even senses. These originate in Ahamkara. O brahmanas! I will recount these. These are the ears, the skin, the eyes, the tongue, the nose as the fifth, the feet, the
anus, the gential organ, the hands and speech as the tenth. In this aggregate of senses, mind is the eleventh. When
this aggregate is conquered, it is only then that the brahman is manifested. Five of these are said to be organs of
sense and five are organs of action. It is the truth that the five that begin with the ears are said to be the organs of
sensation. The remaining ones are the organs of action. The mind is classified as both[Organ of sense and organ of action.]. Intelligence is the twelfth.
In due order, I have thus recounted the eleven organs of sense. Learned ones who know this think that they have
become successful. There are three states of beings, land, water and sky. There is no fourth state. There are four
kinds of birth-from eggs, upwards[Plants, trees and herbs, which germinate upwards from seeds.], from sweat and from wombs. In all kinds of creatures, these four kinds of
birth are seen. There are immobile creatures too. Among the ones that roam in the sky, know that all these are born
from eggs, or are reptiles. Worms are born from sweat and there are other creatures like that. This is said to be the
second kind of birth, one that is inferior. O supreme among brahmanas! After some time, there are some who are
born after sprouting through the earth. These are known as plants and trees. O excellent ones! Now learn about the
creatures that are born from wombs. Some have two feet. Some have many feet. Some move diagonally. Know
that Brahma's eternal womb is the outcome of two things-austerities and auspicious rites. This is the view held
by the learned[This is not clear and the meaning has to be deduced. Brahma's eternal womb probably means birth as a brahmana and the intention is to convey that among humans, one is born as a brahmana because of austerities and
good deeds.]. Know that there are two kinds of auspicious rites for those who have been born-sacrifices and
donations at sacrifices and studying. This is the instruction of the ancients. O bulls among brahmanas! A person
who knows this in the proper way becomes liberated. Listen. In this way, he is freed from all sins. Space is the first
element and it is connected with the atman through the ear. In its natural form, it becomes sound and is the divinity
of the directions. Wind is the second element and it is connected with the atman through the skin. In its natural
form, it becomes touch and is the divinity of lightning. Light is the third element and it said to be connected with
the atman through the eyes. In its natural form, it becomes form and is said to be the divinity of the sun. Know that
water is the fourth and is connected with the atman through the tongue. In its natural form, it becomes taste and is
the divinity of the moon. Earth is the fifth element and is connected with the atman through the nose. In its natural
form, it becomes smell and is the divinity of the wind. These five elements are said to be progressively divided into
four categories[This probably means the four kinds of birth.]. I will next relate how all the senses are divided into three categories. Brahmanas who have seen
the truth have said that the feet are connected with the atman. In their natural state, they represent movement and
their divinity is Vishnu. When apana moves downwards, it is connected with the atman through the anus. In its natural state, it is what is excreted and its divinity is Mitra. In the act of procreation of all beings, the genital organ is
connected with the atman. In its natural state, it is semen and its divinity is Prajapati. Those who are learned about
adhyatma say that the hands are connected with the atman. In its natural state, it is represented in action and its divinity is Shakra. The Vishvadevas come before the mind and are said to be connected with the atman through the
tongue. In its natural state, it is speech and its divinity is Agni. In adhyatma, the mind is said to instigate the five
elements and its natural state is thought of in that way. Its divinity is the Moon. In adhyatma, intelligence is said to
be that which moves the six senses[The five senses and the mind.]. In its natural state it represents what there is to be known and its divinity is
Brahma. I have recounted the rules of adhyatma in the proper way. O ones who know about dharma! A person who
possesses this knowledge is said to have obtained intelligence. The senses, the objects of the senses and the five
great elements-all these should be collected and restrained by the mind. When the mind manages to diminish
there, there is no longer any happiness from birth. It is the view of those who are learned that such spirited ones
experience true bliss. I will next tell you about what is subtle in sentiment and auspicious. This is about strong and
weak renunciation in all beings. A brahmana who is no longer attached to differences between the existence and
non-existence of qualities and follows the conduct of being alone obtains bliss. Such a learned person withdraws
all desire, like a tortoise drawing in its limbs. Such a liberated man is radiant in every way and is always happy. He
controls desire in his atman. He is controlled and his thirst has been exhausted. He has fraternal sentiments of affection towards all creatures. He becomes merged in the brahman. He restrains all the senses that hanker after material objects. Such a sage abandons habitations and uses the fire of adhyatma as kindling. When kindling is offered into the fire, it blazes forth in great radiance. Through the restraint of the sense, a great-souled one is illuminated in that way. With a tranquil soul, he considers all the elements in his heart. Originating within himself, he obtains what is subtler than the most subtle. Fire is the form[ALL these refer to the physical body.]. Water is the flow of liquids. Wind is touch. The earth
is the terrible mire[Flesh and blood.]. Space is in the ears. It is enveloped by these five kinds of flows and is overwhelmed with attachment and grief. It is made up of the five elements. It has nine gates. It has two divinities[The jivatman and the paramatman.]. It is full of rajas
and does not deserve to be seen. It has three qualities and three attributes[Wind, bile and phlegm.]. Foolishly, one assumes a body and is
delighted with attachment. Those who have sought refuge with the essence find it difficult to roam around in this
world of the living. It is in this way that the wheel of time revolves in this world. This is a terrible, fathomless and
great ocean. It is full of delusion. It[Time.] extends and contracts, awaking the universe, including the immortals. Desire,  anger,  fear,  confusion,  hatred  and  falsehood  are  extremely  difficult  to  cast  away.  They can be abandoned
through the restraint of the senses. If a person conquers the world, with its three qualities and five elements, it is
seen that he obtains an infinite status, beyond the sky. He crosses the river that has desire as its banks and the mind
as the fearful current. He crosses the river and the lakes that are so difficult to traverse and vanquishes both desire
and anger. He is freed from all sins and beholds the ultimate. By using his mind to control his mind, he sees his atman in his own self. He sees his atman in his own self and sees himself in all beings, in one form and in many
forms. There is no doubt that he sees all those forms, like a hundred lamps lit from a single lamp. He is Vishnu,
Mitra, Varuna, Agni, Prajapati, Dhatri and Vidhatri. He is the lord with a face in every direction. The great-souled
one is illuminated in the hearts of all beings. He is in the large numbers of brahmanas, the gods, the asuras, the
yakshas, the pishachas, the ancestors, birds and all the large numbers of rakshasas and bhutas. The maharshis always praise him."'"'
