'"Pulastya said, 'O one learned in dharma! One should then go to the ancient Dharmatirtha. O king! There is no
doubt that a man who bathes there, controlled and devoted to dharma, sanctifies his lineage for seven generations.
O one learned in dharma! One should then go to the supreme Karapatana. One obtains agnishtoma and goes to the
world of the sages. O king! A man should then go to the forest Sougandhika[Literally, sweet-smelling and fragrant. There is also a plant and a flower by the name of Sougandhika.]. Brahma, the gods, the sages and
the ascetics are there and the siddhas, the charanas, the gandharvas, the kinnaras[Mythical beings who were followers of Kubera and could sing well. They were also physically deformed,
sometimes described as possessing human heads and bodies of horses.] and the great nagas. As soon
as one enters the forest, one is freed from all sins. O king! The best of streams, the supreme of rivers, the immensely sacred goddess and river, Sarasvati, flows in Plaksha[Plaksha is a fig tree and the Sarasvati originated from the Shivalik hills in the Himalayas from below a fig
tree. This fountain at the foot of the fig tree is called Plaksha Prasravana. Plaksha is sometimes also identified with
Paonta Sahib in Himachal Pradesh.]. On performing one's ablutions there, from the water
that issues from an anthill, and worshipping the ancestors and the gods, one obtains the fruits of a horse sacrifice.
There is a tirtha named Ishanadhyushita[Literally, a place where Shiva (Ishana) is established.] there, difficult of access and determined to be six throws of a shamya
away from the anthill[Shamya is a wooden sacrificial stick and the distance is six throws of this stick away.]. O tiger among men! It has been seen in the ancient accounts, that on bathing there, one
obtains a thousand tawny cows and a horse sacrifice[That is, the fruits of a horse sacrifice and donating one thousand cows.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O best of men! If
one goes to Sugandha, Shatakumbha and Panchayajna, one obtains greatness in the world of heaven. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! The tirtha known as Trishulakhata is also there. On performing ablutions there, engaged in
the worship of the ancestors and the gods, there is no doubt that after discarding one's body, one attains the status
of a Ganapati.

'"'O Indra among kings! One should then go the place of the goddess that is difficult of access. This is famous
in the three worlds by the name of Shakambhari[Shaka means vegetable, herb or edible leaf. Shakambhari is one who nourishes through shaka and is one of
the goddess Durga's manifestations. There are Shakambhari temples throughout India.]. O lord of men! Strict in her vows, for a thousand divine years,
she subsisted on vegetables, month after month. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Rishis, ascetics and devotees
of the goddess came there and the guests were entertained with offerings of vegetables. Her name of Shakambhari
was thus established. On going to Shakambhari, celibate and controlled, one should live there for three nights, eating vegetables and restrained and pure. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Through the grace of the goddess, a
visit there is equal in fruits to living on vegetables for twelve years.

'"'Then one should go to Suvarnaksha, renowned in the three worlds. In ancient times, to win his favours, Vishnu propitiated Rudra there. He obtained many rare boons, difficult even among the gods. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! The destroyer of Tripura[Shiva is the destroyer of Tripura. Tripura was the name of three (tri) cities (pura) created by the demons and
was destroyed by Shiva.] was satisfied and told him, "O Krishna! You will be more loved in
the world. There is no doubt that your mouth will be the entire universe." O Indra among kings! Going there and
worshipping Vrishadhvaja, one attains a horse sacrifice and the status of a Ganapati. Then a man should go to Dhumavati[Dhumavati is one of the manifestations of the goddess.] and fast there for three nights, obtaining certainly everything that one desires in one's mind. O lord of
men! Rathavarta is towards the south[Alternatively, the right.] of the goddess. O one learned in dharma! One should ascend it with faith,
and in control of one's senses. Through Mahadeva's grace, one then obtains the supreme objective. O bull among
the Bharata lineage! O immensely wise one! After circumambulating it, one should go to Dhara, the cleanser of all
sins. O tiger among men! O lord of men! On bathing there, one never sorrows. O one learned in dharma! After
showing obeisance to the great mountain, one should then go to the gate of the Ganga[More accurately, Gangadvara, probably Har ki Pauri in Haridwar.]. There is no doubt that
this is like the gate of heaven. On bathing there in Kotitirtha, controlled in mind, one obtains pundarika sacrifice
and saves one's lineage. On satisfying the gods and the ancestors in Saptaganga[Saptaganga usually means seven (sapta) great rivers, of which, Ganga is one. But clearly, something else is
meant here.], Triganga and Shakravarta, in
accordance with the prescriptions, one obtains greatness in the world of the virtuous. Then bathing in
Kanakhala[Kankhal in Haridwar.] and fasting there for three nights, a man obtains a horse sacrifice and goes to the world of heaven. O
lord of men! The visitor of tirthas should then go to Kapilavata[This Kapila was a king of the nagas and Kapilavata was near the source of the Ganga, that is, near
Rishikesh in Uttarakhand.]. Staying there for one night, one obtains the
fruits of one thousand cows. O Indra among kings! O best among the supreme of the Kuru lineage! This is the
tirtha of the great-souled Kapila, king of the nagas. It is renowned in all the worlds. O lord of men! On performing
ablutions in that tirtha of the nagas, a man obtains the fruits of one thousand tawny cows. Then one should go to
Lalitika, Shantanu's supreme tirtha. O king! On bathing there, a man never confronts difficulties. A man who
bathes at the confluence of the Ganga and the Sangama[Sangama means confluence. So this probably means the confluence of Ganga with the confluence of the Yamuna and the Sarasvati.], obtains ten horse sacrifices and rescues his lineage. O
Indra among kings! From there, one should go to Sugandha, famous in the worlds. Cleansed of all sin and pure of
soul, one attains greatness in Brahma's world. O lord of men! The visitor of tirthas should then go to Rudravarta. O
king! On bathing there, a man obtains greatness in the world of heaven. O best of men! On bathing at the confluence of the Ganga and the Sarasvati, one obtains a horse sacrifice and goes to the world of heaven[The confluence of the Ganga, the Yamuna and the Sarasvati is at Prayaga (Allahabad).].

'"'On going to Bhadrakarneshvara and worshipping the gods in accordance with the rites, one never confronts
difficulties and goes to the world of heaven. O lord of men! The visitor of tirthas should then go to Kubjamraka.
One obtains the fruits of one thousand cows and goes to heaven. O lord of men! The visitor of tirthas should then
go to Arundhativata. On touching the water at Samudraka, and fasting there for three nights, a man obtains the
fruits of one thousand cows and rescues his lineage. Celibate and controlled in mind, one should then go to Brahmavarta. One obtains a horse sacrifice and goes to the world of heaven. On going to the source of the Yamuna[The source of the Yamuna is in the Yamunotri glacier.]
and touching the water of the Yamuna there, one obtains the fruits of a horse sacrifice and attains greatness in the
world of heaven. Then one should go to the tirtha named Darvisamkramana, famous in the three worlds. One obtains a horse sacrifice and goes to the world of heaven. On going to the source of the Sindhu[The source of the Sindhu is near Manasa Sarovara, in Tibet.], frequented by siddhas and gandharvas, and staying there for five nights, one obtains a lot of gold. On going thereafter to Vedi, extremely difficult of access, a man obtains a horse sacrifice and the goal of Ushanas[Ushanas is Shukra's name. So, one goes to Shukra's world.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! One should then go to Rishikulya[This might mean Rishikesh.] and Vasishtha. On going to Vasishtha, all the other varnas become
brahmanas. O lord of men, having bathed in Rishikulya, a man attains the world of the rishis, if one lives there for
one month and subsists on vegetables.'

'"On going to Bhrigutunga, one obtains the fruits of a horse sacrifice. On going to Virapramoksha, one is freed
from all sins. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On going to the tirthas of Krittika and Magha, a virtuous man
obtains the fruits of agnishtoma and atiratra. On going to the supreme Vidyatirtha in the evening, and touching the
water there, one becomes skilled in all forms of knowledge. If one spends a night in Mahashrama, eating once a
day, one is cleansed of all sins and attains the worlds of the pure. Living there for one month at the time of Maha-
laya[The night of the new moon (amavasya) during krishnapaksha, when there is a conjunction of the sun and
the moon and the sun enters the constellation of Kanya (Virgo). This occurs in September or October.] and eating once in three days, one is cleansed of all sins, the soul becomes pure, and one obtains a lot of
gold. One should then go to Vetasika, frequented by the grandfather[Brahma.]. One obtains a horse sacrifice and goes to
the objective of Ushanas. Then, on reaching the tirtha of Sundarika, frequented by the siddhas, as has been witnessed in the ancient texts, one becomes handsome. Then, going on to Brahmani, celibate and in control of one's
senses, one goes to Brahma's world in a lotus-coloured vehicle. Then one should go to the sacred Naimisha, frequented by the siddhas. Brahma always resides there, together with the masses of the gods. Even if one desires to
go to Naimisha, half of one's sins are destroyed. As soon as a man enters it, all his sins are cleansed. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! The wise visitor of tirthas should live in Naimisha for a month. All the tirthas of the earth
are in Naimisha. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Bathing there, controlled and restrained in diet, one obtains
the fruits of a sacrifice in which cows are donated. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! One also rescues one's
lineage for seven generations. It is said by the wise ones that he who gives up his life in Naimisha through fasting,
finds delight in the world of heaven. O supreme among kings! Naimisha is always sacred and holy.

'"On going to Gangobheda and fasting there for three nights, a man obtains a horse sacrifice and is born like
Brahma. Going to the Sarasvati, one should satisfy the ancestors and the gods. There is no doubt that one finds delight in Sarasvati's world. Celibate and controlled, one should then go to Bahuda. A man then obtains the fruits of
a devasatra[Sacrifice to the gods.] sacrifice. Then one should go to the sacred Chiravati, surrounded by holy ones. Worshipping the
ancestors and the gods there, one obtains a horse sacrifice. On going to Vimalashoka, one shines like the moon.
Spending a night there, one attains greatness in the world of heaven. One should then go to Gopratara, the supreme
of tirthas on the Sarayu. Rama went to heaven there, with his servants, forces and vehicles[The Sarayu River is in Uttar Pradesh. At the end, Rama immersed himself in the Sarayu River and returned
to heaven. Gopratara is about 8 km from Ayodhya.]. O lord of men! On
bathing at the tirtha of Gopratara, a man is cleansed of all sins, becomes pure in soul and attains greatness in the
world of heaven. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! If a man bathes in Rama's tirtha on the Gomati[River in Uttar Pradesh, the Sarayu River is a tributary. This Rama tirtha is probably a reference to
Parashurama.], he obtains
a horse sacrifice, and the man's lineage is saved. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! The tirtha Shatasahasrika
is there. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On bathing there, controlled and restrained in diet, one obtains the sacred fruits of one thousand cows. O Indra among kings! One should then go to the supreme region of Bhartri. O
king! On bathing in Kotitirtha and worshipping Guha[Guha is the king of the nishadas in the Ramayana.], a man obtains the fruits of one thousand cows. Such a
man becomes energetic. On going to Varanasi and worshipping Vrishadhvaja, and bathing in the pond known as
Kapila, one attains a royal sacrifice. O Indra among kings! On going to Markandeya's tirtha, difficult of access and
famous in the worlds, located at the confluence of the Gomati and the Ganga, one obtains agnishtoma and rescues
one's lineage. Celibate and in control of one's senses, one should then go to Gaya. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On going there, one obtains a horse sacrifice. Akshayavata, famous in the three worlds, is there. O lord!
Whatever is offered to the ancestors there becomes inexhaustible. On bathing in Mahanadi and satisfying the ancestors and the gods, one attains the inexhaustible worlds and saves one's lineage. On going to Brahma's lake,
adorned with Dharma's forests, one attains a pundarika sacrifice, as soon as night becomes dawn. O Indra among
kings! Brahma's sacrificial pole rises high in that lake. On circumambulating the pole, one obtains the fruits of a
horse sacrifice.

'"O Indra among kings! One should then go to Dhenuka, famous in the world. O king! On staying there for one
night and donating sesamum and a cow, all sins are cleansed, one becomes pure in soul and there is no doubt that
one goes to the world of the moon. O great king! There is no doubt that, even today, there is a sign there. A cow,
with her calf, used to roam over that mountain. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Her hoof-marks, and those of
her calf, can be seen there, even today. O Indra among kings! O supreme among kings! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On touching water at these hoof-marks, whatever evil acts one has committed are destroyed. Then one
should go to Gridhravata, the place where the wise god is established. On going to Vrishadhvaja, one should bathe
in ashes. If one is a brahmana, one will obtain a vow of twelve years[That is, the merits will be equal to those from observing a vow for twelve years.]. If one is from an inferior varna, all one's
sins will be destroyed. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Then one should go to Mount Udyanta, filled with the
sound of singing. The footprint of Savita[The sun-god. Alternatively, Savitra.] can be seen there. Rigid in vows, a brahmana who observes the sandhya prayers there is like one who has observed sandhya prayers for twelve years. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The famous Yonidvara[Literally, the gate (dvara) to the womb (yoni).] is there. On going there, a man is freed from any mixing up of varnas[The text literally translates as mixing up of wombs, that is, miscegenation.]. O king!
If a man lives in Gaya during both shuklapaksha and krishnapaksha, there is no doubt that his lineage is sanctified
for seven generations. If one wishes for many sons, one should only go to Gaya, or perform a horse sacrifice, or set
free a blue bull[The sense is that going to Gaya is easier.]. O king! O lord of men! The visitor of tirthas should then go to Phalgu[Tributary of the Ganga. Gaya is on the banks of the Phalgu River.]. He obtains a horse
sacrifice and goes to great success. O Indra among kings! Controlled, one should then go to Dharmaprastha. O
great king! O Yudhishthira! Dharma is always present there. Going there, one obtains the fruits of a horse sacrifice.
O Indra among kings! One should then go to the supreme Brahmatirtha. O Indra among kings! There, worshipping
Brahma, whose energy is unlimited, a man obtains the fruits of a royal sacrifice and a horse sacrifice.

'"O lord of men! The visitor of tirthas should then go to Rajagriha[Rajagriha is also known as Girivraja and today, it is known as Rajgir. There is a hot spring there. Figures of
yakshas and yakshinis have been found in Rajagriha. The naga Maninaga is believed to have lived in Rajagriha
and today, that particular place is known as Maniyar Nath.]. On touching the warm water there, one
becomes the equal of Kakshivat[Famous sage.] and finds delight. On partaking from the daily offerings made to the yakshini
there, a man becomes pure. Through the grace of the yakshini, one is freed from the sin of killing an embryo. Going to Maninaga, one obtains the fruits of one thousand cows. If one partakes from the daily offerings made to
Maninaga, and stays there for one night, one is freed from all sins and terrible serpent's venom does not cause
harm. O king! Then one should go to brahmarshi Goutama's forest. Bathing in Ahalya's[Ahalya was the sage Goutama's wife and Indra used deceit to seduce her.] lake, one goes to the
supreme objective. O king! On going to Shri[Shri means Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth. It also means beauty, in addition to prosperity. Shri can refer to
the place, as well a person. Since Ahalya was beautiful, the text probably means Ahalya.], one obtains supreme prosperity. O one learned in dharma! There
is a spring there, renowned in the three worlds. Performing one's ablutions there, one obtains a horse sacrifice.
There is also rajarshi[A royal sage, that is a king who has attained the characteristics of a rishi.] Janaka's well, worshipped by the thirty gods[Originally, the gods were believed to be thirty or thirty-three in number.]. On performing one's ablutions there,
one attains Vishnu's world. One should then go to Vinashana[Vinashana is the place where the Sarasvati river disappears into the desert.], which frees from all sins. One obtains the fruits
of a horse sacrifice and goes to the world of the moon. On going to Gandaki[River in Nepal that eventually becomes part of the Ganga.], created from the water of all the
tirthas, one obtains a horse sacrifice and goes to the world of the sun. O one learned in dharma! One should then go
to the hermitage Adhivamshya. O great king! There is no doubt that one finds delight among the guhyakas[Demi-gods similar to the yakshas, companions of Kubera.]. Going on to the river Kampana, frequented by the siddhas, one obtains a pundarika sacrifice and goes to the world of
the sun. Then going to the river Vishala, renowned in the three worlds, one obtains agnishtoma and goes to the
world of heaven. O lord of men! On going to the rivulet Maheshvari, one attains a horse sacrifice and rescues one's
lineage. On going to the celestial pond, a pure man never confronts difficulties and attains a horse sacrifice. Celibate and controlled, one should then go to Maheshvarapada. On bathing in Maheshvarapada, one obtains the fruits
of a horse sacrifice. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O Indra among kings! There are one crore famous tirthas
there and these were carried away by an evil-souled demon in the form a tortoise. O king! While they were being
carried away, Vishnu recovered them through Vishnu's powers. O Yudhishthira! On performing ablutions at the
one crore tirthas, one obtains a pundarika sacrifice and goes to Vishnu's world. O Indra among kings! One should
then go to Narayana's region. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Hari always dwells near that place. Vishnu, the
performer of extraordinary deeds, is famous by the name of Shalagrama there[Shalagrama is a sacred stone that is Vishnu's personification. According to legend, Vishnu promised that he
would be present as this stone in the Gandaki River. The Gandaki River is therefore famous for its shalagrama
stones.]. On going to Vishnu, without decay, the granter of boons and the lord of the three worlds, one obtains a horse sacrifice and goes to Vishnu's world.

'"O one learned in dharma! There is a well there that frees from all sins. The four oceans are always present in
this well. O Indra among kings! By touching the water there, one never confronts any difficulties. On going to Mahadeva[Literally, Mahadeva means the great god. Mahadeva is usually used for Shiva. But here, it is being used for
Vishnu.], Vishnu without decay and the granter of boons, one shines like the moon and is freed from all one's
debts. If one touches the water in Jatismara, pure and controlled in mind, there is no doubt that one can recall one's
past lives by bathing there. Going to Vateshvarapura and fasting and worshipping Keshava, there is no doubt that
one satisfies all one's wishes and desires. Thereafter, on going to Vamana, one is freed from all sins. On worshipping the god Hari, one never confronts any difficulties. Then one should go to Bharata's hermitage, which frees
from all sins. There, a man should go to the Koushiki[A river.], the destroyer of great sins, and obtain the fruits of a royal sacrifice. O, one learned in dharma! Then one should go to the supreme forest of Champaka. Spending a night
there, one obtains the fruits of one thousand cows. Then one should go the supremely revered tirtha of Jyeshthila.
Fasting and spending a night there, one obtains the fruits of agnishtoma. O bull among men! On seeing the immensely radiant lord of the universe there[This could mean either Shiva or Vishnu.], together with the goddess, one attains the world of Mitra and
Varuna. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On going to Kanyasamveda, controlled and restrained in diet, one goes
to the world of Prajapati Manu. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Whatever drink or food is offered at Kanya
becomes inexhaustible. This is what sages, rigid in their vows, have said. On going to Nishchira[A river.], renowned in
the three worlds, one attains a horse sacrifice and goes to Vishnu's world. O tiger among men! There is no doubt
that men who donate at the confluence of Nishchira, go to Brahma's world. Vasishtha's hermitage, renowned in the
three worlds, is there. On performing ablutions there, one attains a horse sacrifice.

'"On going to Devakuta, frequented by masses of brahmarshis, one attains a horse sacrifice and rescues one's
lineage. O Indra among kings! Then one should go the lake of the sage Koushika. In ancient times, Koushika's son
Vishvamitra obtained success there. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On staying for a month at brave Koushika's
place, one obtains within a month the merits of a horse sacrifice. He who dwells in that great lake, supreme among
all the tirthas, never confronts any difficulty and obtains a lot of gold. On going to Kumara[Kartikeya.], who dwells in Virashrama, there is no doubt that a man obtains a horse sacrifice. On going to Agnidhara, renowned in the three
worlds, and bathing there, one obtains agnishtoma and does not return from heaven. On going to the
grandfather's[Brahma is the grandfather.] lake, established in the king of the mountains[Probably meaning the Himalayas.], and performing one's ablutions there, one obtains the fruits of agnishtoma. From the grandfather's lake issues the stream of Kumaradhara, renowned in the
three worlds and the purifier of the world. On bathing there, one knows in one's own mind that one has become
successful. If one eats once in three days there, one is freed from the sin of killing a brahmana. The peak of the
great goddess Gouri is famous in the three worlds. A devoted man should climb, and touching the waters of
Stanakunda[The name of a lake near the peak.] and worshipping the ancestors and the gods, obtain a horse sacrifice and go to Shakra's world.
Celibate and controlled, one goes to Tamraruna and obtaining a horse sacrifice, goes to Shakra's world. One goes
to the well named Nandini, frequented by the thirty gods. O extender of the Kuru lineage! One then obtains the
fruits of a human sacrifice. On bathing in Kalika, the confluence of the Koushiki and the Aruna, and fasting for
three nights, a learned one is freed from all sins. Going to Urvashi tirtha and the hermitage of the moon, and
bathing in the hermitage of Kumbhakarna, a wise man is worshipped by the earth. Bathing in the sacred Koka-
mukha, celibate and careful in vows, it has been seen in the ancient accounts that one can recall one's earlier births.
A brahmana who has gone to Nanda becomes successful and accomplished in his soul. He is cleansed of all sins,
becomes pure of soul and goes to Shakra's world. On going to the island Rishabha, worthy of a visit and inhabited
by curlews, and touching the waters of the Sarasvati, one becomes resplendent in a celestial vehicle. O great king!
Ouddalaka tirtha is frequented by the sages. On performing one's ablutions there, one is freed from all sins. On going to the sacred Dharmatirtha, frequented by brahmarshis, there is no doubt that a man obtains a horse sacrifice.
On going to Champa and touching the waters of the Bhagirathi and on going to Dandarka, one obtains the fruits of
one thousand cows. On going to the sacred Lavedika, frequented by holy ones, one obtains a horse sacrifice and is
worshipped in a celestial vehicle.'"
