Vaishampayana said, 'The king dismissed all the subjects and instructed them to
return to their own homes. King Yudhishthira then spoke to Bhima, terrible in his
valour, the intelligent Arjuna and the twins and pacified them. "In the great battle,
your bodies have been mangled by the enemy with many kinds of weapons. You
are exhausted and extremely tormented by sorrow and intolerance. O best of men!
You have suffered hardships in the forest because of me. You have endured that,
like inferior men. Now enjoy this victory in happiness, as you wish. After having
rested and recovered your sense, meet me again in the morning." Duryodhana's
house was as beautiful as a palace. It was strewn with many gems and full of male
and female servants. With Dhritarashtra's permission, it had been given to Vrikodara by his brother[Yudhishthira.]. The mighty-armed one received it and entered, like Maghavan. Just like Duryodhana's house, Duhshasana's house was also adorned with the
garlands of many palaces and was decorated with golden gates. It was stocked with
male and female servants and had a lot of riches and grain. On the instructions of
the king, the mighty-armed Arjuna received this. Durmarshana's supreme abode
was even better than Duhshasana's house. It was like Kubera's residence and was
decorated with jewels and gold. Nakula had suffered in the great forest and deserved this. O great king! Dharmaraja Yudhishthira happily gave him this. Dur-
mukha's foremost residence was prosperous and decorated with gold. It had many
beds and was full of women who had eyes that were like the petals of lotuses. Sahadeva always did what brought him pleasure and he[Yudhishthira.] gave it to him. Having obtained it, he[Sahadeva.] delighted himself, like the lord of riches[Kubera.] on Kailasa. Yuyutsu,
Vidura, the immensely radiant Sanjaya, Sudharma and Dhoumya[There was no reason for Dhoumya to have had a house in Hastinapura.]went to their
own houses. With Satyaki, Shouri[Krishna.], tiger among men, went to Arjuna's residence
and entered it, like a tiger entering a cave in the mountains. Those places were
stocked with food and drink. They spent the night happily there. Having cheerfully
awoken in the morning, they presented themselves before King Yudhishthira.'
