Vaishampayana said, 'After the Pandavas had left for the forest, Ambika's son[Dhritarashtra.], whose wisdom was in his
eyes[Since Dhritarashtra was blind, this means inner sight.], was tormented and happily seated himself[This sounds like a contradiction, because Dhritarashtra was tormented, but was happily seated. However, typos in Sanskrit are also possible and sukha (happiness) can be confused with duhkha (unhappiness). Alternatively,
happily might be an adjective referring to the comfortable seat, rather than Dhritarashtra's state of mind.]. The king spoke these words to the infinitely intelligent Vidu-
ra, who had dharma in his soul, "Your intelligence is like that of the pure Bhargava[Since Bhargava means descendant of Bhrigu, it is not clear who is meant. It could be either Shukracharya or
Parashurama.]. You know all the subtleties
of supreme dharma. The Kouravas applaud you as one who is impartial. Tell me what is right for me and for
them[The Pandavas.]. O Vidura! Now that all this has happened, what should be done? How can the citizens be made to show us
respect? They[Referring to the Pandavas.] may destroy us from our roots. But I don't want their destruction either."

'Vidura replied, "O Indra among men! Dharma has three roots[Dharma, artha and kama.]. It has been said that the roots of a kingdom
are also vested in dharma. O king! Therefore, sustain dharma to the best of your powers. Protect your sons and the
sons of Pandu. What happened in the sabha destroyed dharma. Led by Soubala, those evil-hearted ones challenged
Kunti's son to a gamble with dice and your son vanquished one who is devoted to the truth. O king! In this, you
were misguided. O Kouravya! But I see a means of saving yourself, whereby your son can be cleansed of sin and
be established in this world as a righteous one. O king! Let Pandu's sons regain everything that you took in excess
of what is yours. It has been said that the supreme dharma of a king is to be content with what he has and not covet
that of others. This is your foremost task, to gratify them[The Pandavas.] and censure Shakuni. Otherwise, no one may remain
from your sons. O king! You should do this immediately. O king! If you do not do this, it is certain that the lineage
of the Kurus will be destroyed. When angered, neither Bhimasena nor Arjuna will leave enemies unslain in a war.
Savyasachi, skilled in the use of weapons, is their warrior. He possesses the bow named Gandiva, unmatched in the
world. Bhima with the powerful arms is their warrior. Who in the world is beyond their reach? Earlier, as soon as
your son was born, I told you what would have brought your well-being. O king! For the sake of the lineage, I
asked you to abandon your son. But you did not perform that task. O king! If you do not now listen to what is good
for you, you will have to regret it later. If your son agrees to rule the kingdom in friendship with the Pandavas,
there will be no regret and together with your son, you will find happiness. But if the opposite happens, subdue
him[Duryodhana.] and instate Pandu's son as the king. O king! Let Ajatashatru[Yudhishthira.], who is devoid of passion, rule the earth in
accordance with dharma. O king! Then all the lords of the earth will immediately offer us homage, like vaishyas. O
king! Let Duryodhana, Shakuni and the son of a suta[Karna.] happily wait upon the sons of Pandu. Let Duhshasana seek
Bhimasena's pardon and that of Drupada's daughter, in the middle of the sabha. After pacifying Yudhishthira, offer
him homage and instate him in the kingdom. O king! Asked by you, what else can I say? If you act according to
what I have said, you will have performed the right task."

'Dhritarashtra said, "O Vidura! These are the words you spoke in the sabha, for the sake of the Pandavas and for
me. But this is for their welfare and not for mine. My mind does not approve of any of this. How have you arrived
at this conclusion, if not for the welfare of the Pandavas? I now think that you don't have my welfare in mind.
How can I abandon my son for the sake of the Pandavas? There is no doubt that they are my sons too but Duryodhana has been born from my own body. Speaking for the welfare of others and appearing as one impartial, how can
you ask me to abandon my own body? O Vidura! Though I hold you in great respect, everything that your tongue
has uttered in wrong. Stay or go, as you please. However much she is pacified, an unchaste wife always leaves."'

Vaishampayana said, 'O king! Having uttered these words, Dhritarashtra suddenly arose and went away to his
inner quarters. Declaring that this was not the way it should be, Vidura went away to where the Parthas were.'
