'"Rishyashringa replied, 'A brahmachari came. He had matted hair and he was intelligent. He wasn't too short and
he wasn't too tall. His complexion was golden. His eyes were long, like lotuses. He was radiant, like a son of the
gods. His prosperous form was as radiant as the sun. His eyes were beautiful and black and white, like those of
chakora birds. His matted hair was blue, clear, fragrant and extremely long, and braided with golden thread. Like
lightning blazing in the sky, there were two receptacles under his throat. There were two balls under his throat[The breasts.].
They had no hair on them and were extremely beautiful. His waist was thin around the navel. But his hips were expansive. Like mine, a girdle blazed from under his garment. But his was made of gold. That apart, there was an extraordinary sight-a tinkling sound emerged from his feet[There were anklets.]. Ornaments with a similar sound were also tied to
his wrists. They were like this string of rosaries, but made a musical sound. They made a sound whenever he
moved, like intoxicated swans in a pond. His garments were extraordinary to see. They were not like mine, but
were beautiful. His face was also an extraordinary sight. His words brought gladness to the heart. His speech was
like that of male cuckoos. When I heard it, it saddened the innermost parts of my heart. During the spring months,
the forest is fragrant when fanned by the wind. O father! Like that, there was a supreme and sacred fragrance when
the wind fanned him. His matted hair was tied neatly and arranged so that it divided his forehead into two equal
halves. His ears seemed to be surrounded by circles[Earrings.]. They were coloured and beautiful of form. He held something that looked like a beautiful circular fruit[The ball.] in his right hand. It bounced repeatedly on the ground and rose
up again, in an extraordinary way. He hit it and whirled around. His body was like a tree stirred by the wind. O father! On seeing that son of the immortals, my joy became supreme and desire was born in me. He embraced my
body repeatedly. He grasped me by my matted hair and lowered my mouth. He placed his mouth on my mouth and
uttered a sound that brought great pleasure to me. He did not desire water for washing the feet, or the fruits that I
had brought. He told me that those were the vows followed by him. He gave me other novel types of fruit. I tasted
all the fruits he gave me. These are not as succulent as those. They did not have skins like these have. Nor did they
have seeds like ours. The generous one gave me liquids to drink. They were extremely fine in flavour. As soon as I
drank them, great pleasure engulfed me and the ground seemed to move. These are the beautiful and fragrant garlands that he tied up with silken threads. Having scattered them here, he left for his own hermitage, blazing in austerities. I have lost my senses at his departure. My body seems to be burning. I wish to go to him immediately. I
wish that he should always roam around here. O father! I shall go to him this very instant. Please tell me the name
of the vow observed by him. I wish to observe it, together with him. I wish to observe the severe and austere rites
practised by him.'"'
