Vaishampayana said, 'O Janamejaya! Hearing these piteous words of the rajarshi, Gandhari began to sorrow
again. So  did  Kunti,  Drupada's  daughter,  Subhadra  and  the  excellent  women  and  daughters-in-law  of  the
Kourava lineage. Queen Gandhari was overwhelmed with grief. Her eyes were bound. Joining her hands in salutation, she spoke to her father-in-law. "O bull among sages! Sixteen years have elapsed since this king's sons were
slain. O lord! He sorrows over his sons and can find no peace. Overcome with grief on account of his sons, the lord
of the earth sighs. O great sage! Dhritarashtra has never been able to sleep or sit. Through the strength of your austerities, you are capable of creating all the worlds. Why can you not show the king the worlds to which his sons
have gone? Krishna Droupadi sorrows grievously because her relatives and sons have been slain. She is virtuous
and you love this daughter-in-law the most among all your daughters-in-law. Krishna's sister, Subhadra, is gentle
in speech. The beautiful one sorrows grievously because Subhadra's son was killed. This is the wife of Bhurishrava and she is extremely miserable. O lord! Because of the grief at the hardship her husband confronted, she cannot
lie down or sit. Her father-in-law was the intelligent Bahlika, the extender of the Kuru lineage. With his father, Somadatta was slain in the great battle[Bahlika's son was Bhurishrava. Bhurishrava's son was Somadatta.]. O immensely intelligent one! Your son had one hundred handsome sons who
did not retreat from battle. They were slain in the forefront of the battle. These are those one hundred wives, also
grieving on account of their sons. The king and I think repeatedly about this and sorrow. O great sage! They surround me in their sorrow. Those were brave and great-souled maharathas, my fathers-in-law, Somadatta and the
others. O lord! What has happened to them? O illustrious one! Through your favours, the king's sorrow can be
banished. The time is right for this to be done for me too, and for Kunti, your daughter-in-law." Kunti's face was
emaciated because of her vows. When Gandhari had spoken, she remembered her son, who had been secretly born
from the sun god. Rishi Vyasa was the granter of boons and could hear and see from a distance. He saw that the
queen, Savyasachi's mother, was miserable. Vyasa told her, "O immensely wise one! Tell me what you wish to be
done. What is in your mind?" Kunti bowed her head down before her father-in-law. In shame, she told him these
words, explaining what had happened earlier.'
