Yudhishthira said, "O Madhusudana! Tell us about the prosperity that comes from worshipping brahmanas.
Our grandfather knows you. And you know about the purport of everything."

'Vasudeva replied, "O king! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Hear attentively to the truth about brahmanas. O
supreme among the Kuru lineage! I will speak to you about their qualities. Once, Pradyumna[Krishna's son.] was enraged by
some brahmanas and asked, 'O Madhusudana! What are the fruits associated with worshipping brahmanas? In this
world and in the world hereafter, how do they get that sovereignty? O one who deserves honours! What are the
fruits from constantly worshipping brahmanas? O father! Tell me everything about this. In this connection, I have a
great doubt.' I was addressed in these words by Pradyumna and replied. O great king! Listen attentively to what I
said. 'O Rukmini's son! Listen to the prosperity that comes from worshipping brahmanas. They are Somarajas[Either they are like the moon, or they are the ones who rule over the soma juice.].
They are the lords of happiness and unhappiness and prosperity, in this world and in the next. O Rukmini's son! O
son! Brahmanas are the best of friends. There is no need to think about this. In this world, the brahmanas are foremost in valour, lifespans, deeds, fame and strength. Among all those who roam around in the world, brahmanas are
the foremost. O son! How can one disrespect those who are like lords? O mighty-armed one! You should not display any rage towards brahmanas. In this world and in the next world, brahmanas are great beings. If they are angry, they can burn down the entire universe and this can be instantly seen. They are capable of creating worlds and
those who roam around in those worlds. They possess knowledge and energy. Why should one not treat them properly? O son! A brahmana resided in my house and his complexion was tawny. He was dressed in rags and he had a
staff made out of a bilva tree. His hair and nails were long. He was a tall man and there was no one taller than him
on earth. He wandered around the worlds of gods and men, singing a chant at public squares and assemblies. "Who
will honour the brahmana Durvasa by inviting him to reside in his house? Hearing my words, who will dare to
grant me refuge? If someone accepts me as a guest, he must not enrage me." Since no one invited him, I invited
him to come and live with me. On some days, he would eat food that could be eaten by many thousands of people
alone. Some days, he would eat very little. Some days, he would go out of the house and not return. He would suddenly laugh and suddenly cry. At that time, there was no one on earth who was his equal in rage. On one occasion,
he entered his living quarters and burnt down the beds, the spreads and the ornamented maidens who were there to
serve him. Having done this, he left. On another occasion, the sage, rigid in his vows, told me, "O Krishna! I wish
to eat some payasam. Fetch it quickly." I always got to know what he had in mind beforehand. Therefore, I had instructed all the people in the house to keep every kind of food and drink ready. I thus brought him the food he
wanted. Having known in advance, I treated him with every honour. I brought some flaming hot payasam and offered it to him. Having quickly eaten it, he spoke these words to me. "Swiftly smear this payasam on your limbs."

Without any hesitation, I did what he had asked me to. I smeared my body and my head with what was left. At that
time,  he  saw  that  your  mother,  the  one  with  the  beautiful  face,  was  standing  nearby.  Smiling, he smeared the
payasam on her too. The sage suddenly yoked her, with payasam smeared all over her limbs, to his chariot and left
my house. The intelligent brahmana blazed, with a complexion like that of the fire. While I looked on, he yoked
the young Rukmini like a beast of burden to his chariot and goaded her. Despite this, I did not exhibit the least bit
of sorrow or jealousy. He went out, along a large royal road. On witnessing this great wonder, some from the
Dasharha lineage were overcome by rage. They spoke to each other and conversed among themselves. "Let only
brahmanas be born. Let no other varnas be born. Which other man could have used his chariot in this way and remained alive? The venom from a virulent serpent is the sharpest among all kinds of poison. But this is sharper than
that poison. When one is burnt by the poison of a brahmana, no physician exists." When the unassailable one advanced in this way, Rukmini tottered and fell down on the road. Intolerant, the handsome one quickly goaded her.
Extremely angry, the brahmana descended from the chariot. He advanced along the path on foot and headed towards the southern direction. With payasam smeared all over our limbs, we followed that rushing supreme among
brahmanas along the path. We said, "O illustrious one! Be pacified." The energetic brahmana looked towards me
and replied, "O Krishna! O mighty-armed one! Using your nature, you have conquered anger. O one who is excellent in vows! I do not see any crime in you. O Govinda! Ask for the boon that you desire. O son[The word used is tata.]! I am pleased
with you. Behold the prosperity I can confer. As long as men have a liking for food, they will exhibit the same liking towards you, as they do towards their food. As long as anything auspicious remains in the worlds, your fame
will also remain. You will obtain supremacy in the three worlds. O Janardana! You will be extremely loved in the
worlds. O Janardana! Each of your objects that have been shattered, burnt or destroyed, will be restored, in a better
form than earlier. O Madhusudana! O Achyuta! Because you have smeared your body, as long as you wish, you
will not suffer any fear from death. O son! Why did you not smear the soles of your feet too? Acting in that way,
you have not done something that is agreeable to me." Pleased with me, he spoke to me in that way. When he said
this, I myself saw that my body had become radiant and handsome. Delighted, he told Rukmini, "O beautiful one!
You will be supreme among women in fame and deeds. You will be supreme in the worlds. You will not suffer
from old age or disease. You will not lose your complexion. With an auspicious fragrance emanating from your
body, you will be seen to be worshipping Krishna. Keshava will have sixteen thousand wives. But you will be
foremost among them and will obtain the worlds with Keshava." Having said this to your mother, he again addressed me. "O Keshava! May your intelligence always be directed in this way, towards brahmanas." The extremely energetic Durvasa, blazing like the fire, then departed. O son! Having said this, he vanished. Having instructed
me about this radiant vow, he disappeared. O lord! I have done everything that the brahmana told me about. O son!
With your mother, I have observed that vow. Cheerful in our souls, we entered the house. O son! When we entered
our house, we found that everything had become new, all that had been destroyed or burnt down by the brahmana.
Seeing that everything had become new and firm, I was overcome by great wonder. O Rukmini's son! I mentally
worshipped the brahmana.' O bull among the Bharata lineage! When Rukmini's son asked me, I thus told him
everything about the greatness of that foremost among brahmanas. You should always worship those immensely
fortunate and eloquent ones with gifts. In this way, through the favours of brahmanas, I obtained prosperity. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! Everything that Bhishma has said about me is true."'
