Vaishampayana said, 'King Shantanu was intelligent and was honoured by the gods and the rajarshis. He was devoted to dharma and was famous in all the worlds for being righteous and truthful. Shantanu, bull among men, always displayed self-control, generosity, forgiveness, forbearance, resoluteness, supreme energy and great nobility.
The king had all these qualities and was also skilled in dharma and artha. He was the protector of the Bharata lineage and all righteous people. His neck was like a conch shell, his shoulders were broad and his strength was like
that of a mad elephant. For him, dharma was superior to kama and artha. O bull among men! On seeing that he was
devoted to dharma and supreme in the practice of all forms of dharma, all the kings instated him as the king of
kings. With that lord of the Bharata lineage as their protector, all the kings on earth were freed from sorrow, fear
and anxiety and awoke every morning from sweet dreams. When the world was ruled by kings led by Shantanu, all
the varnas followed rules that served the cause of the brahman. Brahmanas were served by Kshatriyas, Kshatriyas
were served by Vaishyas. Devoted to Brahmanas and Kshatriyas, Shudras served the Vaishyas. Shantanu lived in
Hastinapura, the beautiful capital of the Kurus. He ruled over the entire earth, right up to the boundaries of the
oceans. He was devoted to truth and learned in dharma, an equal of the king of the gods. He attained great fortune
through the dharma of generosity and austerities. He was free of anger and hatred. He was as pleasant as Soma[The moon-god.].
He was as energetic as the sun and his speed was like that of Vayu. He was like Yama in anger and like the earth in
his patience. O king! When Shantanu ruled the earth, no animals, boars and birds suffered pointless death. Brahmana dharma was always followed in Shantanu's kingdom. He treated all beings equally, without desire and anger.
Sacrifices were performed for the worship of gods, rishis and the ancestors. But no being was deprived of its life,
other than in accordance with dharma. The king was like a father to those who were miserable, to those who were
without a protector and to animals. During the reign of that best of the Kuru lineage, the king of kings, words were
embedded in truth and the mind was embedded in generosity and dharma.

'Having pleasured with women for thirty-six years, the king retired to the forest. Shantanu's son, the vasu who
was born as Ganga's son and was now named Devavrata, was like him in beauty, conduct, behaviour and learning.
He was skilled in the usage of all weapons. Compared to other kings, he was mighty in strength, mighty in power,
mighty in valour and mighty as a charioteer.

'Once, when he had shot a deer, King Shantanu followed it along the banks of the river Ganga. He saw that the
waters of the Bhagirathi had become shallow. On seeing this, Shantanu, bull among men, was concerned and wondered, "Why does this best of rivers not flow the way it used to do earlier?" While trying to determine the reason,
the great-souled one saw a large youth who was beautiful and handsome of face. He was like the god
Purandara[Indra. Literally, one who sacks cities.] himself. He had divine weapons and a bow. Using his sharp arrows, he had stemmed the flow of the
river Ganga. On witnessing this wonderful and superhuman feat of checking the Ganga's course with arrows, the
king was astounded. Shantanu had seen his son only once, at the time of birth. Therefore, despite being wise, he
did not have sufficient recollection to recognize his own son. As soon as he saw his father, the youth created delusion through his powers and instantly disappeared.

'When King Shantanu witnessed this, he suspected the youth to be his own son and addressed Ganga, "Show
him to me." Ganga appeared in a supremely beautiful form and showed him the ornamented youth, holding him by
the right hand. Though he had known her before, Shantanu failed to recognize her, since she was adorned with ornaments and wore a garment that gathered no dust.

'Ganga said, "O king! O tiger among men! This is the eighth son who you fathered on me. Take him home. He
has studied the Vedas and the Vedangas from Vashishtha himself. This valorous one is skilled in the usage of all
weapons and a supreme archer. In battle, he is like the king of the gods himself. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The gods always revere him and so do the asuras. He has all the knowledge of the Vedas that Ushanas[Shukra.]
possesses. This great-souled and strong-armed son of yours is also well versed in all the knowledge of the sacred
texts and their branches possessed by Angirasa's son[Brihaspati.],who is worshipped by the gods and the asuras. He also
has the knowledge about weapons possessed by the powerful and invincible rishi who is the son of Jamadagni[Parashurama.].
O king! Your son is a great archer and also has knowledge about dharma and artha, as practised by kings. O brave
one! I am myself giving you my brave son. Take him home."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having been thus addressed by Ganga, Shantanu accepted his son, who was as radiant as
the sun, and returned to his capital. When he reached his city, which was like Purandara's[Indra.] city, the descendant
of the Puru lineage was happy and thought that all his desires had been fulfilled. He instated his great-souled son,
who had all the qualities, as the heir apparent. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The immensely famous son won,
through his conduct, the affection of everyone in the Puru lineage, his father and the kingdom. Thus the lord of the
earth, who was unlimited in valour, enjoyed himself with his son for four years.

'One day, the lord of the earth went to a forest that was along the Yamuna River. While he was wandering
around, he inhaled an extremely sweet fragrance that came from an unknown direction. Searching for the cause, he
saw a lady from the fisherman tribe who was as beautiful as a goddess. On seeing that dark-eyed lady, he asked,
"O timid one! Who are you and whose are you? What are you doing here?" She replied, "O great-souled one! I belong to the fishermen tribe. Following the dharma prescribed for us, I ply a boat on the instructions of my father,
who is the king of the fishermen." Having seen her beauty and sweetness, equal to that of a goddess, and inhaled
her fragrance, King Shantanu desired the lady from the fishermen tribe. He went to her father and asked him to
give her to him. The king of the fishermen told the king, "From the day she was born, I have known that I will
have to give my beautiful daughter to someone. O lord of men! However, there was a desire in my heart and let me
tell you that now. O unblemished one! If you desire to take her as your wife in accordance with dharma, you must
truthfully make a pledge to me, because I know that you are true to your word. O king! If you make that pledge, I
will give my daughter to you, because I will never be able to find a husband for her who is like you." Shantanu
replied, "O fisherman! It is only after hearing what you ask for, that I can say whether I can or cannot. If it is something that can be granted, I will do so, but not otherwise." The fisherman replied, "O lord of the earth! The son
who will be born from her will be instated king of the earth after you and no one else." O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Though his body burnt with the sharp pains of desire, Shantanu was unwilling to grant this boon to the
fisherman. The lord of the earth returned to Hastinapura, thinking about the daughter of the fisherman and with his
heart burdened by sorrow.

'One day, his son Devavrata came to Shantanu when he was thus meditating and thinking sorrowfully, and told
his father, "Everything is peaceful. All the kings obey you. Why are you then always sorrowful, as if in pain? O
king! Immersed in your own thoughts, you do not utter a word." Having been thus addressed by his son, Shantanu
replied, "Wihout a doubt, I am always meditating, just as you say. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You are
the only son in this great lineage of ours. O son! I sorrow because of the impermanence of this mortal life. O son of
Ganga! If anything happens to you, this lineage of ours will cease to exist. There is no doubt that you are superior
to 100 great sons. Therefore, without reason, I do not wish to have another wife. I only wish that you are fortunate,
fulfil your desires and have sons so that our lineage survives. However, those who are learned in dharma say that
having one son is like having no son at all. Agnihotra[The maintenance of the sacred fire.], the three Vedas[The word three here accordingly refers to the first three Vedas.] and sacrifices that involve a lot of
alms are together not worth one-sixteenth part of having a son. This is true of man and all beings. O immensely
wise one! On this, I have no doubts. That is what the eternal and supreme three[The three Vedas.] and Puranas say. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! You are brave, never forgive and are always armed. O unblemished one! There is every
possibility of your being killed through weapons. If that happens, I worry about how I can possibly find peace. O
son! Now I have completely told you the reason for my sorrow." Having heard this complete reason, the immensely intelligent Devavrata began to think about this. He then went and asked an old adviser, who was always concerned about his father's welfare. He asked him the reason for his father's misery. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On being asked by the foremost among the Kurus, he told him truthfully about the boon that had been asked
for the lady.

'Then Devavrata took many old Kshatriyas with him and went to see the king of the fishermen. On his father's
behalf, he himself asked for the daughter. The fisherman received him and paid him homage, in accordance with
what was prescribed. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When he was seated in the king's assembly, he said, "O
bull among men! You are an adequate protector for Shantanu. You are his son and he is the best of fathers. How
can I say anything against your words? Even if the bride's father is Shatakratu[Indra, the performer of a hundred sacrifices.] himself, he cannot but be pained
at having to reject such a honourable and desirable union of wombs. The famous Satyavati was born from the seed
of an arya who is equal in qualities to you. He has often told me about your father's achievements. He has told me
that among all the kings, he is most suited to marry Satyavati. In earlier times, I have refused the famous devarshi
Asita, when that supreme of rishis came and asked for Satyavati. O bull among the Bharatas! However, as the
girl's father, there is sometime I must say. There is one strong objection that I can see. O scourge of your enemies!
Whoever is your rival, gandharva or asura, will not live happily if you are angry. O king! This is the only fault with
the marriage and no other. O scourge of your enemies! O fortunate one! Know that this is all I have to say in the
matter of giving and taking." O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having heard this, for the sake of his father and
in the hearing of the kings, Ganga's son uttered the following words in reply. "O supreme among truthful ones!
Listen to the truthful vow I take today. The man has not been born, nor will ever be born, who will dare to utter
words like these. I will do what you have asked for. The son who will be born from her will be the king." O bull
among the Bharata lineage! At these words, the fisherman spoke again, desiring to accomplish the difficult task of
obtaining the kingdom. "O lord! You are an adequate protector for the radiant Shantanu and also for the lady. Your
heart is in dharma and you are also lord of the act of granting[The marriage.]. O equable one! However, there is something else
that needs to be said and done. Listen to me. O conqueror of enemies! This must be said for the welfare of daughters. O you who are devoted to truth and all dharma! The vow that you have taken, in the midst of all these kings,
for Satyavati's sake is worthy of you. O mighty-armed one! I have no doubt that it will never be violated by you.
But I do have great doubts about the sons who will be born to you." O king! Knowing what was on his mind, the
one who was devoted to truth and all dharma wished to do that which would bring pleasure to his father and made
a promise. "O king of fishermen! O supreme among kings! Listen to these words of mine. In front of these lords of
the earth, hear what I have to say for my father's sake. O lord of men! I have already relinquished my right to the
kingdom. I will not destroy the doubt that has arisen about my sons. O fisherman! From today, I take the vow of
brahmacharya. Even if I die without a son, I will attain the eternal world of heaven." When he heard these words,
the fisherman's body hair rose up in delight.

'He told the one who had dharma in his heart[Devavrata.] that he was prepared to give. From the sky, apsaras, gods and
rishis rained down flowers and said, "He is Bhishma[The terrible or fearsome one, because of the vow he took. The word bhishma means terrible or fearssome.]." For his father's sake, he then told the famous one, "O
mother! Please ascend this chariot and let us go to our own home." Having uttered these words, Bhishma made the
beautiful lady ascend the chariot and, arriving in Hastinapura, he told Shantanu all that had happened. Then all the
kings praised him for his difficult feat and jointly and individually said, "He is Bhishma." Witnessing the difficult
feat accomplished by Bhishma, his father Shantanu was pleased and granted him the boon that he would only die
when he himself so willed.'
