Sanjaya said, "Vaikartana himself countered and restrained Bhimasena, supported by the Panchalas, Chedis and
Kekayas, with his arrows. While Bhimasena looked on, Karna angrily killed many Chedi, Karusha and Srinjaya
maharathas. Bhimasena avoided Karna, supreme among rathas, and advanced against the Kourava soldiers, like a
blazing fire amidst dead wood. The son of a suta, the great archer, slaughtered thousands of Panchalas, Kekayas
and Srinjayas in the battle. The maharathas caused great carnage-Partha against the samshaptakas, Vrikodara
against the Kouravas and Karna against the Panchalas. O king! Because of your evil counsel, those three were like
fires and consumed and destroyed the kshatriyas in the encounter.

' "O foremost amongst the Bharata lineage! Meanwhile, Duryodhana was angry and struck Nakula with nine arrows, also piercing his four horses. O lord of men! Your son, immeasurable in his soul, again severed Sahadeva's
golden standard with a razor-sharp arrow. O king! Nakula became enraged and struck your son with seventy-three
arrows in the battle. Sahadeva pierced him with five. Those two were the best amongst the Bharata lineage and the
best among all archers. But he[Duryodhana.] angrily struck each of them with five arrows. O king! With other broad-headed
arrows, he severed the bows of the twins and laughed, piercing them with seven arrows. Those two brave ones
were resplendent in the battle, equals of the sons of the gods. They picked up other supreme bows that were as
beautiful as Shakra's bow. O king! In that encounter, the two brothers proudly fought against a brother. They
showered down arrows on him, like two giant clouds on a mountain. O great king! Your maharatha son became
enraged and repulsed Pandu's sons, great archers, with arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In the encounter, the circle of his bow could be seen. In every direction, arrows could be seen to whiz around. The two Pandavas were enveloped by his arrows and looked beautiful, like the sun and the moon in the sky, when covered by
clouds and robbed of their radiance. O great king! Those arrows were gold-tufted and sharpened on stone. Like the
rays of the sun, they covered all the directions. The firmament was covered by those arrows. The forms of the
twins were like that of Yama, at the time of the destruction of an era. On witnessing your son's valour, the maharathas thought that the sons of Madri had attained the presence of death. O king! At this, the great-souled commander-in-chief of the Pandavas, Parshata, went to the spot where King Suyodhana was.

' "Abandoning the valiant and maharatha sons of Madri, your son oppressed Dhrishtadyumna with arrows. O
bull among men! Your son, immeasurable in his soul, was intolerant, and piercing Panchala with twenty-five arrows, laughed. O lord of the earth! Your son, immeasurable in his soul, again pierced Panchala with sixty-five arrows and roared. O venerable one! In the battle, the king used extremely sharp kshurapra arrows to sever his bow,
with an arrow affixed to it, and his arm-guards. Discarding his severed bow, Panchala, the destroyer of enemies,
quickly picked up a new bow that was capable of bearing a great load. The great archer, Dhrishtadyumna, was covered with wounds. But he blazed violently because of his anger, with eyes that were red as blood. He looked beautiful. Dhrishtadyumna sighed like a serpent and wishing to kill the foremost among the Bharata lineage, shot fifteen iron arrows that had been sharpened on stone. Those forceful arrows were shafted with the feathers of herons
and peacocks. They penetrated the king's gold-decorated armour and entered the ground. O great king! Having
been severely struck, your son looked dazzling, like a blossoming kimshuka dotted with flowers during the spring.
His armour was shattered by the iron arrows. He was exhausted because of the blows. However, he angrily severed
Dhrishtadyumna's bow with a broad-headed arrow. O king! Having severed the bow, the lord of the earth swiftly
struck him between the eyebrows with ten arrows. These arrows had been polished by artisans and with these,
his[Dhrishtadyumna's.] face looked beautiful, like a flowering champaka tree visited by bees desiring honey[The arrows are being compared to bees.]. The great-minded
Dhrishtadyumna abandoned the severed bow and quickly picking up another bow, struck Duryodhana with sixteen
broad-headed arrows, slaying his horses and charioteer with five arrows. With a broad-headed arrow that was embellished with gold, he sliced down his bow. With nine broad-headed arrows, Parshata severed your son's chariot,
his seat, his umbrella, his lance, his sword, his club, his standard and his colourful and golden armlet, sparkling
with gems and the sign of an elephant[This adds up to nine arrows. One arrow was used for the bow, five for the horses and
the charioteer and one for Duryodhana himself. We thus have a tally of sixteen arrows.]. All the kings saw that the standard of the lord of the Kurus had been
brought down. In the battle, Duryodhana was without a chariot and deprived of his weapons. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! His brother, Dandadhara, sought to rescue his brother. O king! While Dhrishtadyumna looked on,
he raised the frightened king onto a chariot and bore him away.

' "Having defeated Satyaki, the immensely strong Karna wished to save the king. In the battle, he advanced
against Drona's fierce slayer[Dhrishtadyumna.]. Shini's descendant quickly pursued him from the rear, showering down arrows,
like an elephant goring another elephant from the rear with its tusks. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The
great-souled warriors fought extremely fierce and great battle in the space between Karna and Parshata. The Pan-
dava warriors, nor those on our side, desired to retreat. On seeing this, Karna swiftly advanced against the Pancha-
las. O best among men! At that time, there was a destruction of elephants, horses and men. When the sun attained
midday, this gave rise to great fear. O great king! The Panchalas desired victory and quickly attacked Karna from
all sides, like birds flocking to a tree. Adhiratha's son was spirited and sought to angrily repulse them. With fierce
arrows, he clashed against those who were at the forefront-Vyaghraketu, Susharma, Shanku, the fierce Dhananjaya[Not to be confused with Arjuna.], Shukla, Rochamana, Simhasena and Durjaya. Those valiant ones advanced forcefully on their chariots
and surrounded the best of men. They angrily released many arrows towards Karna, the ornament of a battle.
Those brave and powerful kings of men fought there. But Radheya killed all eight of them with sharp arrows. O
great king! O king! In that encounter, the powerful son of a suta, skilled in fighting, then angrily slew many thousands of other warriors-Vishnu, Vishnukarma, Devapi, Bhadra, Danda, Chitra, Chitrayudha, Hari, Simhaketu,
Rochamana[The name Rochamana has already been mentioned.], maharatha Shalabha and many other maharathas amongst the Chedis. While he was slaughtering
them, the body of Adhiratha's son was smeared in blood in all his limbs and he looked like the great Rudra himself. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Many elephants were afflicted by Karna's arrows. Terrified, they fled in
all the directions, causing greater destruction. Afflicted by Karna's arrows, they shrieked and fell down in the encounter, roaring in many different ways, as if mountains had been shattered by the thunder. In every direction, elephants, horses and men fell down and the earth became impassable because of the large numbers of chariots and
horses. No other person on your side had performed such a deed in the battle-not Bhishma, nor Drona. O tiger
among men! The son of a suta created a great destruction of elephants, chariots, horses and men. He was seen to
fearlessly roam around, like a lion amidst deer. In that fashion, Karna fearlessly roamed around amidst the Pancha-
las. Just as large numbers of deer are driven away in diverse directions by a lion, in that way, the array of Panchala
chariots was routed by Karna. On approaching a lion, a deer does not remain alive. In that way, on approaching
Karna, the maharathas did not remain alive. People are usually burnt if they approach a blazing fire. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! In that way, in that battle, the Srinjayas were consumed by the fire that was Karna. O descendant of the Bharata linege! Proclaiming his name, Karna single-handedly killed many amongst the Chedis and
the Panchalas who prided themselves on their bravery. O Indra among men! On witnessing Karna's valour, I
thought that not a single one among the Panchalas would escape from Adhiratha's son in the battle.

' "O venerable one! Having slain the Panchalas in the battle, the powerful son of a suta angrily rushed against
Yudhishthira, Dharma's son. Dhrishtadyumna and Droupadi's sons surrounded the king. The destroyer of
enemies[Karna.] was surrounded by hundreds of others-Shikhandi, Sahadeva, Nakula, Nakula's son, Janamejaya, Shini's grandson and many Prabhadrakas. In that encounter, they placed Dhrishtadyumna at their forefront. Those infinitely energetic ones looked beautiful, as they attacked Adhiratha's son with weapons. In that battle, Adhiratha's
son single-handedly descended on those Chedis, Panchalas and Pandavas, like Garuda on numerous serpents.

' "In that battle, Bhimsena, the great and angry archer, single-handedly attacked the Kurus, Madras and Kekayas
and looked extremely resplendent in the encounter. Elephants were struck in their inner organs by Bhima's iron arrows. With their riders slain, they fell down, making the earth tremble. Horses and their riders were slain and foot
soldiers lost their lives. They were mangled and lay down on the ground, vomiting copious quantities of blood.
Thousands of rathas fell down, their weapons dislodged. Those that were not wounded lost their lives because of
their fear of Bhima. The earth was strewn with chariots, horses, charioteers, foot soldiers and elephants that were
destroyed by Bhimasena's arrows. O king! Duryodhana's army was afflicted because of Bhimasena's strength and
though it remained there, it was dispirited and covered with wounds. In that great and tumultuous battle, it was
seen to be immobile and cheerless. O king! It looked like an ocean when the waters are still. Your son's army had
possessed the best of anger, valour and strength. But because of the arrows, it lost all that strength. It was covered
in waves of blood and was drenched in blood. In the battle, the son of a suta angrily attacked the Pandava soldiers
and the resplendent Bhimasena drove away the Kurus. There was a fierce battle there and it was extraordinary to
behold.

' "In the midst of the army, having slain large numbers of samshaptakas, Arjuna, best among victorious ones,
spoke to Vasudeva. 'O Janardana! This army, which was fighting, has been shattered. The samshaptaka maharathas
are running away, together with their followers. They cannot bear my arrows, like deer cannot stand the sound of a
lion. In the great battle, the large army of the Srinjayas has also been shattered. O Krishna! The intelligent Karna's
standard, with the mark of an elephant's housing, can be repeatedly seen, resplendent in the midst of the king's soldiers. In a battle, I don't think those maharathas are capable of defeating Karna. You know about Karna's bravery
and valour. Go to the spot where Karna is driving away our army. Abandon the battle here and advance against the
maharatha son of a suta. O Krishna! Unless you are exhausted, do that, or whatever else you desire.' O great king!
Having been thus addressed, Govinda laughed. He told Arjuna, 'O Pandava! Slay the Kouravas swiftly.' Urged by
Govinda, those horses, with the complexion of swans, penetrated that large army, bearing along Krishna and Pan-
dava. The horses were controlled by Keshava. They were white, with golden harnesses. They penetrated your army
and drove it away in the four directions. When Keshava and Arjuna entered, that large army was shattered. Those
two greatly resplendent ones were angry and dazzling. Their eyes were red with rage. They took delight in fighting
and in that field of battle, were challenged by the enemy. They looked like the gods, the two Ashvins, summoned
to a sacrifice by the officiating priests in the proper way. Since they were enraged, the speed of those tigers among
men increased. In that great battle, they were like elephants enraged by the sound of slapping palms[The image is that of hunters pursuing and hunting wild elephants with the slapping of
palms.]. Phalguna
roamed around the arrays of chariots and the numerous horses. In the midst of those formations, he was like Yama
with a noose in his hand. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On witnessing his valour in the battle, your son
again urged the large numbers of samshaptakas. At this, one thousand chariots, three hundred elephants, fourteen
thousand horses and two hundred thousand foot soldiers and archers attacked him in the great battle. They were
known for their bravery. They were skilled. Those maharathas attacked and enveloped those two brave ones[Krishna and Arjuna.].
Having been thus shrouded in the battle by arrows, the destroyer of enemy forces displayed his fierce self, like
Yama with a noose in his hand. Partha slaughtered the samshaptakas and became a sight worth beholding. His arrows, decorated with gold, dazzled like lightning. Kiriti incessantly covered the sky with these. Mighty arrows
were released from Kiriti's arms and descended. They covered everything, with the radiance of Kadru's
offspring[The snakes are Kadru's offspring.]. They were gold-tufted and fierce at the tip. They were arrows with drooping tufts. Pandava, immeasurable in his soul, was seen to shoot them in all the directions. The maharatha killed ten thousand kings. Kounteya
then swiftly attacked the extreme flank of the samshaptakas. Having approached the extreme flank, protected by
the Kambojas, Partha crushed it with the force of his arrows, like Vasava against the danavas. Using broad-headed
arrows, he swiftly servered the arms, with the hands still holding on to weapons, and the heads of those among the
enemy who wished to slay him. Limbs and bodies were sliced down. Deprived of weapons, they fell down on the
ground. They were shattered, like trees with many branches broken by a storm. The storm that was Arjuna destroyed elephants, horses, chariots and infantry. Sudakshina's younger brother showered down a hail of arrows on
him[Sudakshina and his brother were from Kamboja. Arjuna killed Sudakshina in Section
Sixty Nine  (Volume 6).]. His arms were like clubs. However, with two arrows in the shape of a half-moon, he[Arujna.] sliced off those
arms. His face was like the full moon. However, with a kshurapra arrow, he severed that head. He fell down from
his vehicle, exuding blood, like the summit of a mountain, when it is struck by the thunder and exudes red arsenic.
Sudakshina's younger brother, from Kamboja, was seen to be slain. He was tall. His eyes were like the petals of
lotuses. He was extremely handsome. He was like a golden pillar, or a golden mountain, and was shattered. Thereafter, the battle continued and it was fierce and wonderful to behold. In many different ways, the warriors fought
there. The Kambojas, the Yavanas and the Shakas abandoned their horses. O lord of the earth! All of them were
covered with blood and everything seemed red. Chariots lost their rathas, horses and charioteers. The riders of
horses were slain. The riders of elephants were killed. The drivers of elephants were slain. O great king! They
fought with each other and created a great destruction of men.

' "The great-souled Arjuna, foremost among victorious ones, destroyed the flank and the extreme flank[Of the samshaptakas.].
Drona's son brandished his great bow, decorated with gold, and swiftly advanced against him. He released many
terrible arrows that were like the rays of the sun. O great king! The arrows released by Drona's son descended in
all the directions. They enveloped Krishna and Dhananjaya, who were stationed on the chariot. Bharadvaja's powerful descendant released hundreds of sharp arrows and in that battle, immobilized Madhava and Pandava. On seeing that the protectors of the mobile and the immobile were thus shrouded by arrows, lamentations arose everywhere, amidst the mobile and the immobile. Large numbers of siddhas and charanas assembled there from every
direction and began to reflect about the welfare of the worlds. O king! I have not witnessed valour like this earlier,
as Drona's son enveloped the two Krishnas with his arrows. The twang of the bow of Drona's son generated great
terror in the battle. O king! It was repeatedly heard, like the roaring of a lion. He roamed around in that battle, to
the left and to the right. His bowstring was as beautiful as a cloud tinged with lightning. Pandava was swift in acting and his hand was firm. However, on seeing Drona's son, he seemed to be overcome with great stupefaction. He
thought that his own valour had been surpassed by the great-souled one. O king! In that battle, his[Ashvatthama's.] form was
impossible to behold. O Indra among kings! In that great battle between Drona's son and Pandava, the great
strength of Drona's son was seen to increase. On seeing that Kounteya was waning, Krishna was overcome with
rage. O king! He sighed repeatedly with rage and glanced towards Drona's son and Phalguna in that encounter, as
if burning them down with his eyes. Krishna angrily spoke to Partha, though with affection. 'O Partha! On seeing
you in this encounter, I find it to be extraordinary. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Drona's son is surpassing
you today. O Arjuna! Is Gandiva not in your hand? Or are you not stationed on your chariot? Are your arms well?
Is your valour still there?' Having been thus addressed by Krishna, he[Arjuna.] was enraged. At a time when speed was
of the essence, he quickly used fourteen broad-headed arrows to destroy the bow and chariot of Drona's son and
also his standard, umbrella, flags, chariot, javelin and club. With vatsadanta arrows, he struck him severely in the
shoulder joints. Having become completely unconscious, he[Ashvatthama.] grasped the pole of his standard. To protect him
from Dhananjaya, his charioteer bore him away from the field of battle. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! At
that time, Vijaya, the scorcher of enemies, destroyed hundreds and thousands of your soldiers, while your brave
son looked on. Thus, as they engaged with the enemy, there was the destruction of your soldiers. O king! That cruel and terrible destruction was because of your evil counsel. In that battle, Kounteya completely destroyed the
samshaptakas, Vrikodara the Kurus and Vasushena the Panchalas." '
