Bhishma said, "The illustrious Atri, the son of the grandfather, said that those who give gold give all the objects of desire. Harishchandra, Indra among men, spoke about gold as something that is pure, cleansing the
donor and providing indestructible benefits to his forefathers. Manu said that the gift of a drink is a supreme gift.
Therefore, tanks, wells and ponds must be dug. If a man undertakes the task of digging a well and always follows
good conduct, then half of his sins are taken away. If cattle, brahmanas and virtuous people always drink from a
waterbody dug by a man, then his entire lineage is saved. If a person offers an unrestricted supply of water during
the summer, then he never faces any calamity or hardship. The illustrious Brihaspati, Pushan, Bhaga, the Ashvins
and the fire god are satisfied with ghee. It is a supreme medication and this is supreme knowledge. It is a supreme
liquid and leads to supreme fruits. A man who desires fruits, fame and nourishment must always purify himself
and give ghee to brahmanas. If a person gives ghee to brahmanas in the month of Ashvina, then the gods, the two
Ashvins, are pleased with him and confer beauty on him. If a person gives payasam mixed with ghee to brahmanas, rakshasas never attack his house. If a person gives vessels filled with water, he doesn't die from thirst. He
doesn't face a hardship and isn't seen to suffer from a difficulty. If a person is controlled and with supreme devotion gives to a best among brahmanas, then he obtains one-sixth of the brahmana's merits. O Indra among kings! If
a man gives a brahmana wood for the successful completion of his rites or for purposes of heating, he is always
successful in his efforts. All of his different kinds of efforts are always successful. His form is seen to be progressively more radiant than that of the enemy. The illustrious fire god is always extremely pleased with such a person.
He is never separated from his animals. Nor is he separated from victory in battle. If a person gives an umbrella, he
obtains sons and prosperity. He doesn't suffer from any disease of the eyes and obtains a share in the sacrifices. If a
person gives an umbrella during the summer or when it is raining, he never suffers from any mental anxiety. O
brahmana[This doesn't belong and is clearly an error.]! He is freed from all hardships and difficulties. Among all the kinds of gifts that can be given, a cart is
the best. O immensely fortunate one! This was said by the illustrious rishi, Shandilya."'
