Sanjaya said, "Those brave ones were unwilling to retreat and made efforts. Their resolution was firm. But
Dhananjaya's Gandiva was invincible. The touch of the immensely energetic one's arrows was like that of Indra's
vajra. They were seen to be shot, like a torrent of rain released on a mountain. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! Those soldiers were slaughtered by Kiriti. While your son looked on, they fled from the battle. Some lost the
yokes of their chariots. For others, the charioteers were slain. O lord of the earth! For some others, the poles and
wheels of the chariots were shattered. Some no longer possessed any arrows. Others were afflicted by arrows.
Some were not unwounded. Nevertheless, they collectively fled, afflicted by fear. With their mounts slain, some
tried to rescue their sons. Others loudly called out to their fathers, or to others, for help. O tiger among men! O lord
of the earth! Here and there, some fled, abandoning their relatives, brothers and allies. Many maharathas were severely wounded and benumbed. Men were seen to be immobile, struck by Partha's arrows. Others ascended their
chariots and assured themselves for a short while. Having rested and quenched their thirst, they advanced towards
the fight again. Some were invincible in battle. Acting in accordance with your son's instructions, they abandoned
the wounded and set out to fight again. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! Others drank water and tended to
their mounts. Having donned armour, they battled again. Others comforted their brothers, sons and fathers and
conveyed them to the camps. Having done this, they desired to fight again. The brave ones were resplendent, decorated with nets of gold. They were like the daityas and the danavas, in pursuit of the conquest of the three worlds.
Some violently advanced on chariots that were decorated with gold. They fought with the Pandava soldiers and
with Dhrishtadyumna. Panchala Dhrishtadyumna, maharatha Shikhandi and Nakula's son, Shatanika, fought
against that division of rathas.

' "The angry Panchala was surrounded by a large army. He wrathfully rushed against those on your side, wishing to kill them. O lord of men! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When he attacked, your son affixed and shot
many arrows at him. O king! Dhrishtadyumna swiftly struck your archer son in the arms and the chest with many
iron arrows. Severely pierced, the great archer was like an elephant struck by a goad. He used arrows to convey
his[Duryodhana's.] four horses to the land of the dead. With a broad-headed arrow, he severed his charioteer's head from his
body. Having been deprived of his chariot, King Duryodhana ascended onto the back of a horse. The scorcher of
enemies retreated a short distance away. O great king! On seeing that his immensely strong and valiant army had
been destroyed, your son went to where Soubala was.

' "When the rathas were routed, three thousand giant elephants surrounded and attacked the five Pandava
rathas[The five Pandava brothers.] from all directions. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In the battle, those five were surrounded by an
army of elephants. Those tigers among men looked radiant, like planets surrounded by clouds. O great king! Arjuna was unwavering in his aim and mighty-armed. With Krishna as his charioteer, he advanced on a chariot drawn
by white horses. Surrounded by elephants that were like mountains, he used sharp, sparkling and iron arrows to
bring down that army of elephants. We saw each of those giant elephants killed by a single arrow. Mangled by
Savyasachi, they fell down, or were falling down. On seeing those elephants, Bhimasena became like a crazy elephant. The powerful one grasped a giant club in his hand and swiftly descended from his chariot onto the ground,
like Yama with a staff in his hand. On seeing the Pandava maharatha attack with his club, the soldiers on your side
were frightened and excreted urine and excrement. On seeing Vrikodara with the club, the entire army was agitated. The elephants were as large as mountains and we saw them run away. Their frontal lobes were shattered by
Bhimasena with the club, and blood began to flow. Struck by Bhimasena's club, the elephants fled, uttering shrieks
of pain, like mountains with their wings lopped off[According to belief, mountains once possessed wings.]. There were many elephants that fled, with their frontal lobes
shattered. On seeing that they were falling down, your soldiers were terrified. Yudhishthira and the Pandavas who
were Madri's sons were enraged. They used sharp arrows that were tufted with the feathers of vultures to kill the
warriors on elephants.

' "When the king, your son, had been defeated by Dhrishtadyumna in the battle, he retreated on the back of a
horse. O great king! On seeing that all the Pandavas had been surrounded by elephants, Dhrishtadyumna, accompanied by all the Prabhadrakas, attacked. Your son climbed onto another elephant, wishing to kill the king of Pan-
chala. On not seeing Duryodhana, scorcher of enemies, in the midst of that array of chariots, Ashvatthama, Kripa
and Satvata Kritavarma asked the kshatriyas there, 'Where has Duryodhana gone?' On not seeing the king in that
destruction of men, the maharathas thought that your son had been killed. Therefore, with distress written on their
faces, they asked about your son. Some people told them that your son had gone to the spot where Soubala was.
Other kshatriyas, who were severely wounded, said, 'What is the need to ask about Duryodhana and see if he is
still alive? Fight unitedly. What can the king do?' Those kshatriyas were wounded in their limbs. Many of their
mounts had been slain and they were afflicted with arrows. They softly said, 'Let us kill the army with which we
have been surrounded. After having slain all the elephants, the Pandavas are advancing here.' On hearing their
words, the immensely strong Ashvatthama penetrated that irresistible army of the king of Panchala. With Kripa
and Kritavarma, they went to the spot where Soubala was. Those brave ones, firm archers, abandoned that array of
chariots[They wanted to find out if Duryodhana was well.].

' "O king! When they had left, with Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, the Pandavas attacked and slaughtered
those on your side. The maharathas descended cheerfully, powerful and brave. On seeing this, the faces of those in
your army turned pale and they gave up all hope of remaining alive. They had few weapons left and they saw that
they were surrounded. O king! Surrounded by those two kinds of forces, I abandoned all hope of remaining alive.
With the five on our side, I fought with the Panchala soldiers. I stationed myself at the spot where Sharadvata
was[This is one of the rare and anomalous instances of Sanjaya personally
fighting. The five on the Kourava side clearly are Ashvatthama, Kripa,
Kritavarma, Shakuni and Duryodhana. The two kinds of forces probably
means elephants and chariots.]. The five on our side were severely afflicted by Kiriti's arrows. However, we fought a great battle with
Dhrishtadyumna's large army. When all of us were defeated, we retreated from the field of battle. We saw maharatha Satyaki advancing against us. With four hundred chariots, the brave one pursued me in the battle. With difficulty, I freed myself from Dhrishtadyumna, whose mounts were exhausted. But I now found myself in the midst
of Madhava's army, like an evildoer who has descended into hell. For a short while, there was a fierce and extremely terrible battle. The mighty-armed Satyaki sliced off my armour. He seized me alive and I fell down on the
ground, senseless. In a short instant, that army of elephants was slaughtered by Arjuna's iron arrows and Bhimasena's club. In every direction, those mangled and giant elephants fell down, like mountains. Consequently, the Pandavas found that their path was obstructed. O great king! The immensely strong Bhimasena dragged away those
giant elephants and created a path for the Pandava chariots. On not seeing Duryodhana, the scorcher of enemies, in
that army of chariots, Ashvatthama, Kripa and Satvata Kritavarma tried to search for the king, your maharatha son.
They abandoned Panchala and went to the spot where Soubala was. In that destruction of men, they were anxious
to see the king." '
