'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! You have briefly described that island. Now tell me about it in detail. Tell me
about that part of the land that looks like a hare. Then tell me about the measure of the part that looks like a pip-
pala."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Thus addressed by the king, Sanjaya spoke these words.

'"O great king[These words are spoken by Sanjaya.]! From the east to the west, there are six mountains that are full of jewels. In both directions,
they are immersed in the eastern and western ocean. They are named Himavan; Hemakuta; Nishadha, supreme
among mountains; Nila, full of lapis lazuli; Shveta, with the complexion of silver; and the mountains known as
Shringavan, made up of every kind of mineral. O king! These are mountains frequented by siddhas and charanas.
The distance from one to the other is one thousand yojanas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There are many
sacred countries or varshas. In all of these, dwell many different kinds of beings. This is the varsha known as
Bharata and the one known as Himavat comes after that. The region known as Harivarsha is beyond Hemakuta. O
great king! To the south of Nila and to the north of Nishadha, is a mountain named Malyavan that stretches from
the east to the west. Beyond Malyavan is the mountain known as Gandhamadana. Between these two[Malyavan and Gandhamadana.], there is
the circular and golden mountain of Meru. It is as radiant as the rising sun, or a fire without smoke. O lord of the
earth! It is said to be 84,000 yojanas high and 84,000 yojanas deep[Meru extends both above the earth and inside the earth.]. The worlds are established on it, above and
diagonally. O lord! There are four islands along its sides. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! These are
Bhadrashva, Ketumala, Jambudvipa and Uttara Kuru, the abode of those who have performed virtuous deeds. The
bird Sumukha, Suparna's[Garuda's.] son, saw that all the birds on Meru had golden feathers and thought that there was no
difference there between superior, average and inferior birds. He therefore decided to leave the place. The supreme
among stellar bodies, the sun, always revolves around it[Meru.]. So do the moon, all the nakshatras and Vayu[The wind or the wind god.]. O great
king! That mountain is full of divine flowers and fruit. It is full of mansions that are made out of polished gold. O
king! The masses of gods, gandharvas, asuras, rakshasas and masses of apsaras always go to that mountain to sport
there. Brahma, Rudra and Shakra, the lord of the gods, assemble there, to perform different kinds of sacrifices,
with a lot of donations. Tumburu, Narada, Vishvavasu, Haha and Huhu[Tumburu, Vishvavasu, Haha and Huhu are the names of gandharvas.] went there and satisfied the foremost
among immortals with different kinds of hymns. O fortunate one! The seven sages, and the great-souled Kashyapa
Prajapati, always go there on the day of the new moon and the full moon. O lord of the earth! Kavya Ushanas[Shukracharya, the preceptor of the demons.]
also goes to the summit, with the daityas. The jewels that exist in all the mountains come from the jewels there. A
fourth part of those is enjoyed by the illustrious Kubera. He gives only a sixteenth part of those riches to men.

'"On its northern side is the divine, auspicious and beautiful forest of Karnikara. It is full of flowers everywhere
and extends across several mountains. The illustrious Pashupati[Shiva. Shiva's consort is Uma.] himself, the creator of beings, sports there, surrounded by divine beings and accompanied by Uma. He wears a radiant garland of karnikara flowers[Karnikara is also the name of a flower. It is colourful, but has no fragrance.] that extends down to his feet. His three eyes blaze, like three rising suns. The Siddhas are extremely terrible in their austerities. They are excellent in their vows and truthful and can see him. Those who are evil in conduct are incapable
of seeing Maheshvara. O lord of men! A stream of milk issues from the summit of that mountain. This is the sacred and auspicious Ganga, the beautiful Bhagirathi. She has three flows[Ganga flows in the sky, the earth and the nether world. She is called Mandakini in the sky, Ganga on earth and
Bhogavati in the nether world.] and is worshipped by the virtuous. She
flows with a terrible roar. With great force, she descends into the beautiful lake Chandramas. That sacred lake is
like an ocean and has been created from her. Even the mountains are incapable of bearing her. But in earlier times,
Maheshvara bore her on his head for a hundred thousand years.

'"O lord of the earth! Ketumala is on the western side of Meru. Jambukhanda is also there and is extremely
large[Jambukhanda or Jambudvipa is at the centre of the seven dvipas (islands), which are spread out in a concentric
circle. Meru is at the centre of Jambukhanda. Jambukhanda is named after the jamun (the Indian blackberry).
Bharatavarsha is in Jambukhanda.]. It is like Nandana[The name of Indra's pleasure garden.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The lifespan there is ten thousand years. The
men have golden complexions and the women are like apsaras. Everyone is without disease and devoid of sorrow.
They are always delighted in their minds. Humans born there have the complexion of molten gold. On the summit
of Gandhamadana, Kubera, lord of the guhyakas, spends his time in delight, with the rakshasas and surrounded by
masses of apsaras. There are smaller mountains and hills at the feet of Gandhamadana. The maximum lifespan
there is eleven thousand years. O king! The men there are dark, energetic and extremely strong. All the women
have the complexion of lotuses and are extremely beautiful to look at. Shveta is beyond Nila and Hiranyaka is beyond Nila[Varsha is a continent and usually nine such continents are mentioned- Kuru, Hiranmaya, Ramyaka, Ilavrita,
Hari, Ketumala, Bhadrashva, Kinnara and Bharata. Hiranyaka is the same as Hiranmaya and Airavata is the
same as Ilavrita. Shveta and Nila are the names of mountains.]. The varsha named Airavata is bounded by Shringavat[The name of a mountain.]. O great king! The two varshas to the south
and the north are in the form of a bow. Ilavrita is in the middle of the five varshas[Probably referring to Hiranyaka, Ramyaka, Ilavrita, Hari and Ketumala.]. A varsha that is towards the
north surpasses one to its south in qualities like lifespan, stature, health, dharma, kama and artha. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Beings live together in these varshas. O great king! The earth is thus covered with mountains.
The large mountain Hemakuta also has the name of Kailasa. O king! Vaishravana[Vishrava's son, Kubera.] sports there with the
guhyakas. To the north of Kailasa and near Mount Mainaka, there is the large and divine Mount Manimaya, with a
golden peak. To its side[There is a typo in the Critical edition's text here. It should read parshva (side) instead of Partha.], there is the large, divine, auspicious and beautiful Vindusara[A lake.], with golden sand. After
having seen Ganga Bhagirathi, King Bhagiratha lived there for many years. There are many sacrificial stakes made
out of gems there and sanctuaries made out of gold. The immensely famous one with a thousand eyes[Indra.] attained
salvation there. The creator Bhutapati[Literally the lord of all beings, Shiva.], the eternal lord of all beings, supreme in his energy, is worshipped there,
surrounded by his followers. Nara, Narayana, Brahma, Manu and Sthanu[Shiva.], as the fifth, are always present there.
The goddess with the three flows[Ganga.] first showed herself there. She emerged from Brahma's world and divided herself into seven streams-Vasvokasara, Nalini, the sin-cleansing Sarasvati, Jambunadi[Nadi means river.], Sita, Ganga and Sindhu as
the seventh. She is inconceivable and divine and the lord himself[Probably meaning Shiva.]thought of ways of dividing her. At the end of a
yuga, it is there that sacrifices have been performed on a thousand occasions. The Sarasvati can be seen sometimes
and sometimes she is invisible. Ganga, with the seven flows, is thus famous in the three worlds.

'"The rakshasas live on Himavat, the guhyakas on Hemakuta. The sarpas, the nagas[Sarpas are snakes, nagas are serpents. Unlike sarpas, nagas have semi-divine qualities. They can assume any
form at will and dwell in a separate nether world.], the nishadas and those
rich in austerities live on Gokarna. Shveta mountain is said to be the abode of gods and asuras. O king! The gandharvas live on Mount Nishadha and brahmarshis on Nila. O great king! Shringavat is where the ancestors wander
around. O great king! These are the divisions into seven varshas. Diverse types of mobile and immobile beings are
placed in them. Different types of prosperity, divine and human, can be seen in them. This is incapable of being
described. But those who desire their own welfare, have faith in them. O king! You asked me about the divine region that is in the form of a hare and I have told you. On two sides of the hare, to the north and to the south, there
are two varshas. The ears[Of the hare.] are Nagadvipa and Kashyapadvipa. O king! The head is the beautiful Mount Malaya,
with the hue of copper. This is the second part of the dvipa that has the shape of a hare."
