Arjuna asked, "In ancient times, how did it happen that Agni and Soma came together? O Madhusudana! I
have a doubt about this. Dispel it."

'The illustrious one replied, "O descendant of the Pandu lineage! In this connection, there is an ancient account.
O Partha! This concerns what was generated from my own energy. Listen with single-minded attention. When four
thousand yugas are over, the time for cleansing arrives. All creatures, mobile and immobile, are destroyed and
merge into the unmanifest. Light, earth and wind vanish. There is blind darkness everywhere and the world is covered in water. When everything is enveloped in this fashion, nothing other than the unmanifest exists. There is no
night, nor day. There is no existence, or non-existence. There is no manifest, or unmanifest. In this state, Narayana
is the refuge of qualities. He is without destruction. He is without old age. He is incapable of being grasped by the
senses. He is without birth. He is truth. He is beyond the attributes of injury and gain. He is indestructible, immutable and immortal. He is without form, but pervades everything. In that darkness, he is the eternal Purusha who
undertakes everything. The undecaying Hari then manifests himself. These are the signs then. There is no day. Nor
is there night. There is no existence. Nor is there non-existence. In the beginning, there was only darkness everywhere in the universe. This darkness is spoken of as the mother of the universe. Purusha was born from that darkness. Brahma, born from the lotus, was generated from Purusha. Having been created, this being wished to create
subjects and created Agni and Soma from his eyes. After this, the various categories of creatures were generated,
progressively subjects like brahmanas and kshatriyas. Soma is the same as Brahma and Brahma is the same as
brahmanas. Agni is nothing but the kshatriyas and the brahmanas were more powerful than the kshatriyas. Why
did this happen? This is an evident attribute of the worlds. Everything was created after the brahmanas, not before
them. Oblations are offered into the blazing Agni. After having created the various categories of beings, Brahma
established these creatures, so that the three worlds might be held up. The mantras speak about this. 'O Agni! For
the benefit of the universe, you are the one who receives the oblations at sacrifices. You are the one who is engaged
in the welfare of gods, men and the worlds. There are signs for this. O Agni! In the universe, you are the one who
receives the oblations at sacrifices. You are the one who is engaged in the welfare of gods, men and the universe. O
Agni! You are truly the one who offers oblations and performs sacrifices.' Agni is Brahma. No oblations can be
offered without mantras. There can be no austerities without someone to undertake them. Oblations are offered
with mantras and worship. 'O Agni! The gods and men have appointed you as the receiver of oblations.' There are
men who have been given the right to offer oblations. For kshatriyas, vaishyas and all the twice-born categories, it
is only brahmanas who can officiate at sacrifices. That is the reason brahmanas are like Agni. They uphold sacrifices. The gods are satisfied through sacrifices. The gods sustain the earth. There are hundreds of ways to be a
brahmana. If a learned person gives food to the mouth of a brahmana, that is like offering kindling and oblations
into a fire. The learned have thus come to think of brahmanas as Agni. Since it penetrates all creatures and sustains
life, Agni is also Vishnu. There is a shloka that Sanatkumara sung about this. 'In creating the universe, Brahma
created them first. Through chanting about the brahman, those who are born as brahmanas become immortal and
are established in the firmament and in heaven. The intelligence, speech, acts, faith and austerities of brahmanas
hold up the earth and the sky, like great amrita sustaining one during the cold season. There is no dharma superior
to the truth. There is no preceptor equal to the mother. In this world and in the next, there is nothing superior to a
brahmana.' In a kingdom where brahmanas are without a means of subsistence, bulls do not grow or bear burdens,
milk does not produce anything when it is churned and property comes under the possession of bandits. The Vedas,
the Puranas and the histories state that brahmanas emerged from Narayana's mouth. They are in the atmans of
everything. They are in all doers. They are in all creatures. It is said that when the god who is the granter of boons
had restrained his speech, the brahmanas emerged first and all the other varnas were born later. That is the reason
the brahmanas are superior to gods and asuras. In ancient times, I myself created gods, asuras and maharshis and
established brahmanas as superior, so that they could restrain other creatures.

'"Because he oppressed Ahalya, Indra was cursed by Goutama and got a tawny beard. Through Koushika's
curse,  Indra  lost  his  testicles  and  obtained  a  ram's  testicles[Ahalya was the sage Goutama's wife. There are different versions about the way Indra seduced her. Both Indra
and Ahalya were cursed. In different versions of the curse, Indra got a tawny beard, lost his testicles and got one
thousand vaginas all over his body (later changed to eyes). Koushika does not fit with Goutama. Koushika probably refers to Vishvamitra, who told Rama and Lakshmana the Ahalya story. But Vishvamitra didn't curse Indra.].  When  Chyavana  wished  to  give  shares  to  the
Ashvins, Purandara, the wielder of the vajra, tried to prevent this and his arms were paralysed[This incident has been described in Section 33 (Volume 3). The Ashvins restored Chyavana's youth and at King
Sharyati's sacrifice, Chyavana wished to ensure that they were given a share in the sacrificial offerings. When
Indra resisted, Chyavana paralysed Indra's arms.]. When his sacrifice was destroyed, Daksha was overcome by great rage. He performed austerities again and obtained another eye
on his forehead, to replace the one that had been uprooted by Rudra. When Rudra consecrated himself and advanced for the destruction of Tripura, Ushanas[Shukracharya, the preceptor of the demons.] uprooted a strand from his matted hair and hurled it down. Serpents were generated from this. Oppressed  by  these serpents, his neck turned blue[There are other stories, like the churning of the ocean, for Shiva's throat turning blue.].  Earlier,  in Svyambhuva
manvantara, Narayana had seized his throat with his hand and that is how it had turned blue. To obtain amrita, Brihaspati, born in the Angiras lineage, wished to perform purashcharana[Preparatory rites. This incident occurred at the time of the churning of the ocean and Brihaspati cursed the
ocean.]. However, when he tried to touch the water, it turned dirty. Brihaspati was enraged and cursed the water. 'When I tried to touch you, you did not show me
your favours and your water turned filthy. Therefore, from now on, you will be dirty and will be populated by fish,
makaras, other fish, turtles and aquatic creatures.' Since then, the waters of the ocean have been thus infested.

'"Vishvarupa, Tvashtri's son, was the priest of the gods. But his mother was related to the asuras[His mother was the asura lady Rachana. Trishira means one with three heads.]. Outwardly,
he offered shares to the gods. However, secretly, he offered shares to the asuras. With Hiranyakashipu at the forefront, the asuras went to their sister, Vishvarupa's mother, and asked for a boon. 'O sister! Your son, Vishvarupa,
also known as Trishira, is Tvashtri's son. As a priest of the gods, he outwardly gives them their shares and only
gives us a share privately. Because of this, the gods are prospering and we are suffering. You should restrain him,
so that he also serves us.' At that time, Vishvarupa was in the forest of Nandana. His mother went to him and said,
'O son! Why are you making the side of the enemy prosper and why are you destroying your maternal side? You
should not act in this way.' Unable to ignore his mother's words, Vishvarupa honoured her and went over to Hiranyakashipu. At this, Hiranyakashipu was cursed by Vasishtha, Hiranygarbha's son[Vasishtha was Brahma's (Hiranyagarbha's) son. Earlier, Vasishtha used to be Hiranyakashipu's priest. When
Vishvarupa arrived, Hiranyakashipu dismissed Vasishtha.]. 'Since you have appointed
someone else to offer the oblations, this sacrifice will not be completed. A being, the like of whom has never been
born before, will slay you.' Hiranyakashipu was slain because of this curse. To make his mother's side prosper,
Vishvarupa engaged in austerities. To make him desist from his vows, Indra and Agni sent beautiful apsaras. On
seeing them, his mind was agitated and within a short period of time, he became attached to those apsaras. Realizing that he had become attached to them, the apsaras said, 'We will not remain here any more. We will return to the
place we have come from.' Tvashtri's son replied, 'Where will you go? Stay here with me and I will do what
brings you benefit.' They answered, 'We are celestial women, the apsaras. In earlier times, we obtained boons from
Indra and the powerful Vishnu.' At this, Vishvarupa replied, 'Indra and the gods will no longer exist.' He chanted a
mantra and meditated. Because of the mantra, Trishira began to grow. In all the worlds, the brahmanas offered
oblations and soma at sacrifices. With one mouth, he drank the soma. With a second mouth, he ate the oblations.
With a third mouth, he sapped the energy of Indra and the gods. Indra saw that because he was drinking the soma,
every limb of his body was growing. He began to worry. Indra and the gods went to Brahma and said, 'Vishvarupa
is drinking all the soma offered as oblations at sacrifices. We no longer obtain our shares. The side of the asuras is
prospering and we are decaying. O creator! You should arrange for our welfare.' Brahma replied, 'The rishi Dadhicha of the Bhargava lineage is tormenting himself through austerities. Go and seek a boon from him, so that he
gives up his body. Use his bones to construct a vajra.' The gods went to the place where the illustrious rishi Dadhicha was tormenting himself through austerities. Indra and the gods went to him and said, 'O illustrious one! We
hope your austerities are proceeding well, without any hindrances.' Dadhicha replied, 'Welcome. What can I do for
you? I will do what you ask me to.' They answered, 'O illustrious one! For the welfare of the worlds, you should
cast aside your body.' Dadhicha was a great yogi. Joy and misery were the same to him and he was not distressed
at this. He controlled his atman and gave up his body. When he had merged into the paramatman, Dhatri[The architect of the gods, Vishvakarma.] collected his bones and constructed the vajra. The invincible vajra was created with the bones of a brahmana and
Vishnu penetrated it. Using this, Indra slew Vishvarupa and severed his head. Thereafter, when the body of Vishvarupa, Tvashtri's son, was churned, the energy gave birth to Vritra and Indra also killed Vritra. However, Indra
was frightened because he had killed two brahmanas[Both Vishvarupa and Vritra were descended from brahmanas.]. He gave up the kingdom of heaven. He entered a lotus
stalk that grew in the cool waters of Lake Manasa. Using the powers of anima obtained through yoga, he became
minute and penetrated the fibres of the lotus. Shachi's consort, the protector of the three worlds, disappeared, terrified at having killed brahmanas. When the lord of the universe vanished, the gods were enveloped in rajas and
tamas. Mantras were no longer chanted. Maharshis were attacked by rakshasas. The sons of the brahman disappeared. The worlds were without an Indra. Weakened, they were easily attacked. At this, the gods and the rishis
instated  Nahusha,  the  son  of  Ayusha,  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  There  were  five  hundred  blazing  stars  on
Nahusha's forehead and they robbed everyone of energy. He began to rule in heaven. The worlds regained their
natural  state  of  comfort.  Nahusha  said,  'Everything  that  Shakra  used  to  enjoy  has  presented  itself  before  me.
Shachi is the only exception.' Having said this, he went to Shachi and said, 'O extremely beautiful one! I am the
Indra of the gods now and you should serve me.' Shachi replied, 'You are naturally devoted to dharma and you
have also been born in the lunar dynasty. You should not oppress someone else's wife.' Nahusha said, 'I have obtained the title of Indra. I have obtained his kingdom and there is no adharma in enjoying anything that Indra used
to enjoy.' She replied, 'There is a vow that I am observing now. Within a few days, after the vow has been completed, I will come to you.' When he was thus addressed by Shachi, Nahusha departed. Shachi was afflicted by
grief. She wished to see her husband and was frightened of being seized by Nahusha. She went to Brihaspati. On
seeing her approach, Brihaspati discerned through his meditations that she wished to ensure her husband's objectives. Brihaspati said, 'Because of the vow and austerities you have observed, you should summon the goddess
Upashruti, the granter of boons. She will show Indra to you.' She engaged in those great rituals and using mantras,
summoned the goddess Upashruti, the granter of boons. Upashruti arrived before Shachi and said, 'Since you have
summoned me, I have come here. What can I do to please you?' Bowing her head down, Shachi replied, 'O illustrious one! You should show me my husband. It is my view that you are the truth.' He took her to Lake Manasa
and showed her Indra, hidden in the fibres of the lotus. Seeing that his wife was pale and distressed, he began to
think. 'This is a great misery that has presented itself before me. My possessions have been destroyed and I confront this calamity.' Indra asked her, 'How are you?' She replied, 'Nahusha has summoned me and I have only obtained the pledge of some time.' Indra said, 'Go. Speak these words to Nahusha. Tell him that he should come to
you on a vehicle that has not been used before. Let him ascend a vehicle to which rishis have been yoked. Tell him
that this is the desire in your mind, that there should be a vehicle that is superior to those possessed by Indra and
that he should act so as to please you.' Thus addressed, she left cheerfully. Indra again entered the fibres of the lotus. On seeing that Indrani[Shachi.] had returned, Nahusha told her that the time period was over. Shachi repeated what
Shakra had asked her to. He ascended a vehicle yoked to maharshis and came to Shachi. Agastya, born in a jar and
the son of Maitravaruna, saw Nahusha being dragged by those maharshis. When he was touched by him with the
foot[There is a slight error in the sense that Agastya was also one of the maharshis bearing the vehicle. Hence, it is
obvious that Agastya would have seen this. While Agastya was bearing the vehicle, Nahusha inadvertently
touched him with his foot.], he told Nahusha, 'You have performed a wicked act and will fall down on earth. As long as the earth and
the mountains exist, you will be a snake.' As soon as the maharshi spoke these words, he fell down. The three
worlds were again without an Indra. For the sake of an Indra, the gods and the rishis went to the illustrious Vishnu.
They said 'O illustrious one! You should save Indra from the sin of having killed brahmanas.' The granter of boons
replied, 'Let Shakra perform a horse sacrifice in Vishnu's honour. He will then regain his status.' The gods and the
rishis searched for Indra, but could not find him. They went to Shachi and said, 'O beautiful one! Bring Indra
here.' She again went to the lake. Indra arose from the lake and went before Brihaspati. For Shakra's sake, Brihaspati arranged for a great horse sacrifice. Instead of a horse, a black antelope was used and Indra, the lord of the
Maruts, was made to ride this. In this way, Brihaspati got his old state back for him. The king of the gods was
cleansed of sin. Praised by the gods and the rishis, he was established in heaven. The sin of killing a brahmana was
divided into four parts and vested in women, fire, trees and cattle. Indra's energy was thus extended through a
brahmana. He could slay his enemies and also regain his own status.

'"In ancient times, maharshi Bharadvaja was on the banks of the Ganga that courses through the sky. At that
time, he was touched by one of Vishnu's three feet[In his vamana (dwarf) incarnation, Vishnu covered the three worlds in three steps. What is meant is that one of
those steps was placed there.]. Bharadvaja picked up some water in his hand and struck
him in the chest with this. This left a mark[The srivatsa mark on Vishnu's chest.]. Maharshi Bhrigu cursed Agni that he would devour everything.
Aditi cooked some food for the gods, so that on eating it, they would be able to kill the asuras. Having completed a
vow, Budha appeared before Aditi and asked for some alms. Aditi thought that no one should be given alms before
the gods had eaten. At being refused alms, Budha, who possessed the brahman inside him, was enraged. He cursed
her that when Vivasvat would have the second birth in Aditi's womb in the form of an egg, he would cause her
pain[There are twelve Adityas who are the sons of Aditi. The list varies. In earlier lists, Aditi only had seven sons
who were born first. Martanda, the eighth son, was born later. Martanda also means a dead or lifeless egg.]. This form of Vivasvat, Martanda, is the god of funeral ceremonies.

'"Daksha had sixty daughters. He gave thirteen to Kashyapa, ten to Dharma, ten to Manu and twenty-seven to
the moon. These twenty-seven, known as nakshatras, were equal. But Soma loved Rohini the most. The other
wives were jealous. They went to their father and censured Soma. 'O illustrious one! All of us are equal in beauty.
But he loves Rohini more.' They informed Daksha about this disrespect. Daksha cursed King Soma that tuberculosis would penetrate him. Thus struck by tuberculosis he went to Daksha. Daksha told him, 'Treat them all equally.'

The rishis saw that Soma was afflicted by tuberculosis and said, 'Towards the western directions of the ocean,
there is the tirtha known as Hiranyasara. Go and bathe there.' Soma went to the tirtha known as Hiranyasara. He
went and bathed there. Having bathed, he was cleansed from his sin. Since that tirtha was illuminated by Soma, the
tirtha has come to be famous by the name of Prabhasa[Prabbasa means something that is bright and has been lit up. Prabhasa is near Dvaraka.]. However, because of the curse, Soma still suffers from
the inner trait of waning. On the night of the full moon, his complete form can be seen and is then gradually covered by lines of darkness. Even when he is sparkling, a dark sign can be seen on him, with the mark of a hare[Because of the taint that was left. A hare is sbasba and the moon is known as Shashi or Shashanka.].

'"Maharshi Sthulashira went to the northern directions of Meru and tormented himself through austerities there.
While he tormented himself through austerities there, an auspicious breeze began to blow. That breeze bore all
kinds of fragrant scents and touched his body. His body was tormented because of those austerities. It was lean.
Fanned by the breeze, his heart was satisfied. While he was fanned in this way, to satisfy him and show their beautiful selves, the trees blossomed out in flowers. He  cursed  them,  'You  will  not  be  able  to  bear  flowers  all  the
time[The trees were cursed because they were jealous of the wind.].' In ancient times, for the welfare of the worlds, Narayana became a maharshi named Vadavamukha. He
tormented himself through austerities in Meru and summoned the ocean there. Since it did not arrive when it had
been summoned, through the heat of his body, the rishi stilled the waters of the ocean. He cursed them and said,
'Your water will be salty, like the sweat from a body. Your water will be sweet only when Vadavamukha drinks
it[Vadavamukha is the horse-headed subterranean fire.].' Since that day, the waters of the ocean cannot be drunk, except by the one known as Vadavamukha.

'"Uma,  the  daughter  of  the  Himalaya  mountains,  desired  Rudra.  Maharshi  Bhrigu  appeared  before  the  Himalayas and said, 'Give your daughter, Uma, to me.' The Himalayas replied, 'I have already chosen Rudra as a
groom.' Bhrigu said, 'You have refused me your beautiful daughter. Therefore, you will no longer be full of jewels.' Even today, the words of the rishi remain true. These are the different kinds of greatness of brahmanas. It is
through the benedictions of brahmanas that kshatriyas are able to look upon this eternal and undecaying earth as
their wife and are able to enjoy her. It is they who hold up the universe."'
