Yudhishthira asked, "Who deserves to be worshipped? Who should one bow down to? What should one's conduct
be,  and  towards  whom?  O  grandfather!  What  kind  of  conduct,  and  towards  whom,  does  not  lead  to
suffering?"

'Bhishma replied, "The subjugation of brahmanas makes the gods suffer. O Yudhishthira! One does not suffer if
one bows down before brahmanas. They must be worshipped. One should bow down before them. They should be
treated like one's own sons. Those learned ones are the ones who hold up all the worlds. For all the worlds, the
brahmanas are the great bridges of dharma. Their happiness is in renouncing riches and in restraining speech. They
are firm in their vows and lay down ordinances that are agreeable to creatures. Those illustrious ones are the ones
who formulate the sacred texts for the worlds. They possess the wealth of austerities. Words always constitute their
great strength. Their power flows from dharma. They possess the subtle insight of dharma. They desire dharma and
are established in dharma. Their good deeds are the bridges of dharma. All the four kinds of subjects[Born from wombs, born from eggs, born from sweat and plants and trees.] depend on
them for life. They lead along the path that everyone should follow. They are the conveyors of the eternal sacrifices. They always bear the burdens of fathers, grandfathers and preceptors. Like well-trained cattle, they do not
waver under the burden, even on uneven terrain. They are ahead of ancestors, gods and guests. They deserve the
first share of havya and kavya. By eating the food, they save the worlds from great fear. They are lamps for all the
worlds. They are eyes, even for those who possess sight. They are subtle in their insight and accomplished. They
are the stores of all kinds of artisanship. They know  about the progress  of  all creatures. They think about the
progress of adhyatma. They know about the beginning, the middle and the end and are devoid of any sense of
doubt. They know about what is superior and inferior. They go to the supreme destination. They are emancipated
and have cleansed all sins. They are beyond the opposite pairs of sentiments and are without any possessions. They
deserve to be honoured and are always respected. Those great-souled ones possess knowledge. They treat sandalwood paste and mud and filth equally. They are indifferent to what constitutes food and what does not constitute
food. They regard fine cloth, coarse cloth, silk and hides equally. They can remain for many days, without eating
anything. They can control their senses and dry up their bodies in studying. They can turn those who aren't divinities into gods and turn gods into those who aren't divinities. If they are enraged, they can create other worlds and
guardians of the worlds. Because of the curse of those greatsouled ones, the waters of the ocean can no longer be
drunk. The fire of their rage has still not been pacified in Dandaka. They represent gods among the gods. They are
the reason among all reasons. They are the supreme proof among all proofs. Which learned person can disregard
them? Among them, the aged and the young deserve all kinds of honours. They are superior because of their austerities and learning and they revere each other. An ignorant brahmana is also like a god and can be a great source
of purification. A learned one is a greater god and is like a full ocean. Whether ignorant or learned, a brahmana is
like a great divinity. This is like Agni being a great divinity, whether sanctified by mantras or not. An energetic fire
is not tainted, even if it burns in the cremation ground. Clarified butter is also as beautiful, whether used in a sacrifice or not. A brahmana must always be revered, even if he is engaged in all kinds of acts that aren't beneficial.
Know that he is like a supreme divinity."'
