Sanjaya said, "O king! Duryodhana roared repeatedly. Vasudeva angrily spoke these words to Yudhishthira. 'O
Yudhishthira! In this encounter, if he had named you, Arjuna, Nakula or Sahadeva, what would have happened? O
king! How could you show rashness like this? "If you can kill any one of us, you will be king!" O king! With the
desire of killing Bhimasena, for thirteen years he has practised against a man made out of iron[Duryodhana has practised against an iron statue.]. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! How will our task be accomplished? O supreme among kings! Because of compassion, you have
committed an act of rashness. With the exception of Vrikodara, I do not see anyone who can fight against him in
the encounter and Partha has not made a great deal of effort[Bhima has not practised as much as Duryodhana has.]. O lord of the earth! It is almost as if the ancient and
unequal gambling match between you and Shakuni is being enacted again. Bhima is powerful and capable, but
King Suyodhana is accomplished. O king! When there is a contest between strength and skill, skill is always superior. O king! You have placed such an enemy on an even path. You have also placed us in an extremely difficult
and hazardous state. Having vanquished all the enemies and with only a single foe remaining, who desires to give
that up in a single act of gambling? I do not see the man in this world who can fight, with a club in his hand in an
encounter, against Duryodhana, supreme among men, especially because he is skilled. With a club in the hand in a
battle, I do not think Phalguna, Madri's sons or you are capable. How did you tell the enemy to fight with a club?

"O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If you kill any one of us, you will be the king!" Even if Vrikodara fights
against him, our victory is not certain, especially not in a fair encounter. He is extremely strong and skilled.' Bhi-
ma said, 'O Madhusudana! O descendant of the Yadu lineage! Do not grieve. Even if it is extremely difficult, I will
bring an end to this enmity today. There is no doubt that I will kill Suyodhana in the battle. O Krishna! It is evident
that Dharmaraja's victory is certain. In qualities, this club of mine is one-and-a-half times heavier than that of
Dhritarashtra's son. O Madhava! Do not be distressed. I can cheerfully fight with the three worlds, including the
immortals, even if they are armed with many weapons, not to speak of Suyodhana.' When Vrikodara spoke these
words, Vasudeva joyfully honoured him and spoke these words. 'O mighty-armed one! Depending on you, there is
no doubt that Dharmaraja Yudhishthira will slay his enemies and obtain his blazing prosperity. All the sons of
Dhritarashtra have been killed by you in the battle. You have brought down kings, princes and elephants. O descendant of the Pandu lineage! Kalingas, Magadhas, those from the east, Gandharas and Kurus have clashed
against you in the great battle and have been slain. O Kounteya! Having also slain Duryodhana, bestow the earth,
with all its oceans, to Dharmaraja, like Vishnu to Shachi's lord[Shachi's lord (husband) is Indra, that is, just as Vishnu gave the lordship
of the three worlds to Indra.]. Having obtained you in the battle, Dhritarashtra's wicked son will be destroyed. Having shattered the bones of his thigh, you will accomplish your pledge[Bhima had taken a vow that he would break Duryodhana's thigh in the
battle.]. O
Partha! However, you must always fight carefully with Dhritarashtra's son. He is skilled and strong and always
revels in a fight.' O king! At this, Satyaki honoured Pandava. The eloquent Madhava[Meaning Satyaki.] honoured him in various
ways. With Dharmaraja at the forefront, all the Panchalas and the Pandaveyas applauded Bhimasena's words.

' "Bhima, terrible in his strength, spoke these words to Yudhishthira, who was stationed amidst the Srinjayas,
like the scorching sun. 'I am interested in establishing you and fighting this one in the battle. This worst of men is
not capable of defeating me in the encounter. Today, I will free myself of the terrible anger that is lodged in my
heart against Suyodhana, Dhritarashtra's son. I will be like Arjuna, offering Khandava to Agni. O Pandava! Today,
I will uproot the stake that is lodged in your heart. O king! Today, I will kill this wicked one with my club. Be happy. O unblemished one! Today, I will regain your garland of fame. Today, Suyodhana will be freed of his life, his
prosperity and his kingdom. Today, King Dhritarashtra will hear that his son has been killed by me and remember
all the evil deeds he did because of Shakuni's advice.' Having spoken thus, the valiant and best of the Bharata lineage raised his club up and stationed himself for battle, like Shakra challenging Vritra. Dhritarashtra's immensely
strong son advanced alone to the clash, like an elephant that has been separated from the herd. At this, the Pandavas were delighted. They saw him raise his club, like the summit of Kailasa.

' "O king! Bhimasena spoke these words to Duryodhana. 'Remember all the evil deeds that King Dhritarashtra
and you have done towards us and what happened in Varanavata[This is a reference to the attempt to burn the Pandavas down, described
in Section 8 (Volume 1).]. Droupadi was in her season and was oppressed
in the midst of the assembly hall. Through Shakuni's advice, the king was vanquished in the gambling match. O
evil-souled one! You have performed many other wicked deeds towards the innocent Parthas. Behold the grave
consequences of that. It is because of your deeds that Gangeya, best of the Bharata lineage and a grandfather to all
of us, has been brought down and is lying down on a bed of arrows. Drona has been slain. Karna has been slain,
and so has the powerful Shalya. Shakuni, the creator of the enmity, has also been killed in the battle. Your brave
brothers and sons have been killed, together with the soldiers. Brave kings, who did not retreat from the battle,
have been slain. Many other bulls among kshatriyas have been killed. The wicked Pratikami, who seized Droupadi
by the hair, has been slain[Pratikami is a messenger. This isn't a proper name. In Section 27 (Volume 2), after the gambling match, the Pratikami was sent to summon
Droupadi to the assembly hall. However, the Pratikami didn't seize
Droupadi by the hair, Duhshasana did. Nor, before this, have we been
told anything about the Pratikami being killed.]. You alone are left, destroyer of your lineage and worst among men. There is no doubt
that I will slay you with the club today. O king! I will destroy all your insolence in the encounter today and your
hopes of the kingdom. O king! I will repay the grave misdeeds towards the Pandavas.' Duryodhana replied, 'What
is the need to speak a lot? Fight with me now. O Vrikodara! I will today destroy your love for fighting. O wicked
one! Do you not see me, stationed for the encounter with a club? I have grasped a gigantic club that is like a summit of the Himalayas. O wicked one! When I wield the club today, where is the enemy who wishes to slay me? If it
is a fair fight, not even the god Purandara can do that. O Kounteya! Do not roar in vain, like a cloud without water,
during the autumn. Show me your strength in the battle today, everything that you possess.' On hearing his words,
all the Panchalas and the Srinjayas honoured his words, desiring victory. O king! The men were like crazy elephants and clapped their hands repeatedly, delighting King Duryodhana. The elephants there trumpeted and the
horses neighed. Desiring victory, the weapons of the Pandavas seemed to blaze." '
