Janamejaya asked, 'While those foremost among men lived in the forest, their bodies lean from the cold, the heat,
the wind and the sun, they arrived at the lake and the sacred wood[The Kamyaka forest.]. What did the Parthas do next?'

Vaishampayana said, 'When Pandu's sons arrived at the lake, they dismissed their people and gave them instructions. They then roamed through beautiful forests and mountains and regions that were along rivers. When those
brave ones dwelt there, studying and engaged in austerities, many venerable ones, learned in the Vedas, came to
visit them. Those foremost among men showed them homage. One day, a brahmana arrived to visit the Kurus. He
was skilled in recounting tales. Having spent some time, he went as he willed to visit the king who was Vichitravirya's son[That is, Dhritarashtra.]. Having been honoured by the aged king, supreme among the Kurus, he seated himself. On being
asked, he began to recount stories about the sons of Dharma, Anila and Indra, and the twins[That is, the Pandavas.]. They were in difficulties. They were lean in their bodies from the wind and the heat. They were almost prostrate through terrible
misery. Though she had the brave ones for her protectors, Krishna was like one without a protector and was overwhelmed through suffering.

'On hearing his words, the king who was Vichitravirya's son was disturbed and was flooded with compassion.
He had learnt that the sons and grandsons of a king had been immersed in a river of difficulties in the forest. His
inner soul was full of misery. His sighs were full of tears shed for the Parthas. He thought that he himself was responsible for everything. He collected himself in some fashion and spoke these words. "Dharmaraja is the eldest of
my sons. How is it that the truthful Ajatashatru, pure and devoted to the conduct of aryas, must now sleep on the
ground? He earlier used to sleep on beds covered with soft ranku[Ranku is a kind of antelope.] skin. He is like Indra and used to be awoken
every day by the praises of minstrels and bards. Before night is over, he is now awoken from the bare ground by
flocks of birds. Vrikodara is lean in the body from the wind and the sun. His limbs are full of wrath. His limbs do
not deserve this. Before Krishna's eyes, how does he sleep on the earth, on the surface of the ground? Arjuna is
delicate and intelligent. He is under the control of the king who is Dharma's son. But yet, with all his limbs in pain,
it is certain that he will not sleep at night, overcome by anger. On seeing the twins, Krishna, Yudhishthira and Bhi-
ma, devoid of happiness, he will sigh like an energetic serpent and it is certain that he will not sleep at night, overcome by anger. Though deserving of happiness, the twins are wretched. Their forms are the equal of the gods. It is
certain that they are disturbed and will spend the nights awake, restrained only because of dharma and truth. The
son of the wind-god is strong and is equal to the wind-god in strength. It is certain that his terrible energy is restrained by dharma. It is certain that he sighs, suffering this in rage. Tossing and turning on the ground, he desires
the death of my sons. He is restrained by truth and dharma. He is waiting for the time when he can overcome them
in battle. Ajatashatru was vanquished through deceit and Duhshasana spoke harsh words to him then. They must
have penetrated Vrikodara's limbs and consumed his inside, like a fire burns kindling. Dharma's son never thinks
about evil deeds. Dhananjaya always follows him. But dwelling in the forest, Bhima's anger is increasing, like a
fire fanned by the wind. He is being tormented by that rage. The brave one is kneading one hand with the other. He
is heaving terrible and warm sighs, as if he wants to burn down my sons and grandsons. The wielder of the Gandi-
va and Vrikodara are like the fire at the time of destruction. With arrows that blaze like thunder, they leave no
residue from the armies of enemies. Duryodhana, Shakuni, the son of the suta[Karna.] and the extremely evil-minded
Duhshasana only saw the honey. They did not see the fall, nor Vrikodara and Dhananjaya. Having performed good
or evil deeds, a man awaits the fruits of the deed that has been done. But the fruits often bind him. How can a man
be freed from that? When the field has been ploughed well and the seed has been sown, when the god has rained at
the right time, has it ever been seen that there is no fruit? I think that it is not possible without destiny. The Pandavas are always devoted to that which is right. But the one who knows the minds of dice[Shakuni.] was not fair. Attached
to my evil sons, neither was I. That became the fire of destruction for the Kurus. It is certain that the wind will
blow, even if it is not instructed. It is certain that a woman who has conceived will give birth to offspring. It is certain that dawn signals the death of night and that evening signals the death of the day. Regardless of the acts performed by us and those performed by others, regardless of riches donated by men, when it comes to obtaining the
fruits, what are the fruits one obtains? If nothing remains of deeds, why perform them? We protect our riches so
that they are not divided, do not drain off, and are not eroded. If they are not protected, they would divide into a
hundred parts. But it is certain that deeds are not destroyed in this world. Behold Dhananjaya's valour. From the
forest, he went to Shakra's world. He obtained divine weapons of four kinds[The four types of weapons are amukta (those not released, like swords), mukta (those released, like chakras),
muktamukta (those that can be released or not released, like spears) and yantramukta (those released from a machine or implement, like arrows).]. Having obtained the knowledge, he
again returned to this world. Where is the man who has gone to heaven in his own body and desires to return
again, unless he has seen the innumerable Kurus on the point of death, overcome by destiny? Arjuna Savyasachi is
the wielder of the bow. The bow named Gandiva is the essence of the world. There are celestial weapons in his
possession. Who can withstand the energy of those three[Arjuna, Gandiva and the celestial weapons.]?" Having secretly heard these words of the king, Duryodhana and Soubala[Subala's son, Shakuni.] were disturbed. They went to Karna and told him everything. The one with limited intelligence[Duryodhana.] was unhappy at what he had heard.'
