'Dhritarashtra asked, "O Sanjaya! Arjuna's brave son killed many maharathas in battle. How did Alambusa
counter him in the encounter? How did Subhadra's son, the destroyer of enemy heroes, fight with Rishyashringa's
son? Tell me all this in detail, exactly as it occurred in the course of the battle. O Sanjaya! What did Dhananjaya
do against my soldiers, and Bhima, foremost among strong ones, rakshasa Ghatotkacha, Nakula, Sahadeva and
maharatha Satyaki? O Sanjaya! Tell me all this, because you are skilled."

'Sanjaya replied, "O venerable one! I will later tell you about the battle that took place between the Indra among
the rakshasas and Subhadra's son. It made the body hair stand up. I will also recount to you the valour of Arjuna
and Pandava Bhimasena in the battle and that of Nakula and Sahadeva in the encounter. I will also tell you about
the extraordinary and wonderful deeds of those on your side, performed without fear and with Bhishma and Drona
at the forefront. In that encounter against maharatha Abhimanyu, Alambusa roared extremely loudly. He advanced,
roaring again and again, and asking him[Abhimanyu.] to wait. O king! In that battle, Subhadra's son also roared repeatedly
like a lion. He attacked the great archer who was Rishyashringa's son and was also a sworn enemy of his fathers.
The man and the rakshasa, foremost among rathas, swiftly confronted each other in battle on their respective chariots, like a god and a danava. The foremost among rakshasas was skilled in maya and Phalguna's son was skilled in
the use of divine weapons. O great king! Krishna's son used three sharp arrows to pierce Rishyashringa's son in
that battle and then again pierced him with five arrows. Alambusa became angry and pierced Krishna's son in the
chest with nine swift arrows, like forcefully striking a giant elephant with a goad. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that battle, the traveller of the night, swift in action, used a thousand arrows to oppress Arjuna's son. Abhimanyu became angry. He shot nine sharp arrows with drooping tufts at the rakshasa's giant chest. They quickly
pierced his body and penetrated his inner organs. O king! The limbs of that supreme among rakshasas were mangled and he was as beautiful as a mountain with blossoming kimshukas. Bearing those gold-encrusted arrows, the
best of the rakshasas, immensely strong, was as dazzling as a flaming mountain. O great king! At this,
Rishyashringa's immensely strong son became wrathful. He enveloped Krishna's son, who was like the great Indra, with arrows. He released sharp arrows that were like Yama's staff. These pierced Abhimanyu and fell down on
the ground. Arjuna's son shot arrows that were decorated with gold. They pierced Alambusa and penetrated the
ground. In that battle, Subhadra's son used straight-tufted arrows to make the rakshasa retreat, like Shakra in a battle against Maya. Having been repulsed, the rakshasa, the scorcher of enemies, wished to kill his enemies in the
battle and resorted to his great powers of dark maya. He caused everything on the ground to be enveloped in darkness. Abhimanyu could not be seen. And those on one's own side, or that of the enemy, could not be distinguished
in that battle. On seeing that terrible and great gloom, Abhimanyu, the descendant of the Kuru lineage, invoked the
supreme weapon known as bhaskara[Bhaskara means the sun, or something that brings light.]. O lord of the earth! At this, everything in the universe again became visible. Thus, the maya of the evil-souled rakshasa was destroyed. In that encounter, the greatly valorous Indra among
rakshasas became angry. He shrouded the supreme of men with straight-tufted arrows. The rakshasa used many
other kinds of maya. But Phalguna's son, skilled in the use of all weapons and with an immeasurable soul, countered all of them. The rakshasa's maya was destroyed and he was wounded with arrows. He discarded his chariot
and fled in great fear.

'"After having defeated the rakshasa, who used deceitful means to fight, Arjuna's son began to crush your soldiers in the battle. He was like a wild king of elephants, crazy with musth, agitating a pond that was full of lotuses.
Bhishma, Shantanu's son, saw that the soldiers were being routed. He surrounded Subhadra's son with a large
number of chariots. Many brave maharathas among the sons of Dhritarashtra created a circle around him. A single
one fought against many and they struck him with firm arrows. That brave ratha was like his father in valour. He
was Vasudeva's equal in valour and strength. He was supreme among all wielders of weapons and in that battle,
performed many deeds that were like the two of them, his father and his maternal uncle[Arjuna and Krishna respectively.]. O king! Dhananjaya
began to destroy your soldiers. Wishing to rescue his son, the intolerant one arrived at the spot where he[Abhimanyu.] was
fighting with Bhishma. O king! In that battle, your father, Devavrata, attacked Partha in the encounter, like Svarbhanu[Rahu.] against the sun. O lord of the earth! With chariots, elephants and horses, your sons surrounded Bhishma
in that battle, wishing to protect him in every direction. O king! In that fashion, the Pandavas surrounded Dhananjaya. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The armoured ones engaged in a great battle.

'"O king! Sharadvata stationed himself in front of Bhishma. He pierced Arjuna with twenty-five arrows. To accomplish a pleasant task for Pandava, Satyaki attacked him, like a tiger against an elephant, and pierced him with
sharp arrows. Goutama was enraged. In return, he swiftly pierced Madhava[Satyaki.] in the chest with nine arrows that
were tufted with the feathers of herons. Shini's descendant became extremely angry at having been pierced. The
maharatha unleashed a terrible arrow at Goutama, one capable of taking his life away. On seeing it descend with
great force, as radiant as Shakra's vajra, Drona's son, driven by supreme rage, angrily sliced it down into two.
Avoiding Goutama, supreme among rathas, in that battle, Shini's descendant then attacked Drona's son in that encounter, like Rahu in the sky against the moon. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! However, Drona's son sliced
his bow into two and once his bow had been severed, oppressed him with arrows. The destroyer of enemies picked
up another bow that was capable of bearing a great burden. O great king! He struck Drona's son in the arms and
the chest with six arrows. Having been thus pierced and wounded, he lost his senses for some time. He sat down
on the floor of his chariot, using the pole of his standard for support. Having regained his senses, Drona's powerful
son angrily pierced Varshneya[Descended from the Vrishni lineage. In this context, Satyaki.] in that encounter with iron arrows. These pierced Shini's descendant and penetrated the ground, like a powerful and young snake entering a hole during the spring. In that encounter, Drona's
son roared like a lion. He used another broad-headed arrow to sever Madhava's supreme standard. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! O great king! He again unleashed a shower of arrows to envelope him, like clouds covering
the sun at the end of summer. O great king! Satyaki destroyed that net of arrows and quickly covered Drona's son
with many nets of arrows. He was like the sun that had emerged from a net of clouds. Shini's descendant, the destroyer of enemy heroes, scorched Drona's son. The immensely strong Satyaki roared and again enveloped him
with thousands of arrows. On seeing that his son was eclipsed, like the moon afflicted by Rahu, Bharadvaja's powerful son attacked Shini's descendant. O king! In that great battle, he pierced him with extremely sharp arrows, desiring to rescue his son, who was being tormented by Varshneya. In that battle, having defeated the maharatha son
of his preceptor, Satyaki then pierced Drona with twenty arrows that were completely made out of iron. Kounteya,
borne on white steeds, was immeasurable in his soul. In that encounter, the maharatha angrily attacked Drona. O
great king! In that great battle, Drona clashed against Partha and it was like Budha and Shukra[Mercury and Venus respectively.] meeting each
other in the firmament."'
