'Yudhishthira asked, "If a kshatriya wishes to defeat another kshatriya in battle, in that victory, how can one follow
dharma? I am asking you this. Please tell me."

'Bhishma replied, "When a lord of the earth has arrived in a kingdom, whether he is with aides or without aides,
he must say, 'I am your king. I will always protect you. Following dharma, pay me the taxes. Do you accept my
power?' If they accept the one who has come, all will be well. There may be virtuous ones who oppose him,
though they are not kshatriyas. O lord of men! They are committing a perverse act[Because they are not kshatriyas.] and must be restrained in
every way possible. There may be others who take up weapons because they think that the kshatriyas are incapable[Of protecting them.]. Or they may be extremely proud and think that he[The invader.] is incapable of saving himself."

'Yudhishthira asked, "How should a kshatriya king conduct himself against another kshatriya who advances
against him in battle? O grandfather! Tell me this."

'Bhishma replied, "In a battle, one must not fight against a kshatriya who is not armoured and not clad in mail.
A single one must speak to another single one, 'Release. I am hurling mine[Referring to weapons.].' If the one who advances is armoured, one must armour oneself. If the one who advances possesses soldiers, one must collect soldiers. If the one
who is fighting uses deceit, one must fight back using deceit. If he fights with adharma, one must counter him with
adharma. Horses must not be used against chariots. Chariots must advance against chariots. If the adversary is distressed, whether it is to frighten him or for the sake of victory, he must not be struck. There must not be smeared[With poison.]
or barbed arrows. These are the weapons of wicked people. One must fight for the sake of victory, not because of
anger, or a desire to kill. When two virtuous people are fighting with each other, one of them may face a hardship.
One who is wounded or one without offspring must never be struck. His weapons may be shattered. His forces
may face a difficulty. His bowstring may have been severed. His mounts may have been slain. A wounded person
must be treated in your territory, or he may be sent back to his own home. One who is not wounded must be released. That is the eternal dharma. Svayambhuva Manu said that one must fight in accordance with dharma.
Against the virtuous, the virtuous always resort to dharma and this is never destroyed. The kshatriya, who wishes
his prosperity and wins through the use of adharma, himself kills his own self. He is wicked and leads an inferior
life. It is a duty that the virtuous should defeat the wicked through the use of virtuous means. It is better to use
dharma and be killed than to triumph through evil deeds. O king! If one follows adharma, like a cow[The cow has to have a calf before it yields milk.], the fruits
are not immediate. But it follows you and burns down the roots and the branches. If one obtains prosperity through
wicked deeds, one becomes addicted to evil. Such a person thinks that there is no dharma and laughs at purity. He
is without devotion and advances towards destruction. Though he thinks he is immortal, he is bound by Varuna's
noose. Like a large and inflated leather bag, his own deeds make him expand. However, he is then destroyed from
the roots, like a tree on the banks of a river. He is shattered, like a clay pot on stone, and there is rejoicing at this.
Therefore, a lord of the earth should desire to earn victory through the use of dharma."'
