'Yudhishthira said, "The Pandavas and the Srinjayas have assembled, together with Janaradana, Yuyudhana and
Virata. O son of Gavalgana! O son of a suta! Tell us what Dhritarashtra has instructed you to say."

'Sanjaya said, "I show homage to Ajatashatru, Vrikodara, Dhananjaya, the sons of Madri, Shouri Vasudeva,
Yuyudhana, Chekitana and Virata, and also to the aged lord of Panchala, Parshata Dhrishtadyumna and
Yajnaseni[Droupadi.]. All of you listen to my words, which I speak for the welfare of the Kurus. King Dhritarashtra welcomes peace. He has asked me to swiftly yoke my chariot. If the king[Yudhishthira.], his relatives, his brothers and his sons so
desire, let the Pandavas find peace. The Parthas are endowed with all the qualities of dharma. They are steadfast,
mild and upright. They have been born in a noble lineage and are non-violent and generous. They are restrained by
shame and are determined in their deeds. Mean deeds do not befit you. O Bhimasenas[The plural has been used, since all the Pandavas are being addressed.]! Such is your spirit. Any
mean act by you would be glaring, like a spot of collyrium on a white garment. Who will knowingly commit an
evil act that is seen to bring about complete destruction? That will be sin and will lead to devastation and hell. A
victory obtained thus will be equal to a defeat. Blessed are those who act for their relatives. They are your sons,
your well-wishers and your relatives. If prosperity can be ensured for the Kurus, they are prepared to give up their
lives, which are of limited value, for your cause. O Parthas! If you subjugate the Kurus, and destroy and vanquish
all your enemies, your being alive will be equal to being dead. It is not right that you should live after killing your
kin. Who is capable of fighting with you, even if Indra and all the gods were to help? You have Keshava, Chekitana and Satyaki and are protected by Parshata's arms[The Parshata here may refer to either Drupada or Dhrishtadyumna.]. O king! But who can withstand in battle and vanquish the
Kurus, protected by Drona, Bhishma, Ashvatthama, Shalya, Kripa and the others, and protected by Radheya and
the other lords of the earth? The king who is Dhritarashtra's son has a large army. Who can withstand it, without
being killed and destroyed? Therefore, I do not see the slightest welfare, either in victory, or in defeat. Why should
the Parthas commit an act that is against dharma, like those born in low and inferior lineages? Therefore, I bow
down and seek the favours of Vasudeva and the aged lord of Panchala. With hands joined in salutation, I seek
refuge with you. How can there be safety for the Kurus and the Srinjayas? O Vasudeva! There is not a single one
of your words that Dhananjaya will fail to follow. He will give up his life, if you were to ask him. O learned one! I
am speaking to you, so that my objective is accomplished. The king[Dhritarashtra.], with Bhishma at the forefront, desires that
there should be supreme peace amongst you."'
