'Yudhishthira said, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! There is no dharma that is more evil than the dharma of
kshatriyas. The king mounts a campaign, wages a battle and kills a large number of people. What are the deeds
through which a lord of the earth can conquer the worlds? O learned one! O bull among the Bharata lineage! I am
asking you. Tell me this."

'Bhishma replied, "By chastising the wicked, by cherishing the virtuous, by performing sacrifices and by giving
gifts, kings are purified and cleansed. When kings pursue victory, they cause impediments to people. However,
having obtained victory, they make the subjects prosper again. They counter their sins through donations, sacrifices
and the strength of austerities. By showing favours to people, they increase their good deeds. One who cuts the
crops in a field seems to destroy the dry grass and grain at the same time, but he doesn't actually destroy the grain.
In that way, kings release their weapons and seem to slay everyone at the same time. However, they are saved from
all sins because they make beings flourish again. He protects the wealth of people and protects them from slaughter
and hardship at the hand of bandits. He is the granter of life, riches and happiness and is Virat. The king performs
all the sacrifices and gives fearlessness as a dakshina. Having experienced fortune, he attains Indra's world. When
he advances to fight for the cause of brahmanas, he offers his own self as the sacrificial post and his sacrifice has
an infinite amount of dakshina. He is fearless and scatters the enemy, receiving their arrows. That is the reason the
thirty gods do not see anyone superior to him on earth. As long as his limbs continue to be mangled by weapons in
battle, he continues to enjoy all the eternal worlds that yield every object of desire. As he moves around[In the battle.], blood
flows from his body and that blood cleanses him of all his sins. The pain that he has to bear from those wounds is
superior to austerities. This is what is said by those who are learned about dharma. Those who are frightened and
display their backs in a battle are the worst of men. They wish to seek refuge with the brave one, like one seeks
Parjanya for life. If a brave person comforts them and protects them from fear, people should create his image.
However, it doesn't happen like that. If they always honour him, recognizing him for what he has done, that would
be proper. But they do not act in accordance with that. People are seen to be the same, but there are great differences between them. When there is a battle, there are those who advance into the tumult of army formations. Brave
ones advance against enemy soldiers, but cowards run away, abandoning their companions, and this is not an act
that leads to heaven. O son! Do not give birth to those who are like these worst of men, those who abandon their
companions in a battle and go to the comfort of their own homes. The gods, with Indra at the forefront, cause discomfort for those who abandon their comrades and wish to save their own lives. They kill them with sticks and
stones and burn them up in mats of straw[The straight translation does not capture the nuance. The word used is
katagni and is a method of execution used against criminals. Dry grass
and straw are tied around the criminal and he is then burnt.]. Kshatriyas who behave in this way are slain like animals. It is adharma for a kshatriya to die when he is lying down on his bed, releasing bile and phlegm and lamenting piteously.
Those who are learned about ancient accounts do not praise the deed of a kshatriya who heads towards his destruction without any injuries on his body. O son! A kshatriya's death at home is not praised. It is adharma for those
who are haughty to be distressed, like those who are not proud. 'Alas, this is misery! This is unhappiness! This is
wicked. This is a sin.' With an emaciated face and with a putrid body, he laments a lot[If the kshatriya dies in his bed.]. He envies those who are
healthy and desires an instant death. Surrounded by his kin, he should create carnage in a battle. He should be severely wounded by sharp weapons. That is the kind of death a kshatriya deserves. A brave one is based on truth
and is intolerant. He penetrates the devastation of a battle. When his body is mangled by the enemy, he does not
notice it. Having been killed in a battle, he is praised and honoured by the people. He obtains greatness through his
own dharma and goes to Shakra's world. Ready to give up their lives, all warriors perform this supreme act of renunciation. A brave one does not show his back and will be with Indra in his world."'
