'Dhritarashtra asked, "O Sanjaya! How did those brave and great archers, Drona and Pandava Dhananjaya, encounter each other in that battle? Tell me. Pandava was always the beloved of Bharadvaja's intelligent son. O Sanjaya! In any encounter, the preceptor was always the beloved of Partha. Those two rathas are proud in battle and
are as fierce as lions. How did Dhananjaya and Bharadvaja's son clash against each other in the encounter?"

'Sanjaya replied, "In a battle, Drona does not know Partha as someone who is dear to himself. Placing the dharma of kshatriyas at the forefront, Partha does not acknowledge a preceptor in an encounter. O king! Kshatriyas do
not avoid each other in an encounter. Without any fear, they fight with their fathers and their brothers. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that battle, Partha pierced Drona with three arrows. But he[Drona.] paid no heed to the
arrows that had been released from Partha's bow in that battle. In that battle, Partha again covered him with a
shower of arrows and he[Drona.] blazed in anger, like a conflagration in a deserted forest. In that battle, Drona released
straight-tufted arrows towards Arjuna. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O Indra among kings! But those were
speedily countered. O king! King Duryodhana instructed Susharma to protect Drona's flank in that battle. The angry king of Trigarta drew his bow and in that battle, enveloped Partha with arrows with iron heads. O king! The
arrows released by both of them[Drona and Susharma.] were resplendent in the sky. O great king! They looked like swans in the autumn sky. O lord! Those dazzling arrows reached Kounteya and penetrated, like birds entering a tree that is lowered from the burden of succulent fruit. Arjuna, supreme among rathas, roared in that battle. In that encounter, he
pierced the king of Trigarta and his sons with arrows. Partha pierced them, like the fire at the destruction of a yuga.
But having made up their minds to die, they did not retreat from the encounter with Partha. They showered arrows
towards Pandava's chariot. O Indra among kings! Pandava countered that shower of arrows with his own shower
of arrows. He was like a mountain receiving a downpour of rain. We witnessed the extraordinary dexterity of Bib-
hatsu's hands. The brave one countered many showers of arrows that were difficult to withstand, like the wind
scattering masses of clouds. The gods and the danavas were delighted with Partha's deeds. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Partha angrily advanced against Trigarta in battle. O great king! He released the vayavya weapon
against the head of their army. A turbulent wind arose in the sky. It brought down masses of trees and killed the
soldiers. Drona beheld that extremely terrible vayavya weapon. O great king! He released the extremely terrible
weapon known as shaila[As an adjective, shaila means something that is made out of stone.]. When Drona released this weapon in the great battle, the wind was pacified and the
directions became placid. But Pandu's brave son made the Trigartas, roaming around on their chariots, dispirited in
that battle. They lost their valour and retreated.

'"King Duryodhana, Kripa, supreme among rathas, Ashvatthama, Shalya, Sudakshina from Kamboja, Vinda and
Anuvinda from Avanti and Bahlika and the army of the Bahlikas surrounded Partha from every direction with a
great number of chariots. In a similar way, Bhagadatta and the immensely strong Shrutayu surrounded Bhima from
every direction with a large army of elephants. O lord of the earth! Bhurishrava, Shala and Soubala quickly countered Madri's sons with many colourful arrows. With all the sons of Dhritarashtra and their soldiers, Bhishma attacked Yudhishthira and surrounded him from every direction. On seeing that army of elephants descend, the brave
Partha Vrikodara licked the corners of his mouth, like a king of deer in a forest. The best of rathas grasped a club
in the great battle. He swiftly got down from his chariot and terrified your soldiers. On seeing him, with the club in
his hand, the elephant-riders made endeavours to surround Bhimasena from every side in that battle. But Pandava
penetrated the midst of the elephants and began to roam around. He was like the sun in the middle of a large mass
of clouds. The bull of the Pandava lineage slew that army of elephants with his club. He was like the wind, scattering a large mass of clouds. Those tuskers were slaughtered by the powerful Bhimasena. They shrieked in that battle, roaring like clouds. There were many wounds on his body, resulting from the tusks of the elephants. Partha
dazzled in the forefront of that battle, like a flowering ashoka tree. He seized some elephants by their tusks and uprooted their tusks. He used those tusks to strike the elephants on their temples. He brought them down in that battle, like Yama with the staff in his hand. The club was covered with blood and his body was spattered with fat and
marrow. With blood on his armlets, he seemed to be like Rudra. O king! Thus slaughtered, the remaining mighty
elephants fled in all the directions, crushing their own soldiers in the process. O bull among the Bharata lineage!
The gigantic elephants were driven away in all the directions. All of Duryodhana's soldiers retreated from the field
of battle."'
