'Narada said, "He was divested from his station and lost his seat. His mind trembled and he was tormented by the
flames of grief. His garlands withered. His knowledge vanished. His crown and armlets fell down. He was dizzy
and all his limbs turned numb. His ornaments and garments were dishevelled. He became invisible. Though he
could see, he could not see any of the others. He was void and his mind was empty. He was about to fall down on
the surface of the earth. 'What inauspicious thoughts have I harboured in my mind, causing offence to dharma?
What has led me to losing my station?' The king thought in this way. But the kings, Siddhas and apsaras who were
there, could no longer see Yayati. He was without a support and was dislodged. There was a man who was in
charge of throwing out those whose merits had been exhausted. O king! On the instructions of the king of the gods,
he came and told Yayati, 'You are intoxicated because of your insolence. There is no one you have not disrespected. Your pride has dislodged you from heaven. O son of a king! You do not deserve it. No one knows you here. Go
and fall down.' Thus did he speak. 'Let me fall down among virtuous ones.' About to fall down, Nahusha's son
spoke these words thrice. That foremost among travellers thought about the path that he should take.

'"At that moment, he saw four bulls among kings in Naimisha and fell down in the midst of the kings. Pratar-
dana, Vasumana, Ushinara's son Shibi and Ashtaka were performing a vajapeya sacrifice to satisfy the lord of the
gods. The smoke from that sacrifice arose up to the gates of heaven. As he fell down towards the ground, King
Yayati smelt this, which was like a river of smoke, like the Ganga, joining earth and heaven. The king floated
down towards the ground. He descended among those four prosperous ones, foremost among those who sacrifice.
The king fell down among the four who were like the guardians of the world. They were lions among kings and
like the great fire into which oblations are offered. They were his relatives[They were descended from Yayati. They were Madhavi's four sons.]. Rajarshi Yayati descended in that
sacred sanctuary. He was radiant in his beauty and all the kings asked him, 'Who are you? Whom are you related
to? Which country and city are you from? Are you a yaksha, god, gandharva or rakshasa? You do not have the
form of man. What objective do you desire?'

'"Yayati replied, 'I am rajarshi Yayati. I have fallen from heaven because my merits have been exhausted. Desiring that I should fall among righteous ones, I have descended amidst you.'

'"The kings replied, 'O bull among men! May your wishes come true. Accept all our fruits of the sacrifice and
the dharma.'

'"Yayati said, 'I am not a brahmana who can accept riches. I am a kshatriya. My mind is not inclined to destroying the merits of others.'"

'Narada said, "At that time, the kings saw Madhavi, who was leading the life of a doe. When she arrived, they
greeted her and asked, 'What is the reason behind your coming here? What instructions of yours must we carry
out? O one rich in austerities! We will follow your commands. All of us are your sons.' On hearing their words,
Madhavi was extremely delighted. She went to her father Yayati and honoured him. On seeing that her sons had
their heads bowed down, the ascetic lady said, 'O Indra among kings! These are your daughter's sons. They are
my sons. They are not strangers. They will save you. Those are the ancient ordinances. O king! I am your daughter
Madhavi, who is living the life of a deer. I have also earned dharma. Accept half of that. O king! All men have a
share in the fruits of offspring. O lord of the earth! That is the reason they wish to have daughter's sons like you.'

Then all the kings bowed down their heads before their mother and honoured and saluted their maternal grandfather. They filled the earth with their soft, unmatched and gentle words addressed towards him. The kings saved
their maternal grandfather, who had been dislodged from heaven. At that time, Galava arrived there and told the
king, 'Ascend to heaven with one-eighth of my austerities.'"'
