'"Kripa replied, 'Men who are not in control of their senses indeed find it difficult to understand everything about
dharma and artha, even if they serve these. That is my view. In that way, it is certain that an intelligent person who
has not studied humility understands nothing about dharma and artha. A person, who exercises self-control and
serves[In the sense of serving superiors, elders and preceptors.], without countering what is accepted by everyone, learns all the sacred texts and is intelligent. But there
may also be an insolent, evil-souled and wicked man. He disregards destiny and what is beneficial and performs
many wicked deeds. A well-wisher is a protector and seeks to dissuade from committing sin. One who is dissuaded
obtains prosperity. However, one who is not dissuaded faces ill fortune. Just as a person whose intelligence is confused can be restrained through good and bad words, a well-wisher is capable of restraining a person and preventing him from facing a hardship. If an intelligent well-wisher[In the sense of friend.] is about to perform a wicked deed, wise ones must
use all their capacity to repeatedly restrain him. Therefore, set your mind on what is beneficial and control yourself. O son[The word used is tata.]! Act in accordance with my words, so that you do not have to repent later. Following dharma, in this
world, the slaughter of those who are sleeping is not applauded. This is also true of those who have cast aside their
weapons and have abandoned their chariots and horses, those who say, "I am yours[As a token of surrender.]," those who seek refuge,
those who have loosened their hair[Again as a sign of surrender.] and those whose mounts have been killed. O lord! The Panchalas have cast
aside their armour. All of them will sleep peacefully in the night, unconscious, like those who are dead. If a wicked
person acts hostilely against them in that state, it is evident that he will be immersed in a large and fathomless hell,
without a boat to aid him. In this world, you are famous as the best among those who know all about weapons.
Since you have been born on earth, you have not committed the slightest transgression. When the sun rises tomorrow and illuminates all beings, you will again be like a sun and defeat the enemies in the battle. This reprehensible
deed is impossible in someone like you. It will be like a red spot on a white sheet. That is my view.'

'"Ashvatthama said, 'O maternal uncle! It is exactly as you have instructed me now. However, they have earlier
shattered that bridge[Of dharma.] into a hundred fragments. In your presence, the lords of the earth have witnessed it. When
he had cast aside his weapons, my father was brought down by Dhrishtadyumna. Karna was supreme among
rathas. When the wheel of his chariot was submerged and he faced a great difficulty, he was slain by the wielder of
Gandiva. In that way, Bhishma, Shantanu's son, had cast aside his weapons and was without arms. Placing
Shikhandi in front of him, the wielder of Gandiva slew him. In that way, Bhurishrava, the great archer, had decided
to cast aside his life in the battle. Disregarding the cries of the lords of the earth, Yuyudhana[Satyaki.] brought him down.
In the encounter, Duryodhana clashed against Bhima with the club. While all the lords of the earth looked on, he
was brought down through adharma. He was alone there, and was surrounded by many maharathas. That tiger
among men was brought down by Bhimasena through adharma. The messengers have recounted the lamentations
of the king with shattered thighs. I have heard them and it tore at my vitals. In similar fashion, the wicked Pancha-
las have also resorted to adharma and have broken the bridge[Of dharma.]. Why don't you reprimand those who have broken
all the rules? They slew my father. I wish to kill the Panchalas, while they sleep in the night. I do not care whether
I am born as a worm or an insect. I will now swiftly do what appeals to me. I will quickly hasten towards that. Otherwise, how can there be sleep? How can there be happiness? I have made up my mind to kill them. The man who
can dissuade me has not been born, nor will he be born.'"

'Sanjaya said, "O great king! Having spoken these words, Drona's powerful son yoked his horses alone and set
out in the direction of the enemy. The lords, the great-minded Bhoja and Sharadvata, spoke to him. 'Why are you
yoking them to your chariot? What do you wish to do? O bull among men! We will accompany you tomorrow. We
are with you, in joy and in sorrow. You should not doubt us.' However, Ashvatthama remembered the slaughter of
his father and was enraged. He told them everything about what he desired to do. 'My father slew hundreds of
thousands of warriors with his sharp arrows. When he had cast aside his weapons, he was brought down by
Dhrishtadyumna. I will kill him in that situation today, when he has cast aside his armour. A wicked deed will be
committed against the wicked son of Panchala. Like an animal, the wicked Panchala will be slain by me today. He
will not attain the worlds obtained by those who are killed with weapons. That is my view. Swiftly fasten your armour and seize your swords and bows. O best among rathas! O scorcher of enemies! Wait here for me.' Having
spoken these words, he ascended his chariot and left in the direction of the enemy. O king! Kripa and Satvata Kritavarma followed him. Those three advanced in the direction of the enemy. They blazed like fire with kindling in a
sacrifice. O lord! They went to the camp, where all the people were sleeping. On his supreme chariot, Drona's son
reached the vicinity of the gate."'
