'Markandeya said, "Skanda was seated, with golden armour. He wore a golden crest and crown. His eyes were
golden and he was immensely radiant. His garments were tinged with red. His teeth were sharp and he was beautiful. He possessed all the auspicious marks. He was the beloved of the three worlds. He was the granter of boons.
He was brave. He was young. He was adorned with earrings. In the form of an embodied lotus, Shri herself worshipped him. When the greatly famous Kumara was thus united with Shri, all the beings saw him, like the moon on
the night of the full moon. The great-souled brahmanas worshipped the extremely powerful one.

'"The maharshis spoke to Skanda in these words. 'O fortunate one! O one with the golden complexion! May
you be the saviour of the worlds. Though you have been born in six nights[This is a reference to Svaha having adopted the forms of the wives of the rishis on six separate nights.], the worlds have been subdued by
you. O supreme among gods! You have granted them freedom from fear again. You should therefore become Indra
and free the three worlds from their fear.' Skanda asked, 'O ones rich in austerities! What does the Indra of all the
worlds do? How does the lord of the gods always protect the masses of gods?' The rishis replied, 'Indra grants beings strength, energy, offspring and happiness. When he is satisfied, the lord of the gods grants everyone their
shares. He withdraws it from those who perform evil deeds and grants it to those who perform good ones. The destroyer of Bala assigns beings to their tasks. He acts as the sun when there is no sun, and as the moon when there is
no moon. He becomes the fire, the wind, the earth and the water and their origins. These are Indra's tasks and Indra's strength is immense. You are brave and you are supreme in strength. Therefore, you should be our Indra.'

Shakra said, 'O mighty-armed one! O excellent one! You become Indra and bring happiness to everyone. You are a
worthy one and we will instate you today.' Skanda replied, 'You alone will rule over the three worlds, fixed on victory. O Shakra! I will remain as your servant. I do not desire to become Indra.'

'"Shakra said, 'O brave one! Your strength is extraordinary. Kill the enemies of the gods. Amazed at your prowess, the worlds will ignore me. O brave one! Though I am established as Indra, I am inferior in strength and have
been vanquished. Incessantly, they will attempt to bring about false dissension among us. O lord! When you have
been separated, the world will be divided into two factions. The beings of the worlds will then decide to split into
these two sides. O immensely strong one! Because of this division of beings, there will be strife then. O son[The word used is tata.]!
Let me assure you that you will then vanquish me in battle. Therefore, you should become Indra. Do not think
about this.' Skanda answered, 'O fortunate one! You are my king, as well as of the three worlds. O Shakra! What
can I do for you? Tell me what your instructions are.' Shakra said, 'O Skanda! If you have spoken true words according to your decision, and if you wish to follow my instructions, then listen to me. O immensely strong one! Be
instated as the general of the gods. O immensely strong one! Following your words, I will remain as Indra.' Skanda answered, 'For the destruction of the danavas, for accomplishing the objectives of the gods, for the protection of
cows and brahmanas, then instate me as the general.' So Maghavan[Indra.], together with all the masses of gods, instated him. He looked extremely handsome and was worshipped by the maharshis. The golden umbrella[Held over Skanda's head.]
sparkled like the circle of a fire that has been kindled well. Vishvakarma had created a golden and celestial garland.
The slayer of Tripura[Shiva.] fastened this on him. O tiger among men! O scorcher of enemies! He himself arrived,
with the famous goddess[Shiva's consort, Uma.]. Extremely happily, the illustrious Vrishadhvaja[Shiva. Literally, the one with a bull on his banner. Rudra is also Shiva's name.] showed him homage. The brahmanas also refer to Agni as Rudra and he is thus Rudra's son. The semen secreted by Rudra became Mount Shveta.
It was on Mount Shveta that the Krittikas placed Agni's semen[More correctly, placed there by Svaha in the form of the six wives.]. All the residents of heaven saw Rudra offer
homage to Guha, foremost among those who possess all the qualities. So he came to be known as Rudra's son. The
child was born after Rudra entered Agni. Because he was born in this way, he became Rudra's son. It was thus that
Skanda, foremost among the gods, was born as Rudra's son, through the energy of Rudra, Agni, Svaha and the six
ladies.

'"Agni's son was attired in a pair of red garments that had no dust. His blazing body shone, like the sun attired
in a pair of red clouds. Agni gave him a cock and that became his ornamental sign[The rooster or the cock is Skanda's emblem. The peacock became his mount later.]. Perched on his chariot, it
blazed like the red fire of destruction. His body was cased in armour that he had naturally been born with. It is always visible when the god goes into battle. O lord of the people! With Skanda, power, dharma, energy, beauty,
truthfulness, devotion to brahmanas, lack of delusion, protection of devotees, destruction of enemies and protection of the worlds were also born. Having been thus instated by the masses of all the gods, in his ornaments, he
looked happy and satisfied. His visage was as radiant as the full moon. Pavaki[Skanda's name.] was thus instated by the gods.
The sounds of hymns from the Vedas, celestial music, the songs of the gods and the gandharvas and all the masses
of apsaras arose. He sported, surrounded by many who were happy, satisfied and ornamented. Thus instated by the
residents of heaven, Mahasena could be seen, like the rising sun when darkness has been destroyed. At that, thousands of armies of the gods came to him from all the directions and said that he was their lord. The illustrious one
was surrounded by masses of all the beings. He was worshipped and praised and comforted them.

'"Having instated Skanda as the general, Shatakratu remembered Devasena, whom he had once freed. 'Brahma
himself must have destined that he will be her husband.' Thinking this, the slayer of Bala fetched Devasena,
adorned in her ornaments and told Skanda, 'O supreme among gods! Even before you were born, the self-creating
one[Brahma.] destined this maiden to be your wife. Therefore, in accordance with the prescribed rites and to the chanting
of mantras, accept her hand. The right hand of this goddess is like a lotus. Accept it.' Having been thus addressed,
he accepted her hand, in accordance with the prescribed rites. Brihasapati recited the prescribed mantras and offered oblations. Thus, wise ones know Devasena to be Skanda's queen. The brahmanas know her as Shashthi, Lakshmi, Asha, Sukhaprada, Sinivali, Kuhu, Sadvritti and Aparajita. When Devasena obtained Skanda as her eternal
husband, the goddess Lakshmi herself sought refuge with him, in embodied form[Lakshmi was personified in the form of Devasena. Lakshmi is also known as Shri.]. Since Skanda was united
with Shri on the fifth lunar day, this is known as Shripanchami[Panchami is the fifth lunar day.]. He accomplished his objective on the sixth and
this is known as the great tithi of shashthi[Tithi is a lunar day and shashthi means the sixth. Shashthi is also one of Devasena's names.]."'