'Yudhishthira said, "O grandfather! O one with dharma in his soul! In this world, what is said to be the best thing
for a brahmana who desires dharma and makes the effort to study? Many things are seen as best in this world. O
grandfather! Tell me what you think to be best in this world and the next. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The
path of dharma is great and it has many branches. Which are the elements of dharma that are held to be the best? O
king! In truth, dharma is great and has many branches. O father! Tell me carefully about all this and about what is
the supreme foundation."

'Bhishma replied, "I will indeed tell you about how you may obtain the ultimate benefit. O wise one! You will
drink this, which is like amrita, and be satisfied with the knowledge. Each of the maharshis has depended on his
knowledge and has talked about a separate aspect of dharma. Self-control is the ultimate among them. The ancients
were certain in their foresight when they said that self-control is the supreme quality. In particular, for a brahmana,
self-control is eternal dharma. If one is not self-controlled, the success of deeds is not properly obtained. Self-control and generosity surpass sacrifices and studying. Self-control increases energy and self-control is the supreme
purifier. A man who is without sin and possesses energy obtains greatness. We have not heard of any dharma that
is equal to self-control in any world. Those who follow complete dharma praise self-control as supreme in this
world. O Indra among men! Even in the world hereafter, one obtains supreme happiness. Being united with selfcontrol, one obtains great dharma. A self-controlled person sleeps happily. He wakes in happiness. He moves
through the world in happiness and his mind is cheerful. A person who is not self-controlled obtains hardship and
decay. Because of his own sins, he creates many calamities. Among the four ashramas, this is said to be the
supreme vow. I will tell you about the signs that give rise to self-control. Forgiveness, fortitude, non-violence, impartiality, truthfulness, uprightness, conquest of the senses, skill, mildness, modesty, steadfastness, generosity, lack
of anger, satisfaction, pleasantness in speech, lack of an acquisitive tendency and lack of malice-these unite and
give rise to self-control. O Kouravya! One must also worship the seniors, show compassion towards all beings, be
free of slander and tendency to gossip, not indulge in futile conversation and avoid both praise and censure. A self-
controlled man does not indulge in desire, anger, greed, pride, insolence, boasting, confusion, jealousy and disrespect of others. He is not censured and is free of desire. He desires little and is not resentful. Such a man is like the
ocean and is never filled[It is difficult to understand this. A self-controlled man should presumably always be content. Perhaps it means that a self-controlled man is
never content with trifles.]. 'I am yours. You are mine. They are mine. I am theirs.' The self-controlled person
does not say such things about his former relatives[The relatives must be former because the self-controlled person has
renounced.]. Whatever be the conduct of people in the village or in the
forest, such a person does not speak words of censure or praise. He is friendly and good in conduct. He is supremely devoted to his aides. He is free from many kinds of attachment and obtains great fruits in the world hereafter. He
is excellent in conduct. He is good in conduct. He is cheerful in his soul and knows about his soul. He obtains reverence in this world and a good end thereafter. There are auspicious deeds in this world. These are practised by the
virtuous. He possesses knowledge about these and does not diminish the dharma of sages. He departs and resorts
to the forest. He is united with knowledge and conquers his senses. He roams around, waiting for the time[For death to arrive.]. He is
capable of attaining the brahman. He has no fear from beings. Beings have no fear from him. He has no fear on account of being separated from his body. He has exhausted his good deeds and has none to accumulate. He acts
equally towards all beings and behaves affectionately towards them. He is like a bird in the sky or like an aquatic
creature in the water. There is no doubt that his progress cannot be seen[In the sense that he doesn't leave a visible trail. He does not accumulate
any karma.]. O king! He abandons his home and attains moksha. He obtains the worlds of energy for an eternal period of time. He renounces all deeds. He renounces
all the recommended austerities. He renounces the different kinds of learning. He renounces everything. He does
not return to desire. He is cheerful and pure in his soul. He obtains great reverence in this world and heaven thereafter. This is the place of the grandfather[Brahma.] and Brahma's essence arises from there. This is always concealed in
secret, but can be obtained through self-control. A person who takes comfort in wisdom and possesses intelligence
and who does not indulge in hostility towards any being has no fear of returning again[Of being reborn.]. What fear can he have of
the world hereafter? There is one sin associated with self-control and a second one does not exist. Because he is
forgiving, people think that he is incapable. O immensely wise one! But there is an extremely good quality associated with this taint. Because forgiveness is great, the patient person easily obtains the worlds. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! A self-controlled person doesn't need the forest. A person without self-control also finds nothing
there. Wherever a self-controlled person resides, that is his forest and his hermitage."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Hearing these words of Bhishma, King Yudhishthira was cheerful and extremely satisfied,
as if he had savoured amrita. He again asked Bhishma, supreme among the upholders of dharma. O extender of the
Kuru lineage[Janamejaya.]! He told him everything about austerities.'
