Vaishampayana said, 'O bull of the Bharata lineage! The gods were delighted that Kacha had attained the knowledge. They learnt the knowledge that Kacha had learnt and were content. They assembled together and told
Shatakratu[Indra. Literally, the performer of a hundred sacrifices.], "O Purandara[Indra. Literally, the destroyer of cities.]! The time has come to display your valour and kill your enemies." Having been
thus addressed, Maghavan[Indra.] agreed and set out with the assemblage of thirty gods. He saw many women in the
forest. The ladies were sporting in a forest that was like Chitraratha's[Meaning that the forest or the wood was beautiful. Chitraratha was the king of the gandharvas.]. Changing himself into the wind, he
mixed up all their garments. After emerging from the water, the women then each picked up a garment that was
nearest her. Devayani's garment was then picked up by Sharmishtha, the daughter of Vrishaparva, who did not
know about the mixing up. O lord of kings! At that, a quarrel arose between Devayani and Sharmishtha. Devayani
said, "O asuri! Despite being inferior to me[The text actually has Devayani addressing Sharmishtha as her disciple. This is because Devayani's father
(Shukra) was the preceptor to Sharmishtha's father (Vrishaparva).], how did you dare to take up my garment? You are devoid of good
conduct. No good will come to you." Sharmishtha replied, "Whether my father is seated or lying down, your father
is always humbly below him and always praises him. You are the daughter of a man who begs, praises and holds
up his hand for alms. I am the daughter of a man who is praised and stretches out his hand to give alms, not to receive. You are defenceless and deserted. You are a beggar who trembles before me, who is armed. Find an equal. I
do not regard you as one." On hearing this, Devayani stood up erect and clung to the garment. But Sharmishtha
threw her into a well and went off to her city. The evil Sharmishtha took her to be dead. In extreme anger, she did
not even bother to look down.

'Nahusha's son, Yayati, came to that place, looking for deer to hunt. He was thirsty and his two horses were
tired. Nahusha's son saw a well in which there was no water. But the king saw a maiden who was as radiant as the
flames of a fire. Seeing her there, he addressed the maiden who was celestial in beauty. The best of kings pacified
her with extremely soft words and asked, "O one with nails the shade of copper! O one with the dusky complexion! O one adorned in beautiful gems and earrings! Who are you? Why are you in such deep grief? Why are you
sighing in distress? How did you come to fall into this well that is full of creepers and grass? O one with the slender waist! Whose daughter are you? Tell me truly." Devayani replied, "I am Shukra's daughter, who uses his
knowledge to revive the daityas when they are killed by the gods. He does not know what has become of me. O
king! Here is my right hand, with nails that are the shade of copper. You seem to have been born into a good family. I know you to be gentle, brave and famous. Grasp me by the hand and pull me out of the well into which I have
fallen." Having learnt that she was the daughter of a Brahmana, the king, who was Nahusha's son, grasped her by
the right hand and pulled her out of the well. After pulling the one with beautiful hips out of the well, Yayati gently
bid farewell and returned to his capital.

'Devayani said, "O Ghurnika[One of Devayani's companions or maids.]! Quickly go to my father and tell him what has happened. From now on, I
refuse to enter Vrishaparva's city." Ghurnika swiftly went to the asura's palace. On seeing Kavya, she spoke to
him, her senses flustered. "O immensely wise one! O immensely fortunate one! I tell you that Devayani has been
struck in the forest by Sharmishtha, Vrishaparva's daughter." Having heard that his daughter had been struck by
Sharmishtha, Kavya quickly set out for the forest with a heavy heart. When he found his daughter Devayani in the
forest, he engulfed her in his arms and sorrowfully said, "It is through their own faults that people reap happiness
and sorrow. I am sure that you must have done something wrong, which has now been purged." Devayani replied,
"Whether it is the purging of my fault or not, listen attentively to what Sharmishtha, Vrishaparva's daughter, told
me. I am telling you truthfully. She said that you chanted praises to the daityas. With eyes red in anger and a harsh
and sharp voice, this is what Vrishaparva's daughter, Sharmishtha, said. She said that I was the daughter of someone who always begged, chanted the praises of others and stretched out his hand for alms. And she was the daughter of one who was always praised, always granted and stretched out his hand to give alms. Eyes red with anger
and full of pride, this is what Sharmishtha, Vrishaparva's daughter, repeatedly said. O father! If I am really the
daughter of one who chants praises of others and stretches out his hand for alms, I must pay homage to
Sharmishtha to obtain her favour. I have already told my friend[Before the quarrel, Devayani and Sharmishtha were friends.] that." Shukra replied, "O Devayani! You are
not the daughter of someone who always praises, asks for alms and receives. You are the daughter of someone who
is always praised, but never praises. Vrishaparva knows this and so do Shakra and the king who is Nahusha's son.
Know my strength to be as inconceivable and incomparable as the supreme brahman."'
