Dhritarashtra asked, "When Bhimasena and Pandava Yudhishthira returned and my army was slaughtered by the
Pandus and the Srinjayas, when my army that was like an ocean was repeatedly distressed, what was done by the
Kurus? O Sanjaya! Tell me that in detail."

'Sanjaya replied, "O king! On seeing the mighty-armed Bhima, the eyes of the powerful son of a suta became
red with rage. He attacked Bhimasena. O king! On seeing that your army had retreated before Bhimasena, the
powerful one made great efforts to rally it. Having rallied your son's army, the mighty-armed Karna advanced
against the Pandavas, who were indomitable in battle. Radheya counter-attacked the maharatha Pandavas. He brandished his bow and showered down arrows on Bhimasena, Shini's grandson, Shikhandi, Janamejaya, the powerful
Dhrishtadyumna and all the Prabhadrakas. The Panchalas, tigers among men, angrily attacked your army from all
sides in that battle, desiring victory. O king! In that fashion, the maharathas on your side wished to kill them and
impetuously attacked the Pandava army. O tiger among men! The place was beautiful with chariots, elephants,
horses, foot soldiers and standards and the armies were wonderful to see. O great king! Shikhandi advanced
against Karna and Dhrishtadyumna against your son, Duhshasana, who was surrounded by a large army. Nakula
advanced against Vrishasena and Yudhishthira against Chitrasena[The inconsistency about Chitrasena has been mentioned earlier.]. O king! In the encounter, Sahadeva attacked
Uluka, Satyaki attacked Shakuni and Bhimasena the Kouravas. In the battle, Drona's maharatha son made endeavours against Arjuna. In the battle, Goutama attacked the great archer, Yudhamanyu, and Kritavarma advanced
against the powerful Uttamouja. O venerable one! Single-handedly, the mighty-armed Bhimasena countered all
your sons, the Kurus, together with their soldiers.

' "O great king! Shikhandi, the slayer of Bhishma, roamed around fearlessly and countered Karna with his arrows. Countered, Karna's lips quivered in rage. He struck Shikhandi between his eyebrows with three arrows. With
those arrows stuck there, Shikhandi looked exceedingly beautiful. He was like a silver mountain with three peaks.
In the battle, having been thus grievously struck by the son of a suta in the encounter, he pierced Karna with ninety
sharp arrows. Karna slew his horses and charioteer with three arrows. The maharatha then brought down his standard with a kshurapra arrow. With his horses slain, the maharatha, the scorcher of enemies[Shikhandi.], jumped down from
his chariot and angrily flung a javelin towards Karna. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In the battle, Karna cut
that down with his arrows and then mangled Shikhandi with nine sharp arrows. Shikhandi, supreme among men
and supreme among victorious ones, avoided the arrows released from Karna's bow and retreated quickly.

' "O great king! Karna then scattered the Pandu soldiers, like a mass of cotton by the speed of a mighty wind. O
great king! Dhrishtadyumna was afflicted by your son and struck Duhshasana between the breasts with three arrows. O venerable one! Duhshasana pierced his left arm with a sharp, gold-tufted and broad-headed arrow with
drooping tufts. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thus pierced, Dhrishtadyumna became fierce in his wrath and
angrily dispatched an arrow towards Duhshasana. O lord of the earth! The arrow released by Dhrishtadyuma descended with great force, but your son sliced it down with three arrows. He then used another seventeen broad-
headed and gold-decorated arrows to strike Dhrishtadyumna in the arms and in the chest. O venerable one! Becoming angry, Parshata severed his bow with an extremely sharp kshurapra arrow and people roared in applause. O
bull among the Bharata lineage! Your son picked up another bow and showered a storm of arrows from every direction on Dhrishtadyumna. On witnessing the valour of your great-souled son, the warrior, in the battle, the large
numbers of siddhas and apsaras smiled.

' "O scorcher of enemies! Thus the battle raged between those on your side and that of the enemy. It was fierce,
as terrible in form as the destruction of all beings at the end of a yuga. Vrishasena pierced Nakula with five iron
arrows and stationing himself near his father[Vrishasena was Karna's son.], pierced him again with three arrows. Nakula became angry and
laughed at Vrishasena. He then pierced him firmly in the chest with an extremely sharp iron arrow. Having been
severely struck by the powerful enemy, the destroyer of foes struck his adversary with twenty arrows and was
pierced back with five. Those two bulls among men shot thousands of arrows at each other and, supported by their
respective soldiers, enveloped each other. O lord of the earth! On seeing that the soldiers of the sons of Dhritarashtra were fleeing, the son of a suta followed them and powerfully checked them. O venerable one! When Karna had
withdrawn, Nakula advanced against the Kouravas. In the battle, Karna's son also abandoned Nakula and swiftly
went to the spot where Radheya was.

' "In the battle, the angry Uluka was checked by Sahadeva. The powerful Sahadeva slew his four horses and
conveyed his charioteer towards Yama's abode. O lord of the earth! At this, Uluka, loved by his father, descended
from his vehicle and swiftly joined the army of the Trigartas.

' "Satyaki pierced Shakuni with twenty sharp arrows and severing Soubala's standard with a broad-headed arrow, laughed. O king! The powerful Soubala became enraged in that battle. Having shattered Satyaki's armour, he
again brought down his golden standard and pierced him back with sharp arrows. O great king! He[Satyaki.] brought
down his charioteer with three arrows and swiftly used other arrows to convey his mounts to Yama's eternal abode.
O bull among the Bharata lineage! Maharatha Shakuni suddenly alighted from his chariot and swiftly ascended
that of Uluka. He was quicky borne away from Satyaki, who was skilled in fighting. O king! In that battle, Satyaki
attacked your soldiers with great force and shattered the formation. O lord of the earth! Your soldiers were enveloped by arrows shot by Shini's descendant and were quickly scattered in the ten directions. They lost their lives
and fell down.

' "Your son[Though not clearly stated, this seems to be Duryodhana.] countered Bhimasena in the battle. But in an instant, Bhima deprived that lord of men of his
horses, charioteer, chariot and standard. This satisfied the charanas. At this, he withdrew from Bhimasena's presence. Wishing to kill the single-handed Bhimasena, all the Kuru soldiers let out a mighty roar and attacked him.

' "Yudhamanyu attacked Kripa and quickly severed his bow. Kripa, supreme among the wielders of weapons,
picked up another bow. He brought down Yudhamanyu's standard, charioteer, umbrella and bow on the ground.
Maharatha Yudhamanyu withdrew on another chariot. Hardikya was terrible in his valour and Uttamouja suddenly
shrouded him with arrows, like clouds raining down on a mountain. O scorcher of enemies! O lord of the earth!
The encounter between them was extremely great and terrible. I have not seen anything like that earlier. O king! In
that battle, Kritavarma pierced Uttamouja in the chest and he sank down on the floor of his chariot. His charioteer
bore the best of rathas away on his chariot. O king! The Pandu soldiers were then quickly routed." '
