'Dhritarashtra said, "After Abhimanyu had been killed, the next day arrived. They[The Pandavas.] were oppressed with sorrow
and grief. What did they do? Who, from my side, fought with them? The Kurus knew about Savyasachi's deeds.
Knowing this, how could they, and those on my side, fearlessly perform this wicked deed? Tell me. The tiger
among men[Arjuna.] was tormented by sorrow on account of his son. He was enraged. He was like Death, the destroyer.
When he advanced in that battle, how could they glance at him? In the battle, the one with the ape on his banner
shook his giant bow, grieving on account of his son. On beholding him, what did those on my side do? O Sanjaya!
What did Duryodhana confront in the course of the battle? A great sorrow has overtaken us today. I do not hear
sounds of joy[From the Kourava camp.]. Those are sounds pleasant to the mind. They bring happiness to the ear. Today, all of those can no
longer be heard in Saindhava's abode. The praises I heard earlier in the camps of my sons, can no longer be heard
today. There were masses of bards and minstrels and dancers everywhere. Earlier, those sounds used to strike my
ears. But I no longer hear them today. They must be miserable today and I can no longer hear those sounds. O Sanjaya! O son[The word used is tata.]! Earlier, seated in the abodes of Satyadhriti and Somadatta, I used to hear those supreme sounds,
charming to the ears[Is this at the time of the war? At the time of the war, there was no reason for Dhritarashtra to be seated in any of
the abodes, either of Satyadhriti or of Somadatta. Satyadhriti was from the Matsyas and fought on the Pandava
side. At the time of the war, there was no reason for Dhritarashtra to be in Satyadhriti's abode. In that case,
Satyadhriti should not be taken as a proper noun, but as an adjective for Somadatta, meaning someone who upholds the truth. However, at the time of the war, why should Dhritarashtra be in Somadatta's abode either? We
have therefore taken this to mean an earlier occasion, and accepted Satyadhriti as a proper noun.]. My merits have diminished today and I hear woes and lamentations from the abodes of my
sons. I perceive that they have lost their enterprise. That is the reason I do not hear such sounds from Vivimshati,
Durmukha, Chitrasena, Vikarna and my other sons. Drona's son, the great archer, is devoted to my sons. Brahmanas, kshatriyas, vaishyas and disciples used to wait upon him. He found delight in debate, talk and conversation
and in the playing of musical instruments. Day and night, he found pleasure in many kinds of songs. He was worshipped by many from the Kurus, the Pandavas and the Satvatas. O suta! In the house of Drona's son, sounds cannot be heard today, as they used to be earlier. Drona's son, the great archer, used to be worshipped by multitudes of
dancers and singers. Those sounds cannot be heard there now. Every evening, a great sound arose from the camps
of Vinda and Anuvinda. It cannot be heard today. Every day, from the houses of the Kekayas, great sounds of
rhythmic singing and dancing could be heard, as they and their soldiers amused themselves. O son! Those sounds
are non-existent today. Somadatta's son[Bhurishrava.] is a store of learning. Officiating priests, learned in saptatantu[Saptatantu is a special kind of sacrifice in seven (sapta) parts.] sacrifices,
used to wait upon him. Those sounds cannot be heard. The twang of bowstrings, the praise of the brahman and the
sounds of lances, swords and chariots could be incessantly heard from Drona's house. But they cannot be heard
now. There were the sounds of singing from those from many different countries and the playing of musical instruments. Those great sounds cannot be heard today. Janardana Achyuta arrived in Upaplavya, compassionate towards all beings and desiring peace[This is a reference to Krishna's mission for peace, described in Section 54 (Volume 4).]. O suta! At that time, I told my wicked son, 'O son! Use Vasudeva as a place
of pilgrimage and have peace with the Pandavas. O Duryodhana! I think that the time has come and do not cross
me. Do not refuse Keshava, who has come to solicit peace. He has your welfare in mind. Otherwise, you will truly
be defeated.' But he refused Dasharha, who is a bull among all archers, and who was entreating him. He brought
calamity on himself. The evil-minded one was attracted by destiny and ignored my beneficial words. He accepted
the views of Duhshasana and Karna. I did not desire the game with the dice. Nor did Vidura approve of it. Saindhava did not desire the gambling. Bhishma did not desire the gambling. O Sanjaya! Shalya, Bhurishrava, Purumitra, Jaya, Ashvatthama, Kripa and Drona did not desire the gambling either. If my son had acted in accordance
with the views of these people, with his kin and his well-wishers, he would have had a long and peaceful life. 'The
sons of Pandu are pleasant and sweet in speech[From the text, it is not obvious where Dhritarashtra's quote to Duryodhana begins again. But this is as good a
place as any.]. In the midst of their kin, they speak pleasantly. They are born in
noble lineages. They are revered and wise. They will obtain happiness. A man who is always on the side of dharma, obtains happiness everywhere. After death, he obtains welfare and favours. Based on their capacity, they deserve to enjoy half of the earth. Right up to the frontiers of the ocean, the earth is also theirs, from their fathers and
grandfathers. Obtaining their stations, the Pandavas will remain devoted to dharma. O son! I have kin and the Pandavas will always listen to them-Shalya, Somadatta, the great-souled Bhishma, Drona, Vikarna, Bahlika, Kripa
and other aged and great-souled ones among the Bharata lineage. O son! If they speak on your behalf, they will act
in accordance with those words. Do you think that there is any among them[That is, among the Pandavas.] who will speak in a contrary way?
Krishna will never give up dharma and all of them will follow him. Those brave ones will not act contrary to the
words of dharma that I speak to them. The Pandavas have dharma in their soul.' O suta! Thus did I lament and
speak many words to my son. But the stupid one did not listen. It seems to me that all this is because of destiny.
Vrikodara and Arjuna are there and brave Satyaki from the Vrishni lineage. There are Uttamouja from Panchala,
the invincible Yudhamanyu, the unassailable Dhrishtadyumna, the unvanquished Shikhandi, the Ashmakas, the
Kekayas, Kshatradharma from the Somakas, Chekitana from Chedi, Abhibhu, the son of Kashi, the sons of
Droupadi, Virata, maharatha Drupada and the twins, tigers among men. Madhusudana is the counsellor. Who in
this world wishes to fight the likes of these and desires to live? Who will withstand my enemies when they exhibit
their divine weapons? There are Duryodhana, Karna, Shakuni Soubala and Duhshasana as the fourth. I do not see a
fifth. They have Vishvaksena[Krishna's name.] stationed on the chariot, reins in his hand. The armoured Arjuna is the warrior.
There cannot be defeat. Does Duryodhana not remember those lamentations of mine? You have told me that
Bhishma and Drona, tigers among men, have been brought down. Those were the words spoken by Vidura, the farsighted one. Beholding the fruits of those deeds, I think that my sons must be sorrowing. At the end of the winter,
aided by a great wind, the fire consumes dry wood. Thus will Dhananjaya consume my soldiers. O Sanjaya! You
are skilled in narrating. Tell me everything. O son! When Abhimanyu was slain and that wicked deed was done to
Partha in the evening, what was the state of your minds? O son! Having performed that wicked deed, in battle,
those on my side must have found it impossible to withstand the deeds of the wielder of Gandiva. What did Duryodhana do? What did Karna do and say? When they confronted this end, what about Duhshasana and Soubala? O
Sanjaya! O son! Everything that befell my assembled sons in battle was because of wicked and intolerant deeds.
The evil-minded one[Duryodhana.] was addicted to avarice. His mind was distorted because of anger. The stupid one coveted
the kingdom. Hatred made him lose his senses. O Sanjaya! Tell me whether their actions were good or evil."'
