Yudhishthira asked, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! What is the one that is known  as  the donation of
lamps? How did it originate and what are its fruits? Tell me about this."

'Bhishma  replied,  "O  descendant  of  the  Bharata  lineage!  In  this connection, an ancient history is recounted
about a conversation between Prajapati Manu and Suvarna. There was an ascetic who was known by the name of
Suvarna. His complexion was golden. That is the reason he was known as Suvarna[Suvarna means gold.]. He possessed the qualities of
noble lineage and good conduct. He was supremely devoted to studying. Through his own qualities, he surpassed
many who were descended from excellent lineages. On one occasion, the brahmana saw Manu wandering around.
They asked each other questions about their respective well-beings. Resolved to obtain success, they sat down together on the mountainous slopes of the golden mountain of Meru. Seated there, they conversed with each other on
various topics-the brahmana rishis, the gods, the daityas and the ancient great-souled ones. Suvarna spoke these
words to the lord, Svayambhu Manu. 'For the welfare of all beings, you should answer my question. O lord of the
subjects! There are many beautiful objects that are offered to the gods. How did this originate and what are the
fruits that result? Please instruct me about this.'

'"Manu replied, 'In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about a conversation between Shukra and
Bali when they met. Bali, Virochana's son, ruled the three worlds. He quickly approached Shukra, the extender of
the Bhrigu lineage. The lord of the asuras honoured Bhargava with arghya and after he had sat down, seated himself. In the proper way, he then offered him a large quantity of dakshina. They then conversed about what you have
spoken about, about the fruits of donating beautiful objects like incense and lamps. The Indra among the daityas
asked the Indra among wise ones this supreme question. "O supreme among those who know about the brahman!
What are the fruits from donating beautiful objects like incense and lamps? O foremost among brahmanas! You
should tell me this."

'"'Shukra said, "Austerities were created first and dharma evolved after that. During  the intervening period,
creepers and herbs were generated. They had soma as their essence and many of these were created on earth. Some
of this species were like amrita, while others were like poison. There were others that were neither. Amrita instantly provided pleasure and nourishment to the mind. The terrible stench of poison makes the mind suffer in every
way. Know that amrita is auspicious and poison is extremely inauspicious. All the herbs constitute amrita. The energy of poison is generated from the fire. Whatever delights the mind is beneficial. That is the reason men who are
performers of good deeds describe them as beautiful. A pure man gives the gods these beautiful objects. Whatever
satisfies the gods is said to be beautiful. O lord! O king of the daityas! When a person gives beautiful objects to the
gods, with an auspicious end in mind, they are pleased with him. Herbs possess many kinds of valour and have
many different forms. It should be known that they have separate categories of fierce, mild and energetic. There
are trees that can be used at sacrifices and those that should not be used at sacrifices. Listen to me. There are garlands that ensure welfare for the asuras and for the gods. I will progressively tell you what is loved by rakshasas,
gods, yakshas, ancestors and humans and what ensures benefit. There are those[This is a description of flowers.] that are wild, those that naturally
grow in villages, those that have to be cultivated, those that are grown in mountainous regions, those with thorns,
those without thorns and those that have fragrance, beauty and taste. The scent of flowers is said to be of two types
-agreeable and disagreeable. Flowers with an agreeable fragrance must be offered to the gods. O lord! The gods
always desire flowers that come from trees without thorns and those that are generally white in complexion. A person who knows about donations should give garlands of aquatic flowers, lotuses and the like, to gandharvas, serpents and yakshas. Flowers which are extremely difficult to touch, those with thorns and those that are mostly red
or black, must be offered to creatures that are fierce in their valour[Such as evil spirits.]. O lord! It has been said that beautiful and
agreeable flowers, those that delight the mind and are sweet when crushed, should be offered to humans. Flowers
that have grown in cremation grounds or temples should not be used in any activity that involves nourishment,
such as marriages or secret pleasures. Mild flowers from slopes of mountains should be offered to the gods. Following the ordinances of the sacred texts, mild flowers that have grown and have been plucked properly can be offered. They please gods with their fragrance, yakshas and rakshasas with their sight and serpents with their touch.
Men are pleased in all three ways. Gods are pleased instantly. They are capable of satisfying all the desires and
wishes of mortals. When the gods are pleased, they always honour those who revere them. When they are ignored
and disrespected, they destroy those inferior men. I will now tell you the fruits from offering incense. There are
many kinds of incense-good and bad. Listen to me. There are three kinds-extractions, wood that naturally burns
and incense that is artificially created. There are auspicious and inauspicious fragrances. Listen in detail. With the
exception of sallaki[Frankincense, Boswellia serrata.], all extractions can be given to the gods. It is certain that guggulu[Resin of guggul tree, agar wood.] is the best among these.
Aguru[Aloe, kind of agar wood.] is the best among extractions and is desired by yakshas, rakshasas and serpents. The daityas love sallaki
and such similar extractions. O king! Fragrances from sarja[Resin of shala tree.] and the essence of similar wood, mixed with the fermented juice of sugar cane are recommended for men. The gods, the danavas and demons are said to be instantly
satisfied. Men are said to use these[Incense.] for pleasure. These are the qualities and reasons why these beautiful objects
are said to be given. These different kinds of incense lead to an enhancement of pleasure. I will tell you about the
supreme fruits associated with giving lamps-whom these lamps should be given to, when, and in what form.
Light is a manifestation of energy and it is described as moving upwards. Therefore, when energy is given, it increases the energy of men. Dakshinayana is mixed with a period of intense darkness. Therefore, the donation of
lamps is praised during uttarayana[To save people who have died during dakshinayana.]. Light moves upwards and it is an antidote to darkness. Therefore, it has been
determined as something that moves upwards. It is because of light that the gods are energetic, powerful and radiant. Rakshasas obtain these through darkness. Thus, lamps should be given. Through giving light, a man obtains
the radiance of eyesight. Such a donor should not be injured and the lamp must not be stolen or destroyed. A person who steals a lamp becomes blind. He is shrouded in darkness and loses his radiance. The donor of a lamp goes
to heaven and is surrounded by an array of lights there. The best lamps are those in which ghee is burnt. Next are
those in which the juices of herbs[Interpreted as oil from mustard and castor seeds.] are burnt. A person who desires prosperity must never give a lamp in which
the essence of fat, marrow and bones is being burnt. A person who desires his own prosperity must always place
lamps on the slopes of mountains, along deserted roads, near sanctuaries and crossroads. A man who gives lamps
always saves his lineage and purifies his soul. He becomes radiant and obtains the world of the stellar bodies. I will
tell you about the qualities and fruits associated with rendering offerings to gods, yakshas, serpents, men, ghosts
and rakshasas. Know that rakshasas are those who eat first, without feeding brahmanas, gods, guests and children.
They are inauspicious and do not pronounce vashatkara. Therefore, one must single-mindedly bow  one's  head
down and respectfully first render offerings to the gods. The gods accept these and always praise the house. It is
through  such  offerings  that  brahmanas,  other  guests,  yakshas,  rakshasas,  serpents,  gods  and  ancestors  are  sustained. When they are gratified, they please the offerer with a long life, fame and riches. Along with the offerings,
flowers, curds and well-cooked food, auspicious, fragrant and agreeable to see, must be rendered to the gods. Offerings made to yakshas and rakshasas must have blood and meat, mixed with liquor[Two kinds of liquor are mentioned, sura and asava. The former is undistilled, while the latter is distilled.] and decorated with parched
rice. What is given to the serpents must always be mixed with lotuses. The ghosts accept sesamum seed and molasses. Someone who eats only after honouring the gods with a first share becomes strong and noble. Therefore,
they must be given an offering first. One's house is radiant because of the gods who are present in the house. For
the sake of prosperity, one must worship them and give them the first share."'"

'Bhishma continued, "This is what Kavya Bhargava told the Indra among the asuras. Manu told Suvarna this
and Suvarna told Narada. O immensely radiant one! Narada told me about these qualities. O son! Therefore, you
should also follow all these kinds of conduct."'
