Sanjaya said, "The lord of Madra picked up another bow that was more powerful and capable of bearing a greater
load. He pierced Yudhishthira and roared like a lion. He showered down arrows, like Parjanya pouring down rain.
The bull among the kshatriyas, immeasurable in his soul, showered arrows on the kshatriyas. He pierced Satyaki
with ten arrows and Bhimasena with three. He pierced Sahadeva with three and afflicted Yudhishthira. He afflicted
all the other great archers, with their horses, chariots and elephants. The supreme among rathas destroyed elephants and elephant riders, horses and horse riders and chariots and rathas. He severed arms, weapons and flags.
He scattered the earth with warriors, like a sacrificial altar strewn with kusha grass. He slaughtered the soldiers,
like Death, the Destroyer. The Pandus, Panchalas and Somakas angrily surrounded him. Bhimasena, Shini's grandson and Madri's sons, foremost among men, challenged him and clashed against him in turn, while he was fighting
with the king, terrible in his strength. Those brave Indras among men, supreme among warriors, reached the lord
of Madra. In the battle, those brave ones among men struck him with arrows that were fierce and powerful. The
king was protected by Bhimasena, Madri's sons and Madhava. Dharma's son struck the lord of Madra between the
breasts with fierce and powerful arrows. Those on your side saw that the lord of Madra was afflicted by arrows in
the battle. On the instructions of Duryodhana, those supreme ones surrounded him with an array of chariots from
all sides. In the encounter, the lord of Madra speedily pierced Yudhishthira with seven arrows. O king! In the tumultuous battle, the great-souled Partha pierced him with nine arrows. Those two maharathas, the lord of Madra
and Yudhishthira, drew their bows back up to their ears and covered each other with arrows that had been washed
in oil. The two maharathas swiftly glanced towards each other in the battle. Those two supreme among kings were
immensely strong. They attacked the enemy and severely pierced each other. A great sound arose because of the
twanging of bows and the slapping of palms. It was like the roar of the great Indra's vajra. Those two brave and
great-souled ones, the lord of Madra and Pandu, showered down large numbers of arrows on each other. They circled around, like young tigers in a great forest in search of meat. They insolently gored each other, like the best of
elephants using their tusks. The great-souled lord of Madra struck the brave Yudhishthira, whose valour was terrible, in the chest with a powerful arrow that was like the sun or the fire in its splendour. O king! Yudhishthira, the
bull among the Kuru lineage, was grievously struck by that well-aimed arrow. He struck the great-souled lord of
Madra back and was delighted. In a short instant, the Indra among kings regained his senses. His eyes were red
with rage. He was like the one with one thousand eyes[Indra.] in his prowess. He swiftly struck Partha with one hundred arrows. Dharma's great-souled son wrathfully struck Shalya with nine arrows. These pierced his golden armour and he struck him again with another six arrows. The lord of Madra was delighted at this. He stretched his
bow and released two razor-sharp arrows towards the king, severing the bow of the bull among the Kuru lineage.
The great-souled king picked up another bow in that encounter, one that was more terrible. From every direction,
he pierced Shalya with sharp arrows that were pointed at the tip, like the great Indra against Namuchi. Shalya used
nine arrows to sever the golden armour of Bhima and King Yudhishthira and then struck the great-souled ones in
their arms. He then used another razor-sharp and flaming arrow, as resplendent as the sun, to sever the king's bow.

' "At this, Kripa used six arrows to slay his[Yudhishthira's.] charioteer, who fell down in front of him. The lord of Madra
used his arrows to slay Yudhishthira's four horses. Having slain the horses, the great-souled one began to destroy
the warriors who were on the side of the king, Dharma's son. When the king was reduced to this state, the great-
souled Bhimasena quickly attacked the king of Madra and severed his bow with a powerful arrow. He then severely pierced that Indra among men with two arrows. With another arrow, he severed the head of his charioteer
from his armoured body. Extremely enraged, Bhimasena swiftly killed his four horses. The foremost among all
archers[Shalya.] was single-handedly roaming around in that field of battle, with great force. Bhima enveloped him with
one hundred arrows and so did Madri's son, Sahadeva. On seeing that he was confounded by these arrows, Bhima
severed Shalya's armour with his arrows. When his armour was severed by Bhimasena, the lord of Madra picked
up a shield that was marked with the signs of one thousand stars. The great-souled one jumped down from his
chariot. Grasping a sword, he dashed towards Kunti's son. Terrible in his strength, he destroyed Nakula's chariot
and advanced towards Yudhishthira. He angrily descended on the king, like an advancing Yama. Dhrishtadyumna,
Droupadi's sons, Shikhandi and Shini's descendant swiftly advanced to the rescue. The great-souled Bhima used
ten arrows to sever his unmatched shield. He used a broad-headed arrow to sever the sword in his hand and roared
in the midst of the soldiers. On witnessing Bhima's deed, the foremost of the rathas on the Pandava side were delighted. They roared in applause and blew on conch shells that were as white as the moon. At that terrible sound,
the soldiers on your side were tormented and distressed. They were covered in sweat and their limbs were covered
in blood. They were miserable and lost all sense of enterprise.

' "However, the lord of Madra violently attacked the foremost of Pandava warriors, with Bhima at their head.
He swiftly advanced against Yudhishthira, like a lion advancing in search of deer. Dharmaraja's horses and charioteer had been slain. He blazed in anger, like the fire. On seeing the lord of Madra advance swiftly, he also rushed
forward with great force. He swiftly thought of Govinda's words and made up his mind to destroy Shalya. Though
his horses and charioteer had been slain, Dharmaraja remained stationed on his chariot and wished to pick up a
javelin. The great-souled one thought about Shalya's deeds and the remaining share that had been allotted to him.
Remembering this, he set his heart on killing Shalya, just as Indra's younger brother[Vishnu, that is, Krishna.] had asked him to.

' "Dharmaraja picked up a javelin that was golden in complexion. It was bejewelled and possessed a golden
handle. His eyes blazed and were dilated. With an angry heart, he glanced towards the lord of Madra. The king was
a god among men. He was pure in his soul and all his sins had been cleansed. O king! Though he glanced at the
lord of Madra, he was not reduced to ashes[That is, Shalya could have been reduced to ashes because of Yudhishthira's sight alone.]. This was extraordinary. That javelin possessed a beautiful tip and
handle. With coral and gems, it flamed and dazzled. The great-souled one flung it with great force towards the lord
of Madra, foremost among the Kurus. It blazed as it was flung with great force. It descended violently, emitting
sparks. While all the assembled Kurus looked on, it was like a giant meteor at the time of the destruction of a yuga.
It was like the night of destruction and like Yama with a noose in his hand. It was fierce in form, like the midwife
of destruction. It was like Brahma's staff and was invincible. Dharmaraja had preserved it carefully for the battle.
The sons of Pandu had taken great care to worship it with the best of fragrances, garlands and seats, food and
drink. It flamed like the fire of destruction. It was as fierce as rites performed by Atharvan and Angirasa. Tvashtra
had created it for Ishana's use[Ishana is Shiva and Tvashtra is Vishvakarma, the architect of the gods.]. It was capable of consuming the lives and bodies of enemies. Through it,
Isha[Shiva.] was capable of destroying all beings on earth, the firmament and bodies of water. It was adorned with
bells, flags, jewels and diamonds. It was decorated with lapis lazuli and had a golden handle. Tvashtra had constructed it with great care, after controlling himself and observing rites. It was invincible and could destroy all
those who hated brahmanas. He[Yudhishthira.] hurled it with great force, strength and care, after having chanted terrible
mantras over it. For the sake of destroying the lord of Madra, he dispatched it towards the enemy along the best of
paths. Dharmaraja seemed to be dancing around in anger. He extended his firm arm, with the excellent hand. He
loudly exclaimed, 'O wretched one! You are dead.' It was like Rudra shooting an arrow. That javelin was hurled
by Yudishthira with force. Shalya roared loudly and used all his strength to try to seize and repulse it. It was as if a
fire was leaping up to catch clarified butter over it. It pierced through his inner organs, his broad chest and his
sparkling armour. It then penetrated the earth, as if it was slicing through water. The king's[Shalya's.] great fame was taken away. Blood began to flow from his wounds and covered his nose, eyes, ears and mouth. His limbs were covered with blood. He was like the giant mountain Krouncha, when it had been shattered by Skanda[Skanda (Kartikeya) shattered Mount Krouncha, when he killed the
demons who hid there. The Krouncha mountain is in the Bellary district of
Karnataka.]. He stretched
out his arms and fell down from his chariot onto the ground. His armour was shattered by the descendant of the
Kuru lineage. The great-souled one was like the great Indra's mount. But he was like the summit of a mountain
that had been shattered by thunder. The king of Madra extended his arms in Dharmaraja's direction. He then fell
down on the ground, like Indra's standard. All his limbs were mangled and covered with blood. The bull among
men fell down affectionately on the ground, like a beloved wife who falls down on the chest of her dear husband.
The lord had enjoyed the earth for a long time, like a beloved wife. He seemed to go to sleep now, clasping her
with all his limbs. The one with dharma in his soul had fought in accordance with dharma and was killed by Dharma's son. He was like a fire that had been pacified on a sacrificial altar. The javelin shattered his heart and he was
deprived of his weapons and standard. Though he had been pacified, prosperity[Lakshmi, alternatively, beauty.] did not desert the lord of
Madra.

' "Yudhishthira picked up his bow, which was as dazzling as Indra's bow. In the battle, he began to slaughter the
enemy, like the king of birds against serpents. In a short instant, he used sharp and broad-headed arrows to deprive
the bodies of the enemies of their lives. Your soldiers were completely covered by Partha's arrows. With their eyes
closed and distressed, they began to strike each other in fear. The armour was displaced from their bodies and they
lost their weapons and their lives. The younger brother of the king of Madra was youthful. He was his brother's
equal in all the qualities. When Shalya was brought down, the ratha attacked Pandava. He swiftly pierced that best
of men with many iron arrows. He was invincible in battle and wished to observe the last rites of his brother. Dharmaraja quickly pierced him back with six swift arrows. With a couple of razor-sharp arrows, he severed his bow
and his standard. While he was stationed in front of him, he used a blazing, extremely firm, sharp and broad-headed arrow to sever his head. With the earrings, the head was seen to fall down from the chariot. This was like a resident of heaven falling down, after the store of good deeds has been exhausted. With the head severed, the torso fell
down from the chariot. The limbs were covered with blood. On seeing this, the soldiers[The Kourava soldiers.] ran away. The younger
brother of the king of Madra was clad in colourful armour. On seeing that he had been slain, sounds of lamentation
arose among the Kurus and they fled swiftly. On seeing that Shalya's younger brother had been killed, those on
your side gave up all hope of remaining alive. They were terrified because of their fear of the Pandavas and, covered with dust, ran away.

' "O bull among the Bharata lineage! While the terrified Kouravas were running away, Satyaki, Shini's grandson, pursued them and shot arrows. He was a great archer and extremely difficult to withstand. O king! However,
Hardikya received him fearlessly and spiritedly. Those two great-souled and unvanquished ones from the Vrishni
lineage[Both Satyaki and Kritavarma were from the Vrishni lineage.], Hardikya and Satyaki, clashed against each other. They were like maddened lions. They showered
down sparkling arrows, which were like the rays of the sun, on each other. Both of them were like the sun in their
radiance. Those lions among the Vrishni lineage shot powerful arrows from the circles of their bows and they
seemed to be like swift insects in the sky. Hardikya used ten arrows with drooping tufts to pierce Satyaki and
struck his horses with three. He then severed his bow with a single arrow. The bull among the Shini lineage cast
aside the best of bows that had been severed. He picked up another powerful weapon[Another bow.] that was even more forceful. Picking up the best of bows, the supreme among all archers pierced Hardikya back between the breasts with
ten arrows. He used well-aimed broad-headed arrows to shatter his chariot and his yoke. He then swiftly slew his
horses and his two parshni charioteers. O king! When the king of Madra was slain and Kritavarma deprived of his
chariot, all of Duryodhana's soldiers again retreated from the battle. Because they were covered in dust, the soldiers could no longer distinguish the enemy. The troops who were still alive retreated from the battle. A dust had
arisen from the earth. O bull among men! But in a short while, it was seen that this was pacified because of the
several streams of blood that flowed.

' "From a close distance, Duryodhana saw that his troops had been shattered. He advanced with great speed and
single-handedly countered all the Parthas. He saw the Pandavas on their chariots and Parshata Dhrishtadyumna
and the invincible one from Anarta[Satyaki.]. He countered them with his sharp arrows. At that time, the enemy did not
attack him, like mortal beings avoiding death. Hardikya ascended another chariot and returned. Maharatha King
Yudhishthira swiftly slew Kritavarma's four horses with four arrows. He pierced Goutama with six broad-headed
arrows that were extremely energetic. Ashvatthama saw that Hardikya had been deprived of his chariot by the king
and that his horses had been slain. He bore him away on his own chariot, away from Yudhishthira. Sharadvata
pierced Yudhishthira back with eight arrows and also pierced his horses with eight other sharp arrows that had
been sharpened on stone. O great king! At this time, the remnants of the battle raged on. O king! O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! All this happened because of your evil policy, together with that of your sons. When Shalya,
supreme among great archers, was slain in the midst of the battle by the bull among the Kuru lineage, all the assembled Parthas saw this and were greatly delighted. In a short while, they blew on their conch shells. They
praised Yudhishthira, just as in ancient times, the gods had praised Indra after Vritra had been killed. They roared
and sounded many kinds of musical instruments. This resounded, from every side of the earth." '
