'Sanjaya said, "When Partha vowed to kill the king of Sindhu, the mighty-armed Vasudeva spoke to Dhananjaya.

'You consulted your brothers and took the words of the pledge[That is, you did not consult me before taking the oath.]. "I will slay Saindhava." You performed an extremely rash act. Without consulting me, you have taken up an extremely heavy burden. How can we now avoid
the ridicule of all the worlds? Spies have been sent by me to the camp of the sons of Dhritarashtra. They returned
swiftly and conveyed this information to me. After you took a pledge to kill the king of Sindhu, the sons of Dhritarashtra and Saindhava were frightened at the sounds they heard. They heard roars like lions, mingled with the
great sound of musical instruments. They thought that these roars like lions must have a reason and waited. O
mighty-armed one! A great sound arose among the Kouravas, among their elephants, horses and infantry and there
was the roar of chariot wheels. "Having heard of Abhimanyu's death, it is certain that Dhananjaya will be enraged
and will emerge in the night[To fight.]." This was their view and they waited. O one who is devoted to the truth! O one with
eyes like lotuses! While they prepared, they heard the truth about the pledge you had taken for the death of the
king of Sindhu. All of them, Suyodhana's advisers and King Jayadratha, were distressed and frightened, like small
deer. The lord of Sindhu and Souvira was extremely frightened[Jayadratha is described as the king of Sindhu, Souvira and Shibi. Souvira and Shibi were kingdoms adjacent to
Sindhu and had probably been conquered by Jayadratha.]. He arose, and with his advisers, entered his own
camp. At the appropriate time for consultation, they consulted each other about the best course of action. He then
went to the assembly of the kings and spoke these words to Suyodhana. "Dhananjaya thinks that I am the one who
has caused the death of his son. Therefore, in the midst of the soldiers, he has promised to kill me tomorrow. When
Savyasachi takes a vow, the gods, the gandharvas, the asuras, the serpents and the rakshasas are incapable of countering it. Therefore, all of you should protect me in the battle and not allow Dhananjaya to place his foot on your
heads and thereby accomplish his objective. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Therefore, make arrangements to
protect me in the battle. O king! Otherwise, grant me permission so that I can return home." Having been thus addressed, Suyodhana was miserable and hung down his head. On hearing this and learning about the great fear, he
silently began to think.

'"'On seeing that the king was distressed, Saindhava gently spoke these words, with an eye on his own self-interest and on what would be good for him. "I do not see a brave archer here who is capable of countering Arjuna's
weapons with his own weapons in the great battle. He wields the bow Gandiva and Vasudeva is his aide. Who can
stand in front of Arjuna, even if it were to be Shatakratu himself? It has been heard that Partha, on foot, fought
with the immensely energetic lord Maheshvara earlier, in the Himalaya mountains[This incident has been recounted in Section 31 (Volume 2).]. Urged by the king of the gods,
on a single chariot, he killed a thousand danavas who resided in Hiranyapura. Kounteya is now united with the intelligent Vasudeva. It is my view that he is capable of destroying the three worlds, together with the immortals. I
desire that you should give me permission to leave. Alternatively, if you so wish, the great-souled Drona and his
brave son should protect me." O Arjuna! Thus addressed by the one who was terribly afflicted, the king himself
spoke to the preceptor. "All the arrangements have been made and the chariots have been arrayed. Karna, Bhurishrava, Drona's son, the invincible Vrishasena, Kripa and the king of Madra-these six will be at the forefront.
Drona will construct a vyuha at the rear. Half of this will be in the form of a cart[Shakata.] and half in the form of a lotus.
There will be an array in the form of a needle in the midst of the pericarp of the lotus. Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu who is unassailable in battle, will be stationed there, protected by brave ones." O Partha! There is no doubt that
those six rathas are impossible to withstand, in use of the bow, in weapons, in valour, in strength and in lineage.
Without vanquishing them and their followers, one cannot reach Jayadratha. Think of the valour of each of those
six, not to speak of them united together. O tiger among men! They cannot be defeated easily. We should think
again about the best course of action for our welfare. We should consult with our advisers and well-wishers and
then determine a successful course of action.'

'"Arjuna replied, 'You think that those six rathas on the side of the sons of Dhritarashtra are superior to me in
strength. But it is seen that their valour is equal to half of my own. O Madhusudana! I will sever all their weapons
with my weapons. Desiring to kill Jayadratha, you will see me shatter them. In the sight of Drona and his lamenting followers, I will bring down the head of the king of Sindhu on the ground. O Madhusudana! This will be the
case even if the Sadhyas, the Rudras, Vasus, the Ashvins, the Maruts with Indra, the Vishvadevas, the asuras, the
ancestors, the gandharvas, the suparnas[Birds like Garuda, eagles.], the oceans, the mountains, the firmament, heaven, earth, the directions,
the lords of the directions, the villages, the forests and all mobile and immobile beings seek to protect the king of
Sindhu. Even then, in the battle tomorrow, you will see him slain by my arrows. O Krishna! I swear this truthfully,
as I touch my weapons[Arjuna is swearing by touching his weapons.]. Drona, the great archer, is the protector of that wicked and evil-minded one. O Keshava!
I will engage him first. Suyodhana thinks that this gambling match is based on him[The battle is being compared to a gambling match in which Jayadratha is the stake.]. Therefore, I will shatter him
at the forefront of the army and then assail Saindhava. Tomorrow, you will see that great archer pierced by my
fierce, energetic and iron arrows in battle, like the summit of a mountain shattered by a thunderbolt. Blood will
flow from the bodies of men, elephants and horses. They will be brought down by sharp arrows that descend on
them. The arrows released from Gandiva will be as swift as thought or the wind. They will rob the breath of life
from the bodies of thousands of men, elephants and horses. In the battle, men will behold terrible weapons descend, those that have been obtained by me from Yama, Kubera, Varuna, Rudra and Indra. All those who wish to
protect Saindhava will see their weapons routed in the battle by my brahmana astra[Divine weapon, also referred to as brahmastra.]. O Keshava! In the battle
tomorrow, you will see the earth strewn with the heads of kings, severed by forceful arrows that I release. I will
gratify carnivorous beasts and drive away the enemy. I will delight my well-wishers and bring down Saindhava.
He has performed great misdeeds. He has been a bad ally[This is ally in the sense of one with whom there is a matrimonial alliance.]. He has been born in an evil land. Having been killed
by me, King Saindhava will cause sorrow among those on his own side. Saindhava has enjoyed the best of milk
mixed with rice. But he has been evil in conduct. In the forefront of the battle, you will see him destroyed with my
radiant arrows. O Krishna! In the morning, I will accomplish that which will make Suyodhana think that there is
no archer in this world who is equal to me in battle. O bull among men! Gandiva is a divine bow and I am the warrior. O Hrishikesha! You are the charioteer. Who is incapable of being vanquished by me? Lakshmi is always
present in the moon and water is always present in the ocean. O Janardana! Like that, know that my pledge is always true. Do not disrespect my weapons. Do not disrespect my firm bow. Do not disrespect my strength. Do not
disrespect Dhananjaya's strength of arms. I will go to battle so that I am victorious and am not defeated. Know that
because of my pledge, Jayadratha has already been slain in battle. It is certain that the brahman is truth. It is certain
that there is humility in the virtuous. It is certain that there is prosperity in the wise. It is certain that there is victory
in Narayana.'"

'Sanjaya said, "Having spoken these words to Hrishikesha and having addressed them to his own self too, Vasa-
va's son once again addressed the lord Keshava in a sonorous tone. 'When night is over and it is morning, please
arrange for my chariot to be prepared. O Krishna! That is your task. The task that has to be undertaken is a grave
one.'"'
