Vaishampayana said, 'O great king! When maharatha Karna was routed by the gandharvas, in the sight of the sons
of Dhritarashtra, the entire army fled. O great king! On seeing all the sons of Dhritarashtra flee, Duryodhana refused to run away. On seeing the great army of gandharvas descend on him, the scorcher of enemies unleashed a
great shower of arrows. Without thinking about this shower of arrows, and desiring to kill Duryodhana, the gandharvas surrounded his chariot from all sides. They cut down the yoke, shafts, fenders, pennants, charioteer, horses,
trivenu[Trivenu means three bamboo poles. One doesn't know what part of the chariot this is, except that it is clearly
a joint.] and seat into pieces that were as small as sesame seeds. Duryodhana was thus unseated from the chariot
and fell down on the ground. The mighty-armed Chitrasena rushed at him and captured him alive. O Indra among
kings! When he had been thus captured, the gandharvas surrounded Duhshasana on his chariot and captured him
too. With Chitrasena, others rushed at Vivimshati and still others at Vindu and Anuvindu and all the wives of the
kings. The soldiers of Dhritrarashtra's sons were routed by the gandharvas.

'Together with the ones who had been wounded before, they then went to the Pandavas. When the king had been
captured, all the wagons, shopping carts, whores, carriages and vehicles sought refuge with the Pandavas. Dhritarashtra's son was handsome, mighty-armed and immensely strong. But the king was taken prisoner by the gandharvas and the Parthas pursued them. Duhshasana, Durvishaha, Durmukha and Durjaya[These, and the names that follow, are of Duryodhana's brothers.] were captured and tied
by the gandharvas, as were all the wives of the kings. When the king had been captured, Duryodhana's advisers
were miserable. Lamenting in sorrow, all of them went to Yudhishthira. Bhimasena spoke to Duryodhana's aged
advisers, who were grief-stricken and miserable and were begging Yudhishthira. "They[Duryodhana and his army.] came here for a different
purpose, but something else has transpired. The gandharvas have accomplished what we should have undertaken.
O son[The word used is tata.]! This is the outcome of the king listening to evil counsel and indulging in deceitful gambling. We have
heard it said that others bring down the enemies of one who is impotent. The gandharvas have performed this extraordinary act before our eyes. We are fortunate that, in this world, there exist men who wish to do that which is
pleasant for us and while we were seated, they have taken up our burden and made us happy. We have been suffering from the cold, the heat and the wind and have become emaciated through our austerities. The evil-minded one
was comfortable and wished to see us in this state. Those who followed the conduct of that evil-souled Kouravya,
the adherent of adharma, are witnessing their own defeat. It is because adharma was performed that this instruction
is now being given. I am telling you. You can see that the Kounteyas are not violent or evil." When Kounteya Bhimasena was speaking in this way, the king[Yudhishthira.] said that this was not the time for harsh words.'
