Karalajanaka asked, 'O supreme among rishis! You have spoken about the characteristics of the many and
the one[The many is destructible and the one is indestructible.]. But I still detect some doubt about the signs of the two. O unblemished one! This is comprehended by both those who are knowledgable and those who are ignorant[That the atman is one.]. However, because my intelligence is
gross, I still have some doubt about the truth of this. You have spoken about the causes behind that which is destructible and that which is not destructible. O unblemished one! However, because my intelligence is fickle, I
have forgotten about all of that. That is the reason I wish to know how one can be seen in many. How does a
knowledgable or ignorant person comprehend the truth about this? O illustrious one! Tell me, completely and separately, what sankhya and yoga say on knowledge and ignorance and on the indestructible and the destructible?'

'"Vasishtha replied, 'I will tell you what you have asked me about. O great king! Hear separately from me about
the practice of yoga. For yogis who practice yoga, meditation is the supreme strength. Those who know about the
Vedas say that there are two kinds of meditation-concentration of the mind and pranayama. Pranayama possesses
qualities, while concentration of the mind is without qualities[Pranayama is performed while chanting mantras, but concentration of the mind doesn't require mantras.]. O lord of men! With the exception of three times
-passing urine, releasing excrement and eating-at all other times, the mind should be devoted to the supreme. A
sage uses his mind to withdraw from the senses and the objects of the senses and should engage in the twenty-two
and the supreme twenty-four[The twenty-four have been mentioned earlier. In pranayama, there are different methods of breathing and controlling prana, with a list that runs into around fifty. Clearly, twenty-two of these are being singled out.]. The intelligent person uses these to direct the atman. Learned ones have said that
this is the undecaying entity that resides in the body. It has been instructed that the atman must always be known. It
has been determined that this is for someone whose mind has been delinked from objects and not for others. He
must be free from all attachments. He must be restrained in diet and conquer the senses. During the early and later
part of the night, the mind must be fixed on the atman. O lord of Mithila! All the senses must be stilled by the
mind. The mind must be stilled with intelligence. Having done this, one should be as motionless as stone. He must
be as motionless as a pillar. Like a mountain, he must not move. When learned ones, who know about the techniques, are like this, they are said to be united in yoga. He does not hear. He does not inhale. He does not taste. He
does not see. He does not know any touch and there is no resolution in his mind. He does not pay attention to anything, or understand anything. He is like a piece of wood. The learned say that such a person is then united with
Prakriti. One is seen to blaze like a lamp in a place where there is no wind. He does not move and is immobile.
Such a person ascends upwards and doesn't descend into inferior species. Then he sees what is to be seen. Having
seen, he does not speak. People like us say that the heart of the knower and what is to be known, the atman, have
become one. He is like a smokeless fire with the seven flames[A fire has seven flames.]. He is like the sun with its rays. He is like the fiery
lightning in the sky. He sees the atman in his own self. Great-souled and intelligent and learned brahmanas see it in
this way. This is the brahman, who has not been born. This is immortality that exists in the atman. It is said that
this is more subtle than what is most subtle and greater than what is greatest. Though it is inside all beings, it is
certain that it cannot be seen. The creator of the world can be seen through the wealth of intelligence and the lamp
of the mind. It is the greatness that is beyond darkness. It is located beyond darkness. Those who know about the
truth of the Vedas say that it is the dispeller of darkness. It is sparkling. It is beyond darkness. It is without attributes. It has the characteristic of being without traits. Yogis say that this is yoga. I think that these are the signs of
yoga. This is the way they see the supreme and undecaying one in their own atmans. I have thus told you the truth
about the philosophy of yoga.

'"'I will now tell you about the knowledge of sankhya, where one progressively destroys the errors. Those who
know about Prakriti say that the unmanifest Prakriti is the supreme. O supreme among kings! From this, the second entity, known as Mahat, is generated. We have heard that the third entity, consciousness, results from Mahat.
Those who have the insight of sankhya say that the five elements are created from consciousness. These eight are
Prakriti[The five elements, consciousness, Mahat and the original Prakriti.]. There are sixteen transformations of these. In particular, there are the five senses and the five organs of
action[Added to the five elements, there are fifteen, and the mind is added to get sixteen.]. Learned ones who know about sankhya say that this is the truth. They know about the ordinances of
sankhya and are always established along the path of sankhya. Whatever is generated from the cause, is also destroyed within it. As they have been created from inside that atman, they are destroyed in reverse order. They are
created in the proper order, but are destroyed in the reverse order[That is, consciousness is created after Mahat, but is destroyed before Mahat.]. O supreme among kings! The qualities are always like waves in an ocean. This is the way the creation and destruction of Prakriti also take place. When there is
destruction, the single one[In this context, the Purusha.] alone remains and many are subsequently created from it. O Indra among kings! This
is what has been determined by those who have reflected on it. It is evident that the presider[Purusha.] is not manifest. It is
both one and many and so is the case with Prakriti. There is a single one at the time of destruction and many at the
time of creation. Prakriti generates from its womb and the atman makes it many[Purusha makes Prakriti many.]. The great-souled one is established over the twenty-five that constitute the field[Prakriti is the field and the great-souled one is the brahman.]. O Indra among kings! That is the reason the best among ascetics say that it[The brahman.] is the presider. We have heard that it is the presider and it presides over the field[The field or kshetra is Prakriti and the one who knows about the field, kshetrajna, is the brahman.]. Because it
knows the kshetra, the umanifest one is known as kshetrajna. Since the unmanifest one lay down in earlier times, it
is known as Purusha[The word pura means earlier, ancient, in the beginning. Hence, purusha means the original or primeval one.]. Those that are known as kshetra and kshetrajna are distinct. While kshetra is also not manifest, it becomes discernible because of the twenty-fifth. Knowledge and the object of knowledge are said to be distinct. Knowledge is not manifest, but becomes known because of the twenty-fifth. The kshetra is not manifest and
neither are intelligence and Ishvara. The lack of Ishvara isn't truth. Truth is known because of the twenty-fifth.
These are the principles of sankhya philosophy. Those who believe in the philosophy of sankhya say that, in accordance with sankhya, it is Prakriti that acts. They enumerate and ascertain the truth about the twenty-four elements.
Those who believe in sankhya talk about Prakriti and the twenty-fifth, which is devoid of qualities. It is said that if
a person has got to know the twenty-fifth, he is the one who knows. A person who knows this realizes that it is the
atman alone that exists. I have properly spoken to you about the true nature of sankhya philosophy. A person who
knows this obtains tranquility. Prakriti is manifest to such a person, as something that is directly seen. It is the one
with qualities and there is also the entity without qualities. When they no longer exist[When they die.], they do not have to return
again. They obtain sentiments that are without decay and also obtain the supreme and unmanifest one. But there
are also those who do not see properly and do not see everything as one. O destroyer of enemies! They do not
reach the unmanifest and have to return again and again. They have not understood everything and have not comprehended. They are born in manifest forms and are under the subjugation of the manifest. Everything that is manifest results from the unmanifest and the twenty-fifth. A person who knows this does not suffer from any fear.'"'
