'Sanjaya said, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! This hardship is the result of your own transgressions. O brave
one! You should not grieve like an ordinary person. O supreme among kings! Knowing your absence of qualities,
your partiality towards your sons, your duplicity about dharma, your malice towards the Pandavas and your many
piteous lamentations, Vasudeva, the one who knows about all the worlds and the lord and preceptor of all the
worlds, caused the great war to arise among the Kurus. This great and pervasive destruction has arisen because of
your own crimes. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! No good deeds by you can be seen at the beginning, in the
middle, or at the end. That is the root of this defeat. Therefore, knowing the fate of this world, be patient and listen
to how the battle raged, like the terrible one between the gods and the asuras.

'"Shini's descendant, with truth as his valour, penetrated amidst your soldiers. The Parthas, with Bhimasena at
the forefront, advanced against your army. Maharatha Kritavarma alone resisted the Pandus in that battle, as they
arrived in violence and anger, together with their followers. Just as the shoreline holds back the salty ocean,
Hardikya repulsed the Pandu soldiers in that battle. Hardikya's valour was regarded as extraordinary. The united
Parthas could not crush him in that battle. The mighty-armed Bhima pierced Kritavarma with three iron arrows and
blew on his conch shell, delighting all the Pandavas. Sahadeva pierced Hardikya with twenty arrows, Dharmaraja
with five and Nakula with one hundred. Droupadi's sons pierced him with seventy-three, Ghatotkacha with seven
and Dhrishtadyumna struck Kritavarma with three. Virata, Drupada and Yajnasena's son[Since Dhrishtadyumna and Shikhandi have been separately named, it is not clear which of Yajnasena's (Drupada's) sons is meant by this.] pierced him with five
each. Shikhandi pierced Hardikya with five swift arrows and laughing, again pierced him with twenty arrows. O
king! Kritavarma pierced each of those maharathas with five arrows and piercing Bhima with seven, brought down
his bow and his standard from his chariot. Once the bow was severed, the spirited maharatha angrily struck him in
the chest with seventy arrows. Having been severely and powerfully struck by Hardikya's supreme arrows, he
trembled on his chariot, like a mountain during an earthquake. On seeing Bhimasena in that state, they[The Pandava warriors.], with
Dharmaraja at the forefront, afflicted Kritavarma with the release of terrible arrows. O venerable one! They
hemmed him in with a large number of chariots. To protect the son of the wind god in the battle, they cheerfully
pierced him with arrows."

'"The immensely strong Bhimasena recovered his senses. In that encounter, he grasped an iron javelin with a
golden handle. From his chariot, he swiftly hurled it towards Kritavarma's chariot. Released from Bhima's arms, it
was like a snake that has cast off its skin. Flaming extremely fiercely, it headed towards Kritavarma. On seeing it
suddenly descend towards him, with a hue like that of the fire at the time of the destruction of a yuga, Hardikya
used two arrows to slice it into two. That javelin, decorated with gold, was severed and fell down on the ground. O
king! It illuminated the directions, like a giant meteor that has been dislodged from the sky. On seeing that the
javelin had been destroyed, Bhima was extremely enraged. He picked up another bow that was forceful and made
a great sound. In that battle, Bhimasena angrily attacked Hardikya and struck him between the breasts with five arrows. O king! Bhima was terrible in his strength and all this was because of your evil policy. O venerable one!
Bhimasena mangled Bhoja in all his limbs. In that field of battle, he was as beautiful as a red ashoka tree that was
blooming. However, that great archer only laughed. In that battle, he angrily struck Bhimasena with three arrows
and then firmly and carefully, pierced those maharathas back with three arrows each. They also pierced him back
with seven arrows each.

'"O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that encounter, the maharatha laughed and wrathfully used a kshurapra arrow to sever Shikhandi's bow. On seeing that his bow had been severed, Shikhandi became angry. In that
encounter, he grasped a sword and a brilliant shield that was marked with one hundred moons. He whirled that giant shield, which was decorated with gold and dispatched the sword towards Kritavarma's chariot. O king! In that
encounter, the giant sword severed his bow and arrow and fell down on the ground, like a stellar body dislodged
from the firmament. At the same time, in the battle, those maharathas quickly and severely pierced Kritavarma
with arrows. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! Hardikya, the destroyer of enemy heroes, discarded the giant
bow, which had been shattered. In that encounter, he picked up another bow and pierced each of the Pandavas with
three arrows. He pierced Shikhandi with three arrows, and then yet again with another five. The immensely illustrious Shikhandi picked up another bow and countered Hridika's son with arrows that had heads made out of the
nails of tortoises. O king! In that battle, Hridika's son became angry and powerfully attacked Yajnasena's maharatha son, the one who was responsible for the death of the great-souled Bhishma in the battle. O king! The
brave and powerful one attacked him, like a tiger against an elephant. Those two were like flaming fires, or two
elephants in charge of the directions. Those destroyers of enemies clashed against each other with a torrent of arrows and released showers of arrows at each other from the best of bows. They released hundreds of arrows, like
the rays of two suns in the sky. Those two maharathas tormented each other with their sharp arrows. Those two
brave ones were as resplendent as suns at the end of a yuga. Kritavarma fiercely struck Yajnasena's maharatha son
with seventy-three arrows and pierced him again with another seven. Severely pierced and wounded, he sat down
on the floor of his chariot, letting go of his bow and arrows and becoming unconscious. O bull among the Bharata
lineage! On seeing him thus distressed in the battle, those on your side honoured Hardikya and waved their garments around in the air. On discerning that Shikhandi was thus afflicted by Hardikya's arrows, his charioteer swifly
bore the maharatha away from the field of battle.

'"On seeing Shikhandi on the floor of the chariot in the battle, the Parthas quickly surrounded Kritavarma with
chariots. Maharatha Kritavarma accomplished a supreme wonder there. In that battle, he single-handedly repulsed
the Parthas and their followers. Having defeated the Parthas, maharatha Kritavarma vanquished the Chedis, the
Panchalas, the Srinjayas and the Kekayas, all of whom were immensely valorous. In the battle, the Pandavas were
slaughtered by Hardikya. In that encounter, they were unable to retain their spirits and fled in all directions, bereft
of their senses. In the battle, Hardikya defeated the sons of Pandu, with Bhimasena at the forefront. He was stationed there, like a fire without smoke. Those maharathas were driven away by Hardikya in the battle. They were
afflicted by his shower of arrows and were forced to retreat."'
