Vaishampayana said, 'When the brahmanas and the great-souled Pandavas were seated, Droupadi and Satyabhama
entered together. They were extremely happy and seated themselves comfortably. O Indra among kings! They had
seen each other after a long time. They were pleasant in speech and spoke to each other about the deeds of the
kings from the Kuru and Yadu lineages. Then the slender-waisted Satyabhama, Krishna's beloved queen and the
daughter of Satrajit, spoke to Yajnaseni in private. "O Droupadi! How do you conduct yourself when you attend to
the Pandavas? Those brave and young ones are the equals of the guardians of the world. O beautiful one! How do
you keep them under your control? O one who is beautiful to behold! The Pandavas are always under your control.
They always look towards you and do your bidding. Tell me the reason. Do you follow vows or is it austerities? Is
it ablutions, bathing, mantras or herbs? Is it the valour of knowledge or the valour of roots? Is it meditation, obla-
tions or medicaments? O Panchali! O Krishna[Droupadi is actually Krishnaa, though it has been written as Krishna.]! Tell me about your famous knowledge of amorous matters, so that
Krishna will always remain under my control." Having said this, the famous Satyabhama stopped.

'The immensely fortunate Droupadi, who was devoted to her husbands, replied. "O Satya! You are asking me
about the practices of evil women. How can one praise those who travel along wicked paths? Such questions and
uncertainties are not worthy of you. You yourself have enough intelligence. You are Krishna's beloved queen.
When a husband learns that a woman uses mantras or roots, he becomes as terrified of her as of a snake that has
entered the house. How can someone who is anxious find peace? How can there be happiness without peace? No
woman is able to control her husband through mantras. Those who propagate roots are enemies. They are violent
and transmit poison and extremely terrible diseases. When a man accepts these powders through the tongue or the
skin, there is no doubt that he will soon be killed. Women have caused dropsy, leprosy, old age, impotence, dumbness, blindness and deafness through these means. Addicted to wicked ways, these evil women cause great harm to
their husbands. A woman should never act so as to cause displeasure to her husband. O illustrious Satyabhama!
Listen. I will tell you everything about how I behave towards the great-souled Pandavas. I always avoid vanity, desire and anger. I always steadily serve the Pandavas and their wives[The Pandavas had other wives too. Bhima was married to Hidimba.
Arjuna was married to Subhadra, Ulupi and Chitrangada. Nakula was married to Karenumati and Sahadeva to Vijaya.]. In return for the love, I always place my soul
in their souls. I always serve them without any sense of pride. I protect the hearts of my husbands, without being
anxious about wrong words, wrong situations, wrong looks, difficult seats, difficult roads and difficult signs. That
is the way I serve the maharatha Parthas, who are extremely terrible in their energy and are equal to the sun, the
fire and the moon and who are capable of killing with their glances. My mind never turns to other men-be it a
god, a man, a gandharva, a young one with ornaments, one who is rich or one who is handsome. I do not eat, bathe
or sleep before my husband[The singular is used in the text.], together with his servants, has performed these acts. When my husband returns
home from the field, the forest or the village, I always get up to welcome him and offer him a seat and water. The
stores for food are clean. The food is clean. I serve food at the right time. I am careful in maintaining the grain and
ensure that the house is clean. I am direct and refined in speech. I do not consort with evil women. I always do that
which is pleasant. I am never lazy. I do not laugh unless there is a joke. I do not tarry for a long time at the gate. I
do not spend a long time in the toilet or in the garden. I do not laugh loudly or complain, or give cause for anger. O
Satya! I am always engaged in steadfastly serving my husbands. In no way do I desire anything that does not bring
my husband pleasure. When my husband is not at home because of some work connected with the relatives, I follow a vow of not using flowers or fragrances. When my husband does not drink or does not eat, neither do I. I always renounce everything that my husband does not enjoy. O beautiful one! I always base myself on what has
been instructed. I am ornamented well. I am extremely careful. I am engaged in the pleasure of my husband. Earlier, my mother-in-law had told me about this dharma followed in the household-about offering alms, sacrifices,
funeral ceremonies, cooking food on auspicious lunar days and everything else that should be respected. I know all
that. I always follow them untiringly, day and night, with all my soul always fixed on humility and injunctions. My
husbands are mild, righteous, truthful and the followers of true dharma. But I serve them as if they are angry and
venomous serpents. It is my view that the eternal dharma of women is to be dependent on the husband. He is the
god and he is the path. How can one cause him displeasure? I do not transgress my husbands in sleeping, eating or
speech. I always control myself and never complain about my mother-in-law. O fortunate one! Through constant
attention in daily pursuits and through servitude to the superiors, my husbands remain under my control. I always
serve Kunti, the mother of brave ones and one who is always true in her words, myself-in her bathing, dressing
and eating. I never cross her in issues of garments, ornaments or food. Pritha[Kunti.] is the equal of the earth itself and I
never complain about her. Earlier, in Yudhishthira's abode, eight thousand brahmanas were fed every day on golden plates. Eighty-eight thousand snataka householders[A snataka is a brahmana who has completed his period of celibate student life and is about to step into the householder stage.] were supported by Yudhishthira, with thirty servant girls
for each. Other than this, ten thousand ascetics, with their desire under control, were fed well-cooked food on golden plates. All those brahmanas were knowledgeable about the brahman and had been given grants of land. I worshipped them in due order, with drink, garments and food. The great-souled Kounteya possessed one hundred
thousand servant girls. They were adorned with necklaces and bracelets made of shells, gold around their necks,
ornaments, expensive garlands, gold and sandalwood paste and sported their gems and their gold. They were
skilled in dancing and singing. I knew the names, the forms, the food and the garments of each of them and also
their work, what each one did and did not do. Kunti's intelligent son had one thousand maid servants, who used to
serve the guests day and night, holding vessels in their hands. When Yudhishthira lived in Indraprastha, he possessed one hundred thousand horses and one hundred thousand elephants. Such were the king's instructions when
he ruled the earth. I listened to them and laid down the number and tasks for all the servants and everything that
was done in the inner quarters. I knew everything about the cowherds and the shepherds, what they did and did not
do. I knew everything about the king's revenue and expenditure. O fortunate one! I alone knew everything about
the famous Pandavas. Those bulls among the Bharatas passed on everything about the household to me. O one
with the beautiful face! That is the reason they were devoted to me. This load was incapable of being borne by
someone who was evil in soul. I gave up all pleasure, day and night. That treasury of my husbands, who followed
dharma, was such an ocean that even Varuna could not manage it. I alone knew about the store. I endured hunger
and thirst, day and night. I attended to the Kouravyas, and day and night were the same for me. I was the first to
rise from my bed. I was the last to lie down. O Satya! That has always been my practice. I know this to be the
greatest technique of making husbands devoted to you. I have not followed the practices of evil women. Nor do I
desire to do that." Having heard these words from Krishna, full of dharma, Satya honoured Panchali, whose conduct always abided by dharma, and said, "O Panchali! O Yajnaseni! I have been at fault. Pardon me. Among
friends, it does happen that words are spoken in jest, without having been intended."'
