'Sanjaya said, "O great king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O Indra among kings! O king! When the great-
souled Pandavas were established along the Hiranvati, Duryodhana, together with Karna, Soubala and
Duhshasana, summoned Uluka and secretly told him, 'O Uluka! O son of a gambler! Go to the Pandavas and the
Somakas. In Vasudeva's hearing, go and tell them my words. "What has been thought of for many years has come
to pass. There will be a war between the Pandavas and the Kurus, terrible to the worlds. O Kounteya[Duryodhana's message is to Yudhishthira.]! You spoke
great and boastful words that Sanjaya recounted in the midst of the Kurus. The time has arrived. Carry out your
pledge. Do everything that you promised. O Pandava! Remember the anger, the robbing of the kingdom, the exile
to the forest and the molestation of Droupadi. Be a man. The purpose for which a kshatriya lady bears a son in her
womb has arrived. Display your strength, valour, bravery, supreme dexterity in use of weapons and manliness in
war and free yourself from your anger. Whose heart will not be shattered if he is dislodged from his prosperity for
a long time? Who will not be oppressed and distressed? If a brave one is born in a noble lineage and desires the
riches of others, how can his anger not be ignited, if his kingdom has been lost? Now act in accordance with the
great words that you have uttered. The learned say that one who does not act is an evil man. There are two objectives behind a battle-the subjugation of enemies and the restoration of the kingdom. Therefore, act in accordance
with your manliness. Defeat us and rule over the entire earth. Or be killed by us and go to the world of the brave. O
Pandava! Remember the exile from the kingdom, the hardship of dwelling in the forest and Krishna's molestation.
Be a man. Display your wrath to those who have used unpleasant words against you repeatedly, in the course of
your wanderings. Wrath is manliness. O Partha! Be a man. Display your anger, strength, valour, knowledge, yoga
and dexterity in the use of weapons in battle." O Uluka! On my behalf, speak these words to the foolish, ignorant
and glutton eunuch Bhimasena. "O Vrikodara! Though impotent, you took an oath in the midst of the assembly
hall. If you are capable, drink Duhshasana's blood." The weapons have been consecrated. Kurukshetra is free of
mud. The horses have been fed and are fat. The soldiers have been paid. Tomorrow, together with Keshava,
fight[These words are addressed to Yudhishthira again.].'"'