Vaishampayana said, 'Then the unblemished Krishna braided her hair, with curls at the tips. The mild and dark-
eyed one hid it on the right side and donned a garment that was long, dark and extremely dirty. She thus assumed
the garb of a sairandhri and began to roam around, as if she was in great trouble. On seeing her wandering around,
men and women rushed to her and asked, "Who are you and what do you desire?" O Indra among kings! She then
told them, "I am a sairandhri. I have come here, wishing to work for anyone who will feed me." On seeing her
beauty, her attire and the gentleness of her speech, they did not believe that she was a maidservant who had come
in search of food.

'Virata's wife was the daughter of Kekaya and was greatly honoured. She looked down from the palace and beheld Drupada's daughter. On seeing her in that state, without a protector and clad in a single piece of garment, she
summoned her and said, "O fortunate one! Who are you and what do you wish to do?" O Indra among kings! She
told her[Droupadi and Virata's queen respectively.], "I am a sairandhri and I have arrived here in search of work. I will work for anyone who feeds me."

Sudeshna[Virata's wife.] replied, "O beautiful one! Those you speak of[Sairandhris.] do not possess the beauty you have. Those like you
have many and varied servant maids and servants. Your ankles are concealed. Your thighs are firm. You are deep in
three places[Speech, intelligence and navel.] and high in six[Nose, eyes, ears, nails, breasts and neck.]. You are red in the five places that should be red[Soles of the feet, palms of the hand, tongue, lips and nails.]. Your voice is as slow as that of
a swan. You have beautiful hair and beautiful breasts. You are dark[The word used is shyama, meaning dark. Shyama is also a term for a woman who hasn't had children. While
Droupadi has had children, the sense could also be that she is as beautiful as one who has not.]. Your buttocks and breasts are full. You are
endowed with all the qualities, like a mare from Kashmira. Your eyelashes curl gracefully. Your lips are like
bimbas[The bimba tree has fruit that is red when ripe. Ripe bimba fruit is a standard comparison for the lips of beautiful
women.]. You are slender at the waist. Your neck is lined like a conch shell. Your veins are hidden. Your face is
like the full moon. O fortunate one! Tell me truthfully who you are. You cannot be a servant maid. Are you a yak-
shi, a goddess, a gandharvi or an apsara[Apsaras are celestial dancers who serve Indra, sometimes regarded as wives of gandharvas.]-Alambusha, Mishrakeshi, Pundarika, Malini, Indrani, Varuni, or the
consort of Tvashtra, Dhata or Prajapati[Alambusha, Mishrakeshi, Pundarika and Malini are the names of apsaras. Indrani is Indra's consort, while
Varuni is Varuna's. Tvashtra is Vishvakarma, the architect of the gods. Dhata is best translated as the creator of the
worlds and Prajapati as the guardian.]? These goddesses are famous among the gods. Which of these are you?"

'Droupadi replied, "I am not a goddess, or a gandharvi, or an asuri, or a rakshasi. I tell you truthfully that I am a
sairandhri. I know how to dress hair and am skilful at grinding unguents. I can weave extremely beautiful and
colourful garlands. I served Satyabhama, Krishna's beloved queen and Krishna[Droupadi, or Krishnaa, as opposed to Krishna.], the wife of the Pandus and the
solitary beauty in the Kuru lineage. I go wherever I can obtain a good life. I am happy as long as I can obtain excellent garments. The goddess herself used to call me by the name of Malini[The goddess in question is Droupadi. Mala is a garland and Malini is one who collects flowers and weaves
garlands.]. O goddess! O Sudeshna! I have arrived thus in your house."

'Sudeshna said, "There is no doubt that I can place you on my head, as long as the king does not desire you with
all his heart and go to you. Behold! The ladies of the royal lineage and those who live in my abode are gazing at
you with attachment. What man will you not infatuate? Behold! Even the trees that are established in my abode are
bending down over you. What man will you not infatuate? When King Virata sees your superhuman beauty, with
the beautiful buttocks and the beautiful hips, he will forsake me and go to you with all his heart. Your limbs are
flawless. Your eyes are soft and long. O one with the beautiful smiles! On looking at you, any man who sees you
will become attached and be overcome with desire. You are unblemished in all your limbs and he will come under
the sway of the god of love. A she-crab conceives and brings about her own death[Reflecting the belief that a she-crab dies after giving birth.]. O one with the beautiful
smiles! I think that if I grant you residence, I will bring about my own destruction."

'Droupadi replied, "O beautiful one! Neither Virata, nor anyone else, can ever obtain me. I have five young
gandharvas[Gandharvas are semi-divine, celestial musicians.] as my husbands. They are the sons of a gandharva king who is extremely powerful. They always protect me. Any conduct that brings me grief ensures destruction. My gandharva husbands allow me to live in a house
where I am not served any leftover food and where I am not asked to wash anyone's feet. If any man desires me,
like any other common woman, before the night is over, he will enter another body[That is, he will be killed.]. O beautiful one! No one is
capable of making me stray. Those powerful gandharvas always protect me from unhappiness."

'Sudeshna said, "O beloved one! I will then offer you residence, according to your desires. You will not wash
the feet of others. Nor will you ever eat leftover food."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Krishna was thus comforted by Virata's wife. O Janamejaya! No one there got to know
who she actually was.'
