'Yudhishthira asked, "O Indra among kings! How did the great-souled Indra confront supreme and terrible unhappiness, together with his wife? I wish to know this."

'Shalya said, "O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Listen to this old and ancient historical account,
about how Indra had to face unhappiness, together with his wife. There was Tvashtra Prajapati[Tvashtra was an artisan, architect and builder. He is often equated with Vishvakarma, the architect of the gods.]. He was foremost
among the gods and was a great ascetic. Out of hatred for Indra, he created a son with three heads. This immensely
radiant one[The son with the three heads, Trishira.], who was universal in form, coveted Indra's station. His three faces were terrible and were like the
sun, the moon and the fire. He studied the Vedas with one mouth, he drank liquor with another. With another, he
glanced at all the directions, as if he was going to drink them up. He was an ascetic, mild and self-controlled. He
was engaged in dharma and austerities. O destroyer of enemies! His austerities were so great and terrible that they
were extremely difficult to accomplish. Having witnessed his austerities, valour, truthfulness, Shakra was depressed that he might become Indra[Indra is a title, status or position. Severe austerities allow a person to assume that position and dislodge Shakra.]. 'How can one get him addicted to desire, so that he does not torment
through these great austerities? If Trishira continues to grow, he will swallow up the three worlds[The three worlds are heaven, earth and the nether regions. Trishira means one with three (tri) heads (shira).].' O bull among
the Bharata lineage! That intelligent one thought about this in many ways. He then instructed the apsaras to seduce
Tvashtra's son. 'Go quickly, without any delay. Seduce Trishira and get him addicted to the pleasures of desire. O
ones with the beautiful hips! Wear the garments of love. Adopt a charming demeanour. O fortunate ones! Tempt
him and pacify my fear. O one with the beautiful limbs! I feel ill. I do not feel like myself. O ladies! Swiftly take
away my extremely terrible fear.' The apsaras replied, 'O Shakra! O destroyer of Bala[Bala was a demon killed by Indra.]! We will make endeavours
to seduce him, so that you have nothing to fear. That treasure among ascetics seems to burn everything down with
his eyes. O god! We will go together and try to seduce him. We will try to bring him under our control and remove
your fear.' Being instructed by Indra, they went to Trishira. There, the ones with the beautiful limbs adopted all
kinds of allurements to seduce him. They showed their dances. They exhibited the beauty of their limbs. But having seen this, the great ascetic was not perturbed. He was in control of his senses and was as calm as the full ocean.
They made supreme efforts and returned to Shakra. All of them joined their hands in salutation and told the king of
the gods, 'O lord! This one is extremely difficult to distract. It is impossible to sway him from his firmness. O immensely fortunate one! Do what must be done hereafter.' The immensely wise Shakra honoured the apsaras and
sent them away.

'"He began to think about a way of killing the great-souled one. The brave and powerful king of the gods began
to think about this in silence. The wise one began to think about a means of killing Trishira. He thought, 'I will
swiftly strike him with the vajra today, so that he quickly ceases to exist. One who is stronger must not ignore a
weak enemy who is strengthening.' Deciding on a course of action that was in accordance with the sacred texts, he
firmly made up his mind to kill him. In great anger, Shakra hurled his vajra at Trishira. It was fearsome and terrible
in form. It was like the fire. Injured and slain by the firm vajra, he fell down dead on the ground, like a mountain
peak that has been shattered. On seeing him slain by the vajra and lying down like a mountain, Indra of the gods
still found no peace, because his energy still blazed forth. Though he had been killed, his energy blazed forth, as if
he was still alive. Shachi's consort[Indra's wife is Shachi.] saw a woodcutter who had arrived there, engaged in his work. On seeing him,
the chastiser of Paka[Indra killed a demon named Paka.] quickly said, 'Listen to my words. Immediately cut off his heads.' The woodcutter replied,
'His shoulders are extremely broad and my axe will not be able to cut through. Besides, I am incapable of performing a deed that is condemned by the virtous.' Indra said, 'Do not be afraid. Swiftly act according to my words.
Through my favours, your weapon will become as strong as the vajra.' The woodcutter replied, 'I must know who
you are and why you have performed this terrible deed today. I wish to hear all this. Tell me everything
accurately.' Indra said, 'O woodcutter! I am Indra. Know me to be the king of the gods. Act according to my
words. O woodcutter! Do not reflect on this.' The woodcutter replied, 'O Shakra! How is it that you are not
ashamed of this cruel deed? Having killed the son of a rishi, are you not scared of the sin that comes from killing a
brahmana?' Indra said, 'To purify myself, I will perform an extremely difficult task of dharma later. This was an
extremely valorous enemy and I have killed him with my vajra. O woodcutter! I am anxious and frightened about
this even now. Swiftly cut off his heads and I will show you my favours. When animals are sacrificed, men will
give you their heads as a share. O woodcutter! This is the favour that I will show to you. Swiftly do that which
brings me pleasure.' Having heard these words of the great Indra, the woodcutter sliced off Trishira's heads with
his axe. When the heads had been cut off, birds like kapinjalas, tittiras and kalavimkas issued from them[A kapinjala is the chataka bird, a tittira is a partridge, a kalavimka is a sparrow.]. From
the mouth through which the Vedas had been studied and soma juice had been drunk, kapinjalas quickly flew
away. O king! O Pandava! From the mouth through which he glanced in every direction and seemed to drink them
up, tittiras flew out. O bull among the Bharata lineage! From the mouth through which Trishira used to drink
liquor, kalavimkas flew away. When the heads had been cut off, Maghavan[Indra.] was freed from his fever and happily
went to heaven. The woodcutter also returned to his own home.

'"On hearing that his son had been killed by Shakra, Tvashtra Prajapati's eyes reddened in rage and he spoke
these words. 'My son was always intent on austerities. He was forgiving, self-controlled and the master of his
senses. He committed no crime. Yet violence has been done to him. For this reason, I will create Vritra, with a
view to destroying Shakra. Let the worlds witness my valour and the great strength of my austerities. Let the evil-
souled and evil-minded Indra of the gods also behold.' That extremely famous and enraged ascetic touched water.
He offered oblations into the fire. Having created the terrible Vritra, he told him, 'O enemy of Indra! Through the
strength of my asceticism, increase in power.' He grew and touched the sky and was like the sun and the fire.

'What shall I do?' he asked, like the sun at the time of destruction. Having been told that he should kill Shakra, he
went to heaven. O supreme among the Kuru lineage! There ensued an angry and extremely terrible battle and the
valorous Vritra grasped Shatakratu Indra of the gods. Overcome with rage, Vritra opened his mouth and swallowed
him. When Shakra had been swallowed by Vritra, the lords of heaven were terrified. Those greatly spirited ones
created a yawn that would be Vritra's destruction. When Vritra yawned, the destroyer of Bala contracted his limbs
and emerged from the gaping mouth. Ever since then, the yawn has remained in all living beings. On seeing
Shakra emerge, all the gods were delighted. Vritra and Vasava again engaged in a battle. O bull among the Bharata
lineage! It was a terrible fight that went on for a long time. Because of the power of Tvashtra's austerities, Vritra's
power increased in that battle and Shakra retreated. When he retreated, the gods were immersed in supreme despondency. They were deluded because of Tvashtra's energy. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Together with
Shakra, they sought the advice of all the sages. O king! Deluded by fear, they reflected about what should be done.
In their minds[They went through their mental powers, they did not have to go physically.], all of them went to the imperishable and great-souled Vishnu. All of them seated themselves on
the peak of Mandara, wishing to kill Vritra."'
