'Sanjaya said, "O great king! Duryodhana advanced behind those bulls among men, Partha and Varshneya, who
had already penetrated. The Pandavas, together with the Somakas, emitted a mighty roar and swiftly rushed against
Drona. The battle commenced between the Panchalas and the Kurus at the mouth of the vyuha and it was extraordinary. It was extremely terrible and tumultuous and made the body hair stand up. O king! The likes of that
encounter had not been seen, nor heard of. O lord of the earth! The battle commenced when the sun was at the
midpoint. With Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, the Parthas, who were skilled in striking, arranged themselves
into a battle formation and enveloped all of Drona's soldiers with a shower of arrows. We had Drona, supreme
among the wielders of all weapons, at the forefront and showered down arrows on the Parthas, with Parshata at the
forefront. The heads of the two armies, adorned by chariots, were beautiful and dazzling. They looked like giant
clouds at the end of the winter season, driven towards each other by opposing winds. Those two large armies encountered and clashed against each other with the greatest of forces. It was like the rivers Ganga and Yamuna,
overflowing with water during the monsoon. Many different kinds of weapons were the winds. There were large
numbers of elephants, horses and chariots. In that battle, great and fierce clouds were like giant clouds tinged with
lightning. Thousands of currents of arrows were released from the wind that was Bharadvaja's son. They seemed
to pour down and pacify the immensely fierce fire that was created by the Pandu soldiers. The supreme of brahmanas agitated the Pandava soldiers, like the ocean at the end of the summer, when it is agitated by a fierce and gigantic storm. They made every endeavour to advance against Drona. They were like a strong wind that seeks to
shatter a large embankment. But they were restrained by Drona, like a mountain repulsing a torrent of water. In
that battle, the Pandavas, the Panchalas and the Kekayas were enraged. There were other kings too, who surrounded them from all sides. In that battle, those immensely strong and brave ones countered the Panchalas.

'"In that battle, Parshata, tiger among men, together with the Pandavas, repeatedly struck Drona, wishing to penetrate the enemy forces. Drona showered arrows on Parshata and he brought down a shower in return. Dhrishtadyumna brought down a shower of arrows. The swords were like winds at the forefront and there were lances,
spears and scimitars. The bowstrings were like lightning and Dhrishtadyumna was like the slayer of Bala[Indra.]. He
showered down a torrent of arrows in all the directions. He killed the best of rathas and horses and enveloped the
army. He prevented Drona from following the paths that the chariots of the Pandavas traversed. Parshata afflicted
Drona with his arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Drona made every endeavour in the battle. Having
encountered Dhrishtadyumna, his army was divided into three parts. One of these retreated towards Bhoja and another towards Jalasandha[There is some inconsistency about who this Jalasandha was. Duryodhana had a brother named Jalasandha. But
this must be a different Jalasandha, because he was later killed by Satyaki, and not by Bhima. In all probability,
this Jalasandha was from Magadha, and was Jarasandha's son. Jarasandha's eldest son, Sahadeva, sided with the
Pandavas. But the younger brother, Jalasandha, sided with the Kouravas.]. The last one was slaughtered by the Pandavas and went towards Drona. Drona,
supreme among rathas, tried to unite his forces. But maharatha Dhrishtadyumna routed and separated them. Divided into three parts, the army of the sons of Dhritarashtra was slaughtered by the Pandus and the Srinjayas. They
were like unprotected animals[Implying cattle.] in the forest, when attacked by many predators. Confounded by Dhrishtadyumna,
it was as if the warriors were devoured by Death. In that tumultuous battle, that is what people thought. The kingdom of a bad king is devastated by famine, disease and thieves. That is the way your army was shattered and routed by the Pandavas. Because of the rays of the sun on shattered weapons and armour and because of the dust raised
by the soldiers, the eyes were afflicted. Divided into three, the soldiers were slaughtered by the Pandavas.

'"Drona became intolerant and killed the Panchalas with his arrows. While he crushed those arrays and killed
them with arrows, Drona assumed the form of the blazing fire at the time of destruction. O lord of the earth! In that
battle, with only a single arrow, the maharatha pierced chariots, elephants, horses and foot soldiers. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! In the battle, there was not a single one among the soldiers of the Pandavas who could
withstand the sharp arrows that were released from Drona's bow. They were scorched by the sun and consumed by
Drona's arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Parshata's soldiers began to wander around there. In that
fashion, Parshata was like Death among your forces. He blazed everywhere, like a forest fire amidst dry wood. The
soldiers were killed by the arrows of Drona and Parshata. But those soldiers were ready to give up their lives and
fought to the best of their capacity. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O great king! Whether in your army, or that
of the enemy, there was not a single one who abandoned the fight out of fear.

'"The brothers Vivimshati, Chitrasena and maharatha Vikarna surrounded Kounteya Bhimasena from all sides.
Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti and the valiant Kshemadhurti-these three followed your three sons[Vivimshati, Chitrasena and Vikarna.]. The maharatha and energetic King Bahlika, born in a noble lineage, with his soldiers and his advisers, countered Droupadi's sons. Shaibya, the king of Govasana, with a thousand supreme warriors, countered the valiant son of Kashi.
Ajatashatru Kounteya was like a flaming fire and King Shalya, the lord of Madra, repulsed the king[Yudhishthira.]. The brave
and intolerant Duhshasana, together with his own soldiers, advanced and fought against Satyaki, supreme among
rathas. I armoured myself and with my soldiers and four hundred great archers, countered Chekitana[This is strange, because it suggests that Sanjaya himself took part in the battle and it doesn't sound right.]. Shakuni,
with seven hundred warriors from Gandhara who were armed with bows, lances, arrows and swords, countered
Madri's son[Meaning Sahadeva.]. The great archers, Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti, were prepared to give up their lives for the
sake of their friend and raised their weapons in battle, countering Virata, the lord of Matysa. The valiant Bahlika
made efforts to counter the unvanquished and powerful Shikhandi, the son of Yajnasena. Those from Avanti and
Souvira, together with the cruel Prabhadrakas countered the angry Dhrishtadyumna from Panchala. The brave rakshasa Ghatotkacha was cruel and was advancing to fight. Swiftly and angrily, Alayudha rushed against him in the
battle. Alambusa, the king of the rakshasas, adopted a fearsome form and was repulsed by maharatha Kuntibhoja,
with a large body of soldiers. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Saindhava remained stationed behind all the
soldiers. He was protected by the rathas who were supreme archers, Kripa and the others. O king! Saindhava's
chariot wheels were protected by two great ones-Drona's son to the left and the son of the suta to the right. His
rear was protected by Kripa, Vrishasena, Shala and the invincible Shalya, with Somadatta's son at the forefront.
They knew about policy and were great archers. All of them were skilled in fighting. Having made arrangements to
protect Saindhava, they[The Kouravas.] got ready to fight."'
