Vaishampayana said, 'Thereafter, when night had passed, Pandava Bhimasena took the food with him and left for
the place where the maneater lived. Reaching the forest where the rakshasa lived, the immensely strong Pandava
began to eat the food himself and called out to the rakshasa by name. Then, on hearing Bhimasena's words, the
rakshasa was greatly enraged and came to where Bhima was. His body was huge and his speed was swift, as if he
was breaking up the ground. His forehead was furrowed into three lines and he bit his lips. On seeing Bhimasena
eating the food, the rakshasa dilated his eyes and angrily said, "Who are you, stupid one, who dares to eat these offerings meant for me, that too in front of my own eyes? Do you wish to go to the land of the dead?" O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! On hearing this, Bhimasena began to laugh. Ignoring the rakshasa, he turned his head away
and continued to eat.

'Uttering a terrible roar and raising both arms high, the maneater rushed at Bhimasena, with the intention of
killing him. Even then, Pandava Vrikodara, the killer of enemy warriors, ignored the rakshasa. Casting only a
glance, he went on eating. Greatly enraged, the rakshasa struck a mighty blow with both his hands on the back of
Kunti's son. Though Bhima was powerfully struck by those arms, he did not even look up, and continued to eat.
Thereupon, the rakshasa became even more enraged. He uprooted a tree and powerfully dashed at Bhima, so as to
strike him again. Bhima, bull among men and immensely strong, slowly finished eating all the food. He washed
himself and then cheerfully stood up to fight. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The valorous Bhima laughingly
caught the tree that had been angrily hurled in his left hand. Then that powerful one hurled many other trees at
Bhimasena and the Pandava Bhima also hurled many at him. O great king! The terrible and great fight between
Baka and the Pandava with trees went on, denuding the forest of its trees. Announcing his name, Baka dashed at
the Pandava and grasped the immensely powerful Bhimasena in both his arms. Bhimasena also grasped the rakshasa in his great arms and began to violently drag the swift and strong one[The rakshasa.].

'Dragged by Bhima and also dragging the Pandava, the maneater was gradually overcome by great fatigue. The
earth shook because of their violent movements. Giant trees that stood there were shattered into pieces. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! On seeing the rakshasa fading away, Vrikodara pressed him down on the ground and
began to strike him with his arms. Powerfully pushing the middle of his[The rakshasa's.] back down with one knee, the Pandava
grabbed his neck with his right hand and his loincloth with the left, and then ripped the rakshasa into two with
great force. O ruler of the earth! Uttering a terrible roar, the fearsome rakshasa was torn into two by Bhima and
vomited blood.'
