Yudhishthira asked, "O grandfather! How did Shuka, the great ascetic with dharma in his soul, obtain birth as
Vyasa's son? How did he obtain supreme success? Tell me that. Through which woman did Vyasa, the store
of austerities, generate Shuka? We do not know anything about his mother, or about the birth of that fierce and
great-souled one. When he was a child, how did his intelligence turn towards the pursuit of subtle knowledge?
There is no second person in the world in whom such signs can be seen. O immensely radiant one! I wish to hear
about all this in detail. Your words are the equal of amrita and I am never satisfied with hearing them. O grandfather! In due course, tell me about Shuka's greatness, the yoga in his atman and about his knowledge."

'Bhishma replied, "The rishis did not make dharma dependent on grey hair, riches or relatives. A person who is
devoted to learning is great. O Pandava! Everything that you have asked me about has austerities as a foundation.
Austerities can be resorted to by controlling the senses and not in any other way. There is no doubt that addiction
to the senses is associated with sin. It is through controlling them that a man obtains success. O son! One thousand
horse sacrifices and one hundred vajapeya sacrifices are not equal to one-sixteenth of the fruits that one can obtain
through these means. I will tell you how the fierce Shuka's birth came about, the fruits of his yoga and the end that
he attained. It is difficult for a person with an unclean soul to understand this. In ancient times, Mahadeva was
sporting on the summit of Mount Meru, which was decorated with karnikara flowers[The Indian laburnum.]. He was surrounded by a
large number of terrible spirits. In those ancient times, the goddess[Parvati.] who was the daughter of the king of the
mountains, was also there. The lord, Krishna Dvaipayana, tormented himself through divine austerities there. He
was devoted to the dharma of yoga and using yoga, penetrated his atman. O supreme among the Kuru lineage! For
the sake of a son, he tormented himself through austerities, meditating in dharana. He repeatedly said, 'O lord[He was praying to Shiva.]!
Give me an energetic son who will have the power of the fire, the earth, the water, the wind and space.' Driven by
this resolution, he prayed to the lord of the gods, one whom those with unclean souls find difficult to obtain. He
worshipped him through supreme austerities. Subsisting only on air, the lord was there for one hundred years. He
worshipped the many forms of Mahadeva, Uma's consort. The brahmana rishis, all the devarshis, the guardians of
the worlds, the lords of the worlds, the Sadhyas, accompanied by the Vasus, the Adityas, the Rudras, the sun, the
moon, the wind, the Maruts, the oceans, the rivers, the Ashvins, the gods, the gandharvas, Narada, Parvata, the
gandharva Vishvavasu, the Siddhas and large numbers of apsaras were also there. Rudra Mahadeva was decorated
with beautiful karnikara flowers. He blazed in his radiance, like moonlight from the moon. That beautiful and divine forest was full of gods and devarshis. For the sake of a son, the rishi[Vedavyasa.] was engaged in supreme yoga there.
His complexion did not fade and there was no decay in his beauty. The three worlds thought that this was extraordinary. In his matted hair, his energy was like the flames of a fire. United in that infinite energy, he was seen to
be blazing. The illustrious Markandeya told me about this. He always talked about the conduct of the gods. O son!
Because, Krishna's[Krishna Dvaipayana.] matted hair blazed through those austerities, even today, it is seen to possess the complexion
of the fire. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In this way, he faithfully performed austerities. Maheshvara was
gratified and decided to grant him his wish. The illustrious Tryambaka seemed to smile and said, 'O Dvaipayana!
You will get the kind of son you desire. You will have a pure and great son and he will be like the fire, the wind,
the earth, the water and space. His sentiments and his intelligence will be like that and he will seek refuge in the
atman. He will be enveloped in energy and he will obtain fame in the three worlds.'"'
