'Sanjaya said, "On hearing these words of Dharmaraja, the bull among the Shini lineage was afraid that Partha[Arjuna.]
would censure him if he abandoned the king. But he especially thought that the worlds would speak of him as being a coward, if he did not go towards Phalguna. Having thought about this in many ways, Satyaki, unassailable in
battle and bull among men, spoke these words to Dharmaraja. 'O lord of the earth! If you think that this will ensure
your protection and make sure that you are safe, I will follow Bibhatsu and act in accordance with your words. O
king! I tell you truthfully that there is nothing in the three worlds that is dearer to me than Pandava[Arjuna.]. O one who
provides honours! As you have instructed, I will follow in his footsteps. There is nothing that I will not do for your
sake. O supreme among men! The words of my preceptor are special. But your words are even more special for
me. O bull among kings! Know that your brothers, Krishna and Vasudeva, are always engaged in doing what
brings you pleasure and base themselves on your welfare. O lord! For Arjuna's sake, I accept your words on my
head. O supreme among men! I will penetrate these impenetrable soldiers. I will angrily pass through Drona's array, like a fish through the ocean. O king! I will go to the spot where King Jayadratha is. He is stationed in the assembly of soldiers there, frightened of Pandava. He is protected by the best of rathas there-Drona's son, Karna,
Kripa and the others. O lord of the earth! I think that the spot where Partha is, prepared to slay Jayadratha, is three
yojanas from here. But though he has advanced three yojanas, I will follow in his footsteps. O king! Firm in my
resolution, I will remain there until he has killed Jayadratha. Instructed by his superiors, which man does not fight,
not to speak of someone like me? O king! I have been commanded by you. O lord! I know the spot to which I have
to go. This ocean of soldiers is full of iron rods, spears, clubs, lances, swords, shields, javelins, arrows and the best
of weapons, but I will agitate it. You can see that there is an array of elephants, with one thousand of them. They
have been born in the lineage known as Anjana[Anjana is one of the eight elephants that is a guardian of the directions.] and are valorous. They are mounted by many mlecchas, who
are armed and find delight in battle. O king! These elephants have the complexion of clouds and are exuding like
clouds[Exuding musth.]. If they are urged by the elephant-riders, they never retreat. O king! They cannot be vanquished until
they have been killed. O king! You can see the rathas. These maharathas are princes and have the name of Rukmarathas[Literally, those with golden chariots.]. O lord of the earth! They are skilled in fighting on chariots and on elephants. They are supreme in
knowledge of fighting and are skilled in fighting with their fists. They are accomplished in fighting with clubs and
also skilled in fighting at close quarters[The word used is niyuddha. Other than fighting at close quarters, this can also be translated as boxing.]. They have swords as weapons and can attack with the sword and the
shield. These brave ones are skilled in knowledge and seek to rival one another. O king! They always vanquish a
large number of men in battle. O king! They were vanquished by Karna and follow Duhshasana. They were applauded by Vasudeva as supreme rathas. They always seek to do that which brings Karna pleasure and follow his
instructions. O king! It is on his instructions that they retreated from their pursuit of the one with the white horses.
They have no wounds and are not exhausted. They possess strong armour and bows. On the commands of Dhritarashtra's son, they are certainly waiting for me. O Kourava! For the sake of bringing you pleasure, I will crush
them in the battle. I will then follow Savyasachi's footsteps. O king! There are seven hundred other elephants that
you can see. They are armoured and are ridden by kiratas[Mountain tribes who lived through hunting.]. To protect his life, the king of the kiratas had earlier
ornamented them and presented them to Savyasachi, together with many servants. O king! They have performed
many hard deeds for you earlier. Behold the vagaries of time that they are now battling against you. These elephants are ridden by kiratas, who are invincible in battle. All of them are skilled in handling elephants and descended from Agni. Savyasachi defeated all of them in a battle earlier. They follow Duryodhana's instructions and
are carefully waiting for me now. O king! These kiratas are invincible in battle, but I will shatter them with my arrows. I will follow Pandava, as he is engaged in Saindhava's death. These other extremely great elephants have
been born in Anjana's lineage. They are both harsh and humble and their temples and mouths are exuding. Their
armour is completely made out of gold and they are well ornamented. O king! In a battle, they succeed in accomplishing their objectives and are like Airavata. They hail from the northern mountains, and fierce dasyus[Either barbarians or bandits.] are
astride them. They are harsh and supreme warriors and their armour is made out of black iron. There are also those
who have been born from cows and those who have been born from monkeys. There are others who have been
born from other species and those who have been born as humans. That army, which seems to have the complexion
of smoke from a distance, consists of mlecchas who reside in fortresses in the Himalayas. They are the performers
of evil deeds. Duryodhana obtained them and this large number of elephants, together with Kripa, Somadatta's
son, Drona, supreme among rathas, the king of Sindhu and Karna. He disregards the Pandavas. Driven by destiny,
he thinks himself to be successful. But those that I have named will be within the reach of my iron arrows. O
Kounteya! They will not escape from me, even if they possess the speed of thought. He[Duryodhana.] has always drawn sustenance from the valour of others and honours them. But they will be afflicted by arrows, and destruction confronts
them. O king! You can see the rathas with golden standards. They are difficult to resist and are famous by the name
of Kambojas. They are brave and skilled in knowledge. They are devoted to the science of fighting. They desire
each other's welfare and have assembled firmly. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! These angry ones constitute
one akshouhini for Dhritarashtra's son. They are stationed for my sake and are protected by the brave ones among
the Kurus. O great king! They are not distracted and have presented themselves before me. I will destroy them,
like a fire against straw. O king! Therefore, let those who prepare chariots make my chariot ready and equip it with
all the implements, as has been decreed by those who prepare chariots. Let all the different weapons used in war be
placed. But compared to what the instructors have said, let five times the number be placed on the chariot. I will
have to clash against and kill the Kambojas, who are as angry as venomous serpents. They possess many weapons
and fight with many different kinds of weapons. I will have to clash against the kiratas, who are skilled in striking
and like poison. They have always been nurtured by King Duryodhana and have his welfare in mind. I will have to
clash against the Shakas, who are like Shakra in their valour. They are as unassailable as the fire and blaze like
fires. There are many other warriors, who are as difficult to resist as time. O king! I will clash against many such
invincible ones in the battle. Therefore, let the best of horses again be yoked to my chariot. Let them be without
exhaustion. Let them bear auspicious marks. Let them be groomed and watered.'

'"The king arranged for all the equipment and all the implements to be placed on the chariot. There were many
different kinds of weapons. Skilled men unyoked all the well-trained horses. They were given tasty water and fed.
After this, they were fanned. When they had drank and bathed, they were adorned with golden garlands. Stakes
were plucked out from the four horses. Those handsome and swift-coursing horses were dressed in golden harnesses. They were cheerful and well trained and were yoked to the chariot. The giant standard, with the mark of a lion
with golden manes, was erected. Pennants decorated with gold, gems and colourful coral were fastened. There was
an ornamented flag, with the complexion of a white cloud. There was an umbrella with a golden staff and there
were many weapons. With many golden trappings, the horses were duly yoked to the chariot. Daruka's[Daruka is the name of Krishna's charioteer.]
younger brother was the charioteer and was also his[Satyaki's.] beloved friend. Like Matali to Vasava, he came and reported that the chariot had been yoked. Having bathed, Satyaki, supreme among handsome ones, purified himself. He
performed the auspicious ceremonies and gave away one thousand nishkas of gold to snatakas[A snataka is a brahmana who has completed his period of celibate student life and is about to step into the
householder stage. Nishka is a golden coin.]. They blessed
him. He drank madhuparka[A mixture of honey and curd.] and kailavata liquor[Kailavata is a region to the north.]. His eyes were red and his eyes were unsteady because of
the intoxication. The brave one touched the brass and his joy increased[It is not obvious what the brass signifies. The liquor could have been kept in a brass goblet.]. His energy doubled and he blazed like
a fire. The supreme of rathas slung the bow around his hips and picked up the arrows. He was armoured and ornamented and the brahmanas pronounced benedictions on him. Beautiful maidens honoured him by showering
parched rice, fragrances and garlands on him. He joined his hands in salutation and touched Yudhishthira's feet.
He[Yudhishthira.] inhaled the fragrance of his head. He then ascended the giant chariot. The horses were cheerful and well fed
and were as fleet as the wind. They were from the Sindhu region and bore him on that victorious chariot. Satyaki's
limbs were full of cheer and he spoke to Bhima. 'O Bhima! Protect the king. That is your supreme duty. I will
pierce through this army, which has been ripened by time. I will proceed and it is your supreme duty to protect the
king. O destroyer of enemies! You know my valour and I know yours. O Bhima! Return and let me accomplish my
desired objective[Bhima had followed Satyaki.].' Having been thus addressed, he[Bhima.] replied, 'O Satyaki! Go and accomplish your objective.
O supreme among men! I will perform the task of protecting the king.' Having been thus addressed, Madhava said
to Bhimasena. 'O Partha! Go! Go swiftly. It is certain that victory will be mine, since you are obedient, affectionate and devoted to me today. O Bhima! That is what these auspicious portents are telling me. There is no doubt that
the wicked Saindhava will be slain by the great-souled Pandava and that I will embrace the king who has dharma
in his soul.' Having thus addressed Bhima, the great-minded one took his leave. He glanced towards your soldiers,
like a tiger towards a mass of deer. O lord of men! On seeing his glances, your soldiers were extremely confounded and began to tremble. Thus did Satyaki suddenly descend on your soldiers. O king! On Dharmaraja's instructions, he wished to see Arjuna."'
