Vaishampayana said,  'O  king!  A  great  uproar  arose  from  the  women  and  men  who  were  standing  atop  the
palaces or on the ground. The royal road was crowded with men and women. With difficulty, the king advanced along that, trembling and with his hands joined in salutation. He emerged from Gajasahvya through the
main gate and repeatedly took his leave from those large numbers of people. Vidura decided that the time was right
for him to also go to the forest with the king. The chief adviser and suta, Sanjaya, Gavalgana's son, also took the
same decision. King Dhritarashtra persuaded Kripa and maharatha Yuyutsu to return and handed them over to Yudhishthira. After the citizens had returned, the king[Yudhishthira.] sought Dhritarashtra's permission to return, with the women
from the inner quarters of the palace. O bull among the Bharata lineage! He told his mother, Kunti, "I will go with
the king[This isn't clear. Kunti insisted that she would follow Dhritarashtra and Yudhishthira tried to persuade her against
it.]. You should return. O queen! Surrounded by your daughters-in-law, you should return to the city. The
king is devoted to dharma and is firm in his resolution that he will devote himself to austerities." With tears flowing down from his eyes, Dharmaraja said this. But Kunti clung on to Gandhari and continued to advance. She said,
"O great king! Never disregard Sahadeva. O king! He has always been affectionate towards you and me. Karna
never retreated from battle and you must always remember him. It is because of my stupid intelligence that the
brave one was destroyed. O son! My wicked heart is certainly made out of iron. Despite my being unable to see the
son of the sun, it has not shattered into a hundred fragments. O destroyer of enemies! That being the case, what can
I possibly do now? It is my sin that I did not reveal that he was the son of the sun. O mighty-armed one! Therefore,
with your brothers, I hope you will give excellent gifts in his name. O slayer of enemies! He was your elder. O afflicter of enemies! Always be devoted to Droupadi. O extender of the Kuru lineage! Always look after Bhimasena,
Arjuna and Nakula. O brave one! You have to bear the burden of the Kuru lineage now. I will dwell in the forest
now and devote myself to serving my father-in-law and mother-in-law[Dhritarashtra was elder to Pandu and was therefore like Pandu's father.]. I will dwell with Gandhari, cover myself
with filth and devote myself to austerities." Yudhishthira had dharma in his soul. Thus addressed, he controlled
himself. With his brothers, he was immersed in great grief and did not say anything.

'After having thought for some time, though he was distressed, full of reflection and overcome by sorrow, Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, spoke to his mother. "Why are you going away? You should not speak in this way. I will
not give you permission to go. You should show us your favours. O beautiful one! In earlier times, you spoke
agreeable words to energize us. You spoke to us about Vidula's words and you should not abandon that principle[Vidula's instructions to her son have been described in Section 54 (Volume 5). Kunti cited those to persuade Yudhishthira to fight. Kunti's message to Yudhishthira was conveyed through Krishna.].
I have obtained this earth after slaying the kings. Those were your words of wisdom, received by me through Vasudeva, bull among men. I had heard about your intelligence earlier. Where has that gone now? You spoke to us
about adherence to the dharma of kshatriyas, but you wish to deviate from those now. How will you dwell alone in
the forest after abandoning us, the kingdom and these illustrious daughters-in-law? Show me your favours." Her
eyes flowing with tears, Kunti heard these words from her son. However, with tears flowing from her eyes, she
continued to advance and Bhima spoke to her. "O Kunti! You should enjoy this kingdom that has been conquered
by your sons. Having obtained it, why does your mind turn away from the dharma of kings? Earlier, why did you
then ask us to destroy the earth? For whom do you wish to give it up and go to the forest? When we were children,
why did you bring us back from the forest[The Pandavas were born in a forest hermitage.]? Madri's sons are overcome with sorrow and grief. O mother! O illustrious one! Be gratified and do not go to the forest. Enjoy Yudhishthira's prosperity, conquered through Partha's[Arjuna's.]
strength." But she had made up her mind that the time had come to go to the forest. Though her sons lamented in
many ways, she did not pay any attention to their words. Droupadi's face was distressed. As her mother-in-law left
for the forest, she wept, and with Bhadra[Subhadra.], followed her. The immensely wise one[Kunti.] had made up her mind to leave
for the forest. She repeatedly glanced at her sons, who were weeping, but proceeded. The Pandavas, the servants
and the women from the inner quarters continued to follow. She restrained them and tearfully, spoke these words to
her sons.'
