'Yudhishthira said, "Anger destroys men and anger again leads to prosperity. O immensely intelligent one! Know
therefore that both well-being and ill-being find their source in anger. O beautiful one! He who always restrains his
anger obtains prosperity. O beautiful one! But he who never controls his anger, never obtains prosperity. The terrible anger contributes to his downfall. It has been seen that anger is the root of destruction for all beings. How can
someone like me indulge in anger, when it brings about the destruction of the worlds? The angry man commits sin.
The angry man may even murder his superiors. The angry man abuses his superiors with harsh words. When angered, one cannot distinguish between what should be said and what should not be said. There is nothing that such
a person cannot do or say. From anger, one can kill someone who should not be killed, or honour someone who
should be killed. An angry person can even send himself to Yama's abode. On realizing these faults, the learned
ones have said that anger must be conquered, if one wishes for supreme welfare in this world and the hereafter.
The wise have controlled anger. O Droupadi! Thinking about this, why should someone like me also not act accordingly? That is the reason my anger does not increase.

'"One who does not retaliate in anger against someone who is angered, saves himself and the other person from
great fear. He is like a physician for both. A weak man may be oppressed by men who are stronger. But if he is angered in his folly, he brings about his own destruction. In the hereafter, there is no world for one who does not control one's own self and destroys one's own self. O Droupadi! It has therefore been said that those who are weak
should control their anger. And though powerful, the wise one is not angered when oppressed. Having destroyed
his oppressor, he finds delight in the next world. It is for this reason that wise men who have the knowledge, be
they strong or weak, always forgive, even if they are in difficulties. O Krishna! The righteous always praise those
who have controlled anger. The virtuous hold the view that victory comes to the forgiving and the good. Truth is
superior to falsehood and gentleness to cruelty. For the sake of killing someone like Suyodhana[Duryodhana.], how can
someone like me show the anger, with its many faults, that is shunned by the virtuous? It is certain that learned and
far-sighted ones call someone controlled when he has no anger in him. If a person uses wisdom to check an anger
that has arisen, those who know the truth call such a person powerful. O one with the beautiful hips! An angry one
cannot see the course of action accurately. An angry man does not see his tasks or his limits. The angry one kills
those who should not be killed. He exhibits harshness towards his superiors. Therefore, it is the duty of anyone
with power to keep anger at a distance. For one overcome with anger, it is not easily possible to attain courtesy,
tolerance, valour, swiftness, energy and other qualities. By forsaking anger, a man can attain his true energy. O immensely wise one! But it is extremely difficult for an angry one to exhibit his energy when the time is right. Those
who have no learning always think that anger is the same as energy. Passion has been given to humankind for the
destruction of the world.

'"Therefore, a person who wishes to live appropriately must always forsake anger. It is certain that it is better to
give up one's own dharma than fall prey to anger. It is all those who have no intelligence and limited senses who
transgress this. O unblemished lady! How can someone like me do this? If men equal to the earth in forgiveness
did not exist, there would be no peace among men, but dissension caused by anger. If injured ones return the injury
and those oppressed by seniors return the oppression, the outcome will be a destruction of all beings and the establishment of that which is not dharma. O Krishna! O one with the beautiful face! If every man who is abused immediately abuses back, if one who is injured returns violence with violence, if fathers oppress their sons and sons oppress their fathers, if husbands oppress their wives and wives oppress their husbands, there can be no birth in a
world thus angered. Know that the birth of all beings is conditional on conciliation. O Droupadi! All beings will be
swiftly destroyed in such a world. Thus anger leads to the destruction and non-existence of all beings. It is because
people as forgiving as the earth are seen in this world that beings keep getting born and there is existence. O beautiful one! A man must be forgiving in all his difficulties. It has been said that the birth of all beings results from
forgiveness. If a man is insulted and oppressed by a stronger person, but always pacifies his anger and controls his
anger, he is said to be learned and supreme. Such a man has influence in the eternal worlds. But one who has little
knowledge and falls prey to anger is destroyed in this world and the next.

'"O Krishna! The great-souled and forgiving Kashyapa sung this hymn in honour of those who are eternally forgiving: 'Forgiveness is dharma. Forgiveness is sacrifices. Forgiveness is the Vedas. Forgiveness is the sacred texts.
He who knows this is capable of forgiving everything. Forgiveness is the brahman. Forgiveness is the truth. Forgiveness is the past and the future. Forgiveness is austerities. Forgiveness is purity. Forgiveness holds up the entire
world. Forgiving ones attain the worlds of ascetic ones who know the brahman and those who know about sacrifices. Forgiveness is the energy of the energetic. Forgiveness is the brahman of the ascetics. Forgiveness is the
truth of those who are truthful. Forgiveness is alms. Forgiveness is fame.' O Krishna! The brahman, truth, sacrifices and the world are established in forgiveness and how can someone like me give up something like that?
Those who perform sacrifices enjoy their worlds and those who forgive enjoy other ones. A man who is wise must
always forgive. Whoever forgives everything attains the brahman. This world belongs to those who forgive. The
next belongs to those who forgive. They are honoured here and in the hereafter and attain the pure goal. Men who
always overcome their wrath through forgiveness obtain the supreme worlds. Therefore, forgiveness is considered
supreme.

'"In praise of those who are forgiving, Kashyapa always chanted these verses. O Droupadi! Now that you have
heard these verses about forgiveness, do not be angered. Our grandfather[Bhishma.], Shantanu's son, always praises
peace. The preceptor[Drona.] and Kshatta Vidura also speak about peace. Kripa and Sanjaya also speak about peace.
Somadatta, Yuyutsu, Drona's son[Ashvatthama.] and our grandfather Vyasa always speak about peace. Always urged by all of
them towards peace, I think the king[Duryodhana.] will return the kingdom. If he does not, he will face destruction. A terrible
time has come about. It will lead to the destruction of the Bharatas. O beautiful one! I am certain that this has been
decreed by destiny a long time ago, and thereafter. Suyodhana is undeserving of forgiveness and therefore he finds
none. I deserve it and therefore, forgiveness has taken possession of me. Forgiveness and gentleness are eternal
dharma and the conduct of those who have control over their own selves. Therefore, that is the way I will act."'
