'Yudhishthira asked, "O illustrious one! Through what deeds did Sudyumna, the lord of the earth, obtain supreme
success? I wish to hear about that king."

'Vyasa replied, "An ancient history is recounted about this. There were two brothers, Shankha and Likhita, and
they were controlled in their vows. They had separate and beautiful abodes on the banks of the Bahuda river and
these were always lovely with trees that had flowers and fruit. On one occasion, Likhita went to Shankha's hermitage. At that time, following his own wishes, Shankha had gone out of his hermitage. Likhita arrived at the hermitage of his brother, Shankha. He knocked down some ripe fruit. Having got them, without thinking about it, the
brahmana ate them. While he was eating them, Shankha returned to his hermitage. On seeing him eating them,
Shankha asked his brother, 'Where did you get the fruit and why are you eating them?' Embracing his elder brother and greeting him, he smiled and said, 'I got them here.' Shankha was overcome by great anger and replied, 'By
taking these fruits yourself, you have committed an act of theft. Go to the king and tell him what you have done.
Say, "O best of kings! I have taken something that was not given to me. Know me to be a thief. Follow your own
dharma. O lord of men! As a thief, quickly punish me."' O mighty-armed one! Having been addressed in these
words, Likhita, rigid in his vows, went to King Sudyumna.

'"Sudyumna heard from his guards that Likhita had arrived. With his advisers, the lord of men advanced on foot
to greet him. Having approached the one who knew about the brahman, the king asked, 'O illustrious one! Tell me
the reason why you have come. It will be done.' Having been thus addressed, the brahmana rishi replied to
Sudyumna, 'You have promised that you will do what has to be done. Now listen and act. O bull among men! I ate
fruit that my elder had not authorized. O king! I ate those. Therefore, punish me immediately.' Sudyumna replied,
'O bull among brahmanas! If you think that the king has the authority to wield the rod, then he also has the power
to pardon. O performer of auspicious deeds! O observer of great vows! You have been pardoned. Tell me what else
you desire. I will certainly act in accordance with your words.' The brahmana rishi was delighted with the great-
souled king. But he wished for no other boon from the king than the boon of being punished. At this, the great-
souled lord of the earth severed Likhita's two hands.

'"Having been punished, he[Likhita.] went to his brother, Shankha, and said in great distress, 'I have been punished for
my stupid intelligence. O illustrious one! You should now pardon me.' Shankha replied, 'O one who knows about
dharma! I am not angry with you. Nor have you caused me any injury. You violated dharma and that is the reason
you have been punished. Now quickly go to the Bahuda and according to the rites, offer oblations to the gods, the
ancestors and the rishis. Do not set your mind on adharma again.' On hearing Shankha's words, Likhita performed
his ablutions in the sacred river and also performed the water-rites. Instantly, his hands reappeared, like two lotuses. Astounded, he went to his brother and showed him his hands. Shankha said, 'Do not doubt that this has happened because of my ascetic powers and because it has been ordained.' Likhita asked, 'O immensely radiant one!
Why did you not purify me earlier? O supreme among brahmanas! Afterall, the strength of your austerities is like
this.' Shankha responded, 'I had to act in this way because I was not the one who wielded the rod of chastisement.
Other than you, the king and all his ancestors have also been purified.' O best among Pandavas! Through his
deeds, that king became supreme. He obtained supreme success, like Daksha, the son of Prachetasa. This is the
dharma of kshatriyas, the protection of subjects. Anything else is a wrong path. O great king! Do not unnecessarily
sorrow in your mind. O supreme among those who know about dharma! Listen to the beneficial words of your
brothers. O Indra among kings! The dharma of kshatriyas is the rod, not the shaved head."'
