Janamejaya said, 'If there was anything wonderful in the sacrifice of Dharma's intelligent son, my grandfather,
you should tell me about it.' Vaishampayana replied, 'O tiger among kings! Hear about a great wonder. O lord!
This occurred after the great horse sacrifice was over. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! The best among
brahmanas, relatives, kin, friends, the distressed, the blind and the helpless were gratified. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! The great gifts were being spoken about in every direction. Showers of flowers rained down on
Dharmaraja's head. O unblemished one! A mongoose that was golden along one flank emerged from its hole. O
lord of the earth! It spoke in a voice that resembled the vajra and thunder. Because of the roar it uttered, it terrified
all the animals and birds. That proud hole dweller spoke in a human voice. "O lord of men! This sacrifice is not
equal to a little bit of coarse ground meal[Saktu, this is powdered and mixed with water.] given away by a person who resided in Kurukshetra and followed the
conduct of unchha." O lord of the earth! On hearing the words of the mongoose, all the bulls among brahmanas
were overcome by great wonder. The brahmanas approached the mongoose and asked, "From where have you
come to this sacrifice, attended by the virtuous? What is your greatest strength? What is the learning you resort to?
You are censuring this sacrifice, but what do you know? Without any deviation, all the rites have been observed in
the sacrifice that has been performed. Everything has been according to the sacred texts. Everything has been proper. Everything that needs to be done has been done. Using the insight of the sacred texts and following the rites,
everyone who deserves to be worshipped has been honoured here. Without any malice, oblations sanctified by
mantras have been offered into the fire. With many kinds of gifts, the bulls among brahmanas have been satisfied
here. The kshatriyas have been satisfied with excellent battles. The ancestors have been satisfied with funeral rites.
The vaishyas have been satisfied with protection and the best of women have been satisfied through their desires
having been met. The shudras have been satisfied through kind words and the others who are left have been satisfied with the remnants of gifts. The kin and relatives have been satisfied by the purity of our king's behavior. The
gods have got sacred oblations and those who sought refuge have been granted protection. Therefore, speak to
these brahmanas, who are devoted to the truth. The brahmanas who desire to know have asked you about what is
in the sacred texts and about what has been seen. You seem to be wise and you are radiant in your celestial form.
Your words should be respectfully heard. The brahmanas have assembled here and you should tell them the truth."

Thus asked by the brahmanas, the mongoose laughed and replied, "O brahmanas! The words I have spoken are not
false. Nor have I spoken out of insolence. Everything that I have said has been heard by you. The sacrifices performed by kings are not equal to a little bit of coarse ground meal being given by a person who resided in Kurukshetra, resorting to the vow of unchha. O bulls among brahmanas! I should indeed tell you about this. O  bulls
among brahmanas! Listen single-mindedly to what I tell you. I felt and saw something extraordinary. This is about
a person who resided in Kurukshetra, resorting to the vow of unchha. That brahmana obtained heaven, with his
wife, son and daughter-in-law. Because of what transpired, one half of my body turned golden."'
