'Duryodhana said, "O Sanjaya! Kounteya Yudhishthira has obtained seven akshouhinis. Together with the kings,
what does he plan to do in preparation for the war?"

'Sanjaya replied, "O king! In great happiness, Yudhishthira is preparing for the war. Bhimasena, Arjuna and the
twins are not scared. Bibhatsu Kounteya has yoked his divine chariot and, invoking mantras, is radiating in all the
directions. We have seen him ready, like a cloud tinged with lightning. After invoking the mantras, he happily told
me, 'O Sanjaya! Behold the portents. We will be victorious.' Bibhatsu told me this and I also saw this to be true."

'Duryodhana said, "You happily praise the Parthas, who were defeated in the game of dice. Tell me. What kind
of chariot does Arjuna possess? What is the nature of his standard?"

'Sanjaya replied, "O lord of the earth! O lord! Together with Shakra, Tvashta and the creator, Bhouvana thought
of and created many beautiful things[Bhouvana or Bhoumana is Vishvakarma, the architect of the gods. Tvashta or Tvashtra is also Vishvakarma,
but is mentioned here separately.]. With their celestial maya, they created many beautiful forms for the standard-extremely expensive, celestial, heavy and light. In all directions, sideways and upwards, his standard is one
yojana long. It is not entangled, even if it is surrounded by trees. Such is the maya that Bhouvana has created.
Shakra's bow[The rainbow.] sparkles in the sky in many hues and we do not know what it is. Such is the standard that Bhouvana has created. It can be seen in many forms. From a fire, smoke ascends up into the sky. It has energy as its
body, but has many forms. Such is the standard that Bhouvana has created. It has no weight and it does not face
any impediments. He has excellent and white horses that are as fleet as the wind. They are divine and a gift from
Chitraratha[The king of the gandharvas.]. Even when some are killed, one hundred will always remain. This was the boon that was granted
earlier. The king[Yudhishthira.] has large and ivory-coloured horses yoked to his chariot, a match for his valour. In battle, Bhimasena has mounts that are as swift as the wind and have the hue of antelopes. Sahadeva has mounts with speckled
bodies, with backs that have the colour of partridges. In affection and delight, his brother Phalguna gave them to
him. These horses are superior to those of his brave brother. Madri's son, Nakula Ajamidha[Ajamidha was a common ancestor and Ajamidha is usually used for Yudhishthira and Dhritarashtra.], has supreme and
bay horses that were given by the great Indra. They are equal to the wind in strength and speed and they bear the
brave one, like Indra, the slayer of Vritra. There are horses that are their equal in age and valour. They are well
trained and have no equals in their speed. They bear Subhadra's son and Droupadi's sons. These are large horses
that were given by the gods."'
