Vaishampayana said, 'When the great-souled Pandavas had travelled a short distance, Droupadi, who was not accustomed to travelling on foot, sat down. She was exhausted and miserable from the storm and the wind. The famous Panchali was delicate and fainted. When the black-eyed one fell down with faintness, she clasped her thighs
with her round and beautiful arms. Trying to support herself with her thighs, which were like the trunks of an elephant, she suddenly fell down on the ground, like a trembling plantain tree. On seeing the one with the beautiful
hips fall like a clinging creeper, the valorous Nakula dashed forward and grasped her. Nakula said, "O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The dark-eyed daughter of the king of Panchala is exhausted and has fallen down
on the ground. Be considerate. She does not deserve unhappiness. But the one whose gait is slow has suffered
great unhappiness. O great king! Comfort her. She is tired out through exhaustion." On hearing these words, the
king was extremely distressed. Bhima and Sahadeva also swiftly rushed towards her.

'Kounteya[Yudhishthira.] looked at her. She was wan in face and emaciated. Taking her on his lap, the one with dharma in
his soul began to lament. "She was accustomed to sleeping on beautifully spread beds, in houses that were guarded
well. This beautiful one is deserving of happiness. How is it that she has fallen down on the ground? Her feet are
delicate. She is deserving of boons. Her face is like a lotus, but because of me, it is now darkened. Having been addicted to dice, what have I done out of my stupidity? With Krishna, I am now wandering around in this forest, infested by masses of animals. Her father, King Drupada, bestowed the large-eyed one, thinking that with the Pandavas as her husbands, Panchali would obtain happiness. None of that has happened. She is oppressed by exhaustion and unhappiness. She has fallen down on the ground because of my evil deeds." When Dharmaraja Yudhishthira lamented in this fashion, Dhoumya and all the other supreme among brahmanas came to him. They comforted him and pronounced their benedictions over him. They recited mantras to keep the rakshasas away and performed rites. The supreme rishis recited mantras for the sake of peace. The Pandavas repeatedly touched her with
their cold hands. Fanned by the cool breeze that had drops of water mixed in it, Panchali slowly recovered and regained consciousness. They laid out the distressed Krishna on antelope skins that were spread out. After having
rested, the ascetic lady regained her senses. With calloused hands[Calloused from wielding bows.], the twins slowly rubbed her red-soled feet,
marked auspiciously. Dharmaraja Yudhishthira also comforted her.

'The best of Kurus then spoke to Bhimasena. "O Bhima! There will be many mountains. They will be uneven,
covered with ice and difficult of access. O mighty-armed one! How will Krishna be able to traverse them?" Bhimasena replied, "O king! I will myself carry the princess, the twins and you, bull among men. O Indra among
kings! Do not unnecessarily be anxious. Alternatively, my son is great in valour. He can roam the skies and is my
equal in strength. If you say so, Ghatotkacha will carry all of us." Having been instructed by Dharmaraja, he remembered his rakshasa son. As soon as his father had thought of him, Ghatotkacha, with dharma in his soul, appeared. The mighty-armed one greeted the brahmanas and the Pandavas, hands joined in salutation, and they also
welcomed him. Truth was his valour and he spoke to his father Bhimasena. "You thought of me and I swifly arrived to serve you. O mighty-armed one! What is your command? Without a doubt, I will do everything." On hearing this, Bhimasena embraced the rakshasa.'
