'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanatsujata! These supreme words that you have spoken about the brahman have the form
of the entire universe. These supreme words are extremely rare among desirable objects. O young one! Therefore,
speak to me."

'Sanatsujata replied, "You have happily asked me about the brahman, but it is not something that can be obtained in a hurry. I will tell you the ancient knowledge about the one who is not manifest. This can be successfully
known through the practice of brahmacharya."

'Dhritarashtra said, "You have said that the eternal knowledge about the one who is not manifest can be successfully obtained through the practice of brahmacharya and not through the performance of acts at prescribed points
in time. How does one then obtain the immortality of the brahman?"

'Sanatsujata replied, "Those who conquer their desires in this world, while patiently establishing themselves on
the brahman, are firmly based on truth, and pluck the soul out of the body, like a stalk of munja grass[Munja is a kind of rush or grass, used to make girdles for brahmanas.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The father and the mother create the body. But the birth instructed by the preceptor is
the true birth, because that is free of age or death[The preceptor is also like a father and initiation into studies is like a second birth.]. Those who enter a preceptor's womb and become embryos
there, observing brahmacharya, become learned in the sacred texts in this world and attain supreme yoga after they
give up their bodies. The preceptor fills the ears with the truth, practises truth and confers immortality. He should
be regarded as the father and the mother. Knowing of his deeds, one should not cause him any injury. A disciple
must always show respect to his preceptor. Pure and without distraction, he should study. His pride should not be
annoyed, nor should he be angered, at tasks he is asked to perform. This is the first quarter of brahmacharya. Doing
what pleases the preceptor, in deeds, thoughts and speech, even at the expense of life and riches, is said to be the
second quarter. The conduct towards the preceptor should be the same as that towards the preceptor's wife, acting
as one is instructed and performing what is pleasant. This is said to be the third quarter. Thinking oneself to be
wise, one should never tell a preceptor that one isn't responsible for a deed. Even if one thinks this, one should not
say it. This is the fourth quarter of brahmacharya. One should dwell by presenting to the preceptor whatever objects one obtains. For those who are righteous and possess many qualities, the conduct should be the same towards
the preceptor's son. When one dwells in this way, one prospers in this world. One obtains many sons and fame. All
the directions shower down upon him and many people dwell with him in turn, for the sake of brahmacharya. It is
through such brahmacharya that the gods attained divinity, the immensely fortunate and learned rishis attained the
world of Brahma and the gandharvas and the apsaras obtained their beauty. It was with such brahmacharya that the
sun was born earlier. O king! He who lies down and torments his entire body with austerities, will transcend childishness and become learned. In due course of time, he will conquer death. O kshatriya! The worlds that people
conquer through deeds they have performed are finite. But through knowledge, one obtains the entire brahman.
There is no other path to traverse."

'Dhritarashtra asked, "Does he[The brahman or the paramatman. There is no gender in the text.] appear white or red? Is he dark, black like collyrium, or brown? In what form
does a righteous and learned brahmana visualize the seat of that immortal and undecaying one?"

'Sanatsujata replied, "He does not appear as white or red, as black, or with the complexion of iron. Nor does he
have the complexion of the sun. He is not established in the earth or the sky. He is not to be found in the waters of
the ocean. He does not resort to the stars, or the lightning. His form cannot be seen in the clouds. He cannot be
found in the wind or the gods, nor can he be seen in the moon or the sun. He is not the mantras of the Rig Veda, the
Yajur Veda or the Atharva Veda, nor can he be seen in the unblemished Sama Veda. O king! It is certain that he
cannot be seen in great vows and in rathantara and barhata[Barhata (brihati) is a kind of metre. Rathantara is a metre that particularly occurs in the Sama Veda.]. He is the darkness that is impossible to cross. He is
beyond death and beyond destruction. His form cannot be seen, it is as thin as a razor's edge, but he is also larger
in form than the mountains. He is the foundation. He is immortality. He is the worlds. He is the brahman. He is
fame. He is the source of all beings and at the time of destruction, he is the one into whom they flow. He is without
division and gigantic. His fame soars up. The words of the wise say that he is immutable. Everything in the universe is established in him. Those who know him become immortal."'
