The brahmana said, 'Vivasvat's[The sun's.] chariot has a single wheel and in due course, you firmly draw it. If you
have seen anything wonderful and praiseworthy, you should tell me about it.'

'"The serpent replied, 'Successful sages and the gods reside in his thousand rays, like birds perched on branches
during the spring. The great wind emerges from Surya's rays and yawns in the sky. O brahmana! What can be
more wonderful than that? The one named Shukra is at his feet[Shukra is Venus. This should probably read Shakra, that is, Indra.]. At the time of the monsoon, he showers down
rain from the clouds in the sky. What can be more wonderful than that? For eight months, he sucks up the water
through his pure rays and at the right time, showers them down again. What can be more wonderful than that? The
atman is always established in specific parts of his energy. That is the seed of the earth and sustains mobile and immobile objects. The mighty-armed god is eternal. He is supreme and without decay[This seems to be a reference to the brahman or paramatman.]. O brahmana! He is without
beginning and without end. What can be more wonderful than that? There is something that is even more extraordinary than all these wonders. Hear about it from me. Residing with Surya, I have seen this in the sparkling
sky. In ancient times, at midday, the sun used to scorch the worlds. At that time, an entity was seen to advance towards the sun. It illuminated all the worlds with its own natural radiance. It advanced towards the sun and seemed
to splinter the sky in the process. The rays of that energy blazed like oblations poured into the fire. That form was
like that of a second sun and could not be looked at. As it advanced, Vivasvat stretched out his hand. As if honouring back in return, the entity also stretched out its right hand. Splintering the firmament, it then entered the solar
disc. It mingled with Aditya's energy and in an instant, merged inside it. A doubt arose, because we could no
longer distinguish between the two different masses of energy. Of these two, which one was Surya on his chariot?
And which was the one that had arrived? Since a doubt arose in us, we asked Ravi[Surya's name.], "O Surya! Who is the one
who has advanced through the firmament and has merged into you, like a second self?"'"'
