Brahma said, "O excellent ones! I will now tell you what you have asked. Listen to everything properly and
in due order. It is the view that non-violence towards all creatures is the supreme task. That is the highest
state and is free of anxiety. It is the sign of dharma. The ancient ones, certain in their determinations, have said that
knowledge is the best. Therefore, through knowledge, one is purified and is freed from all sins. Those who are violent in conduct towards other people are non-believers. They are immersed in greed and confusion and go to hell.
Those who single-mindedly pursue beneficial acts are born again and again and find pleasure in this world. There
are learned ones who faithfully perform tasks. They do not desire anything. They are patient and virtuous in their
insight. After this, I will tell you about the association between sattva and kshetrajna. O excellent ones! Listen to
the association between them and to the disassociation. This is said to be the connection between the subject and
the object. Purusha is always the subject and sattva is said to be the object. In an earlier section, this has been explained as the difference between a gnat and a fig-tree. Sattva is always unconscious. It enjoys and does not know.
The one who enjoys the enjoyer[Purusha.] is the one who knows. Sattva is said to be associated with the qualities. It is
transient and possesses opposite sentiments. Kshetrajna has the attribute of being without qualities. It is eternal and
without opposite sentiments. It has no parts. It always enjoys sattva, like the leaf of a lotus enjoys the water on it. It
knows all the qualities. Despite being associated with them, it is not attached. It is like a drop of water that moves
on the leaf of a lotus. There is no doubt that Purusha is unattached in that way. It has been determined that matter
originates with sattva, which is in turn owned by Purusha. The connection between the two is like that between
matter and its creator. When one is in a place that is dark, one advances with the help of a lamp. In that way, if one
desires the supreme, one advances with the lamp of sattva. That lamp shines as long as matter and its qualities exist. When matter and its qualities are destroyed, the light is also extinguished. The manifest is said to be the quality
of sattva, while Purusha is unmanifest. O brahmanas! Know this. I will tell you more. Even if there is a thousand,
it is difficult to comprehend and one doesn't attain intelligence[Even if one tries to explain it in one thousand different ways.]. However, even with one-fourth of that[One-fourth of the explanations.], if one
has intelligence, one can obtain happiness. Know that the attainment of dharma depends on the means. A person
who knows the means is intelligent and obtains extreme happiness. There may be a man who is travelling without
the requisite provisions. He suffers from great hardships and may even die before he reaches his destination. In that
way, actions may, nor may not, yield fruits[Action without intelligence is like travelling without provisions.]. By resorting to his own atman, a man can determine what is auspicious and what is inauspicious. If a person proceeds without knowledge of the truth, that is like a man rashly advancing on foot along an unfamiliar road. However, when an intelligent person advances along that same road, it is
like swiftly advancing on a chariot yoked to horses. When one has ascended a tall mountain, one does not look
down at the ground[The sense seems to be the following. Once one has obtained lofty intelligence and knowledge, one is no longer
concerned with more mundane tasks and rites.]. However, even if a charioteer is mounted on a chariot, he can be seen to be afflicted and unconscious. Therefore, one should advance on a chariot as long as there is a road for the chariot. When a track for
the chariot no longer exists, a wise person abandons the chariot. An intelligent person who knows the truth about
the ordinances of yoga advances in that way. He uses his great intelligence to progressively move from one stage
to the next. If a person plunges into a great and terrible ocean without a boat and tries to cross using his arms, there
is no doubt that he will be destroyed. However, a wise person knows about the different categories and uses a boat.
There is no doubt that using oars, he is not exhausted and immersing himself in the water, swiftly crosses over.
Having crossed over to the other side, he no longer possesses any sense of ownership and abandons the boat. For
the person on a chariot and on foot, this has already been explained earlier. If a person is overwhelmed by attachment and delusion, he is like a fisherman attached by a sense of ownership to his boat. He is whirled around. One
cannot climb onto a boat and roam around on land. In that way, it is not recommended that one should ascend a
chariot and travel on water. In different kinds of terrain, one accordingly has different kinds of deeds. Depending
on the deeds that are performed in this world, one obtains the fruits.

'"'"There is an entity that has no smell, taste, form, touch or sound. Using their intelligence, sages think about
this. This is said to be Pradhana. Pradhana is unmanifest and one of the aspects of the unmanifest is Mahat. An attribute of Mahat, generated from Pradhana, is Ahamkara. Through Pradhana, the attribute of the great elements
orginates from Ahamkara. The qualities of objects are said to be different from the elements. The unmanifest follows the dharma of a seed and creates from its own self. We have also heard that Mahat follows the dharma of a
seed and has also been created. Ahamkara follows the dharma of a seed and has also been created again and again.
The five great elements follow the dharma of being a seed and also creating. Those which possess the dharma of
seeds are usually said to be ones that do not create. However, the five elements are special in this way and possess
a distinctive property. Space has only one quality and wind is said to possess two qualities. Light is said to possess
three qualities and water has four qualities. Know that the earth, full of mobile and immobile objects, has five qualities. This goddess is the creator of all beings and has agreeable and disagreeable aspects. O supreme among brahmanas! Sound, touch, form, taste and smell as the fifth-know that these are the five qualities associated with the
earth. Smell is always associated with the earth and smell is said to have many different types. Therefore, I will tell
you in detail about the many qualities of smell. Agreeable, disagreeable, sweet, sour, pungent, pervasive, concentrated, oily, dry and clear-know that these are the ten kinds of qualities associated with the earth. Sound, touch,
form and taste are said to be the qualities of water. I will tell you about the many kinds of smell that have been spoken about. Sweet, sour, pungent, bitter, astringent and saline-in detail, these are the six kinds of smell that are
said to be associated with water. Sound, touch and form-these are said to be the three qualities associated with
light. Form is said to be the quality of light and form is of many different types. White, dark, red, blue, yellow, orange, short, long, large, square and circular-in detail, these are the twelve kinds of attributes associated with
form. Brahmanas who know about dharma and are truthful in speech should always know this. Sound and touch-
these are the two qualities known to be associated with the wind. Touch is a quality of the wind and there are said
to  be  many  kinds  of  touch.  Hot,  cold,  agreeable,  disagreeable,  gentle,  extensive,  hard,  oily,  smooth,  slippery,
rough, soft-in detail, these are said to the twelve qualities associated with the wind. Brahmanas who know dharma, have insight about the truth and are successful know this. It has been said that space has the single quality of
sound. In detail, I will recount the many different qualities of sound. These are known as shadaja, rishabha, gand-
hara, madhyama, panchama, and after that, nishada and dhaivata[The seven primary musical notes.]. There are agreeable and disagreeable sounds,
combined together and separate. In this way, sound is generated from space and has many different types. Space is
supreme among the elements and Ahamkara is superior to it. Intelligence is superior to Ahamkara and the atman is
superior to intelligence. The unmanifest is superior to the atman and Purusha is superior to the unmanifest. A person who knows the difference between superior and inferior attributes obtains the infinite."'"'
