'Sanjaya said, "At the time when the soldiers were scattered by Shini's descendant, Bharadvaja's son repulsed him
with a great shower of arrows. While all the soldiers looked on, a tumultuous clash commenced between Drona
and Satvata, like that between Bali and Vasava. Drona pierced Shini's grandson in the forehead with three colourful arrows that were completely made out of iron and were like venomous snakes. O great king! Pierced in the
forehead by those arrows, Yuyudhana was as beautiful as a mountain with three peaks. Bharadvaja's son was looking for an opportunity in the battle. He released many other arrows, with roars like those of Indra's vajra. While the
arrows released from Drona's bow were descending, Dasharha, who was supreme in the knowledge of weapons,
severed them with two arrows that had excellent tufts. O lord of the earth! On beholding this dexterity of hand,
Drona smiled and suddenly struck the bull among the Shini lineage with twenty arrows. He surpassed Yuyudhana's
lightness of hand with his own dexterity and pierced him with fifty arrows, and then yet again with one hundred. O
king! They arose from Drona's chariot, like large and angry serpents from a termite hill, and penetrated his body.
In that fashion, Yuyudhana released hundreds and thousands of arrows. Those arrows could drink up blood and enveloped Drona's chariot. O venerable one! No difference in dexterity could be seen between the foremost of brahmanas and Satyaki. Those bulls among men were equal. Extremely angry, Satyaki struck Drona with nine arrows
with drooping tufts and also struck his standard with sharp arrows. While Bharadvaja's son looked on, he struck
his charioteer with one hundred arrows. On witnessing Yuyudhana's dexterity, maharatha Drona pierced Satyaki
with seventy arrows and each of the horses with three. With a single arrow, he pierced the standard that was stationed on Madhava's chariot. In that battle, he then used another broad-headed arrow with golden tufts to sever the
great-souled Madhava's bow. At this, maharatha Satyaki became very angry. He discarded that bow. He grasped a
giant club and hurled it at Bharadvaja's son. It was made completely out of iron and was bound with strips of cloth.
It descended suddenly. However, Drona used many arrows of diverse kinds to counter it. Satyaki, for whom truth
was his valour, then grasped another bow. He pierced Bharadvaja's brave son with many arrows that had been
sharpened on stone. He pierced Drona in the battle and roared like a lion. But Drona, supreme among the wielders
of all weapons, could not tolerate this. He grasped an iron javelin with a golden handle and swiftly hurled it towards Madhava's chariot. That javelin was like death, but it did not reach Shini's descendant. It shattered his chariot and with a terrible noise, fiercely penetrated the ground. O king! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Shini's
grandson pierced Drona with arrows and struck him on his right arm. O king! In that battle, using an arrow that
was in the shape of a half-moon, Drona severed Madhava's great bow and struck the charioteer of his chariot with
a javelin. For an instant, he[The charioteer.] sank down senseless on the floor of the chariot. O king! Satyaki then performed a
superhuman deed there. He grasped the reins himself and fought with Drona. O lord of the earth! In that encounter,
maharatha Yuyudhana pierced the brahmana with a hundred arrows and was delighted. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Drona released five arrows at him. In the battle, they penetrated his armour and drank his blood. Pierced
by those terrible arrows, Satyaki became extremely angry. The brave one released arrows towards the one with the
golden chariot. With an arrow, he brought Drona's charioteer down on the ground. With the great-souled Drona's
charioteer slain, the horses began to run away. O king! In that battle, the radiant chariot whirled around in a thousand circles, like the sun. 'Drona's horses are running away. Grab them.' These were the sounds that arose from all
the princes and the kings. O king! The maharathas quickly abandoned the battle with Satyaki. All of them swiftly
rushed to the spot where Drona was. On seeing that all of them were running away, afflicted by Satvata's arrows,
your soldiers were again shattered and distressed. Drona went and again stationed himself at the mouth of the
vyuha. He had been borne away by horses that were as fleet as the wind and had been afflicted by Vrishni's arrows.
The valiant one[Drona.] saw that the vyuha had been shattered by the Pandus and the Panchalas. Therefore, he devoted
himself to protecting the vyuha and did not follow Shini's descendant. The fire that was Drona consumed and
countered the Pandus and the Panchalas. The flame of his ire blazed, like the sun that arises at the end of a yuga."'
