Yudhishthira asked, "O grandfather! What kind of affection results from seeing someone or dwelling together?
What is the great fortune that is associated with cattle? O grandfather! Tell me this."

'Bhishma replied, "O immensely radiant one! I will tell you an ancient account, about a conversation between
Nahusha and maharshi Chyavana. O bull among the Bharata lineage! In ancient times, maharshi Chyavana, from
the Bhargava lineage, decided to observe an extremely great vow, characterized by residing in water. He destroyed
his pride, anger, joy and sorrow. Firm in his vows, the sage dwelt in water for twelve years. He offered all the creatures there great and auspicious reassurances. To the creatures who lived in the water, the lord was like cool rays.
He purified himself and was like a pillar. He bowed down before the gods. He entered the water at the confluence
of the Ganga and the Yamuna. The currents of the Ganga and the Yamuna flowed with a loud and terrible roar. The
force was as swift as that of the wind, but he received all this on his head. The Ganga and the Yamuna, and the other rivers that followed and flowed into them, passed by the rishi and did not cause him any affliction. The great
sage was like a piece of wood and happily slept inside the water. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Sometimes,
the intelligent one stood upright. The creatures that lived in the water thought that he was agreeable to look at.
Cheerful in their minds, the fish sniffed at him. Thus, a long period of time elapsed. O immensely radiant one! On
one occasion, some fishermen arrived at the spot, with fishing nets in their hands. Those many nishadas had made
up their minds to catch fish. They were brave, strong and broad and were not scared of the water. They arrived at
that spot, determined to cast their nets. O lord of men! O supreme among the Bharata lineage! They tied all their
nets together and readied themselves to catch fish in the water. Desiring to catch fish, those kaivartas[Fishermen.] arrived at
the banks of the Ganga and the Yamuna and covered a part of the water with nets that were joined together. These
nets were made of new strands and covered a large space. They cast this large net at an appropriate place in the
water. With great force, all of them then began to draw the net in from every side. They were cheerful and without
fear and listened to each other. Many fish and other aquatic creatures got enmeshed. Chyavana, descendant of the
Bhrigu lineage, was surrounded by the fish. O great king! As they dragged in the net, as they wished, he too got
enmeshed. His limbs were covered with moss. His beard and matted hair were tawny. Large numbers of conch
shells and other kinds of shells had attached themselves to his body and made it multicoloured. As they dragged in
the net, they saw the one who was accomplished in the Vedas. All those lower classes joined their hands in salutation, bowed their heads and prostrated themselves on the ground. When the net had been dragged in, the fish were
distressed at having been brought in contact with the ground. They were terrified and lamented. The sage saw the
carnage that had been done to the fish. He was overcome by compassion and sighed repeatedly.

'"The nishadas said, 'In our ignorance, we have committed this sin[Of dragging Chyavana up.]. Show us your favours. O great king[Since this is not being addressed to Yudhishthira, this is an inconsistency.]!
What can we do to please you? Tell us.'"

'Bhishma continued, "Chyavana was thus addressed in the midst of the fish and spoke these words. 'Listen with
single-minded attention to my supreme desire now. Whether I have to give up my life, or whether I am sold, I wish
to remain with the fish now. I have dwelt with them for a long time and cannot abandon them now.'

Having been thus addressed, the nishadas trembled in great fear. All their faces were distressed and they went
and told Nahusha what had happened."'
