Vaishampayana said, 'At the same time, the valorous Bhimasena took his leave from Dharmaraja and left for the
eastern direction. That tiger among the Bharata lineage had with him a great circle of forces, capable of oppressing
the enemy's kingdom. He marched out to increase the enemy's sorrow. Pandava, tiger among kings, first went to
the city of Panchala and used various means of conciliation to win the Panchalas over. Then that valorous one, bull
among men, defeated the Gandakis and the Videhas[Gandaki is a tributary of the Ganga and Videha is the region to the north-east of Magadha, including parts of
what is now Nepal.] and after some time, went on to Dasharna[Dasharna is the region around Vidisha and there is a geographical problem. Not only is Dasharna far from
Videha, it cannot be described as part of the east.]. There, King
Sudharma of Dasharna performed a feat that makes one's hair stand up-he had a great duel with Bhima without
any weapons[It was an unarmed wrestling match.]. On witnessing this deed, Bhimasena, the scorcher of enemies, made the immensely strong Sudharma the supreme general. O king! Bhima, terrible in valour, then marched towards the east and that large army
seemed to make the earth tremble. O king! That warrior, strongest among the strong, defeated in battle
Rochamana, the lord of Ashvamedha, and his younger brother. Without exerting terrible force in vanquishing him,
the immensely valorous Kounteya[Kunti's son. Here, Bhima.], descendant of the Kuru lineage, then conquered the eastern regions. He then
went south to the great city of the Pulindas and conquered Sukumara and Sumitra, the lord of men. O Janamejaya!
Then, on Dharmaraja's command, that bull among the Bharata lineage advanced on the immensely brave
Shishupala.

'Having heard of Pandava's[In this context, Bhima.] intention, the king of Chedi[Shishupala.], the scorcher of enemies, came out of his city and
welcomed him. O great king! When the bulls among the Kuru and Chedi lineages met, they asked about the welfare of each other's lineages. O lord of the people! The king of Chedi then smilingly offered his kingdom and told
Bhima, "O unblemished one! What do you wish to do?" Bhima then told him about Dharmaraja's wish and that
lord of men acted accordingly[That is, accepted Yudhishthira as a sovereign.]. O king! Bhima spent thirty nights there as Shishupala's guest. After that, he left
with his army and his mounts.'
