Sanjaya said, "When the brave Shalva, the ornament of an assembly, was killed, that army was agitated, like a giant tree struck by a forceful storm. On seeing that the army was routed, the immensely strong and valiant maharatha Kritavarma resisted the soldiers of the enemy in the battle. O king! The descendant of the Satvata
lineage[Kritavarma.] was stationed in the battle and was enveloped with arrows. On seeing this, the brave ones[On the Kourava side.] returned and
a battle between the Kurus and the Pandavas commenced. O great king! They did not retreat and preferred death
over retreat. There was a wonderful battle between Satvata and the enemy. Single-handedly, he countered the Pandu soldiers, who were difficult to resist. On witnessing this, other well-wishers performed extremely difficult
deeds. They cheerfully roared like lions and that great sound rose up to heaven. O bull among the Bharata lineage!
The Panchalas were frightened by that noise. However, Shini's grandson, the mighty-armed Satyaki, attacked. He
advanced against the immensely strong Kshemadhurti, and using seven sharp arrows, conveyed him to Yama's
abode. The mighty-armed descendant of the Shini lineage tormented with sharp arrows. As he attacked, Hardikya
rushed against him, terrible and fierce. Those two archers, best among rathas, roared like lions. They rushed
against each other, wielding the best of weapons. The Pandavas, the Panchalas, other warriors and the best of kings
became spectators to that clash between those two lions among men. The maharathas from the Vrishni and Andhaka lineages used vatsadantas and iron arrows. Like cheerful elephants, they tried to kill each other. Hardikya and
the bull among the Shini lineage roamed around in diverse motions. They repeatedly struck each other with showers of arrows. Those lions from the Vrishni lineage stretched their bows with force and strength and shot arrows.
We saw these in the sky, travelling fast, like insects. Hridika's son approached the one who was the performer of
truthful deeds[Satyaki.] and used four sharp arrows to pierce his four horses. The long-armed one became angry, like an
elephant struck with a goad. He used eight supreme arrows to pierce Kritavarma. Kritavarma stretched his bow
back all the way up to his ears. Piercing Satyaki with three arrows, he severed his bow with another one. When
that best of bows was severed, the bull among the Shini lineage picked up another bow with an arrow affixed to it.
Shini's descendant, best among all archers, picked up that best of bows with great speed. The immensely valorous,
immensely intelligent and immensely strong one was unable to tolerate the fact that his bow had been severed by
Kritavarma. Enraged, the atiratha speedily attacked Kritavarma. Using ten extremely sharp arrows, the bull among
the Shini lineage struck Kritavarma's charioteer, horses and standard. His gold-decorated chariot, horses and charioteer were destroyed. O king! O venerable one! On seeing this, the great archer, maharatha Kritavarma, was overcome by great rage and picked up a javelin. With the force of his arms, he hurled this towards the bull among the
Shini lineage, wishing to kill him. But Satvata shattered the javelin with his sharp arrows. Shattered, it fell down,
and Madhava[Kritavarma. All the Yadavas were descended from Madhu.] was confused. His horses had been slain. His charioteer had been killed. In the encounter, Yuyudhana[Satyaki.], skilled in the use of weapons, used a broad-headed arrow to strike him in the chest. Kritavarma fell down
on the ground. In the duel, the brave one was deprived of his chariot by Satyaki. At this, all the soldiers[On the Kourava side.] were
overcome by great fear and your sons were miserable, because Kritavarma had been deprived of his chariot and his
horses and charioteer had been slain. The horses of that scorcher of enemies had been killed. His charioteer had
been slain. O king! On seeing this, Kripa attacked the bull among the Shini lineage, wishing to kill him. While all
the archers looked on, the mighty-armed one swiftly picked him up on his own chariot and bore him away from the
field of battle. O king! Kritavarma had been deprived of his chariot and Shini's descendant remained stationed
there. All of Duryodhana's soldiers again became reluctant to fight. Because they were covered in dust, the soldiers
could no longer discern the enemy. O king! With the exception of King Duryodhana, those on your side ran away.
Duryodhana was nearby and saw that his own army had been routed. O venerable one! Angered, he quickly attacked all the Pandus, Parshata Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi, Droupadi's sons, the large numbers of Panchalas, the
Kekayas, the Somakas and the Panchalas[The Panchalas are mentioned twice.] and countered them. He was fearless and unassailable and repulsed
them with sharp weapons. Your immensely strong son endeavoured and remained stationed in the battle. He was as
resplendent as the great fire on a sacrificial altar, invoked with mantras. In the battle, the enemy was incapable of
approaching him, like mortal beings against Death. Hardikya ascended another chariot and attacked." '
