'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! Before Madhusudana left, surrounded by the princes and the advisers, he instructed Karna to ascend the chariot. What did the destroyer of enemy warriors tell Radheya on the chariot? What comforting words did Govinda tell the son of a suta? Krishna speaks in a voice that roars like a flood or a cloud. O Sanjaya! Whether it was mildly, or whether it was sharply, what did he tell Karna?"

'Sanjaya replied, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Listen to what Madhusudana, whose soul cannot be
measured, told Radheya. I will recount the words in their entirety, both sharp and mild. They were pleasant and in
conformity with dharma. They were truthful and beneficial. They were acceptable to the heart.

'"Vasudeva said, 'O Radheya! You have served brahmanas who are learned in the Vedas. Free of jealousy and
attentively, you have asked them about the truth. O Karna! You know the eternal teachings of the Vedas. You know
about the sacred texts of dharma and their subtleties. People who know about the sacred texts say that a son who is
born to a maiden before her marriage is as much of a son as one who is born from a father after marriage. O Karna!
You have been born in this fashion[However, this is supposed to be a secret known only to Kunti.]. According to dharma, you are Pandu's son. According to the instructions of
the sacred texts of dharma, come with me and you will become a king. The Parthas are on your father's side and
the Vrishnis are on your mother's side. O bull among men! Know that both these sides are your own lineage. O
son[The word used is tata.]! Come with me now and the Pandavas will recognize you as a Kounteya who has been born before Yudhishthira. The five Pandavas will grasp your feet as brothers, together with the five sons of Droupadi and Subhadra's unvanquished son[Abhimanyu.]. The kings and princes who have gathered together in the cause of the Pandavas and all
the Andhakas and Vrishnis will grasp your feet. The kings, the wives of kings and the daughters of kings will bring
gold, silver and earthen vessels, herbs, all kinds of seeds, all kinds of gems and creepers for your anointment[As king.]. At
the sixth point in time[After the five Pandavas.], Droupadi will have intercourse with you. Let the brahmanas who are acquainted with the
four Vedas consecrate you today, assisted by the priest of the Pandavas[Dhoumya.], the five Pandava brothers who are bulls
among men, Droupadi's five sons, the Panchalas and the Chedis. You will be seated on the skin of a tiger. I will
myself instate you as king and the lord of the earth. Kunti's son, King Yudhishthira, will be the heir apparent. Kunti's son, Yudhishthira, rigid in his vows and with dharma in his soul, will ascend the chariot behind you and hold a
white umbrella[Above Karna's head, as a sign of kingship.]. O Kounteya! The immensely strong Bhimasena will hold a giant white umbrella above your head
when you are consecrated. Your chariot will have hundreds of bells that make a noise and will be strewn with the
skins of tigers. It will be yoked to white horses and Arjuna will drive it. Abhimanyu, Nakula, Sahadeva and
Droupadi's five sons will always be stationed near, for your instructions. The Panchalas and maharatha Shikhandi
will follow you. I will myself follow you and so will all the Andhakas, Vrishnis and Dasharhas. O lord of the
earth! The Dasharhas will be part of your family. O mighty-armed one! Enjoy the kingdom, together with your
Pandava brothers. Practise meditation. Offer oblations. Observe other auspicious signs. Let the Dravidas, together
with the Kuntalas, follow you, with the Andhras, Talachakras, Chuchupas and Venupas. Let bards and minstrels
sing your praises in many ways. Let the Pandavas proclaim Vasushena's[Vasushena is Karna's name.] triumph. O Kounteya! Surrounded by the
Parthas, like the moon is by the nakshatras, rule over the kingdom and delight Kunti. Let your friends rejoice and
let your enemies suffer. Today, let there be fraternity between you and your Pandava brothers.'"'
