'Sanjaya said, "Those words were full of affection. They were sweet as honey. They were appropriate to the occasion. They were colourful and were addressed by Dharmaraja himself. On hearing those words, Satyaki, bull
among the Shini lineage, spoke to Yudhishthira, foremost among the Bharata lineage. 'O unblemished one! I have
heard all your words. They are just, colourful, for Phalguna's benefit and conducive to fame. O Indra among kings!
At times like this, it is appropriate for you to command someone like me, who is in front of you[Since Arjuna is not present.]. It is exactly as
you have said. I am just like Partha to you. For Dhananjaya's sake, I have never sought to preserve my own life.
Instructed by you, what will I not do in this great battle? O Indra among men! If instructed by you, I will fight the
three worlds, with all the gods, asuras and men, not to speak of this extremely weak force of Duryodhana's. O
king! In this battle today, I will fight with them in every direction and conquer them. I am telling you this truthfully. I will be safe and will also reach Dhananjaya, who is also safe. O king! After Jayadratha has been killed, I will
return before you again. O lord of men! However, I must tell you all the words that were spoken by Vasudeva and
the intelligent Phalguna. In the midst of all the soldiers and in Vasudeva's hearing, Arjuna repeatedly and firmly
instructed me. "O Madhava! Today, it is your task to protect the king earnestly. O noble one! Set your mind on
fighting, until I have killed Jayadratha. O mighty-armed one! Having handed over the king to you and to maharatha Pradyumna, I am going undistractedly towards Jayadratha. You know that Drona is violent in battle and is
regarded as the best. O Madhava! You also know about the pledge that he has taken in everyone's hearing. Bharadvaja's son has promised to capture Dharmaraja in battle. Drona is capable of afflicting Yudhishthira in the battle.
Having entrused the task of protecting Dharmaraja, supreme among men, to you, I am going today to kill Saindhava. O Madhava! It is certain that I will return after killing Jayadratha. Ensure that Drona does not forcibly capture
Dharmaraja in the battle. O Madhava! If the foremost among men is seized by Bharadvaja's son, I will obtain no
delight from having slain Saindhava. If the truthful Pandava, foremost among men, is seized, it is evident that we
will have to go to the forest again. If the angry Drona captures Yudhishthira in the battle, it is evident that my victory will obtain no success. O mighty-armed one! O Madhava! For the sake of doing that which will bring me
pleasure, and for the sake of victory and fame, protect the king in the battle." You have been given to me as a trust
by Savyasachi. O lord! You can see that there is always a fear because of Bharadvaja's son. O mighty-armed one!
O lord! In this battle, with the exception of Rukmini's son[Pradyumna.], I do not see anyone who is capable of withstanding
him. In an encounter, I am regarded as a match for Bharadvaja's intelligent son. I cannot act against that reputation
or against the words of my preceptor. I cannot leave you. O lord of the earth! The preceptor[Drona.] is light in hand and
is clad in impenetrable armour. If he approaches you in the battle, he will toy with you, like a child with a bird.
Had Krishna's son[Abhimanyu. This Krishna is Arjuna.] been here, with the makara on his banner and with the bow in his hand, I would have handed you over to him and he would have protected you, like Arjuna. Protect yourself. Who will protect you when I
am gone? When I go to Pandava, who will advance against Drona in the battle? O king! You should not have any
fear on Arjuna's account. The mighty-armed one does not suffer from any burden. There are warriors from the
north, the Souviras, the Saindhavas and the Pouravas. There are other maharathas from the south, with Karna at the
forefront. O king! They are famous as the best of rathas. But before an angry Arjuna, they do not amount to one of
sixteen kalas[The moon has sixteen kalas or phases. Stated differently, these warriors do not even amount to one-sixteenth of
Arjuna.]. O king! Even if the entire earth were to rise up against him, with all the gods, asuras, humans,
masses of rakshasas, kinnaras[Mythical creatures who were followers of Kubera and could sing well. They were also physically deformed,
sometimes described as possessing human heads and bodies of horses.], giant serpents, together with all the mobile and immobile objects, they are incapable of withstanding Partha in battle. O great king! Knowing this, banish any fear on Dhananjaya's account.
Where those two brave and great archers, the two Krishnas who have truth for their valour, exist, there is nothing
that can stand against what they wish to do. They are divine. They are skilled in the use of weapons. They possess
yoga. They are intolerant in battle. Think of the gratefulness and compassion of your brother. I will go towards Arjuna, as you have asked me to. O king! Drona is wonderful in the use of weapons in battle. Think about that. O
king! The preceptor is extremely keen to capture you. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I have to protect my
pledge. I have to protect my truth. Who will protect you when I am gone? O Partha! Without handing over your
protection to someone, how can I go towards Phalguna? O great king! I cannot leave you unprotected in this great
battle. O Kouravya! How can I do that? I am telling you this truthfully. O supreme among those who possess intelligence! Use your intelligence to reflect on this in many ways. Use your intelligence to determine what is most
beneficial. O king! Then instruct me accordingly.'

'"Yudhishthira replied, 'O mighty-armed one! O Madhava! It is exactly as you say. O venerable one! But on account of the one with the white horses, my mind is not at rest. I will take the utmost care in protecting myself.
Commanded by me, go to the spot where Dhananjaya is. Using my intelligence, I have reflected on both-protecting myself in this battle and going towards Arjuna. I think you should go. Therefore, prepare yourself to go where
Dhananjaya has gone. The immensely strong Bhima will perform the task of protecting me. O son! There is no
doubt that Droupadi's sons will also protect me. There are the five brothers from Kekaya and the rakshasa Ghatotkacha, Virata, Drupada and maharatha Shikhandi. O venerable one! There are the powerful Dhrishtaketu and
Kuntibhoja, Nakula, Sahadeva, the Panchalas and the Srinjayas. O son! There is no doubt that all these assembled
ones will protect me. Drona with his soldiers, or Kritavarma, will not be capable of oppressing me in this battle. In
the battle, Dhrishtadyumna, the scorcher of enemies, will display his valour and hold back the enraged Drona, like
the shoreline against the abode of makaras[The ocean.]. When Parshata, the destroyer of enemy heroes, is stationed in the
battle, Drona and his soldiers will never be able to assail us forcibly. He[Dhrishtadyumna.] has arisen from the fire for Drona's destruction, sporting armour, arrows, sword, bow and the best of ornaments. O Shini's descendant! Go without any
anxiety. Do not be anxious on my account. In the battle, Dhrishtadyumna will repulse the angry Drona.'"'
