Sanjaya said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O great king! When Drona, the great archer was killed on
that day, and the resolution of Drona's maharatha son countered[In Section 72 (Volume 6), Ashvatthama used the divine narayana astra,
which was countered through Krishna's advice.], the Kourava forces were driven away there.
Together with his brothers, Partha[Probably meaning Arjuna.] arranged the soldiers on their side into a vyuha[A vyuha is an arrangement of troops in battle formation and there were
different types of vyuhas.]. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On discerning that he was stationed in that fashion and on seeing that his own forces were running
away, your son[Duryodhana.] used his manliness to restrain them. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having stationed his
own troops, he used the strength of his arms to fight with the Pandaveyas for a long time. The enemy had attained
its objective and was cheerful, after having struggled for a very long time. However, since it was evening, the
armies withdrew. The soldiers were withdrawn and entered their own respective camps. Having done this, the Kurus consulted with each other. They were on expensive beds, with supreme cushions and supreme beds. They were
on supreme seats and comfortably lying down, were like the immortals. King Duryodhana spoke to them in conciliatory and supremely restrained tones. He addressed those great archers in words that were appropriate to the occasion. 'O best among intelligent ones! All of you, quickly tell me what your counsel is. O kings! What should be
done now? What is the supreme task?' Having been thus addressed by that Indra among men, those lions among
men, who were seated on their thrones, used different kinds of signs to indicate that they wished to fight. They
were ready to offer their lives as oblations into the sacrifice of war. The king's face was also as radiant as the rising
sun. On seeing this, the preceptor's son, who was intelligent and eloquent in words, spoke these words. 'Passion,
engagement, skill and policy-these are the means to accomplish objectives. That is what the learned ones have
said. However, everything depends on destiny. We had foremost among men, maharathas, on our side. They were
the equals of the gods. They had good policy and were devoted, skilled and faithful. But they have been killed.
However, despite this, we should not lose hope about our victory. If we use good policies, destiny will become
favourable in accomplishing all our objectives. Among all these foremost men, we should make Karna the overall
commander. He is endowed with all the qualities. We will then crush our enemy.' On hearing these pleasant words,
Duryodhana was delighted. He thought that these auspicious and beneficial words were full of affection towards
him.

' "O great king! Reassuring his mind because of the strength of his arms[Meaning Duryodhana's, not Karna's.], King Duryodhana spoke these
words to Radheya. 'O Karna! I know your valour and that you are my supreme well-wisher. O mighty-armed one!
But nevertheless, I will address some beneficial words towards you. O brave one! Having heard them, do what
pleases you. You have always been the wisest. You are my supreme refuge. Bhishma and Drona, both atirathas,
were my commanders and they have been killed. You are superior to them. Become my commander. Those great
archers were aged and were partial towards Dhananjaya. O Radheya! I revered those brave ones because of your
words. O son[The word used is tata.]! In the great battle, for ten days, you saw that Bhishma, the grandfather, protected the sons of
Pandu. Having laid his weapons aside in the great battle, Bhishma, the grandfather, was killed by Phalguna, who
placed Shikhandi at the forefront. That immensely fortunate one was brought down and is lying down on a bed of
arrows. O tiger among men! It was because of your words that Drona was placed in our forefront[That is, Drona was made the commander.]. But because
they were his students, he also protected the Parthas in the battle. Then, the aged one was swiftly killed by Dhrishtadyumna. Thinking about it, I do not see any other warrior who is your equal, because of your infinite valour,
even if I include those two foremost ones who have been killed. There is no doubt that you will be able to ensure
victory. You know everything about what has happened, earlier, in the middle, and later. You should be our leader
in this battle. You should be the leader in this enterprise. Consecrate your own self in all these soldiers, like Skanda, the undecaying lord, is the general of the gods. Like that, become the protector of the soldiers of the sons of
Dhritarashtra. Slay all the large numbers of the enemy, like the great Indra against the danavas. Knowing that you
are stationed in the battle, the maharatha Pandavas, together with the Panchalas, will run away, like the danavas on
seeing Vishnu. O tiger among men! Therefore, become the leader of this large army. When you station yourself
and make endeavours, the Pandavas, with their advisers, the Panchalas and the Srinjayas, will be bereft of their
senses. You will be like a rising sun that scorches with its energy and dispels the terrible darkness. Like that, you
will drive away our enemy.' Karna replied, 'O son of Gandhari! In your presence, I have spoken these words before. O king! I will defeat the Pandavas, with their sons and with Janardana. There is no doubt that I will be your
commander. O great king! Be assured. Know that I will defeat the Pandavas.' Having been thus addressed, the immensely energetic King Duryodhana arose, together with the kings, like the gods with Shatakratu[The performer of one hundred sacrifices, Indra's name.].

' "He instated Karna as the commander, like the immortals did to Skanda. Desirous of victory, King Duryodhana
and the other kings swiftly sprinkled water, according to the prescribed rites[The sprinkling of water is part of the act of consecration.]. Golden and earthen pots were
filled and mantras pronounced over them. The tusks of elephants and the horns of large bulls were filled with water. There were others[Clearly, other vessels.] that were decorated with gems and jewels and with fragrant perfumes and herbs. He
seated himself on a seat made out of the fig tree[Udumbara, the sacred fig tree.], covered with a piece of silk. He was consecrated, in accordance with the rites in the sacred texts. 'In the great battle, may you defeat Partha and Govinda, together with their
followers.' O bull among the Bharata lineage! These were the benedictions pronounced by bards and brahmanas.

'Be like the rising sun, the destroyer of darkness through its fierce rays. May they, together with Keshava, not be
able to look at your arrows. May those ungrateful ones look on them as the blazing rays of the sun. May the
Parthas and the Panchalas not be able to stand before you. In a battle, you possess the knowledge of weapons and
will be like the great Indra against the danavas.' Thus was the infinitely radiant Radheya consecrated. In his resplendent form, he looked like another sun. Radheya was instated as the commander by your son and goaded by
destiny, he thought that his task had been accomplished. O king! Having become the commander, Karna, the destroyer of enemies, instructed that the soldiers should be yoked and should wait for the sun to rise. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Surrounded by your sons, Karna looked dazzling there. He was like Skanda surrounded by the
gods, in the tarakamaya battle." '121