Vaishampayana said, 'When night was over, Dhritarashtra, Ambika's son, sent Vidura to Yudhishthira's house.
The greatly energetic one, supreme among all those who are intelligent, went there. Having gone there, he
spoke these words to King Yudhishthira, the lord who had no decay. "O great king! Dhritarasthra has consecrated
himself for departure to the forest. The king will leave for the forest on the day of the full moon in the month of
Kartika[October-November.]. O best among those of the Kuru lineage! He desires some riches. He wishes to give this away at a funeral ceremony for the great-souled Gangeya, Drona, Somadatta, the intelligent Bahlika, all his sons, the well-wishers
who have been killed and, if you allow it, for the wicked Saindhava[Saindhava means Jayadratha. Why is Jayadratha being singled out? Probably because he is related on the daughter's side.]." Hearing Vidura's words, Yudhishthira and
Gudakesha Pandava[Arjuna.] were delighted and applauded them. However, Bhima was unwavering in his anger and did
not accept Vidura's words. The greatly energetic one remembered what Duryodhana had done. 'Phalguna understood Bhimasena's thoughts. Kiriti lowered his face and spoke these words to Bhima. "O Bhima! Our aged father
has consecrated himself for going to the forest. He wishes to give something for the funeral ceremonies of all the
well-wishers. Kourava wishes to give away riches that have been conquered by you. O mighty-armed one! It is for
Bhishma and the others. You should grant permission. O mighty-armed one! It is good fortune that Dhritarashtra is
asking us now. Behold the progress of time. Earlier, we used to ask him. This king used to be the lord of the entire
earth earlier. With his offspring killed by the enemy, he now desires to go to the forest. O tiger among men! You
should not consider any option other than giving. O mighty-armed one! Everything else will bring ill fame and will
be adharma. We serve the lord and king who is our elder brother. O bull among the Bharata lineage! From him, we
should learn to give and not refuse." When Kounteya said this, Dharmaraja applauded these words. However, Bhimasena angrily spoke these words in reply. "O Phalguna! We should perform funeral rites for Bhishma, King Somadatta, Bhurishrava, rajarshi Bahlika, the great-souled Drona and the other well-wishers. Kunti will give for Karna. O tiger among men! The king should not perform funeral rites for the Kouravas. That is my view. Let the enemy not find an opportunity to rejoice. Let Duryodhana and all the others move from misery to greater misery. They
were the worst of the lineage and destroyed everything on earth. How can you now forget that enmity of twelve
years and the departure for a period of concealment, which increased Droupadi's grief? What was the affection
Dhritarashtra showed towards us then? We attired ourselves in black antelope skins and our ornaments and adornments were lost. With the daughter of Panchala, we followed the king then. Where were Drona, Bhishma and Somadatta then? For thirteen years we dwelt there, roaming from one forest to another forest. Your elder father did
not cast a paternal eye towards us then. O Partha! When we were defeated in the gambling match, have you forgotten what this wicked one, the worst of the lineage, asked Vidura? 'What has been won?'" When this was said,
King Yudhishthira, Kunti's intelligent son, rebuked his brother and asked him to be quiet.'
