Souti said, 'Having heard all this, Jaratkaru became extremely miserable with grief. He told his ancestors in a
voice that was choked with tears, "I am Jaratkaru, your evil son. I have committed a foolish wrong. Please punish
me." The ancestors replied, "O son! O Brahmana! It is fortunate that you have happened to come here. Why have
you not taken a wife?" Jaratakaru said, "O ancestors! It has always been my objective to carry my seed inside my
body and to take this entire body to the next world. O grandfathers! But having seen you hanging here like birds,
my mind has been diverted from a life of celibacy. There is no doubt that I will do that which brings pleasure to
you. If I get a lady who bears my own name, who comes to me of her own volition, who comes to me as alms and
whom I will not have to maintain, I will accept her as my wife. O ancestors! Otherwise, I will not marry. That is
my truthful promise." Having said this to the ancestors, the sage continued to roam the earth. O Shounaka! Though
he grew old, he could not find a wife.

'He was sorry that he was not successful in keeping his promise to his ancestors. He went to the forest and cried
out aloud in his grief. "Whatever creatures there are, mobile or immobile, visible or invisible, hear my words. I am
a man engaged in severe austerities. But my grief-stricken ancestors told me to have a wife. Instructed by my ancestors and wishing to marry and do what they want, I am now roaming the world, poor and miserable, looking for
a maiden as alms. If any of the beings I have addressed has a daughter, please bestow that daughter on me, since I
am wandering in all directions. The maiden has to have the same name as mine. She has to be given to me as alms
and I should not need to maintain her. I ask for such a maiden." Thereupon, the snakes who had been appointed to
watch over Jaratkaru took this news about his intentions to Vasuki.

'Hearing this, the king of snakes immediately went to the forest where the hermit was, taking his maiden sister
with him, adorned in various ornaments. O Brahmana! Having gone there, Vasuki, the king of snakes, offered the
maiden as alms to that great-souled sage. But he did not immediately accept her, thinking that she might not have
the same name as his and that the issue of maintaining her remained unsettled. He hesitated and was in two minds
about accepting her. O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! He then asked Vasuki for the maiden's name and said that
he would not support her.'
