Vaishampayana said, 'Then the greatly radiant king of Panchala spoke to Prince Yudhishthira in the form that is
reserved for Brahmanas and cheerfully asked Kunti's son, "Should we know you as Kshatriyas or Brahmanas? Are
you accomplished Vaishyas or are you born from the wombs of Shudras? Are you siddhas[Semi-divine species.] who use their powers
of maya to roam in all directions and have come here from heaven in search of Krishna[Droupadi.]? O lord! Tell us the truth,
because we are in great doubt. Will our hearts not be content when our doubts have been removed? O scorcher of
enemies! Will our share of fate prove to be fortunate? From your heart, tell us the truth. Among kings, truthfulness
is a better adornment than sacrifices and alms. Therefore, do not say that which is untrue. O destroyer of enemies!
O you who are the equal of the gods! After hearing your reply, I will then make arrangements for the marriage according to what is proper[The arrangement for the marriage would depend on what caste the Pandavas came from.]." Yudhishthira replied, "O king of Panchala! Do not be disheartened. Be happy. There is
no doubt that your wishes have come true. O king! We are Kshatriyas and sons of the great-souled Pandu. Know
me to be the eldest of Kunti's sons. These are Bhimasena and Arjuna. O king! Your daughter was won by these in
an assemblage of kings. O king of kings! The twins are waiting there, where Krishna is. O bull among kings! Let
all sorrow be dispelled from your heart. We are Kshatriyas. Like a lotus, your daughter has been transplanted from
one pond to another. O great king! This is the truth that I have told you. You are like our preceptor and our main
refuge." On hearing this, King Drupada's eyes brimmed over with joy.

'For some time, he could not answer Yudhishthira properly. Controlling his delight with great effort, the king,
the conqueror of enemies, 9 spoke to Yudhishthira in the appropriate form. The one with virtue in his heart[Drupada.]
asked how they[The Pandavas. Drupada assured them that he would help them get back their kingdom.] had escaped from that city[Varanavata.]. The Pandava[Yudhishthira.] narrated it in detail, from the beginning. On hearing the narration from Kunti's son, King Drupada censured Dhritarashtra, that ruler of men. Drupada, chief among
all men who are eloquent, gave every assurance to Kunti's son Yudhishthira and vowed that he would restore him
to his kingdom. On the king's invitation, Kunti, Krishna, Bhimasena, Arjuna and the twins took up residence in
that great palace.

'O king! They continued to live there, treated with every respect by Yajnasena[Drupada.]. Later, the king and his sons
spoke to those[The Pandavas.] who had been reassured. Drupada said, "Let the mighty-armed son[Arjuna.] of Kuru today accept my
daughter's hand in accordance with the prescribed rites. Today, the moment is an auspicious one." On this, the
righteous-souled Yudhishthira replied, "O lord of people! Then I too, must take a wife." Drupada said, "O lord! O
warrior! Then you accept my daughter's hand in accordance with the rites. Or give Krishna in marriage to whomsoever you wish." Yudhishthira replied, "O king! Droupadi will be the queen to all of us. O lord of the people!
This is what has already been ordered by my mother. I am yet unmarried, and so is the Pandava Bhimasena. Your
jewel of a daughter has been won by Partha[Arjuna.]. O king! It is our rule that every jewel we obtain must be equally
shared. O best of kings! We are not willing to break that rule now. According to the prescribed norms, Krishna will
be the wedded queen of all of us. According to age, let her accept our hands, one after another, before the fire."

'Drupada said, "O descendant of the Kuru lineage! It has been decreed that one man may have many queens.
But we have never heard that one woman can have many men. O son of Kunti! Pure as you are, and well acquainted with the path of dharma, you should not commit an act that is counter to dharma, the Vedas and usual practice.
Why has your intelligence become thus?" Yudhishthira replied, "O great king! Subtle is the path of dharma; we do
not know its direction. Let us therefore follow the path that was trodden by illustrious men in ancient times. My
tongue never utters that which is untrue. Nor has my mind ever turned to that which is adharma. This has been
commanded by our mother and my mind also approves of it. O king! This is certainly dharma. Therefore, act accordingly, without hesitation. O ruler of the earth! Do not have any doubt on this score." Drupada said, "O son of
Kunti! You yourself, my son Dhrishtadyumna and Kunti must settle among yourselves what should be done now.
Tomorrow, I will do that which is proper." O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O king! At that, those three got
together and discussed the matter. At that very moment, Dvaipayana arrived there, in accordance with his wishes.'
