Vaishampayana said, 'The gandharvas were bedecked with golden garlands and possessed celestial weapons. They
enveloped them with blazing arrows from all the directions. There were four brave Pandavas and thousands of
gandharvas. O king! They attacked each other in that battle and it was extraordinary. Just as the gandharvas had
shattered the chariots of Karna and the sons of Dhritarashtra into a hundred pieces, they attempted to do it again. O
king! Hundreds of gandharvas attacked them in that battle and the tigers among men repulsed them with many
showers of arrows. Repulsed by showers of arrows in all the directions, those travellers of the sky could not approach near the sons of Pandu. On seeing that the gandharvas were angered, Arjuna used great and celestial
weapons against them. In that war, insolent about his strength, Arjuna used his agneya weapon to send a million
gandharvas to Yama's abode. O king! With his sharp arrows, Bhima, the great archer and supreme among strong
ones in battle, killed hundreds of gandharvas. O king! Insolent of their strength, Madri's two sons fought and captured and killed hundreds of enemies. When the gandharvas were thus killed by the great-souled ones with celestial weapons, they took to the sky and took the sons of Dhritarashtra with them. But Kunti's son, Dhananjaya, saw
them arise. He surrounded them on all sides with a great net of arrows. Having been tied down by that net of arrows, they were like birds in a cage. They angrily hurled showers of maces, spears and swords at Arjuna. But
Dhananjaya pierced the bodies of the gandharvas with bhallas. Heads, legs and arms[Of the gandharvas.] fell down from above like a
shower of rocks and the others took fright. When the gandharvas were being killed by the great-souled Pandava,
who was on the ground, they showered down arrows on him from the sky. But Savyasachi, the energetic scorcher
of enemies, repulsed all of them with his own weapons and began to pierce the gandharvas. Arjuna, the descendant
of the Kuru lineage, unleashed his weapons-sthunakarna, indrajala, soura, agneya and soumya[All of these are celestial weapons. It is impossible to be more specific than that. Sthunakarna literally means
something that has a pillar for its ears. Soura, agneya and soumya are named after the sun, the fire and the moon
respectively. Literally, indrajala means Indra's net and stands for something magical.]. The gandharvas were burnt up by the arrows of Kunti's son. They were in supreme despondence, like the daityas at Shakra's
hands. When they tried to escape upwards, his net of arrows restrained them. When they tried to slither away,
Savyasachi restrained them with his bhallas.

'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing the gandharvas terrified by Kunti's intelligent son, Chitrasena
grasped a mace and rushed towards Savyasachi. In that battle, he held the iron mace in his hand. But with his arrows, Partha sliced the mace into seven pieces. On seeing that the mace had been cut into many pieces by the arrows of the nimble one, he[Chitrasena.] made himself invisible and began to fight with Pandava. Established in the sky, he
repulsed those celestial weapons. The powerful king of the gandharvas hid himself through his powers of maya.
Arjuna saw that he was invisible and was striking. He therefore attacked him with divine weapons that could travel
in the sky, invoked with mantras. Arjuna was angered. Dhananjaya used the weapon known as shabdabheda[Weapon that is aimed at the source of a sound, without the target being seen.] and
restrained his disappearance into many different forms. Pierced by the weapons of the great-souled Arjuna, the
gandharva revealed himself to his beloved friend[Sections 32 (Volume 2) and 35 have said that Arjuna learnt singing and dancing from Chitrasena in heaven
and that Chitrasena became his friend.]. On seeing his friend Chitrasena, fighting feebly in battle[Presumably, Chitrasena was fighting feebly because he knew that it was his friend Arjuna.],
the bull among the Pandavas withdrew the weapon he had released. When all the other Pandavas saw that Dhananjaya had withdrawn his weapons, they too restrained their swift steeds and their bows and arrows. Chitrasena, Bhi-
ma, Savyasachi and the twins then asked about each other's welfare, while they were astride their respective
chariots.'
