'Sanjaya said, "Bhagadatta, Kripa, Shalya, Satvata Kritavarma, Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti, Saindhava
Jayadratha, Chitrasena, Vikarna and the youthful Durmarshana-these ten warriors from your side fought against
Bhimasena. They were accompanied by a large army that had come from many countries. O king! In the battle
over Bhishma, they sought great fame. Shalya struck Bhimasena with nine arrows, Kritavarma with three arrows
and Kripa with nine arrows. O venerable one! Chitrasena, Vikarna and Bhagadatta struck Bhimasena with ten
broad-headed arrows each. Saindhava struck him with three arrows in the joints of his shoulders. Vinda and Anu-
vinda from Avanti struck him with five arrows each. Durmarshana struck Pandava with twenty sharp arrows. O
great king! The illustrious one struck all the maharathas from the side of the sons of Dhritarashtra, brave ones in all
the worlds, separately. The immensely strong Bhimasena pierced them with many arrows. He pierced Shalya with
fifty and Kritavarma with eight. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He severed Kripa's bow, with an arrow fixed
to it, from the middle. After severing the bow, he pierced him with five arrows. He pierced Vinda and Anuvinda
with three arrows each, Durmarshana with twenty and Chitrasena with five. Bhima pierced Vikarna with ten arrows and Jayadratha with five. He again struck Saindhava with three arrows and roared in delight. Goutama,
supreme among rathas, grasped another bow and angrily pierced Bhima with ten sharp arrows. He was pierced by
those many arrows, like a giant elephant that has been goaded. The mighty-armed and powerful Bhimasena became angry. In that battle, he wounded Goutama with many arrows. As dazzling as Yama at the end of an era, he
pierced Saindhava's horses and his charioteer with three arrows and sent them to the land of the dead. With his
horses slain, the maharatha quickly jumped down from his chariot. In that battle, he released many sharp arrows
towards Bhimasena. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O best of the Bharata lineage! But Bhima used a broad-
headed arrow to sever the bow of the great-souled Saindhava into two, from the middle. O king! With his bow severed, bereft of a chariot and with his horses and charioteer slain, he quickly climbed onto Chitrasena's chariot. In
the battle there, Pandava performed an extraordinary deed. The maharatha pierced all those maharathas with his
arrows and repulsed them. While all the worlds looked on, he deprived Saindhava of his chariot.

'"Shalya could not tolerate Bhimasena's valour. He affixed sharp arrows that had been polished by an artisan.
Asking Bhima to wait, he pierced him with seventy arrows. O venerable one! In that battle, for Shalya's sake, Kripa, Kritavarma, Bhagadatta, Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti, Chitrasena, Durmarshana, Vikarna and the valiant
king of Sindhu, scorchers of enemies, quickly pierced Bhima. He pierced each of them back with five arrows. He
pierced Shalya with seventy arrows and yet again with ten. Shalya pierced him with nine arrows and yet again with
five. He then used a broad-headed arrow to severely strike his charioteer in his inner organs. On seeing that
Vishoka[Bhima's charioteer.] had been wounded, the powerful Bhimsena struck the king of Madra in the arms and the chest with
three arrows. He pierced each of the other great archers with three arrows each. Having wounded them in that battle, he roared like a lion. Pandava was unassailable in battle. But the great archers made great efforts. Without any
hesitation, each of them severely wounded him in the inner organs with three arrows each. But despite being
pierced, Bhimasena, the great archer, was not distressed. He was like a mountain on which showers of rain were
pouring down from the clouds. The immensely illustrious one severely pierced Shalya with nine arrows. O king!
He firmly pierced Pragjyotisha with one hundred arrows. Using an extremely sharp kshurapra and displaying the
dexterity of his hands, he severed the great-souled Satvata's bow, with an arrow fixed to it. O scorcher of enemies!
Kritavarma grasped another bow and struck Vrikodara in the midst of his forehead with an iron arrow. In that encounter, Bhima pierced Shalya with nine iron arrows, Bhagadatta with three and Kritavarma with eight. He pierced
Goutama and the other rathas with two arrows each. O king! In that encounter, they pierced him back with sharp
arrows. He was thus afflicted in every direction by those maharathas. But he disregarded them like straw and
roamed around, without any pain. Those best of rathas were not distracted and released hundreds and thousands of
sharp arrows towards Bhima.

'"The brave maharatha Bhagadatta hurled an immensely forceful javelin in the battle. It was extremely expensive and possessed a golden handle. The strong-armed King Saindhava hurled a spear and a lance. O king! In that
encounter, Kripa used a shataghni and Shalya an arrow. The other great archers released five energetic arrows each,
in Bhimasena's direction. But the son of the wind god used a kshurapra to slice down the spear. He severed the
lance with three arrows, as if it were the stalk of a sesamum plant. He shattered the shataghni with nine arrows that
were tufted with the feathers of herons. The immensely strong one sliced down the arrow shot by the king of
Madra and severed the javelin that had been suddenly and forcefully hurled by Bhagadatta in the battle. As for the
other terrible arrows, he used straight-tufted arrows to strike them down. Bhimasena was proud in battle and struck
each of them with three arrows. Each of those great archers was wounded with three arrows. In the great battle,
Dhananjaya arrived there. He arrived on his own chariot and beheld maharatha Bhima, striking the enemy warriors
in the battle with his arrows. O bull among men! On seeing the two great-souled Pandavas united, all those on your
side gave up all hope of victory. In the battle, Arjuna advanced to fight with maharatha Bhishma. Wishing to kill
Bhishma, he placed Shikhandi at the forefront. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O king! Those ten warriors on
your side had been fighting in the battle with Bhima. On seeing them stationed there and wishing to do that which
would bring pleasure to Bhima, Bibhatsu attacked them. King Duryodhana incited Susharma for the death of both
Arjuna and Bhimasena. 'O Susharma! Go swiftly, surrounded by your large army. Vanquish the sons of Pandu,
Dhananjaya and Vrikodara.' On hearing this instruction, Trigarta, the lord of Prasthala, attacked the archers Bhima
and Arjuna in the battle. He surrounded them with many thousands of chariots in every direction. A battle commenced between Arjuna and the enemy."'
