Vasudeva said, "O Yudhishthira! O mighty-armed one! V Listen to me. I will recite the names of the immensely fortunate and great-souled Rudra, who has many forms. He is spoken of as Agni, Mahadeva, Sthanu, Maheshvara, Ekaksha[The single-eyed one.], Tryambaka[The three-eyed one.],Vishvarupa and Shiva. Brahmanas who know about the Vedas say that the
god has two forms-one is terrible and the other is auspicious. Those forms are again divided into many others.
The form that is fierce and terrible is equated with fire, lightning and the sun. The form that is auspicious and benign is equated with dharma, water and the moon. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Half of his body is also said
to be the fire, while the half that is auspicious is said to follow brahmacharya. The fiercest of his forms is the one
which destroys the universe and is said to be the great lord or Maheshvara. He burns down. He is sharp. He  is
fierce. He is powerful. Since he subsists on flesh, blood and marrow, he is said to be Rudra[Rudra means the terrible one.]. He is great among
all the gods and his dominion is vast. Since he saves the great universe, he is known to be Mahadeva[The great god.]. In everything that he does, in every way, he seeks to ensure what is auspicious for men. That is the reason he is known as
Shiva[Shiva means auspicious.]. Remaining established above, he burns everything down. He is established in one place for the origins of
life. He is always immobile in the form of a lingam. That is the reason he is spoken of as Sthanu[Sthanu means immobile, firm, stationary.]. He has many
different kinds of forms. He is the past, the present and the future. He is immobile and mobile. That is the reason
be is said to be Bahurupa[One with many forms.]. He is said be Dhurjati because he has the form of smoke[This is forced. Smoke is dhumra, Dhurjati means someone who has matted hair.]. The Vishvadevas are in
him. That is the reason he is said to be Vishvarupa. He possesses one thousand eyes. He possesses ten thousand
eyes. He has eyes in every direction. His energy and power flow through his eyes. He destroys through his eyes.
He nourishes creatures and also sports with them in every way. Since he is their lord, he is said to be Pashupati[The lord of creatures.].
He is established in the form of a lingam and always practises brahmacharya. Since he ensures greatness in the
worlds, he is known as Maheshvara. A great-souled person should worship his image and his lingam. A  person
who worships the lingam always obtains great prosperity. The rishis, the gods, the gandharvas and the apsaras always worship the lingam, which is stationed, facing upwards. When worshipped, the person who provides delight
is Maheshvara. He is affectionate towards his devotees. Cheerful in his soul, he grants happiness to his devotees.
This god always resides in cremation grounds. People who worship him there obtain the regions meant for heroes.
In the bodies of creatures which face hardship, he exists in the form of death. In the form of the breath of life in the
bodies of embodied beings, he exists as prana and apana. He has many terrible and blazing forms. These are also
worshipped in the worlds and are known to learned brahmanas and the gods. He has many other names and meanings that are spoken about in the Vedas, based on his greatness, powers and deeds. Learned brahmanas recite the
supreme shatarudriya from the Vedas. The great-souled Vyasa articulated it thereafter. He is said to be the great
one who has provided all the worlds and the universe. That is the reason brahmanas and other rishis speak of him
as the first being. He is first among the gods and Agni was generated from his mouth. In creating and sustaining
many kinds of life, he faces various difficulties. He is the one who grants refuge. He saves the pure-souled ones
who seek refuge and grants long lives, freedom from disease, prosperity, riches and all the objects of desire. He
confers these on men and takes them away again. He is said to be the prosperity of Shakra and the other gods. In
addition, he is always all the good and the evil that exists in the three worlds. He is said to be Ishvara because he is
prosperity and all the objects of desire. Since he is the great lord of the worlds, he is known as Maheshvara. He
pervades the universe in many kinds of different forms. This god's mouth exists in the ocean in the form of the
mare-headed fire[The subterranean fire.]."'