'Dhritarashtra asked, "O Sanjaya! In that situation, after Kourava Bhurishrava had been killed, how did the battle
proceed? Tell me that."

'Sanjaya replied, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! After Bhurishrava had left for the world of the hereafter,
mighty-armed Arjuna urged Vasudeva. 'O Krishna! Urge the horses speedily to where King Jayadratha is. O
mighty-armed one! The sun is hanging low, towards Mount Asta[Mountain over which the sun sets.]. O tiger among men! An extremely great task
has been undertaken by me. But he is protected by maharathas among the Kuru soldiers. O Krishna! Urge the horses so that I am able to kill Jayadratha before the sun sets and am able to make my words come true.' At this, the
mighty-armed Krishna, who was skilled about horses, goaded the horses, with complexions of silver, towards
Jayadratha's chariot. As they left, he[Arjuna.] shot swift arrows that always found their mark. O great king! The foremost among the soldiers attacked swiftly-Duryodhana, Karna, Vrishasena, the king of Madra, Ashvatthama, Kripa and Saindhava himself. Having encountered and stationed himself before Saindhava, Bibhatsu glanced at him
with eyes that blazed with rage and seemed to burn him down with his sight.

'"On seeing Arjuna advance and glance towards Jayadratha's chariot, King Duryodhana quickly spoke to Rad-
heya. 'O Vaikartana! This is the time for battle. O great-souled one! Exhibit your valour now. O Karna! Act so that
Arjuna cannot kill Jayadratha in the battle. O brave one among men! There is only a little bit of the day left. Strike
the enemy with torrents of arrows. O foremost among men! O Karna! Once the day is over, it is certain that victory
will be ours. If Saindhava can be protected until the time when the sun sets, Kounteya's pledge will be falsified and
he will enter the fire. O one who grants honours! Without Arjuna on this earth, his brothers and their followers will
have no interest in remaining alive, even for an instant. O Karna! When the Pandaveyas are destroyed, we will enjoy the entire earth, with its mountains, forests and groves, bereft of thorns. O one who grants honours! It seems
that destiny is against Partha. Without knowing about what should be done and what should not be done, he has
taken a pledge in this battle. O Karna! There is no doubt that Kiriti Pandava has taken this vow about killing
Jayadratha for the sake of his own destruction. O Radheya! When an invincible one like you is alive, how will
Phalguna be able to kill King Saindhava before the sun has set? He is protected by the king of Madra and the
great-souled Kripa. How will Dhananjaya be able to kill Jayadratha in the forefront of the battle? He is protected
by Drona's son, me and Duhshasana. Driven by destiny, how will Bibhatsu be able to approach Saindhava? There
are many brave ones who are fighting and the sun is hanging low. O one who grants honours! There is no doubt
that Partha will not be able to approach Jayadratha. O Karna! With me and the other brave maharathas, fight
against Partha in the battle and carefully make supreme efforts.' O venerable one! Having been thus addressed by
your son, Radheya spoke these words to Duryodhana, supreme among the Kuru lineage. 'The brave archer Bhimasena is firm in his aim. In the battle, he has wounded me grievously with many nets of arrows. O one who
grants honours! I have nevertheless been stationed in this battle. There is not a single limb of mine that has not
been tormented by arrows in the encounter. O king! I will however fight in this battle, to the utmost of my capacity,
so that the foremost among the Pandavas cannot kill Saindhava. As long as I am fighting and am shooting my
sharp arrows, the brave Savyasachi Dhananjaya will not be able to obtain Saindhava. O Kouravya! I will do everything that a strong person, always devoted to your welfare, can do. Victory depends on destiny. O best among the
Kuru lineage! Today, all the beings will witness the terrible battle between me and Partha and it will make the
body hair stand up.' While Karna and Kouraveya were thus conversing on the field of battle, Arjuna struck your
army with sharp arrows.

'"With sharp arrows that were pointed at the tip, in that battle, he severed the arms of the brave ones who would
not retreat. They[The arms.] were like clubs and like the trunks of elephants. The mighty-armed one severed heads with
his sharp arrows. The trunks of elephants, the necks of horses and the wheels of chariots were strewn around.
Horse-riders, with lances and spears, were steeped in blood. Bibhatsu sliced them down into two and three pieces
with his razor-sharp arrows. Thousands of supreme horses and elephants fell down. There were standards, umbrellas, bows, whisks and heads. He consumed your army, like a rising fire against dry wood. Partha soon caused the
earth to be covered with blood. The mighty one killed many warriors in your army. The invincible one, with truth
as his valour, approached Saindhava. Bibhatsu was protected by Bhimasena and Satvata. O best of the Bharata lineage! He was as resplendent as a blazing fire. On seeing Phalguna stationed there, those on your side who were
great archers and honoured as brave ones, bulls among men, could not tolerate this.

'"Duryodhana, Karna, Vrishasena, the king of Madra, Ashvatthama, Kripa and Saindhava himself were enraged.
For Saindhava's sake, they surrounded Kiriti from all sides. He seemed to be dancing around along the path of his
chariot, with a roar from his bowstring and from the clapping of arms. But all of them were skilled in fighting and
fearlessly surrounded Partha, who was skilled in war and was like Death with a gaping mouth. They placed Saindhava behind them and wished to kill Arjuna and Achyuta. The sun had a reddish tint and they desired that it might
set fast. They stretched their bows with their arms and released hundreds of arrows, which were like serpents and
the sun's rays, towards Phalguna. In that battle, Kiriti, invincible in battle, struck them and severed them[The arrows.] into
two, three and eight fragments.

'"The one with the lion's tail on his standard[Ashvatthama.] then displayed his own strength. O king! The son of Sharadvata's daughter countered Arjuna[Sharadvata's daughter was Kripi and Ashvatthama was her son.]. He pierced Partha with ten arrows and Vasudeva with seven. He remained stationed in the path of the chariot[Arjuna's chariot.] and protected Saindhava. All the other maharathas, foremost among the
Kouravas, surrounded him from every side with a great array of chariots. They stretched their bows and released
arrows. On the instructions of your son, they sought to protect Saindhava. The strength of Partha's arms, the inexhaustible arrows[Arjuna's quiver was never exhausted of arrows, as a result of the boon he received from Agni.] and the bow Gandiva were then seen. He repulsed all the arrows of Drona's son and Sharad-
vata's son[Kripa.] and struck all of them with nine arrows each. Drona's son pierced him with twenty-five arrows, Vrishasena with seven, Duryodhana with twenty and Karna and Shalya with three each. They roared and pierced him
repeatedly. They brandished their bows and surrounded him from all sides. They quickly drew their chariots in a
circle all around him. The maharathas desired that the sun might set fast. They roared and brandished their bows.
They covered him with sharp arrows, like clouds pouring rain on the slope of a mountain. O king! Those brave
ones, with arms like clubs, showed their great and divine weapons and released them on Dhananjaya's body. The
powerful one killed many warriors in your army. The invincible one, with truth as his valour, approached
Saindhava.

'"O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that battle, while Bhimasena and Satvata looked on, Karna
countered him with arrows. But in that encounter, while all the soldiers looked on, the mighty-armed Partha
pierced the son of the suta back with ten arrows. O venerable one! Satvata pierced Karna with three arrows, Bhimasena with three and Partha again pierced him with seven arrows. Maharatha Karna pierced each of them back
with sixty arrows. O king! That encounter between Karna and many was extraordinary. O venerable one! We witnessed the son of the suta's wonderful act, since he single-handedly and angrily countered three rathas. In that battle, the mighty-armed Phalguna struck Vaikartana Karna with one hundred arrows that penetrated all the inner organs. The powerful son of a suta had blood flowing from all his limbs. However, the brave one pierced Phalguna
back with fifty arrows. On witnessing his dexterity in battle, Arjuna could not tolerate it. The brave Partha Dhananjaya severed his bow and quickly struck him between the breasts with nine arrows. It was a time when speed was
of the essence. Wishing to kill him in the battle, Dhananjaya then quickly shot an arrow that was as radiant as the
sun. But as that arrow descended forcefully, Drona's son severed it with a sharp arrow that was in the shape of a
half-moon. Severed, it fell down on the ground. The powerful son of the suta then took up another bow. Wishing to
kill his enemy and perform deeds that would counter his, Karna enveloped Phalguna with many thousands of arrows. Those maharathas, lions among men, roared like bulls. They covered the sky with straight-flying arrows.
Wishing to strike each other, they became invisible because of that storm of arrows. 'I am Partha. Stay there. I am
Partha. O Phalguna! Stay there.' They roared and tormented each other with these words as stakes. Those brave
ones fought colourfully in that battle, showing dexterity and skill. All the warriors became spectators to this encounter. O great king! Wishing to kill each other in the battle, they fought on and were praised by the siddhas, the
charanas and other applauders.

'"O king! Duryodhana addressed those on your side. 'Make efforts to protect Radheya. Vrisha Radheya has told
me that he will not retreat without killing Arjuna in this battle.' O king! At this time, on witnessing Karna's valour,
he[Arjuna.] drew his bow back up to his ears and dispatched Karna's four horses to the land of the dead with four
supreme arrows. With another broad-headed arrow, he brought down his charioteer from the seat of the chariot.
While your son looked on, he covered him with arrows. In that encounter, he[Karna.] was thus shrouded. His horses
were slain. His charioteer was killed. Confounded by that net of arrows, he did not know what he should do. O
great king! On seeing that he was without a chariot, Ashvatthama took him on his own chariot and continued to
fight with Arjuna. The king of Madra pierced Kounteya with thirty arrows. Sharadvata's son struck Vasudeva with
twenty and struck Dhananjaya with twelve arrows that had been sharpened on stone. O great king! The king of
Sindhu struck Krishna and Partha separately with four arrows and Vrishasena struck them separately with seven. In
that fashion, Kunti's son, Dhananjaya, pierced them back. He pierced Drona's son with sixty-four and the king of
Madra with one hundred. He struck Saindhava with ten broad-headed arrows and Vrishasena with three arrows.
Partha struck Sharadvata's son with twenty arrows and roared. Desiring to render Savyasachi's pledge unsuccessful, all those on your side united and quickly attacked Dhananjaya. At this, Arjuna used a weapon that was sharp
on all sides and created terror among the sons of Dhritarashtra. The Kurus were on extremely expensive chariots.
They advanced against Pandu's son and showered down torrents of arrows.

'"O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A tumultuous and extremely terrible encounter commenced and it caused
confusion. But the prince[Arjuna.], with a diadem and a garland, did not lose his senses and continued to shoot arrows.
Desiring the kingdom and remembering the twelve years of hardship suffered because of the Kurus, the great-
souled and immeasurable Savyasachi released arrows from Gandiva and covered all the directions. The sky
seemed to be covered with flaming meteors. Many crows descended on the dead bodies. The one with the diadem
and the garland angrily killed his enemies, like the one with the tawny bowstring using Ajagava[Ajagava is the name of Shiva's bow and it has a tawny bowstring.]. The great one
with the diadem and the garland was immensely illustrious. With his bow and arrows, he was the conqueror of
armies. With his arrows, he brought down the brave ones among the Kurus, astride their supreme horses and elephants. In that encounter, many kings picked up heavy clubs, iron bludgeons, swords and spears. They grasped
those large weapons and assuming fierce forms, suddenly attacked Partha. But the great archer destroyed them,
with their chariots, horses, elephants and masses of foot soldiers. In that encounter, the brave one deprived them of
their weapons and their lives and extended Yama's kingdom."'
