'Devasthana said, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted. This is about what
Brihaspati[The preceptor of the gods.] said, when he was asked by Indra. 'Contentment is the best heaven. Contentment is
supreme happiness. There is nothing superior to contentment, since a person is well established in
that. When one withdraws from desire, just as a tortoise draws in its limbs, then the radiance of the
atman clearly manifests the atman itself. When one is not frightened and does not frighten anyone
else, then one triumphs over desire and aversion and sees the atman. Whether in deeds, thought or
words, when one is not angry towards anyone and does not injure anyone, then one attains the brahman[Though not clearly stated, this is the end of Brihaspati's quote.].' O Kounteya! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In this way, beings look at this and that,
and follow this dharma and that. Understand this[Follow the right dharma.]. Some praise tranquility, others praise exertion.
Some recommend one or the other, others praise both. Some praise sacrifice, other people sannyasa.
One praises giving, another receiving. Some say that everything must be renounced and one must be
seated in silent meditation. Some praise the kingdom and the protection of everyone, through
killing, cutting and piercing[Of wicked ones.]. Others prefer solitude. Having examined all this, the wise have determined that the virtuous should have the view that dharma lies in not injuring any being and in
non-injury, truthfulness in speech, sharing, fortitude, forgiveness, procreation on one's own wife,
gentleness, modesty and steadfastness. Svayambhuva Manu[Each era (manvantara) is presided over by a Manu. After fourteen manvantaras, the cycle of destruction and creation starts again. In the present
cycle of fourteen manvantaras, Svayambhuva Manu was the first and we
are now in the seventh manvantara, presided over by Vaivasvata Manu.] said that riches constituted the most
important component of dharma. O Kounteya! Therefore, you should make efforts to protect. A
kshatriya who is established in a kingdom must be self-controlled and look on pleasant and unpleasant things equally. He must know the truth about what the sacred texts prescribe for kings and he
must subsist on the remnants of sacrifices. He must be engaged in chastising the wicked and supporting the virtuous. He must establish the subjects on the path of dharma and must himself follow
dharma. Having passed on the riches to his son, he can retire to the forest and sustain himself on
forest fare, in accordance with what is prescribed for hermits, being attentive until his time
comes[Until it is time to die.]. Such a king acts in accordance with the dharma of kings. O king! Therefore, he is successful in this world and the next. It is my view that nirvana[The final liberation.] is extremely difficult to attain. There
are many obstacles along the path. Therefore, those who follow this dharma, are devoted to truth,
generosity and austerities, have the quality of not causing injury, are devoid of desire and anger, are
engaged in the task of protecting the subjects, are based on supreme self-control and fight for the
sake of cattle and brahmanas, obtain the supreme objective. O scorcher of enemies! The Rudras, the
Vasus, the Adityas, the Sadhyas and large numbers of rajarshis adopted this dharma. They were not
distracted. Through their meritorious deeds, they obtained heaven."'
