'Bhishma said, "O lord of men! I then informed Kali[Because she was dark, Satyavati was also known as Kali.] Satyavati, the advisers, the brahmanas and the priests and
allowed the eldest maiden, Amba, to leave. On obtaining the permission, the maiden went to the capital of the lord
of Shalva. She was protected by aged brahmanas and accompanied by her nurse. Travelling the entire distance, she
went to that lord of men and told King Shalva these words. 'O mighty-armed one! O immensely radiant one! I
have arrived here, before you.' O lord of the earth! But the lord of Shalva smiled and told her, 'O one with the
beautiful complexion! You have belonged to another one before this and I do not wish you as my wife. O fortunate
one! Therefore, return again to the descendant of the Bharata lineage! After you have been forcibly abducted by
Bhishma, I do not desire you. You were won by Bhishma and seemed to be delighted then. He defeated all the
lords of the earth in a great battle. O one with the beautiful complexion! You have gone to another one before. I am
a king who is instructed by dharma and am skilled in knowledge. How can I accept as my wife a lady who has
gone to someone else before? O fortunate one! Go wherever you wish. Do not waste your time here.' O king!
Amba was struck by the arrows of the god of love and told him, 'O lord of the earth! Do not speak in this fashion. I
wasn't happy when I was abducted by Bhishma, the destroyer of enemies. After driving away the lords of the
earth, he used force on me and I was weeping. O lord of Shalva! I love you. Love me back in return. I am an innocent maiden. Dharma does not approve of the abandoning of those who love you. I have come here after obtaining
the permission of Gangeya, who never retreats from the field of battle. I have obtained his permission and have
come here before you. O lord of the earth! The mighty-armed Bhishma does not want me. I have heard that all
Bhishma's exertions were for the sake of his brother. O king! Gangeya has given my sisters, Ambika and Ambalika, whom he had also abducted, to his younger brother Vichitravirya. O lord of Shalva! I have never desired any
man other than you. O tiger among men! I swear on my head that I have not thought of anyone but you. O Indra
among kings! I have come before you and I have not gone to any other man earlier. O Shalva! I am telling you the
truth. I swear on my own self that this is the truth. O one with the large eyes! Love me. A maiden has come to you
of her own accord. I have not been to any other man earlier. O Indra among kings! I desire your favours.' O foremost among the Bharata lineage! But though she spoke in this way, Shalva abandoned the daughter of the king of
Kashi, the way a snake discards its old skin. She sought his favours with these and many other words. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! But the king who was the lord of Shalva did not show her his favours. Then the eldest
daughter of the king of Kashi was overcome by anger. With tears in her eyes and with her voice choking with
tears, she said, 'O lord of the earth! Having been discarded by you, I will go wherever I wish. I will go to the virtuous. It has been rightly said that where there is virtue, there is truth.' O Kouravya! The maiden spoke in this way
and lamented piteously. But the lord of Shalva abandoned her and Shalva repeatedly said, 'O one with the beautiful hips. Go. Go from here. I am frightened of Bhishma. You are Bhishma's property.' She was thus addressed by
Shalva, who was not far-sighted. She departed wretchedly from the city, weeping like a female osprey."'
