'Sanjaya said, "The terrible and fierce battle continued. O lord of the earth! The world was covered in darkness and
dust. As they were stationed in that encounter, the warriors could not see each other. The great battle continued on
the basis of guessing and signs. Men, elephants and horses encountered supreme destruction and it made the body
hair stand up. O supreme among kings! The brave Drona, Karna and Kripa and Bhima, Parshata and Satyaki, agitated each other's soldiers. In every direction, the maharathas slaughtered the soldiers. Because of the darkness and
the dust, the elephants fled in different directions. The warriors were terrified and bereft of their senses. They also
fled in different directions. O great king! They were killed and fled in that encounter. Thousands of maharathas
killed each other in that battle. They were blind and confounded by the darkness and this was due to your stupid
son's policy. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the soldiers, and the protectors of the soldiers, were confused in that battle. Everything was covered in darkness."

'Dhritarashtra asked, "They were agitated by the Pandavas and their energy was sapped. Those on my side were
blinded and shattered by the darkness. What was the state of your minds then? O Sanjaya! When the world was
covered in darkness, how did their soldiers and those on my side again become visible?"

'Sanjaya replied, "There were soldiers who had not been killed[On the Kourava side.]. Instructed by their leaders, they again
arranged themselves in the form of a vyuha. Drona was in the front and Shalya at the rear. O king! Drona and
Soubala were along the flanks. During that night, the king himself[Duryodhana.] protected all the soldiers. O king! Duryodhana spoke to the large numbers of infantry and comforted them. 'Abandon your supreme weapons. Take up flaming lamps in your hands.' Thus instructed by the supreme of kings, they were cheered and took up lamps. Divided
through different standards, during that night, the army was beautiful because of the radiance of the fire. They were
adorned in extremely expensive ornaments. They possessed divine weapons. These blazed as they were hurled. In
a short while, properly arranged, those lamps lit up the entire army. The foot soldiers held lamps with oil in their
hands and this made all the soldiers look radiant. They looked like clouds in the night sky, illuminated by lightning. When the soldiers were illuminated in this way, Drona, who was like the fire, scorched all the directions. O
Indra among kings! In his golden armour, he was like the midday sun with its rays. As the light was reflected from
golden ornaments, sparkling swords and bows and yellow weapons, it was beautiful. There were bright clubs and
dazzling bludgeons. There were lances and spears. O Ajamidha! As they were repeatedly lit, the rays of the lamps
reflected from these. O king! There were umbrellas, new whisks and other accompaniments and they flamed like
giant meteors. There were golden garlands that were whirled around. They looked brilliant. Because of the reflection from the weapons and the illumination from the lamps, your army then looked dazzling. O king! There was
the radiance from the reflection on ornaments and it was extremely beautiful. There were yellow weapons that
were well crafted, used for mangling bodies. They were whirled by the brave ones and created a flaming radiance
there, like the lightning in the sky at the end of summer. These were brought down with great force to kill the enemy and the faces of the men trembled as they did this, like large clouds driven by the wind. It was as if a raging
conflagaration blazes like the sun and destroys a large forest. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The army
blazed in that light and looked fierce in form, generating great fear.

'"On seeing that our army was thus illuminated, the Parthas quickly instructed all their soldiers and the large
numbers of foot soldiers to also light lamps. Seven lamps were placed on each elephant. Ten lamps were placed on
each chariot. There were two lamps on the back of each horse. There were other lamps on the flanks, the standards
and the rear. There were others along the flanks of all the soldiers, at the rear and in the front, in every direction.
Other men roamed around in the midst of the two armies, with flaming torches in their hands. All the soldiers and
the masses of infantry got mixed up with the elephants, the chariots and the large numbers of horses. The army of
the sons of Pandu was illuminated with others who were in the midst and held flaming torches in their hands. It
was as if a fire was rendered more powerful because of an additional blaze and those two armies assumed greater
strength. It was like the sun making the planets more radiant, or the sun fiercely illuminating the flames of a fire.
That radiance spread on the earth and into the sky and spreading over all the directions, seemed to increase. The
splendour was extremely fierce and made your soldiers, and theirs, visible. O king! As that radiance spread up towards the sky, the masses of gods, the gandharvas, the yakshas, the asuras and large numbers of siddhas were
awakened and assembled, with all the apsaras. The place was full of gods, gandharvas, yakshas, leaders among the
asuras, masses of apsaras and brave warriors who had been killed and had ascended to heaven. The field of battle
looked like heaven itself. There were chariots, horses, elephants, all illuminated with lamps. Angry warriors
roamed around and so did wounded horses. Those large armies of chariots, horses and elephants were arrayed in
battle formation and were as resplendent as the gods and the asuras, arranged in vyuhas. The force of spears was
like a turbulent wind. The large chariots were like clouds. There was the roar of chariots and horses. Weapons
showered down, like clouds raining blood. As night commenced, there was a battle between the men who were
like gods. The great-souled one[Drona or Ashvatthama. It is not clear who is being referred to.] was like a giant fire. He tormented the foremost among the Pandavas. O Indra
among men! He was like the sun that has reached the midpoint of the sky at the end of the monsoon."'
