'"Bharadvaja said, 'O supreme among brahmanas! Situated in the midst of
Meru, how did the lord Brahma create the different categories of beings?
Tell me this.'

'"Bhrigu replied, 'Manasa created many different categories of subjects
through the powers of his mind. To protect the subjects, he first created water, since it is the life of all beings and it is through it that all the subjects
grow. If it did not exist, everything would be destroyed. Everything is pervaded by it. The earth, the mountains, the clouds and everything else that
has form is known to be water. They are its solidified form.'

'"Bharadvaja asked, 'How was water created? What about fire and the
wind? How was the earth created? I have great doubts about this.'

'"Bhrigu replied, 'O brahmana! In ancient times, in the period that is
known as Brahma's era, the great-souled brahmana rishis assembled and
had a doubt about how the worlds were created. They remained silent and
immobile, resorting to meditation. Those brahmanas gave up food and subsisted on air for one hundred celestial years. After that, they all heard words
that were full of dharma. This celestial and divine voice was heard in the
firmament. "Earlier, there was only silent space. It was motionless and immobile. Without the moon, sun and wind, it seemed to be asleep. Then water was created, like darkness emerging from darkness. When that water
stirred, the wind was created. An empty vessel without a hole is seen to be
silent. But when it has been filled with water, the wind creates a noise inside
it. Like that, the infinite space was filled with water. After that, the wind
penetrated the water and created a loud noise. Generated from the stirring of
the water, the wind whirled around in this way. It reached up into the sky,
but was still not pacified. As a result of the friction between the wind and
the water, the immensely powerful fire arose, blazing in energy. It rose upwards and removed the darkness that covered the firmament. The wind
fanned the fire and brought the sky and the water together. As a result of
uniting with the wind, fire became dense. As it descended from the sky, the
friction caused its liquid part to solidify and created the earth. The juices,
different kinds of fragrances, liquids, beings-the earth is known to be the
womb that gave rise to all these things."'"'
