'Sanjaya said, "The lord Pundarikaksha entered Arjuna's unmatched abode. He touched water and spread out an
excellent bed on the plain and auspicious floor. It was made out of darbha grass, with the complexion of lapis
lazuli. He duly adorned it with garlands, parched grain, fragrances and auspicious objects and surrounded the bed
with supreme weapons. Partha also touched water. Humble servants produced sacrifices[The word used is bali. While this can mean any object of tribute or offering, it can also mean an animal
sacrifice.] offered every night to
Tryambaka[Shiva.]. Partha delightedly adorned Madhava with fragrances and garlands and tendered the nightly offerings[The text is a bit vague. Logically, Arjuna must have made the nightly offerings to Shiva. However, this verse
suggests that Arjuna made the offerings to Krishna and this is substantiated later.]. Govinda smiled and spoke to Phalguna. 'O Partha! O fortunate one! Lie down. For the sake of your welfare, I will leave.' He placed gatekeepers there and other well-armed men for the sake of protection. With
Daruka[Krishna's charioteer.] following him, the handsome one then went to his own camp. He laid himself down on his white bed
and thought about the many things that needed to be done.

'"No one in the Pandava camp slept during that night. O lord of the earth! Everyone was awake. 'Because he
was overcome by sorrow on account of his son, the great-souled wielder of Gandiva has suddenly taken an oath to
slay the king of Sindhu. How will Vasava's mighty-armed son, the destroyer of enemy heroes, make his pledge
successful? The pledge that the great-souled Pandava has taken is an extremely difficult one. He has taken this
great vow because he was tormented by sorrow over his son. His[Referring to Duryodhana.] brothers are valiant and his forces are numerous. All of Dhritarashtra's sons will serve his[Jayadratha's.] cause. May Dhananjaya return, after having killed Saindhava in
battle. Let Arjuna accomplish his pledge and vanquish masses of the enemy. If he does not kill the king of Sindhu,
he will enter the fire. Partha Dhananjaya will never do something that is false. If Arjuna is dead, what will be the
state of the king who is Dharma's son? All his hopes of victory are based on Pandava[That is, Arjuna.]. If we have performed any
good deeds, if we have offered donations and oblations, because of all those great fruits, let Savyasachi be triumphant.' O lord! Thus did they converse, desiring victory. O king! That great and difficult night began to pass.

'"When it was the middle of the night, Janardana woke up. He remembered Partha's oath and spoke to Daruka.
'Because he was oppressed at the death of a relative, Arjuna has taken an oath. O Daruka! He has said that he will
kill Jayadratha before tomorrow is over. Having heard this, Duryodhana will consult his advisers, so that Partha
cannot kill Jayadratha in the battle. Several of his akshouhinis will protect Jayadratha. Drona and his son are
skilled in the use of all weapons. If someone is protected by Drona, not even the brave thousand-eyed one[Indra.], the
oppressor of daityas and danavas, ventures to kill him. Tomorrow, I will act so that Arjuna, Kunti's son, can kill
Jayadratha before the sun has set. My wives, my friends, my relatives and my kin are not dearer to me than Arjuna,
Kunti's son, is. O Daruka! Bereft of Arjuna, I will not be able to look at the world even for an instant. Therefore, it
shall not be that way[It shall not be that Arjuna dies.]. For Arjuna's sake, I will slay the standard-bearers of the enemy, with their horses, chariots
and elephants, with Karna and Suyodhana. In the great battle tomorrow, let the three worlds witness my valour. O
Daruka! For Dhananjaya's sake, I will show my valour in the battle. O Daruka! Tomorrow, I will rout thousands of
kings and hundreds of princes, with their horses, elephants and chariots. Tomorrow, you will witness the army of
kings shattered by my chakra. For the sake of Pandava, I will angrily bring them down in the battle. Tomorrow, the
gods, the gandharvas, the pishachas, the serpents, the rakshasas and all the worlds will know me as Savyasachi's
well-wisher. He who hates him, hates me too. He who follows him, follows me too. Use your intelligence to comprehend that Arjuna is half of my body. When night is over and morning has dawned, prepare and yoke my
supreme chariot according to the rites decreed in the sacred texts. O suta! Place the divine club Koumodaki[The name of Vishnu's club.],
lances, the chakra, bow and arrows. Stock the chariot with all implements. Make room on the floor of the chariot
for the standard and for Vinata's brave son[Vinata's son is Garuda, who is Vishnu's mount.], the adornment of the chariot in battle. Place the golden umbrella and
make the horses don divine armour created by Vishvakarma, as radiant as the sun and the fire. Yoke the supreme
horses Balahaka, Meghapushpa, Sainya and Sugriva[The names of Krishna's horses.]. O Daruka! Armour and station yourself. You will swiftly
come to me when you hear the loud and terrible sound of Panchajanya fill everything with the bhairava note[Panchajanya is the name of Krishna's conch shell. In this context, bhairava is a note (built on the natural seven
tones) rather than a raga.]. O
Daruka! I will alone angrily dispel all the reasons for misery that have afflicted my brother, the son of my paternal
aunt[Kunti was the sister of Krishna's father.]. While the sons of Dhritarashtra look on, I will make every effort so that Bibhatsu can kill Jayadratha in the
battle. O charioteer! I assure you that his victory is certain.' Daruka replied, 'His victory is certain. How can he be
defeated? O tiger among men! You have yourself agreed to be his charioteer. As for me, I will do what you have
asked me to. This night will give way to an excellent morning that will bring Vijaya's[Vijaya is Arjuna's name.] victory.'"'
