'Yudhishthira asked, "A king may be devoted to dharma, but may be obstructed by his advisers. If he desires happiness, how should he act when he doesn't possess riches and has been deprived of his treasury and his army?"

'Bhishma replied, "On this, the history of Kshemadarshi is sung. O Yudhishthira! I will tell you this. Listen to it.
Kshemadarshi was the son of a king and in ancient times, his strength had decayed. We have heard that he went to
the sage Kalakavrikshiya and asked him, 'My prosperity has disappeared and I am immersed in this hardship. I am
a man who should have his share of riches and I have tried repeatedly. However, I have been unable to obtain the
kingdom. O brahmana! What should I do? O supreme one! There is nothing other than death, theft, seeking refuge
or other inferior forms of conduct. Tell me. You are accomplished in your wisdom. Someone afflicted with disease,
mental or otherwise, should seek refuge with someone who is as extremely learned as you are. A man who has
broken free and has controlled his desires obtains bliss. He abandons joy and sorrow and obtains wealth that has
nothing to do with happiness. I sorrow for those who seek happiness in riches. My large quantity of riches has
been destroyed, as if they had appeared in a dream. It is an extremely great and difficult task to abandon riches,
even for virtuous ones. We are incapable of giving up what no longer exists[Though the kingdom has gone, Kshemadarshi still hopes to get it back.]. I have been dislodged from my
prosperity and have attained this state, where I am miserable and distressed. O brahmana! Instruct me about the
other kind of bliss that exists.'

'"Having been addressed by the intelligent prince of Kosala, the immensely radiant sage Kalakavrikshiya
replied, 'You already know, because that intelligence has presented itself before you. Act accordingly. Know that
everything, I and what is mine, is temporary. Everything that you think of as existing, know that it is non-existent.
That is the reason a wise person is not distressed, even when he faces a difficulty and a hardship. Know that whatever had happened and whatever has happened are certainly things that have no existence[In the sense that they are temporary.]. Knowing what
should be known, you will be able to free yourself from adharma. There was an accumulation of things earlier and
there are those that came after that. All of those no longer exist. Knowing this, who will be anxious? Having existed, something no longer exists. Having not existed, something exists. One should not have the capacity to grieve.
Why should a man sorrow? O king! Where is your father now? Where is your grandfather now? You cannot see
them now, nor can they see you. Beholding your own self to be impermanent, why do you sorrow over them? Use
your intelligence to comprehend this. It is certain that you will not exist. O king! I, you, your enemies and your
well-wishers will cease to be. Everything will cease to exist. Whether they are twenty years old or whether they are
thirty years old, all the men who are here will die before one hundred years have passed. If a man is freed from his
great prosperity, if he wishes to ensure his own welfare, he should think that it wasn't his. He should not regard
what will come as his either. What has passed should also not be regarded as his. Those who think that destiny is
superior are learned and it is said that those are the virtuous ones. It is possible to survive without riches and rule
the kingdom. People who are your equal or superior in intelligence and manliness have done that. They have not
sorrowed like you. Therefore, you should also not grieve. Why are you not their equal, or superior, in intelligence
and manliness?'

'"The prince replied, 'I think that my obtaining the kingdom was also destiny. O brahmana! Everything that was
there has been taken away by the greatness of time. O one who is rich in austerities! It has been taken away, as if
by a flow of water. I can see the fruits. I must live on whatever I can obtain.'

'"The sage said, 'O one from Kosala! You have arrived at the right conclusion about what will come and what is
past. That is the reason you are not sorrowing. Behave in that way about everything. Never desire objectives that
cannot be attained, only those that can be attained. Experience what has presented itself and do not sorrow over
what has not come. O one from Kosala! You will then find delight in the objectives that have been attained. Now
that your sentiments have been cleansed, perhaps you will not grieve over Shri having left. When an evil-minded
person confronts misfortune and is deprived of what he possessed earlier, he always censures the creator and is not
satisfied with what he now possesses. He thinks that people who are prosperous do not deserve it. That is the reason he is repeatedly immersed in grief. O king! Such a man is proud and is overcome by excessive jealousy. O lord
of Kosala! O wise one! In that way, you should not suffer from envy. Though you do not possess prosperity, tolerate that of others. Accomplished people enjoy Lakhsmi, even if she is with someone else. Shri goes to the virtuous
and abandons those who hate. Brave men who follow dharma and know about dharma give up Shri and their sons
and grandsons. They even give up their own selves. They see that even when they have satisfied their desires, there
is a lot that crumbles away. There are others who renounce, thinking that the objectives are extremely difficult to
obtain[Some abandon the pursuit of riches to start off with. Others abandon the
pursuit after realizing that these are transient.]. But though you are wise by nature, you are tormented in your misery. You desire things that should not
be desired, noticing that those riches are with others. Use your intelligence to question and abandon the pursuit.
Something that is not desirable presents itself in the form of artha. Something that is not artha presents itself in the
form of something that is desirable. For some, the destruction of riches is desirable. There are those who look towards prosperity and think that it will bring infinite happiness. There are those who find pleasure in prosperity, disregarding what is superior. In his pursuit of prosperity, all his enterprise is destroyed. O one from Kosala! When
something desired has been obtained with a great deal of difficulty and then disappears, the man who was pursuing
riches is completely shattered. Men who know about welfare desire dharma alone. They desire happiness beyond
death and are indifferent towards what happens in this world. In their greed for wealth, some men are ready to give
up their lives. When they are unable to obtain riches, such men think that there is no point in remaining alive. Behold their misery. Behold their stupidity. Because of their confusion, they thirst for riches and live for what is temporary. All these stores are destroyed. Life ends in death. Why should one turn one's mind towards acquiring
something that will be separated? O king! Wealth abandons a man, or a man abandons wealth. Knowing that this is
certainly inevitable, why should one be anxious over it? The well-wishers and riches of others are also destroyed.
O king! Use your intelligence to judge the calamities that you, and other men, face. Restrain, control and focus
your senses, mind and words. There are injurious ends, extremely difficult to obtain, that may not be available.
These are despicable by nature, or perhaps it is impossible to obtain them. Be content in your wisdom. Be valiant
and know. Do not sorrow. Desire a little. Do not be fickle. Be mild, generous and controlled. If you resort to brahmacharya, someone like you will not be confounded. Someone like you should not resort to the contemptible
means of begging for subsistence[The text uses the word kapalin, which means a mendicant who carries a
skull around and begs for a living.]. That is cruel, wicked and unhappy conduct, meant for cowards. You can subsist on roots and fruits and enjoy yourself in the great forest. Control your soul by being restrained in speech. Show
compassion towards all beings. One who finds pleasure in dwelling alone in the forest, is satisfied with a little and
enjoys companionship with aged tuskers is like a learned person. The atman will be like a large lake that was once
agitated, but is now tranquil. If someone treads this path, I can only see happiness for him. O king! When prosperity is impossible, when one is devoid of advisers, by seeking recourse with destiny, can you think of anything that
will be superior?'"'
