Vaishampayana said, 'Hearing these words of Nara and Narayana, Narada became extremely devoted towards
that single god. He spent one thousand years in Nara and Narayana's hermitage. He heard accounts about the
illustrious one and saw the undecaying Hari. Then he quickly went to his own hermitage, on the slopes of the Himalayas. The famous rishis, Nara and Narayana, continued to dwell in their own beautiful hermitage, tormenting
themselves through supreme austerities. You are extremely valiant. You are the extender of the lineage of the Pandavas.  Having  heard  about  these  accounts,  right  from  the  beginning,  you  have  been  completely  purified.  O
supreme among kings! A person who hates the immutable Vishnu in deeds, thoughts and words, possesses neither
this world, nor the next. For an eternal number of years, his ancestors are submerged in hell. This is what happens
to someone who hates the best among the gods, the god Narayana Hari. How can one hate someone whose atman
is in all the worlds? O tiger among men! Know that Vishnu is established in all atmans. Our preceptor is the rishi
who is Gandhavati's son[Gandhavati is another name for Satyavati.]. O son! He is the one who told us about the paramatman's greatness. O unblemished
one! I have told you what I heard from him. Know that Krishna Dvaipayana is the lord Narayana. O tiger among
men! Who else could have composed the Mahabharata? Other than that lord, who could have spoken about the
many kinds of dharma? The great sacrifice that you thought of, is going on[The story is being told by Vaishampayana to Janamejaya, at the latter's snake sacrifice. It was later retold by
Souti to the sages.]. Having listened to the truth about
what the sacred texts say about dharma, think of a horse sacrifice.

'Souti said, "The king who was Parikshit's son heard this great account[The text does not clearly say this. But it is now Souti speaking.]. He started all the rites that were necessary for the completion of the sacrifice."'

Vaishampayana said, 'I have recounted to you the stories about Narayana. O king! In earlier times, Narada told
my preceptor about these, in the hearing of the rishis, the Pandavas, Krishna and Bhishma. He[Narayana.] is the supreme
preceptor and the lord of the universe. He is the one who holds up the earth. He is the store of tranquility and rituals. He is the store of the sacred texts and humility. He is engaged in the supreme welfare of brahmanas. The beneficial Hari should be your destination. He is the great store of extremely great austerities. He is famous. He is worshipped by the ones who do not cause injury. He is the single refuge. He is the end that grants freedom from fear.
He  is  the  one  who  accepts  shares  at  sacrifices.  He  is  beyond  the  three  qualities.  He  has  four  and  five  sacred
forms[The four forms have already been mentioned. The fifth form is seen when one has been completely emancipated and one is in Vaikuntha.]. He accepts a share in the fruits of sacrifices. He is always worshipped. He cannot be vanquished. He is
extremely strong. He is the destination for the atmans. He constitutes the good deeds of the rishis. He is a witness
to the worlds. He is without birth. He is the Purusha. He is like the sun in complexion. He is the lord who progresses along many paths. He is the single one to whom one should bow down. He emerged from the waters. It is before
him that the rishis bow down. He is the origin of the worlds. He is the immortal destination. He is subtle, ancient,
immobile and supreme. He is the one who is always upheld by intelligent ones who know about sankhya and yoga,
those who are controlled in their souls and know about him.'
