Vaishampayana said, 'As soon as they saw him, all the Pandavas and the greatly illustrious son of Panchala[Dhrishtadyumna. The text is such that it could also mean Drupada, ruler of Panchala.]
stood up. All of them welcomed and paid their respects to the great-souled Krishna[Krishna Dvaipayana.]. The great-minded one returned their greetings and asked about their welfare. He then sat down on a radiant and golden seat. Instructed by
Krishna, the one with infinite energy, those greatest among men[The text actually says bipeds.] also sat down on expensive seats. O lord of the
people! After some time, in sweet words, Parshata[Meaning probably Drupada. Parshata is a family name, used for both Drupada and Dhrishtadyumna.] asked the great-souled one about Droupadi.

'Drupada asked, "O fortunate lord! How can one woman become the wife of many, without leading to sin?
Please explain this to us in detail." Vyasa replied, "This dharma has fallen into disuse because it runs counter to the
Vedas and common practice. But on this, I wish to hear the opinions of each one of you."

'Drupada said, "In my view, this practice leads to a sin, because it is against the Vedas and common practice. O
best of the Brahmanas! Nowhere can a wife of many be found. Nor did the illustrious ones, of ancient times, follow such a dharma. Those who have wisdom should never follow such a dharma. I can therefore never convince
myself of acting in this way. To me, this dharma appears to be of doubtful morality." Dhrishtadyumna said, "O bull
among the twice-born! O Brahmana! O one rich with austerities! If he follows the path that is righteous, how can
an elder brother unite with the wife of his younger brother? The ways of dharma are always subtle and, therefore,
we do not know the ways in entirety. Thus, we cannot say what is in accordance with dharma and what is not. O
Brahmana! We cannot therefore perform such an act with a clear mind. I cannot say that Krishna should be the
wife of five." Yudhishthira said, "My tongue never utters an untruth and my mind never turns to sin. When my
mind approves, it cannot be sinful. I have heard in ancient tales that there was a lady named Jatila in the Goutama
lineage. She was chief among all virtuous women and consorted with seven sages. O supreme among those who
know the path of dharma! It is said that listening to the preceptor is virtue and among all preceptors, the mother is
the foremost. She has commanded us that we must always share what we obtain. O best among the twice-born!
Thus, do I consider this act virtuous." Kunti said, "It is as the virtuous Yudhishthira has said. I am frightened that
my words might become untrue. How can I be saved from a lie?"

'Vyasa replied, "O fortunate one! You will be saved from a lie. This is eternal dharma. O king of Panchala! I
will not reveal this matter before everyone. You will alone hear how this practice was established and why this
should be regarded as old and eternal. There is no doubt that what Kounteya[Kunti's son, Yudhishthira.] has said is in accordance with dharma."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Then, the illustrious lord Dvaipyana Vyasa arose and, taking hold of the king's[Drupada's.] hand,
went into the king's palace. The Pandavas, Kunti and Parshata Dhrishtadyumna waited despondently for those two
to return. Thereupon, Dvaipayana explained to the great-souled king how it came to be that these men's marriage
with a single wife was in conformity with dharma.'
