Vyasa said, 'The mind creates sentiments, and intelligence chooses between them. The heart differentiates
between the pleasant and the unpleasant. Know that there are three kinds of urges behind action. The objects of the senses are superior to the senses and the mind is superior to the objects of the senses. Intelligence is superior to the mind and it is held that the atman is superior to intelligence. Intelligence is in the atman of men. Intelligence is in the atman that is inside. When it creates sentiments, it becomes the mind. Since the senses are different, the intelligence discriminates between them. When it hears, it becomes hearing. When it touches, it becomes
touch. When it sees, it become sight. When it tastes, it becomes the tongue. When it smells, it becomes the nose. It
is intelligence that creates a difference between these. What are called the senses in men are seen to be the three
kinds of sentiments of the intelligence[Sattva, rajas and tamas.]. One is sometimes delighted. At other times, one grieves. There are times
when a person is united with neither happiness, nor unhappiness. The ocean is the lord of the rivers and the giant
shoreline withstands the waves. Like that, though driven by the three sentiments, it can transcend them[Through yoga, intelligence can transcend the qualities.]. Though
thought of as existing separately, when it desires anything, intelligence is known as the mind. All the strong senses
must be conquered. In due course, when each of these[The senses.] overwhelms the intelligence, it exists in the mind. Rajas is
excited and follows sattva. Just as the spokes are attached to the wheel of a chariot, those qualities are attached to
those three[Sattva, rajas and tamas attach themselves to the mind, intelligence and consciousness.]. A man must use his supreme intelligence like a lamp to control the senses and use yoga to be indifferent and immobilize desire. While qualities are natural, a learned person is not confused. He is always without
sorrow and without delight and beyond jealousy. The senses pursue objects of desire and are incapable of seeing
the atman. It is difficult for people with cleansed souls to see it in this way, not to speak of others. However, the
mind can be used to control them[The senses.], as if through reins. The atman then manifests itself in all beings, like a lamp
inside a pot, when the darkness has been overcome. An aquatic bird doesn't become wet, even when it roams
around in water. In that fashion, a person whose wisdom is accomplished is not tainted by material objects. Though
he enjoys them, he is never attached to them. He has performed deeds earlier[Before opting for sannyasa.], but only loves the atman now,
which is inside all living beings. He has given up the path characterized by the qualities. For him, there are no
qualities, other than those engendered by the sattva in his atman. The qualities are incapable of comprehending the
atman, though it always knows them. It sees the qualities and is also their creator. Know that this is the subtle difference between understanding and the kshetrajna. One of them creates the qualities. But the qualities do not create
that single one. They[Understanding and the soul.] are naturally different, but are always united. The fish that lives in water is different from
the environment in which it lives. A gnat may be attached to a fig tree, but they are actually different. A blade of
grass is also different from the clump of munja grass it is in. Like that, though they are united, they are actually established separately.'"'
