Vaishampayana said, 'Hrishikesha, King Yudhishthira, Kripa and the others
and the four Pandavas rode on chariots that were like cities, adorned with
standards and flags. On horses that were swift, they quickly went to Kurukshetra. They got down in Kurukshetra, full of hair, marrow and bones. That
was where the great-souled kshatriyas had given up their bodies. The bodies
and bones of elephants and horses were piled up in heaps, like mountains.
The heads and skulls of men were strewn around like conch shells. Thousands of funeral pyres had been lit, with armour and weapons piled on. It
looked like a drinking ground that had been used by Death and had just been
abandoned. Large numbers of demons wandered around and large numbers of
rakshasas frequented it. The maharathas quickly went and saw Kurukshetra.

'While they were going there, the mighty-armed one, the delight of all the
Yadavas, spoke to Yudhishthira about the valour of Jamadagni's son. "O
Partha! There, in the distance, you can see the five lakes created by Rama[Parashurama.].
Earlier, he used the blood of kshatriyas to offer oblations to his ancestors. On
twenty-one occasions, the lord emptied the earth of kshatriyas. It is only now
that Rama has refrained from that task." Yudhishthira replied, "You have told
me that Rama emptied the world of kshatriyas twenty-one times. I have a
great doubt about this. O bull among the Yadu lineage! O infinitely valorous
one! If the seed of the kshatriyas was burnt, how were the kshatriyas generated again? O bull among the Yadu lineage! How were the kshatriyas exterminated by the illustrious and great-souled Rama? How did they prosper again?
O supreme among eloquent ones! In the Mahabharata war, crores of kshatriyas have been slain. The earth is strewn with kshatriyas. O Varshneya! O
one with Tarkshya[Garuda.] on your standard! Sever my doubt. O Vasava's younger
brother! O Krishna! Our supreme knowledge comes from you." As they proceeded, the lord who was Gada's elder brother 460 told the infinitely energetic
Yudhishthira the complete truth about that account and about how the earth
again became full of kshatriyas.'
