'Sanjaya said, "Arjuna and Vasudeva are supremely honoured archers. They have everything in them and have
been born in this way because of their own wishes. O lord! The intelligent Vasudeva's chakra is hidden in the firmament and works through the powers of maya. It may be hidden from the Pandavas, but the Pandavas honour it. I
am briefly telling you about their strengths and weaknesses. Listen. As if in play, the immensely strong Janardana
Madhava defeated Naraka, Shambara, Kamsa and the king of Chedi, who was terrible in form. Purushottama[The supreme being, Vishnu and Krishna's name.]
pervades the earth, the sky and heaven. He is supreme in his soul and everything is under his control. O king! You
have repeatedly asked me about the Pandavas, wishing to know about the strengths and weaknesses of their forces.
If you place the entire universe on one side and Janardana on the other, Janardana will exceed the essence of the
entire universe. Through his mind, Janardana can reduce the entire universe to ashes. But nothing in the universe
can reduce Janardana to ashes. Wherever there is truth, wherever there is dharma, wherever there is modesty,
wherever there is uprightness, Govinda is present there. Wherever there is Krishna, victory exists there. As if in
play, Purushottama Janardana, the soul of all beings, guides the earth, the sky and heaven. Using the Pandavas as
his instruments and keeping the world in delusion, he wishes to burn down your stupid sons, who are devoted to
adharma. Through his own yoga, the illustrious Keshava makes the wheel of time, the wheel of the universe and
the wheel of the yugas ceaselessly go round and round. I tell you truthfully that the illustrious lord alone governs
time and death, the mobile and the immobile. Hari, the great yogi, is the lord of everything in the universe. But he
yet undertakes tasks, like any ordinary tiller of the soil. Thus, Keshava deceives the world with the maya of his
yoga. But men who seek refuge with him are not deluded."'
