'Sanjaya replied, "O king! O bull among the Bharata lineage! It is because of your own sins that you have confronted this calamity. O king! Duryodhana failed to foresee what you saw as the outcome of adharma in action. O
lord of the earth! It was because of your sins that the gambling match had taken place earlier. It is because of your
sins that the battle with the Pandavas has commenced. Having committed the evil yourself, you must now enjoy
the fruits. O king! One must bear the consequences of the deeds one commits, in this world or in the next, and you
have obtained what is appropriate. O king! Therefore, though you confront this great calamity, be patient. O venerable one! Listen, while I describe the account of the battle.

'"With sharp arrows, Bhimasena penetrated your great army. The brave one then confronted all of Duryodhana's
younger brothers- Duhshasana, Durvishaha, Duhsaha, Durmada, Jaya, Jayatsena, Vikarna, Chitrasena, Sudarshana, Charuchitra, Suvarmana, Dushkarna, Karna[Not to be confused with the famous Karna, who was not fighting at this stage.] -and a large number of other maharathas. When he approached and saw these sons of Dhritarashtra, the immensely strong Bhima was excited with rage. In that battle,
the great army was protected by Bhishma. But he penetrated into it. On seeing him there, those lords of men spoke
to each other. 'Vrikodara Bhima is here. Let us rob him of his life.' Partha was thus surrounded by the brothers,
who had made up their minds. He was like the sun, surrounded by large and evil planets at the time of the destruction of all beings. Though Pandava was in the midst of the vyuha, he was not frightened. It was like the great Indra, when he confronted the danavas in the battle between the gods and the asuras. O lord! Hundreds and thousands of rathas covered the single-handed one from all directions, with terrible arrows and he reciprocated. In that
battle, the brave one paid no attention to the sons of Dhritarashtra and killed the foremost of brave warriors, on elephants, horses and chariots. O king! The great-minded Bhimasena knew the intentions of his relatives and had
made up his mind to kill all of them. Pandava descended from his chariot and grasped a club. With this, he began
to kill the soldiers of the sons of Dhritarasthra, which was like a great ocean.

'"When Bhimasena had penetrated, Parshata Dhrishtadyumna swiftly abandoned Drona[He had been fighting with Drona.] and went to where
Soubala was. That bull among men shattered your large army. In that battle, he came upon Bhimasena's empty
chariot. In that encounter, he saw Bhimasena's charioteer, Vishoka. O great king! Dhrishtadyumna was distressed
and lost his senses. Exremely miserable, he asked in a voice that was choked with tears, the words emerging
through his sighs. 'Where is Bhima? I love him more than my own life.' Vishoka joined his hands in salutation and
told Dhrishtadyumna, 'The powerful and strong Pandaveya instructed me to wait here and plunged into the army
of the sons of Dhritarashtra, as large as an ocean. That tiger among men cheerfully spoke these words to me. "O
charioteer! Control the horses and wait here for an instant, while I swiftly slay those who have raised their
weapons against me." When they saw the immensely strong one advance with the club in his hand, all the others
on our side also advanced to fight. A tumultuous and fearful battle commenced. O king! Your friend penetrated
that great vyuha and entered. 'Parshata Dhrishtadyumna heard Vishoka's words. In that field of battle, the immensely strong one replied to the charioteer. 'O suta! If I abandon my affection for the Pandavas and abandon Bhimasena in the battle, there is no reason for me to remain alive. What will the kshatriyas say, if I return without Bhi-
ma? After all, I was present when Bhima showed such single-mindedness in battle. With Agni at the forefront, the
gods inflict harm on those who forsake their aides and return home unharmed. The immensely strong Bhima is my
friend and my relative. That destroyer of enemies is devoted to me and I am devoted to him. I will therefore go
where Vrikodara has gone. Behold me slay the enemies, like Vasava against the danavas.' Having said this, the
brave one penetrated the midst of the Bharata soldiers[That is, the Kourava army.], following the path traversed by Bhimasena, marked out
by elephants ravaged with the club. He saw Bhima consuming the ranks of the enemy. He shattered those kings in
battle, like a powerful wind devastating trees. In that battle, charioteers, horse-riders, infantry and elephant-riders
were killed and roared loudly in lamentation. O venerable one! There were cries of woe among your soldiers, as
Bhimasena, wonderful in different means of fighting, slew them. All those who were skilled in the use of weapons
surrounded Vrikodara from all sides. Without any fear, they showered weapons at him from all directions. Parshata
saw that Pandava Bhimasena, foremost among the wielders of weapons, was attacked on all sides by those brave
ones of the world, accompanied by their terrible assembly of soldiers. His limbs were mangled from the arrows.
He was treading on the ground with a club in his hand, vomiting the poison of his wrath. He was like death at the
time of destruction. Parshata went and comforted Bhimasena. The great-souled one removed the arrows from his
body and lifted him up onto his own chariot. He embraced and comforted Bhimsena, in the midst of the enemy.

'"While that great battle was going on, your son approached his brothers and told them, 'This son of Drupada is
evil in his soul. He has arrived to help Bhimasena. All of you go and kill him. Let the enemy not seek out our soldiers.' The sons of Dhritarashtra were incited by their elder brother. They heard his words and attacked in intolerance. They raised their weapons with a desire to kill, like terrible comets at the time of the destruction of a yuga.
The brave ones grasped colourful bows. They made the earth tremble with the twang of their bows and the roar of
their chariot wheels. They showered arrows on Drupada's son, like clouds pouring down water on the tops of
mountains. But that colourful warrior[Dhrishtadyumna.] was not perturbed in the battle and sliced them all down with his own
sharp arrows. Your brave sons were stationed around him in that battle, striving their utmost. But Drupada's young
and fierce son was determined to kill them. O king! Extremely angry, the maharatha released the weapon known as
pramohana[A divine weapon that causes loss of consciousness.] at your sons, like the great Indra in a battle against the daityas. In that battle, those brave ones
among men lost their senses. Afflicted by the pramohana weapon, they lost their minds and their spirits. When they
saw that your sons were unconscious and had lost their senses, as if their time had come, all the Kurus fled in all
the directions, together with the horses, the elephants and the chariots.

'"At that time, Drona, foremost among the wielders of weapons, confronted Drupada and pierced him with three
terrible arrows. O king! Having been thus pierced by Drona in the field of battle, King Drupada remembered his
earlier enmity[The enmity between Drona and Drupada doesn't quite explain why Drupada should flee. Drupada probably remembered that Dhrishtadyumna had been born so that Drona might be killed.]. O king! He fled. Having thus defeated Drupada, the powerful Drona blew on his conch shell.
On hearing the sound of this conch shell, all the Somakas were frightened. The energetic Drona, supreme among
the wielders of weapons, heard that your sons had become unconscious in battle because of the pramohana
weapon. O king! In his anxiety, Drona swiftly went to that part of the battlefield. Bharadvaja's powerful son, the
great archer, saw Dhrishtadyumna and Bhima wandering around in that great field of battle. The maharatha saw
that your sons were overcome by unconsciousness. He unleashed the weapon known as prajna, to counter the mohana weapon[Prajna means wisdom or intelligence. Mohana and pramohana have the same meaning.]. Your maharatha sons again regained their breath of life. They returned to the battle against Bhi-
ma and Parshata.

'"Yudhishthira summoned and addressed his own soldiers. 'Let twelve brave rathas armour themselves. And
with Subhadra's son at the forefront, to the best of their ability, follow the footsteps of Bhima and Parshata in the
battle. Let us find out what has happened to them. My mind is not at peace.' Having been thus addressed, those
brave and valiant warriors, all of whom prided themselves on their manliness, agreed and accepted what they had
been asked to do. They departed together, when the sun had reached the midpoint in the sky. The Kekayas,
Droupadi's sons and the valiant Dhrishtaketu had Abhimanyu at the forefront and were surrounded by a large
army[The five Kekaya princes, five of Droupadi's sons, Dhrishtaketu and Abhimanyu-these were the twelve.]. In that battle, those destroyers of enemies arranged themselves in the vyuha known as suchimukha[The mouth of a needle.].
In that battle, they broke through the ranks of chariots that belonged to the sons of Dhritarashtra. Those great
archers advanced, with Abhimanyu at the forefront. O lord of men! Your soldiers were terrified of Bhimasena and
had lost their senses because of Dhrishtadyumna. They were incapable of resisting and were like a woman in the
streets, who faces a person who is drunk. Those great archers advanced with standards that were decorated with
gold. They advanced swiftly to protect Dhrishtadyumna and Vrikodara. On seeing the great archers, with Abhimanyu at the forefront, those two were delighted and began to slaughter your soldiers.

'"Brave Parshata of Panchala suddenly saw his preceptor advancing towards him[Dhrishtadyumna had studied under Drona.]. He gave up the desire to
kill your sons. He made Kekaya take Vrikodara up on his chariot and advanced in great rage against Drona, skilled
in the use of weapons. At this, Bharadvaja's powerful son, the destroyer of enemies, became angry and used a
broad-headed arrow to slice down his bow. For the sake of Duryodhana's welfare and remembering the food he
had obtained from his master[Duryodhana.], he released hundreds of arrows towards Parshata. But Parshata, the destroyer of
enemy heroes, took up another bow and pierced Drona with seventy gold-tufted arrows that had been sharpened on
stone. Drona, the destroyer of enemies, sliced down his bow yet again. The valiant one then swiftly used four
supreme arrows to despatch his four horses to Vaivasvata's[Yama's.] eternal and terrible abode. He despatched another
broad-headed arrow and killed his charioteer. With his horses killed, the mighty-armed maharatha descended from
his chariot and climbed onto Abhimanyu's great chariot. While Bhimasena looked on and while Parshata looked
on, the infinitely energetic Drona shattered the forces and made their army of chariots, horses and elephants tremble. The assembled maharathas were powerless to counter this. Having been killed by Drona's sharp arrows, those
soldiers swayed, like a turbulent ocean. When they saw those soldiers in that state, your troops were delighted.
They saw the enraged preceptor consume the ranks of the enemy. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the
warriors roared in applause."'
