'Dhritarashtra asked, "He was undefeated by Drona, Radheya, Vikarna and Kritavarma. Fulfilling his promise to
Yudhishthira, the brave one passed through that ocean of soldiers. How was he checked and humiliated in the battle by Kouraveya Bhurishrava and forcibly thrown down by him on the ground?"

'Sanjaya replied, "O king! Listen to the ancient account about the origin of Shini's descendant and also that of
Bhurishrava. O king! You are uncertain on that account. Atri had a son named Soma and Soma's son was known as
Budha. Budha had a single son named Pururava and his splendour was like that of the great Indra. Pururava's son
was Ayu and Ayu's son was known as Nahusha. Nahusha's son was Yayati, revered by the gods as a rajarshi.
Through Devayani, Yayati had an eldest son named Yadu. A son named Devamidha was born in Yadu's lineage.
His son Shura was born in the Yadava lineage and was honoured in the three worlds. Shura's descendant was the
immensely illustrious Shouri[Anyone descended from Shura is Shouri, not necessarily the son alone. Shura's son was Shini and Shini's son
was Vasudeva.] Vasudeva, foremost among men. Shura was a supreme archer and was equal to
Kartavirya[Kartavirya Arjuna.] in battle. In his lineage, and equal to him in valour, was born a king named Shini. O king! At this
time, a svayamvara was organized for the great-minded Devaka's daughter[The daughter was named Devaki.]. All the kshatriyas assembled there.
Wishing to obtain her for Vasudeva, he[It has to be inferred that this is Shini. As mentioned earlier, there is a distinction between svayamvara and
viryashulka, though that distinction is not always maintained. This is more of viryashulka.] defeated all the kings there and placed the princess Devaki on his chariot. O king! On seeing Devaki on Shouri Shini's chariot, the immensely energetic Somadatta, bull among men,
could not tolerate this. O king! There was a wonderful and extraordinary battle between them and it lasted for half
a day. Those two extremely strong ones engaged in a wrestling match, like that between Shakra and Prahlada. Somadatta was forcibly thrown down on the ground by Shini. He[Shini.] raised his sword, grasped him by the hair and
kicked him with the foot, in the midst of thousands of kings who looked on in every direction. Then, overcome by
compassion, he let him go and said, 'Live.' O venerable one! Having been reduced to that state, Somadatta was
overcome by intolerance and sought the favours of Mahadeva. The lord Mahadeva, supreme among the granters of
boons, was satisfied. He wished to gratify him with a boon and the king asked for the following boon. 'O lord! I
ask for a son who will strike down Shini's descendant in the midst of thousands of kings and kick him with the
foot in a battle.' Having heard the words of King Somadatta, the god agreed that it would be this way and disappeared. It was because of the boon that he obtained Bhuridakshina, and Somadatta's son brought down Shini's descendant in the battle. O king! I have told you what you asked me. Satvata, bull among men, cannot be vanquished
in an encounter.

'"The Vrishnis are successful in attaining their objective in battle. They fight in diverse colourful ways. They
can even defeat the gods, the danavas and the gandharvas. They obtain victory through their own valour and do not
have to depend on the help of others. O lord! O bull among the Bharata lineage! No one equal to them in strength
can be seen. There is no one like that. There has been no one like that. Nor will there be anyone like that. They do
not disrespect their kin and are devoted to the commands of the elders. In a battle, the gods, the asuras, the gandharvas, the yakshas, the serpents and the rakshasas cannot vanquish the brave ones of the Vrishni lineage, not to
speak of men. They do not covet the possessions of brahmanas, the possessions of their elders or the possessions of
their kin. They never covet the possessions of those who have protected them in times of distress. Though prosperous, they are not excessively attached[To wealth.]. They are devoted to brahmanas and are truthful in speech. They regard
even the strong as weak and save them. They are always devoted to the gods. They are self-controlled, generous
and free from insolence. It is because of this that the foremost ones among the Vrishnis can never be thwarted. O
king! One can bear Mount Meru or swim across the abode of makaras, but one cannot stand up in an encounter
with the foremost among the Vrishnis. O lord! I have told you everything that you had doubts about. O king of the
Kurus! O best of men! All this is because of your grave errors."'
