Yudhishthira said, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! Why is it that at the time of accepting a woman's hand
in marriage, it is stated in the learned texts that one must follow dharma together? This sahadharma[We have deliberately used the Sanskrit. Sahadharma means that husband and wife follow dharma together.] has
been spoken about by the great rishis earlier. Does this dharma result from arsha, prajapatya or asura[There were eight kinds of marriage. Three of these were arsha, prajapatya and asura. In arsha, the father gives
away his daughter after receiving a bride price. In prajapatya, husband and wife are instructed to follow dharma
together. In asura, the bridegroom pays whatever he can afford to the bride's family. Yudhishthira evidently is
asking which of these forms of marriage develop the concept of sahadharma.]? I have a
grave doubt on this account and my mind refuses to accept this. Why has sahadharma been recommended, if there
is death? O grandfather! When one dies, one goes to heaven. What does sahadharma mean then? If one of the couple dies first, what happens to the other one then? Tell me this. There are diverse fruits that result from deeds.
There are diverse means of subsistence. Depending on what they do, there are diverse and many kinds of hells that
men go to. Those who have laid down the sutras have said that women are false in their behaviour. O father[The word used is tata.]! If
women are prone to falsehood, why have the sacred texts spoken about sahadharma? Even in the Vedas, one can
read that women are prone to falsehood. The signs of dharma are said to be the observance of rituals and rites on
auspicious occasions. I have thought about this incessantly, but it seems to be a great mystery to me[If women are wicked, how can there be dharma with them? If dharma is interpreted as rituals, what happens
when one of the couple dies? If dharma is not interpreted as rituals, it is individual. In that case, what is the concept of practising dharma together? Since the couple may not be married to each other in their next lives, how
can the fruits of dharma be carried over?]. O grandfather! As has been instructed in the sacred texts, as it is practised and as it has come down, dispel all my doubts
about this. O immensely wise one? You should explain this to me in its entirety."

'Bhishma replied, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In this connection, there is an ancient history about a
conversation between Ashtavakra and Disha. In ancient times, the great ascetic, Ashtavakra, desired the daughter
of the great-souled rishi Vadanya, and asked for her. The lady was known by the name of Suprabha and her beauty
was  unmatched on  earth. She  was  supremely  worthy  in  her  qualities,  conduct,  virtue,  character  and  beauty.  A
glance of that beautiful-eyed one had robbed him of his heart, just like a beautiful grove adorned with blossoming
flowers does so in the spring. The rishi said, 'I will give you my daughter. But listen to me. First, go to the auspicious northern directions, to see what you might find there.'

'"Ashtavakra answered, 'You should tell me what I will see there. I will undertake whatever task you ask me to.'

'"Vadanya said, 'When you pass beyond the dominion of the lord of riches, you will approach the Himalayas
and see Rudra's plains, frequented by the siddhas and the charanas. A large number of his cheerful companions
will be there. They will possess many kinds of faces and will be engaged in dancing. Their limbs will be smeared
with divine paste. There will also be many kinds of pishachas. They will clap their hands and sound musicial instruments. The rhythms of their cheerful dancing will be both uneven and smooth. They serve Sharva there. We
have heard it said that in that celestial region in the mountains, the god is always present, with his auspicious companions. To obtain Shankara, it was there that the goddess[Uma.] tormented herself with extremely difficult austerities.
It has therefore been said, that region is desired by the god and Uma. There is a cave that is on the great slopes that
are to the north of where the god resides. The seasons, the night of destruction[At the time of universal dissolution.] and celestial humans, all assume
their own forms to worship the god there. You should cross that region and proceed further. You will see a blue
forest that has the complexion of the clouds. You will see a beautiful lady there, charming to the mind. The immensely fortunate one is aged and has consecrated herself to asceticism. When you see her there, worship her carefully. When you return after having seen her, you can accept the hand[Of the daughter.]. If you want to make a true pledge, then
undertake a successful journey there.'"'
