Vaishampayana said, 'Like a setting sun before the eyes of the worlds, Pinaki Vrishabhadhvaja disappeared before
his eyes. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Arjuna, the slayer of enemy warriors, was extremely astounded. He
said, "I have seen the great Mahadeva in person. I am blessed and greatly favoured. For I have seen Tryambaka
Hara Pinaki, the granter of boons, in person and have touched him with my hands. I know that I have accomplished my objective. I have already defeated my enemies in battle. All my objectives have been attained." Then,
lighting up all the directions, the handsome lord of the waters[Varuna.] arrived. His complexion was like that of lapis
lazuli[Vaidurya.] and he was surrounded by aquatic creatures, nagas, male and female rivers, daityas, sadhyas[Class of demigods.] and
gods[Obviously meaning lesser gods.]. Varuna, the self-controlled lord of all aquatic creatures, arrived in that region. Followed by yakshas, the
lord Kubera also arrived. His complexion was like that of gold and he arrived in a splendid chariot. The illustrious
lord of riches, extraordinary in form, came to see Arjuna, illuminating the sky. In similar fashion, the illustrious
Yama, the powerful destroyer of the worlds and the one who makes the worlds prosper, also came in person. He
was accompanied by the ancestors, embodied and disembodied. The destroyer of all beings, whose soul cannot be
fathomed, came with a staff in his hand[This is a description of Yama.]. Dharmaraja, the son of Vivasvat[Vivasvat is the sun and Dharmaraja Yama is the son of the sun.], arrived in a chariot that brightened up the three worlds, with guhyakas, gandharvas and pannagas. He was like a second sun when the end of the
yuga has arrived. From that resplendent and multi-hued peak of that great mountain, they saw Arjuna there, engaged in austerities. In a short while, the illustrious god Shakra arrived. He was accompanied by Indrani[Indrani is Indra's consort, Shakra is Indra.] and
was surrounded by masses of gods. He was seated on Airavata's[Indra's elephant.] head. The white umbrella that was held aloft
his head shone like the lord of the stars[The moon is the lord of the stars.] amidst white clouds. He was praised by gandharvas, rishis and those
blessed with the power of austerities and having reached the peak of the mountain, he stood there like a rising sun.

'Yama, supremely knowledgeable in dharma, was established in the southern direction. That intelligent one then
spoke these pure words, in a voice like the roar of clouds. "O Arjuna! Behold. All the protectors of the worlds have
assembled here. We will give you sight, because you deserve to see us. In the past, you were an immensely strong
rishi named Nara. O son! Instructed by Brahma, you have been born on earth. You have been born from Vasava,
who is immensely valorous and powerful. O descendant of the Kuru lineage[The word used is nandana. So it can also be translated as beloved of the Kuru lineage.]! You will pacify kshatriyas who
are like fire to the touch and are protected by Bharadvaja[Drona.], immensely valorous danavas who have been born as
men and the nivatakavachas[The nivatakavachas are demons. The story will be told in Section 35.]. The greatly valorous Karna is a part of my father, the sun-god, who heats all the
worlds[Yama is the son of the sun and so is Karna.]. O Dhananjaya! He will be slain by you. You will kill in battle those parts of the gods, danavas and rakshasas that have been born on earth. O Kounteya! O dragger of enemies! They will then obtain their ends, as determined by the fruits of their own deeds. O Phalguna! Your fame will remain eternal in the world. You have pleased
Mahadeva himself in a great battle. Along with Vishnu[A reference to Krishna.], you will lighten the burden of the earth. O mighty-
armed one! Accept the staff[Danda.], my weapon that cannot be repulsed. With this weapon, you will accomplish great
deeds." Partha, the descendant of the Kuru lineage[The word used is nandana.], accepted it in accordance with the prescribed rites, with the
mantras for holding, releasing and withdrawing.

'Varuna, the lord of aquatic creatures, was established in a western direction. His complexion was as dark as that
of a cloud. The lord then uttered these words, "O Partha! You are foremost among the kshatriyas and you are established in the dharma of kshatriyas. Behold me with your large and copper-red eyes. I am Varuna, lord of the waters. When discharged by me, Varuna's noose[Pasha.] cannot be resisted. O Kounteya! I am giving it to you. Accept it,
together with the mysteries and means of withdrawal. O brave one! At the time of the tarakamaya battle[Famous battle that took place between the gods and the demons.], I used
it to restrain thousands of great-souled daityas. O great-souled one! Accept it as a sign of my favour. Even Death
will not be able to escape, if you assault him with this. When you are armed with this weapon and roam in the field
of battle, there is no doubt that the earth will be bereft of all kshatriyas." After Varuna and Yama had given their
divine weapons, the lord of riches, who lives on the peak of Kailasa, spoke.

'He said, "O mighty-armed one! O Savyasachi! Earlier, you were an eternal god. In an earlier era, your endeavours were always at our side. Accept this favourite weapon of mine, known as antardhana[Antardhana means disappearance. This weapon enables the user to become invisible.]. It is energetic, vigorous and resplendent. O destroyer of enemies! It can put the enemy to sleep[In its capacity to put the enemy to sleep, this weapon was also known as prasvapana.]." Then the mighty-armed Arjuna,
descendant of the Kuru lineage[The word used is nandana.], accepted Kubera's divine weapon in accordance with the rites.

'The king of the gods now spoke to Partha, the performer of unsullied deeds. He pacified him in gentle words, in
a voice that was like a cloud or a kettledrum, "O mighty-armed one! O one with Kunti as your mother! You are the
ancient Ishana[Ishana is the supreme god. Specifically, the term is used for both Shiva and Vishnu. It is being used in a
general sense here.]. You have already obtained supreme salvation earlier and have personally gone the way of the
gods. O conqueror of enemies! You must now accomplish a great task for the sake of the gods. You will now ascend to heaven. O immensely radiant one! Prepare yourself. My chariot will descend to earth for you, driven by
Matali[Matali is the name of Indra's charioteer.]. O Kourava! I will give you divine weapons there." Having seen the lords of the worlds assembled on
the peak of that mountain, intelligent Dhananjaya, Kunti's son, was astounded. Then the immensely energetic Arjuna paid homage to the assembled lords of the worlds in accordance with the rites, with words, water and fruit.
The gods honoured Dhananjaya in return. All of them then returned as they had come, capable of going wherever
they wished, with the speed of thought. Having obtained the weapons, Arjuna, bull among men, was delighted. He
considered that his wishes had been satisfied and that his desires had been completely satisfied.'
