Vaishampayana said, 'O lord of the earth! In shuklapaksha of the tenth month, like the lord of the stars[The moon.] in the
sky, a child was conceived in Pritha's womb. The maiden with the beautiful buttocks was concerned that her relatives would censure her if they got to know about the conception. But people did not get to know. The young maiden lived in the inner quarters and was skilled at protecting herself. No one other than her nurse got to know. In due
course of time, through the favours of the god, the maiden, who was excellent in her complexion, gave birth to a
son. He was as radiant as the immortals. He was attired in armour and was adorned in golden and brilliant earrings.
His eyes were tawny and he had the shoulders of a bull, like his father. As soon as the son was born, the beautiful
one consulted the nurse. She placed the child in a basket that was prepared well on all sides. It was comfortable
and soft, with covers, and lined with beeswax[To make it waterproof.]. With tears in her eyes, she set it afloat on the waters of the river
Ashva. O Indra among kings! Though she knew that it was improper for an unmarried maiden to have a child, out
of affection for her son, she lamented piteously. She cast away the basket in the waters of the river Ashva.

'Having done this, Kunti wept and spoke these words. Listen to them. "O son! May you be safe from all the beings in the sky, the earth and heaven and from those that roam the water. May your paths be auspicious and may
you be free from obstructions. O son! May those who meet you have no enmity in their minds. May King Varuna,
lord of the waters, protect you in the water. May the wind-god, who travels everywhere, protect you in the sky.
May your father, foremost among those who provide heat, protect you everywhere. O son! Driven by destiny, he is
the one who has given you to me. The Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, Sadhyas, Vishvadevas, the Maruts, together with
Indra, the directions and the lords of the directions and all the gods must protect you, in terrain that is smooth and
rough. Even if you are in a different region, I will get to know you through your armour. O son! Your father, the
god Bhanu Vibhavasu is fortunate. Through his divine eyesight, he will see you flowing down the river. Blessed is
the woman who will adopt you as her son. You are the son of a god and when you are thirsty, you will drink milk
at her breast. What kind of a dream must the woman, who will adopt you, have had? You are like Aditya in your
radiance. You are clad in divine armour. You are adorned in divine earrings. Your eyes are long and wide, like a
lotus. Your palms are coppery red, like a lotus. You have a beautiful forehead and beautiful hair. O son! Fortunate
are the ones who will see you crawling around on the ground, uttering inarticulate words and covered in dust. O
son! Fortunate are those who will see you become a youth, like a lion with a mane, in the forests of the
Himalayas." O king! Thus did Pritha piteously lament, in many ways, as she consigned the basket to the waters of
the river Ashva, in the company of her nurse and at night. Overcome with grief for her son, the lotus-eyed one
wept. Pritha yearned to see her son. She cast away the basket and returned again to the palace, overcome with
grief, but frightened that her father might get to know.

'The basket flowed from the river Ashva to the river Charmanvati, from Charmanvati to Yamuna and from
there, it went to Ganga. The waves of the Ganga bore the son and the basket to the city of Champa, the habitation
of charioteers. With divine armour and earrings that were created from amrita, the son was protected by the gods,
because of what had been ordained by destiny.'
