Sanjaya said, "When those three rathas had withdrawn, the Pandavas arrived at the lake where Duryodhana was.
O best of the Kuru lineage! They reached Lake Dvaipayana. They saw that the abode of the waters had been turned
to stone by Dhritarashtra's son. The descendant of the Kuru lineage[Meaning, Yudhishthira.] spoke these words to Vasudeva. 'Behold.
Dhritarashtra's son has used his powers of maya on the water. He has turned the waters to stone and is lying down,
without any fear from humans. He has used divine powers of maya and is inside the water now. He is skilful in deceit and has used deceit. However, he will not escape from me with his life. O Madhava! Even if the wielder of the
vajra himself helps him in the fight, the worlds will see that he is slain in the battle today.' Vasudeva replied, 'He is
skilled in the use of maya. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Slay his maya with maya. O Yudhishthira! Maya
must be destroyed with maya. That is the truth. Use many different deeds and means to apply maya to these waters. O best among the Kuru lineage! Slay Suyodhana, who is evil in his soul. It is through different deeds and
means that Indra slew the daityas and the danavas. It is through many different deeds and means that Bali was
bound down by the great-souled one[This great-souled one means Vishnu in his dwarf (vamana) incarnation,
when he deprived Bali of the three worlds in three steps.]. It is through deeds and means that the great asura Hiranyaksha was slain in
earlier times and deeds were also used to slay Hiranyakashipu[Hiranyaksha and Hiranyakashipu were brothers. Hiranyakashipu was
slain by Vishnu in his half-man half-lion (narasimha) incarnation and Hiranyaksha was slain by Vishnu in his boar (varaha) incarnation.]. O king! There is no doubt that Vritra was slain
through deeds. O king! Poulastya's son, the rakshasa named Ravana, was slain by Rama, together with his relatives
and followers[Ravana was the son of the sage Vishrava, and Vishrava (Poulastya) was
the son of the sage Pulastya.]. Resort to deeds and yoga and show your valour. O king! In ancient times, I used deeds and means
to slay the great daityas Taraka and the valiant Viprachitti[Vishnu's role in the slaying of Taraka and Viprachitti can only have been
indirect. Taraka was slain by Kartikeya, though there are some references
to Taraka having been killed by Indra. There are also references to Viprachitti having been killed by Indra.]. O lord! It is through deeds that Vatapi, Ilvala, Trishira
and the asuras Sunda and Upasunda were killed[Ilvala and Vatapi were killed by the sage Agastya. The story has been
recounted in Section 33 (Volume 3). The Sunda-Upasunda story has been
recounted in Section 16 (Volume 1). Trishira was killed by Indra. The
story has been recounted in Section 49 (Volume 4).]. O lord! Indra enjoys the three worlds through deeds and means.
O King Yudhishthira! Deeds are powerful. There is nothing else. Daityas, danavas, rakshasas and kings have been
killed through deeds and means. Therefore, resort to deeds.' Pandava, rigid in his vows, was thus addressed by
Vasudeva.

' "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Kounteya laughed and addressed your immensely strong son, who was
inside the water. 'O Suyodhana! O lord of the earth! After having caused the destruction of all the kshatriyas and
your own lineage, why have you entered the water? Today, you have entered the water, wishing to save your own
life. O king! O Suyodhana! Arise and fight with us. O best of men! O king! Where have your insolence and your
sense of pride gone now, since you are terrified and are inside the waters, having turned them to stone? In assemblies, everyone has spoken of you as a hero. I think all of that is in vain, since your prowess is now lying down inside the water. O king! Arise and fight. You have been born in a kshatriya lineage. In particular, remember that you
have been born in the lineage of Kouraveyas. How can you praise your birth in the lineage of Kouravas? You have
run away from the battle and have entered and stationed yourself inside these waters. Stationing oneself away from
a battle is not eternal dharma. O king! It is not like an arya to run away from a battle. That does not lead to heaven.
How is it that you wish to remain alive, without having seen the end of this war? You have seen your sons, brothers, fathers, matrimonial allies, friends, maternal uncles and relatives brought down. O son[The word used is tata. This means son, but is used towards anyone who
is younger or junior. Duryodhana was younger to Yudhishthira.]! Having caused their
destruction, how can you station yourself inside this lake? O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Though you have
spoken of yourself as brave, you are not brave. O evil-minded one! In everyone's hearing, you have said that you
are brave. On seeing enemies, brave ones do not run away. O brave one! Tell us about the fortitude that has led you
to run away from the encounter. Arise and fight and abandon the fear in you. O Suyodhana! You have caused the
destruction of all the soldiers and your brothers. You should not turn your mind to the dharma of remaining alive
now. O Suyodhana! This is not indicated for someone who has resorted to the dharma of kshatriyas. You depended
on Karna and Shakuni Soubala and in your delusion, thought yourself to be immortal. You were not intelligent. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having performed that extremely evil deed, fight back now. In your confusion,
how can something like flight appeal to someone like you? O Suyodhana! Where have your manliness and your
pride gone now? Where have your valour and your extremely swollen insolence gone now? Where has your skill
with weapons gone? Why have you resorted to this store of water? O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Following
the dharma of kshatriyas, arise and fight. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Defeat us and rule over the entire
earth, or be killed by us and lie down on the ground. That is the foremost dharma, ordained by the great-souled
creator. O maharatha! Act in accordance with that and be a king.'

' "Duryodhana replied, 'O great king! It is not surprising that fear should enter all living beings. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! But I have not retreated because I am frightened for my life. I was without a chariot and without quivers. The parshni charioteers were killed. I was without a single follower in the battle and wished to retreat.
O lord of the earth! I did not enter these waters because I was frightened of being killed or because I was grieving,
but because I was exhausted. O Kounteya! With those that follow you, rest for some time. I will arise and fight
with all of you in this battle.'

' "Yudhisthira said, 'All of us are sufficiently rested. We have been looking for you for a long time. O Suyodhana! Arise and fight with us now. Kill the Parthas in the battle and obtain this prosperous kingdom, or be killed in
the battle and obtain the worlds of heroes.'

' "Duryodhana replied, 'O descendant of the Kuru lineage! O lord of men! Those among the Kurus for whose
sake I desired the kingdom, all my brothers, are dead. Those bulls among kshatriyas have been killed and the earth
is devoid of her jewels. I am not interested in enjoying her. She is like a widowed lady. O Yudhishthira! O bull
among the Bharata lineage! However, I still wish to defeat and subjugate you and am interested in breaking the
Panchalas and the Pandus. But I do not think there is any need for battle when Drona and Karna have been pacified
and the grandfather has been slain. O king! This bare earth is now only for you. Which king wishes to rule over a
kingdom without any aides? Well-wishers have been killed by me and so have sons, brothers and fathers. When the
kingdom has been robbed, who like me would wish to remain alive? I will clad myself in deerskin and leave for
the forest. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! With those on my side slain, I have no desire for the kingdom.
Many relatives have been killed. Horses have been killed. Elephants have been killed. O king! Devoid of fever, enjoy this kingdom. I will clad myself in deerskin and go to the forest. O lord! Now that I have been vanquished, I
have no desire to remain alive any more. O Indra among kings! Go and enjoy the earth, which is devoid of kings,
destitute of warriors, robbed of riches and bereft of fortifications, as you please.'

' "Yudhishthira said, 'O son! Do not utter such woes of lamentation from inside the water. O king! In my mind,
there is no desire like that of a bird[The sense is that a bird is given crumbs that it has not earned.]. O Suyodhana! You may be capable of giving it to me, but I do not wish to
rule over something that has been given by you. If you give this earth to me, its acceptance will be adharma. O
king! The learned texts say that it is not dharma for a kshatriya to receive gifts. I do not desire this entire earth,
when it has been given by you. I will enjoy this earth after having defeated you in battle. Why do you want to give
an earth that has no kings? O king! Why do you want to give an earth that is not yours to give? We asked for it in
accordance with dharma, for the sake of peace and for the sake of our lineage. O king! You first refused the immensely strong Varshneya. Why do you want to give it now? What is this delusion in your mind? When he is accused, which king wishes to give away the earth? O descendant of the Kourava lineage! You are not the lord of this
earth that you can give it away. O king! Why do you wish to give something that you have no powers over? Defeat
me in the battle and rule over the earth. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In earlier times, you were not prepared to give me even that much which could be held up on the point of a needle. O lord of the earth! Why do you
then wish to gift me the entire earth? If you were earlier not prepared to give up that much which could be held up
on the point of a needle, why do you want to give up the earth now? This earth is prosperous and you have ruled
over it. Which foolish person will be prepared to give this earth to enemies? You are not only stupid and foolish,
you possess no intelligence. Though you wish to give up the earth, you will not escape with your life. Defeat us
and rule over the earth, or be killed by us and roam in the supreme worlds. O king! If, between the two of us, both
of us remain alive, all beings will be uncertain about who has emerged victorious. You are of limited intelligence
and your life now depends on me. If I wish, I can grant you life. But you are not capable of remaining alive. In particular, you had made efforts to burn us. You tried to kill us by drowning us and making us consume virulent poison[This is a reference to the attempt made to poison Bhima, described in
Section 7 (Volume 1).]. Deceived by you, we were deprived of the kingdom. Because of these and other evil deeds, you should not
remain alive. Arise. Arise. Fight. That will be beneficial for you.'"

'Sanjaya said, "O lord of men! Those brave and victorious ones spoke these and many other words there." '
