Narada said, 'When happiness and misery appear and disappear, they cannot be countered through wisdom,
good policy or enterprise. Established in one's own nature, one must make efforts not to suffer from lassitude. A person who loves his atman saves himself from old age, death and disease. Physical and mental diseases
afflict the body, like sharp-pointed arrows that have been released from the bows of firm archers. A person who is
frightened and desires to remain alive, wishing to be free from the afflictions, is rendered incapable. His body is
afflicted and he is destroyed. Through nights and days, the lifespan of a mortal creature is continuously running,
like the flowing current in a river, which does not retreat. Shuklapaksha and krishnapaksha incessantly progress.
Without tarrying for an instant, they decay mortal creatures who have been born. The sun is without decay, but
continuously rises and sets. The happiness and unhappiness of creatures is like that and is subject to decay. While
he is concerned with what he has not seen earlier and what he has not obtained earlier, the desirable and undesirable aspects of a man set and depart like the night. Had a man not been dependent on the consequences of his earlier deeds, he would have obtained whatever he wished for and all his desires would have been satisfied. There are
men who are controlled, accomplished and intelligent. However, if such virtuous people have not performed their
own tasks[In an earlier life.], they are seen to be unsuccessful. There are others who are foolish, devoid of qualities and the worst
among men. But because they possess the benedictions, they are seen to obtain everything that they desire[Again, because of deeds performed in an earlier life.].
There are other creatures who are always ready to indulge in violence. Though they deceive the worlds, they age in
happiness. There is someone who doesn't exert at all, but obtains prosperity. There is another one who undertakes
all the tasks, but does not get what he should. Do you think that this is due to a transgression in a man's nature?
The semen that is generated somewhere, goes somewhere else. Even when it has been placed inside a vagina, there
may or may not be conception. It is then like the flower of a mango and it is as if there was abstinence. There are
some who desire a son and wish for offspring. They are potent and make efforts, but no embryo results. There may
be another brahmana who wishes to avoid embryos, like a venomous serpent. But he has a son with a long lifespan. Without a life after death, how could he have become a father? There are those who are miserable and desire
sons. They satisfy the gods and perform austerities. After being borne for ten months, a son who is the worst of the
lineage is born. There are others who obtain auspicious and extensive stores of riches and grain stored by their fathers and only enjoy them. When two people approach each other in an act of sexual intercourse, the vagina is invaded and an embryo results. When the body decays, the wind of life leaves and enters another body. When a creature's life is destroyed, the flesh and phlegm are rendered immobile. When the next body is burnt, movement and
lack of movement pass on to a further body. This ends in destruction. And there is an end in a further destruction.
This is like boats moving back and forth[Ferrying passengers back and forth across a river.]. Through sexual intercourse, an unconscious drop of semen is deposited in the womb. What do you see? Through whose efforts does that embryo become alive? Inside the stomach,
why is that embryo not digested? Inside the womb, there is a natural progression of urine and excrement. It[The embryo.] cannot do anything about whether it is retained or discharged. It is not independent. Some foetuses suffer a miscarriage, others are born. There are some that are destroyed as soon as they are born. When there is union with the
vagina, semen is released. Sometimes, an offspring results. In due course, that offspring is also submerged in intercourse. Among the hundreds who are born, some survive till seven or ten years of age. Some die and do not survive to be one hundred years old. There is no doubt that when men are assailed by disease, they are unable to get
up. They are crushed, like small animals by predatory beasts. They are devoured by disease and spend a great deal
of riches. But even then, despite the best efforts of physicians, the pain is not reduced. The physicians may be
skilled. They may be accomplished in the use of large numbers of herbs. However, they are themselves afflicted by
disease, like animals by hunters. They may drink astringent concoctions and diverse kinds of clarified butter. But
they are seen to be crushed by old age, like serpents by stronger serpents. When animals and birds suffer from disease, who on earth treats them? In general, among predatory beasts and poor people, there are rarely those who are
afflicted. There may be fiercely energetic kings. Even they are attacked by terrible diseases that are extremely difficult to withstand, like animals by stronger animals. Overcome by confusion and sorrow, people shriek. They are
suddenly flung into a current and borne away by something that is stronger. Those with bodies can't counter what
is  natural-through  riches,  kingdoms  or  fierce  austerities.  Otherwise,  no  one  would  have  died  or  become  old.
Everyone would have obtained everything that he desired. No one would have seen anything unpleasant and all
and the fruits would have been obtained. Every person wishes to rise upwards. They try their utmost. But it doesn't
work out that way. Even people who are not distracted by deceit and are brave without being cruel, become insolent and intoxicated because of riches and drunk and maddened with liquor. For some, hardships disappear even
before they have seen them. There are others who are searching, but do not obtain anything. A great difference is
seen between fruits and the undertaking of acts. There are some who bear palanquins. Others ride on those palanquins. Everyone desires prosperity. But only some have chariots advancing in front of them. There are men with
hundreds of wives and there are hundreds of widowed women. There is conflict and pleasure in creatures and hundreds of men face these. Therefore, look only towards the hereafter and do not get confused. Cast aside both dharma and adharma. Abandon both truth and falsehood. Having abandoned both truth and falsehood, cast aside everything that must be cast aside. O supreme among rishis! I have told you about a supreme secret. Using this, the gods
abandoned the mortal world and went to heaven.'"

'Bhishma said, "Hearing Narada's words, the extremely intelligent Shuka patiently thought about this in his
mind, but could not arrive at a conclusion. 'Sons and wives lead to great hardship. Knowledge requires great effort. What is the eternal spot that is free from hardship and leads to greatness?' Having thought about this for some
time, he made up his mind to follow the atman. He knew about supreme dharma and the supreme and beneficial
end. 'How can I be unattached and go to that supreme objective? From there, there will no return and birth in this
ocean of life. I desire that supreme state, so that I do not have to return again. I have determined in my mind that I
will cast aside all attachment and strive towards that end. I will go to the place where the atman will find peace. I
will establish myself in the eternal there and there will be no decay and destruction. Without yoga, I cannot obtain
that supreme objective. Deeds cannot lead to that unattached state of liberation. Therefore, I will resort to yoga and
cast aside this body, which is like a house. I will become a wind and enter the mass of energy in the rays of the sun.
Having gone there, there is no decay, unlike the moon and the large number of gods, who tremble and fall down on
the ground, ascending again when they have acquired merit. The moon always wanes and waxes again. The sun
heats the world with its rays. It receives all the energy and the solar disc never decays. Therefore, going to the
sun's blazing energy appeals to me. I will dwell there, without being assailed, without attachment and based on my
inner atman. I will cast my body into the sun's residence. With the rishis, I will go to the sun's energy, which is extremely difficult to withstand. I am seeking the permission of the trees, the elephants, the mountains, the earth, the
directions, the firmament, gods, danavas, gandharvas, pishachas, serpents and all the creatures in the world. There
is no doubt that I will enter there. Let all the gods and the rishis behold the power of my yoga.' Narada, the rishi
who was famous in the worlds, gave him permission. Having obtained his permission, he went to his father. Having greeted the great-souled sage and rishi, Dvaipayana, Shuka  circumambulated him. He  then  asked  the  sage
Krishna's permission. On hearing the words of the rishi Shuka, the great-souled one was delighted and said, 'O
son! Stay here today, so that my eyes are gratified at the sight of you.' Shuka had become indifferent, without affection and free from all attachment. Having thought about moksha, he had made up his mind to go. Leaving his
father, the supreme among brahmanas went away[One thus deduces that Shuka did not listen to his father's request.]."'