Sanjaya said, "In the course of the encounter between Karna and Arjuna, the soldiers had been mangled with arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing this, Shalya went to Duryodhana, who was glancing at the
field of battle. Duryodhana saw that his army, with its chariots, horses and elephants, had been destroyed and the
son of a suta had been killed. His eyes filled with tears and in great distress, he sighed repeatedly. The brave Karna
had fallen down on the ground. His body had been mangled by arrows and blood flowed from it. It was as if the
sun had fallen down from the sky. To see this, everyone came there and surrounded the body. There were those
who belonged to your side and others who belonged to the enemy. Some were cheerful. Others were frightened.
Some were distressed. Others were amazed. There were others who were completely overcome by grief. According to their natural traits, they looked towards each other. Karna had possessed armour, ornaments, garments and
weapons. On seeing that he had been brought down by Dhananjaya and deprived of his energy, the Kurus fled.
They were like a distressed herd of cattle, when the bull has been killed. By slaying Karna, like an elephant by a
lion, Arjuna had struck them severely.

' "On seeing that he was lying down on the ground, the king of Madra was terrified. He swiftly withdrew on his
chariot. The lord of Madra was stupefied. He quickly departed on the chariot that was without a standard. He swiftly went to Duryodhana's side and spoke these sorrowful words. 'The elephants, horses and best of rathas in your
army have been destroyed. It looks like Yama's kingdom. The large armies with men, horses and elephants that are
like mountain tops have clashed against each other and have been killed. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
There has never been a battle like that fought between Karna and Arjuna today. Karna clashed against the two Krishnas and others who are your enemies and has been devoured. Destiny flows according to its own rules. That is
the reason it is protecting the Pandavas and weakening us. All the brave ones sought to accomplish your objectives. They have been slain by the enemy. Those brave ones were the equals of Kubera, Vaivasvata and the lord of
the waters in power. They possessed valour, bravery and strength. They possessed large stores of qualities. Those
lords of men were unslayable. They sought to accomplish your objectives, fought against the Pandaveyas and have
been slain. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Do not grieve. This is destiny. There is no substitute for success.
However, success cannot always be obtained.' Hearing the words of the lord of Madra, Duryodhana was miserable
in his mind. He thought of his own evil deeds and looked within his heart. He was bereft of his senses. In great
grief, he repeatedly sighed.

' "He reflected and was silent. He was extremely distressed. Artayani[Shalya.] spoke these words to him. 'O brave
one! Behold this fierce field of battle. It is strewn around with slain men, horses and elephants. Giant elephants
have fallen down, like giant mountains. They have been sliced down. Their inner organs have been pierced with
arrows. They are unconscious and anxious. Some have lost their lives. The warriors have dislodged their body armour and their weapons. They are like fragmented mountains, with rocks, animals, trees and herbs, which have
been shattered by Indra's vajra. The bells, goads, javelins and standards have been destroyed. They possessed
golden harnesses, which are streaming with copious quantities of blood. Mangled by arrows, horses have fallen
down. Some of them are finding it difficult to breathe and are vomiting blood. Some are shrieking loudly, with dilated eyes. Some are biting the ground with their teeth and neighing in distress. Warriors on horses and elephants
have been struck. Some have a little bit of life left and others have lost their lives. Men, horses, elephants and chariots have been crushed. Like the great Vaitarani, the earth is difficult to behold. Elephants have had their trunks
severed by the enemy. They are shrieking, trembling and falling down on the ground. There were illustrious elephants, chariots, horses, warriors and foot soldiers. Advancing against the enemy, they have been slain. Armour,
ornaments, garments and weapons are strewn around. It is as if the earth is covered with many fires that have been
extinguished. One can see that the mighty armies have been struck by the force of the arrows and soldiers have
fallen down in thousands. They have lost their senses and are trying to regain their breath again. The earth is beautiful, as if with fires that have been extinguished. Flaming and sparkling planets seem to have fallen down from the
sky. The arrows, released from the arms of Karna and Arjuna, have shattered the bodies of elephants, horses and
men. The weapons have quickly deprived them of their lives and have entered the ground, like giant serpents looking for an abode. In the battle, men, horses and elephants have been killed. Chariots have been shattered by the arrows. The earth has become impassable because of the bodies of elephants that have been killed by the arrows of
Dhananjaya and Adhiratha's son. The best of rathas and warriors have been uprooted by the arrows. Chariots,
horses, the best of weapons and standards are strewn around. It is impassable because of shattered and destroyed
weapons. Wheels, axles, yokes and trivenus have been shattered. The chariots are without charioteers, who have
been killed. It is impassable because some are without yokes, while others have had their yokes broken. The seats
were decorated with gold and jewels and have been shattered. They are strewn around on the ground, like clouds in
the autumn sky. The swift and ornamented horses were yoked to excellent chariots and with riders slain, are dragging them around. Large numbers of men, elephants, chariots and horses are seen to speedily run away. They have
been routed in many ways. Clubs tied in golden cloth, battleaxes, swords[Actually, the text says kaddanga. This is a kind of liquor made from molasses. This
doesn't fit at all. So we have assumed that this is a typo and should actually read khadga.], bludgeons, spears, sparkling and unsheathed scimitars, and maces tied up in golden pieces of cloth have fallen down. There are bows, golden armlets,
ornaments, arrows with colourful tufts made out of gold, yellow and spotless swords that have been unsheathed,
javelins and scimitars with golden complexions. There are umbrellas, fans, whisks, conch shells and garlands of
flowers, embellished with gold. There are housings, flags and garments. There are radiant crowns, garlands and diadems. The housings are scattered and strewn around. There are necklaces decorated with pearls from the waters.
There are guards, armlets and excellent bracelets. There are golden collars and golden threads for the necks. There
are the best of gems, diamonds, gold, pearls and other jewels. There are auspicious signs, good and not that good,
on the bodies, which have been reared in great happiness. The faces on the heads are like the full moon. The bodies have given up pleasure and garments, objects desired by the heart and happiness. They have resorted to their
own dharma and obtained great merits. They have ascended to the worlds that bring fame.' Shalya spoke these
words to Duryodhana and stopped.

' "His[Duryodhana's.] mind was overcome with great grief. Bereft of his senses, he lamented, 'Alas! Karna! Alas! Karna!'

His eyes overflowed with tears. All the kings, with Drona's son at the forefront, comforted him and departed[Towards their camp.].
They repeatedly glanced at Arjuna's great standard, which seemed to be blazing because of his glory. The bodies
of men, horses and elephants were covered with blood. The earth was covered with blood. It looked like a woman
attired in crimson and golden garments and garlands, who would go to everyone[Meaning that the woman was a courtesan.]. O king! Their terrible forms
were covered with blood and could not be recognized. The Kurus were unable to look at all those who had departed for the world of the gods and could not stand there. Because Karna had been slain, they were extremely miserable. They lamented, 'Alas! Karna! Alas! Karna!' On seeing that the sun had assumed a reddish tinge, they rapidly
left for their camps.

' "Gold-tufted and sharp arrows were released from Gandiva. Their tufts were smeared with blood. With those
arrows on his limbs, Karna looked beautiful on the ground. Though slain, he looked like the sun, with its rays. Karna's body was covered with blood. It was as if the illustrious sun was showing compassion towards its devotee[Karna was devoted to the sun god.]
and having touched the crimson form with its red hand, was proceeding beyond the ocean to have a bath. That is
what the large numbers of gods and rishis thought. They returned to their respective abodes. The other beings also
thought in the same way and left as they wished, to heaven or on earth. The foremost of brave ones among the Kurus had witnessed the terrible encounter between Dhananjaya and Adhiratha's son, destructive of lives. They were
amazed. Now that it was over, they praised it and departed. The brave one's armour had been shattered by arrows.
He had been slain in the battle. Radheya had lost his life. But his beauty[The word used is Lakshmi. So it can also be translated as lustre or prosperity.] did not desert him. O king! He was
adorned in many ornaments and his armlets were made out of gold. Vaikartana had been slain and was lying down,
like a tree with branches and sprouts. He had the complexion of pure gold and blazed like a fire. With his son, the
tiger among men was pacified by Partha's energy. O king! With his weapons and energy, he scorched the Pandavas
and the Panchalas. Whenever he was asked to give, he always did and never said that he had nothing to give. The
virtuous always regarded him as righteous. This Vrisha was killed in the duel. The great-souled one gave everything that he possessed to brahmanas. There was nothing, not even his own life, which he would not give away to
brahmanas. He was always loved by men. He was generous. He loved giving. He went to heaven. He took away
with him the hopes your sons cherished for victory and their comfort and armour. When Karna was killed, the
rivers stopped flowing. The sun was tainted and set. The blazing planets coursed in a diagonal direction. O king!
Yama's son arose[This must be a typo. Yama has no recorded son. It should probably read Soma, rather than
Yama, as it does in some non-critical versions. Soma's (the moon) son is Budha (Mercury).
So Mercury arose. Yama can also be interpreted as 'twin'. But one doesn't know what to
make of the son of twins. Finally, Yama is a name for Pluto. But no Pluto was known then
and Pluto's son makes no sense.]. The sky seemed to divide into two parts. The earth seemed to shriek. Extremely harsh and
forceful winds began to blow. The directions seemed to blaze fiercely, with a lot of smoke. The giant oceans were
agitated and roared loudly. O venerable one! The groves, mountains and large numbers of beings were distressed
and trembled. Brihaspati afflicted Rohini[Brihaspati is Jupiter and Rohini is the fourth of the twenty-seven nakshatras, known in
English as Aldebaran.] and assumed the complexion of the moon and the sun. When Karna
was killed, the directions were covered in darkness and could not be distinguished. The firmament and the earth
seemed to move. Flaming meteors showered down. Those who travel during the night[Demons.] were seen to be delighted. Karna's head was as beautiful as the full moon and Arjuna brought it down with a razor-sharp arrow. Loud
sounds of lamentation were heard among beings in heaven, in the sky and on the ground. In the battle, Arjuna
killed his enemy, Karna, who was revered by the gods, the gandharvas and men.

' "Partha was resplendent in his supreme energy, like the one with the one thousand eyes, after Vritra had been
killed. That chariot roared like a large mass of clouds. Its radiance was like the midday sun in the autumn sky.
With its standard and flags, it clattered loudly. It was as radiant as snow, the moon, a conch shell or a crystal. It was
ornamented with gold, pearls, jewels, diamonds and coral. It possessed the speed of thought. Those two supreme
among men, Pandava and the slayer of Keshi[Krishna killed a demon named Keshi.] were as resplendent as the fire and the sun in that field of battle.
They roamed around, without any fear. Astride the same chariot, they were like Vishnu and Vasava. The one with
the ape on his banner created a tumult with the twang of his bowstring, the slapping of his palms and the clatter of
his wheels. He destroyed and killed the enemy with his power. With the one with a bird on his banner[Krishna/Vishnu has a bird (Garuda) on his banner.] with
him, he showered torrents of arrows on the Kurus. They held their conch shells, as white as snow, in their hands.
These emitted a loud roar and were decorated with golden nets. Their minds filled with delight, they blew loudly
on these conch shells. Placing those best of conch shells against their lips, those best of men, simultaneously blew
on them with the best of mouths. Panchajanya and Devadatta[Krishna and Arjuna's conch shell respectively.] roared. That sound filled up the earth, the sky and
heaven. At the sound of those conch shells, the forest, the mountains, the rivers and the directions were terrified, as
were the soldiers of your son. However, those two brave ones delighted Yudhishthira. As soon as they heard the
loud blare of those conch shells, the Kurus speedily departed. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They abandoned the lord of Madra and Duryodhana, the lord of the Bharatas. In the great battle, a large number of beings assembled around the radiant Dhananjaya. They joyfully congratulated him and Janardana, each dazzling like a sun.
In the battle, having been struck by Karna's arrows, those two scorchers of enemies, Achyuta and Arjuna, looked
beautiful. They were like the sparkling moon and sun, garlanded with rays, arising after darkness has been destroyed. Taking out those large numbers of arrows, those valiant lords entered their own camps, surrounded by
well-wishers. They were like Vasava and Achyuta[Vishnu.], invoked by officiating priests. When Karna was slain in that
supreme battle, the gods, the gandharvas, men, charanas, maharshis, yakshas and giant serpents honoured them
greatly and hoped that their victories might continue." '
