Sanjaya said, "On seeing that Bhimasena had approached, Duryodhana was not distressed in his soul. He roared
loudly and attacked him with force. Like horned bulls, they clashed against each other. As they struck each other,
there were great and thunderous sounds. That tumultuous battle commenced and it made the body hair stand up.
Wishing to triumph, they fought each other in that battle, like Indra and Prahlada[Prahlada was a virtuous demon and Vishnu's devotee. There are no stories about Indra and Prahlada having fought each other.]. The spirited ones fought with
clubs and blood covered all their limbs. The great-souled ones looked like flowering kimshukas. That great and extremely terrible battle raged on. As they roamed around, the sky was beautiful, as if covered with swarms of fireflies[Presumably, the sparks of fire from the clubs are being compared with
fireflies.]. That fierce and tumultuous clash raged on for some time. As they fought, both scorchers of enemies were
exhausted. Having rested for a short while, those scorchers of enemies again grasped their sparkling clubs and attacked each other. Those immensely valorous bulls among men looked like strong elephants, intolerant with pride
and wishing to indulge in intercourse. With clubs in their hands, those infinitely valorous ones glanced towards
each other. The gods, the gandharvas and the danavas were overcome by supreme wonder. On seeing Duryodhana
and Vrikodara wield those clubs, all the beings were uncertain about who would be victorious. The brothers,
supreme among strong ones, attacked each other again. They circled around each other, seeking to detect a weakness in each other. O king! The spectators saw that they raised those heavy and terrible clubs, which were like
Yama's staff or Indra's vajra.

' "In that encounter, when Bhimasena struck with his club, in an instant, it produced a terrible and fierce sound.
Dhritarashtra's son saw that Pandava was striking dexterously and powerfully with his club and was astounded. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! As the brave Vrikodara roamed around, executing many different kinds of motions, he looked resplendent. They protected themselves and attacked each other. They repeatedly wounded each
other, like hungry cats over food. Bhimasena moved around in many different kinds of motions. He executed circular motions in different spots, wonderful zigzag movements, advancing and retreating. He countered strikes,
struck, avoided and chased. He adopted positions that were meant for attack. He defended, restrained himself, leapt
up and leapt down. Both of them were skilled in fighting with clubs and wielded them, high and low. The best
among the Kuru lineage roamed around in this way, striking each other and avoiding each other. The extremely
strong ones sported, executing circular motions. With clubs in their hands, those powerful ones whirled around. O
king! Dhritarashtra's son struck from the right side. Bhimasena struck from the left side. O great king! As Bhima
strode around in that field of battle, Duryodhana struck him on his flank. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
When Bhima was thus struck by your son, he whirled his heavy club, thinking about how he should strike. O great
king! Bhimasena's upraised and terrible club was seen to be like Indra's vajra or like Yama's staff. On seeing that
Bhimasena was whirling his club around, your son, the scorcher of enemies, raised his terrible club and struck him
again. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Your son's club descended with the violence of a storm. A tumultuous
sound was raised and sparks were generated. Suyodhana was energetic and radiant. As he roamed around and executed many kinds of circular motions, he again got the better of Bhima. When Bhima used his gigantic club to
strike with great force, smoke and sparks of fire were generated and there was also a loud and terrible sound. On
seeing that Bhimasena was whirling his club, the radiant Suyodhana whirled his heavy club, which possessed the
essence of stone. The great-souled one's club had the violence of a storm. Beholding this, all the Pandus and the
Somakas were terrified. They were seen in that encounter, as if they were sporting in the field of battle. Those two
scorchers of enemies violently struck each other with their clubs. They were like elephants, goring each other with
their tusks. O great king! With blood flowing down, they were beautiful. Thus did the battle, terrible in form, rage
on. At the end of the day, it was cruel, like that between Vritra and Vasava.

' "On seeing that Bhima was stationed, your immensely strong son executed wonderful and colourful motions
and attacked Kounteya. Bhima became angry. With great force, he struck that gold-decorated club[Duryodhana's club.]. O great king!
Sparks began to fly and there was a clap, as if lightning was mixed with thunder. O great king! Hurled powerfully
by Bhimasena, the club descended and made the earth tremble. Kouravya could not tolerate that his club should be
countered in the clash. He was like a crazy elephant, angered at the sight of another elephant. O king! Enraged and
having made up his mind, from the left, he powerfully struck Kounteya on the head with the club. O great king!
Struck in this way by your son, Pandava Bhima did not tremble and it was extraordinary. O king! It was wonderful
and all the soldiers honoured him. Despite being struck by the club, Bhima did not waver and did not retreat a step.
Bhima, terrible in his valour, picked up a flaming club, decorated with gold, which was heavier and hurled this towards Duryodhana[The earlier club had already been hurled.]. However, displaying his dexterity, the immensely strong Duryodhana freed himself from
that thrust and it was extremely wonderful. O king! The club hurled by Bhima was baffled and fell down with the
loud noise of a storm and made the earth tremble. Repeatedly resorting to the koushika[Technique of fighting with a club.] technique of jumping up
and circling, he[Duryodhana.] discerned when Bhimasena would strike down with the club and deceived him. Having thus deceived Bhima, the immensely strong one, supreme among the Kuru lineage, angrily struck him in the chest with
the club. Struck by the club in that great encounter, Bhima was stupefied. Having been struck by your son, he did
not know what he should do. O king! At that time, the Somakas and the Pandavas were severely distressed and
miserable in their minds. Having been struck, he[Bhima.] became as enraged as an elephant and attacked your son, like
an elephant against another elephant. The proud Bhima attacked your son with the club. He rushed forward with
force, like a lion against a wild elephant. O king! He was skilled in releasing the club. Approaching the king, he
used the club to strike in your son's direction. Duryodhana was struck in the flank by Bhimasena. He was stupefied
by this blow and sank down on his knees on the ground. O lord of the earth! At this, the Srinjayas let out a loud
roar. O best of the Bharata lineage! On hearing the roar of the Srinjayas, your son, bull among men, became angry.
The mighty-armed one raised himself, like an angry serpent that was sighing. He glanced towards Bhimasena and
burnt him down with his sight. With the club in his hand, the great-souled one, best among the Bharata lineage, attacked and, in that clash, struck the great-souled Bhimasena on his head. Bhima was terrible in his valour. Though
he was struck on his head, he did not waver, like a mountain. O king! Struck by the club in that encounter, blood
began to flow from Partha and he was as beautiful as an elephant with a shattered temple.

' "Dhananjaya's brave elder brother then picked up a club that was made out of iron and was capable of slaying
heroes. It made a sound like that of the vajra. The destroyer of enemies struck powerfully with this. Struck in this
way by Bhimasena, your son fell down, with his body trembling. He was like a blossoming shala tree in a large
forest, whirled around by the force of a storm. On seeing that your son had fallen down on the ground, the Pandavas roared in delight. Your son recovered his senses and rose, like an elephant from a lake. The king was always
intolerant. He skilfully circled around and struck Pandava, who was stationed before him, making him lose control
over his limbs and fall down on the ground. In that encounter, on seeing that the infinitely energetic Bhima had
fallen down on the ground, Kourava roared like a lion. Though he[Bhima.] was like the thunder in his energy, the descent
of the club shattered his body armour. At this, a loud roar was heard in the firmament, made by the residents of
heaven and the apsaras. The immortals showered down many kinds of excellent flowers. On seeing that the
supreme among men had fallen down on the ground, great fear entered the hearts of the enemies. Because of the
force of Kourava's blow, the firm armour had been shattered. However, he[Bhima.] recovered his senses in a short while
and wiped away the blood from his face. Resorting to his fortitude and recovering his strength, Vrikodara dilated
his eyes and steadied himself." '
