Vaishampayana said,  'When  Krishna,  Devaki's  son,  spoke  these  words,  Yudhishthira  again  asked  Bhishma,
Shantanu's son. "O immensely intelligent one! O supreme among those who uphold all kinds of dharma! In determining the reason behind anything, should one depend on direct perception or the sacred texts?"

'Bhishma replied, "It is my view that there should be no scope for doubt on this. O wise one! Listen to me. I will
answer your question properly. O king! It is easy to have a doubt. It is extremely difficult to arrive at a determination. There are innumerable instances where there are doubts about what one has seen and what one has heard[What one has seen is being used for direct perception, what one has heard is being used for the sacred texts.].
There are those who are proud of their wisdom and are skilled in debating. They say that direct perception can be
the only proof. They hold that everything that cannot be perceived is non-existent and cannot be true. However,
even if they pride themselves on their learning, people who speak in this way are nothing but foolish. Or perhaps
you may doubt how a single entity[The brahman.] can be the cause. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! This is only capable
of being comprehended by those who have fixed their senses and tried for a long period of time, thinking of this
alone in the journey of life. No one other than such a person is capable of comprehending this single cause. This is
the ultimate cause. When one reaches it, one has obtained supreme knowledge. This[The brahman.] is extensive radiance that
illuminates  all  the  worlds.  O  king! When  one  reaches  that  truth,  one  reaches  the  ultimate  cause.  It  cannot  be
grasped or bound down through words and those methods must be avoided."

'Yudhishthira said, "O grandfather! Tell me about direct perception, what other people have proclaimed as leading to success, the ancient sacred texts that exist in the world and the many kinds of virtuous conduct."

'Bhishma replied, "When dharma suffers through the strength of evil-souled people, it can be re-established for
a short period of time by making efforts. Dharma, like grass, can cover the mouth of a well that is full of adharma.
O Yudhishthira! However, listen to what happens. Those who are wicked in conduct and have discarded the sacred
texts, those who are sinful and hate dharma, attack this good conduct and doubts arise because of what they say.
Those who are satisfied at this state of affairs must approach virtuous people who possess the knowledge of the sacred texts and ask them. That will lead to satisfaction. Turn your back on desire and also on greed and confusion,
which are followers. Approach learned people and ask them about dharma. Their conduct and tasks of sacrifices
and studying never suffer. These three kinds of behaviour[Conduct, sacrifices, studying.] are also the foundations of dharma."

'Yudhishthira asked, "My intelligence is again confused by a doubt. It is as if I cannot find a path to cross over
and cannot even see the distant shore. If the Vedas, direct perception[Acts and sacrificies that can be seen.] and conduct are the three yardsticks, they
are seen to be different. If dharma is one, how can it be of three different types?"

'Bhishma replied "Dharma is seen to sometimes suffer because of the strength of evil-souled ones. O king! That
is the reason you reflect and think that dharma is of three different types. Know that it flows as one, but can manifest itself in three different ways. That is the reason one's intelligence thinks of it in three different forms. Truthfully follow the three different paths that have been laid down. You should never question dharma or hear about it being reviled. O best among the Bharata lineage! There should be no doubt about this. Without any hesitation, follow
what I have said, like a person who is blind and dumb. O Ajatashatru[Yudhishthira's name.]! Non-violence, truth, lack of anger and
generosity as the fourth-following these is eternal dharma. Follow your fathers and grandfathers in behaviour towards brahmanas. O mighty-armed one! These are the methods to reach the region of heaven. An ignorant man
who is concerned with proof and lack of proof does not deserve to get any proof. He only generates debate. Respect brahmanas greatly, serve them and treat them well. Listen to me. All these worlds are established on them."'
