Yudhishthira asked, "What kind of conduct, what kind of behaviour, what kind of knowledge and what kind of
faith enable one to obtain the state of the brahman, which is permament and is beyond nature?"

'Bhishma replied, "A person who is devoted to the dharma of moksha must be restrained in diet and must conquer his senses. He will then obtain the supreme state, which is permanent and is beyond nature. The sage will depart from his home and regard gain and loss as equal. He will be indifferent to objects of desire, even when they
present themselves. He will become a mendicant. He will not hurt anyone through sight, thoughts or words. He
will not display any harsh conduct, whether the person is present or absent. He will not cause injury to any being.
He will roam around like the sun[Meaning that he will not reside in any fixed abode.]. He should lead a life so that he does not commit an act of injury. He must tolerate harsh words and never be arrogant. Even when he is enraged, he will speak pleasant words. When he is censured, he will reply agreeably. When he roams around in the midst of a village, he should not show either excessive friendship or enmity. When searching for alms, he should not go to a house that he has visited earlier. Even
when he is reviled, he must protect himself well and not speak unpleasant words in reply. He must be mild and not
injure someone who has injured him. He must control fear and rage. The sage should desire alms when the smoke
has gone out, when the pestle has been laid down, when the fire has been extinguished, when food has been eaten
and when the vessels are no longer laid out[When the house is through with the meals.]. He should only accept what is required for subsistence and ignore
anything in excess. He should not be distressed at not getting something. Nor should he be delighted at getting
something. He should not desire what ordinary people want. He should not eat when he is respectfully invited[If he is invited to eat in a house, he should refuse it.].
In a similar way, he should refuse anything that is offered as a mark of honour. He must not find fault with the food
that has been offered, nor should he praise its qualities. He must always refuse a bed or a seat offered as a mark of
honour. He should reside in an empty house, at the foot of a tree, in a forest or in a cave. His conduct should not be
known to others. If others come there, he should go somewhere else[This is also interpreted as retreating inside his own self.]. He should treat requests and obstructions
equally. He will be certain and fixed. He will not be bound down by either good deeds or bad ones. He will control
the force of words, his mind and the force of anger. He will control the urge to know and the force of the stomach
and the penis. The ascetic will control these urges. No censure will be allowed to afflict his heart. He will be neutral, regarding praise and censure as equal. This is the supremely sacred ashrama of a mendicant. He is great in
soul and excellent in his vows. He is controlled and is detached in every way. He doesn't go to earlier places[Earlier places refer to his former life as a householder.]. He
is tranquil. He is without an abode. He is controlled. He does not consort with those who are in vanaprastha or
garhasthya stages. He should not unwittingly fall prey to desire. Nor should he succumb to delight. Know that this
is the ashrama of moksha, known to those who are learned. Everything about moksha was spoken about by the
learned Harita. If a person departs from his house and grants fearlessness to all beings, he obtains worlds that are
full of energy.'"
