'"Suparna said, 'This is the beloved region of King Varuna, the lord of the cows. This kingdom of the waters has
always been the source of his powers. At the end of the day, the sun himself sheds his rays here. O supreme among
brahmanas! That is the reason this direction is known as the last[Pashchima means west and pashchat means later.]. The illustrious and divine Kashyapa instated
Varuna here, to rule over the kingdom of the waters and aquatic creatures. Having drunk the six rasas of Varuna
here, the moon becomes young at the beginning of shuklapaksha and dispels darkness. Vayu vanquished the
daityas here and subsequently fettered them. O brahmana! They sleep and sigh here, oppressed by the great nagas.
The mountain named Asta[The mountain over which the sun sets (asta).] accepts the beloved sun here and from this, the western twilight spreads. At the end
of the day, night and sleep spread from here, seeming to steal away half the lives of living beings. It was here that
Shakra aborted the goddess Diti when she was asleep and the masses of Maruts were born from that[Diti performed austerities so that she would have a son who could defeat Indra. Indra ingratiated himself with
Diti and in one of her weak moments, penetrated her womb and sliced up the foetus. The Maruts were born from
this.]. Here, the
root of the Himalayas extends as far as the eternal Mandara. Even if one travels for one thousand years, one does
not reach the end. Having reached the shores of the golden ocean, near the golden mountain, Surabhi yields milk
here. Here, in the midst of the ocean, can be seen the torso of Svarbhanu[Rahu.]. Resembling the sun, he tries to kill the
sun and the moon. The loud chanting by Suvarnashira can be heard here. His body hair is golden and he is invisible and immeasurable. On the instructions of the sun, Harimedha's daughter Dhvajavati was stationed in the sky
here and was asked to remain there[Harimedha's wife was Harini and Hari (Vishnu) was born as a son to them. Harimedha's daughter was Dhvajavati. She was asked by the sun god to remain stationed in the western sky.]. O Galava! During the day and during the night, the wind, the fire, the water
and the sky are freed from any unhappiness that their touch causes. From this point on, the sun travels in a diagonal direction[Beyond the winter solstice, the sun moves to uttarayana.] and all the nakshatras enter the sun's circle. Together with the sun, they circle for twenty-eight
nights. Having emerged again from the sun, they have conjunctions with the moon. This is the eternal source of the
rivers and the ocean is created from them. The waters of the three worlds are here and this is Varuna's abode. This
is the residence of Ananta, the king of the serpents. This is the supreme residence of Vishnu, who is without a beginning and without an end. This is also the abode of the wind, a friend of the fire. This is the abode of maharshi
Kashyapa, the son of Maricha. Thus, in my description of the directions, I have recounted the western path. O
Galava! O supreme among brahmanas! Tell me the direction in which you wish to go.'"'
