'Arjuna said, "Wherever I went, I was praised by the maharshis. Then I beheld the terrible ocean, the eternal lord
of the waters. Towering waves could be seen there, full of foam, dashing against each other and scattering, like
moving mountains. There were thousands of boats, laden with gems, in every direction. Timingilas[Timingila is a fish that devours whales (timi). The text has the word timingila twice, but we have retained it
in the translation only once. A makara is a mythical creature, translated very loosely as a crocodile.], tortoises,
whales and crocodiles could be seen, immersed in the water like mountains. Thousands of conch shells could be
seen in every direction, immersed in the water. They looked like stars in the night, covered by thin clouds. Thousands of gems floated in heaps. A terrible wind whirled over this and it was extraordinary. I crossed over that
supreme and extremely forceful storehouse of waters and drew near to the city of the daityas. I saw it, infested
with danavas. Matali swiftly descended on to the ground. He drove on to the city, filling it with the roar of the
chariot. On hearing the roar of the chariot, like the sound of thunder in the sky, the danavas took me to be the king
of the gods and were anxious. Their minds trembled. All of them stood there, holding arrows and bows, spears,
swords, battleaxes, clubs and maces in their hands. Their minds trembling with fear, the danavas closed the gates.
They arranged for the protection of the city and nothing could be seen.

'"I took out the conch shell Devadatta, whose sound is great. Circling around the city of the asuras, I blew gently on it. That sound echoed everywhere and seemed to stupefy the sky. On hearing this, the immensely mighty beings trembled and hid themselves. Then all the nivatakavachas, Diti's sons, appeared everywhere. They were clad
in different kinds of armour and had many different weapons in their hands. There were gigantic iron lances, clubs,
maces, spears and the wheels of chariots in their hands. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were shataghnis[Weapons capable of killing one hundred at a time.], catapults and brilliantly ornamented swords. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Then, thinking about the
route the chariot should take, Matali drove the horses along level ground. Because of the swift speed that he made
the horses adopt, I could see nothing and it seemed to me to be extraordinary. Then the many martial danavas
adopted distorted voices and shapes. That great sound made hundreds and thousands of fishes die, suddenly floating up in the sky, like mountains. With great force, the danavas rushed towards me. They discharged hundreds and
thousands of sharp arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! For the sake of the death of the nivatakavachas, a
great and terrible fight occurred between them and me. Devarshis, masses of rishis among the danavas, brahmarshis and siddhas assembled to witness that great battle. Hoping for victory, the hermits praised me with eloquent and sweet voices, just as they praised Indra at the time of tarakamaya[Famous battle between the gods and the demons.]."'