'Vasudeva said, "O Kounteya! Listen to what I heard when the maharshis were talking about Rama's birth and the
reasons behind why Jamadagni's son killed crores of kshatriyas. Those who were born in royal lineages in
Bharata[Bharatavarsha.] were again slain. Jahnu's son was Ajahnu and his son was Ballava. King Kushika, knowledgeable about
dharma, was his son. He was an equal of the one with the thousand eyes[Indra.] on earth and performed fierce austerities. He wished to obtain a son who would not be defeated and would be the lord of the three worlds. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! On seeing him engaged in those terrible austerities, the thousand-eyed Purandara knew that
he was capable of giving birth to a son who would be his[Indra's.] equal. O king! Therefore, having gone there, the chastiser of Paka, the lord of all mobile and immobile objects, himself became Kushika's son, by the name of Gadhi. O
king! O lord! His daughter was the maiden named Satyavati. The lord Gadhi gave her to Richika, the son of a wise
sage[The text uses the word kavi, which means wise, and refers to Richika as the son of Kavi. There was a sage
named Kavi. However, Richika was the son of Ourva. Therefore, kavi is being used as an adjective and not as a
proper noun.]. O Kounteya! O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Bhargava[This means Richika. The entire lineage was descended from the sage Bhrigu.] was pleased at this. For the sake of a son for
himself and for Gadhi, he cooked some charu[Mixture of milk and rice used as a sacrificial offering.]. Bhargava Richika summoned his wife and said, 'This charu is
for you and that one is for your mother. She will give birth to a blazing bull among the kshatriyas. He will be invincible before all the kshatriyas on this earth. He will destroy the bulls among the kshatriyas. O fortunate one!
Your son will be steadfast and full of austerities. He will be peaceful in his soul. This charu will make him foremost among the brahmanas.' Having spoken these words to his wife, the intelligent Richika, the descendant of the
Bhrigu lineage, went away to the forest to engage in austerities.

'"At that time, King Gadhi had decided to visit the tirthas. With his wife, he arrived in Richika's hermitage. O
king! Satyavati picked up the two charus and cheerfully gave them to her mother, forgetting in her haste, her husband's words. O Kounteya! The mother gave her own charu to her daughter and ignorantly, consumed her[Satyavati's.] charu
herself. The destroyer of kshatriyas was conceived in Satyavati's womb. His form blazed and he was terrible to
look at. While he was engaged in the yoga of meditation, Richika saw this. O tiger among kings! He told his beautiful wife, 'O fortunate one! The charu has been exchanged and your mother has deceived you[This suggests that Satyavati's mother had done this consciously.]. You will give
birth to an extremely powerful son who will be the performer of cruel deeds. Your brother will be born as a store
of austerities, immersed in the brahman. Through my austerities, I have given him the universal brahman.' Having
been thus addressed by her husband, the immensely fortunate Satyavati trembled. She lowered her head at his feet
and said, 'O illustrious one! O great sage! You should not speak such words to me now. "You will have a son who
will be the worst among brahmanas."' Richika replied, 'O fortunate one! This is not what I had envisaged for you.
You will have a son who is terrible in his deeds. The charu and your mother are the reason for that.' Satyavati said,
'O sage! If you wish, you can create the worlds. But what about me? O supreme among those who meditate! I desire a son who is peaceful and upright.' Richika replied, 'O fortunate one! I have never wilfully uttered a falsehood. Why will I do it after igniting a fire and pronouncing mantras for the charu?' Satyavati said, 'O supreme
among those who meditate! Let our grandson be like that. But let our son be like you. I desire a son who is peaceful and upright.' Richika replied, 'O one with a beautiful complexion! I see no difference between a son and a
grandson. O fortunate one! It will be according to your words.' Satyavati gave birth to Bhargava Jamadagni. He
was peaceful and engaged in austerities. He was peaceful in his soul. Gadhi, the descendant of Kushika, obtained
Vishvamitra as a heir. He was united with the universal brahman and was a brahmarshi.

'"Jamadagni, Richika's son, had the extremely terrible Rama as a son. He was foremost among those who knew
all forms of learning. He was accomplished in dhanurveda. He was the slayer of kshatriyas and like a blazing fire.
At that time, Kritavirya had a powerful son. He was an energetic kshatriya in the Haihaya lineage and his name
was Arjuna. He scorched the entire earth with its seven continents[Dvipas.] and cities, using the strength of his own arms
and weapons, but also using supreme dharma. O Kouravya! Chitrabhanu[Literally, the one with the wonderful and shining light. A name for the fire god, Agni.] was thirsty and approached him for
alms. The powerful and thousand-armed one[Kartavirya Arjuna possessed one thousand hands.] gave Agni the alms. Chitrabhanu blazed from the valiant one's arrows and burnt down villages, fortifications, hamlets and cities. Because of the powers of that Indra among men,
Kartavirya, the one with the great heat burnt down mountains and forests. Aided by the wind and with Haihaya,
Chitrabhanu consumed and emptied the hermitage of Varuna's son[This means the sage Vasishtha, who is sometimes described as the son of Mitra and Varuna.]. O unblemished one! O great king! When his
hermitage was burnt down, Apava[Vasishtha.] angrily cursed Kartavirya Arjuna. 'Because of your delusion, you did not
spare my forest. O Arjuna! Therefore, in a battle, Rama will burn down and sever your arms.' O great king! After
this, the powerful Arjuna always turned to peace. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He became the generous
granter of refuge to brahmanas and brave ones. His extremely powerful sons caused him to be slain through the
curse. Those powerful ones were always cruel and became the cause. O bull among the Bharata lineage! In their
intolerance, they seized Jamadagni's calf, though the intelligent Haihaya Kartavirya did not know about this. O Indra among kings! At this, the lord[Parashurama.] used his manliness to sever Arjuna's arms and brought the weeping calf back
to Jamadagni's hermitage, back from where it was wandering around in the inner quarters[The calf was in the inner quarters of Kartavirya Arjuna's palace.]. Arjuna's sons lost
their minds because of this. Foolishly, they went to the great-souled Jamadagni's hermitage. O lord of men! With
broad-headed arrows, sharp at the tip, they severed and brought down his head from his body. This happened when
the great-souled Rama had gone out in search of kindling and kusha grass. Rama was overcome with great rage
and anger at his father's death. He grasped his weapons and pledged to empty the earth of kshatriyas. The tiger
among the Bhrigu lineage used his valour to quickly kill all the sons and grandsons of the valiant Kartavirya.
Overcome by great anger, he killed thousands of Haihayas. O king! Bhargava covered the earth with the mud of
blood. Thus, the extremely energetic one emptied the earth of kshatriyas. Having done this, he was overcome by
great compassion and retired to the forest.

'"Thousands of years passed. The lord was naturally angry and confronted a fierce agitation. O great king! Paravasu was a great ascetic and was the son of Raibhya and the grandson of Vishvamitra. He angrily addressed
him[Parashurama.] in an assembly of men. 'O Rama! When Yayati fell down[Yayati fell down from heaven. This has been described in Section 54 (Volume 4). The point is that some kshatriyas were still alive.], virtuous ones assembled at a sacrifice. There
were Pratardana and others. Were they not kshatriyas? O Rama! Your pledge has been false. Why do you boast in
the assemblies of men? Because of your fear of these brave kshatriyas, you have sought refuge in the
mountains[Parashurama resided in Mount Mahendra.].' On hearing Paravasu's words, Bhargava again picked up his weapons and, overcome by rage, again
covered the earth with hundreds of kshatriyas. O king! However, there were hundreds of kshatriyas who remained
alive. Those immensely valorous ones prospered and became lords of the earth. O lord of men! He quickly slew
them again, including the children and those who were in the wombs. The earth was again covered. As soon as babies were born from wombs, he killed them again. However, some kshatriya women managed to protect their sons.
On twenty-one occasions, the lord emptied the earth of kshatriyas. In a horse sacrifice, he then gave it[The earth.] to
Kashyapa as dakshina. O king! Wishing to save the remaining kshatriyas, Kashyapa held the sacrificial ladle[Kashyapa was the officiating priest at the sacrifice.] in
his hand and spoke these beneficial words. 'O great sage! Go to the shores of the southern ocean. O Rama! You
should not dwell within my dominion.' Because of its fright of Jamadagni's son, the ocean created the country
known as Shurparaka, on the other side of the earth. O great king! Kashyapa received the earth. Having made
arrangements for the brahmanas to dwell there, he entered the great forest.

'"O bull among the Bharata lineage! The shudras and the vaishyas acted as they wished. They descended on the
wives of the foremost among the brahmanas. When there is no king in the world of the living, the strong oppress
the weak. There are no restraints and no one is the lord of his own possessions. At that time, the earth entered rasa-
tala[Rasatala is a general term for the nether regions. More specifically, there are seven worlds in the nether regions.
Their names vary from one list to another. But rasatala happens to be one of the seven.]. At that time, she was not protected in the proper way by kshatriyas, who should be protecting in accordance with dharma. O king! As the earth was submerging, Kashyapa held her on his thigh. That is the reason the
earth is known as Urvi[Uru and urvi both mean thigh. Urvi also means the wide one and is one of the earth's names.]. The goddess earth sought Kashyapa's favours and asked that she should be protected by
kshatriyas who possessed strength in their arms. 'O brahmana! I have protected some virtuous men who are bulls
among kshatriyas. O sage! They have been born in the lineage of the Haihayas. Let them protect me. There is a
lord who is a descendant of the Pourava lineage. He is Viduratha's son. O brahmana! The bears have reared him on
Mount Riksha[Riksha also means a bear.]. There is another one who is the son of Sudasa. Because of compassion, Parashara's infinitely energetic son has protected him and has performed sacrifices for him. Like a shudra, he performs all the tasks for that
rishi and is known by the name of Sarvakarma[Sarvakarma means someone who performs all the tasks.]. Let that king protect me. Shibi's immensely energetic son is
known by the name of Gopati. The cows have protected him in the forest[Gopati means lord of the cows.]. O sage! Let him protect me. Pratar-
dana's son is the immensely illustrious Vatsa. The calves have reared him in a pen[Vatsa means calf.]. Let that king protect me.
There is Dadhivahana's grandson, the son of Diviratha. He is Anga and he was protected on the banks of the Ganga by Goutama. The mighty-armed Brihadratha is foremost on the earth because of his prosperity. The immensely
fortunate one was protected on Gridhrakuta by golangulas[Gridhrakuta is a peak and golangulas are cow-tailed monkeys.]. There are three kshatriyas in the lineage of Marutta.
They have been protected by the ocean and are like the Maruts in their valour. Here and there, these sons of kshatriyas have been heard of. Protected by them, I will no longer move. For my sake, Rama, unblemished in his deeds,
killed their fathers and their grandfathers in a battle. There is no doubt that it is my duty to honour them[By performing their funeral rites.]. I do
not desire to be protected by someone who always lacks valour.' Kashyapa brought together the ones whom the
earth had indicated. He consecrated those valorous kshatriyas as the lords of the earth. The present lineages are
based on their sons and grandsons. O Pandava! This is the ancient account that you have asked me about."'

Vaishampayana said, 'The foremost among the Yadu lineage spoke thus to Yudhishthira, supreme among those
who uphold dharma. He then swiftly departed on his chariot, like the illustrious sun god penetrating the three
worlds with its rays[All of them were travelling, to see Bhishma.].'