Janamejaya asked, 'After having obtained the kingdom, how did the immensely fortunate Pandavas, my grandfathers, act towards the great-souled and great king, Dhritarashtra? The king's advisers and sons had been slain. He
was without a refuge. With the prosperity gone, what did the illustrious Gandhari do? How long did my great-
souled forefathers and ancestors remain in that kingdom? You should tell me this in detail.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'With the enemy slain, the great-souled Pandavas obtained the kingdom. Placing Dhritarashtra at their head, they protected the earth. Vidura, Sanjaya and the intelligent Kourava Yuyutsu, the son of a
vaishya lady, tended to Dhritarashtra. Before undertaking any task, the Pandavas asked the king and obtained his
permission. They did this for fifteen years. Those brave ones always went to the king and worshipped him. Acting
according to the views of Dharmaraja, they touched his feet. Before they engaged in any task, he inhaled the fragrances of their heads. Kuntibhoja's daughter[Kunti.] also followed Gandhari. So did Droupadi, Subhadra and the other
Pandava women. They followed the rites in attending to them, as if they were their own father-in-law and mother-
in-law. O great king! Yudhishthira presented Dhritarashtra with extremely expensive beds, garments, ornaments,
everything that should be given to a king and large quantities of food and objects of pleasure. Kunti acted in the
same way towards Gandhari, treating her like a senior. Vidura, Sanjaya and Kourava Yuyutsu tended to the aged
king, whose sons had been slain. Drona's brother-in-law, Kripa, the great archer and beloved and great brahmana,
also attended on him. The illustrious Vyasa always dwelt with the king. O king! He told him accounts of the ancient rishis, devarshis and rakshasas. On Dhritarashtra's instructions, Vidura undertook many kinds of tasks and
rites that were in conformity with dharma. Because of Vidura's influence, they obtained riches, large and small,
from vassal kingdoms and were loved by them. Those who were imprisoned were freed. Those identified for capital punishment were also freed. With dharma in his soul, the king never said anything about this[That is, Yudhishthira did not object, freedom having been granted by Dhritarashtra and Vidura.]. When Ambika's
son[Dhritarashtra.] went out on a pleasure trip, the immensely energetic king of the Kurus, Yudhishthira, gave him every object
of pleasure. As in earlier times, cooks, chefs[The text says supakara, meaning someone who made sauces and juices. We have translated this as chef and aralika as cook.] and confectioners served King Yudhishthira. As is proper, the Pandavas offered Dhritarashtra extremely expensive garments and many kinds of garlands. As was the case earlier, he
was given maireya liquor, meat, light beverages and wonderfully concocted food. Lords of the earth assembled on
every side. As in earlier times, all of them served the Indra among the Kouravas[Dhritarashtra.]. Kunti, Droupadi, the beautiful
Satvati[Subhadra.], Ulupi, the naga princess, the queen Chitrangada, Dhrishtaketu's sister and Jarasandha's daughter[Subhadra, Ulupi and Chitrangada were married to Arjuna. Dhrishtaketu's sister and Jarasandha's daughter seems
to be Karenumati, who was married to Nakula.]-all of
them served Subala's daughter[Gandhari.] like servants. Yudhishthira's perpetual instruction to his brothers was that the king
should not suffer the slightest bit of misery because of being deprived of his sons. All of them paid special attention to Dharmaraja's purposeful words and acted according to them, with the sole exception of Bhima. The evil intelligence and conduct of the sons of Dhritarashtra at the time of the gambling match were still lodged in the brave
one's heart.'
