'"Yudhishthira asked, 'O Madhusudana! Have you spent the night happily? O Achyuta! Are all your senses of wisdom keen?'"

'Sanjaya said, "Having been thus addressed by Yudhishthira, Vasudeva also asked him similar questions. An ordinary gatekeeper entered and reported that others had also arrived and were waiting for the king's permission to
enter-Virata, Bhimasena, Dhrishtadyumna, Satyaki, Shikhandi, the twins, Chekitana, the Kekayas, the Kouravya
Yuyutsu, the Panchala Uttamouja and many other kshatriyas. They entered, approached the great-souled bull
among kshatriyas and seated themselves. The brave, immensely radiant, immensely strong and great-souled
Krishna and Yuyudhana seated themselves on a single seat. In their hearing, Yudhishthira spoke these sweet words.

'O Madhusudana! O Pundarikaksha! You alone are our refuge, like the thousand-eyed one is of the immortals. We
depend on you for victory in the battle and for eternal happiness. O Krishna! You know everything about the destruction of our kingdom, about our banishment by the enemy and about the many hardships we have had to bear.
You are the lord of everything. You are everything to us. You are affectionate towards your devotees. O Madhusudana! Our happiness and our path are vested in you. O Varshneya! My mind is vested in you. Act accordingly. My
wish is that Arjuna's pledge should be true. Help us cross this great ocean of misery and intolerance. O Madhava!
We wish to cross over. Be our boat. O Krishna! He is the equal of Kartavirya[Kartavirya Arjuna, famous king of the Haihayas. He was killed by Parashurama.]. When he has you as his charioteer,
there is nothing that ratha cannot accomplish in battle.' Vasudeva replied, 'In all the worlds, including that of the
immortals, there is no wielder of the bow who is the equal of Partha Dhananjaya. He is valiant and skilled in
weapons. He is powerful and immensely strong. He is terrible and wrathful in battle. He is energetic. He is
supreme among men. He is young. He has the shoulders of a bull. He is long-armed. He is immensely strong. His
gait is like that of a bull among lions. He is handsome. He will slay all your enemies. I will act so that Arjuna,
Kunti's son, consumes the army of the sons of Dhritarashtra, like a fire that has arisen. Through Arjuna's arrows,
the inferior and wicked one, the slayer of Subhadra's son, will today travel along a path from which no one returns.
Vultures, hawks, wild crows, jackals and many other meat-eaters will devour his flesh today. Even if all the gods,
together with Indra, seek to protect him today, he will be slain in the encounter and conveyed to Yama's capital.
Having slain Saindhava, Jishnu will return to you today. O king! Be bereft of sorrow and devoid of fever. You will
be bedecked with prosperity.'"'
