Vaishampayana said, 'On seeing his beloved brother encircled in the coils of the snake, the wise Yudhishthira approached and told the brave one, "O one whose mother is Kunti! How has this misfortune befallen you? Who is
this supreme of serpents, with a body that is equal to a mountain?" On seeing his elder brother Dharmaraja, he[Bhima.]
told his brother everything that had happened and how he had come to be grasped. Yudhishthira said, "O serpent!
Yudhishthira is asking you. Tell the truth. Are you a god, a daitya or a serpent? O serpent! What must be done for
you, or what must be told you, so as to please you? What food must be brought to you? What must be done to set
him free?"

'The serpent replied, "O unblemished one! I was earlier a king named Nahusha, your ancestor. O lord of men! I
was Ayu's famous son and fifth in the line from Soma[This is the lunar dynasty, originating with Soma or Chandra, the moon. Soma's son was Budha, Budha's son
was Pururava, Pururava's son was Ayu and Ayu's son was Nahusha. So Nahusha was fifth in the line.]. Through sacrifices, austerities, studying, self-restraint
and valour, I obtained unrivalled lordship of the three worlds. Having attained that prosperity, insolence overcame
me. Thousands of brahmanas carried my palanquin. Intoxicated with my fortune, I insulted those brahmanas. O
lord of the earth! I have been reduced to this state because of Agastya. O Pandava! O king! But because of the
favours of the great-souled Agastya, I have not lost my wisdom even now. I have obtained your younger brother as
my food at the sixth point in time[Meaning, the sixth day. The boa eats on every sixth day.]. I will not free him. Nor do I desire any other food. But if you answer the
questions I ask you, I will later free your brother Vrikodara."

'Yudhishthira replied, "O serpent! Tell me whatever you like. O serpent! If I can, I will answer and please you.
You are certainly aware of what only a brahmana can know. O king of the serpents! On hearing your words, I will
reply."

'The serpent asked, "O king! O Yudhishthira! Who is a brahmana and what should he know? From your words,
I think that you are extremely wise."

'Yudhishthira replied, "O Indra among serpents! It is said that a brahmana is one in whom truthfulness, charity,
forgiveness, good conduct, lack of cruelty, self-control and compassion can be seen. O serpent! He obtains knowledge of the supreme brahman, which is beyond happiness and unhappiness, and on attaining which, there is no sorrow. What else will you say?"

'The serpent asked, "Truthfulness and knowledge of the brahman can be found in all the four varnas. O Yudhishthira! Truthfulness, charity, lack of anger, lack of cruelty, non-violence and compassion can also be found
among shudras. O lord of men! You have said that the object of knowledge is beyond happiness and unhappiness.
But there is nothing that is free from either. I do not think such a thing exists."

'Yudhishthira replied, "If these traits, not even found in a brahmana, are seen in a shudra, he is not a shudra. A
brahmana in whom a brahmana's traits are not found, is a shudra. O serpent! It is said that one in whom these traits
are found is a brahmana. O serpent! One in whom these traits are not found, is marked as a shudra. Then again,
you have said that the object of knowledge does not exist, because there is nothing that is free from both those sentiments[Happiness and unhappiness.]. O serpent! It is your view that nothing can exist without those two. There is a state between cold and
heat that is neither cold nor heat. Like that, there is something in between that is neither happiness, nor unhappiness. That is my view. O serpent! What do you think?"

'The serpent said, "O king! O one with a long life! If you assert that a brahmana is known by his conduct, birth
has no meaning, as long as those characteristics can be seen."

'Yudhishthira replied, "O great serpent! O immensely wise one! I think that among men, birth is difficult to determine, because of mixed birth among all the varnas. Men always beget children on women from all varnas. All
men are equal in speech, intercourse, birth and death. The proof of this can be found in the words of the learned
rishis, who have said 'We sacrifice' and so on, basing this entirely on conduct[That is the right to sacrifice is based on conduct, and not on varna.]. The birth rituals of a man are performed even before the navel chord has been severed. At that time, the mother is Savitri and the father is the preceptor[The word Savitri means several things. It is a sacred mantra from the Rig Veda. It is also the ceremony of investiture with the sacred thread. The sense is that at the time of birth, the mother is more important than the father,
and is the equivalent of the sacred thread ceremony.]. Before initiation into knowledge of the Vedas, everyone is a shudra by conduct. When there is a difference of opinion on this, Svayambhuva Manu[Each manvantara (era) is presided over by a sovereign known as Manu. It is because humans are descended
from Manu that they are known as manava. There are fourteen manvantaras and fourteen Manus to preside over
them. The present manvantara is the seventh and the Manu who presides over this is known as Vaivasvata, because
he was born from the sun (Vivasvat). Svayambhuva Manu is the first, thus known because he created himself.] has categorically stated, 'The observance of rituals determines varna. If conduct cannot be seen, mixed races overwhelmingly dominate.' O Indra among serpents! O great serpent!
O supreme among serpents! I have earlier defined as a brahmana one in whom the principles of good conduct are
seen."

'The serpent said, "O Yudhishthira! I have listened to your words. You know what should be known. How can I
now devour your brother Vrikodara?"'
