Vaishampayana said, 'When the night passed, all the city's inhabitants went there quickly to look for Pandu's sons.
They put out the fire and saw that the house which had been burnt down had been constructed with lac and that the
adviser Purochana had been burnt. The citizens said, "There is no doubt that the evil Duryodhana committed this
act to destroy the Pandavas. Without a doubt, this was done with Dhritarashtra's knowledge. Otherwise, he would
have prevented Dhritarashtra's son from burning Pandu's heirs. Indeed, Shantanu's son[Bhishma.], Drona, Vidura, Kripa
and the other Kouravas haven't followed the dictates of dharma either. Let us send the news to the evil-hearted
Dhritarashtra that his supreme desire has been fulfilled and that he has burnt to death the Pandavas." When they
stirred the ashes to look for the Pandavas, they found the burnt hunter woman and her five sons. While cleaning up,
the digger covered up the opening with debris, so that none of the men present noticed it.

'The citizens then sent the news to Dhritarashtra, that the Pandavas, together with the adviser Purochana, had
been burnt in a fire. Hearing the terrible news of the death of Pandu's sons, King Dhritarashtra lamented in great
sorrow. Dhritarashtra said, "When those warriors and their mother have been burnt to death, today my unparalleled
brother, Pandu, is truly dead. Let men quickly go to Varanavata and perform the funeral ceremonies for those warriors and for the princess Kunti. Let the bones of the dead be sanctified in large and white receptacles. Let the well-
wishers of the dead pay homage to them. Now that this has happened, let us spare no riches to perform acts that
bring welfare to Kunti and the Pandavas." Having said this, surrounded by his relatives, Ambika's son[Dhritarashtra.] tendered
offerings of water to Pandu's sons. Afflicted with grief, all the Kouravas lamented. But Vidura did not sorrow
much, because he knew more.

'O lord of kings! After escaping from the city of Varanavata, the Pandavas swiftly moved on, heading towards
the south. In the night, they found their way towards the south by the stars. O king! After a lot of suffering, they
reached a deep forest. Pandu's sons were tired, thirsty and blind from lack of sleep. Yudhishthira again spoke to the
immensely valorous Bhimasena. "What can be more painful than our being in this dense forest? We do not know
the directions and we are incapable of proceeding further. We do not know if that evil Purochana has actually been
burnt to death. Unobserved, how will we escape from these dangers? O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Carry
us once again, as earlier, and let us proceed. Among us, you alone are strong and swift as the wind." Thus addressed by Dharmaraja, the immensely strong Bhimasena once more picked up Kunti and his brothers and walked
with great strength.'
