Sanjaya said, "Dhananjaya saw that the foremost among the Kurus had attacked Bhimasena with great force and
that he was submerged. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Wishing to save him, he struck the soldiers of the
son of a suta with arrows. Dhananjaya conveyed brave ones amongst the enemy to the world of the dead. Some of
his nets of arrows covered the sky. Others were invisible, but killed your soldiers. He filled the sky with arrows
and they seemed to be like a flock of birds. O great king! Dhananjaya was like a destroyer of the Kurus. Partha
used broad-headed arrows, kshurapras and sparkling iron arrows to mangle the bodies and sever the heads. Severed bodies, dislodged armour and heads were strewn around everywhere. Foot soldiers fell down and warriors
were spread around. O king! Destroyed by Dhananjaya's arrows, chariots, horses, men and elephants were on the
field of battle and made it look like a giant Vaitarani river. As they fought, wheels of chariots were shattered,
sometimes without horses and sometimes yoked to horses. With charioteers slain, or with charioteers, chariots
were scattered around on the ground. The warriors wore golden armour and golden ornaments. They were on
well-trained elephants that were also armoured. The wrathful drivers angered them by urging them on towards
Arjuna. Kiriti slew and brought down four hundred of these through his showers of arrows. They were like the
summits of large mountains, with living beings still atop them. Struck by Dhananjaya's arrows, the elephants
were strewn around on the ground. Arjuna's chariot passed through them, like the sun penetrating a mass of
clouds. Elephants, men and horses were slain and many chariots were fragmented. With their armour dislodged
by arrows, warriors who were fierce in battle lost their lives. Phalguna crossed over that path of battle, which was
strewn around in this fashion. He stretched Gandiva and it let out a great and terrible twang. The sound was as
awful as that of thunder, resounding amidst dark clouds. Struck by Dhananjaya's arrows, the army was routed. It
was as if a large boat was tossed around on the ocean by a great tempest. Arrows and weapons of many forms issued out of Gandiva. They flamed like meteors and lightning and scorched your soldiers. It was like a grove of
bamboos burning on a giant mountain in the night. That was how your large army seemed to blaze, oppressed by
the arrows. Yours soldiers were crushed, burnt and destroyed by Kiriti. They were killed and wounded by the arrows and fled in all the directions. It was as if a herd of deer was being devoured by a conflagration in a large forest. When they were consumed by Savyasachi, such was the state of the Kurus.

' "In the battle, they abandoned the mighty-armed Bhimasena. The army of the Kurus was anxious and all of
them desired to retreat. Thus, the Kurus were defeated by Bibhatsu and routed. Having clashed against Bhimasena, they were made to withdraw in a short while. Phalguna approached Bhima and consulted with him. He told
him that Yudhishthira's wounds had been attended to. Having obtained Bhimsena's permission, Dhananjaya departed. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The earth and the sky resounded with the clatter of his chariot. Ten
of your terrible sons, bulls among the enemy, and all born after Duhshasana, surrounded Dhananjaya. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Those cruel ones seemed to dance around and attacked him with their arrows, like an
elephant with flaming torches[The image is of hunters hunting a wild elephant with burning torches in
their hands.]. Madhusudana guided the chariot so that they were on the right side. On seeing
that Arjuna was advancing towards them, those brave ones retreated. Partha swiftly used iron arrows and arrows
in the shape of a half-moon to destroy their standards, chariots and bows and bring them down. He then used ten
other broad-headed arrows to sever their heads[Since Duryodhana and all his brothers were killed by Bhima, there is
an inconsistency here and they couldn't have been Dhritarashtra's sons.]. The eyes were red with rage. The teeth bit the lips. Fallen
down on the ground, those faces looked like stars that had been dislodged from the firmament. Ten immensely
forceful, gold-tufted and broad-headed arrows brought down ten Kouravas who possessed golden clubs. When
they had been pierced, the slayer of enemies departed." '
