Bhishma said, "O Yudhishthira! In this connection, an ancient history is recounted, about a conversation between Shakra and Shambara. Listen. Shakra assumed the disguise of an ascetic with matted hair, smeared
with dust all over his body. In that distorted form, he presented himself before Shambara and asked, 'O Shambara!
What is the conduct through which you have come to be regarded as the foremost one among your relatives? I am
asking you. Tell me that.'

'"Shambara replied, 'I never censure brahmanas and Brahma, the grandfather. When brahmanas recite from the
sacred texts, I cheerfully honour them. I do not ignore what I have heard, nor do I ever find fault with it. Having
grasped the feet of those intelligent ones, I worship and then question them. Since they are always assured by me,
they speak to me trustfully. Even if they are distracted, I am attentive. When they are asleep, I am awake. Without
any malice, I follow the path indicated by the sacred texts. Like bees use honey in a hive, these brahmanas sprinkle
me with knowledge from the sacred texts. I satisfy them and use my intelligence to accept whatever they say. Meditating with my soul, I always think of myself as inferior. I am like one who is licking the juices at the tip of their
tongues. That is how I am established amidst my kin, like the moon among nakshatras. The sacred texts that emanate from the mouths of brahmanas are like amrita on earth. If one acts in accordance with this, one obtains
supreme benefit. Thus, in ancient times, my father was delighted and amazed to see that this was being used in a
battle between the gods and the asuras in ancient times[Since there was more than one Shambara, it is not obvious which one is meant. The idea clearly is that, in the
war, Brihaspati helped the gods and Shukracharya helped the demons.]. On witnessing the greatness of the great-souled brahmanas, my father asked the moon, "How do they become successful?"

'"'Soma  said,  "All  the  brahmanas  become  successful  through  their  austerities.  Their  strength  always  lies  in
speech, just as that of kings lies in the valour of their arms. For brahmanas, words are weapons. Wherever he
dwells, he should study. If he lives in a place that is extremely difficult to reside in, he must tend to the fire. He
must be without anger and without pride. He must be an ascetic who looks upon everything equally. If he is born in
a superior lineage, he must dwell in his father's house and study all the Vedas. He must not boast about this learning. Know that this is the sign of an ordinary person. Just as a snake is swallowed up by a hole in the ground, a
king who is unwilling to fight and a brahmana who does not dwell far away[Away from home, to study. With the exception of those born in noble lineages, all other brahmanas should go to
the houses of their preceptors to study.] are both swallowed. Great insolence destroys prosperity for men who are limited in intelligence. A maiden who conceives is tainted and this is
also true of a brahmana who resides at home."'

'"Shambara continued, 'My father heard these extraordinary instructions from Soma. He followed the great vow
of worshipping brahmanas and so do I.'"

'Bhishma  said,  "On  hearing  the  words  that  had  emanated  from  the  mouth  of  the  Indra  among  the  danavas,
Shakra worshipped brahmanas and became the great Indra."'
