Vaishampayana said, 'Dhritarashtra granted them leave. All the brothers, bulls among the Kurus,
together with Keshava, went to Gandhari. The unblemished Gandhari was oppressed by grief on
account of her sons. When she recognized Dharmaraja Yudhishthira[Gandhari was blindfolded.], who had slain his enemies,
she wished to curse him. However, the rishi who was Satyavati's son[Vedavyasa.] got to know in advance
about her wicked intentions towards the Pandavas. He touched the fragrant and pure waters of the
Ganga. With the speed of thought, the supreme rishi then arrived at the spot. With his divine sight,
he could see and understand what was in the minds of all living beings. The immensely ascetic one
blessed his daughter-in-law and told her that this was not the time for cursing. It was the time for
peace. "O Gandhari! You should not have anger towards the Pandavas. Obtain peace and control
your passion. Listen to my words. Desiring victory, your son spoke to you eighteen days ago. 'O
mother! I am going to fight with the enemy. Pronounce auspicious blessings on me.' Desiring victory, he repeatedly beseeched you. O Gandhari! You said, 'Where there is dharma, there is
victory.' O Gandhari! Earlier, I cannot remember your words ever having come false. You are prudent. O spirited one! Remember those words of dharma that you uttered earlier. O one who always
speaks the truth! Control your anger and do not behave in this way."

'Gandhari replied, "O illustrious one! I do not hate them. Nor do I desire that they should be destroyed. But the sorrow on account of my sons is powerful and I am distracted. I must protect the
Kounteyas now, just as Kunti does, and just as Dhritarashtra will protect them. This destruction of
the Kurus has come about because of the crimes of Duryodhana, Shakuni Soubala, Karna and
Duhshasana. Bibhatsu[Arjuna.] has committed no crime, nor have Partha Vrikodara, Nakula and Sahadeva, and certainly not Yudhishthira. Wishing to fight, the Kouravyas destroyed each other. They
fought with each other and killed each other. However, what I find unpleasant is the deed Bhima
undertook while Vasudeva looked on. The great-minded one challenged Duryodhana to a duel
with the clubs. As they roamed around in many ways in the encounter, he realized that he was superior in skills[Bhima realized that Duryodhana was superior in skills.]. He struck him below the navel and my anger increases because of that. The
great-souled ones were knowledgeable about dharma and have been instructed about dharma. To
save their lives, how could those brave ones have abandoned it in the encounter?"'
