Souti said, 'Hearing that Janamejaya had been instated at the snake-sacrifice, the learned rishi Krishna Dvaipayana
went there. The grandfather of the Pandavas was born on an island in the river Yamuna, in the womb of the virgin
Kali[Satyavati, who was dark in colour.] and from Shakti's son Parashara. As soon as he was born, the sage of great fame developed his body through
the power of his will, and mastered the Vedas, the Vedangas and the histories[Itihasa.]. He achieved that which cannot be
surpassed through austerities, study of the Vedas, rites, fasting, having progeny or through sacrifices. The best
among those who know the Vedas, first divided the one Veda into four parts. He was a brahmarshi, knower of
everything, a wise poet, truthful and pure. That sage of great fame and holy deeds begot Pandu, Dhritarashtra and
Vidura in order to continue Shantanu's[Shantanu was Bhishma's father and also the father of Chitrangada and Vichitravirya. The Kouravas and the
Pandavas were descended from Vichitravirya.] lineage.

'Accompanied by his disciples, learned in the Vedas and the Vedangas, this great soul entered the sacrificial assembly of rajarshi Janamejaya. There he saw King Janamejaya seated, surrounded by his many sacrificial assistants[Sadasyas.], like Purandara[Indra.] surrounded by the gods. There were the lords of many countries who had undergone sacrificial baths and skilled officiating priests, the equals of Brahma, seated on the kusha grass laid out at the sacrifice.
On seeing the rishi approach, rajarshi Janamejaya, the best of the Bharata lineage, advanced in great delight, with
all his companions. With the approval of the sacrificial assistants, the lord offered a golden seat, as did Shakra[Indra.] to
Brihaspati[The preceptor of the gods.]. When the granter of boons was seated, worshipped by the devarshis[Divine sages.], the lord of kings worshipped
him according to norms laid down in the sacred texts. Then the king offered his grandfather Krishna[Krishna Dvaipayana.] water to
wash his feet and mouth, oblations and a cow, as laid down in the rituals. Vyasa was delighted and accepted the offerings made by the Pandava Janamejaya, including the cow.

'Thus having worshipped his great grandfather, bowed before him, and having joyfully seated himself below
him, the king asked him about his health. The great lord looked at him and asked him about his welfare. He then
worshipped all the sacrificial assistants, who had already worshipped him. Thereupon, with folded hands, Janamejaya and all the sacrificial assistants addressed the best of the Brahmanas. Janamejaya said, "O Brahmana! You
witnessed with your own eyes the great deeds of the Kurus and the Pandavas. I wish to hear them narrated by you.
What was the reason for the great quarrel between these men of great and virtuous deeds? Why did the great battle,
which caused the destruction of beings, take place among my grandfathers[The word in the original is pitamaha, which means paternal grandfather, as well as being a name for Brahma.
But it is also generically used for all ancestors.], their minds clouded by destiny? O
best of the Brahmanas! Tell me the details as they exactly happened." On hearing these words, Krishna Dvaipayana spoke to his disciple Vaishampayana, seated by his side, and said, "Relate in full, exactly as you had heard
it from me, the account of the ancient quarrel between the Kurus and the Pandavas." Thereupon, that bull among
Brahmanas, instructed by his preceptor, recited in its entirety that old history to the king, the sacrificial assistants
and all the assembled kings about the quarrel between the Kurus and the Pandavas and the destruction of the
kingdom.'
