'Bhishma said, "The Chedi king's intention of challenging Achyuta is not his own. There is no doubt that Krishna,
lord of the universe, determined this. O Bhimasena! What king on earth dares abuse me now, as this defiler of his
lineage has done, had it not been for incitement by destiny? O mighty-armed one! It is certain that he is but a small
part of Hari's energy and the greatly famous Hari wishes to reclaim it. O tiger among the Kuru lineage! It is for
this reason that the evil-minded king of Chedi roars like a tiger, without thinking about all of us."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having heard these words of Bhishma, the Chedi could not tolerate them and again spoke
to Bhishma in anger.

'Shishupala said, "O Bhishma! Let our enemies possess the influence that Keshava possesses[Since it is so meagre.]. You always
arise and praise him like a bard. O Bhishma! If your mind finds pleasure in praising others, then praise the real
kings, leaving out Janardana. Praise Darada of Bahlika, supreme among kings. When he was born, he tore the earth
asunder. O Bhishma! Praise this Karna. He is the wielder of a mighty bow. He equals the thousand-eyed one in
strength and is the ruler of Vanga and Anga. O Bhishma! Always praise Drona and Drouni[Drona's son, that is, Ashvatthama.]. The father and son
are maharathas, supreme among brahmanas, and worthy of praise. O Bhishma! It is my view that if either of them
is enraged, he can annihilate the earth, with all its mobile and immobile objects. O Bhishma! I do not see a lord of
men who is Drona's equal in battle, or that of Ashvatthama's. Why don't you wish to praise them? O Bhishma!
Since your mind is always fixed on praising, why don't you praise Shalya and the other rulers of earth? O king!
But what can I do if you fail to heed the old ones. You have not heard what they, knowledgeable in dharma, said in
ancient times. There are four things that must not be done-self-censure, worship of oneself, censure of others and
worship of others[Implying, censure and worship of those one doesn't have complete information about.]. These are not done by those who follow proper conduct. O Bhishma! If in your continual
delusion you praise Keshava out of devotion towards him, no one will approve. How can you establish the entire
universe in this evil-minded protector of herds, Bhoja's[Kamsa was the king of Bhoja and Bhoja is one of Kamsa's names.] servant? O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Or perhaps your devotion is not a natural one. Have I not mentioned the bhulinga bird earlier? O Bhishma! The bhulinga
bird lives on the other side of the Himalayas. What it spoke was always devoid of meaning. 'Do not act out of extreme courage' was what it always said. But in folly, it always acted out of extreme courage. O Bhishma! That
foolish bird used to pick out pieces of flesh that stuck between the teeth of a feeding lion. O Bhishma! There is no
doubt that the bird's life was dependent on the lion's pleasure. You are based in what is not dharma and always
speak like it. O Bhishma! There is no doubt that you live at the pleasure of these lords of the earth. There is no one
like you, engaged in deeds that the worlds abhor."'

Vaishampayana said, 'O king! Having heard these bitter words of the king of Chedi, Bhishma uttered these
words, so that the king of Chedi could hear. "I truly live at the pleasure of these lords of the earth, I who do not
consider these kings as equal to even straw." Hearing these words of Bhishma, the kings became angry. Some of
them trembled, and others censured Bhishma. On hearing Bhishma's words, some mighty archers exclaimed,
"Though old, this Bhishma is insolent and sinful. He deserves no pardon. Let all the angry kings assemble together
and kill the evil-minded Bhishma like an animal, or burn him in a fire made out of straw." Hearing these words, the
intelligent Bhishma, the grandfather of the Kurus, spoke thus to the lords of the earth. "O lords of the earth! I do
not see an end to these words, since there will be more words. Therefore, all of you listen to me. Whether you kill
me like an animal or burn me in a fire made out of straw, I place this foot of mine on all your heads. Govinda
Achyuta is here. We have offered him worship. If anyone's mind propels him towards death, let him challenge in
battle Madhava Krishna, the wielder of the bow and the club, until he is brought down and his body merges with
that of the god."'
