The brahmana said, 'O beautiful one! In this connection, there is an ancient history about a conversation between Kartavirya and the ocean. There was a king named Kartavirya Arjuna and he possessed one thousand
arms. Using his bow, he conquered the earth, up to the frontiers of the ocean. We have heard that on one occasion,
intoxicated with his strength, on the shores of the ocean, he enveloped the ocean with hundreds of arrows. The
ocean joined its hands in salutation and bowed down before him. "O brave one! Do not shoot iron arrows at me.
What can I do for you? O tiger among kings! The creatures that have sought refuge with me are being slaughtered
by the great arrows you have released. O lord! Grant them freedom from fear."

'"'Arjuna replied, "If there is any archer who is equal to me in battle, tell me about him, so that I can face him in
an encounter."

'"'The ocean said, "O king! You may have heard of maharshi Jamadagni. As you have said, he is capable of receiving you as a guest[Jamadagni's son was Parashurama. Guest is an indirect way of saying that Parashurama would accept Kartavirya
Arjuna's challenge in a battle. Jamadagni was Richika's son. Jamadagni was killed by Kartavirya Arjuna.].""'
'"The brahmana continued, 'At this, the king was overcome by great rage. He left for the hermitage and confronted Rama. With his relatives, he engaged in hostilities against Rama and this caused stress to the great-souled
Rama. O lotus-eyed one! The infinitely energetic Rama's energy blazed forth and he burnt down the enemy soldiers. Rama violently grasped a battleaxe and sliced down the thousand arms, like lopping off the branches from a
tree. When they saw that he had been slain, all the relatives assembled together. They surrounded Bhargava and
attacked him with their spears. Rama seized his bow and swiftly ascended a chariot. He released a shower of arrows and killed the king's soldiers. Some of the kshatriyas were slain by Jamadagni's son. Others entered fortifications in the mountains, like deer afflicted by a lion. Because of their fear, some of them could not find brahmanas
and could not engage in their own rites. Their offspring became vrishalas[Kshatriyas require brahmanas for the performance of rites. Vrishala means someone who is wicked or inferior,
but is often taken to be the same as shudra.]. In this way, Dramidas, Kashas, Pun-
dras and Shabaras were uprooted from the dharma of kshatriyas and became vrishalas. When the brave ones were
slain, the brahmanas obtained sons through the kshatriya women[Since the male kshatriyas were killed.]. However, Jamadagni's son repeatedly killed
these kshatriyas. When this had happened twenty-one times, an invisible and divine voice spoke gentle words and
these were heard by all the worlds. "O Rama! Desist. O son[The word used is tata. Parashurama's ancestors spoke.]! O Rama! What gain do you see in this? Why are
you repeatedly depriving the relatives of the kshatriyas of their lives?" His great-souled and immensely fortunate
ancestors, with Richika at the forefront, asked him to desist. However, unable to tolerate his father's death, Rama
told those rishis, "You should not restrain me in this way." The ancestors replied, "O supreme among victorious
ones! You should not kill the relatives of the kshatriyas in this way. You are a brahmana. You should not kill these
kings."'"'
