'Sanjaya said, "The great-souled and intelligent Satyaki, the bull of the Vrishni lineage, killed Sudarshana and
spoke these words to his charioteer. 'O son[The word used is tata.]! We have passed through the impenetrable and great ocean that is
Drona's army. It is full of chariots, horses and elephants. The arrows and javelins are the garlands of waves. The
swords are the fish and the clubs are the crocodiles. The weapons of the brave ones make a loud roar. This is terrible and is destructive of life. There is a terrible din created by musical instruments. Warriors find this pleasant to
the touch. But it is unassailable to those who desire victory. There are the forces of Jalasandha, surrounded by
flesh-eating ones. But I think that the remaining part of the army is like a small river. It only has a little bit of water. Therefore, fearlessly, urge the horses forward. I think that Savyasachi is only the distance of a hand away and
we will reach him. In the battle, we have vanquished the intolerable Drona and his followers and Hardikya,
supreme among warriors. I think that we have reached Dhananjaya. At the sight of innumerable soldiers, no fear is
engendered in me. They are like dried grass during the summer, before a blazing fire. Behold. This is the ground
along which Kiriti, the foremost of the Pandavas, has passed. It has been rendered uneven by large numbers of infantry, horses, chariots and elephants that have fallen. I think that we are close to the one with the white horses,
with Krishna as the charioteer. The sound of the infinitely energetic Gandiva can be heard. From the omens that
manifest themselves before me, Arjuna will kill Saindhava before the sun has set. Go slowly and preserve the
strength of the horses. Proceed towards the army of the enemy. That is where the armoured ones are, with Suyodhana at the forefront. The Kambojas are indomitable in battle. They are armoured and are the performers of cruel
deeds. There are armed Yavanas, wielding bows and arrows. There are Shakas, Kiratas, Daradas, Barbaras and
Tamraliptakas. There are many other mlecchas, with diverse weapons in their hands. All of them are stationed with
their faces towards me, wishing to fight. This is an extremely terrible fortress, with chariots, elephants and infantry.
But consider that we have already passed through this and have slain them.'

'"The charioteer replied, 'O Varshneya! O one who has truth as his valour! Know that I have no fear, even if the
extremely enraged son of Jamadagni[Parashurama.] were to be stationed before us now. O mighty-armed one! Even if it were
to be Drona, best among rathas, or Kripa, or the lord of Madra, I have no fear as long as I am under your protection. O destroyer of enemies! You have already vanquished many of them in battle. I have never exhibited any fear
in battle. O brave one! Why should I show it now, in this battle with a trifle[The text uses the word goshpada. This literally means the mark of a cow's foot in the soil and the small puddle
of water that fills up such a mark, that is, a trifle.]? O one with a long life! Which
route shall I take to reach Dhananjaya? O Varshneya! Whom are you angry with? To whom has death presented
itself? Who have made up their minds to go to Yama's residence today? You are like death at the end of a yuga and
exhibit your valour in battle. On witnessing this valour, which warriors will run away? O mighty-armed one! Who
are the ones whom King Vaivasvata[Yama.] has remembered today?'

'"Satyaki said, 'Like Vasava against the danavas, I will slay the ones with the shaved heads and fulfil my vow.
Take me towards the Kambojas. Having caused carnage among them today, I will swiftly go to Pandava. The
Kouravas, together with Suyodhana, will witness my valour today. O charioteer! I will afflict all the soldiers and
kill the ones with the shaven heads. In the battle today, I will shatter the soldiers of the Kouravas. Having heard
many kinds of lamentations, Suyodhana will be satisfied. Today, in the battle, I will show my preceptor, the great-
souled one with the white horses, who is foremost among the Pandavas, the path that he has indicated to me. Thousands of foremost among warriors will be slain by my arrows today. On witnessing this, King Duryodhana will
suffer from repentance. I will release supreme arrows today, using the dexterity of my hands. The Kouravas will
behold my bow, like a circle of fire. My arrows will make copious quantities of blood flow from their limbs. On
witnessing the slaughter of the soldiers, Suyodhana will suffer from repentance. In my angry form, I will slay the
best of the best today. Today, Suyodhana will think that the world has two Arjunas. In the battle today, thousands
of kings will be killed by me. On witnessing this, King Duryodhana will repent the great battle. Today, I will show
my affection and devotion to the great-souled Pandavas. I will kill thousands of kings and show the king[Duryodhana.].'"
'Sanjaya said, "Thus instructed, the charioteer urged Yuyudhana's supreme horses, which were trained and well
skilled. Those horses had the complexion of the moon and he urged them to their greatest speed. They possessed
the speed of the wind, or of thought, and seemed to devour the sky as they quickly sped to the spot where the Yavanas were. As he reached that army, without retreating, they exhibited the dexterity of their hands and enveloped
Satyaki with many showers of arrows. O king! But before those arrows could reach him, Satyaki used his powerful
arrows with drooping tufts to sever those arrows and other weapons. He then used extremely sharp arrows that
were gold-tufted, with the feathers of vultures, to sever the heads and arms of the Yavanas. Some of those arrows
penetrated the armour made out of steel and brass and passing through the bodies, penetrated the earth in every direction. In the battle, the mlecchas were slaughtered by the brave Satyaki. Hundreds of them lost their lives and
fell down on the ground. The bow was drawn back to its full extent and an incessant stream of arrows was shot. He
afflicted and oppressed them and killed five, six, seven and eight Yavana's with a single arrow. O lord of the earth!
Thousands of Kambojas, Shakas, Shabaras, Kiratas and Barbaras fell down and the earth was full of mire made out
of flesh and blood. Shini's descendant caused a great destruction among your forces. The earth was strewn everywhere with the helmets of bandits[Dasyus.] and their severed and shaved heads, which looked like birds without feathers. The field of battle was resplendent, with blood and wounds on the limbs of torsos that were strewn in every
direction, like the sky covered with coppery clouds. The arrows had excellent joints and were like the vajra or
thunder to the touch. Horses and carts were destroyed and scattered around on the ground. The few that were left
were scattered. They sought to protect their lives and were bereft of their senses. O great king! In that battle, those
armoured ones were vanquished by Yuyudhana. They used their whips to urge the parshnis and horses to adopt the
greatest speed and run away in different directions. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that battle, he drove
away the invincible Kamboja soldiers, the soldiers of the Yavanas and the great army of Shakas. Thus did Satyaki,
the tiger among men for whom truth was his valour, defeat those on your side. He was delighted and urged his
charioteer to proceed. O lord of the earth! On seeing that he was advancing as the one who was protecting Arjuna's
rear, the charanas were delighted, and together with those on your side, honoured him."'
