Vaishampayana said, 'When night approached, they performed their evening ablutions. All those who had assembled approached Vyasa. Dhritarashtra, with dharma in his soul, purified his mind. He seated himself, with
the Pandavas and the rishis. The women seated themselves with Gandhari. According to age, all the people, the
residents of the city and the countryside, also sat down. Vyasa, the immensely energetic and great sage, bathed in
the sacred waters of the Bhagirathi and summoned all the people[The dead warriors.]-all the warriors who had fought for the Pandavas and the Kouravas and the immensely fortunate kings who had resided in different countries. O Janamejaya!
A tumultuous sound arose from inside the water, raised by those who had earlier been Kuru and Pandava soldiers.
All the kings, with Bhishma and Drona leading the way, and all the soldiers arose from the water in their thousands. Virata and Drupada were there, with their sons and their soldiers. Droupadi's sons, Subhadra's son and the
rakshasa Ghatotkacha were also there. There were Karna and Duryodhana, maharatha Shakuni, Duhshasana and
the other maharatha sons of Dhritarashtra. There were Jarasandha's son, Bhagadatta, King Jalasandha, Bhurishrava, Shala, Shalya, Vrishasena and his younger brother, Prince Lakshmana, Dhrishtadyumna and his son, all of
Shikhandi's sons, Dhrishtaketu and his younger brother, Achala, Vrishaka, the rakshasa Alayudha, Bahlika, Soma-
datta and King Chekitana. There were many others, several whom I have not mentioned now. With shining bodies,
all of them arose from the water. The brave kings were seen to arise with the garments, standards and mounts that
they had possessed. All of them were attired in celestial garments. All of them were adorned in dazzling earrings.
They were beyond enmity, beyond ego, beyond rage and beyond intolerance. Gandharvas sang around them and
bards chanted their praises. They sported divine garments and garlands and were surrounded by large numbers of
apsaras. O lord of men! The sage who was Satyavati's son was delighted. Through the strength of his austerities,
he gave Dhritarashtra divine eyesight. The illustrious Gandhari also had the strength of this divine knowledge. She
saw all her sons and all the others who had been slain in the battle. All the people watched with unblinking eyes.
They thought that this was an extremely great wonder and it made their body hair stand up. The large numbers of
cheerful men and women made it seem like a festival. They saw the soldiers who had arrived, as if they had been
etched on  a painting. With his divine sight, Dhritarashtra saw  all of  them. O  best among the Bharata lineage!
Through the sage's favours, he was delighted.'
