'Kunti said, "Do not grieve because of this fear. I see a means through which you can escape from that rakshasa.
You have an only son who is a child and an only daughter who is engaged in austerities. It does not seem right to
me that they, you or your wife should go there. O Brahmana! I have five sons. One of them will go, taking on your
behalf the offerings to that evil rakshasa."

'The Brahmana said, "In order to live, I can never do this. For the sake of saving my own life, I cannot cause the
death of a Brahmana and a guest. Even those who are of low birth and sinful refuse to do this. One should sacrifice
oneself and one's children for the sake of a Brahmana. I consider this principle to be the best for me and I would
like to follow it. Between the death of a Brahmana and my own, it seems to me that the latter is better. There is no
salvation from the great sin of killing a Brahmana. Even if I do it without the right frame of mind, it is better for
me to sacrifice myself. O fortunate lady! In sacrificing myself, I will not commit the crime of self-destruction, because there is no sin if someone else does the killing. But if I deliberately kill a Brahmana, I will commit a cruel
and vile act, from which there is no means of atonement. The learned have said that the sacrifice of someone who
has come to your house or has sought your protection or the killing of a supplicant are cruel and sinful deeds.
Great-souled ones, learned in principles that should be followed at times of distress, have earlier said that one
should never commit cruel deeds capable of censure. It is best for me that I should perish today with my wife, than
that I should ever cause the killing of a Brahmana."

'Kunti said, "O Brahmana! It is also my firm view that Brahmanas must always be protected. If I had 100 sons, I
would not love any one of them less. But this rakshasa will not be able to kill my son. My son is full of energy, valorous and has knowledge of the mantras. He will deliver all that food to the rakshasa, but it is my firm conviction
that he will be able to save himself. Earlier, I have myself seen that powerful and gigantic rakshasas have fought
with that brave one and have been killed, one after another. O Brahmana! But do not reveal this to anyone through
any means. For people, curious and wishing to learn[Wishing to learn the secret of the power.], will trouble my sons. The learned have said that if my son
parts with this knowledge without the permission of his preceptor, the receiver will not gain from it."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Hearing these words of Pritha[Kunti.], the Brahmana and his wife were very happy and agreed
to her words, which were like ambrosia[In the sense of restoring life.]. Then, Kunti and the Brahmana went to Anila's son[Bhima. Anila is the wind-god.] and said, "Do
this." "So shall it be," was his reply.'
