'Sanjaya said, "The sun assumed a reddish tinge. Desiring victory and wishing to kill him, King Duryodhana attacked Bhima. On seeing that brave one amongst men, firm in his enmity, advance towards him, Bhimasena was
extremely enraged and spoke these words. 'I have desired this moment for many years and the time has now arrived. If you do not flee from the battle, I will kill you today. I will dispel the misery of Kunti today and the difficulties we faced during our exile in the forest. I will kill you and dispel Droupadi's woes. At the time of gambling
with the dice, you insulted the Pandavas. O Gandhari's son! Witness the calamity that has befallen you because of
your evil act. In earlier times, you relied on the views of Karna and Soubala. You did not think of the Pandavas and
did as you wished. When Dasharha came as a supplicant[A reference to Krishna's mission of peace.], you disregarded him because of your delusion. In delight, you gave Uluka a message to deliver to us. I will kill you today, with your relatives and your kin. I will
avenge all the evil deeds you have committed earlier.' Having said this, he repeatedly stretched his terrible bow.
He took up terrible arrows that were as radiant as the great vajra. In great anger, he swiftly shot twenty-six arrows
at Suyodhana. They were flaming, with crests like fire, and they had tongues like the vajra. After that, he struck his
bow with two and his charioteer with another two. With four arrows, he despatched his[Duryodhana's.] swift horses to Yama's
abode. The scorcher of enemies then used two arrows that were released with great force. With these, he sliced
down the king's umbrella from his supreme chariot. With three more, he sliced down the flaming and supreme
standard. Having sliced it down, while your son looked on, he emitted a loud roar. That handsome standard, decorated with many gems, fell down from the chariot. It suddenly fell down on the ground, like lightning from the
clouds. It was resplendent like the sun and was beautiful with jewels. It was marked with the sign of an elephant.
All the kings saw that the standard of the lord of the Kurus had been brought down. In that battle, as if he was
smiling, Bhima then used ten arrows to slay his mighty elephant.

'"At this, Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu, foremost among rathas, stationed himself on Duryodhana's flank, supported by many good warriors. O king! Kripa, foremost among rathas, picked up the infinitely energetic Kouravya,
the intolerant Duryodhana, on his own chariot. He had been deeply pierced and wounded in that battle with Bhimasena. O king! Duryodhana sat down on the floor of the chariot. Desiring to kill Bhima, Jayadratha surrounded
him from all sides. There were many thousand chariots on all of Bhima's directions. O king! Then Dhrishtaketu,
the valiant Abhimanyu, the Kekayas and Droupadi's sons fought with your sons.

'"O king! The delicate and famous Abhimanyu's chariot was surrounded from all directions by eight great
archers-Chitrasena, Suchitra, Chitrashva, Chitradarshana, Charuchitra, Sucharu, Nanda and Upanandaka. But the
great-souled Abhimanyu swiftly wounded each of them with five straight-tufted arrows. These were like the vajra,
or like death itself, and were released from his colourful bow. All of them were unable to tolerate this. They showered down sharp arrows on the supreme chariot of Subhadra's son, like clouds showering down on Mount Meru.
Though he was skilled in weapons and invincible in battle, he was oppressed in that encounter. O great king! But
Abhimanyu made all of them tremble, like the wielder of the vajra against the great asuras, in the battle between
the gods and the asuras. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The foremost among charioteers despatched fourteen
broad-headed and terrible arrows towards Vikarna. They were like venomous serpents. With these, he cut down his
standard, his chariot and his horses and seemed to be dancing around in the battle. Subhadra's immensely strong
son then again used yellow arrows that did not waver from their course. They were pointed and had been sharpened on stone and were shafted with the feathers of herons and peacocks. They descended on Vikarna and pierced
his body. Having done this, they penetrated the ground, like flaming serpents. Those gold-tufted and gold-tipped
arrows could be seen stuck to the ground. They were drenched with Vikarna's blood and seemed to be vomiting
blood. On seeing that Vikarna had been thus wounded in the battle, all his other brothers attacked those charioteers, with Subhadra's son at the forefront. They swiftly advanced on their own chariots and attacked those other
chariots, which were as radiant as the sun. Invincible in battle, they began to pierce each other in that encounter.

'"Durmukha pierced Shrutakarma[The names of Droupadi's sons were Prativindhya (through Yudhishthira), Sutasoma (through Bhima), Shrutakarma (through Arjuna), Shatanika (through Nakula) and Shrutasena (through Sahadeva).] with seven swift arrows, sliced down his standard with one and pierced
his charioteer with seven. Shurtakarma's horses were caparisoned with nets of gold and were as fleet as the wind.
He advanced closer and killed them with six arrows and then brought down his charioteer. But despite his horses
having been slain, maharatha Shrutakarma remained stationed on the chariot. In great anger, he hurled a flaming
javelin that was like a giant meteor. The illustrious Durmukha's large armour was penetrated. Having shattered the
armour, it penetrated the ground, blazing in its great energy. The immensely strong Sutasoma saw that he[Shrutakarma.] was
without a chariot. While all the soldiers looked on, he took him up on his own chariot. O king! The brave Shrutakirti[Shrutakirti is another name for Shrutakarma.] then attacked your son Jayatsena in that battle, wishing to kill the illustrious one. O king! O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! When the great-souled Shrutakirti stretched his bow in battle, smilingly, your son, Jayatsena, sliced it down with an extremely sharp kshurapra arrow. Shatanika saw that his brother's bow had been sliced
down. The energetic one swiftly arrived there, roaring repeatedly like a lion. In that battle, Shatanika firmly drew
his bow and pierced Jayatsena with ten arrows. Using another extremely sharp arrow that was capable of penetrating all kinds of armour, Shatanika powerfully struck Jayatsena in the chest. Dushkarna was near his brother then.
Senseless with rage, he sliced down the bow of Nakula's son in that battle. However, the immensely strong
Shatanika took up another supreme bow that was capable of bearing a great load and affixed sharp arrows. In the
presence of his brother[Referring to Jayatsena.], he asked Dushkarna to wait and released sharp arrows that were like flaming serpents.
O venerable one! He sliced down his bow with one arrow and killed his charioteer with two. In that battle, he then
pierced him with seven more. With twelve sharp arrows, the unblemished one killed all his horses, which were
speckled and were as swift as the mind. In that battle, he used another broad-headed and well-released arrow to angrily pierce Dushkarna deeply in the chest. O king! On seeing that Dushkarna had been smitten[The text is such that it can also be translated as 'slain', but smitten is indicated. There are two reasons why
slain can't be right. First, Dushkarna wasn't killed and surfaces again in Drona Parva. Second, Duryodhana and
all his brothers were killed by Bhima.], five maharathas surrounded Shatanika from all sides, wishing to kill him. They enveloped the illustrious Shatanika with a
torrent of arrows.

'"Extremely wrathful, the five brothers from Kekaya advanced to the attack. O great king! On seeing them advance, like elephants against giant elephants, your maharatha sons-Durmukha, Durjaya, the youthful Durmarshana, Shatrunjaya and Shatrusaha, all of them wrathful and illustrious, countered the brothers from Kekaya. Their
chariots were like cities, with many colours and decorated with flags, and horses as fleet as thought had been yoked
to them. The brave ones held supreme bows and were adorned with colourful armour and standards. They descended on the enemy soldiers, like lions moving from one forest to another forest. A tumultuous battle ensued, with
chariots and elephants. It was extremely terrible, where they sought to kill each other. O king! Because of enmity
towards each other, they increased the numbers in Yama's kingdom. But since the sun was about to set, that extremely terrible battle lasted only for a short while. Thousands of charioteers and horse-riders were strewn around.
Bhishma, Shantanu's son, was excited with rage. He used straight-tufted arrows to slaughter the soldiers of the
great-souled ones. He used his arrows to despatch the Panchala soldiers to Yama's undecaying realm. O king! Having thus shattered the Pandava army, the great archer withdrew his soldiers and returned to his own camp. Having
seen Dhrishtadyumna and Vrikodara, Dharmaraja inhaled the fragrances of their heads and happily retired to his
own camp."'
