Janamejaya asked, 'Why does Vasishthapavaha have a great and terrible current? Why did the best of rivers bear
the rishi away[We haven't been told this yet, nor has Janamejaya heard it yet. Janamejaya has inferred this from the name Vasishthapavaha. Apavaha means to
bear or carry away, so Vasishthapavaha means something that carries off
Vasishtha.]? O lord! What was the reason for the enmity between them[Vasishtha and Vishvamitra.]? O immensely wise one! I am
asking you. Please tell me. I am not satisfied from hearing these stories.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There was an extremely terrible enmity between
the rishis Vishvamitra and Vasishtha. This was because they greatly rivalled each other in austerities. Vasishtha's
great hermitage was in the tirtha known as Sthanu. This was on the east and the intelligent Vishvamitra's was on
the west[The eastern and western banks of the river Sarasvati.]. O great king! Sthanu had performed great austerities there[Sthanu means one who is fixed and immobile and is one of Shiva's
names. The tirtha got its name because of this.]. Learned ones speak about the terrible
deeds he performed there. O lord! Having performed a sacrifice there and having worshipped Sarasvati, the illustrious Sthanu established a tirtha there, known as Sthanu-tirtha. O lord of men! All the gods had instated Skanda, the
destroyer of the enemies of the gods, as the great general of their army there. Through his fierce austerities, the
great sage, Vishvamitra, brought Vasishtha to that tirtha on the Sarasvati. Listen to that account. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Vishvamitra and Vasishtha, rich in austerities, rivalled and challenged each other through the
fierce austerities that they performed. Vishvamitra, the great sage, saw that Vasishtha was superior to him in energy. He was tormented by this and began to think. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The sage formed a resolution. "This Sarasvati will swiftly and forcefully bring Vasishtha, store of austerities and supreme among those who
meditate, to my presence. Once he is here, there is no doubt that I will kill that foremost of brahmanas." Having
decided this, Vishvamitra, the great sage, remembered the best of rivers, his eyes red with rage. When she was thus
thought of, the beautiful one anxiously went to the sage, who was great in energy and great in wrath. Sarasvati
trembled and was pale. She joined her hands in salutation and presented herself before Vishvamitra, supreme
among sages. She was extremely miserable and was like a lady whose husband had been killed. She asked that
supreme of sages, "What do I have to do? Tell me." The sage angrily replied, "Quickly bring Vasishtha here, so
that I can kill him today." On hearing this, the river was distressed. The one with eyes like a lotus joined her hands
in salutation. She trembled, like a climbing creeper shaken by the wind. Vishvamitra saw that she had arrived and
that she was trembling, joining her hands in salutation. Extremely angry, he said, "Quickly bring Vasishtha here."

O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Terrified, the best of rivers began to think. She was frightened that either one
would curse her and did not know what to do.

'Realizing the purport of the words, the best of rivers went to Vasishtha and told him what the intelligent Vishvamitra had said. She was scared that either one would curse her and trembled repeatedly. She was grievously
frightened that the rishis would impose a grave curse on her. O king! Vasishtha was supreme among men and had
dharma in his soul. He saw that she was wan and pale and was worried. He said, "O best of rivers! Save yourself.
O fast-flowing one! Bear me there. Otherwise, Vishamitra will curse you. Do not think unnecessarily." The river
heard the words of the compassionate one. O Kouravya! She began to think about the best course of action for herself. She thought and arrived at the conclusion, "Vasishtha has always shown compassion for me. What he has
asked me to do will be beneficial for me." O king! She saw that the supreme of rishis was meditating along her
banks. She saw that Koushika[Vishvamitra.] was also offering oblations. Sarasvati, supreme among rivers, decided that this
was her opportunity. With great force, the river washed away one of her banks. When the bank was broken, Maitra
Varuni's son was also borne away[There was a sage named Maitra Varuni. According to some accounts,
Vasishtha was the son of the sage Maitra Varuni and Urvashi. Thus, Vasishtha is being referred to as Maitra Varuni's son.]. O king! As he was borne away, he was satisfied and praised Sarasvati. "O
Sarasvati! You are a river that has arisen from the grandfather[As a goddess, Sarasvati was born from Brahma's mental powers.]. This entire universe is pervaded by your wonderful waters. O goddess! You flow through the sky and pass on your waters to the clouds. All the waters are yours
and it is through you that we obtain our learning[Sarasvati is the goddess of learning.]. You are nourishment, radiance, fame, success, expansion and
splendour[Pushti, Dyuti, Kirti, Siddhi, Vriddhi and Uma respectively.]. You are speech and svaha .108 You pervade the entire universe. It is through you that the four kinds
of beings find life[Those born from wombs, those born from eggs, those that are
trees/plants and those that are born from sweat (insects).]." O king! Sarasvati was praised thus by the maharshi. With great force, she bore the brahmana along towards Vishvamitra's hermitage and told the sage Vishvamitra that he had been brought. On seeing
that Vasishtha had been brought by Sarasvati, he[Vishvamitra.] was overcome by rage and looked for a weapon so that he
might be slain. On seeing that he was angry, the river was scared that a brahmana might be killed. Without any delay, she swiftly bore Vasishtha away to the eastern bank again. She acted in accordance with both their words, but
deceived Gadhi's son. On seeing that Vasishtha, supreme among rishis, had been borne away, Vishvamitra was
overcome by intolerance and wrathfully told her, "O supreme among rivers! You have gone away again and have
deceived me. O fortunate one! Your waters will change to blood, acceptable only to the foremost among
rakshasas." Sarasvati was thus cursed by the intelligent Vishvamitra. For an entire year, Sarasvati flowed, with
blood instead of water. The rishis, the gods, the gandharvas and the apsaras were extremely miserable to see the
Sarasvati in that state. O lord of men! That is the reason that spot is famous in this world as Vasishthapavaha.
However, the supreme among rivers again returned to her original course.'
