Bhishma replied, "O Partha! O son! Listen to the ancient and truthful account about Vishvamitra, about how be
obtained the status of a brahmana and became a brahmana rishi. In the lineage of the Bharatas, there was a
king named Ajamidha[Descended from this king, Yudhishthira and Dhritarashtra are also occasionally referred to as Ajamidha.].  O  best  among  the  Bharata  lineage!  He  performed  sacrifices  and  was  supreme  among
those who upheld dharma. His son was the great king named Jahnu. The great-souled one obtained Ganga as his
daughter[In the usual stories, Jahnu is described as a sage, who drank up Ganga and later released the water through his
ear. Ganga thus became his daughter and is known as Jahnavi.]. His son was the immensely illustrious Sindhudvipa, who was his equal in qualities. The immensely
strong rajarshi, Balakashva, was born from Sindhudvipa. His son was Vallabha, who was like Dharma himself. His
son was Kushika, whose radiance was like that of the thousand-eyed one[Indra.]. Kushika's son was the prosperous King
Gadhi. The mighty-armed one was without a son and began to dwell in the forest. While he dwelt in the forest, a
daughter was born to him. Her name was Satyavati and her beauty was unmatched on earth. The illustrious Chya-
vana's son was the lord Richika, born in the Bhargava lineage. Because of his great austerities, he was famous. He
sought her hand. However, Gadhi, the destroyer of enemies, thought that the great-souled Richika was poor and
did not give her to him. When he was refused and about to go away, the supreme among kings again said, 'If you
give me a price, I will then give you my daughter.'

'"Richika asked, 'O Indra among kings! What will I give you as a price? O king! Without hesitating about it, tell
me what I should give you for your daughter.'

'"Gadhi replied, 'O Bhargava! Give me one thousand horses that are as swift as the wind, as white as the beams
of the moon, but with each one possessing one black ear.'"

'Bhishma continued, "The lord who was Chyavana's son and was a tiger of the Bhrigu lineage went to Varuna,
Aditi's son and the lord of the waters, and said, 'O supreme among gods! I seek alms from you-one thousand
horses that are as swift as the wind, as white as the beams of the moon, but with each possessing one black ear.'

Varuna, the god Aditya, agreed to what the supreme one of the Bhrigu lineage had asked. 'As soon as you think of
them, the horses will be there.' Richika thought of horses that were as radiant as the moon and one thousand of
them arose from the waters of the Ganga, great in their energy. Not far from Kanyakubja, there are the excellent
banks of the Ganga. Even today, men still refer to the spot as Ashvatirtha[The tirtha of the horses. Kanyakubja is Kannauj. Ganga means the Goutami Ganga or the Southern Ganga, that
is, Godavari. There is an Ashvatirtha on the banks of the Godavari.]. O son! Richika, foremost among those
who meditate, cheerfully gave those one thousand fair horses to Gadhi, as a price. King Gadhi was astounded, but
was also terrified of a curse. He therefore gave his ornamented daughter to Bhrigu's descendant. Following the recommended rites, the supreme among brahmana rishis accepted her hand. She was also extremely delighted at having obtained such a husband. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The brahmana rishi was pleased at her conduct
and desired to grant a boon to the beautiful one. O supreme among kings! The maiden reported this to her mother.
As the daughter stood before her, with downcast eyes, the mother said, 'O daughter! You should ask your husband
to show me his favours too. That great ascetic is capable of granting me a son too.' O king! She swiftly went to
Richika and told him everything about what her mother desired. He said, 'O fortunate one! Because of my love for
you, she will give birth to a son who possesses all the qualities. There will be no violation of this. O fortunate one!
You will also have a son who will be proud of his qualities. This prosperous one will extend our lineage. Your
brother will also extend his lineage. When you have bathed at the end of your seasons, let her embrace an ashvattha tree and you should embrace a fig tree. O fortunate one! Thereby, both of you will obtain what you wish for.
O one with the beautiful smiles! Here are two vessels of charu[Charu is a mixture of rice, barley and pulses, cooked in butter and milk and offered as an oblation.], sanctified with the pronouncement of mantras.
When you consume these, you will obtain the desired sons.' Satyavati happily told her mother what Richika had
said. She also told her about the two vessels of charu. The mother inhaled the fragrance of her daughter Satyavati's
head and told her, 'O daughter! Act in accordance with my words. Your husband first gave you a vessel of charu,
sanctified with mantras. Give that to me. Accept the one he gave me instead. O one with the sweet smiles! We
should also exchange the trees. O unblemished one! If you honour your mother, this is what you should do. It is
evident what the illustrious one wants to do[Obtain the better son for himself.]. O slender-waisted one! Therefore, I desire your charu and your tree.
You should also think about obtaining a superior brother for yourself.' O Yudhishthira! Satyavati and her mother
acted in this way and both of them conceived.

'"When the great rishi, the supreme one of the Bhrigu lineage, saw that his wife, Satyavati, had conceived, he
was distressed in his mind and said, 'It will soon be apparent that you have not done well in exchanging the charu.
O beautiful one! It is clear that you have exchanged the trees too. I had placed all the brahmana energy in the universe in your charu. I had placed all the kshatriya valour in her charu. You would have given birth to a brahmana
who would have been famous in the three worlds because of his qualities. She would have given birth to an excellent kshatriya. That is what I had arranged for. However, you and your mother have effected an exchange. Therefore, your mother will give birth to the best among brahmanas. O fortunate one! You will give birth to a kshatriya
who will be terrible in his deeds. O beautiful one! Thanks to your affection for your mother, you have not done a
good deed.' O king! On hearing this, the beautiful Satyavati was overcome by grief and fell down on the ground,
like a creeper that has been severed. When she regained her senses, she bowed her head down on the ground. The
wife, Gadhi's daughter, spoke, to her husband, the bull among brahmanas. 'O supreme among those who know
about the brahman! Show mercy towards your miserable wife. O brahmana rishi! Show me your favours, so that I
do not have a son who is a kshatriya. If you so desire, let my grandson be the performer of terrible deeds. O brahmana! Grant me the boon that my son should not be like that.' The greatly ascetic agreed to what his wife had said.

'"She gave birth to an auspicious son named Jamadagni. O Indra among kings! Through the rishi's powers, Gad-
hi's  illustrious  wife  gave  birth  to  the  brahmana  rishi,  Vishvamitra,  knowledgable  about  the  brahman.  The immensely ascetic Vishvamitra obtained the status of a brahmana. Though he was born as a kshatriya, he became the
originator of a lineage of brahmanas. His sons were great-souled and the extenders of the lineages of brahmanas.
They were ascetics who knew about the brahman. They were the creators of gotras. The illustrious Madhuchanda,
the valiant Devarata, Akshina, Shakunta, Babhru, Kalapatha, the famous Yajnavalkya, Sthuna, great in his vows,
Uluka, Yamaduta, the rishi Saindhavayana, the illustrious Karnajangha, the great rishi Galava, the rishi Vajra, the
famous Shalankayana, Lalatya, Narada, the one known as Kurchamukha, Vaduli, Musala, Rakshagriva, Anghnika,
Naikabhricha, Shilayupa, Sita, Shuchi, Chakraka, Marutantavya, Vataghna, Ashvalayana, Shyamayana, Gargya,
Jabali, Sushruta, Karishiratha, Samshrutya, Parapourava, Tantu, the great rishi Kapila, the rishi Tarakayana, Upagahana,  the  rishi  Arjunayana,  Margamitri,  Hiranyaksha,  Janghari,  Babhruvahana,  Suti,  Vibhuti,  Suta,  Suranga,
Aradvina, Amaya, Champeya, Ujjayana, Navatantu, Bakanakha, Shayana, Yati, Shayaruha, Arumatsya, Shirishi,
Gardhabhi, Ujjayani, Adapekshi, the great rishi Naradi-all these sages were knowledgable about the brahman and
were descended from Vishvamitra. O king! The great ascetic, Vishvamitra, was born as a kshatriya. O Yudhishthira! But Richika had brought the supreme brahman to him. O bull among the Bharata lineage! I have truthfully told
you the entire account about Vishvamitra's birth. His energy was like that of the moon, the sun and the fire. O
supreme among kings! Tell me about everything that you have a doubt over. I will sever your doubts."'
