Souti said, 'At that, the snake woman Jaratkaru called her son and told him what Vasuki, king of the nagas, had
told her. "O son! The time has come for attaining the objective for which my brother had given me to your father.
Therefore, do what is necessary." Astika said, "Why were you given by my uncle to my father? Tell me in detail,
so that I can do what is necessary." Jaratkaru, the sister of the king of snakes, wished to bring about the welfare of
her relatives.

'She resolutely told him, "It is said that the mother of all snakes is Kadru. Hear how she came to curse her sons
in anger. She said, 'O sons! You have refused to change the colour of Ucchaihshrava, the king of horses, despite
my asking and because of the wager, have made me a slave to Vinata. Therefore, the god of fire will burn you in
Janamejaya's sacrifice. Thus being reduced to the five elements[That is, dying.], you will go to the land of the dead.' The great
god, grandfather of all the worlds, himself heard this curse being uttered and approved. O son! On hearing this
curse and the words of the grandfather, Vasuki sought refuge with the gods after the churning of the ocean was
over. Once they had obtained their objective and got the supreme amrita, the gods went to Prajapati[Brahma.] with their
brother[The brother is Vasuki.] leading the way. All the gods and King Vasuki sought to placate the grandfather so that the curse might
have no effect. The gods said, 'O lord! Vasuki, the king of snakes, feels sorry for his relatives. How can his mother's curse be rendered ineffective?' Brahma replied, 'Jaratkaru will marry a wife named Jaratkaru. The Brahmana
who will be born will save the snakes from the curse.' O god-like son! When Vasuki, the lord of the snakes, heard
this, he gave me to your great-souled father, long before this incident[The snake-sacrifice.]. You were born from me and your father.
That time has now come and you should save us from the fear. You should save me and my brother from the fire,
so that the reason for which I was given to your wise father is not rendered futile. O son! What do you think?" On
hearing his mother's words, Astika then agreed.

'He addressed the suffering Vasuki and brought fresh life into him. "O Vasuki! O supreme among snakes! I will
save you. I truly tell you that I shall free you from this curse. O snake! Be reassured and banish all fear. O tranquil
one! I shall endeavour to bring about your welfare. No one can say that my tongue has ever uttered a lie, even in
jest, not to speak of serious occasions. O uncle! I will go to Janamejaya, supreme among kings, now instated in the
sacrifice. I shall please him with words that bring him good fortune[That is, bless him.]. O supreme one! The king will then restrain
himself from the sacrifice. O king of snakes! O one with great intelligence! Believe all that I say. Believe that what
I have resolved is always fulfilled." Vasuki replied, "O Astika! My head is whirling and my heart is splintering. I
cannot see the directions and I am oppressed because of the curse[The text should literally be translated as the staff of a Brahmana.] of a Brahmana." Astika said, "O supreme
among snakes! You should not suffer any more. I shall destroy the fear that comes to you from the blazing fire and
the curse of the Brahmana, which has energy like the terrible fire at the time of destruction. You need not fear any
more." Then, after having removed the terrible fever from Vasuki's mind and taking it on his own limbs, Astika,
supreme among Brahmanas, swiftly went to where Janamejaya's sacrifice, adorned with all the qualities, was being
held.

'Having gone there, Astika saw the splendid grounds that had been laid out for the sacrifice, populated with numerous sadasyas, as radiant as the sun and the fire. But the gatekeepers refused to allow entry to that best of Brahmanas. To gain entry, the best of Brahmanas praised the sacrifice.'
