'Bhishma said, "On this, listen to this supreme and foremost account. This is about procrastination in deciding what should be done and what should not be done. In a pond that wasn't very
deep, there were three shakula fishes who were friends. O Kounteya! Among the many other
fishes that were there, these became companions. Out of these three that dwelt in the water, one
knew when the right time had come, the second one was far-sighted and the third was a procrastinator. On one occasion, fishermen assembled around the pond. Using various outlets, they
started to drain out the water to lower spots. On discerning that the water level was declining,
the far-sighted fish told his two friends that a danger had arrived. 'There is a disaster for all of
us who dwell in the water. Let us quickly go somewhere else, before the path is destroyed.
Those who follow good policy counter a danger before it has arrived. There is no doubt about
this. We should decide to quickly go.' The procrastinator replied, 'What you have said is true.
But it is my certain view that there is no need for us to hurry.' The one with the right understanding spoke to the far-sighted one, 'When it is the right time, I will not avoid doing anything
that needs to be done.' Having been thus addressed, the far-sighted and immensely intelligent
one emerged through the single stream that still remained and went into a deeper body of water.
When they saw that the water had been drained out from the pond, the fishermen, who earned a
living off fish, used different methods to catch the fish. They fluttered around in the pond,
which was without any water. Together with the others, the fish that was a procrastinator was
captured. When he saw that the fish were being strung together on a rope, the one with the right
understanding penetrated into the midst of the ones that had already been strung and seized the
rope in its mouth, as if it had already been captured. They[The fishermen.] thought that all the fish had been
captured. They took the fish to a clean bit of water to clean them. The one with the right understanding let go of the rope and swiftly escaped. The procrastinator, evil-souled and inferior in
intelligence and consciousness was stupid. It died because it was insensible.

'"In that way, if someone is confused in intelligence and does not realize when the right time
has come, he is swiftly destroyed, like the procrastinating fish. If a man thinks himself to be accomplished and does not do at the beginning what is beneficial, he faces a danger, like the fish
with the right understanding. If a man acts so as to pacify a danger that has not yet come, he attains the best objective, like the far-sighted fish. The earth is said to be the place. Kala, kashtha,
muhurta, dina, nadya, kshana, lava, paksha, masa, ritus that are equal, vatsara[Kala is a small unit of time (roughly one minute), thirty kashthas make 1
kala, one muhurta is forty-eight minutes, dina is a day, nadya means
night, kshana is another word for muhurta, lava is two kashthas, paksha is
fortnight, masa is month, ritu is season and vatsara is year.]-despite
these, time cannot be seen. To obtain success, it is true that there must be good policy too[In addition to time and place.].
This is what the rishis have taught in the sacred texts of dharma and artha and the sacred texts
of moksha. They also determine the rules for the practice of kama among men. One must examine these properly before embarking on action. If one also considers the time and the place, one
obtains the fruits from them."'
