Vaishampayana said, 'Yudhishthira again saluted his grandfather, Gangeya. He joined his hands in salutation, composed himself and asked, "What is dharma for all the varnas? What is it for each of the varnas separately? What
are the views on the four ashramas and for rajadharma? Why does a kingdom prosper? Why does a king prosper?
O bull among the Bharata lineage! Why do citizens and servants prosper? What kind of treasury, punishment,
forts, aides, advisers, officiating priests, priests[The officiating priest is for a specific purpose like a sacrifice, while the priest is more like a permanent
appointee.] and preceptors should a king avoid? When there is a hardship,
whom should a king trust? Whom should a king firmly protect himself against? O grandfather! Tell me this."

'Bhishma replied, "I bow down to the great dharma. I bow down to Krishna, the origin. Having bowed down to
the brahmanas, I will speak about eternal dharma. There are nine aspects that are applicable to all varnas-lack of
anger, truthfulness in speech, sharing properly, forgiveness, procreation on one's wife, purification, non-injury, rectitude and supporting the servants.

'"I will now tell you about the dharma that only applies to brahmanas. O great king! It is said that self-control is
the ancient dharma. There are also tasks like studying and teaching that must be completed. All other acts are a
consequence of these two acts. If a man is calm and content with wisdom, he should not do anything improper. He
should marry, have offspring, practise donations and perform sacrifices. It is said that riches that bring enjoyment
must be shared amongst the virtuous. If a brahmana studies, he has accomplished his greatest task. Whether he performs any other task or does not perform any other task, such a brahmana is spoken of as a Maitra[In general, a maitra is a benevolent and affectionate person who is friendly towards all beings. However, more
specifically, a maitra is also a brahmana who has attained the highest level of human perfection.].

'"O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I will now tell you about the dharma of kshatriyas. The king must give
and not beg. He must perform sacrifices, but not officiate at the sacrifices of others. He should not teach, but can
study. He must protect the subjects. He must always show enterprise in killing bandits. He must act valiantly in a
battle. Kings who perform sacrifices, are learned and are victorious in battle conquer supreme worlds. Those who
are learned about the ancient accounts do not praise the deeds of a kshatriya who retreats from battle without any
wounds on his body. The chief task of a kshatriya has been said to kill. There is no task as important for him as the
slaying of bandits. Donations, studying, performing sacrifices, acquisition of goods and their preservation are recommended. However, specifically, a king who desires dharma must fight. The lord of the earth must ensure that all
the subjects are established in their own dharma. All their tasks must be properly accomplished, in accordance with
dharma. Through protection, the king accomplishes his most important task. Whether he performs other tasks or
does not perform other tasks, such a king is spoken of as Aindra[Similar to Indra.].

'"O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I will now tell you about the dharma of vaishyas-donations, studying,
the performance of sacrifices, purity and the accumulation of wealth. Like a father, a vaishya must protect all animals. Any other task that he undertakes will be regarded as a wrong task for him. By protecting in this way, he will
obtain great happiness. After creating animals, Prajapati gave them to vaishyas. He gave all the subjects to brahmanas and the king. I will tell you about their[The vaishyas'.] means of sustenance and livelihood. Out of six cows, he can take
the milk from one. Out of a hundred cattle, he can take a cow and a bull. When a cow is dead, he can have one-
seventh of the body and horns as his share and one-sixteenth of the hooves[The vaishya thus takes care of animals, but only 'owns' designated shares. When a cow is dead, the shares presumably refer to trade in the dead bodies.]. In all the seeds of grain crops, his
share is one-seventh[This follows the earlier shloka, so it is not clear whether one means one-seventh or one-sixteenth. It could be
either, but one-seventh seems more likely.]. This is his annual maintenance. A vaishya should never have the desire of not tending to
animals. If a vaishya is willing, no one else should ever take care of them.

'"O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I will now tell you about the dharma of shudras. Prajapati thought of
shudras as a varna marked for servitude. Serving is recommended for the shudra varna. Their great happiness results from serving others. Without any hatred, shudras should serve the other three varnas. A person who has been
born as a shudra should never amass anything. If such a wicked person accumulates riches, he will make his superiors subordinate to him. However, with a king's permission, an exception is permitted, or if he[The shudra. That is, the shudra is allowed to accumulate riches under some conditions, such as spending those
riches on pursuits of dharma.] wishes to pursue
dharma. I will tell you about his means of sustenance and livelihood. It is said that the other varnas must certainly
support the shudra. When umbrellas, headdresses, beds, sandals and fans are worn out, they should be given to
shudras who are servants. Garments that are torn should not be worn by the three other varnas. Those are meant for
shudras and, under dharma, those are their riches. People who are learned in dharma say that when a shudra wishes
to serve and comes to any of the other three varnas, work must be found for him. If such a person is weak and aged
and doesn't have any offspring, his master must arrange his funeral cake[Pinda.] for him. If there is hardship, the shudra
must never abandon the master. If the master's possessions are destroyed, he must support the master with anything extra that he has. For a shudra, nothing belongs to him. His riches are his master's. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! The three types of sacrifice[Connected with the three Vedas.] have been recommended for the other three varnas. Svaha and uttering namas are the mantras recommended for shudras[This and the succeeding shlokas get into complicated questions of interpretation. The simplest interpretation is
that shudras were allowed to use the mantras svaha and namaskara, but not other mantras.]. Using these two, the shudra can himself perform rites
and observe pakayajna. The dakshina for a pakayajna is said to be a purnapatra[A pakayajna is one where food is cooked and offered to gods, ancestors, guests and birds and beasts. There is
the clear suggestion that a shudra would have to perform the sacrifice himself, since no brahmana would be an
officiating priest. In that case, where is the question of dakshina? Presumably, dakshina was offered to brahmanas even if they did not officiate. A purnapatra is a full vessel, that is, a vessel full of food.]. We have heard of a shudra
named Paijavana, who followed the rules laid down by Indra and Agni and gave away one hundred thousand as
dakshina[One hundred thousand of what is left dangling, probably one hundred thousand purnapatras.].

'"Sacrifices with devotion are recommended for all the varnas. Great devotion is divine and purifies all those
who sacrifice. Brahmanas worship the supreme divinity, individually and collectively. They have their own desires,
but perform eternal sacrifices[Eternal collective sacrifices, though the desires are individual.]. The other three varnas were created from brahmanas. They are like the gods of
the gods. What they utter is supreme. Therefore, all the sacrifices performed by the varnas have the same end, even
if they result from individual desires. A brahmana who knows Rig, Sama and Yajur must be worshipped like a god.
One who does not know Rig, Sama and Yajur is a misfortune for Prajapati. O son! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Depending on their wishes, all the varnas sacrifice. The gods do not serve the needs of inferior people who
are against sacrifices. Therefore, sacrifices with devotion are recommended for all the varnas. The brahmanas always worship their own gods. But they also performed sacrifices for the other varnas. The other three varnas saw
that the brahmanas were created for this and this extremely great dharma should be respected by us. Because of
this natural dharma, the varnas remain upright. They were created and matured in this way. The Sama was one.
The Yajur was one. The Rig was one. But it is certainly seen that the brahmanas are also but one[The brahmanas are part of the brahman. However, there seems to be a different suggestion too. The Vedas were
originally one, but were divided. In that way, all the varnas originated with brahmanas and were later divided.]. O Indra
among kings! Those who know about the ancient accounts recount a song that was sung about this at a sacrifice,
when the Vaikhanasa sages wished to perform a sacrifice. 'When the sun has risen, or just before it has risen, one
must be full of devotion and conquer one's senses. One must then follow dharma, light a fire and pour oblations
into it. Devotion is the greatest cause. What was earlier spilt was subsequently not spilt[It is difficult to understand this and refers to the process of offering oblations. What it probably means is that
spilt and impure oblations can be rendered pure through mental devotion.]. There are many different kinds of sacrifices and many different kinds of fruits arise from these deeds. A person who knows about all of
these is certainly someone whose knowledge is firm. Such a man, who is a brahmana and is full of devotion, can
officiate at a sacrifice. It is said that a thief, a wicked person and one who is supremely wicked among the wicked,
becomes virtuous if he wishes to perform a sacrifice and performs it. There is no doubt that the rishis praise him as
righteous. Certainly, all the varnas must always perform sacrifices. There is nothing in the three worlds that is
equal to a sacrifice[This is probably the place where the Vaikhanasa quote ends.].' Therefore, it has been said that a man must perform sacrifices without any malice. He must
resort to purification and devotion. He must endeavour to the best of his capacity."'
