Vasudeva said, "O Partha! In this connection, an ancient history is recounted, one that is known as the conversation between a couple. There was a brahmana who was accomplished in vijnana. On seeing that he was
seated alone, the brahmani, the wife, spoke to her husband. 'I am devoted to my husband. What world will be obtained by me? You are seated here, having abandoned all rites. You do not discern that I am uneasy. We have heard
that a wife goes to the world obtained by her husband. I am devoted to my husband. What is the destination I will
obtain?' The one who was tranquil in his soul was addressed in this way. He smiled and replied, 'O fortunate one!
O unblemished one! I have not taken umbrage at your words. There are acts that are accepted[These acts are practised by others.], seen and heard.
Those who are devoted to acts practise these acts and follow these acts. Those who try to withdraw from all acts
are confused and bereft of knowledge. In this mortal world, there can never be freedom from acts. Whatever is
committed, good or bad, in deeds, thoughts and speech, leads to differences in birth and form among creatures.
Deeds are always vested in creatures. Material objects used in rites[Like oblations.] are seen to be destroyed by rakshasas. Having
seen the seat of the atman inside myself, I have based myself there. The brahman, devoid of opposite sentiments, is
there. So are Soma and Agni. Vayu always courses there, sustaining creatures with fortitude[There is a yoga-type interpretation of this. The seat of the atman is between the eyebrows. Soma is ida, Agni is
pingala and the seat of the brahman is where ida and pingala meet.]. That is the reason
Brahma and the others practise yoga and worship Akshara. This is also sought by those who are learned, excellent
in their vows, tranquil in their souls and in control of their senses. The nose cannot smell it. The tongue cannot
taste it. The organ of touch cannot touch it. It can only be obtained through the mind. The eye cannot see it. It is
beyond any sense of hearing. It is without smell, without taste, without touch, without form and without sound. It
is without decay. Everything flows from it and everything is established in it-prana, apana, samana, vyana and
udana[The breath of life is prana and this has five actions-prana (exhalation), apana (downward inhalation), vyana
(diffusion through the body), udana (upward inhalation) and samana (digestive breath). Prana is a general expression for the breath of life, as well as a specific term for the act of exhalation.]. They flow from it and merge into it again. Prana and apana course around between samana and vyana.
When one sleeps, samana and vyana remain absorbed. Udana remains pervaded in the space between apana and
prana. Thus, even when a man sleeps, prana and apana do not abandon him. The one which controls all the breaths
of life is known as udana. Those who know about the brahman and resort to austerities try to control it. In those
who possess bodies, all these different breaths of life seek to devour each other. The fire known as Vaishvanara
courses in the space between them and it has seven flames. The nose, the tongue, the eyes, the skin, the ears as the
fifth, the mind and intelligence as the seventh-these are the seven tongues and flames of Vaishvanara. That which
is smelt, that which is drunk, that which is touched, that which is heard, that which is thought and that which is undertood-for me, these are the seven kinds of kindling. The one who smells, the one who eats, the one who sees,
the one who touches, the one who hears as the fifth, the one who thinks and the one who understands-these are
the seven supreme officiating priests. There are seven kinds of oblations, seven kinds of fires and seven kinds of
officiating priests. Learned ones who know about the respective wombs from which the kindling are generated offer the oblations properly. The earth, the wind, space, water, light as the fifth, the mind and intelligence-these are
said to be the seven wombs. All the qualities of the oblations enter into the mouth of what results from the fire.
Having spent time inside, they are again reborn in their respective wombs. They are the origin of creatures[The seven wombs.]. However, at the time of destruction, they remain restrained. Smell is born from that[At the time of creation.]. Taste is born from that. Form is
born from that. Touch is born from that. Sound is born from that. Doubt is born from that. Faith is born from that.
The learned know that these are the seven kinds of creation. These were the methods that were grasped by the ancient ones. The complete offering of oblations makes them full and also fills them with energy.'"'
