Yudhishthira asked, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Who should be worshipped? Whom should one
bow down to? Whom do you bow down before? O king! Tell me everything about the ones you like. When
you confront a hardship, what excellent things does your mind turn towards? Amidst everything in the world of
men, and in the next world, what is most beneficial?"

'Bhishma replied, "I like brahmanas for whom the brahman represents supreme wealth and who have themselves determined that austerities and careful studying constitute heaven. I like those who bear the burden of the
aged, the young and fathers and grandfathers, without suffering from this. There are virtuous ones who are learned,
humble, self-controlled, mild in speech, full of knowledge and good conduct and always knowledgable about the
brahman. When they speak in an assembly, they are like flocks of swans[If milk is mixed with water, swans have a reputation for drinking the milk, leaving out the water. Learned people
can thus distinguish between the good and the bad.]. Their words are beautiful and auspicious in form, like the rumblings of celestial clouds. O Yudhishthira! When they are heard, their words are pronounced well. Their words are heard by kings, for happiness in this world and in the next. They are always honoured by those who hear them in assemblies. They are accomplished with the qualities of vijnana. I like them. O
king! O Yudhishthira! There are those who always give and try to satisfy brahmanas who are extremely polished
and auspicious, possessing the qualities. I like them. It is easy to fight in a battle. But it is not easy to give, without
a sense of malice. O Yudhishthira! In this world, there are hundreds of brave and valiant people. Among all those
numbers, those who are brave in giving are superior. I would have regarded myself as fortunate had I been an ordinary and amiable brahmana, not to speak of one born in a noble lineage, devoted to austerities and learning and
knowledgable about the progress of dharma. O descendant of the Pandu lineage! In this world, there is nothing that
is dearer to me than you. O bull among the Bharata lineage! However, brahmanas are dearer to me than you. O extender of the Kuru lineage! Since brahmanas are dearer to me than you, through that truth, I will go to the world
where Shantanu has gone. However, my father is not dearer to me than brahmanas. Nor is this true of my father's
father, or other well-wishers. There is nothing that I desire from brahmanas, small or large, though I am known as
a performer of virtuous deeds[The reverence is without a desire for fruits.]. O scorcher of enemies! In deeds, thoughts and words, I have done good to brahmanas. That is the reason I am not tormented now[Despite lying down on the bed of arrows.]. I am content that I am referred to as one who is devoted to
brahmanas. It is said that they are supremely sacred among all those who are sacred. Since I have followed brahmanas, I see many pure and auspicious worlds. O son! In a short while, those are the regions I will go to. O Yudhishthira! In this world, the dharma for women is to be devoted to their husbands. They are like gods. Like that,
other than brahmanas, there is no other destination for kshatriyas. If a kshatriya is one hundred years old and a
brahmana is ten years old, know that in deciding who is a father and who is a son, it is the brahmana who will be
regarded as the father. In the absence of her husband, a woman accepts her husband's younger brother as her husband. In that way, in the absence of brahmanas, the earth made kshatriyas her lord. O supreme among the Kuru lineage! Like the fire, brahmanas must be worshipped. They must be protected like a son and revered like a father.
They are upright and virtuous. They are truthful and good in conduct. They are engaged in the welfare of all beings. They must always be honoured. When brahmanas are enraged, they are like venomous serpents. Their energy
and austerities can always cause fright. Therefore, one must avoid their energy and their austerities. If they are unleashed, both can swiftly lead to fear. O great king! The wrath of an ascetic brahmana can kill. If either is released
against a brahmana who has conquered anger, both are extinguished. But though extinguished, one is not entirely
extinguished[This requires explanation. Kshatriyas possess energy, brahmanas possess both energy and austerities. Applied
against a brahmana who has conquered anger, both are powerless. In general, if energy (the domain of kshatriyas) and austerities (the domain of brahmanas) are released against each other, energy is extinguished, but is
unable to completely extinguish the power of austerities.]. With a staff in his hand, a herdsman is always engaged in protecting the herd. Similarly, kshatriyas
must always protect brahmanas and the brahman. They must protect brahmanas, who possess the energy of the
brahman, like a father protects his son, and must look towards their houses, so that they have a means of sustenance."'
