'Narada said, "The famous Madhavi gave up her riches. Truthful to her words, she became a virgin and followed
the brahmana Galava. Galava's thoughts were fixed on accomplishing his own objective. He went to the city of
Bhoja to see King Oushinara. He went and told the king, for whom valour was truth, 'This maiden will bear you
two sons who will be kings. Through this, you will attain your objectives, here and in the hereafter. O king! You
will have two sons who will be like the sun and the moon. O one learned in all manner of dharma! But as a bride
price, you will have to give me horses that have the complexion of the moon and they must each possess one black
ear. You must give me four hundred of these. I am seeking these horses for my preceptor's sake and not for my
own. O great king! If you are capable, do it without thinking about it. O rajarshi! You are without offspring. O
king! Give birth to two sons. Through these sons as boats, you will save your ancestors and yourself. O rajarshi!
One who bears the fruit of sons is not cast out from heaven. He does not go to the terrible hell, where those without
sons go.' Having heard this and much else spoken by Galava, King Ushinara[There is a minor inconsistency. The king has earlier been referred to as Oushinara, meaning Ushinara's son.
Here, he is being referred to as Ushinara.] gave him this reply, 'O Galava! I
have heard the words that you have spoken. O brahmana! My heart is inclined towards what you have said, but
destiny is powerful. O supreme among brahmanas! I only possess two hundred such horses, though there are many
thousands of others that are roaming around. O Galava! I will only have one son through her. O brahmana! I will
also follow the path that the others[The other kings.] have. O supreme among brahmanas! I will also pay you the same price. My
riches are for the enjoyment of the inhabitants of the cities and the country, not for myself[This suggests that unlike the other two kings, Ushinara did possess more than two hundred such horses, but refused to part with them.]. O one with dharma
in the soul! If a king uses the riches of others to satisfy his own desires, he obtains neither dharma nor fame.
Therefore, I will accept the maiden. Give her to me. This maiden is like one born from the gods and a single son
will be born to me.' Galava, foremost among brahmanas, then worshipped King Ushinara, who had spoken many
beneficial words. After giving her to Ushinara, Galava left for the forest. Like a meritorious one enjoys his prosperity, he[Ushinara.] pleasured with her in mountainous caverns, waterfalls in rivers, diverse gardens, forests, groves, beautiful houses, the roofs of palaces, pavilions, vimanas and secluded rooms. In course of time, a son was born and he
was as radiant as the young sun. That supreme among kings was famous by the name of Shibi. The brahmana
Galava presented himself and accepted the maiden back. O king! He then left to visit Vinata's son."'
