Yudhishthira said, "I have heard the words you have spoken about the ordinances on giving food. But tell me
about the conjunctions of nakshatras[There are twenty-seven nakshatras, which are stars/constellations.], under which, different kinds of gifts must be thought of."

'Bhishma replied, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about a conversation between Devaki and
devarshi Narada. Narada, with a divine form, arrived in Dvaraka. Devaki, who had insight about dharma, asked
him this question. Thus  asked, devarshi Narada told her everything about the ordinances. O  lord of  the earth!
Listen.

'"Narada said, 'O immensely fortunate one! Under Krittika, if one satisfies brahmanas with payasam[Rice mixed with milk and sugar.] and ghee,
then one obtains the supreme among the worlds meant for the virtuous. Under Rohini, to free oneself from debts,
one must give brahmanas the meat of deer, food, ghee, milk and other objects of food and drink. Under Somadaivata[Another name for Mrigashira.], if one gives a cow and a calf, one goes from the world of men to the supreme world of heaven. Under
Ardra, if a man fasts and gives krisara[Krisara is made out of wheat flour, rice and sesamum.]mixed with oil, then he is freed from all difficulties, including those that
are as razor-sharp as the edges of mountains. O beautiful one! Under Punarvasu, if one gives sweet cakes and food,
one is reborn in a family that has a lot of food and one is also famous and handsome. Under Pushya, if one gives
gold, whether it is worked or unworked, one obtains a world where one shines like Soma, though the world itself is
dark. Under Ashlesha, if one gives a bull decorated with silver, one is freed from all fear and obtains prosperity.
Under Magha, if a man fills vessels with sesamum, one obtains sons and animals in this world and happiness after
death. Under Purva Phalguni, if a person desires prosperity, he should fast and give food and fermented sugar cane
juice to brahmanas. Under Uttara Phalguni, if one follows the rites and gives rice[Actually, the text mentions a special kind of rice known as shashtika.] mixed with ghee and milk, one
obtains greatness in heaven. It has been determined that any gifts made by a man under Uttara Phalguni lead to
great and infinite fruits. Under Hasta, if a man fasts and gives a chariot yoked to four elephants, he obtains the
supreme and auspicious worlds that satisfy every kind of desire. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Under Chitra, if one gives a bull and auspicious fragrances, one roams around in delight in this world, like the apsaras do in
Nandana. Under Svati, if one gives riches, one obtains the auspicious worlds that one desires and also obtains great
fame. Under Vishakha, if one gives a bull, a milk-yielding cow, a basket, a wagonload of paddy and garments, then
one pleases the ancestors and the gods. After death, one obtains the infinite. He does not face any hardships and
goes to the world of heaven. By giving what has been stated to brahmanas, one obtains whatever vocation one desires. It has also been determined that the donor is saved from hell and other hardships. Under Anuradha, if a man
fasts and gives embroidered cloth and garments, then he obtains greatness in heaven for one hundred yugas. If a
person desires prosperity, under Jyeshtha, he should give brahmanas the herb known as kalashaka, with earth still
clinging to the roots. He will then obtain the desired objective. Under Mula, if a person is controlled and gives
roots and fruits to brahmanas, he pleases the ancestors and goes to the desired destination. Under Purva Ashadha,
if a person fasts and gives vessels full of curd to a brahmana who has good lineage and conduct and is learned in
the Vedas, then after death, the donor is born in a family that has an extremely large number of cattle. Under Uttara
Ashadha, if one gives jars filled with barley, ghee and large quantities of fermented liquor, one obtains all the objects that one desires. Under Abhijit, by giving milk, honey and ghee to learned men who are always devoted to
dharma, one obtains greatness in the world of heaven. Under Shravana, by giving blankets and thick cloth, one
roams around the worlds on white vehicles. Under Dhanishtha, if a person is controlled and gives a vehicle yoked
to bulls and garments with fine strands, immediately after death, he obtains a kingdom. Under Shatabhisha, if one
gives fragrances, aloe and sandalwood, after death, one obtains a world with apsaras and eternal fragrances. Under
Purva Bhadrapada, if a person gives rajamasha[Kind of bean, commonly known as rajma.], he is happy after death and obtains all kinds of food and fruits.
Under Uttara, if a person gives goat meat, he pleases the ancestors and obtains the infinite after death. Under Revati, if a person gives a cow and a brass vessel for milking, after death, the cow presents itself before the donor and
satisfies every desire. Under Ashvini, if a supreme among men gives a chariot yoked to horses, after death, one is
radiant and is born in a family that possesses elephants, horses and chariots. Under Bharani, if a man gives brahmanas sesamum and a cow, after death, he obtains fame and a large number of cows.'"

'Bhishma continued, "These are the signs associated with the nakshatras that have been indicated. Narada told
Devaki about these and she told her daughters-in-law."'
