'Sanjaya said, "In that battle, the rakshasa made all those on your side retreat from battle. O best of the Bharata lineage! He then rushed at Duryodhana, wishing to kill him. On seeing him forcefully descend on the king, many on
your side, unassailable in battle, attacked him, wishing to kill him. Those immensely strong ones twanged bows
that were as long as palm trees. They roared like a group of lions and together, attacked the one who was alone.
They surrounded him from every direction and showered down arrows. It was like the slayer of Bala showering
rain on mountains during the autumn. He was severely pierced and wounded, like an elephant with a goad. He
quickly rose up into the sky, like Vinata's son[Garuda.]. Stationed there, he uttered mighty roars, like clouds during the
autumn. His terrible roars echoed in the sky, the directions and the sub-directions. O best of the Bharata lineage!
On hearing the sounds emitted by the rakshasa, King Yudhishthira spoke these words to Bhimasena. 'The rakshasa
is certainly fighting with the maharatha sons of Dhritarashtra. That is the reason we are hearing the sounds of these
terrible roars. O son[The word used is tata.]! I see that the burden he has taken on is too much. The angry grandfather is ready to kill
the Panchalas. For the sake of protecting them, Phalguna is fighting with the enemy. O mighty-armed one! Two
tasks now present themselves[Fighting with the enemy and protecting Ghatotkacha.]. Having heard this, go and protect Hidimba's son. He confronts a great danger.'

Obeying the words of his brother, Vrikodara swiftly advanced. He roared like a lion, frightening all the kings. O
king! He proceeded with great force, like the ocean at the time of the new moon or the full moon. He was followed
by Satyadhriti and Souchitti, invincible in battle, Shrenimat, Vasudana and the lord who was the son of the king of
Kashi. There were many other maharathas, with Abhimanyu at the forefront, Droupadi's sons, the valiant Kshatradeva, Kshatradharma and Nila, the lord of the marshy regions, together with his own soldiers. They surrounded
Hidimba's son with a large number of chariots. There were six thousand elephants that were always crazy, with
riders prepared to strike. They advanced to protect Ghatotkacha, Indra among the rakshasas. They roared like lions. There was a great sound from the wheels of the chariots. There was a roar from the sound of the hooves. The
earth began to tremble. On hearing the sounds of those advancing ones, the faces of your soldiers paled. They were
anxious because of their fear of Bhimasena. O great king! They abandoned Ghatotkacha and fled from the field of
battle.

'"A battle then commenced between the great-souled ones on your side and those of the enemy. Neither side
wished to retreat from the encounter. The maharathas used many different kinds of weapons. They attacked each
other and struck each other. That extremely terrible battle struck terror in the minds of those who were cowards.
Horse-riders encountered elephant-riders, infantry clashed with chariot-riders. O king! In that encounter, they challenged each other and attacked each other. Because of that clash, a terrible and great dust arose, from chariots,
horses, elephants, infantry, footsteps and wheels. That dust was thick, like red smoke, and covered the arena of the
battle. O king! It was impossible to distinguish those on one's own side from those of the enemy. The father did
not recognize the son. The son did not recognize the father. No mercy was shown in the encounter and it made the
body hair stand up. O best of the Bharata lineage! There was the sound of weapons and the roar of men. There was
an extremely large din, like that of bamboos being burnt. A river of blood began to flow there and the waves were
elephants, horses and men. The hair[Of the fighters.] constituted the weeds and moss. The heads and bodies of men fell down in
that battle and a great sound was heard, like that of stones falling down. The earth was strewn with the torsos of
men, the mangled bodies of elephants and the mutiliated bodies of horses. The maharathas released many different
kinds of weapons. They attacked each other and struck each other. Urged by horse-riders, horses clashed against
horses. In that battle, they dashed against each other and fell down, devoid of life. Men attacked men, their eyes
extremely red with rage. They struck each other with their chests and thus killed each other. Urged by the trainers,
elephants attacked the elephants of the enemy. And in that encounter, they slew the others with the points of their
tusks. They were adorned with pennants and were covered in blood. In that clash, they looked like clouds tinged
with lightning. Some had their trunks sliced into two. Others had their bodies lacerated. They fell down in that tumult, like mountains with their wings sliced off[Mountains are believed to possess wings, until Indra lopped them off. Mount Mainaka was the only one which
escaped.]. Some supreme elephants had their sides ripped open by other
elephants. They shed large quantities of blood, like mountains exuding minerals. Some were slain through iron arrows, others were pierced by javelins. Without their riders, they were seen to be like mountains without summits.
Some of them were blind with anger and madness. No longer controlled, they crushed hundreds of chariots, horses
and infantry in that encounter. Horse-riders pierced horses with spears and javelins. They rushed against each other, confused about the directions. Rathas born in noble lineages fought with other rathas, ready to give up their
bodies. They resorted to the best of their strength and acted without any fear. O king! Those skilled in battle sought
fame, or heaven, and fought each other, as if in a svayamvara. Thus the battle raged there, and it made the body
hair stand up. The great army of the sons of Dhritarashtra were generally made to retreat."'
