Bhishma said, "Brahmanas must always be worshipped reverentially. With Soma as their king, they are the
lords of happiness and unhappiness. Just as a king worships and protects his ancestors, they must always be
worshipped and revered and offered objects of pleasure, ornaments and whatever else they wish for. The tranquility of the kingdom flows from them, just as all creatures flow from Vasava. Let pure brahmanas, as radiant as the
brahman, be born in the kingdom. Maharatha kings[Meaning kshatriyas.], those who can scorch enemies, are also desired. There may
be a brahmana who has been born in a noble lineage, knows about dharma and is rigid in his vows. O king! There
is nothing superior to making him dwell in your house. Offerings made to brahmanas are received by the gods.
They are the forefathers of all creatures and there is nothing that is superior to them. Aditya, the moon, Vayu, the
earth, the water, the sky and the directions-all these enter the body of a brahmana and consume whatever food he
eats. When a brahmana does not eat, the ancestors do not consume. When a wicked person hates brahmanas, the
gods do not eat with him. When brahmanas are satisfied, the ancestors are always delighted. O king! That is the
way with gods too and there is no need to think about this. Therefore, when they[Brahmanas.] are given offerings, the givers
are themselves gratified. After death, they aren't destroyed and go to the ultimate destination. Whatever be the proportion in which a man gives offerings to brahmanas, in that proportion, the ancestors and the gods are delighted.
All the subjects have originated from brahmanas. They are the origin and after death, they are also the destination.
Brahmanas know about the paths to heaven and hell, about both what has happened and about what will occur.
They are supreme among bipeds. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! Through his intelligence, a brahmana
knows his own dharma. A person who follows them is never defeated. Nor does such a person confront destruction
and defeat after death. Great-souled ones who have cleansed their souls and accept the words that issue out of the
mouths of brahmanas are never defeated. Kshatriyas scorch through their energy and strength, but are pacified by
the energy and strength of brahmanas. The Bhrigus defeated the Talajanghas[This is a reference to Parashurama killing Kartavirya Arjuna.]. The son of Angiras defeated the
Nipas[The Nipas were a mountainous kingdom. Brahmadatta was the son of Nipa and this may mean the defeat of
Brahmadatta by Ayasya, the son of Angiras. Alternatively, there was a king named Nipa in the Bharata lineage
too and Parikshit was cursed by a sage who was descended from the Angiras lineage.]. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Bharadvaja defeated the Vitahavyas and the Ailas. All these warriors
were colourful in fighting. However, those with standards made out of black antelope skins[Brahmanas.] vanquished them.
They are capable of flinging away their water pots, crossing over and striking[Acting like a kshatriya. This half of the shloka is not very clear and we have taken liberties.]. In this world, everything that has
been heard of or seen is latent within brahmanas, like a fire concealed inside wood. O bull among the Bharata lineage! In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about a conversation between Vasudeva and the earth.

'"Vasudeva asked, 'O mother of all creatures! O beautiful one! I am asking you about a doubt. If a man is a
householder, through which acts can be cleanse his sins?'

'"The earth replied, 'The best method of purification is to serve brahmanas. Through serving brahmanas, all
kinds of dirt are destroyed. This is the source of prosperity. This is the source of fame. Intelligence is generated by
this. This grants superiority over another and is better than the best. If a man is praised by brahmanas, he prospers.
If a man slanders brahmanas, he is soon defeated. Just as a lump of earth flung into the great ocean is destroyed, in
that way, a performer of wicked deeds faces destruction. Behold the dark marks on the moon and the saline water
in the ocean. The great Indra was also marked with the signs of one thousand vaginas. It was through their powers
that these were converted into one thousand eyes and Shatakratu obtained peace[Daksha cursed the moon. The sage Koushika cursed the ocean that its water would become salty. The sage
Goutama cursed Indra and later changed the one thousand vaginas into one thousand eyes.]. O Madhava! They are like
that. O Madhusudana! A man who desires prosperity and fame and the worlds, follow brahmanas and purifies his
soul.'"

'Bhishma continued, "Hearing the earth's words, Madhusudana applauded them. Having heard them, he worshipped the earth. O Partha! Since you have heard this, try to always worship the bulls among brahmanas. That is
the way you will obtain benefit."'
