Vaishampayana said, 'Daruka went to the Kurus and met the maharatha Parthas. He told them how the Vrishnis
had destroyed each other with clubs. On hearing that the Varshneyas, the Bhojas, the Kukuras and the Andhakas had been destroyed, the Pandavas were tormented by grief and their minds were terrified. Arjuna, Keshava's
beloved friend, took their leave and went to see his maternal uncle, saying, "Nothing remains." With Daruka, the
lord went to the abode of the Vrishnis. The brave one saw Dvaraka, which looked like a woman with her husband
dead. Earlier, the protector of the world used to be the protector of those women. Partha saw them shrieking there,
without a protector and bereft of protection. There were sixteen thousand of Vasudeva's wives. When they saw Arjuna arrive, they began to wail loudly. On seeing them, Kouravya Arjuna's eyes became full of tears. They were
without Krishna and without their sons and he was incapable of looking at them. The Vrishnis and the Andhakas
were like water[Dvaraka is being compared to a river.]. The horses were fish and the chariots were rafts. The sounding of musical instruments and the
clatter of chariots were like the roar of the currents. The houses were tirthas and giant crocodiles. The jewels were
accumulations of moss. The firm fortifications were like garlands. The roads were like flowing whirlpools in the
water. The crossroads were large lakes. In the river of Dvaraka, Rama and Krishna were giant crocodiles. Devoured by the noose of destiny, that river was now terrible, flowing towards Vaitarani[The river that flows in the nether regions, in Yama's world.]. The intelligent Arjuna saw
that it was now without the bulls among the Vrishnis. It was without prosperity and cheerless, like a lotus during
the winter. Partha saw Dvaraka and Krishna's wives. He wailed loudly, eyes overflowing with tears, and fell down
on the ground, senseless. O lord of the earth! Satya[Satyabhama.], Satrajit's daughter, and Rukmini also wept and fell down,
alongside Dhananjaya. They raised him and made him sit on a golden seat. They surrounded the great-souled and
spoke words of praise about Govinda. They spoke to Pandava, who comforted the women and then left, wishing to
meet his maternal uncle.'
