Vaishampayana said, 'O great king! When the women had been sent away, Dhritarashtra, Ambika's son, lamented again, plunged into an even greater grief. His sighs seemed to be mixed with smoke and he repeatedly
waved his arms around. O great king! Having reflected, he spoke these words. "O suta! Alas! What I have heard
from you is a reason for great unhappiness. In the battle, the Pandavas are safe and have not suffered. It is certain
that my heart is extremely firm, with an essence that is as tough as a diamond. Despite hearing that my sons have
been killed, it has not shattered into a thousand fragments. O Sanjaya! I am thinking about their words and the
sports they indulged in when they were children. Today, having heard that they have been killed, my mind is severely shattered. Because I was blind, I was never able to see their beauty. However, because of affection towards
one's sons, I have always borne great love towards them. O unblemished one! They passed from childhood to
youth and then attained middle age. On hearing this, I was delighted. Today, I have heard that they have been
killed, deprived of their prosperity and robbed of their energy. Because of the calamity that has overtaken my sons,
I cannot find any peace. O son! O Indra among kings[In his lamentations, Dhritarashtra is addressing Duryodhana.]! Come to me. I am without a protector now. O mighty-
armed one! Without you, what will be my state now? O great king! You were the refuge of your relatives and your
well-wishers. O brave one! I am old and blind. Abandoning me, where have you gone? O king! Where is your
compassion, your affection and your honour? You were invincible in a battle. How could the Parthas have killed
you? O son! Why have you abandoned all the assembled kings? Slain, you are now lying down on the ground, like
an ordinary person, or a wicked king. When I arose at the appointed time, you always addressed me in such respectful words. 'O father! O father! O protector of the world!' You clasped my neck with moistened eyes and affectionately said, 'O Kouravya! Instruct me.' Address me in those excellent words. O son! I have heard these wonderful words from you. 'This extensive earth is mine, as much as it is of Partha. O supreme among kings! O lord!
Bhagadatta, Kripa, Shalya, the two from Avanti[Vinda and Anuvinda.], Jayadratha, Bhurishrava, Somadatta, the great king Bahlika,
Ashvatthama, Bhoja, the immensely strong Magadha, Brihadbala, the lord of Kashi, Shakuni Soubala, the many
thousands of mlecchas, Shakas and Yavanas, Sudakshina of Kamboja, the lord of Trigarta[Susharma.], grandfather Bhishma,
Bharadvaja's son, Goutama, Shrutayu, Achyutayu, the valorous Shatayu, Jalasandha, Rishyashringa's son[A rakshasa who fought on the side of the Kouravas.], the
rakshasa Alayudha, the mighty-armed Alambusa, maharatha Subahu-these and many other kings have taken up
weapons for my sake. All of them are ready to give up their lives in the battle. I will be stationed amidst them in
the battle, surrounded by my brothers. O tiger among kings! I will fight against all the Parthas, Panchalas, Chedis
and Droupadi's sons in the battle and with Satyaki, Kuntibhoja and rakshasa Ghatotkacha. O great king! In the battle, even a single one amongst these is capable of angrily countering the rush of the advancing Pandaveyas. Need
one say anything about these brave ones when they are united, firm in their enmity against the Pandavas? O Indra
among kings! All of them will fight with the Pandavas and their followers in the battle and slay them. With me,
Karna will single-handedly kill the Pandavas. All these brave kings will then be under my subjugation. Their adviser is the immensely strong Vasudeva. O king! But he has given me word that he will not don armour for their
sake.' O suta! Thus did he often speak in my presence and believing this, I thought that the Pandavas would be
killed in the battle. However, though they were stationed in their midst and strove in the battle, my sons have been
killed. What can this be, other than destiny? The powerful Bhishma was the protector of the world and having
clashed against Shikhandi, was slain, like a king of deer[A lion.] by a jackal. The brahmana Drona was skilled in the use
of all weapons[The text uses both the words astra and shastra. Both means weapons.
Broadly, an astra is hurled, while a shastra is held in the hand.]. He has been slain by the Pandavas in the battle. What can this be, other than destiny? Bhurishrava has been killed in the battle, and so have Somadatta and the great king, Bahlika. What can this be, other than
destiny? Sudakshina has been killed, and Kourava Jalasandha and Shrutayu and Achyutayu. What can this be, other than destiny? Brihadbala has been slain and the immensely strong Magadha. The two from Avanti have been
killed, the lord of Trigarta and many samshaptakas. What can this be, other than destiny? O king[This is a typo. Since Dhritarashtra is speaking, there is no king he can be
addressing.]! Alambusa, the
rakshasa Alayudha and Rishyashringa's son have been killed. What can this be, other than destiny? The narayanas,
the gopalas, invincible in battle, and many thousands of mlecchas have been killed. What can this be, other than
destiny? The brave and immensely strong Shakuni Soubala, skilled with the dice, has been slain, along with his
soldiers. What can this be, other than destiny? Many brave kings and princes, with arms like clubs, have been
slain. What can this be, other than destiny? O Sanjaya! Kshatriyas assembled there from many countries. All of
them have been killed in the battle. What can this be, other than destiny? My sons have been killed and my immensely strong grandsons. So have my friends and brothers. What can this be, other than destiny? There is no
doubt that a man is born with his destiny. The man who has a good destiny is fortunate. O Sanjaya! I do not have a
good destiny. Hence, I have been deprived of my sons. Therefore, in my aged state, I have now come under the
subjugation of my enemies. O lord! I think that the best thing for me now is to resort to the forest. I am without relatives and my kin have been destroyed. I will go to the forest. O Sanjaya! For a person like me, who has been reduced to this state and whose wings have been clipped, there is nothing superior to retiring to the forest. Duryodhana has been slain. Shalya has been killed in the battle. So have Duhshasana, Vishasta and the immensely strong
Vikarna. How can I bear to hear Bhimasena's supreme roars? In the battle, he has single-handedly killed one hundred of my sons. He will repeatedly speak about Duryodhana's death in my presence and tormented by grief and
sorrow, I will not be able to bear those harsh words." The king's relatives had been slain and he was tormented by
grief. He repeatedly lost his senses, overcome by sorrow on account of his sons.

'Dhritarashtra, Ambika's son, lamented for a long time. His sighs were warm and long and he thought about the
defeat. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The king was tormented by great misery. Then he again asked the suta,
Gavalgana's son[Sanjaya was the son of Gavalgana.], to tell him exactly what had transpired. "After Bhishma and Drona had been killed, and on
hearing that the son of a suta had also been brought down, who did those on my side appoint as a commander? In
the battle, whoever is appointed as a commander by those on my side, is slain in a short while by the Pandavas. In
the forefront of the battle, while all of you looked on, Bhishma was killed by Kiriti. Drona was also killed in that
way, while all of you looked on. In that fashion, Karna, the powerful son of a suta, was also killed by Kiriti, while
all of you, and all the kings, looked on. This is exactly what the great-souled Vidura had told me earlier. Because
of Duryodhana's crimes, the subjects would be annihilated. There are some who see well. But there are others who
are so stupid that they cannot see what is in front of them. I was stupid and treated those words accordingly. The
far-sighted Vidura has dharma in his soul and spoke to me. He spoke the truth and his words have now come to
pass. Deluded by destiny, I paid no attention to them earlier. The fruits have now manifested themselves. O Gavalgana's son! Tell me again. When Karna was brought down, who became the leader of our soldiers? Which ratha
advanced against Arjuna and Vasudeva? In the battle, who guarded the right wheel of the king of Madra? When he
wished to fight, who was on his left? Who protected the brave one's rear? O Sanjaya! When all of you were assembled, how were the immensely strong king of Madra and my son killed by the Pandavas in the encounter? Tell me
everything about the great destruction of the Bharatas in detail. How was my son, Duryodhana, slain in the battle?
How were all the Panchalas, along with all their followers, Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi and Droupadi's five sons
killed? How did the Pandavas, the two Satvata warriors[Krishna and Satyaki.], Kripa, Kritavarma and the son of Bharadvaja's son[Ashvatthama. Ashvatthama was Drona's son and Drona was Bharadvaja's son.]
escape? I wish to hear about the battle exactly as it occurred. O Sanjaya! I wish to hear everything. You are skilled
in recounting." '
