'Bhisma said, "O mighty-armed one! O one whose valour is truth! O Yudhishthira! Listen to the four ashramas and
the tasks to be performed by the four varnas. It is said that the conduct of brahmanas is vanaprastha, bhaiksha[Earning a living through begging.],
the great ashrama of garhasthya and the fourth ashrama of brahmacharya. A person belonging to the first three varnas[The text uses a word that translates as twice-born. This is used for brahmanas, as well as for the first three varnas. The context here suggests the first three varnas.] will perform the samskara[There are thirteen samskaras or sacraments. The list varies a bit. But one list is vivaha (marriage), garbhalambhana (conception), pumshavana (engendering a male child), simantonnayana (parting the hair, performed in the
fourth month of pregnancy), jatakarma (birth rites), namakarana (naming), chudakarma (tonsure), annaprashana (first solid food), keshanta (first shaving of the head), upanayana (sacred thread), vidyarambha
(commencement of studies), samavartana (graduation) and antyeshti (funeral rites).] of getting one's hair matted. He will then perform deeds connected with the
sacrificial fire[The sacrificial fire burns in a household. Since the person is leaving for the forest, this probably means the
putting out of the household fire.] and studying the Vedas. He will then control himself and control his senses. Having performed
the tasks required of a householder, he will then leave for vanaprastha, with his wife, or without his wife. He will
study the sacred texts known as the Aranyakas and will become learned about dharma. Having already had offspring, he will hold up his seed and advance towards the end where his soul becomes one with the brahman. O
king! Sages hold up their seed. A learned brahmana may observe these signs and duties right from the
beginning[Without going through the householder stage.]. O lord of the earth! After completing brahmacharya, if a brahmana seeks moksha, his rights to resorting to bhaiksha on this earth are praised. When the sun sets, he will sleep wherever he is. He will have no home
and no fire in it. He will subsist on whatever is available. He will be a controlled sage who has conquered his senses. He will be without any desires and will look upon everything as equal. He will be without pleasures and will be
indifferent towards everything. Such a brahmana, who has reached a state of tranquility, will advance towards the
end where his soul becomes one with the brahman.

'"He will study the Vedas and do everything that he is supposed to do[This is meant for someone who goes through the householder stage.]. He will have offspring and enjoy all
the objects that bring happiness. He will control himself and observe the dharma of garhasthya, which is perceived
to be more difficult than the dharma of ascetics. He will be satisfied with his own wife and approach her when it is
her season. However, he will accept the system of niyoga[Under the niyoga system, in some situations, a man could have a son through his wife, but through another
man.] and will not be deceitful or cunning. He will not eat a
lot. He will be devoted to the gods and grateful. He will be truthful, gentle, non-violent and forgiving. He will be
self-controlled and not be distracted in offering oblations to the gods and the ancestors. He will always give food
to the brahmanas. He will not be jealous and will give to everyone, regardless of the marks they bear[Irrespective of sect or mode of life.]. The master of the household must always be devoted to performing sacrifices. O son! In this connection, the extremely
great maharshis talk about a song that was sung by Narayana. It is full of great purport and full of austerities. I will
recount this to you. Listen attentively. 'It is my view that truthfulness, uprightness, the honouring of guests, dharma, artha and sex with one's wife are pleasures to be pursued for happiness, in this world and in the next.' The
supreme rishis say that the best ashrama for the virtuous is the maintenance of sons and wives and devotion to the
Vedas. If a brahmana is devoted to performing sacrifices and studies properly in the garhasthya stage, he will be
completely cleansed of any taint that results from his having been a householder. He will reap pure fruits in heaven. When he casts aside his body, it is said that his desires become endless. They eternally surround him in every
direction, with eyes, heads and mouths[This is meant for a person who does not control his desires. The desires are seated around him, like servants
attending to a master.].

'"O Yudhishthira! One should eat alone[This is specifically meant for a brahmachari.]. One should meditate alone. One should wander around alone. One
should have a single preceptor and serve him, even if he is smeared with mud and dirt. One must always follow the
rites of a brahmachari. One must always hold that one's initiation[Diksha.] is supreme. One must not question the Vedas
and one must always complete one's tasks. One must always serve one's preceptor and bow down before him. One
must not withdraw from the six tasks[Studying, teaching, performing sacrifices, officiating at sacrifices, giving gifts and receiving gifts.]. However, in every way, one must not be addicted to them either. One
must not take any task to be an entitlement. One must not serve the enemy. O son! This is described to be the
ashrama for brahmacharis."'
