Sanjaya said, "The unassailable maharatha, the king of Madra, was brought down in the battle. Those on your
side, and your sons, generally retreated. They were like merchants whose boats had been shattered, so that they
were without a raft on the fathomless ocean. O great king! When the brave king of Madra was slain by the great-
souled one[Yudhishthira.], they wished to find a shore, but could not reach one. They were frightened and mangled by arrows.
They desired a protector, but were without a protector. They were like deer afflicted by a lion. They were like bulls
with broken horns, or elephants with shattered tusks. They were defeated by Dharma's son and tormented at midday. O king! There was no one who could rally the soldiers, nor any valour among them. When Shalya was killed,
there was no warrior who could resort to his own intelligence. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O lord of the
earth! When Bhishma, Drona and the son of a suta were killed, the warriors on your side suffered from sorrow and
fear. That grief and terror manifested itself again. When maharatha Shalya was killed, all hope of victory was given up. The foremost of brave ones were slain and destroyed, mangled by sharp arrows. O king! When the king of
Madra was slain, the warriors fled. Some of the maharathas resorted to horses, others to elephants, and still others
to chariots. They speedily ascended on these, or fled on foot. There were two thousand elephants, accomplished in
striking. They were like mountains. When Shalya was killed, goaded by goads and toes, they ran away. O best
among the Bharata lineage! In the encounter, those on your side fled in different directions. They were seen to run
away. They sighed and were afflicted by the arrows. On seeing that they were shattered and running away, vanquished and bereft of enthusiasm, the Panchalas and Pandavas attacked them, desiring victory. They created a
whizzing sound with their arrows and roared loudly, like lions. The brave ones blew fiercely on their conch shells.

' "On seeing that the Kourava soldiers were terrified and were running away, the Panchalas and the Pandavas
spoke to each other. 'King Yudhishthira is firm in his devotion to the truth and has vanquished the enemy today.
King Duryodhana has been destroyed today and has lost his glory and prosperity. On hearing that his sons have
been killed, Dhritarashtra, the lord of men, will fall down senseless on the ground and grieve. He will realize today, how capable Kounteya is, among all archers. The evil-minded one will today censure his evil deeds. Today, he
will remember the truthful and beneficial words that were spoken by Kshatta earlier. Let him serve the Parthas today, with different kinds of objects. Let the king know the sorrow that the sons of Pandu had felt. Let the lord of
the earth learn about Krishna's greatness today. Today, let him realize how terrible the twang of Arjuna's bow is in
battle. Today, let him know the terrible strength of the great-souled Bhima, who possesses the strength of all
weapons and the strength of his arms in battle. Duryodhana will be slain in the battle, like the asura Maya by
Shakra[There is no story that tells us that Maya was killed by Indra.]. There is no one else in the world who could have performed the task that the immensely strong Bhima
has. Bhimasena slew Duhshasana. Today, on hearing about the death of the king of Madra, who was extremely difficult for even the gods to withstand, let him know about the eldest Pandava's valour. In the encounter today, he
will know about the great strength of the two sons of Madri, when the brave Soubala and all those from Gandara
are killed. Why should victory not be on the side of those who have a warrior like Dhananjaya, or Satyaki, Bhimasena, Parshata Dhrishtadyumna, Droupadi's five sons, the Pandavas who are Madri's sons, the great archer,
Shikhandi, and King Yudhishthira? Why should victory not be on the side of those who have Krishna Janardana,
the protector of the universe, as their protector, and who have resorted to dharma? There were Bhishma, Drona,
Karna, the king of Madra and hundreds and thousands of other brave kings. Who other than Partha Yudhishthira
was capable of vanquishing them in battle? Hrishikesha, the store of dharma and fame, has always been his protector.' In great delight, these were the words they spoke to each other. O king! Those on your side were routed and
the Srinjayas followed them from the rear. The brave Dhananjaya attacked the army of chariots[Belonging to the Kouravas.] and Madri's sons
and maharatha Satyaki attacked Shakuni.

' "On seeing that all of them were running away, afflicted by their fear of Bhimasena, Duryodhana smiled and
spoke to his charioteer. 'Partha, stationed with the bow in his hand, will not be able to cross me. He is slaying all
the soldiers. Take my horses to him. I will fight and kill Kounteya, or Dhananjaya will kill me. He will not be able
to cross me, like the great ocean against the shoreline. O charioteer! Behold that large army, attacked by the Pandavas. Behold. In every direction, a dust has arisen because of the soldiers. Listen to the many leonine roars. They
are terrible and fearful. O charioteer! Advance slowly there and protect the rear. If I station myself in battle and
counter the Pandus, my energetic army will swiftly return again.' On hearing the words of your son, spoken like
the best of brave ones, the charioteer gently goaded the horses, tied to golden harnesses. There were twenty-one
thousand foot soldiers who were ready to lay down their lives, though they were without elephants, horses and
charioteers. They stationed themselves for the battle. They had come from diverse countries and were attired in
garments of many colours. Desiring great fame, those warriors stationed themselves there. In great delight, they
clashed against each other. There was an extremely great encounter. It was fierce in form and terrible. O king!
Those four kinds of troops, who had come from many countries, countered Bhimasena and Parshata Dhrishtadyumna[There is a contradiction and a possible typo, because we have been told
there were only foot soldiers on the Kourava side. It should perhaps read
that Bhimasena and Dhrishtadyumna countered them with four kinds of
forces.]. In the battle, other foot soldiers attacked Bhima. Desiring to ascend to the world of the brave, they
roared cheerfully and slapped their armpits. Invincible in the battle, they angrily attacked Bhimasena. Those on the
side of the sons of Dhritarashtra did not speak to each other. But they roared. They surrounded Bhima in the battle
and struck him from all sides. O great king! When he was surrounded by that large number of foot soldiers in the
battle, maharatha Pandava did not waver. He remained immobile on his chariot, like Mount Mainaka. He slaughtered them and they angrily attacked him, countering the other warriors who tried to repulse them. Thus attacked,
Bhima became enraged in that battle. He quickly descended from his chariot and stood on the ground. He grasped
a giant club that was decorated with gold. With this, like Yama with a staff in his hand, he began to slay those warriors. With his club, the powerful Bhima brought down twenty-one thousand foot soldiers, who were without chariots, horses or elephants. Bhima, for whom truth was his valour, slew that army of men. He was soon seen, with
Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront. The slain foot soldiers lay down on the ground, their bodies covered with blood.
They were like flowering karnikara trees shattered by a storm. They were adorned with garlands made out of different kinds of flowers. They wore many kinds of earrings. They were of different races and had assembled from
different countries. That large army of foot soldiers was killed there. Flags and standards were scattered around.
They were destroyed and it was beautiful, but fearful and terrible in form.

' "With Yudhishthira at the forefront, all the soldiers and maharathas attacked your great-souled son, Duryodhana. All the great archers on your side retreated. On seeing this, they attacked. But they could not cross your son,
like the abode of makaras against the shoreline. We witnessed your son's extraordinary manliness. Though he was
single-handed, all the united Parthas were incapable of withstanding him. Duryodhana spoke to his own soldiers,
who were mangled with arrows. Though they had made up their minds to run away, they had not gone far. 'I do not
see a country or mountain on earth, where the Pandavas will not follow and kill you. What is the point of running
away? They have only a little bit of their army left and the two Krishnas have been severely wounded. If all of us
take a stand, it is certain that there will be victory. If you run away, the Pandavas will destroy all of us. They will
pursue and kill us. It is better to be stationed in battle. O kshatriyas! All of you listen to me, those who are still assembled here. Yama slays both cowards and brave ones. Which man calls himself a kshatriya and is stupid enough
not to fight? It is better to be stationed before the angry Bhimasena. If we resort to the dharma of kshatriyas and
fight, there will be happiness, even if there is death in the battle. If we win, we will obtain happiness. If we are
slain, we will obtain great fruits in the world hereafter. O Kouravas! There is no greater path towards heaven than
by resorting to the dharma of fighting. If we are killed in battle, we will soon obtain all those revered worlds.' On
hearing these words, the kings applauded them. They returned and attacked the Pandava assassins. On seeing that
they were swiftly attacking, the Parthas, who were strikers, arrayed themselves in battle formation. Desiring victory, those strikers counter-attacked. The valiant Partha attacked on his chariot. He brandished Gandiva bow, famous
in the three worlds. Madri's sons and the immensely strong Satyaki attacked Shakuni. Cheerfully and quickly, they
endeavoured to attack your army." '
