Sanjaya said, "When night was over, King Duryodhana asked all the maharathas on your side to arm themselves.
On hearing the king's command, the army armoured itself. Some quickly yoked the chariots. Others rushed here
and there. The elephants were prepared. The foot soldiers were armoured. Thousands of others spread out coverlets
on the horses. O lord of the earth! Musical instruments were sounded and a large roar arose. This was meant to enthuse the warriors and the soldiers. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the soldiers were seen to be properly
arrayed in the army. They made up their minds to die, rather than retreat. The maharathas made Shalya, the king of
Madra, their commander. They divided the army into divisions and stationed themselves. The time having arrived,
all the soldiers, with Kripa, Kritavarma, Drona's son, Shalya and Soubala, approached your son, together with the
kings who were still alive. They resolved, 'One who fights alone with the Pandavas, or one who abandons a co-
warrior who is fighting single-handedly with the Pandaveyas, will commit a sin equal to the five great sins and all
the minor sins[A great sin is pataka or mahapataka, while a minor sin is upapataka.
While it is agreed that there are five great or major sins, the listing of
those sins varies. But something like killing a brahmana or having intercourse with a preceptor's wife would figure in all such lists.]. We will protect each other and fight in a united way.' The time having arrived, all the maharathas
adopted such a resolution. With the king of Madra at the forefront, they quickly advanced against the enemy. O
king! In that fashion, in the great battle, the Pandavas also arranged their soldiers in a vyuha. Wishing to fight, all
of them advanced against the Kouravas from every side. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! That army[The singular is used and it is not clear which of the two armies is being
referred to.]
made a sound like that of the agitated ocean. With the chariots and the elephants, it assumed a form like that of turbulent waves on an ocean."

'Dhritarashtra asked, "I have heard about the downfall of Drona, Bhishma and Radheya. Tell me now about the
downfall of Shalya and my son. O Sanjaya! How was Shalya slain by Dharmaraja in the battle? And how was my
mighty-armed son, Duryodhana, brought down by Bhima?"

'Sanjaya replied, "There was a destruction of the bodies of men, horses, elephants and chariots. O king! Be patient and listen. I will describe the battle that ensued to you. O king! At that time, hope became powerful among
your sons. O venerable one! This was despite Bhishma, Drona and the son of a suta having been brought down.
They thought that Shalya would kill all the Parthas in the battle. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Resorting to
this hope in their hearts, they were comforted. In the battle, they sought refuge with the maharatha king of Madra.
Your son thought that he had found himself a protector. O king! When Karna was slain, the Parthas roared like lions. At that time, a great fear had overtaken the sons of Dhritarashtra. However, they now sought refuge with the
powerful king of Madra. O great king! Having constructed a vyuha that was auspicious in every way[The word used is sarvatobhadra. Used as an adjective, this does mean
auspicious in every way. But the word can also be interpreted as a noun.
In that case, a sarvatabhadra vyuha would be one symmetrical in every
direction, implying either a circle, or perhaps a square.], the powerful king of Madra attacked the Parthas in the battle. He brandished his colourful bow, which was extremely forceful and capable of withstanding a great burden. The maharatha was on an excellent chariot, yoked to horses from
the Sindhu region. O great king! The furrows created by the ratha's chariot were beautiful to behold. The brave
one, afflicter of enemies, was surrounded by brave rathas. O great king! The valiant one dispelled the fears of your
sons. Armoured and stationed at the head of the vyuha, the king of Madra advanced. He was accompanied by the
brave Madrakas and Karna's invincible sons. Kritavarma, surrounded by the Trigartas, was on the left flank. With
the Shakas and the Yavanas, Goutama[Kripa.] was on the right flank. Surrounded by the Kambojas, Ashvatthama was at
the rear. Protected by the bulls among the Kurus, Duryodhana was in the middle. Soubala was surrounded by a
large army of horses. The gambler's maharatha son advanced with all the soldiers[Shakuni is being described as the gambler. His son is Uluka.]. The Pandavas, great archers
and scorchers of enemies, also arranged their soldiers into a vyuha. O great king! They divided themselves into
three[As described, the divisions amount to more than three. The threefold division probably means troops headed by Bhima, Arjuna and
Yudhishthira.] and attacked your soldiers. In the battle, Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi and maharatha Satyaki quickly
rushed against Shalya's army. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Wishing to kill, King Yudhishthira surrounded
himself by his own troops and attacked Shalya. The great archer Arjuna, the slayer of enemy hordes, powerfully
rushed against Hardikya and large numbers of samshaptakas. O Indra among kings! Wishing to kill the enemy in
the battle, Bhimasena and the maharatha Somakas attacked Goutama. In the battle, maharatha Shakuni and Uluka
were stationed with their forces, and Madri's two sons attacked them, with their soldiers. In that way, tens of thousands of your warriors angrily attacked the Pandavas in the battle, with many different kinds of weapons in their
hands."

'Dhritarashtra asked, "O Sanjaya! The great archers and maharathas, Bhishma, Drona and Karna, were killed. In
the battle, among the Kurus and the Pandavas, there were only a few left. The powerful Parthas again became enraged in the battle. What were the remaining forces on my side, and on the side of the enemy?"

'Sanjaya replied, "O king! The remaining forces on our side, and on that of the enemy, were stationed for battle
again. Listen to who were left in the encounter. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Your side had eleven thousand
rathas, ten thousand and seven hundred elephants and a complete complement of two hundred thousand horses. O
bull among the Bharata lineage! There were also three crores of men. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The
forces of the Pandavas consisted of six thousand rathas, six thousand elephants, ten thousand horses and one crore
of foot soldiers[The Kouravas started the war with roughly 1.5 times the size of the Pan-
dava army. The relative destruction of rathas and elephants was more or
less proportionate on both sides. However, for cavalry and infantry, there
was relatively greater destruction among the Pandavas.]. This is what was left to them in the battle. O bull among the Bharata lineage! These were the
ones who attacked each other. O Indra among kings! We followed the instructions of the king of Madra and divided ourselves. Desiring victory, we advanced against the Pandavas. In that way, the brave Pandavas also wished for
victory in the battle. With the illustrious Panchalas, those tigers among men attacked. O lord! When it was dawn,
thus did those tigers among men rush against each other, wishing to kill each other and rushing forward in strong
waves. A fierce battle commenced and it was terrible in form. Those on your side, and the enemy, wished to kill
each other." '
