Bhishma said, "On hearing these words of their preceptor, the immensely energetic disciples of Vyasa were delighted in their minds and embraced each other. They said, 'The illustrious one spoke beneficial words. We
will firmly bear these in our minds and act in accordance with them.' Cheerful in their minds, they again embraced
each other. Accomplished in the use of words, they again addressed their preceptor. 'O great sage! We wish to descend from this great mountain and depart. O lord! If it pleases you, we wish to divide the Vedas into many parts.'

On hearing the words of his disciples, the lord who was Parashara's son replied in beneficial words that were full
of dharma and artha. 'Go wherever you wish, to earth, or to the world of the gods. However, always be attentive.
Brahma has a lot of deceit[This requires interpretation. Unless carefully studied, the Vedas (the words of Brahma) are capable of being
misunderstood.].' They obtained the permission of their preceptor, who was truthful in his speech.
Circumambulating Vyasa and bowing their heads down before him, they departed. They descended to earth and
performed four sacrifices. They began to officiate at the sacrifices of brahmanas, kings and vaishyas. They were
cheerful and devoted themselves to the householder mode of life, honoured by brahmanas. They were prosperous
and famous in the worlds, engaged in studying and officiating at sacrifices.

'"When his disciples had descended, Vyasa was only accompanied by his son. The intelligent one was silent and
seated alone, engaged in meditation. Narada saw  the extremely ascetic one in that hermitage. At  that time, he
spoke  to  him  in  these  sweet  words  and  syllables.  'O  maharshi!  O  one  who  is  descended  from  Vasishtha's
lineage[Parashara was Vasishtha's grandson.]! The chants of the brahman can no longer be heard. You are silent and seated alone in meditation. What
are you thinking about? Without chants of the brahman, the mountain is no longer beautiful. It is like the moon,
when it is invaded by Upaplava[Upaplava is Rahu's name, when Rahu is in the ascendant. The reference is to a lunar eclipse.] and enveloped in dust and darkness. It is no longer as radiant as it was earlier
and looks like a habitation of the nishadas. Though there are a large number of devarshis here, the sounds of the
Vedas can no longer be heard. The rishis, the gods and the infinitely energetic gandharvas have been deprived of
the sounds of the brahman. It is no longer as resplendent as it used to be.' On hearing Narada's words, Krishna
Dvaipayana replied, 'O maharshi! You are accomplished in the words of the Vedas and I am in agreement with
what you have said. You have indeed said what is appropriate. You know everything. You see everything. You are
curious about everything. Everything that happens in the three worlds is known to you. O brahmana rishi! Therefore, tell me what I can do for you. O brahmana rishi! Instruct me about what I should do now. Separated from my
disciples, my mind has become cheerless.'

'"Narada said, 'The stain of the Vedas is in their not being chanted. The stain of brahmanas is in the non-observance of vows. Carriers[Those who carry or bear burdens. It is not obvious what is meant.] are the stain of the earth. Curiosity is the stain of women. With your intelligent son,
study the Vedas. Let the chants of the brahman protect us from the fear of darkness.'"

'Bhishma continued, "Vyasa was supremely devoted to dharma. On hearing Narada's words, he agreed with
those words. Firm in his vows, he cheerfully began to practise the Vedas. With his son Shuka, he began to chant
the Vedas. Those syllables were accomplished and seemed to fill the worlds. Both of them were learned about all
kinds of dharma. One day, as they were chanting, a turbulent wind arose. That wind seemed to have arisen from
the depths of the ocean. Vyasa instructed his son to refrain from chanting. Having been restrained, Shuka was filled
with curiosity. He asked his father, 'O brahmana! Where has this wind originated? You should tell me everything
about the progress of the wind.' Hearing Shuka's words, Vyasa was greatly astounded. He spoke these words, explaining why this portent meant that the chanting should cease. 'You possess divine sight. Your pure mind has also
been cleansed. You have discarded tamas and rajas and have resorted to sattva. Just as a person sees a reflection in
the mirror, you see the atman in your atman. Basing yourself on your atman, you use your intelligence to think
about the Vedas. Vishnu walks along devayana. There is darkness along pitriyana[Devayana is the path of the gods and pitriyana is the path of the ancestors.]. After death, there are two
paths. One goes to heaven, or one heads downwards. The wind blows on earth and in the firmament. There are seven courses that the wind follows. In due progression, listen to them. O son! The large numbers of gods and the immensely strong Sadhyas gave birth to a son named Samana. He was invincible. Udana was his son. Vyana was his
son. Vyana's son was Apana. Know  that Apana's  son,  Prana, came after that[These five are also the breaths of life in the body.].  Prana was  invincible and the
scorcher of enemies. However, he didn't have any offspring. I will now tell you accurately about their separate
deeds. In all living bodies, these winds have their separate courses. Prana is said to be the breath of life in creatures. The first wind, which follows the first course, is known by the name of Pravaha[Equated with Samana.]. It whirls along the large
masses of clouds that are full of smoke and heat. It is attached to clouds in the sky and manifests itself in the form
of flashes of lightning. The second wind is known as Avaha[Equated with Udana.] and it blows with a loud roar. This is the one that
causes Soma and the other stellar bodies to rise and set. Inside bodies, maharshis speak of it as Udana. There is a
wind that sucks up water from the four oceans. Having sucked it up, this wind gives it to the clouds in the sky.
Having given it to the clouds, it then gives it to Parjanya[The god of rain.]. This is the third wind, which always blows and gives
rise to rain. This has the name of Udvaha[Equated with Vyana.]. There is a wind that causes confusion in the sky and creates separate
clouds for the sake of releasing rain. It roars in the clouds. It brings them together and separates them again. It is
the roar in the rivers. For the sake of preserving creatures, it appears in the form of clouds. In the sky, it bears the
celestial vehicles of the gods. This fourth wind is named Samvaha[Equated with Apana.] and it shatters mountains. There is a fifth and
immensely forceful wind named Vivaha[Equated with Prana.]. It is powerful and dry and shatters the trees that yield juice. When they
are attached to it, clouds are known as Balahaka. When this wind moves, it creates terrible calamities. It roars in
the firmament. The sixth wind is supreme among upright ones and is named Parivaha. It bears the celestial waters
in the firmament and prevents them from overflowing. It supports the sacred waters of the Ganga in the sky and
prevents them from being dislodged. The sun possesses one thousand rays and lights up the earth. However, because it is restrained from afar by this wind, the sun seems to possess a single ray. It is because of this wind that
Soma becomes the store of divine amrita. There is another wind by the name of Paravaha. When the time of death
arrives, this takes away the breath of life from all creatures. Death and Vaivasvata[Yama.] follow its trail. However,
there are also those who use their intelligence to properly see. They are tranquil and always devoted to adhyatma.
They are cheerful in their practice of meditation. They can think of themselves as immortal. Daksha's ten sons and
the thousands of sons of Prajapati encountered its force at the place where the directions end[Here, Prajapati probably means Daksha and thousands probably means offspring generated through the ten
sons.]. Though it is created, those who can subjugate it don't have to return[Paravaha is also responsible for emancipation.]. O son! These Maruts are the extremely wonderful sons of
Aditi[All the gods were descended from Aditi and the sage Kashyapa.]. They blow and go everywhere. They sustain everything, but do not get attached to anything. It is a great
wonder that this supreme among mountains should suddenly be made to tremble because of the blowing of the
wind. Since this blows with great force, it is the wind that results from Vishnu's breath. O son! When it blows suddenly, the entire universe is distressed. Hence, as long as it is blowing, those who know about the brahman do not
chant the name of the brahman. They are also a form of the wind[The chants of the brahman are also a form of the wind.]. It is said that when the brahman is chanted,
the other wind  that blows  suffers  from a fear and a difficulty.' Having spoken  these words,  the lord who  was
Parashara's son instructed his son to chant again, so that the firmament should again be full of the Ganga[Clearly, the wind had stopped blowing.]."'