'Sanjaya said, "When Subhadra's brave son, the leader of rathas, was slain, all of them[The Pandava warriors.] threw away their bows
and freed themselves from their armour and their chariots. They seated themselves around King Yudhishthira.
Their minds were on Subhadra's deceased son and they reflected in misery. Since the maharatha Abhimanyu, his
brother's brave son, had been killed, King Yudhishthira was extremely overcome by grief and lamented. 'To ensure that which would bring me pleasure, he penetrated Drona's array. He shattered and penetrated the vyuha, like
a lion in the midst of cattle. Brave and great archers from the other side encountered him in battle. They were
skilled in the use of weapons and unassailable in battle. Yet, they were shattered and forced to retreat. He clashed
against Duhshasana, our supreme enemy. But in the encounter, he used his arrows to swiftly render him unconscious and forced him to retreat. The brave one crossed the impassable great ocean that was Drona's army. Having
encountered Duhshasana's son, Krishna's son departed for Vaivasvata's[Yama's.] eternal abode. When Subhadra's son
has been killed, how will I cast my eyes on Kounteya Arjuna? How will I glance at the immensely fortunate Subhadra, without her beloved son? What meaningless, disjointed and incoherent words will I speak to Hrishikesha
and Dhananjaya? Addicted to my pleasure and desiring victory, I have performed this unpleasant deed for Subhadra, Keshava and Arjuna. An avaricious person does not understand his sins. Greed follows from delusion.
Those who desire honey do not see the fall that confronts them and I am like that. He should have been honoured
with food, vehicles, beds and ornaments. He was only a child. But we placed him at the forefront of the warriors.
He was a child. He was young. He was not skilled in battle. What good could come from placing him in danger?
He sacrificed himself like a well-trained horse. We will also lie down on the bare ground today, when we are
scorched by Bibhatsu's blazing anger and the misery of his eyes. He is not greedy. He is intelligent. He is modest.
He is forgiving. He is handsome. He is powerful. He possesses a beautiful body. He is brave. He is affectionate. He
is devoted to the truth. Even the gods praise his terrible deeds. The valiant one slaughtered the nivatakavachas and
the kalakeyas, the ones who were the enemies of the great Indra and resided in Hiranyapura. He killed the Poulamas and their followers in the twinkling of an eye[These incidents have been described in Section 35 (Volume 3).]. The lord grants sanctuary even to enemies who seek refuge
with him. He is such a person. And today, we were incapable of protecting his son from danger. The extremely
powerful sons of Dhritarashtra have been overcome by a great fear now. Partha will be enraged at the slaughter of
his son and will destroy the Kouravas. The mean-minded one[Duryodhana.] has mean-minded advisers. He will be distressed
at seeing that his own side is exterminated. Duryodhana will grieve and will no longer remain alive. I do not find
victory pleasant, nor the kingdom, or immortality or residence in the world of the gods, when I see that the son of
the son of the supreme among the gods, with great valour and manliness, has been brought down.'"'
