'Yudhishthira asked, "O king! How can a kingdom be protected? How can a kingdom be won over? O bull among
the Bharata lineage! I wish to understand this well. Please tell me."

'Bhishma replied, "I will tell you everything about how a kingdom should be protected and about how a kingdom can be won over. Listen with single-minded attention. One must appoint a headman for every village, then
one for ten villages, one for twenty, one for one hundred and one for one thousand. The headman protects the village, ascertains any problems the village faces and reports everything about the villagers to the supervisor of ten,
who reports to the supervisor of twenty. The supervisor of twenty reports everything about the conduct of the people who live in the countryside to the supervisor of one hundred villages. The village headman will sustain himself
on whatever food is produced within the village and this will also be used to sustain the supervisor of ten and
twenty. O best of the Bharata lineage! The supervisor of one hundred villages deserves to be honoured well and
will be sustained by giving him a large village that is prosperous and well-populated village. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! The king possesses many such. The supervisor of one thousand has the right to choose the best
suburb[The text uses the word shakhanagara. This literally translates as a
branch town, something that is not quite a town proper.]. He is entitled to enjoy the grain and gold that the countryside produces[There is some subjectivity in deciding who is entitled to this grain and
the gold. The context suggests that we are talking about the supervisor of
one thousand villages and not the king.]. Whatever needs to be done
in a village must be undertaken by the villagers themselves. However, an adviser who knows about dharma must
attentively supervise this. In every town, there must be a supervisor who thinks about its welfare from every aspect. He must have the terrible form of a planet located above the nakshatras and himself circulate everywhere.
He[This 'he' seems to be the supervisor of the town, rather than the king
directly.] must check the sales, purchases, expenses, shops and routes of traders, impose taxes and act so that their
yoga and kshema are ensured. He must glance towards the production and expenses of artisans, to ensure that they
have a good living and the craft flourishes. The taxes must be commensurate.

'"O Yudhishthira! Earlier, kings levied high taxes and low ones. The lord of the earth must act so that there is no
deprivation anywhere. He must glance towards the outcome of a task and then determine taxes. It should never be
such that there is no incentive for the work and the outcome[The sense is that there must be a decent margin of profit, so as to ensure
incentives.]. The king must always glance towards this and impose taxes so that both the king and the producer have a share in the outcome of the work. Because of his greed, he
should not destroy his own foundation and that of others. The king must be benevolent and restrict his inclination
to be avaricious. A king who consumes excessively is known for being hated. If one is hated, how can there be any
benefit? One who is loved obtains happiness. An intelligent king will milk the kingdom like a calf that sucks milk.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If the calf is nurtured, it becomes strong and can sustain hardships. O Yudhishthira! If a calf has drunk too much of milk, it[This is a straight translation, but the reference seems to be more to the
cow than to the calf.] cannot work. A kingdom that has been milked too much is incapable of achieving anything great. A king who tends to the kingdom himself and receives only that which can
sustain him obtains great fruits.

'"In this world, kings then accumulate enough for times of hardship. The kingdom becomes the treasury and the
treasury becomes his residence[In times of hardship, the subjects willingly part with their resources.]. As long as he can, he should show compassion to all those who are close to him
and the residents of the city and the countryside who are dependent on him and seek refuge with him. He must first
crush the external ones and then enjoy happiness from those who are in between[The king must crush those who are external to the kingdom. He can then
enjoy prosperity from those who are in between in the sense of belonging
to the extremities of the kingdom.]. Thus, people have a share in
the happiness and the unhappiness and are not enraged. He must announce the taxes in advance and then repeatedly show himself throughout the kingdom, instilling fear. 'This is the adversity that confronts us. This is the great
fear from the circle of enemies. Like a bamboo that has yielded fruit[Once there is fruit, the bamboo withers.], one cannot contemplate that the danger
will disappear. The enemy has arisen and there are many bandits with him. They wish to invade the kingdom and
seize me. We are faced with this terrible and fearful danger. I need your riches to save ourselves from this. When
the danger is over, I will return all of this to you. However, the enemy will not return anything that it has seized by
force. You may have desired this store of riches for the sake of your sons and wives. But they will kill your wives
and your own selves. I am delighted at your prosperity, but am appealing to you, like to my own sons. Without afflicting the kingdom, I will show you as much of favour as I can. This is a time of disaster and like good bulls, you
must bear the burden. In this time of hardship, you should not act so as to be so enamoured of riches.' A king who
knows about the appropriate time should use such sweet, gentle and civil words. He should grasp the reins himself.

'"For those who live on animal husbandry, he must ascertain the size of their pastures, the expenses of their servants, the dangers they face and their yoga and kshema. For those who live on animal husbandry, taxes must be
imposed after that. If they are ignored, those who live on animal husbandry will be destroyed and begin to dwell in
the forests[They are nomadic and mobile and will therefore leave the kingdom.]. Therefore, having thought about this in advance, one must behave mildly towards them. O Partha!
After glancing towards their requirements, it is a duty to show conciliation, protection, benevolence, stability, a
share in prosperity and good behaviour towards those who live on animal husbandry. There are many fruits that are
always yielded by those who live on animal husbandry. They make the kingdom, trade and agriculture prosper.
Therefore, one who is perceptive will make efforts to act pleasantly towards those who live on animal husbandry.
One should be compassionate and careful and impose taxes that are mild. O son! For those who live on animal
husbandry, the generation of wealth is always extremely easy. O Yudhishthira! There is no other wealth that is its
equal."'
