Janamejaya asked, 'O supreme among brahmanas! When the Parthas were defeated at the gambling match through
deceit by the evil-hearted sons of Dhritarashtra and their advisers and were angered, and also heard the harsh
words uttered by those who created the enmity, what did the Kouravyas, my ancestors and supreme among men,
do? Equal to Shakra in their energy, but having been suddenly dislodged from their riches and confronted with
great misery, how did the Parthas spend their time in the forest? Who followed those who had attained that great
misfortune? What did they eat? How did they conduct themselves? Where did those great-souled ones dwell? O
best among brahmanas! How did twelve years pass in the forest for those great-souled ones who were the destroyers of enemies? How did the princess[Droupadi.], supreme among women, immensely fortunate and always devoted to her
husbands, one who always spoke the truth, endure the terrible misery of living in the forest, though she did not deserve it? O one blessed with the power of austerities! I wish to hear about the characters of those greatly radiant
and energetic ones. O brahmana! Tell me, because my curiosity is great.'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having been defeated at the gamble with dice by the evil-hearted sons of Dhritarashtra
and their advisers, the Pandavas were angered and left Gajasahrya. They emerged through the gate of the city
known as Vardhamana. With Krishna[Droupadi.] and with all their weapons, they headed towards the north. Indrasena[Yudhishthira's charioteer.] and
the other servants, fourteen in number, followed them in swift chariots, accompanied by their wives. On learning
that they were leaving, the citizens were overwhelmed with great grief. They assembled together, and speaking to
each other, fearlessly censured Bhishma, Vidura, Drona and Goutama[Kripacharya, who was descended from Goutama.] repeatedly. "Everything in this lineage is
insecure. We are not secure. Our houses are not secure, when the evil Duryodhana, aided by Soubala, Karna and
Duhshasana, are covetous of the kingdom. When there is no lineage, there is no good conduct and no dharma, how
can there be happiness? Duryodhana hates his superiors. He has abandoned good conduct and his well-wishers. He
is avaricious of riches and insolent. He is mean and his character is reprehensible. Where Duryodhana is king, the
earth cannot remain healthy. Let us all go where the virtuous Pandavas are going. They are great-souled and not
given to wrath. They have control over their senses and enemies. They are modest and the performers of deeds.
Their conduct is in accordance with dharma." Having spoken these words, all together, they followed the
Pandavas.

'With hands joined in salutation, they spoke to the sons of Kunti and the sons of Madri. "O fortunate ones!
Where will you go, leaving us who share in your grief? We will follow you, wherever you are going. We are greatly distressed at learning that you have been defeated by reprehensible enemies, in ways that are not in accordance
with dharma. All of us are anxious. We have always been devoted to your happiness and well-being. We are devoted and attached to you. We have always been engaged in that which brings you pleasure. We do not wish to be
completely destroyed by living in a kingdom that is ruled by a bad king. O bulls among men! Listen. We will tell
you about merits and demerits that result from associating with those who possess good qualities and evil ones.
Garments, water, sesame seeds and the ground become fragrant through association with flowers. It is the same
from association with good qualities. Association with foolish ones gives birth to a net of delusion. Regular association with the righteous gives birth to dharma. Therefore, those who desire equanimity should associate with the
wise, the old, the good, the austere and the righteous. One should serve those who are pure in three ways-learning, birth and deeds. They are superior to the sacred texts. Without performing rites, we will obtain merit by associating with righteous and meritorious ones, just as one obtains demerit by serving evil ones. The sight and touch
of, and conversing and sitting with, evil ones, diminish those who follow dharma and make men unsuccessful. Association with mean ones diminishes the intelligence of men. Association with those who are medium gives birth
to mediocrity and association with the best makes one supreme. There are qualities that are talked about in the
world as giving rise to dharma, kama and artha. These have been mentioned in the Vedas and are sanctioned by the
good and are the sources of conduct in the world. These good qualities exist in you, separately and collectively. We
wish to ensure our welfare and desire to live among those who possess these good qualities." Yudhishthira replied,
"We are fortunate that our subjects, with the brahmanas at the forefront, driven by affection and compassion, credit
us with good qualities that we do not possess. With my brothers, I am requesting you. For the sake of that affection
and compassion, do not act otherwise. Our grandfather Bhishma, the king[Dhritarashtra.], Vidura, our mother and all our well-
wishers are there in Nagasahrya. If you wish to do something for our pleasure, all of you must unite to take care of
them and protect them. They are beside themselves with sorrow and grief. You have assembled from distant
places. Please return now. It is certain that we will meet again. Let your minds be driven by affection for our kin,
whom we leave in your care. Please perform this act, because that is the act that is placed supreme in my heart. If
you do this, you will satisfy me and show me homage." Having been thus advised by Dharmaraja, the subjects
raised a terrible sound of wailing. "Alas! O king!" They were miserable and extremely grief-stricken. Remembering the good qualities of the Parthas, though unwilling, they returned after meeting the Pandavas.

'When the citizens returned, the Pandavas ascended their chariots and went to a large banyan tree named Pra-
mana, situated on the banks of the Jahnavi[Another name for the Ganga.]. The Pandavas reached the banyan tree at the close of the day. The
brave warriors touched the pure water and spent the night there. Stricken with grief, they spent the night there, subsisting only on water. Some brahmanas had followed them out of the love they bore for them, with their disciples
and relatives. Some maintained the fire[The sacrificial fire.], while others did not. Surrounded by those who knew the brahman, the
king[Yudhishthira.] was radiant. At the hour that is both beautiful and terrible[The hour is terrible because demons are most powerful then.], the fires were lit and after chanting the name of
the brahman, conversations continued. In voices that were as soft as those of swans, the foremost among the brahmanas consoled the king, supreme among Kurus, and they spent the entire night.'
