Janamejaya said, 'O one blessed with the power of austerities! All those great-souled Pandavas are my ancestors.
After obtaining the kingdom of Indraprastha, what did those great-souled ones do? Those five rulers of men had a
common wife in Krishna[Droupadi.]. How did their lawful wife Droupadi follow their wishes? How did they, the immensely
fortunate ones, prevent dissension among themselves? How did they behave with one another after they had united
with Krishna? O one blessed with the power of austerities! I wish to hear all this in detail.'

Vaishampayana said, 'With Dhritarashtra's permission, the Pandavas, tigers among men and scorchers of enemies, obtained the kingdom and sported in pleasure with Krishna. Having obtained the kingdom, the immensely
energetic and truthful Yudhishthira ruled over the earth in accordance with dharma[Depending on the context, dharma is translated as law, virtue or religion. None of these captures the exact nuance of dharma holding things up and dharma has therefore been retained in the translation.], together with his brothers.
Having defeated their enemies, the immensely wise sons of Pandu, always devoted to truth and dharma, lived there
in supreme happiness. Seated on extremely expensive royal thrones, those bulls among men performed all the duties towards the citizens.

'When those great-souled ones were thus seated together, devarshi[Divine sage.] Narada[Narada was Brahma's son, born from Brahma's mind. He was a messenger of the gods, travelling back and
forth between the world of men and the world of the gods. He also had a tendency to create dissension and conflict.], who was travelling as he willed,
happened to come there. Yudhishthira offered him his own excellent seat. As is prescribed, the wise Yudhishthira
himself gave him offerings[Arghya, offerings made to those who are revered, including guests.] and once the devarshi was seated, reported the state of the kingdom. The rishi[Sage.] happily accepted the homage and blessing him, asked him to be seated. Thus instructed, King Yudhishthira sat down. He
sent word to Krishna that the illustrious one had arrived. Hearing this, Droupadi carefully purified herself and went
to the place where Narada and the Pandavas were assembled. That follower of dharma, Drupada's daughter, paid
homage at the devarshi's feet and stood before him with joined palms, appropriately covered. The illustrious Narada, supreme among rishis, always truthful and with dharma in his heart, pronounced his blessings on the unblemished princess and then asked her to leave.

'When Krishna had left, the illustrious rishi told the Pandavas, with Yudhishthira at their head, "The immensely
famous daughter of Panchala[Panchala was Drupada's kingdom.] is a single wife to all of you, in accordance with dharma. You must lay down a rule
among yourselves, lest there be dissension. In ancient times, there were two asura[Demon. Asura or demon is used as the antithesis of sura or god.] brothers named Sunda and Upasunda who were famous in the three worlds[Svarga (heaven), prithivi (earth) and patala (the nether world).]. They were always together and were incapable of being killed by
anyone else, except each other. They ruled over the same kingdom. They lived in the same house. They slept on
the same bed. They sat in the same seat. They ate off the same plate. But they killed each other over Tilottama. O
Yudhishthira! Therefore, seek to protect the friendship you have for each other and act so that there is no dissension amongst you."

'Yudhishthira replied, "O great sage! Whose sons were the asuras Sunda and Upasunda? How did the dissension
originate? Why did they kill each other? They killed each other over desire for Tilottama. Whose apsara[Actually, the Pandavas haven't been told that Tilottama was an apsara. An apsara is a celestial maiden. Apsaras are sometimes described as Indra's servants and sometimes as wives of the gandharvas. They are also
dancers and a bit like celestial courtesans.], daughter of the gods, was she? O one blessed with the power of austerities! O Brahmana! We are greatly curious and
wish to hear everything in detail. Please tell us."'
