'Janamejaya said, "O Brahmana! You have mentioned some and others you have not. I wish to hear in detail the
accounts of all the radiant kings. O man of good fortune! Why were these great warriors, the equals of the gods,
born on earth? Tell me in detail."

'Vaishampayana said, "O king! We have heard that what you ask is unknown even to the gods. However, after
paying my respects to Brahma, I shall tell you that. In ancient times, after destroying the Kshatriyas on earth twenty-one times, Jamadagni's son[Parashurama.] went to Mahendra, supreme among mountains, and began to practise austerities.
O king! When the world was thus bereft of Kshatriyas by the one of the Bhrigu lineage, Kshatriya women used to
come to Brahmanas to fill their wombs. O tiger among men! Brahmanas who were rigid in observance of their
vows had intercourse with them during their productive periods, not out of lust, nor when they were not in season.
O king! Thus, thousands of Kshatriya women conceived and gave birth to many Kshatriyas of great power, boys as
well as girls, so that the Kshatriya race might thrive. Thus the Kshatriya race originated from Kshatriya women
through the ascetic Brahmanas.

'"This new generation had long lives and prospered through righteous conduct. The four castes were again established, with Brahmanas at the head. At that time, every man went to his wife only when she was in season, nor
for lust, nor when she was not in season. O bull of the Bharata lineage! All other beings, even those that were not
human, also went to their wives at the right season. Thus they prospered in a righteous way and lived for hundreds
and thousands of years. O ruler of the earth! All subjects faithfully followed dharma and the right rituals. All men
were free from sorrow and disease. O king, you who have the gait of an elephant! Kshatriyas once again governed
the wide earth, with the mountains, forests and groves, with the ocean as the boundary. When the earth was again
governed righteously by the Kshatriyas, the other castes, with Brahmanas at their head, were filled with immense
joy. All the rulers of men were freed from the sins of lust and anger and, punishing righteously those who deserved
to be punished, they protected their subjects. On seeing that the Kshatriyas followed dharma, the one with thousand eyes and performer of a hundred sacrifices[Indra.] poured down sweet rain at the right time and the right place, so
that subjects prospered. O ruler of men! No child died then. No one knew a woman before attaining the right age.
O best of the Bharata lineage! Right up to the shores of the ocean, the earth was full of people who lived for a long
time. Kshatriyas performed great sacrifices in which a lot of alms were given. The Brahmanas studied the Vedas,
the Vedangas and the Upanishads. O king! At that time, no Brahmana sold the knowledge of the brahman. Nor
were the Vedas recited in the hearing of Shudras. The Vaishyas were engaged in farming and tilled the earth well
with cattle, never yoking cows to ploughs and taking care of the lean ones. Men did not milk cows whose calves
were still drinking the froth. No seller sold goods with false scales. O tiger among men! Men thus performed all
acts with their eyes on dharma and followed the righteous path in every way. O ruler of men! Men of all castes followed the respective duties of their own castes. O tiger among men! At that time, there was no decline from the
path of dharma. O bull of the Bharata lineage! Both women and cows gave birth at the right time. Trees bore flowers and fruit in the right seasons. O king! With Krita Yuga having thus arrived successfully at that time, the entire
earth was filled with many beings.

'"O bull of the Bharata lineage and lord of men! When the world was in such a flourishing state, the asuras began to take birth in royal dynasties. Having been often defeated in battle by the gods, the sons of Diti were dislodged from heaven and their prosperity, and began to take birth on earth. O lord of kings! Wishing to attain divinity in the world of men, the powerful demons took birth as different beings-cows, horses, asses, camels, buffaloes,
predatory beasts, elephants and deer. O ruler of the earth! On account of those that were already born and those
that were being born, the earth was no longer capable of supporting herself. Some of Diti and Danu's offspring,
dislodged from heaven, took birth as kings on earth, powerful and insolent. With great valour and strength, they
covered the earth in many forms. Crushing their enemies, they oppressed the earth, right up to the shores of the
ocean. They began to oppress the Brahmanas, the Kshatriyas, the Vaishyas and the Shudras. They persecuted all
other creatures with their power. O king! Terrorizing and killing all the myriad beings, they roamed over the earth
in their hundreds and thousands. Devoid of righteousness and drunk with the power of their valour and strength,
they even regularly persecuted the maharshis in their hermitages.

'"O ruler of the earth! Oppressed by the great asuras, who were swollen because of valour, power and strength,
the earth approached Brahma. O king! At that time, invaded by the strength of the danavas, the wind, the mountain
or the serpent[This is a reference to Shesha naga.] could no longer support the earth. O ruler of the earth! Therefore, the earth, frightened and overburdened, sought refuge with the god who is the grandfather of all beings. She saw the great and eternal god Brahma, the creator of the worlds, seated, surrounded by gods, Brahmanas and maharshis. Gandharvas and apsaras
were engaged in divine tasks, worshipping him through hymns and chants. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In
the presence of all the rulers of the worlds, the earth saluted him and sought refuge, narrating all that had happened. But the reason for the earth's arrival was already known to the omniscient self-creator who dwells high
above and is the source of matter. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He is the creator of the world. How could
he not know what was in the minds of all beings, including the gods and the demons?

'"O great king! The source of all beings, Prajapati, Isha, Shambhu, the lord of the earth, spoke to earth. 'O Vasundhara[The earth.]! So as to accomplish the task for which you have come to me, I will appoint all those who live in heaven.' O king! Having thus addressed the earth, the god Brahma bid her farewell, and then the creator of all beings
commanded the gods. 'So as to free earth from this burden, all of you go and ensure parts of you are born on earth
and seek the conflicts[Conflicts with the demons.] you want.' Then the great lord summoned the hosts of gandharvas and apsaras and spoke
to them these supreme words: 'Go and ensure that parts of you are born on earth in the forms that please you.' On
hearing these words of the foremost among the gods, words that were appropriate and full of meaning, all the gods,
with Shakra[Indra.] at their head, accepted them. Impatient to go to earth and be born there in their respective parts,
they went to Vaikuntha, to Narayana, the wielder of the chakra and the gada[Club.], he who is dressed in yellow, he
who is radiant white, he who destroys the enemies of the gods, he who has the lotus on his navel and he whose
eyes are soft, wide and sloped downwards. For the purification of the earth, Indra told the supreme of beings,
'Please incarnate yourself.' Hari[Vishnu.] replied that thus it would be."'
