'"Brihaspati said, 'O Agni! You are the mouth of all the gods. You carry the oblations. You are inside all beings[The vaishvanara fire is the digestive fire within all beings.]
and roam around like a secret witness. The wise ones have spoken of you as one, and again as three[Agni is described as having been created in heaven, within men and from the water.]. O bearer of
oblations[Hutashana. This is one of the names of Agni, meaning one to whom oblations are made.]! Without you, the universe is instantly destroyed. Having bowed down before you, the brahmanas go to
whatever eternal destinations they have won because of their own deeds, together with their wives and their sons.
You are the bearer of oblations. You are the supreme oblation. You are worshipped at sacrifices. You are the
supreme sacrifice. O bearer of oblations! Having created the three worlds, you become the kindling and cook them
when the time has come[This is a reference to the fire of destruction.]. You gave birth to this entire universe. O Agni! You are the foremost reason for its establishment again. O Agni! You are the source of all water. You are the blazing lightning. The flames that issue
from you burn all beings. Water is based on you. Everything is this entire universe is based on you. O purifying
one! There is nothing in the three worlds that is not known to you. Everyone loves one's womb, so enter the water
without any fear[Agni was created from water, so water is the fire's womb.]. I will make you grow with my eternal brahmana mantras.'"

'Shalya said, "Having been thus praised by the illustrious and supreme sage Brihaspati, the bearer of oblations
spoke these supreme words. 'I tell you truthfully that I will show Shakra to you.' The fire entered the water, with
its oceans and ponds. It went to the lake where Shatakratu was secretly hidden. O bull among the Bharata lineage!
He searched through the lotuses and found Indra of the gods in the middle of a stalk. He returned quickly and told
Brihaspati, 'The lord is hidden inside the stalk of a lotus, in a very tiny form.' With all the gods, rishis and gandharvas, Brihaspati went there and propitiated the slayer of Bala because of his earlier deeds. 'O Shakra! You killed
the great and terrible asura named Namuchi, and Shambara and Bala, both of whom were terrible in valour. O
Shatakratu! Grow and destroy all the enemies. O wielder of the vajra! Arise and see the gods and the rishis who
have come. O great Indra! O lord! You saved the world by killing the danavas. You used the foam of the waters,
strengthened through Vishnu's energy, to slay Vritra earlier. O king of the gods! O lord of the universe! You are
worshipped by all beings. You are the one who should be worshipped. There is no other being in the world who is
your equal. O Shakra! You sustain all the beings. You ensured the greatness of the gods. Save the world of the
gods. O great Indra! Increase in strength.' When he had been thus propitiated, he slowly grew. He assumed his
own form and became endowed with strength. The god asked his preceptor Brihaspati, who was standing before
him, 'What task remains? The great asura who was the son of Tvashtra has been killed and so has the extremely
gigantic Vritra who wished to devour the world[Since Vritra has been separately mentioned, Indra is referring to Trishira too.].' Brihaspati replied, 'The human King Nahusha has obtained
the kingdom of the gods through the energy of the gods and the masses of rishis. He is grievously oppressing all of
us.' Indra asked, 'How did Nahusha obtain the kingdom of the gods, difficult to attain? O Brihaspati! What austerities did he possess and what was his valour?'

'"Brihaspati said, 'The frightened gods wished for a Shakra, after you had given up the position of the great Indra. All the gods, the ancestors, the rishis and the masses of gandharvas then assembled. O Shakra! They went and
told Nahusha, "Be our king and the herdsman of the universe." Nahusha replied, "I do not have the capacity. You
must make me increase through the energy of your austerities." The gods acted in accordance with these words. He
became a king with terrible valour. Having obtained the kingdom of the three worlds, that evil-souled one makes
the ascetics bear him throughout the world. There is poison in his extremely terrible eyesight and it robs the energy. Nahusha must never look at you. All the gods are frightened of Nahusha. They roam in secret, so that he may
not look at them.'"

'Shalya said, "Thus spoke the best of the Angirasa lineage, Brihaspati. At that time, Kubera, guardian of the
world, and the ancient Vaivasvata Yama, and the gods Soma and Varuna also arrived. When they arrived, they told
the great Indra. 'It is extremely fortunate that the son of Tvashtra and Vritra have been slain. It is extremely fortunate that you are hale and unhurt. O Shakra! We see that your enemies have been killed.' Shakra then replied in the
appropriate way and incited them against Nahusha. 'Nahusha, the king of the gods, is terrible in form. Therefore,
you must assist me against him.' They said, 'Nahusha is terrible in form. O god! There is poison in his eyes and we
are frightened of him. O king! O Shakra! If you truly vanquish Nahusha, we should also be entitled to our
share[Share of the sacrificial offerings.].' Indra replied, 'It shall be that way. The lord of the waters[Varuna.], Kubera and Yama will also be instated with
me. Uniting today, we will vanquish the enemy Nahusha, whose eyesight is terrible.' Then the flaming fire told
Shakra, 'Give me a share also and I will render you assistance.' Shakra said, 'You will also get a share. In great
sacrifices, there will be one share for Indra and Agni together[Agni doesn't get a separate share. Instead, one share of the offerings is simultaneously given to Indra and Agni.].' Having thought about this, the illustrious and
great Indra, the chastiser of Paka, made Kubera the lord of all the yakshas and riches, Vaivasvata of the ancestors
and Varuna of the waters. With due honours, Shakra, the granter of boons, gave them these lordships."'
