'Brihadashva said, "Having seen all the agitations of the wise Punyashloka, Keshini quickly returned and reported
it to Damayanti. Damayanti was sad and anxious because of the suspicion that this was Nala. She sent Keshini
again to her mother[With a message.], 'Suspecting him to be Nala, I have examined Bahuka in many ways. But I have doubts on
account of his appearance. I wish to know this for myself. O mother! Let him come to me, or let me go to him,
with or without my father's knowledge.' Thus addressed by the daughter of Vidarbha, the queen related this to
Bhima and the king got to know about his daughter's plan. O bull among the Bharata lineage! With the sanction of
her father and mother, she had Nala brought to where she was staying.

'"On suddenly seeing King Nala, the beautiful one was overcome with a terrible sorrow. O great king! She was
dressed in a red garment. Her hair was matted, dirty and caked with mud. Damayanti spoke these words to Bahuka,
'O Bahuka! Have you ever seen any man, who is said to know about dharma, abandon his sleeping wife in a deserted forest? Who will forsake his beloved and innocent wife, when she is overcome by fatigue? Who but Punyashloka Nala will leave? What offence have I committed towards that lord of the earth? When I was overcome
with sleep, why did he desert me in the wilderness and go away? In earlier times, I had chosen him myself, in the
presence of the gods. She loved him and was devoted to him. She was the mother of his children. How could he
forsake her? He had accepted my hand in front of the fire, following the words of the swans. He had promised to
sustain me. Where has that pledge gone now?' O destroyer of enemies! When Damayanti was saying all this, tears
of sorrow welled up in her eyes and flowed copiously. When Nala saw those tears of sorrow flow copiously from
the black-pupiled and red-tinged eyes, he replied in words of sorrow, 'O timid one! The loss of my kingdom was
not brought about by me. It was brought about by Kali and he made me abandon you. O you who are best in the
observance of dharma! In earlier times, when you were living in the forest and were miserable and sorrowful at my
having lost my garment, you had cursed him. Ever since then, tormented by the curse, Kali has resided in my body.
Burnt with that curse, he has been like kindling with fire in it. Now he has been conquered with my perseverance
and austerities. O beautiful one! There will be an end to our miseries. Freeing me, that evil one has gone away. O
one with the wide hips! It is because of this that I came here, for your sake and for no other reason. O timid one!
But how could a woman like you abandon a husband who loved her and was devoted to her? How could you marry
another? On the king's instructions, messengers have travelled all over the earth, proclaiming that Bhima's daughter will choose a second husband. Like a wanton one, and acting on her own desires, she will choose one who is
her equal. On hearing this, Bhangasvari came here swiftly.' When she heard Nala's lament, Damayanti trembled
and was frightened. She joined her hands in salutation and spoke these words."'
