'Dhritarashtra asked, "The infinitely energetic and invincible one[Drona.], intolerant and angry, penetrated the Srinjayas.
What was the state of your mind then? After the one with an immeasurable soul had spoken to my disobedient son
and had penetrated, how did Partha counter him? When the brave Saindhava and Bhurishrava had been killed, the
greatly energetic and unvanquished one attacked the Panchalas. When the invincible scorcher of enemies penetrated, what did he[Arjuna.] think? What did Duryodhana think was the most appropriate task for the occasion? Who were
the ones who followed that brave granter of boons, supreme among brahmanas? Who were the ones who remained
behind the brave one and fought? Who fought in the front, as he killed the enemies in the battle? I think that all the
Pandavas must have been afflicted with the arrows of Bharadvaja's son. O lord! They must have been like lean
cows trembling in the cold. Having penetrated the Panchalas, how did the great archer, tiger among men and destroyer of enemies, come by his death? All the soldiers and maharathas united and clashed in the night. They were
agitated and crushed by him separately. Who were the intelligent ones who were present then? You have said that
the rathas on my side were killed, driven away, defeated and deprived of their chariots when they engaged in that
encounter and that the Parthas did not run away. O Sanjaya! In the darkness of the night, how could you distinguish between them and the Kurus there?"

'Sanjaya replied, "O king! During that night, there was an extremely terrible battle. During that night, the Pandavas, together with their soldiers, attacked Drona. Using his swift arrows, Drona sent all the Kekayas and Dhrishtadyumna's sons to the world of the dead. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the maharathas who
advanced against him were dispatched to the world of the hereafter. O king! When he crushed them, the powerful
maharatha, King Shibi[The king of Kashi.], angrily attacked Bharadvaja's brave son. On seeing that maharatha from the Pandava
side descend, Drona pierced him with ten arrows that were completely made out of iron. Shibi pierced him back
with thirty sharp arrows. He brought his[Drona's.] charioteer down with a broad-headed arrow and smiled. At this, Drona
killed his horses and the great-souled one's charioteer. He severed his[Shibi's.] head from his body, with the helmet still
on it.

'"Remembering that his father had earlier been killed by Bhimasena[In Section 64 (Volume 5), Bhima killed King Shrutayu of Kalinga.], the son of Kalinga angrily attacked him,
together with the soldiers from Kalinga. He pierced Bhima with five arrows and again pierced him with seven. O
king! He struck Vishoka[Bhima's charioteer.] with three arrows and his standard with one. Vrikodara became extremely angry with
that wrathful and brave one from Kalinga. He leapt from his chariot onto his chariot and killed him with a blow of
his fist. The powerful Pandava killed him with a blow of his fist and all his bones were separated and suddenly fell
down on the ground. Karna and his maharatha brothers[The brothers of the prince of Kalinga.] could not tolerate this. They struck Bhimasena with iron
arrows that were like venomous serpents. Abandoning his own chariot, Bhima went to Dhruva's chariot[Dhruva was another prince from Kalinga.]. With a
blow from his fist, he brought down Dhruva, who had incessantly been striking him. He was thus slain and brought
down by the powerful son of Pandu. O great king! Having killed him, the immensely strong Bhimasena went to
Jayarata's[Another prince from Kalinga.] chariot and repeatedly roared like a lion. Having seized Jayarata by the left hand, he roared. While
Karna was stationed in front, he killed him with a slap of his palm. Karna hurled a golden javelin towards Pandava.
However, Pandu's son laughed and seized it[With his hand.]. The invincible Vrikodara hurled it back towards Karna. While it
was descending through the sky, Shakuni severed it with an arrow that had been soaked in oil.

'"O king! Your sons[Specifically, Durmada and Dushkarna.] advanced towards Bhima's chariot. They enveloped Vrikodara with a mighty shower of
arrows. In that battle, Bhima laughed at Durmada and used his arrows to send his horses and charioteer to Yama's
eternal abode. Durmada ascended Dushkarna's chariot. Those two brothers, the scorchers of enemies, were mounted on the same chariot. In the forefront of that battle, they rushed against Bhima. They were like the lord of the
waters[Varuna.] and Mitra attacking Taraka, supreme among daityas. Your sons, Durmada and Dushkarna, were mounted
on the same chariot and pierced Bhima with arrows. While Karna, Drona's son, Duryodhana, Kripa, Somadatta
and Bahlika looked on, Pandava, the scorcher of enemies, kicked the chariot of the brave Durmada and Dushkarna
and made it sink into the ground. Extremely angry, he struck and crushed those powerful and brave sons of yours,
Dushkarna and Durmada, with his fists and foot. Cries of woe arose among the soldiers. On seeing Bhima, the
kings said, 'The one who has grasped the sons of Dhritarashtra is Rudra in the form of Bhima.' O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Having said this, all the kings fled. They lost their senses and urged their mounts, with no two
of them running away together.

'"At the commencement of the night, a great carnage was caused in the army. The immensely strong Vrikodara,
whose eyes were like a blooming lotus, was worshipped by the bulls among the kings. The powerful one went to
King Yudhishthira and honoured him. The twins, Drupada, Virata, Kekayas and Yudhishthira were supremely delighted. They showed great homage to Vrikodara, just as the gods did to Hara after Andhaka had been killed[Andhaka was a demon killed by Shiva (Hara).].
Your sons, who were like Varuna's sons, were filled with rage. With their great-souled preceptor and with chariots,
infantry and elephants, they violently surrounded Vrikodara from all sides, desiring to fight with him. Everything
was covered in darkness, as dense as the clouds. At the commencement of the night, the great-souled and supreme
kings began to fight an extraordinary and fierce battle that gave rise to great fear and caused delight to wild crows,
wolves and vultures."'
