Vaishampayana said, 'Partha had obtained the supreme bow, the two inexhaustible quivers, the chariot, the flag and
the sabha. He told Yudhishthira, "O king! I have the bow, weapons, arrows, valour, allies, land, fame and strength
and whatever men desire and find difficult to obtain. O supreme among kings! I think we should act so as to extend
our treasury. I wish to make other kings pay us tribute. On an auspicious day, moment and nakshatra, I will set out
to conquer the region protected by Dhanada[Another name for Kubera, the lord of wealth. Since this was to the north, Arjuna's quest for victory was in a
northern direction.]." On hearing Dhananjaya, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira replied in words
that were soft and grave. "O bull among the Bharata lineage! Go, but only after brahmanas have uttered benedictions on you, so that our well-wishers may be delighted and our enemies immersed in grief. O Partha! Your victory
is certain. Your desires will undoubtedly be fulfilled." Having heard this, Partha set out with a large army. He set
out on the divine chariot, performer of extraordinary deeds, given by Agni. In similar fashion, Bhimasena and the
twins, bulls among men, also worshipped Dharmaraja and set out with their armies. The son of the one who vanquished Paka[Paka was a demon vanquished by Indra and Arjuna was Indra's son.] conquered all the regions protected by the lord of wealth-Bhimasena the east, Sahadeva the south
and Nakula, skilled in the use of all weapons, conquered the west. O king! Dharmaraja Yudhishthira remained in
Khandavaprastha.'

Janamejaya said, 'O brahmana! Please tell me in great detail the directions of their conquests, because I never
tire of hearing about the great characters of my ancestors.'

Vaishampayana said, 'The sons of Pritha conquered the earth at the same time. I will first tell you about Dhananjaya's conquest. With great force, the mighty-armed Dhananjaya first conquered the kings of the land of Kuninda[Also known as Kulinda, but difficult to pinpoint.].
After conquering the Anartas[The region around Dvaraka.], Kalakutas and Kunindas, he placed Sumandala, the conqueror of evil, in charge of
the rear of his army. O king! Together with him, Savyasachi, the scorcher of enemies, vanquished the land of
Shakala[Identified with Sialkot.] and King Prativindhya, the king of Shakala. Shakala was one of the seven regions[The word used in the text is dvipa, which not only means island, but also a continent or region of the earth.
The earth was commonly believed to be divided into seven continents.] and there was a tumultuous battle between Arjuna and the armies of the kings of Shakala[Shakala had kings other than Prativindhya too.]. O bull among the Bharata lineage! After
defeating all of them, the mighty archer attacked Pragjyotisha[Assam.]. O lord of the earth! There was a mighty king
named Bhagadatta there and the great-souled Pandava fought a great battle with him. Pragjyotisha was surrounded
by kiratas, chinas[Should be identified with Tibet rather than China proper.] and many other warriors who lived along the shores of the ocean[Presumably, the Bay of Bengal. The text is best translated as 'surrounded'. However, the sense probably is
that these warriors also supported Bhagadatta.]. Having continuously
fought with Dhananjaya for eight days and finding him to be still untiring on the field of battle, the king smilingly
said, "O mighty-armed one! O descendant of the Kuru lineage! O son of the chastiser of Paka! This blazing valour
in battle is appropriate for you. O son[Tone of affection towards a junior, not to be literally interpreted as son.]! I am a friend of Indra of the gods and can withstand Shakra in battle. But
I cannot withstand you in battle. O Pandava! What is it that you want? What can I do for you? O mighty-armed
one! O son! Tell me. I will do what you wish." Arjuna replied, "King Yudhishthira, the son of dharma, is a bull
among the Kurus. I wish that he may become the sovereign and others pay him tribute. You are my father's friend
and have been affectionate towards me too. Therefore, I cannot command you. Please pay it[The tribute.] happily." Bhagadatta said, "O son of Kunti! You are to me the way King Yudhishthira is. I will do all that. What else can I do for
you?"'
