'Sanjaya said, "The spies heard the loud noise the Pandus created on account of their son and reported it.
Jayadratha arose. His heart was senseless with grief and he was oppressed by great misery. It seemed as if he was
immersed in a giant and fathomless ocean of sorrow. Having thought a lot, Saindhava went to the assembly of
kings and lamented in front of all those kings. He was frightened of Abhimanyu's father and was ashamed. He
spoke these words. 'He was born in Pandu's field when Shakra was full of desire[This is a reference to Arjuna. Arjuna was Indra's son, but was born to Kunti, who was Pandu's wife (field).]. That evil-minded one wishes to
send me to Yama's eternal abode. May all of you be fortunate. In an attempt to remain alive, I will now go back to
my own house. O bulls among kshatriyas! Alternatively, resort to your strength to save me. Partha wishes to send
me to the end meant for heroes. Grant me safety from that. Drona, Duryodhana, Kripa, Karna, the lord of Madra,
Bahlika, Duhshasana and the others are capable of saving a person who is afflicted by Yama, not to speak of Phal-
guna alone desiring to injure my limbs. Why should all you assembled lords of the earth not be able to save me?
Having heard the delighted sounds of the Pandaveyas, my fear is great. O lords of the earth! My limbs are overcome by lassitude, like one who is about to die. There is no doubt that the wielder of Gandiva has sworn my death.
That is the reason the Pandavas are roaring in delight, though it is a time for them to sorrow. Even the gods, the
gandharvas, the asuras, the serpents and the rakshasas are incapable of countering him, not to speak of lords of
men. O fortunate ones! O bulls among men! Therefore, give me permission to depart. I wish to disappear, so that
Pandava cannot see me.' Thus did he lament, his senses overcome by fear and anxiety.

'"King Duryodhana regarded his own task as superior to everything else and spoke these words. 'O tiger among
men! Do not be frightened. O bull among men! When you are stationed in the midst of all these brave kshatriyas,
who is going to seek an engagement with you in battle? Other than me, there are Vaikartana Karna, Chitrasena,
Vivimshati, Bhurishrava, Shala, Shalya, the unassailable Vrishasena, Purumitra, Jaya, Bhaja, Sudakshina from
Kamboja, Satyavrata, the mighty-armed Vikarna, Durmukha, Duhshasana, Subahu, the lord of Kalinga with upraised weapons, Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti, Drona, Drona's son and Soubala. O immensely radiant one!
You are yourself brave and the foremost among rathas. O Saindhava! How can you see any fear emanating from
the Pandaveyas? Eleven of my akshouhinis[An akshouhini is a large army and consists of 21,870 chariots, 21,870 elephants, 65,610 horses and 109,350 soldiers on foot.] will be engaged in protecting you and will make endeavours to fight.
O Saindhava! Therefore, do not be scared and banish this fear.' O king! Having been thus assured by your son,
Saindhava, accompanied by Duryodhana, went to Drona that very night. O lord of the earth! He touched Drona's
feet, showed obeisance and sat down. He then asked him the following. 'O illustrious one! In taking aim, striking
from a distance, dexterity and firmness in striking, tell me the difference between me and Phalguna. O preceptor! I
wish to know the exact difference in learning between me and Arjuna. O lord! Tell me truly and accurately.'

'"Drona replied, 'O son[The word used is tata.]! You and Arjuna are equal in what you have learned from your teachers. But because
of yoga and because of the miseries he has faced, Arjuna is superior to you. In the battle, you should never be terrified on Partha's account. O son! You will be protected by me from fear. There is no doubt about that. Even the immortals have no influence over someone who is protected by my arms. I will create a vyuha and Partha will not be
able to cross that vyuha. Therefore, follow your own dharma and fight without any fear. O lord of men! Follow the
path traversed by your fathers and grandfathers. You have studied the Vedas, as is prescribed. You have offered excellent oblations into the fire. You have observed many rites and sacrifices. You should not be frightened because
of death. It is[That is, even if you were to die.] an extremely rare end and cannot be attained by wicked men. It is obtained by those who are immensely fortunate. Through the valour of one's arms, one can win the celestial and supreme worlds. The Kurus,
the Pandavas, the Vrishnis, other men, my son and I are all transient. Think of that. In due order and in due course,
all of us will be slain by powerful time. We will go to the other world, carrying our respective deeds with us. Ascetics obtain worlds after tormenting themselves with austerities. Brave kshatriyas who follow the dharma of kshatriyas also attain those.'"

'Sanjaya said, "O king! Having been thus assured by Bharadvaja's son, Saindhava dismissed all fears of Partha
from his heart and set his mind on the battle."'
