'"Vamadeva said, 'When someone who is strong imposes adharma on those who are weak, those who earn a living
from him[The king's officers.] also follow that kind of conduct. They follow the king, who implemented the wicked practices. With
those insolent men, that kingdom is swiftly destroyed. When men naturally earn a living from such evil conduct,
when he[The king.] faces a difficulty, even his relatives are prepared to tolerate this[That is, they do nothing to mitigate it.]. When the king is naturally violent,
when he acts without any basis, when he does not follow the indications of the sacred texts, he is swiftly destroyed.
The kshatriya who does not follow the conduct that has been followed for a long time, meant both for those who
win and those who lose, deviates from the dharma of kshatriyas. A king who is successful in his attempt to seize an
enemy in battle, and who does not then show respect to the enemy, deviates from the dharma of kshatriyas. The
king must be gracious. If he can, he must show compassion at a time of distress. He will then be loved by the people and not be dislodged from his prosperity. If someone has done an injury, he should repay with something that is
more pleasant. If he acts in this pleasant way, a person who is not liked will soon be loved. He must avoid false
words. He must do what is pleasant, even if he has not been asked. For the sake of desire, anger or hatred, he
should not abandon dharma. He should not avoid answering questions, nor should he be careless in speaking
words. He should not be hasty or malicious. That is how enemies are overcome. He should not be unduly delighted
at an act of kindness, nor should he suffer at something disagreeable. Remembering the welfare of subjects, he
should not be confused if he encounters a difficulty in the pursuit of artha. The lord of the earth who possesses
qualities to always do what is pleasant obtains success in his deeds and prosperity does not desert him. The king
must always favour those who have stopped acting against him and are now favourably disposed, as he must those
who are devoted. That is the conduct of the virtuous.

'"'There are those who are not careless, but attentive. They are wise, extremely devoted and pure. They are capable and faithful. Such people must be employed for important tasks. There are those who may possess good
qualities, but do not find delight in the lord of the earth. They are resentful of the master's prosperity. Such people
should not be employed for tasks. There are those who are stupid and addicted to their senses. They are greedy, ignoble in their conduct and fraudulent. They have failed the tests and are cruel. They are evil in intelligence and do
not possess a great deal of learning. They have squandered away their possessions in drinking, gambling, women
and hunting. If the king employs these in great tasks, prosperity does not stay with him. If the king protects himself
and protects those whom he is supposed to protect, the subjects prosper and it is certain that he attains greatness.
One must use well-wishers who are not recognized to keep an eye on the acts of all the other kings. By this means,
the king is not harmed. When one has injured a strong person, one should not be comforted because that person
lives a long distance away. Following the conduct of hawks, such people swoop down when one is careless. If one
is firm in one's foundation, if one is not evil in one's soul and if one knows about one's strengths, one can attack a
weaker person, but not one who is stronger. Having conquered the earth through valour, having protected the subjects through dharma, having been devoted to dharma, a king can be killed in battle. Everything ends in death.
There is nothing without disease. Therefore, the king must be established in dharma and must protect the subjects
in accordance with dharma. In the course of time, the earth prospers with five things-arrangements for protection,
battle, ruling according to dharma, thinking about counsel and happiness. The king who protects these is supreme
among kings. If a king is always engaged in these, he enjoys the earth. No single person is capable of paying attention to all of these together. That is the reason the king must engage these[The ministers and advisers.] and enjoy the earth for a long period
of time. When a person is generous, ready to share, mild, upright and pure, and does not abandon people, people
do good things to him. When one knows what is best and acts in accordance with that knowledge, when he gives
up his own views, people follow him. When he does not tolerate words about artha and kama because they are
contrary, when he is distracted and listens to contrary views only for a limited period of time, when he does not
comprehend the intelligence of foremost ones who are in front of him, regardless of whether they have been defeated or not been defeated, he deviates from the dharma of kshatriyas. If he abandons his foremost advisers and
makes inferior ones his beloved, he confronts disaster. When he is distressed, he doesn't find succour. When he
disrespects relatives with good qualities because of his hatred, when his soul is not firm, when his anger is firm, his
prosperity doesn't remain close to him and give him delight. When he acts pleasantly so as to bring those with
good qualities under his control, even though they are not close to his heart, his fame is established for a long time.
He must not try to accomplish his objectives at the wrong time. The unpleasant must not trouble him. He should
not be greatly delighted at something pleasant. He must be engaged in tasks that are healthy. "Which men are devoted to the king? Which seek refuge because of fear? Who among them has the taint of actually being neutral?"

Always think of these things. If one is strong, one should never trust those who are weak. If one is careless, they
will descend like bharunda birds. If someone is wicked in his soul, he will censure a master who has all the qualities and is pleasant in speech. Therefore, one should be scared of such people. Yayati, the son of Nahusha, declared
this teaching for kings. "If one is engaged in conquering men, one can slay a supreme enemy."'"'
