Vaishampayana said, 'O Janamejaya! Dhananjaya[Arjuna.] learnt that the lady had gone to Raivataka. Having learnt of
the sanction[Yudhishthira's sanction.] and after obtaining Vasudeva's permission, the bull of the Bharata lineage discussed and got
Krishna's sanction about the course of action. He mounted a golden chariot that had been constructed in the proper
fashion. It was yoked with Sainya and Sugriva[The names of the two horses.] and decorated with nets of small bells. Its roar was like that of a
thundering cloud and it was stocked with every weapon. Its radiance was like the blazing fire and it struck terror in
the hearts of enemies. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Prepared, armoured with a sword and with guards on
his elbows and fingers, he set out as if on a hunt.

'Having worshipped Raivata, king of the mountains, and obtained the blessings of the gods and all the brahmanas, Subhadra circumambulated the mountain and set out for Dvaraka. Kunti's son rushed at her and forced her
onto his chariot. Abducting the sweet-smiling one, that tiger among men set out for his own city on his chariot, as
if on air. On seeing Subhadra thus carried away, all the armed soldiers who were with her raised an alarm and
dashed towards the city of Dvaraka. They arrived at the assembly hall named Sudharma and recounted the story of
Partha's valour to the presiding officer[Presiding officer for want of a better word. Sabha is an assembly hall and the word used in the text is sabha-
pala, meaning controller or presiding officer of the assembly hall.]. On hearing this, the presiding officer sounded his war drum, one that was
ornamented with gold and had a terrible roar. On hearing that sound, the Bhojas, Vrishnis and Andhakas then gave
up their food and drink and came to the assembly hall.

'Those tigers among men, the Vrishni and Andhaka maharathas[A maharatha is in general a mighty warrior. More specifically, a maharatha is skilled in the use of all
weapons and can take on ten thousand warriors single-handedly.] ascended their thrones, decorated with gold,
covered with excellent cushions and adorned with gems and corals, with the radiance of blazing fires, like a hundred fires on their sacrificial altars. When they were seated like an assembly of gods, the presiding officer and his
companions told them about Jishnu's[Jishnu is one of Arjuna's names and means the victorious one.] conduct. On hearing this, the warriors among the Vrishnis, their eyes red
with drinking, were intolerant of Partha and arrogantly stood up. "Quickly yoke the chariots, bring our lances,
fetch the best bows and large armour." Some asked their charioteers to yoke their chariots. Others themselves
fetched their horses, harnessed in gold. As the chariots, armour and flags were brought, there was then a tumultuous uproar from those warriors among men.

'At that time, Vanamali[Vanamali is usually a name for Krishna. But here it means Baladeva or Balarama.], who was as tall as Mount Kailasha, who was intoxicated with wine and was dressed
in blue, spoke, "O you who are not wise! What are you doing when Janardana is quiet? Without knowing what his
thoughts are, why are you roaring in anger? Let the immensely wise one say what he intends to do. Whatever he
proposes should be unhesitatingly done." On hearing Halayudha's[Halayudha is Baladeva's name and means one whose weapon is a plough.] words, which deserved to be accepted, all of
them exclaimed "excellent" and fell silent. Silence having been restored through the wise Baladeva's calm words,
all of them again took their seats in the assembly hall. Then Kamapala[Baladeva's name.] spoke to Vasudeva, the scorcher of enemies. "O Janardana! Why are you seated here and looking on without a word? O Achyuta[Krishna's name, meaning the one without decay.]! It was for your sake
that we honoured Arjuna. It now seems that evil-minded one, the defiler of his lineage, did not deserve the homage
and honour. Will any man who regards himself as having been born in a good lineage break the plate that he has
eaten from? Even if one has wished for such an alliance, should a supplicant who desires happiness have the
courage to act thus, forgetting earlier favours? By insulting us and disregarding Keshava[Krishna's name.], he has forcibly abducted Subhadra, summoning his own death. O Govinda[Krishna's name.]! Like a serpent that has been trodden on, how can I bear
him who has placed his feet on my head? Today, I will alone rid the earth of all Kouravas. I cannot tolerate this
transgression of Arjuna's." At this, all the assembled Bhojas, Vrishnis and Andhakas applauded the thundering
one, whose voice was like the clouds and a war drum.'
