'Narada said, "O Yudhishthira, son of Pritha[Kunti.]! Then together with your brothers, listen to this ancient account,
exactly as it happened. In ancient times, in the great asura Hiranyakashipu's[Hiranyakashipu was the son of Kashyapa and Diti and his son was Prahlada. Vishnu killed him in his
narasimha incarnation.] lineage, there was a powerful and
energetic lord of the daityas[The daityas are the sons of Diti and were demons. Danavas are the sons of Danu and are also demons.
Daitya, danava and asura are usually used synonymously, though the etymology is distinct.] named Nikumba. He had two immensely valorous sons who were terrible in their
prowess. They never ate unless they were together and never went anywhere without each other. They always did
what was pleasurable to the other and always spoke pleasantly to the other. They were similar in behaviour and
conduct; like one divided into two. Similar in action and inclination, they grew up as immensely valorous and
adopted the identical resolution of conquering the three worlds. After consecration, they went to the Vindhya
mountains and practised terrible austerities there. They were exhausted with hunger and thirst. Their hair was matted and they were dressed in the bark of trees. But they continued to perform austerities until they acquired powers.
They covered all their limbs with filth and lived on air. They offered their own flesh into the fire. They stood on the
tips of their toes. Raising their arms and without blinking, they observed their vows for a long period. Heated by
the power of the length of their austerities, an extraordinary incident occurred. The Vindhya began to belch out
smoke.

'"On seeing the terrible power of their austerities, the gods were frightened. The gods created various obstacles
to prevent them from attaining their vows. They repeatedly tempted them with jewels and beautiful women. But
the two of them stood firm against these temptations. Then the gods used the power of Maya[Delusion.] on the two great-
souls, wherein their sisters, mothers, wives and relatives, trembling and frightened, were oppressed by a
rakshasa[Demon.] who chased them with a spear. Their hair and ornaments were dishevelled and their garments fell
loose. The women seemed to be running towards them, exclaiming, 'Save us!' But even this could not break the
vows of the ones who were great in their vows. When they were not shocked or grieved at this, the women and the
demon all vanished.

'"Then Brahma himself appeared before the great asuras. He who is the grandfather of all the worlds asked them
to seek a boon. On seeing the god and grandfather, Sunda and Upasunda, those two brothers who were firm in their
valour, stood before him with their hands joined. Together, they then spoke to the illustrious god. 'O grandfather!
If you are pleased with our austerities, then may we possess the knowledge of delusion and the knowledge of all
weapons. May we be strong and may we have the power to change our form at will. If the illustrious lord is
pleased with us, may we be immortal.' Brahma replied, 'Except for being immortal, everything else will be the
way you wish. Choose a means of death that will make you the equal of the immortals. Since you have performed
these austerities with an objective in mind, the boon of immortality cannot be granted to you. You have undertaken
these austerities with a view to conquering the three worlds. O, lords of the daityas! For this reason, I cannot grant
you the boon that you desire.' Sunda and Upasunda said, 'O, grandfather! Then let us not face any fear from any
being, anything mobile or immobile, any object in the three worlds, other than each other.' The grandfather
replied, 'I can grant you this boon, the way you have wished it. Your deaths will occur the way you have
indicated.' Having then granted them this boon, Brahma then asked them to refrain from austerities and returned to
his world.

'"Having obtained those boons, the two brothers, the lords of the daityas, who could no longer be slain by anyone in the worlds, then returned to their home. On seeing that the great asuras had obtained the boons and were
successful in getting what they desired, all their well-wishers were extremely happy. The two great asuras cut off
their matted locks. They wore crowns and dressed themselves in expensive ornaments and unblemished garments.
Though it was not the right season, they observed the koumudi[Koumuda is the month of Kartika and koumudi is a festival that is observed on the full moon day in Kartika
(sometimes the full moon day in the month of Ashvina), when everything is illuminated.] festival. The lords of the daityas and their well-
wishers happily enjoyed themselves in the festivities. In house after house were heard the words, 'eat', 'feed',
'pleasure', 'sing', 'drink' and 'give'. There were great bouts of drinking. A roar arose from the clapping of hands.
The entire city of the daityas went wild with joy. As the daityas, who could assume any form at will, sported themselves in varied amusements, many years passed. But it seemed like a single day."'
