'Brihadashva said, "O lord of the earth! When King Nala had abandoned Damayanti, he saw a great forest fire in
that deep forest. From the midst of the fire, he heard the voice of a being. It cried again and again, 'Come here,
Nala! Come here, Punyashloka!' Nala replied, 'Do not be afraid,' and entered the centre of the fire[Nala had a boon that a fire would do him no harm.].
He saw the king of the snakes lying there in coils. Trembling, the serpent joined his hands in salutation and told
Nala, 'O king! Know me to a serpent named Karkotaka. O king! I had once captured an innocent brahmarshi who
was extremely great in austerities. O lord of men! He had cursed me in his anger. Because of his curse, I am unable
to move even a step from this place. If you rescue me, I will teach you that which will ensure your welfare. I will
be your friend and there is no serpent who is my equal. I will become very light. Pick me up swiftly and leave.'

Having spoken these words, the lord of the serpents became as small as a thumb. Grasping him, Nala went to a region that was free of flames. He came to an open space that was free of the black-trailed fire.

'"He wished to let the serpent go. But Karkotaka again told him, 'O Nishadha! Walk on and count your steps as
you proceed. O great king! I will ensure your great welfare when you do this.' At that, he began to count and he
was bitten at the tenth step. As soon as he had been bitten, his form instantly changed. On witnessing his deformed
body, Nala stopped, looked at himself and was astounded. The lord of the earth saw that the serpent had assumed
his own form. Then the serpent Karkotaka consoled Nala and said, 'I have brought this change in your form so that
no one may recognize you. O Nala! I have done this so that the person who has injured you with this great distress
will unhappily reside inside you, stung by my venom[This is a reference to Kali, who is inside Nala.]. O great king! As long as he does not free you, he will
hurt from my venom all over his body. He will suffer from misery as long as he lives there. O lord of men! You
were innocent and did not deserve to be harmed. I have protected you from the anger and envy of the one who has
cheated you. O tiger among men! O lord of men! You will no longer face any fear from enemies who have fangs or
from those who have knowledge of the brahman[The sense is not clear. Perhaps it is a reference to those who possessed secret knowledge.]. O king! You will suffer no pain on account of the poison. O
Indra among kings! You will always be victorious in battles. O king! Go from here and say that you are the suta
Bahuka. Go to Rituparna, who is extremely skilled in gambling with dice. O lord of the nishadhas! Leave now for
the beautiful city of Ayodhya. In exchange for your skill with horses, that king[Rituparna was the king of Ayodhya.] will give you the skill with dice.
That prosperous one, descended from the lineage of Ikshvaku, will become your friend. When you have become
skilled with the dice, you will ensure your welfare and prosperity. You will be reunited with your wife. Banish all
sorrow from your mind. I tell you truthfully that you will obtain your kingdom and your children. O lord of men!
When you desire your own form back, recall me in your mind and clad yourself in these garments. On wearing
these garments, you will obtain your own form back.' Having said this, he then gave him two divine garments. O
Kourava! O king! Having thus instructed Nala and given him the garments, the king of serpents disappeared, then
and there."'
