Sanjaya said, "O great king! That extremely terrible battle was about to commence. All the great-
souled Pandavas were seated. O king! On hearing about the clash between his disciples, Rama[Balarama.],
with the mark of the palm tree on his banner and with the plough as his weapon, arrived at the spot
where the encounter was to take place[Both Bhima and Duryodhana had studied under Balarama. Balarama's
weapon was the plough.]. On seeing him, the lords among men were extremely delighted and honoured him. They said, 'O Rama! Behold the skill of your disciples in the encounter.'

On beholding Krishna and Pandava[Bhima.] and Kouravya Duryodhana, stationed with the club in his hand,
Rama said, 'Since I departed, forty-two days have elapsed. I left at the time of Pushya and have returned at the time of Shravana[Though listings of the twenty-seven nakshatras sometimes differ, Pushya
is usually the eighth, while Shravana is usually the twenty-second. Three
days per nakshatra gives that total of forty-two days.]. O Madhava[Krishna.]! I wish to witness this duel with the clubs between
my two disciples.' King Yudhishthira embraced the one who has a plough as his weapon, welcomed
him and in proper fashion, asked about his welfare. The illustrious and great archers, the two Krishnas, were delighted. They joyfully honoured and embraced him. O king! Madri's sons and Droupadi's
five brave sons also honoured Rohini's immensely strong son[Balarama was Rohini's son.] and stood there. O lord of men! The
powerful Bhimasena and your son raised their clubs and honoured the powerful one. The kings repeatedly welcomed and worshipped Rohini's great-souled son and told Rama, 'O mighty-armed one!
Witness this encounter.' The infinitely energetic Rama embraced the Pandavas and the Srinjayas and
asked all the Pandavas about their welfare. He also greeted and asked all the others about their welfare. The great-minded one, who wields the plough, honoured all the kshatriyas back. In accordance
with age, he asked each of them about their welfare. He affectionately embraced Janardana and
Satyaki. Inhaling the fragrance of their heads, he asked about their welfare. O king! In accordance
with the prescribed rites, those two honoured their superior. They were delighted, like Indra, lord of
the gods, and Upendra, honouring Brahma.

' "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Dharma's son spoke to Rohini's son, the scorcher of enemies. 'O Rama! Witness this great battle between the two brothers.' Keshava's mighty-armed elder
brother was resplendent. Honoured by the maharathas, he was supremely delighted and seated himself among them. Amidst those kings, he was clad in blue garments and, with a fair complexion,
looked dazzling. He was like the moon in the firmament, surrounded by a large number of stars. O
king! That tumultuous battle between your two sons commenced and it made the body hair stand up.
It would bring an end to the enmity." '
