Janamejaya said, 'O great-souled and revered one! I wish to hear in detail accounts of the origins and deeds among
men of all creatures who assumed human form-gods, demons, yakshas, rakshasas and other beings.'

Vaishampayana said, 'O Indra among men! I shall tell you everything about those gods who took birth among
men, and about the demons. The bull among the danavas was known as Viprachitti, and as a bull among men, he
was known as Jarasandha. O king! The son of Diti, known as Hiranyakashipu, was known in the world of men as
the mighty Shishupala. Prahlada's younger brother, known as Samhrada, became known as Shalya, chief among
the Bahlikas. O lord over men! Known as Anuhrada, the mighty youngest brother became famous in this world as
Dhrishtaketu. O king! The son of Diti, known as Shibi, became the famous king Druma on earth. O ruler of men!
The best of the asuras, known as Bashkala, was born as the famous Bhagadatta. O king! The five valorous and
swift asuras-Ayahshira, Asvhashira, Ayahshanku, Gaganamurdha and Vegavan-were born on earth in the illustrious lineage of Kekaya and became great kings. The mighty asura who was known as Ketumana, was born on
earth as King Amitouja. The great, fortunate and famous asura, Svarbhanu, became King Ugrasena of terrible
deeds. The great and fortunate asura, known as Ashva, became the valorous and invincible King Ashoka. O king!
O bull among men! His younger brother Ashvapati, son of Diti, was born as King Hardikya. The great and fortunate asura, famous as Vrishaparva, became King Dirghaprajna on earth. Vrishaparva's younger brother, known as
Ajaka, became King Malla on earth. The strong and great asura known as Ashvagriva became King Rochamana on
earth. The wise and illustrious asura known as Sukshma became the famous King Brihanta on earth. Tuhunda,
supreme among asuras, became King Senabindu on earth. The extremely strong asura, known as Isripa, became
King Papajit on earth, and his valour was well known. The great asura known as Ekachakra became known on
earth as Prativindhya. The great asura known as Virupaksha, capable of displaying different modes of fighting, was
known on earth as King Chitravarmana. The supreme danava Hara, the abductor of his enemies, was born as Su-
vastu, a bull among men. The mightily powerful asura, destroyer of enemy armies and known as Ahara, became
famous on earth as King Bahlika. The supreme among asuras, Nichandra, whose face was like the moon, became
famous on earth as the fortunate King Munjakesha. The wise and invincible asura known as Nikumbha became
Devadhipa on earth, the best of kings. Sharabha, the great asura who was a son of Diti, became rajarshi Pourava
among men. The asura who was known as the second Shalabha, became King Prahrada in the land of the Bahlikas
on earth. Chandra, the best of Diti's sons and as handsome as the lord of the stars[The moon.] in the world, became rajarshi
Rishika on earth, supreme among kings. O best of kings! The best of asuras, known as Mritapa, became King
Paschimanupaka on earth. The great and powerful asura known as Gavishtha became King Drumasena on earth.
The fortunate and great asura, famous as Mayura, became Vishva, ruler of the earth. The asura who was his[Mayura's.]
younger brother and was known as Suparna, became King Kalakriti on earth. The supremely powerful among
asuras, known as Chandrahanta, became rajarashi Shunaka on earth, supreme among kings. The great asura known
as Chandravinashana became rajarashi Janaki on earth, supreme among kings. O descendant of the Kuru lineage!
The supreme danava known as Dirghajihva became famous on earth as the ruler of the kingdom of Kashi. The
planet who was born from Simhi and who oppressed the sun and the moon[Rahu.], became famous as Kratha, ruler of
men. It is said that the eldest of the four sons of Anayu, the asura Vikshara, became the powerful King Vasumitra.
The great asura who was Vikshara's second brother, became king of the land of Pamsu. The best of the asuras
known as Balavira became Poundramatsyaka, ruler of men. O king! The great asura known as Vritra became rajarshi Manimana on earth, ruler of men. The asura who was his[Vritra's.] younger brother and was known as Krodhahanta, became the famous King Danda on earth. The asura known as Krodhavardhana became Dandadhara on earth,
ruler of men.

'O ruler of men! The eight sons of the asura Kalaka were all born on earth and became kings who were as powerful as tigers. Out of the eight great kaleya asuras, the eldest became the illustrious King Jayatsena of Magadha.
The illustrious second, equal to Harihaya[Indra.], became King Aparajita on earth. O great king! The third great asura,
immensely powerful and with immense valour, became the king of the nishadas on earth. The fourth is known on
earth as Shrenimana, supreme among rajarshis. The fifth great asura, greatest among them, became King Mahouja
on earth, the tormentor of his foes. The great and wise asura who was the sixth, became Abhiru on earth, best of
rajarshis. From that group[This was the seventh.] came Samundrasena, renowned all over the earth, right up to the shores of the ocean,
for his learning in dharma and artha. O ruler of men! The eighth of the kaleyas and a tormentor of enemies, known
as Brihata, became a righteous king, devoted to the welfare of all beings.

'O ruler of men! From the race of asuras known as krodhavasha[Literally, those who are slaves to anger.], many famous kings were born on earth. I
have mentioned them to you-Nandika, Karnaveshta, Siddhartha, Kitaka, Suvira, Subahu, Mahavira, Bahlika,
Krodha, Vichitya, Surasa, the handsome king Nila, Viradhama, Dantavakra, Durjaya, Rukmi, King Janamejaya, a
tiger among kings, Ashada, Vayuvega, Bhuriteja, Ekalavya, Sumitra, Vatadhana, Gomukha, the kings known as
Karushaka, Kshemadhurti, Shrutayu, Uddhava, Brihatsena, Kshema, Ugratirtha, Kuhara, the king of Kalinga and
Matimana, an Indra among men and known as Ishvara. O descendant of the Kuru lineage and O ruler of the earth!
O great king! In ancient times, these kings were born on earth from the race known as krodhavasha and they had
great strength and performed great deeds. O ruler of men! Devaka, who was as resplendent as the king of the gods,
was born on earth as the chief of the gandharvas.

'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Drona, the son of Bharadvaja, was not born from a womb. He was a part
of the illustrious devarshi Brihaspati. O tiger among kings! He had great energy and great fame and performed
great deeds. He was the best among those who were skilled in the knowledge of all weapons. Those who had
knowledge of the Vedas knew him to be learned in the Vedas, as well as in knowledge of weapons[This is known as Dhanur Veda.]. Drona
brought fame to his lineage and was like Indra in his deeds. O descendant of the Bharata lineage and O ruler of
men! The brave and lotus-eyed Ashvatthama, of great valour, tormentor of enemies and fearful to enemy armies,
was born from three parts of Mahadeva that merged into one-yama[Destruction.], kama[Desire.] and krodha[Anger.]. Through the curse
of Vashishtha and the design of Vasava[Indra.], the eight vasus were born as the sons of Shantanu[The eight vasus, sons of Manu, were reborn on earth as Shantanu's sons.], through Ganga.
The youngest was Bhishma, intelligent, learned in the Vedas, the best of speakers, fearful to enemy armies and the
dispeller of fear among the Kurus. He was supreme among those who had all knowledge, had great energy and
fought with the great-souled Bhargava Rama, son of Jamadagni. O king! The brahmarshi who was known on earth
as Kripa and who was the embodiment of virility, was born from the group of rudras. O king! Know the king and
great warrior[Maharatha.], known in the world as Shakuni, the tormentor of foes, to be Dvapara himself. He, who was known
as Satyaki, truthful to his promises, upholder of the pride of the Vrishni lineage and the tormentor of enemies, was
born from parts of the divine maruts. Rajarshi Drupada, best among those skilled in the usage of all weapons, was
also born in the world of men from the same gods[The maruts.]. O king! Know that Kritavarma, the best of bulls among
Kshatriyas, performer of unparalleled deeds and chief among lords of men and rajarshi Virata, the conqueror of
other kingdoms and scorcher of foes, were also born from the class of maruts.

'Arishta's son, renowned as Hamsa and king of the gandharvas, was born to propagate the Kuru lineage. He was
known as Dhritarashtra, Krishna Dvaipayana's son. He had great energy, long arms and he was a ruler of men with
wisdom in his eyes. Through his mother's fault and the anger of a rishi, he was born blind. Know that he who was
known in the world as Vidura, best among all wise men, was the greatly fortunate son of Atri himself and the best
among all sons. The evil-minded and evil-spirited King Duryodhana, who brought disgrace to the lineage of the
Kurus, was born on earth from Kali's part. O ruler of the earth! He was responsible for destroying everything on
earth, he created discord and was hated by everyone in the world. He fanned enmity and the great fire of destruction that ended all beings. Among men, Pulastya's sons[The rakshasas.] were born as his brothers. Duhshasana onwards, there
were 100 in number, all performer of cruel deeds. Durmukha, Duhsaha and the others, whose names will not be
mentioned. All of them assisted Duryodhana. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They were all sons of Pulastya.

'O king! Know that King Yudhishthira was a part of Dharma, Bhimasena of the god of wind and Arjuna of the
king of the gods. Nakula and Sahadeva, most handsome and enchanting to all beings, were parts of the Ashvins.
He who was known as Suvarcha, the mighty son of Soma, became Arjuna's son Abhimanyu, the performer of
great deeds. Know that maharatha Dhrishtadyumna was born from Agni's part. O king! Know that the male-female
Shikhandi was born from a rakshasa. O bull of the Bharata lineage! Know that Droupadi's five sons were born
from the class of the vishvadevas[A class of gods often described as ten in number. Their mother was Vishva.]. Know that the greatly famous maharatha Karna, who parted with his natural
armour, was born from the celestial sun. From the eternal god of the gods, whose name is Narayana, was born, in
the world of men, the mighty Vasudeva. The immensely powerful Baladeva was a part of the naga Shesha. O king!
Know that Pradyumna, of great energy, was a part of Sanatkumara. O Indra among men! In this way, the parts of
many of other gods were born in Vasudeva's lineage and increased its glory.

'O king! I have already told you about the class of apsaras. As instructed by Vasava, their parts were also born
on earth. O lord of men! Sixteen thousand parts of these goddesses were born in this world as the wives of
Narayana. A part of Shri[Goddess Lakshmi.] herself was born on earth out of love. She was born as a faultless daughter in the house
of Drupada, from the middle of a sacrificial altar. She was neither tall nor short, and had the fragrance of a blue lotus. Her eyes were long, like lotus leaves. Her hips were well formed. Her hair was long and black. She had all the
auspicious marks on her body and she had the shine of lapis lazuli[Vaiduryamani.]. She charmed the minds of five men who
were like Indras. The goddesses Siddhi and Dhriti became the mothers of the five and were known as Kunti and
Madri. Mati[Gandhari.] became the daughter of Subala.

'O king! Thus have I described to you the birth and incarnations of the parts of the gods, asuras, gandharvas and
also rakshasas, those who were born as kings on earth, drunk with the desire to fight and the great souls who were
born in the extensive lineage of the Yadus. Hearing this account of anshavatarana brings wealth, fame, progeny,
long life and victory and should be heard without questioning. On hearing the anshavatarana of devas, gandharvas
and rakshasas, learned men know of creation, preservation and destruction and are unmoved in adversities.'
