Vaishampayana said, 'Disregarding Vichitravirya's son[Dhritarashtra.], who kept reflecting on the Parthas, Karna addressed
Dhritarashtra's son[Duryodhana.] in the assembly of Kouravas, so as to cheer him up. "In earlier times, when Rama found that
I had obtained the brahmastra weapon from him under false pretences, he told me, 'When your end has come, it
will not appear before you[The text doesn't use the word brahmastra. What it says is literally translated as-the weapon with Brahma at
the forefront. However, this does mean brahmastra. Divine weapons were summoned and invoked with the use of
mantras and appeared in personified form. Thus, the curse was that Karna would not be able to remember the use
of the brahmastra. He was cursed because he studied under Parashurama (Rama) under the false pretence of being
a brahmana.].' The maharshi possessed fierce energy and was capable of burning up the entire
earth, along with her oceans. I had committed a grave crime. But even when the maharshi imposed that grave
curse, he did it pleasantly. Because of my servitude and manliness, his mind was gratified by me. I still possess the
weapon and I still have some life left. Therefore, the burden is mine and I am capable of bearing it. Through the
favours of the rishi, I will kill the Panchalas, the Karushas and the Matsyas in an instant. I will kill the Parthas,
with their sons and grandsons. I will give you the worlds I will obtain with my weapons. Let grandfather[Bhishma.], Drona
and all the foremost among kings stay with you. I will go with the best soldiers and kill the Parthas. That is my
burden." While he was saying this, Bhishma responded, "What are you saying? Your intelligence has been numbed
by destiny. O Karna! Do you not know that once the foremost ones have been killed, Dhritarashtra's sons will be
dead? With Krishna as his second, Dhananjaya burnt down Khandava. Hearing about that should be sufficient to
restrain your soul and those of your relatives. The great-souled, illustrious and great Indra, the lord of the thirty
gods, bestowed a spear on you. In battle, you will see it shattered and reduced to ashes, struck down by Keshava's
chakra. There is a radiant arrow with the mouth of a serpent[The serpent Ashvasena survived the conflagration in Khandava. To wreak vengeance on Arjuna, he hid himself
in the tip of an arrow that Karna would use in battle.]. You have always honoured and protected it with
the best of garlands. It will be struck by the arrows of Pandu's sons. O Karna! Together with you, it will be destroyed. O Karna! Vasudeva, who killed Bana and Bhoumya[The demon Bana was the son of Bali. Bana's daughter was Usha, who was in love with Krishna's grandson
Aniruddha. To bring the couple together, Krishna killed Bana. Bhoumya is the demon Naraka's name.], himself protects Kiriti. In tumultuous battles, he
has killed many enemies who are your equal and superior." Karna said, "There is no doubt that the great-souled
lord of the Vrishnis is as you have described him, and even greater. But let me respond to the harsh words that the
grandfather has spoken. Let him listen to the consequences. The grandfather will see me in the assembly hall, but
not in the war. But until he has obtained peace, I will lay down my weapons and all the kings of the earth will not
witness my power[Karna will not fight until Bhishma has fallen.]." The great archer spoke in this way. He left the assembly hall and went to his own residence.
O king! Amidst the Kurus, Bhishma laughed and told Duryodhana, "This son of a suta is sworn to the truth. How
will he now discharge his burden? He will witness battle formations and counter battle formations and heads shattered, as there is a destruction of the world by Bhimasena. 'While Avanti, Kalinga, Jayadratha, Bahlika and Vedidhvaja are stationed, I will kill thousands and tens of thousands of enemy soldiers[Karna's promise.].' When he obtained weapons
from the unblemished and illustrious Rama through deceit, proclaiming himself to be a brahmana, Vaikartana, the
worst of men, destroyed his dharma and his austerities." When Bhishma, Indra among kings, had spoken, and Karna had departed after laying down his weapons, Duryodhana, Vichitravirya's foolish descendant, spoke to Shantanu's son.'
