'The messenger said, "Because of the wedding, King Drupada has prepared a good feast for the bridegroom's party. Come there with Krishna after finishing the daily rituals. Do not delay. These chariots, adorned with golden lotuses and drawn by excellent horses, are worthy of being ridden by those who rule the earth. Ascending on them,
all of you come swiftly to the palace of the king of Panchala."'

Vaishampayana said, 'When he[The messenger.] left, all the bulls among the Kurus[The Pandavas.] sent the priest on ahead of them. Placing
Kunti and Krishna on one chariot, they ascended those great chariots and left. O king! O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! Having heard from the priest the words of Dharmaraja, he[Drupada.] kept ready a large collection of things like
fruits, sanctified garlands, shields, armour, seats, cattle, ropes, and other objects used in agriculture, to determine
the nature of the Kurus[That is, to find out the caste they belonged to.]. The king also completely provided for all objects concerning other crafts and all articles
used in sports-chariots, horses, armour that were shining, great swords, adorned horses and chariots, the best of
bows and the choicest of arrows and spears and lances laced with gold, javelins, catapults and battleaxes, all instruments connected with war. There were beds and seats and many other objects of craftsmanship.

'Taking the righteous Krishna with her, Kunti entered the inner quarters of Drupada. The ladies worshipped the
wife of the king of the Kouravas eagerly. O king! On seeing those chief among men, with eyes like those of powerful bulls, dressed in deerskin for upper garments, with broad shoulders and long arms that were like coiled snakes,
with the gait of lions, the king, the king's advisers, the king's sons and the king's relatives and attendants were then
extremely delighted. Without hesitation or surprise, those warriors then seated themselves on the best of seats, with
separate footstools. One after another, they sat, according to age. Well-dressed male and female servants and
skilled cooks brought all types of food worthy of kings, in plates made of gold and silver.

'Having eaten, those foremost among men were pleased, and relaxed. They examined all the objects that were
laid out and the warriors showed the most interest in the various implements of war. On seeing this, Drupada's
sons, the king himself[Drupada.] and all his chief advisers were delighted at having realized that the sons of Kunti were the
sons and grandsons of kings. They paid their respects.'
