'Bhishma said, "Utathya, the son of Angiras, was supreme among those who knew about the brahman[Utathya was Brihaspati's elder brother.]. He affectionately told Mandhata, the son of Yuvanashva, about the dharma of kshatriyas. O Yudhishthira! I will tell you
completely and in entirety about what Utathya, supreme among those who knew about the brahman, instructed.

'"Utathya said, 'The king exists for the sake of dharma, not for the sake of engaging in kama. O Mandhata!
Know that the king is the protector of the world. If the king acts in accordance with dharma, he advances towards a
state of divinity[He goes to heaven.]. If he follows adharma, he goes to hell. Beings are based on dharma. Dharma is based on the
king. A king who administers this properly is a king who is the lord of the earth. It is said that a king who has
supreme dharma in his soul and is also prosperous, but happens to be wicked, leads to the gods being despised. It
is said that there is no dharma then. When those who follow adharma are seen to be successful in their pursuit of
artha, all the people think that this is auspicious and begin to follow them. When the wicked are not restrained,
dharma is uprooted, great adharma is followed and it is said that there is fear both during the day and the night.
The brahmanas do not follow the Vedas and the vows. When the wicked are not restrained, the brahmanas do not
perform sacrifices. O great king! When the wicked are not restrained in this world, the minds of all men are confused, like those who are about to be slain. Having looked at both the worlds[This world and the next.], the rishis themselves created the
king as an extremely great being, so that there should be dharma[This is a reference to the sages creating Prithu.]. One in whom dharma shines is known as a
king[Virajate means to shine or appear beautiful and rajan is king.]. If dharma disappears in someone, the gods know that person to be a vrishala. O illustrious one! Dharma is
a bull and the gods know one who does away with it as vrishala[Vrishala means a contemptible person. Vrisha means a bull, as well as moral merit. Alam means 'enough'. A
person who says enough of dharma, is a vrishala.]. Therefore, dharma should not be destroyed.
When dharma prospers, all the beings always prosper and when it decays, they decay. Therefore, make dharma
prosper. There is no doubt that dharma flows from the acquisition and preservation of wealth. O Indra among men!
It has been said that one should lay down the boundaries of what should not be done. Svayambhu[Brahma.] created dharma for the power of beings. Therefore, to show favours to subjects, propagate dharma. O tiger among kings! That
is the reason the sacred texts have said that dharma is the best. The bull among men who rules his subjects virtuously is a king. One should abandon desire and anger and follow dharma. O supreme among the Bharata
lineage[This is an inconsistency, because the words are being spoken to Mandhata, not Yudhishthira. Bharata and the
Pandavas are from the lunar dynasty. Mandhata was from the solar dynasty. There was a lesser known Bharata
in the solar dynasty, but he came after Mandhata.]! Dharma is the best task to be followed by a king. The brahmanas are dharma's womb and must always
be revered. O Mandhata! Without any resentment, their desires must always be fulfilled. If one does not act so as
to satisfy their wishes, the king confronts fear. The friends do not increase and become his enemies. Bali, Virochana's son, exhibited resentment towards brahmanas[Bali was an asura and was Virochana's son. He was deprived of the three worlds by Vishnu in his vamana
(dwarf) incarnation. There are no stories to suggest that Bali was wicked or resentful towards brahmanas. Vishnu restored the three worlds to Indra, who had been deprived by Bali.]. Because of this, Shri[Lakshmi, the goddess of prosperity.] was enraged with him and no
longer dwelt with him, going instead to the chastiser of Paka[Indra killed a demon named Paka.]. O lord! He[Bali.] was tormented when he saw Shri
with Purandara, but this was the consequence of his resentment and insolence. O Mandhata! Therefore, know that
you should not enrage prosperity. The sacred texts say that adharma leads to the birth of Shri's son named
Darpa[Insolence.]. O king! It has led to the subjugation of the gods and the asuras many times. O king! Many rajarshis did
not understand this either. Having conquered it, one becomes a king. One who is defeated becomes a slave. Do not
serve insolence and adharma. O Mandhata! If you wish to be established for a long time, follow this. In particular,
do not associate with those who are intoxicated[Probably in the sense of intoxicated with insolence.], careless, infantile and mad. Do not indulge in conduct that is
harmful. In particular, always take efforts to be careful of advisers who have been punished, women, mountains,
uneven terrain, forts, elephants, horses and reptiles. Do not wander around in the night. Abandon excessive pride,
insolence and anger. The king should not indulge in intercourse with unknown women, eunuchs, promiscuous
women, the wives of others and girls[The word used is kanya, meaning girl, as well as virgin. Girl seems to fit better.]. If there is a mixing of varnas, wicked rakshasas are born in the family-
eunuchs, those without limbs, those with thick tongues and idiots. When the king is careless, these and others are
born. Therefore, for the sake of the welfare of the subjects, the king must take special care. When a kshatriya is
careless, great sins result. Adharma is followed and this leads to a mixing of the subjects[Mixing of the varnas.]. It is cold during the
summer and it is not cold during the winter. There is no rain, or there is too much of rain. The subjects are penetrated by disease. Terrible nakshatras and planets are seen to rise. Many omens are seen, signifying the king's destruction. When the king does not protect his subjects, he is himself not protected. The subjects decay and he is
also destroyed. Two seize the possessions of one and many others seize the possessions of two. Virgins are corrupted. These are said to be the sins of the king. Not a single man can say, "This belongs to me." This is what happens
when the king is careless and abandons dharma.'"'
