'Markandeya said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! This is what the hunter who knew about dharma said and
after hearing this, the brahmana again asked about things that are pleasant to the mind. 'O supreme among those
who uphold dharma! It is said that there are five great elements. Please tell me about the exact qualities of these
five.'

'"The hunter answered, 'The earth, the air, the fire, the water and the sky have separate qualities and I will tell
you everything about their qualities. O brahmana! The earth has five qualities, the water has four qualities, the fire
has three qualities and the air and the sky together have three qualities. Sound, touch, form, taste and smell-these
are the five qualities of the earth, which has more qualities than the others. O supreme among brahmanas! O brahmana! O one who is rigid in his vows! Sound, touch, form and taste have been said to be the qualities of the water.
Sound, touch and form are the three qualities of the fire. Sound and touch are the two properties of the air. The sky
only has sound. O brahmana! Together, these fifteen qualities exist in the five elements and they are in all the beings on whom the worlds are established. O brahmana! They do not stand in opposition to one another, they exist
as a combination. But when mobile and immobile objects become unbalanced, then, over a period of time, the soul
moves from one body to another. In due order, they are destroyed. They are created again, in sequence. The five
elements can be seen in everything, mobile and immobile, that this entire universe is encompassed by. Whatever is
created by the senses is known as the manifest. Whatever cannot be grasped by the senses bears the mark of the
unmanifest. Sound and the others grasp an embodied body and make him subjugate to the senses. But if he can
transcend this, he can see the world extended in his soul and his soul extended in the world. He is then capable of
seeing the higher and the lower, and though still attached, can see all beings. He always sees all the elements in all
their states. He is united with the brahman and is never attached to that which is unholy. Delusion that is enveloped
in difficulties is overcome and the root of this is knowledge of the soul. The world is illuminated with intelligence
and the road of knowledge can be seen. The intelligent ones have said that the illustrious one is without a beginning and without an end. He creates himself and does not decay. He is without compare and without manifestation.
O brahmana! Everything that you have asked me has its base in austerities. Everything about heaven and hell is
based on our senses. When restrained, they lead to heaven. When uncontrolled, they lead to hell. This subjugation
of the senses is the key to yoga. This is the root of austerities. It is also the root of hell. By indulging in the senses,
there is no doubt that one reaps sin. But by bringing them under control, one can attain salvation. If one can control
these six[The five organs of sense and the mind.] in one's soul, one never suffers a decline and one is not visited by sin or calamity. One has then conquered one's senses. It has been seen that a man's body is like a chariot. The senses are like horses and the soul
controls them. When these good horses are skilfully controlled, one is self-controlled and happy, like a steady
charioteer. When the six senses are always controlled in the soul, one is like a supreme and steady charioteer,
wielding the reins in one's hand. When the senses are uncontrolled like horses on a road, the charioteer must
steadily rein them in and it is certain that victory will be achieved. But if the mind is overpowered by these senses
running wild, one loses one's intelligence, like a boat tossed on water by the wind. O brahmana! But one who perseveres steadily on these six and is not deluded about outcomes and fruit, concentrating on the insight of learning,
reaps the fruits that are the outcome of his meditation.'"'
