'Shishupala said, "I held in great esteem the immensely strong King Jarasandha. He did not wish to fight with this
one[Krishna.], saying that he was no more than a servant. Who will regard as praiseworthy the act of killing Jarasandha,
undertaken by Keshava, together with Bhimasena and Arjuna? Entering through a way that was no gate and disguised as a brahmana, Krishna saw the influence of the wise Jarasandha. Since he knew the nature of the brahman
and was himself devoted to dharma, he first offered the evil one water to wash his feet, but it was refused. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Jarasandha invited Krishna, Bhima and Dhananjaya to partake of food, but Krishna
acted in a contrary way[That is, refused the food.]. You fool! If this one is the lord of the universe, as you think him to be, why did he not
consider himself to be a brahmana? What is amazing to me is that though you make the Pandavas veer away from
the path of the truth, yet they regard you as a righteous one. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Or perhaps it is
not strange that you, old and like a woman, are regarded as their guide in all matters."'

Vaishampayana said, 'When he heard these long words, harsh and spoken harshly, the powerful Bhimasena,
supreme among those who are strong, was angered. His eyes were naturally large, like lotuses. Because of anger,
they became dilated and copper-red. All the kings saw him knit his brows in three furrows, like the three-coursed
Ganga[The Ganga flows in heaven, earth and the nether regions.] on the three peaks of his forehead. They saw his face, teeth gnashed in anger, like destiny about to consume all beings at the end of a yuga. The strong-minded one was about to swiftly arise. But the strong-armed
Bhishma restrained him, like Ishvara[The great god. In this context, Shiva.] checking Mahasena[Another name for Kartikeya.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Bhima was
soon pacified by Bhishma. The teacher calmed his anger with various words. That destroyer of enemies could not
transgress Bhishma's words, like the ocean never crosses the shoreline, even though it is swollen after the rains. O
lord of men! Though Bhimasena was angry with Shishupala, that brave one[Shishupala.] did not tremble and remained steadfast in his manliness. Though that destroyer of enemies[Bhima.] kept jumping up, he[Shishupala.] did not even think about him, like
a lion ignoring small deer. On seeing Bhimasena, terrible in valour, thus angered, the powerful king of Chedi uttered words of jest, "O Bhishma! Let him go. Let all these lords of men watch him consumed by my power, like
moths before a flame." On hearing these words of the king of Chedi, Bhishma, supreme among those of the Kuru
lineage and supreme among those who are intelligent, spoke these words to Bhima.'
