'The illustrious god said, "You were Nara in an earlier body, the companion of Narayana. You spent many
ayuta[An ayuta is ten thousand.] years in fearful austerities in Badari[The hermitage at Badari or Badarika, one of the sources of the Ganga.]. There is supreme energy in you, like that in Vishnu, supreme
among men. The universe is held up through the energy of the two of you, foremost among men. O lord! At the
time of Shakra's consecration, you and Krishna oppressed the danavas and you took up the great bow that thunders
like clouds. O Partha! This Gandiva is fit for your hands. O supreme among men! It was that which I snatched
from you, using my powers of maya. O Partha! These two quivers will again be inexhaustible, as they used to be
for you. O Partha! I am pleased with you. Truth is your valour. O bull among men! Accept a boon from me. What
is it that you desire? You are the one who shows respect. There is no one on earth who is your equal. Nor is there
anyone in heaven. O conqueror of enemies! The kshatriyas find their chief in you."

'Arjuna replied, "O illustrious god! O Vrishadhvaja[Vrishadhvaja and Vrishabhadhvaja mean the same.]! O lord! If you wish to grant me that which I desire, I
wish for the terrible and divine weapon known as pashupata[Pashupati is Shiva's name.]. It is known as brahmashira. It is fearful and is
terrible in prowess. When the terrible end of a yuga approaches, it destroys the entire world. Through this weapon,
I can burn down in battle danavas, rakshasas, spirits[The word bhuta means beings, but it also means evil spirits.], pishachas, gandharvas and pannagas[Nagas and pannagas are serpents. They are different from snakes, because they possess extraordinary powers, including that of assuming any form at will.]. When unleashed
with mantras, it releases thousands of spears, fearful clubs and arrows that have virulent poison in them. With it, I
will fight in battle Bhishma, Drona, Kripa and the son of the suta[Karna is the son of the suta.], who always speaks very harshly. O illustrious god! O destroyer of Bhaga's eyes! This is my first wish. Through your grace, let me be empowered in my
pursuit."

'The illustrious god said, "O Pandava! I will give you the great pashupata weapon, dear to me. You will be capable of bearing, releasing and withdrawing it. The great Indra, Yama, the king of the yakshas[Kubera.], Varuna and Vayu
do not know it. How can it be known to humans? O Partha! But it must not be suddenly released at any man. If it is
released at someone who lacks in energy, it will destroy the entire universe. There is no one in the three worlds,
mobile or immobile, who cannot be killed by it. It can be released through thought, eyes, words or the bow[These divine weapons were based on mantras, the physical form was immaterial.]."'
Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing this, Partha swiftly purified and composed himself. He went to the lord of the
universe, who said, "Learn." Then he taught the best of the Pandavas the mysteries of this weapon, including its
withdrawal. It was like the embodied form of death. From then on, it waited on the great-souled one[Arjuna.], as it did
on Tryaksha[Tryaksha is Shiva's name, meaning the one with three (tri) eyes (aksha).], the husband of Uma. Arjuna accepted it with a delighted heart. At that, the entire earth, with its
mountains, forests, trees, oceans, regions of groves, villages, cities and towns, began to tremble. When the moment
came, the sounds of thousands of conch shells, drums and kettledrums were heard. A great whirlwind[The word used is nirghata, which also means earthquake.] occurred.
The gods and the demons saw the embodied form of the blazing and terrible weapon by the side of the immensely
energetic Pandava. Tryambaka[Shiva, the one with three eyes.] touched the immensely energetic Phalguna and everything that was impure in
his body, was immediately destroyed. Then Tryambaka gave Arjuna permission to leave and go to heaven. Lowering his head in obeisance, Partha joined his hands in salutation and looked at the god. Then, the lord of the residents of heaven, the immensely wise Girisha, Shiva the husband of Uma, gave that supreme of men the great bow
known as Gandiva, the destroyer of demons and pishachas. In front of the eyes of that supreme of men[Arjuna.], the
great god then rose up into the sky, accompanied by Uma, leaving that supreme of mountains, with its white peaks,
sides and caverns and frequented by birds and maharshis.'
