'Vasudeva said, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! After having uttered these words to the Yadavas, Rukmini's
son[Pradyumna. Both Pradyumna and Charudeshna were Rukmini's sons. They were brothers.] ascended his golden chariot. It was yoked to tawny horses and the ornamented flag had a makara[Makara can be translated as crocodile, but that isn't quite accurate. A makara is a mythical sea animal, bearing some resemblance to both a crocodile and a shark.], with its
jaws gaping open. The mighty-armed one, best among archers, dashed at the enemy on swift horses that seemed to
fly through the sky. The great bow roared when he strung it and the warrior held quivers and a sword, with his
arms and fingers clad in armour. With lightning speed, he switched the bow from one hand to another and the
daityas and all the residents of Soubha were confused. As he shot an arrow and fixed another one to his bow repeatedly, it was impossible to see a gap and the enemies were continuously killed in battle. The colour of his face
did not change. There was no trembling of his body. All the worlds heard the sound of his wonderful valour, as he
roared like a lion. The aquatic animal[The makara.] that oppressed all fishes was on his golden flag-post, its jaws wide open,
adorning the chariot. It created terror among the chief soldiers in Shalva's army. O king! Pradyumna, the destroyer
of enemies, then rushed with great speed and attacked Shalva, who also wished to fight with him.

'"O extender of the Kuru lineage! Attacked by the brave Pradyumna in that great battle, Shalva was enraged and
could not bear it. He was mad with anger and began to do battle with Pradyumna. Shalva, the destroyer of enemy
cities, descended from the chariot that could go anywhere at will. A terrible battle then raged between Shalva and
the warrior from the Vrishnis. All the worlds watched it, like that between Bali and Vasava[Indra. This was the Bali who was humbled by Vishnu in his vamana incarnation.]. That brave one[Shalva.]
knew the use of maya and ascended a chariot that was ornamented with gold. It had a flag, a flagstaff and an undercarriage and was stocked with quivers. O Kouravya! O lord! Ascending that supreme chariot, that illustrious and
immensely strong one, unleashed arrows at Pradyumna. At that, Pradyumna also used the speed of his arms to bewilder Shalva with a shower of arrows. Thus attacked in battle, the king of Soubha could not bear it. He discharged
arrows at my son that were like blazing fire. O Indra among kings! Having been pierced by Shalva's arrows, Ruk-
mini's son swiftly unleashed an arrow that could seek out the heart in battle. This arrow shot by my son pierced his
armour. The feathered shaft pierced his heart and he fell down unconscious. When the brave King Shalva fell
down unconscious, all the lords among the danavas ran away, cleaving the earth[That is, beneath their running feet.]. O lord of the earth! O king!
Lamentations arose in Shalva's army, on seeing the lord of Soubha felled and deprived of his senses.

'"O Kouravya! But he regained his consciousness and arose. Then that immensely strong one suddenly unleashed an arrow at Pradyumna. Though the mighty-armed Pradyumna was pierced, he remained steady in battle.
But he was struck around his collarbone and the brave one sank down on his chariot. O great king! Thus piercing
Rukmini's son[The word used is nandana.], Shalva uttered a loud roar like a lion and it resounded through the earth. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Thereupon, when my son was senseless, he swiftly again shot many arrows at him, which were
difficult to repulse. O best of the Kouravas! Struck by these many arrows and deprived of his senses, Pradyumna
was helpless in the field of battle."'
