Janamejaya asked, 'O supreme among brahmanas! You have told me about the powers of Sarasvati. O brahmana!
You should tell me about Kumara's consecration. O supreme among eloquent ones! Tell me about the time and
the place where it happened. O illustrious one! How was the lord consecrated according to the proper rites? How
did Skanda create great carnage among the daityas? Tell me everything about this. I have great curiosity.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'Your curiosity is characteristic of someone belonging to the Kuru lineage. O Janamejaya! My words will generate delight in you. O lord of men! I will tell you about that wonderful account, about the
great-souled Kumara's consecration and powers. Listen. In earlier times, Maheshvara's seed fell down into fire[Skanna means something that has trickled down or fallen. The word Skanda is derived from that. The
story is left implicit. Shiva was interrupted by the god of love. The seed fell down and was conveyed by
Agni.].
The illustrious one who devours everything[Meaning Agni.] was incapable of destroying that eternal seed. Instead, because he
was bearing that energetic seed, the one who bears oblations became energetic and radiant. On Lord Brahma's instructions, he went to the Ganga and flung that divine seed, as energetic as the sun, there. However, Ganga was
also not capable of bearing that seed and flung it on the beautiful slopes of the Himalayas, worshipped by the immortals. Agni's son[Because Agni had borne the seed.] began to grow there, pervading the worlds. The Krittikas saw the blazing womb there[Krittika (Pleiades) is the third of the twenty-seven nakshatras. Krittika is actually a star cluster, not a
single star. There are believed to be six Krittikas in that cluster.].
The lord, the great-souled son of the fire god, was lying down in a clump of reeds. Desiring a son, all of them exclaimed, "This is mine." Discerning the sentiments of the mothers, the illustrious lord assumed six mouths and
drank milk from all their breasts. Seeing the powers of the child, the divine goddesses, the Krittikas, celestial in
their forms, were filled with great wonder. O supreme among the Kuru lineage! Since Ganga had cast the illustrious one on the peak of the mountain, that mountain is beautiful and golden everywhere. The child began to grow
and made the earth beautiful. It is because of this that all the mountains began to yield gold. The immensely valorous Kumara is known by the name of Kartikeya[After the Krittikas.]. Before this, with his great powers of yoga, he had been
known by the name of Gangeya. The god possessed prowess and austerities. O Indra among kings! He began to
grow and was as handsome as the moon. Surrounded by prosperity, he lay down on that divine and golden clump
of reeds. As he lay down there, he was praised by the gandharvas and the sages. Thousands of celestial maidens
danced around him. They were beautiful and skilled in dancing. They played on divine musical instruments and
praised him. The celestial river Ganga, supreme among rivers, also worshipped him. The earth, assuming the most
beautiful of forms, bore him. Brihaspati performed the rites, including those connected with birth. The four Vedas
presented themselves before him, hands joined in salutation. The four branches of dhanurveda and collections of
weapons, not just arrows, presented themselves before him.

'The immensely valorous one saw that Uma's consort, the lord of the gods, was seated, surrounded by a large
number of bhutas[They had come to see Skanda.]. The daughter of the mountains was with him[Uma's consort is Shiva. The daughter of the mountains is Uma or Parvati. The bhutas are demons, Shiva's followers.]. Those large numbers of bhutas were without bodies and were extremely wonderful to behold. They were hideous, with distorted bodies. Their ornaments
and standards were ugly. Their faces were like tigers, lions and bears. Some of them had faces like cats and
makaras. There were those with faces like cats[Cats have already been mentioned. The text uses the word vrishadamsha. Vrisha means rat or mouse.
Therefore, vrishadamsha is something that bites rats/mice, hence it means cat. However, the word can be
used for any animal that has strong teeth.]. There were others with faces like elephants and camels. Some
had faces like owls. Others looked like vultures and jackals. Others had faces like curlews, pigeons and herons.
Others had bodies like those of dogs, porcupines, lizards and mules. They assumed all these kinds of forms. Some
were like mountains, others were like oceans. Some held chakras, maces and other weapons. Some looked like
large masses of collyrium. Others possessed the complexion of white mountains. O lord of the earth! The seven
matrikas and their followers were also there[The matrikas are mother goddesses, originally identified with the Krittikas. They have both malign and
benign aspects, vis-à-vis infants. Usually, the matrikas are said to be seven-Brahmani, Vaishnavi, Maheshvari, Indrani, Koumari, Varahi and Chamundi (or Narasimhi).]. So were the Sadhyas, the Vishvadevas, the Maruts, the Vasus and
the ancestors. The Rudras, the Adityas, the Siddhas, the serpents, the danavas, the birds, the illustrious and self-
creating Brahma and his sons[The sages who were created through Brahma's mental powers.], Vishnu and Shakra went there, desiring to see the supreme and undecaying Kumara. There were the best of gods and gandharvas, with Narada at their head. There were the devarshis and the
Siddhas, with Brihaspati at their head. There were the lords of creation, supreme among the gods. Aryama[The sun god.] and
all the worlds went there. Though he was yet a child, the illustrious one possessed great powers of yoga. He advanced towards the lord of the gods[Shiva.], who wielded the trident and pinaka in his hands. On seeing him advance,
Shiva, the daughter of the mountain, Ganga and Agni simultaneously wondered, "Whom will the child approach
and show honours to first? He will come to me[All four had some claim to parentage. There are varying stories about Kartikeya's birth. In some of
these, Parvati is the mother.]." All of them thought in this way. Discerning their thoughts, he
simultaneously divided himself into four bodies. The illustrious lord assumed these four bodies in an instant-
Skanda, Shakha, Vishakha and Naigamesha as the last. Thus did the illustrious lord divide himself into four parts.
Skanda, extraordinary in form, went to where Rudra was. Vishakha went to the goddess who was the daughter of
the mountain. Shakha, the illustrious one's form as the wind, went to Vibhavasu[Agni.]. Naigamesha, Kumara's form
that was as radiant as the fire, went to Ganga. All the four blazing bodies were similar in appearance. They advanced forward and it was wonderful. On beholding this great and wonderful sight, which made the body hair
stand up, great sounds of lamentation arose among the gods, the danavas and the rakshasas. Rudra, the
goddess[Parvati.], Agni and Ganga-all of them bowed down before the grandfather, the lord of the worlds. O bull
among kings! O king! Having bowed down in different ways and to ensure Kartikeya's welfare, they said, "O illustrious one! O lord of the gods! For the sake of our pleasure, grant this child some kind of sovereignty that is appropriate for him." The illustrious and wise one, grandfather of all the worlds, thought about this. What could be
given to him? All the riches had already been given away to the gods, the gandharvas, the rakshasas, the bhutas,
the yakshas, the birds, the serpents and great-souled ones without any bodies. The immensely intelligent one
thought about what prosperity might be bestowed on him. With the welfare of the gods in mind, he thought for an
instant. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He then made him the general of all the beings. The grandfather of
all the beings instructed all the gods, and the lords among them, to serve him. Together with Kumara, all the gods,
led by Brahma, went to the king of the mountains, so as to consecrate him there. That sacred spot was on the
slopes of the Himalayas, where the goddess Sarasvati, best among rivers, flowed. It is famous in the three worlds
by the name of Samantapanchaka. That sacred bank of the Sarasvati possesses all the qualities. Cheerful in their
minds, all the gods and the gandharvas seated themselves there.'
