'Sanjaya said, "These words spoken by your son were like stakes and Bhishma was pierced by them. He was overcome by great grief, but did not say anything unpleasant in reply. Overcome by grief and anger, he thought for a
very long time. Wounded by these stakes, he sighed like a serpent. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The
supreme among those who know the worlds then raised his eyes. He seemed to burn the worlds, with the gods, the
asuras and the gandharvas, with his anger. However, he spoke these conciliatory words to your son. 'O Duryodhana! Why are you piercing me with words that are like stakes? To the best of my strength, I have always sought to
do that which brings you pleasure. Desiring your welfare, I am ready to give up my life in this battle. When the
brave Pandava gratified Agni in Khandava, he defeated even Shakra in battle. That is proof[That the Pandavas are invincible.]. O mighty-armed
one! When the gandharvas captured you, Pandu's energetic son freed you. That is proof. O lord! At that time, all
your brave brothers ran away. And so did Radheya, the son of a suta. That is proof. In Virata's city, he singly attacked all of us together. That is proof. He was angry and defeated both me and Drona in battle. He robbed the garments of Karna, Drona's son and the great maharatha Kripa. That is proof. Partha vanquished the Nivatakavachas
in battle, whom even Vasava found to be invincible in an encounter. That is proof. Who is capable of vanquishing
Pandava, who prides himself in an encounter, in battle? O Suyodhana! Because of your delusion, you do not know
what should be said and what should not be said. A man who is about to die thinks that all trees are made of gold.
O Gandhari's son! In that fashion, you are looking at everything in a contrary way. You have yourself created this
great enmity with the Pandavas and the Srinjayas. Fight with them in the battle now and show us your manliness.
O tiger among men! I will myself kill all the assembled Somakas and the Panchalas, avoiding Shikhandi. Slain by
them in battle, I will go to Yama's abode. Or, I will kill them in battle and give you pleasure. Shikhandi was earlier
born as a girl in the king's abode. By virtue of a boon, she was born as a man[The story of Amba becoming Shikhandi has been recounted in Section 60.]. This is that lady Shikhandi. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! I will not kill him, even if it means giving up my own life. Shikhandi is the one
whom the creator made a lady earlier. O Gandhari's son! Sleep happily. I will fight a great battle tomorrow, one
that will be spoken about as long as the earth exists.' O lord of men! Having been thus addressed, your son departed. He paid respects to his elder by lowering his head and left for his own residence. Having returned, the king
asked his attendants to leave. The destroyer of enemies quickly entered and having entered, the king passed the
night."'
