'"Bhishma said, 'It is my view that Sudakshina of Kamboja has the qualities of a single ratha. He will fight with
the enemies in battle, desiring to accomplish your objectives. O supreme among kings! When this lion among
rathas strives in your cause, the warriors among the Kurus will witness his valour, like that of Indra. He controls a
mass of chariots that are fierce, swift and armed. O great king! These Kambojas are like a swarm of locusts. Nila,
resident of Mahishmati, is clad in blue armour. The rathas under his control will rout the enemy. O king! In earlier
times, he had an enmity with Sahadeva[In the course of the Pandava conquest, Sahadeva defeated Nila.]. O king! O supreme among the Kurus! He will always fight in your
cause. Vinda and Anuvinda of Avanti are supreme rathas. They are skilled in battle. O son[The word used is tata.]! They are firm in their
bravery and are valiant. These two tigers among men will consume the soldiers of the enemy with clubs, spikes,
iron arrows and javelins that are hurled from the hand. Desiring battle, in the field of battle, they will be like the
leaders of herds of elephants, sporting amidst their herds. They will roam around like the god of death. It is my
view that the five brothers from Trigarta are great rathas. In Virata's city, an enmity was created between them and
Partha[Arjuna defeated them.]. O Indra among kings! In the battle with the army of the Parthas, they will be like sharks[Makaras, mythical creatures.] that stir up the
billowing waves of the Ganga. O Indra among kings! They are five rathas and Satyaratha is their leader. They will
remember those earlier deeds and will fight in battle. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When he was
conquering the directions, Pandavya, Bhimasena's younger brother and the one with the white horses, humiliated
them. These maharathas will attack and kill the Parthas, the supreme and best among their great archers and the
skilled kshatriyas. Your son Lakshmana and Duhshasana are both tigers among men. They will never retreat from
the field of battle. They are young and delicate, but are spirited princes. They especially know about fighting and
everything about leadership. It is my view that these two supreme rathas, tigers among rathas, are brave rathas who
are devoted to the dharma of kshatriyas. They will accomplish great deeds. O great king! Dandadhara, bull among
men, is equal to a single ratha. Protected by his army, he will fight when he advances into battle. O son[The word used is tata.]! It is my
view that Brihadbala, the king of Kosala, is supreme among rathas and is a ratha. He is firm in speed and valiant.
He will fight in battle, causing delight among his own forces. He is a great archer and is terrible in the use of
weapons. He is engaged in the welfare of the sons of Dhritarashtra. O king! Kripa Sharadvata is the leader of leaders among rathas. He will give up his own beloved life and will destroy your enemies. The preceptor Sharadvata is
maharshi Goutama's son. Like Kartikeya, he was born from a clump of reeds. He is invincible. O son[The word used is tata.]! He will be
like a fire in the field of battle. He will shatter this diverse army, with different types of weapons and bows.'"'
