'Lomasha said, "O king! Madhuvila Samanga can be seen here[The name of a river.]. This is the place where Bharata[Bharata, the ancestor of the Bharata lineage. Although written in the translation as Bharata, the descendants
are Bhaarata.] bathed,
known by the name of Kardamila. After Shachi's husband killed Vritra, we have heard that he was struck by misfortune[Because Indra had killed the brahmana Vritra.]. He was cleansed of all his sins after bathing in Samanga. O bull among men! This is the place where
Mainaka sunk into the earth. In ancient times, Aditi cooked food here, so as to obtain sons. O bull among men!
Ascend this king of mountains and dispel your ill fame and misfortune, incapable of being expressed in words. O
king! These are the Kankhala mountains, loved by the rishis. O Yudhishthira! The great river Ganga is resplendent
here. In ancient times, the illustrious Sanatkumara obtained success here. O Ajamidha! By bathing here, you will
be cleansed of all your sins. O Kounteya! With your advisers, silently touch the waters of this lake, known as Punya, the mountain Bhrigutunga and the Ganga. The beautiful hermitage of Sthulasirasa is there. O Kounteya! Discard all sense of ego and anger. O Pandava! The beautiful hermitage of Raibhya is resplendent here. The wise
Yavakrita, Bharadvaja's son, died there."

'Yudhishthira asked, "What powers did the rishi who was Bharadvaja's son possess? Why did the sage's son,
Yavakrita, die? I wish to hear all this exactly as it happened. O Lomasha! I find delight in listening to the deeds of
those who were equals of the gods."

'Lomasha said, "Bharadvaja and Raibhya were friends. They lived here happily, in the interior of the forest and
in great friendship. Raibhya had two sons named Arvavasu and Paravasu. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Bharadvaja had a son named Yavakrita. Raibhya and his sons were learned. The other one[Bharadvaja.] was an ascetic. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! Right from childhood, their friendship was unparalleled. Yavakrita noticed that
his father was an ascetic and received no honours. O unblemished one! But Raibhya and his sons were honoured
by brahmanas. The energetic one was tormented by this and became overcome with anger. O Pandava! He performed terrible austerities in order to obtain knowledge of the Vedas. He burnt his body in a gigantic and flaming
fire. The great ascetic generated anxiety in Indra's mind. O Yudhishthira! Indra went to Yavakrita and asked him,
'Why are you engaged in these supreme torments?' Yavakrita replied, 'O one who is worshipped by the masses of
gods! I am performing this supreme austerity so that the Vedas, studied by brahmanas, become manifest in me. O
chastiser of Paka! My efforts are for my own knowledge. O Koushika[Koushika is one of Indra's epithets.]! O illustrious one! The knowledge of the
Vedas must be acquired from a preceptor and take a long time. Therefore, I am engaged in this great endeavour.'

Indra replied, 'O brahmana rishi! This is not the path for you. This is not the road you wish to traverse. O brahmana! Why do you wish to destroy yourself? Go and learn from a preceptor's mouth.'

'"O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having spoken these words, Shakra left. Yavakrita, whose valour was
infinite, also left and once again engaged in austerities. O king! We have heard that with his terrible and great austerities, he caused great distress to the king of the gods. He was burnt by the terrible austerities of the great sage.
The god who was the slayer of Bala came to restrain him again. 'The goal that you have set for yourself is not possible. You have not thought properly about how the knowledge of the Vedas can be manifested to you and your father.' Yavakrita replied, 'O king of the gods! If I do not succeed in my desired objective through these deeds, I will
torment myself with greater austerities and engage in greater vows. O Maghavan! O king of the gods! Listen. If
you do not satisfy my desires, everything that I wish for, I will slice off my limbs and offer them into the fire.' On
realizing that the great-souled sage's resolution was firm, the intelligent and wise one thought of a means of restraining him.

'"Then Indra assumed the form of a brahmana ascetic, who was several hundred years old, feeble and overcome
with consumption. He began to construct a bridge of sand on the Bhagirathi, at the tirtha where Yavakrita used to
go for his ablutions. Since that supreme of brahmanas had not paid any heed to his words, Shakra sought to fill up
the Ganga with scoops of sand. He filled his fists with sand and threw them into the Bhagirathi. Shakra attempted
to construct the bridge so as to attract Yavakrita's attention. When Yavakrita, bull among sages, saw his attempts to
bind up the river, he broke into loud laughter and uttered these words. 'O brahmana! What is going on? What do
you wish to do? Why are you expending this great endeavour on this fruitless objective?' Indra replied, 'When I
have bound up the Ganga through a bridge, it will be easy to cross. O son! People suffer great difficulties when
they repeatedly try to cross it.' Yavakrita said, 'It is not possible to bind this mighty torrent. Refrain from that
which is impossible and embark on something that is possible.' Indra replied, 'I have embarked on this task, just as
you have embarked on austerities for the Vedas, a burden of mortification that is impossible to accomplish.'

Yavakrita said, 'O lord of the thirty gods! O chastiser of Paka! If you think that my endeavours are as fruitless as
yours, then tell me what you think is possible for me. O lord of the masses of gods! Favour me with boons so that I
become superior to others.' Then Indra granted the boons the great ascetic asked for. 'As you desire, the Vedas will
become manifest in you and your father. All your other desires will also be satisfied. O Yavakrita! You can go
now.' Having attained his objective, he went to his father and said ..."'
