Vyasa said, 'Understanding creates the qualities and the kshetrajna is also established there. However, the
lord[The atman.] is indifferent towards all the qualities that have been created. All the qualities that have been created
follow their own nature. This is like a spider creating strands that are the qualities. Despite pravritti, some are not
felt, because they decay and are withdrawn. Others are destroyed because of nivritti[Both of these result from the practice of yoga. In the case of pravritti, the qualities are not really destroyed. But
their presence is no longer felt. In the case of nivritti, they are destroyed.]. One must think about both
these possibilities and try to do what is best. Following either principle, one can obtain the womb of greatness. A
man must always act so as to obtain the one without beginning and without end[The soul.]. He must not be angry. Nor
should he be delighted. He must always be devoid of jealousy. He must firmly sever the strands in his heart that are
due to intelligence and thoughts. Having overcome them, he will be free from doubt. He will be devoid of sorrow
and obtain happiness. A man who is dislodged from the ground and falls down and is submerged in a full river is
tormented. Know this world to be also like that. However, a learned man who knows the truth acts accordingly and
it is as if he is on land. A person who knows the atman realizes that the atman is only knowledge. Such a person
understands the origin and destruction of all beings. He looks on both[Origin and destruction.] equally and soon obtains excellent and
supreme tranquility. In particular, because of birth, this comes naturally to brahmanas. Knowledge of the atman
and tranquility are sufficient to lead to emancipation. Having known this, one becomes enlightened[The text uses the word Buddha, enlightened.]. What other
qualities can there be of learning? Having known this, learned people accomplish their objectives and are emancipated. Those without learning suffer from great fear. But those with learning have no such great fear. There is no
objective that is superior to this, the eternal end obtained by learned people. There are people who are afflicted
with jealousy because of material objects[At what others possess.]. There are others who glance at these and sorrow. However, an accomplished person looks at these and does not grieve at what has been obtained and what has not been obtained. Anything done without attachment destroys earlier deeds[Deeds, say, of past lives.]. In this world, one must act so as to renounce[Renounce attachment.] both the
pleasant and the unpleasant.'"'
