Vaishampayana said, 'On the peak of Kailasa and in that beautiful grove, he saw that beautiful pond, guarded by
rakshasas. Its source was the mountainous waterfalls that were near Kubera's abode. It was extremely beautiful,
with a lot of shade and full of many trees and creepers. It was covered with yellow lotuses and divine golden lotuses. It made the world pure. It was auspicious and extraordinary to behold. Pandava, Kunti's son, saw the clear,
cool, light and pure water there, like amrita. He drank a lot of that auspicious water. The beautiful pond was covered with sougandhika lotuses. There were golden lotuses, with supreme fragrance. The stalks were made out of
lapis lazuli[Vaidurya.]. They were beautiful and had many colours. Disturbed by the swans and the karandakas[The ruddy goose.], they
scattered white pollen. This was the pleasure ground of the great-souled Kubera, king of the yakshas. It was shown
great homage by the gandharvas, the apsaras and the gods. It was frequented by the rishis, yakshas, kimpurushas,
rakshasas and kinnaras and was protected well by Vaishravana[Vaishravana is Vishrava's son and is Kubera's name.].

'On seeing that celestial pond, the immensely strong Kounteya Bhimasena was filled with great delight. On the
instructions of their king[Kubera.], hundreds and thousands of rakshasas, named krodhavashas, stood guard, armed with
many different kinds of weapons. They saw Kounteya, the destroyer of enemies. Bhima, terrible in valour, was
clad in deerskin and golden armour for his upper arms. He was armed and his sword was girded. When they saw
him fearlessly advance to gather the lotuses, they shouted at one another, "Why has this maharatha, tiger among
men, come here? He is clad in deerskin and bears arms. Inquire." Then all of them approached the mighty-armed
Vrikodara and asked the resplendent one, "Who are you? Tell us. You wear the garments of a hermit and we see
that you are attired in bark. O immensely intelligent one. Tell us why you have come."'
