'Markandeya said, "O Yudhishthira! The skilled hunter, devoted to dharma, then again spoke to the brahmana
rishi, supreme among those who uphold all forms of dharma[The following words are the hunter speaking.].

'"'The course of dharma is subtle. It has many branches and is infinite. And the old ones have instructed that the
proof is what is stated in the shrutis. When life is at risk or at the time of marriage, speaking a falsehood is permitted. Sometimes, falsehood becomes truth and truth becomes falsehood. Whatever ensures the welfare of beings is
held to be the truth. Acting in a contrary way ensures adharma. Behold the subtlety of dharma. O excellent one!
Whether a man performs good deeds or evil ones, there is no doubt that he certainly reaps the fruits. One who has
no learning is ignorant of the sins of his acts. On confronting a calamity, he blames the gods gravely. O supreme
among brahmanas! Foolish, deceitful and fickle ones do not possess the wisdom, the good conduct or the manliness to save themselves when their happiness or unhappiness happens to be reversed. One will obtain whatever
one desires, as long as the fruits of one's deeds are not dependent on anything else. Controlled, skilled and intelligent men can be seen to be obstructed and unsuccessful in all their efforts. But those who are always ready to injure other beings and are ready to deceive the world, always lead a life of happiness. There are those who attain
prosperity without even trying. There are those who endeavour a lot and obtain nothing. Wretched ones worship
the gods and perform austerities to obtain a son. They remain in the womb for ten months and are born, but turn
out to be a stain on the lineage. Others enjoy the riches, grain and objects of pleasure accumulated in immense
quantities by their fathers and obtained through auspicious means. There is no doubt that human disease is the result of earlier deeds, men are like small animals tied up by the hunter. O brahmana! Just as hunters hunt deer, competent physicians who have skilfully collected medicines can treat them. Those who can have good food are then
afflicted by evils of indigestion. O supreme among those who uphold dharma! Behold, one is not able to eat. O
supreme among brahmanas! There are many others with strong arms who suffer because they can find food with
great difficulty. Thus the world is flooded with weeping, delusion and sorrow, helplessness, tossed and repeatedly
washed away through powerful currents. If everything depended on a person, no one would live in misery and all
objects of desire would be attained. No unpleasantness would be seen. Everyone wants to surpass others and endeavours as much as one can. But it doesn't happen that way. There are many who are seen to be born under the
same stars and signs, but a great divergence is seen in the fruits of their deeds. O excellent one! O brahmana! No
one can himself determine his fate. The deeds performed earlier are seen to lead to results here. O brahmana! It has
been said in the shrutis that the soul is certainly eternal, but the bodies of all living beings perish in this world.
Therefore, when the body dies, only the body is destroyed. Fettered by the bonds of deeds, the soul goes
elsewhere.'

'"The brahmana asked, 'O supreme among those who uphold dharma! O supreme among those who are eloquent! In what way is the soul eternal? I wish to learn this in detail.'

'"The hunter said, 'The soul does not die when the body perishes. Only the foolish ones aver that it perishes.
The soul moves on to another body. When the body dies, the form changes. No one except the actor obtains the
fruits of deeds and shares in the happiness or unhappiness. Whatever deeds one may have done, those fruits remain
and are not destroyed. Those who were unholy in conduct can become pure. The best of men can become sinners.
A man is always pursued by his deeds. Determined by these, he is born again.'

'"The brahmana asked, 'O excellent one! How is he formed in the womb? How does he become good or evil?
How are the good born good? How does that movement occur?'

'"The hunter replied, 'It is seen that the act of conception is linked to karma. O supreme among brahmanas! I
will describe it to you swiftly and briefly. One is born again with the past accumulation, the good in good wombs
and the evil in evil wombs. Through good deeds one becomes a god. And through mixed ones, a human. Through
evil deeds, one descends below[That is, is born as inferior species.]. It is because of the sins performed by him earlier that a man is cooked in this
life and is always afflicted by birth, old age and death. Tied by the bonds of earlier karma, a being wanders through
thousands of inferior births and even goes to hell. Through the karma of one's own deeds, a being dies and suffers.
To counteract that earlier misery, it is born in an unholy womb. Then it again accumulates a large amount of new
karma. It is cooked again, like a diseased person who has eaten unwholesome food. Although it suffers many difficulties, it considers that unhappiness to be tinged with happiness. Therefore, the bonds are not loosened and a new
karma arises again. Encircled by many miseries, it circles around the world. By casting off those bonds of deeds
and by performing pure deeds, one can obtain the worlds of righteous ones and go to where there is no sorrow. The
sinful one who performs evil deeds never goes to where there is an end to sin. Therefore, one should perform good
deeds and abhor those that are evil. A man who is grateful and does not suffer from malice and does that which ensures welfare, obtains happiness, dharma, artha and heaven. Those who are clean, self-controlled, restrained, collected and wise, enjoy an unmatched existence in this world and the next. One must always follow dharma. One
must always act in accordance with what is good. O brahmana! One must adopt a conduct that does not cause difficulties to others. There are those who are learned in the sacred texts. They are virtuous and knowledgeable about
the sacred texts. In this world, one must follow one's own dharma. Without getting mixed up, that is the task one
should perform. One who is wise finds pleasure in dharma. He lives his life on the basis of dharma. O supreme
among brahmanas! When he is rich in dharma, he appreciates its qualities and waters the roots. The one with dharma in his soul acts thus and his mind becomes serene. He is satisfied with his friends. He finds happiness here, and
in the hereafter. O excellent one! He obtains sound, touch, form and fragrance, as he wishes. He attains lordship.
These are known to be the fruits of dharma. O great brahmana! But having obtained the fruits of dharma, one may
not be satisfied. One who is dissatisfied looks at this dissatisfaction with the insight of knowledge. With the insight
of wisdom, a man does not see any sin in this. If he so desires, without discarding dharma, he frees himself. Observing that the world is naturally subject to decay, he renounces everything and strives for salvation, using the
right means and not the wrong ones. He thus avoids all evil deeds and accepts the detachment. He is devoted to
dharma and obtains supreme salvation. Austerities are the best course for beings and its root is tranquility and selfcontrol. Through this, one can obtain everything that the mind desires. O supreme among brahmanas! Through restraining the senses, truthfulness and self-control, one obtains the supreme abode of the brahman.'

'"The brahmana asked, 'O one who is rigid in his vows! What are these faculties that are called the senses? How
can they be controlled and what are the fruits of this control? O foremost among those who uphold dharma! What
are the fruits obtained from this? O best among those who follow dharma! I wish to know these details about dharma.'"'
