'"Narada said, 'This city is located in the navel[The centre.] of the world of the serpents. This is known as Patala and is frequented by daityas and the danavas[There are seven nether regions-atala, vitala, sutala, rasatala, talatala, mahatala and patala.]. Living beings and immobile objects are washed down here by the waters
and enter, uttering loud noises because they are oppressed by fear. Feeding on the water, the fire known as asura
always blazes forth here. But it knows its own restrictions and keeps to its limits. Having killed their enemies, the
gods drunk the amrita here and kept the remnants. It is from here that the waxing and waning of the moon can be
witnessed[The moon is named Soma. Soma is also the drink of the gods, often equated with amrita. Consequently, the
moon is believed to hold amrita.]. At every conjunction of time, it is from here that the divine Hayashira arises[Hayashira means the head (shira) of a horse (haya). The subterranean fire is in the form of a mare's head.]. It is golden in complexion and fills the universe with water. All the objects that have the form of water fall down here. Therefore, this
supreme region is famous by the name of Patala[From patana, meaning falling down, or cause to fall down.]. For the welfare of the universe, it is from here that Airavata
accepts the water and sprinkles it on the clouds. The great Indra then showers this down as rain[Airavata is Indra's elephant and arose from the waters when the ocean was churned.]. Many kinds of
aquatic creatures, in diverse shapes and forms, dwell here. They roam in the water, drinking the water, which is
like the rays of the moon. O charioteer! During the day, some inhabitants of the nether regions of Patala are
pierced by the rays of the sun and die. They are revived again at night. The moon arises every day, enveloped in its
rays. It touches the amrita and revives the beings with this touch. The daityas dwell here, addicted to adharma.
Vasava has robbed them of their prosperity and they are tied down here, oppressed by destiny. Maheshvara, the
lord of all beings and famous by the name of Bhutapati[Shiva, meaning the lord (pati) of all beings (bhuta).], performed severe austerities here for the welfare of all
beings. The brahmanas who observe the rites of the cow dwell here. They are maharshis devoted to studying and
teaching. They have given up their lives and have conquered heaven. A person who lives anywhere, feeds on anything and wears anything, is said to observe the rite of the cow. Airavata, the king of elephants, Vamana, Kumuda
and Anjana, supreme among elephants, were born in the lineage of Supratika[Supratika means an elephant with a beautiful trunk.]. Look here and see if there is a
groom who appeals to you because of his qualities. O Matali! We will then go to him and make efforts to choose
him as a groom. There is an egg that is placed in these waters. It blazes with its radiance. It has been here since the
time when beings were created[This is the egg from which everything was created.]. It is not shattered. Nor does it move. I have never heard the story about its birth
or creation. No one knows about its father or its mother. O Matali! At the time of destruction, it is said that a gigantic fire arises from it and consumes all the three worlds, with their mobile and immobile objects.'"

'Kanva said, "On hearing what Narada had said, Matali replied, 'There is no one here who appeals to me. Let us
swiftly go somewhere else.'"'
