Vaishampayana said, 'Then the bull among the Bharata lineage started to gather large numbers of those precious,
divine, unblemished and colourful flowers. Suddenly, a large storm arose. It swiftly threw up the stones from below. It was harsh to the touch and carried with it the portents of battle. A giant meteor descended, immensely fiery
in the storm. Covered in the darkness, the sun's rays were dimmed and it lost its radiance. While Bhima resorted to
his terrible valour, a terrible whirlwind gathered. The earth began to tremble and a storm of dust descended. The
directions turned red. Animals and birds screamed in harsh voices. Everything was covered in darkness and nothing could be seen.'

'On seeing these extraordinary happenings, Yudhishthira, Dharma's son and the foremost among speakers,
spoke these words. "Who is attempting to overcome us? O Pandavas! You are always powerful in battle. Be fortunate and prepared. From what I can see, the time for displaying our valour has come." Having spoken these words,
the king looked around. But Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, could not see Bhima. Then the destroyer of enemies
asked Krishna and the twins, who were close by, about his brother Bhima, the performer of terrible deeds in battle.

"O Panchali! Did Bhima desire to perform some deed? Or has the brave one, who is addicted to valour, already
performed some courageous deed? Portents can suddenly be seen in all the directions. They indicate a great battle
and foretell great dangers." The intelligent Krishna, his sweet-smiling and beloved queen, who always wished to
bring him pleasure, replied to his words, "O king! A sougandhika was brought here by the wind today. I showed it
to Bhimasena and lovingly told the brave one to bring many more back to me, if he should see them, and return
quickly. O king! To bring me pleasure, the mighty-armed Pandava must have gone to the north-eastern direction."

Having heard these words, the king told the twins, "In that case, let us immediately go where Vrikodara has gone.
Let the rakshasas bear the brahmanas who are exhausted and tired, as the case may be. O Ghatotkacha! You are the
equal of the immortals. You carry Krishna. It is my certain view that Bhima has gone a long distance away. He has
been away for a long time and he is like the wind in his speed. In swiftly leaping over the ground, he is like Vina-
ta's son[Vinata's son is Garuda.]. He will leap up into the sky and descend, as he pleases. O those who roam in the night[The rakshasas.]! With the
aid of your powers, we will follow him, before he causes any offence to the siddhas and those who are learned in
the brahman." They agreed to these words.

'O bull among the Bharata lineage! They were all led by Hidimba's son, who was foremost among them and
knew the region around Kubera's pond. In a delighted frame of mind, they grasped the Pandavas and many other
brahmanas, together with Lomasha. All of them travelled together until they saw the grove and the extremely
beautiful pond with sougandhika lotuses. They saw the intelligent and great-souled Bhima along its banks and the
bodies of the large-eyed yakshas that he had slain. He was standing on the banks of the river[The text says river here, rather than pond.], his club raised in
his two arms, like Yama with a staff in his hand at the time of the destruction of beings. On seeing him, Dharmaraja embraced him again and again. He spoke to him in gentle words. "O Kounteya! What have you done? O fortunate one! Because of your courage, you have brought displeasure to the gods. If you wish to bring me pleasure,
never commit such deeds again." After having thus instructed Kounteya, they collected lotuses and amused themselves in that lotus pond, like the immortals.

'At that time, the guards appeared. Their bodies were gigantic and they were armed with rocks. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! When they saw Dharmaraja, maharshi Lomasha, Nakula, Sahadeva and all the other bulls
among brahmanas, they prostrated themselves in humility. Dharmaraja pacified those roamers of the night and they
became calm. With Kubera's permission, the bulls among the Kurus lived there for some time and sported
themselves.'
