Vaishampayana said, 'The energetic Bhimasena was thus overcome by the serpent. He began to think about the
great and extraordinary valour of the serpent. He told the great serpent, "O serpent! If you so desire, please tell me.
O best of serpents! Who are you and what will you do with me? I am Pandava Bhimasena, immediately younger to
Dharmaraja. I possess the vigour equal to that of ten thousand elephants. How can I have been brought under your
power? Many lions with manes, tigers, buffaloes and elephants have been encountered and slain by me in battle. O
supreme among serpents! Danavas, pishachas and immensely strong rakshasas have not been able to withstand the
force of my arms. Do you have the strength of knowledge or do you have the gift of a boon? In spite of my endeavours, you have been able to overpower me. O serpent! It is certain in my mind that the valour of men is useless, since you have been able to withstand my great strength." When the brave Bhima, whose deeds are unsullied,
was speaking in this way, the serpent encircled him in one gigantic coil.

'Having thus overcome the mighty-armed one, but freeing his thick arms, the serpent said, "O mighty-armed
one! I have been hungry for an extremely long time and it is fortunate that the gods and destiny have sent me my
food. Life is dear to all beings that have bodies. O destroyer of enemies! O virtuous one! But I must certainly tell
you the account now, how it was that I became a serpent. I attained this state because of the anger of the learned
ones. Wishing to overcome the curse, I will tell you the serpent's account. You must have heard of the rajarshi
named Nahusha. He was your ancestor and that of your forefathers. He was Ayu's son and the extender of that lineage. I am he. Because of the disrespect shown to brahmanas and because of Agastya's curse, I have attained this
state[Nahusha's story is left implicit. After killing Vritra, Indra suffered from guilt and went into hiding. The
throne of the king of the gods was empty and Nahusha was temporarily appointed Indra. But he insulted the brahmanas by making them carry him. He was then cursed by Agastya that he would become a serpent.]. Look at what fate has wrought on me. You are my descendant and you are extremely handsome. Therefore, you should not be killed by me. But look at destiny. I will devour you today. O supreme among men! Once I
have grasped a prey on the sixth day, whether it is an elephant or a buffalo, it can never free itself from me. O best
of Kouravas! You have not only been grasped by a serpent that belongs to the inferior species. I have the gift of a
boon. When I was swiftly falling from the vimana on which Shakra is seated, I asked the illustrious supreme
sage[Agastya.] to free me from the curse. Flooded with compassion, the energetic one replied, 'O king! You will be freed
after some time has passed.' Then I fell down on the ground, but did not lose my memory. Therefore, what has
been determined in ancient times is fixed in my mind and memory. The rishi told me, 'He who replies accurately to
your questions, will free you from your curse. O king! Once grasped by you, even if it is a being that is stronger
and superior to you, it will immediately lose its mettle.' Affectionate towards me and driven by compassion, those
brahmanas then instantly disappeared[The other brahmanas who were with Agastya.]. O immensely radiant one! I thus assumed the form of a serpent. I live in
this unholy hell, performing evil deeds, waiting for the appointed time."

'Then the mighty-armed Bhimasena told the serpent, "O great serpent! I am not angry with you. Nor do I blame
myself. Sometimes a man is capable of bringing happiness or unhappiness. At other times, he is incapable. One's
mind should not be worried at these comings and goings. How can one's own exertions rise above destiny? I think
that destiny is supreme and endeavours are meaningless. Behold. Because of adverse destiny, I have lost the
strength of my arms. Without any immediate reason, I have been reduced to this state now. But today, I do not sorrow as much over my own destruction as I do over my brothers, who have been dislodged from their kingdom and
have been exiled to this wilderness. The Himalayas are difficult of access and are infested with yakshas and rakshasas. On seeing me thus, they will be confounded and will fall down. On hearing of my destruction, they will
lose all enterprise. They follow dharma. It was I who drove them, because of my greed for the kingdom. Or perhaps the intelligent Arjuna, who knows all the weapons and is invincible to the gods, the gandharvas and the rakshasas, will be overcome by sorrow. The mighty-armed one, immensely strong, is capable, with his strength, of
dislodging the king of the gods from his seat, not to speak of Dhritarashtra's sons, deceitful in gambling, hated by
all the worlds and addicted to insolence and avarice. I sorrow over my poor mother, so loving towards her sons.
She always wished that we might attain a greatness superior to that of others. O serpent! At my destruction, she
will be without a protector. All the desires that she had for me will become unsuccessful. The twins, Nakula and
Sahadeva, followed their elder. They were always protected through the strength of my arms and were proud of
their manliness. They will lose their enterprise. They will be dislodged from prowess and valour. At my destruction, they will be without protection. This is what I think." In this way, Vrikodara lamented a lot. He was coiled by
the serpent and could not move at all.

'Kounteya Yudhishthira saw all the terrible omens and was disturbed in his mind. He thought about these evil
portents. The sky to the south of the hermitage was ablaze[The south is the direction of Yama, death, ghosts and demons.]. A she-jackal stationed herself there and let out a terrible and dreadful howl. There was a dreadful-looking quail[Vartika.], with one wing, one eye and one foot. It was seen to
vomit blood, screeching harshly in the direction of the sun. A hot and rough wind began to blow, attracting gravel.
All the animals and birds wailed towards the south. A black crow cawed from the back, "Go! Go!" His[Yudhishthira's.] right arm
repeatedly trembled. There were tremors in his heart and in his left leg. Foretelling of evil, his left eye began to
throb. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Sensing great danger, the intelligent Dharmaraja asked Droupadi,
"Where is Bhima?" Panchali answered that Vrikodara had been gone for a long time. Accompanied by Dhoumya,
the mighty-armed king then left. He gave instructions to Dhananjaya to protect Droupadi. He instructed Nakula
and Sahadeva to tend to the brahmanas. Then the lord followed Bhima's footprints from the hermitage and saw the
earth marked with the signs of his passage. As the brave one, with the speed of the wind, had rushed forward on
his hunt, the wind created by his thighs had broken down and strewn trees along the path. Following these signs,
he reached the mountainous cavern and saw his younger brother immobile there, in the grasp of that Indra among
serpents.'
