Vaishampayana said, 'O king! The one with the plough as his weapon then went to Vinashana. The Sarasvati became invisible there, because of her hatred for the shudras and the abhiras[Abhiras are cowherds and vinashana means disappearance.]. O foremost among the Bharata
lineage! Because the Sarasvati disappeared there, as a consequence of her hatred, the rishis speak of that place as
Vinashana. Having touched the waters of the Sarasvati there, the immensely strong Bala[Balarama.] went to Subhumika,
also located on the supreme banks of the Sarasvati. Pure apsaras are always engaged in sporting there. Their faces
are fair and the innocent ones sport there. O lord of men! Every month, the gods and the gandharvas go there. That
sacred tirtha is frequented by the brahmanas. Gandharvas and large numbers of apsaras can be seen there. O king!
They unite happily in that spot. Amidst the creepers there, the gods and the ancestors find delight. Divine and sacred flowers repeatedly shower down there. O king! That is the sporting ground of the beautiful apsaras. Along the
supreme banks of the Sarasvati, Subhumika is famous. Madhava[Balarama.] bathed there and donated riches to the brahmanas. He heard the songs and the sounds of celestial musical instruments. He saw a large number of shadows of
gods, gandharvas and rakshasas. Rohini's son then went to the tirtha of the gandharvas. With Vishvavasu at their
head, the gandharvas are engaged in austerities there. They are engaged in beautiful dancing, singing and the playing of musical instruments. The wielder of the plough gave away many riches to brahmanas there and also goats,
cattle, mules, camels, gold and silver. He fed the brahmanas and satisfied them with extremely expensive gifts that
they desired. Praised by the brahmanas, Madhava then departed with them. The mighty-armed one, the scorcher of
enemies, adorned with a single earring, left the tirtha of the gandharvas. He went to the extremely great tirtha of
Gargasrota. The aged Garga, cleansed in his soul, performed austerities there. O Janamejaya! He got to know
about the reckoning of time, the movements of stellar bodies and about favourable and unfavourable portents[The sage Garga is believed to have been a pioneer in astronomy and astrology.].
The auspicious tirtha along the Sarasvati is known by the name of the great-souled one. That is the reason that
tirtha is known by the name of Gargasrota. O king! Wishing to know about the reckoning of time, the immensely
fortunate rishis, rigid in their vows, always worshipped the lord Garga there. O great king! Bala, smeared with
white sandalwood paste, went there and, in accordance with the rites, gave away riches to the sages who were
cleansed in their souls. He gave away many kinds of rich foodstuff to the brahmanas who were there. Attired in
blue garments, the immensely illustrious one then went to the tirtha known as Shankha. He saw Mahashanka[A large tree or mountain. The word used is naga, so it could mean either. However, subsequently, a tree is indicated.]
there. It was as large as Meru and was like a white mountain. It was frequented by large numbers of rishis. The
powerful one, with the palm tree on his banner, saw it rise on the banks of the Sarasvati. Yakshas, vidyadharas, immensely strong pishachas, thousands of siddhas-all of them were seen there, giving up the fruits of that tree. They
only enjoyed those at the right time, observing vows and rituals. They obtained those after following rules and
wandered around separately. O bull among men! They roamed around, invisible to men. O lord of men! That tree
is famous in this world. It is the source of the sacred tirtha of the Sarasvati, renowned in the world. The illustrious
tiger of the Yadu lineage donated copper and iron vessels and many garments at that tirtha. He worshipped the
brahmanas and was honoured back by those stores of austerities. O king! The one with the plough as his weapon
then went to the sacred Dvaitavana. Having gone there, Bala saw sages attired in many different kinds of garments.
He worshipped the brahmanas and bathed in those waters. He donated all the objects of pleasure to the brahmanas.
O king! Bala then went to the region south of the Sarasvati. The mighty-armed and greatly illustrious one, with
dharma in his soul, went only a short distance away. The one without decay went to the tirtha of Nagadhanva. That
was the abode of Vasuki, king of the serpents. O great king! There, the immensely radiant one[Vasuki.] was surrounded
by many serpents. There were fourteen thousand rishis and siddhas there. The gods went there and instated Vasuki,
supreme among serpents, as the king of all the serpents, in accordance with the proper rites. O Kourava! There is
no fear from serpents there. According to the decrees, he gave away many stores of jewels to the brahmanas there.
O king! Radiant in his own energy, he then set out in an eastern direction. Joyfully, the one with the plough bathed
in many tirthas. He donated riches to the brahmanas and met the ascetics. The one with the plough as his weapon
honoured large numbers of rishis there. Rama then went to the tirtha that was frequented by a large number of
rishis, at the spot where the Sarasvati returns in an eastern direction. The great-souled one wished to see Naimisharanya of the rishis. The one with the plough saw the great river retrace course there. O king! Bala, smeared with
white sandalwood paste, was astounded.'

Janamejaya asked, 'O brahmana! Why did Sarasvati retrace course in an eastern direction? O supreme among all
officiating priests! I wish to hear this recounted. For what reason was the descendant of the Yadu lineage astounded? O supreme among brahmanas! Why did the best of rivers retrace course?'

Vaishampayana replied, 'O king! In an earlier era, in krita yuga, the large number of ascetics in Naimisha performed an extremely large sacrifice that went on for twelve years. O king! Many rishis came to that sacrifice. The
immensely fortunate ones performed that sacrifice, in accordance with the prescribed rites. After the sacrifice had
been performed for twelve years, they returned. The rishis went to visit the large number of tirthas that were there.
O lord of the earth! Because of the large number of rishis, the tirthas along the southern banks of the Sarasvati
seemed to look like cities. O tiger among men! Because of their love for tirthas, the supreme among brahmanas
resided along the banks of the river, all the way up to Samantapanchaka. The sages, cleansed in their souls, offered
oblations there and the loud sounds of incantations filled the directions. The great-souled ones offered oblations in
agnihotra sacrifices there. In every direction, the best of rivers was beautiful and radiant. O great king!
Valakhilyas, Ashmakutta ascetics, Dantolukhalinas and others, Samprakshalas[Valakhilyas are sages who are as small as the thumb. Ashmakuttas are sages who
pound their bodies with stone. Dantolukhalinas (or Dantolukhalikas) are sages
who use their teeth as mortar, that is, they only eat grain that has not been ground.
Samprakshalas are sages who incessantly wash themselves in water.] and others, those who lived on
air, those who lived on water, those who lived on leaves, many others who observed diverse kinds of rituals and
those who used the bare earth as their beds-all these sages came there, near the Sarasvati. The best of rivers was
radiant, like Ganga frequented by the residents of heaven[Meaning that part of the Ganga (Mandakini) that flows in heaven.]. After this, the rishis, wishing to perform sacrifices and
rigid in their vows, could not find a bare spot in Kurukshetra. They measured out small tirthas with their sacrificial
threads and offered oblations to agnihotras and other kinds of sacrifices. O Indra among kings! Sarasvati saw that
the large number of rishis was finding the situation hopeless and began to think about a means for their sake. O
Janamejaya! The supreme of rivers retraced her course and created many abodes for herself, for the sake of the
rishis and the pious ascetics. The supreme of rivers again flowed in a western direction. "I must go there, so that
their[The rishis'.] arrival is not rendered futile." O king! The great river performed this great and wonderful deed there. O Indra among kings! Those abodes of hers are famous as Naimisha. O best of the Kuru lineage! You must perform
great rites in Kurukshetra. When the river retraced her course, she created many abodes for herself. On seeing
these there, the great-souled Rama was overcome by great wonder. In accordance with the rites, the descendant of
the Yadu lineage bathed there. He gave away gifts and diverse vessels to the brahmanas. He also gave the brahmanas many kinds of food and drink. O king! Worshipped by the brahmanas, Bala then went to the supreme of
tirthas on the Sarasvati, frequented by tens of thousands of many kinds of birds. There are badari, inguda, kash-
marya, plaksha, ashvattha, vibhitaka, panasa, palasha, karira, pilu and other kinds of trees there[Badari is the Indian ber tree, inguda is the desert date, kashmarya is the barberry,
plaksha is pipal, ashvattha is the religious fig tree, vibhitaka is myrobalan, panasa
is jackfruit, palasha is flame of the forest, karira is capparis deciduas and pilu is
salvadora oleoides.]. They bind
down the banks of the Sarasvati and make it look like a chariot. It is adorned with groves of parushas, bilvas, amratakas, atimuktas, kashandas and parijatas[Parusha is difficult to identify, Bilva is bel, Amrataka is wild mango, atimukta is
madhumalati, Kashanda is difficult to identify and parijata is the night jasmine or
coral jasmine.]. There are also beautiful groves of plantains, beautiful and charming. There were those who lived on air, those who lived on water, those who lived on fruit and those who lived on
leaves. The Dantolukhalinas were there too, as were the Ashmakuttas, Vaneyas[Vaneyas are those who live in forests.] and many other kinds of sages.
There were the sounds of chanting and the place teemed with herds of animals. It was a place frequented by those
who were without malice and devoted to dharma. The one with the plough as his weapon went to the tirtha of Sapta-Sarasvata. The great sage, Mankanaka, had performed austerities there and attained success.'
