'Bhishma said, "O lord of the earth! My charioteer was revered for his skill in these matters. He removed the
shafts from himself, from the horses and from me. The horses were bathed and rolled around on the ground. They
obtained water and were refreshed. When the sun arose in the morning, the battle resumed. On seeing me swiftly
approach, stationed and armoured on my chariot, the powerful Rama ensured that his chariot was also completely
ready. When I saw that Rama was desirous of doing battle, I cast aside my excellent bow and swiftly descended
from my chariot. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As earlier, I showed him homage and then mounted my
chariot again. Without any fear and ready to fight, I stood before Jamadagni's son. He enveloped me with a great
shower of arrows. I also covered him with a shower of arrows. O king! Enraged, Jamadagni's son again released
arrows at me and they were like snakes with flaming mouths. O king! Swiftly, I repeatedly sliced them down in the
sky with hundreds and thousands of sharp bhallas.

'"O mighty-armed one! At this, Jamadagni's powerful son released divine weapons at me and I repulsed them
with my weapons. I wished to perform the superior deeds. In every direction, a great roar could be heard in the firmament. I used the vayavya[Divine weapon named after Vayu, the wind god.] weapon against Jamadagni's son. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Rama countered this with his guhyaka weapon[Divine weapon named after guhyakas, semi-divine species who were companions of Kubera.]. I invoked the mantra and released the agneya weapon[Divine weapon named after Agni, the fire god.]. The lord Rama
countered this with a varuna weapon[Divine weapon named after Varuna, the god of the ocean.]. In this fashion, I countered Rama's celestial weapons and Rama, the destroyer of enemies and knowledgeable in divine weapons, repulsed mine. O king! Rama, supreme among brahmanas and Jamadagni's immensely strong son, then suddenly turned to the left and enraged, struck me in the chest.
O foremost among the Bharata lineage! I fainted and fell down on that supreme chariot. O foremost among the
Bharata lineage! On seeing me in that miserable state and oppressed by Rama's arrows, my charioteer quickly carried me away to the distance of one goruta[Goruta is a measure of distance equal to two kroshas. It is so named because it is the distance from which a
cow's (go) bellow can be heard.]. All of Rama's followers, Akritavrana and the others, were extremely
delighted when they saw that I had fallen down pierced, having lost my consciousness. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They cheered, and so did the maiden from Kashi.

'"When I had regained consciousness and got to know what had happened, I told my charioteer, 'O charioteer!
Go where Rama is. I have regained my senses and my pain has gone.' O Kouravya! The extremely beautiful horses
seemed to be dancing. They were as fleet as the wind. The charioteer bore me back on them. O Kourava! On having reached Rama, wishing to vanquish him, I was angry and covered the raging one with a net of arrows. Those
arrows flew straight. But in that battle, Rama sliced them down with his own arrows, shooting three arrows for
each one that I did. All my arrows were extremely sharp. However, in that great battle, all of them were sliced into
two by hundreds of Rama's arrows. Wishing to kill Rama, Jamadagni's son, I again unleashed a flaming arrow that
was extremely radiant and was like time itself. He was struck deeply and pierced by that arrow. Rama swiftly lost
consciousness and fell down on the ground. When Rama fell down on the ground, a lamentation arose everywhere.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The world was anxious, as if the sun had fallen down. Extremely anxious and
overcome by grief, all the ascetics and the maiden from Kashi rushed towards the descendant of the Bhrigu lineage. They embraced him and comforted him gently, with cool water in their hands. O Kourava! They pronounced
benedictions for his victory.

'"Rama arose. Though he was confused, he spoke these words to me. 'O Bhishma! Stand there. You are dead.'

He affixed an arrow to his bow and released it. In that great battle, the swift arrow struck me on my left side. I was
extremely agitated, like a tree whirled by the wind. O king! In that great battle, he killed my horses with swift
weapons. His dexterity with arrows was such that he could carry away a single one of my body hair. To counter
him in that battle, I also used swift weapons. O mighty-armed one! I unleashed an arrow that could not be countered and all those arrows, Rama's and mine, remained in the air[They did not fall down on the ground.] and swiftly covered the sky in every direction.
The sun was covered in this net of arrows and no longer provided any heat. The wind could not pass through them,
as if it had been restrained by clouds. The wind trembled and dashed against the sun's rays. From this friction, a
fire was created in the sky. The arrows blazed, because of the colourful fire that had been created by them. O king!
Everything on the ground was then reduced to ashes. O Kourava! Rama was angry and shot hundreds, thousands,
millions[Prayuta (million), arbuda (one hundred million), ayuta (ten thousand), kharva (ten trillion, or a very large number) and nikharva (billion).], one hundred millions, ten thousands, ten trillions and billions of swift arrows at me. But in that battle, I
sliced them down with my own arrows, which were like the poison of snakes. O king! I shattered them and made
them fall down on the ground, like serpents. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! Thus did the battle continue
then. When twilight had passed, my preceptor withdrew."'
