'Drupada said, "O mighty-armed one! There is no doubt that it will be this way. Duryodhana will not hand back
the kingdom sweetly. Dhritarashtra loves his son and will follow him. So will Bhishma and Drona out of poverty,
and Radheya and Soubala out of folly[The word used is karpanya and the best translation is poverty. The sense is that Bhishma and Drona owe their
living to the Kouravas. Radheya is Karna and Soubala is Shakuni.]. It is my view that Baladeva's words were not appropriate, because they
apply to a man who wishes to act properly right from the beginning. Dhritarashtra's son should never be addressed
through gentle words. I think that it is impossible to persuade that evil-minded one through gentleness. One exhibits gentleness towards a donkey and roughness towards a cow. Duryodhana, the one with evil intelligence, will
not pay any heed to gentle words. I think that if gentle words are used, that evil one will take the speaker to be
weak. If gentle words are used, that stupid one will think that he has triumphed. Let us do this. Let us make preparations here. Let us send word to our allies to collect forces for us. Let messengers who travel swiftly go to
Shalya[The king of Madra.], Dhrishtaketu[The king of Chedi.], the lord Jayatsena[The king of Magadha.] and all the Kekayas. Duryodhana is certain to send messengers to all
of them also. But those who are righteous and have been allied to us earlier, will accept the first request. Therefore,
let us make haste and let us request those Indras among men first. It is my view that a great task is about to be
undertaken.

'"Send word to Shalya quickly and to the kings who are under his suzerainty, and to King Bhagadatta, who
dwells by the eastern ocean. And to Amitouja, Ugra, Hardikya, Ahuka, the extremely wise Malla and the lord
Rochamana. Let Brihanta be brought and the King Senabindu, Papajit, Prativindhya, Chitravarma, Suvastuka,
Bahlika, Munjakesha, the lord of Chedi, Suparsha, Subahu, the maharatha Pourava, the kings who rule over the
Shakas, the Pahlavas and the Daradas, the Kambojas, the Rishikas, the western Anupakas, Jayatsena, the king of
Kashi, the kings of the five rivers[The region of the Punjab.], the unassailable son of Kratha, the kings of the mountainous regions, Janaki,
Susharma, Maniman, Poutimatsyaka, the king of the land of Pamshu, the valorous Dhrishtaketu, Oudra, Dandadhara, the valorous Brihatsena, Aparajita, Nishada, Shreniman, Vasuman, the immensely energetic Brihadbala,
Bahu the conqueror of enemy cities, King Samudrasena with his valorous son, Adari, Nadija, King Karnaveshta,
Samartha, Suvira, Marjara, Kanyaka, Mahavira, Kadru, Nikara, the terrible Kratha, Nila, Viradharma, the valorous
Bhumipala, Durjaya, Dantavakra, Rukmi, Janamejaya, Ashadha, Vayuvega, King Purvapali, Bhuriteja, Devaka,
Ekalavya's son, the kings of Karushaka, the valorous Kshemadhurti, Uddhava, Kshemaka, King Vatadhana, Shrutayu, Dridhayu, Shalva's valorous son and the lord of the Kalingas, Kumara, who is unassailable in battle. I think
that it is desirable that word should be sent to them as quickly as is possible. O king! This brahmana is my priest.
He should be swiftly sent to Dhritarashtra. Tell him the words that he should speak-how Duryodhana is to be addressed, and the king who is Shantanu's son, how Dhritarashtra is to be addressed, and Drona, supreme among
learned ones."'
