'Yudhishthira asked, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Great policy and the path of dharma have many
branches. Is it your view that one element of dharma must be pursued the most? In your view, which is the task of
dharma that is the most important, so that a man can obtain dharma in this world and after death?"

'Bhishma replied, "It is my view that worship of the mother, the father and the preceptor is the most important.
If a man is engaged in this, he obtains great fame and the worlds. O son! O Yudhishthira! If they recognize any
task, irrespective of whether it is for dharma or against dharma, it is your duty to honour and implement it. Without
their permission, one must not think of something else as dharma. It has been prescribed that their suggestions
amount to dharma. They are the three worlds. They are the three ashramas[With the mother, the father and the preceptor, the number is three. It is
not evident which of the four ashramas is being excluded, probably
sannyasa.]. They are the three Vedas. They are
the three fires. The father is said to be the garhapatya fire and the mother is the dakshina fire. The preceptor is the
ahavaniya fire[The garhapatya fire is the one that burns in the household, the dakshina
fire is the one that burns in the southern direction and the ahavaniya fire
is the sacrificial fire into which oblations are poured.]. These three fires are the most important. If you pay attention to these three, you will conquer the
three worlds. By always serving the father one can cross this world, by serving the mother, the world beyond this,
and by serving the preceptor, Brahma's world. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O fortunate one! If you conduct yourself well in the three worlds, you will obtain fame and dharma with extremely great fruits. One should
not cross their policies. One should not eat before them. One should not censure them. One should always serve
them. That is the supreme good deed. O lord of men! Through this, you will earn fame, merits, glory and the
worlds. One who honours them is honoured in the three worlds. However, one who dishonours them is dishonoured and all his tasks become fruitless. O scorcher of enemies! A person who always disrespects these three seniors obtains neither this world nor the one hereafter. His fame is not radiant in the world hereafter. After that, nor
does he obtain any great benefit. If I give everything away to them, it comes back to me, one hundred times and
one thousand times more. O Yudhishthira! Therefore, the three worlds blaze before me. It is said that one good
acharya[Preceptor. A preceptor who is an upadhyaya is superior to a preceptor
who is an acharya. Etymologically, an acharya teaches only good conduct, while an upadhyaya's teachings are more spiritual.]is superior to ten learned brahmanas, one upadhyaya is superior to ten acharyas and the father is superior to ten upadhyayas. However, a mother is superior to ten fathers and even to the entire earth. In her importance,
there is no preceptor who is equal to a mother. However, it is my view that a preceptor is superior to a father and a
mother[There is no conflict, because Bhishma is referring to general views, as
well as to his own.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Both the mother and the father unite to give birth, but the father
and the mother create the body alone. The birth that is instructed by the acharya is divine. It is without old age and
without death. Even if they have caused an injury, the mother and the father must never be killed[This is not a reference to an ordinary individual killing the parents. It is
more a reference to the king imposing punishment on the king's parents.]. If you act in
this way, you will not be censured. Nor will they reprimand you. The gods and the rishis know about those who try
to follow dharma. One who imparts comprehension, one who speaks about the truth in one's ears and one who
grants immortality[A reference to a preceptor.] should be thought of as a father and a mother. Knowing this, one should not act injuriously
towards him. When a person has heard about knowledge from a preceptor but does not honour him in thought and
deeds even when he is present, he must be corrected by other preceptors and those preceptors also deserve to be
respected. Therefore, one who desires for the ancient dharma must make efforts to worship and honour all these
seniors, giving them their shares. A person who pleases his father also pleases his grandfather. If he is affectionate
towards his mother, he reveres the entire earth. If he is affectionate towards his upadhyaya, he worships Brahma.
Therefore, if he worships his mother, his father and his preceptor, he pleases the rishis and the gods, together with
the ancestors. In one's conduct, one should never disrespect the preceptor, nor the mother and the father, because
they are like the preceptor. They should not be censured and they will not reprimand you. The gods, together with
the rishis, know that preceptors must be treated well. In thoughts and in deeds, one should not injure the upadhyaya, the father and the mother. A wicked person who does that commits a sin that is worse than killing a foetus.
There is no one in the world as wicked as he. We have not heard of any salvation for four-one who harms a
friend, one who is an ingrate, one who kills a woman and one who is slanderous. For the acts of men in this world,
all this has been created as great instruction. This is most beneficial and there is nothing that is superior to this.
Following all kinds of dharma, I have told you this."'
