'Shakuntala said[She is actually repeating Kanva's words.], "Having been thus addressed, Shakra[Indra.] commanded the wind, who was always mobile, to
be present with Menaka. The beautiful-hipped Menaka then timidly entered the hermitage and saw Vishvamitra,
who had burnt all his sins through austerities, but was still engaged in austerities. Having paid her homage to the
rishi, she began to play around before him. At that instant, the wind robbed her of her garments, which were as
white as the moon. Bashful at Marut's conduct, the beautiful one dropped to the ground, in an attempt to catch the
garment. The supreme among sages saw Menaka grasp at her garment. He saw her nude and that she was beautiful, with no marks of age on her body. On seeing her beauty and qualities, the bull among Brahmanas was struck
with desire and wished to unite with her. He invited her and the unblemished one accepted his invitation.

'"The two of them then passed a long time in the wood, making love as they wished. It seemed to be but a single
day. Through the sage, Shakuntala was born to Menaka. Menaka went to the banks of the Malini, which passed
through a lovely plain in the Himalayas. Having given birth, Menaka left the child on the banks of the Malini and
left. Her objective accomplished, she quickly returned to Shakra's assembly.

'"The daughter lay in a deserted forest frequented by carnivorous lions and tigers. On seeing this, vultures[The word used is shakuna. In a general sense, this means bird. But in a specific sense, it means vultures or
kites.]
surrounded her from all sides, so as to protect her. The birds protected Menaka's child. Having gone there to perform ablutions, I[This is Kanva speaking.] saw her in the deep and lonely wood, surrounded by birds. I took her home and brought her
up as my own daughter. According to the sacred texts, there are three kinds of fathers. In proper order, they are the
one who gives a body, the one who protects and the one who provides food. Because she was found in the solitude
of the forest, surrounded by birds, I have given her the name of Shakuntala. O amiable one! Know that it is thus
that Shakuntala became my daughter. The unblemished Shakuntala also thinks of me as her father."'

'"When asked, this is how the maharshi described the account of my birth. O ruler of men! I do not know my
own. But this is how I think of Kanva as my father. O king! I have told you exactly as I heard it."'
