Sanjaya said, "When the sound became less and the Pandavas had slain some of that army, Soubala advanced
with seven hundred well-trained horses that still remained. He swiftly approached the army[His own army.] and said, 'O warriors! Make haste. Fight cheerfully.' The scorcher of enemies repeatedly said this. He asked the kshatriyas there,
'Where is the maharatha king[Duryodhana.]?' O bull among the Bharata lineage! Hearing Shakuni's words, they replied, 'The
maharatha Kouravya is stationed in the midst of the battle. He is at the spot where the great umbrella is, as radiant
as the full moon. That is where the armoured rathas are, with their arm-guards. A tumultuous sound can be heard
there, like the roar of clouds. O king! Go there swiftly and you will be able to see Kouravya.' O lord of men! Having been thus addressed by those brave ones, Shakuni Soubala went to the spot where your son was. He was surrounded on all sides by valiant ones who were unwilling to retreat from the battle. Duryodhana was stationed
there, in the midst of an array of chariots. O lord of the earth! Having seen him, Shakuni cheerfully spoke these
words to Duryodhana, gladdening all the rathas on your side. He spoke to the king, as if he thought that his objective had already been achieved. 'O king! Slay this array of rathas[On the Pandava side.]. All their horses have already been defeated by
me. Yudhishthira is incapable of being defeated in the battle, unless one is prepared to give up one's own life. Slay
this array of rathas, protected by Pandava. We will then kill these elephants, foot soldiers and horses.' On hearing
these words, those on your side were cheered. Wishing for victory, they swiftly attacked the Pandava soldiers.
They fixed their quivers and grasped their bows. They brandished their bows and roared like lions. O lord of the
earth! The noise of twang of bowstrings and the slapping of palms was again heard. They shot extremely terrible
arrows.

' "On seeing that they were joyfully and swiftly advancing, with upraised bows, Dhananjaya, Kunti's son, spoke
these words to Devaki's son. 'Goad these horses without any fear and penetrate this ocean of soldiers. Using sharp
arrows, I will bring an end to these enemies. O Janardana! This is the eighteenth day of the battle and we have engaged against each other in this great clash. The standard-bearers, the great-souled ones, were almost infinite. Behold. They have been destroyed in the battle, by destiny. O Madhava! The army of Dhritarashtra's son was like an
ocean. O Achyuta! Having clashed against us, it has now become like a trifle[The text uses the word goshpada. This literally means the mark of a
cow's foot in the soil and the small puddle of water that fills up such a
mark, that is, a trifle.]. O Madhava! It would have been
well had there been peace after Bhishma was killed. But Dhritarashtra's stupid and extremely foolish son did not
act accordingly. O Madhava! Bhishma spoke beneficial words that were like medicine. However, Suyodhana was
beyond reason and did not listen to it. After Bhishma was dislodged and brought down on the surface of the
ground, I do not know the reason why the battle had to continue. I think that, in every way, Dhritarashtra's son is
stupid and extremely foolish. They continued to fight even after Shantanu's son was brought down. After that,
Drona, supreme among those who know about the brahman, was killed, and so were Radheya and Vikarna. But
even then, there was no peace. When only a few of the soldiers were left and the son of a suta, tiger among men,
was brought down with his sons, even then, there was no peace. When the brave Shrutayusha was killed, and
Pourava Jalasandha, and King Shrutayudha, even then, there was no peace. O Janardana! Bhurishrava, Shalya,
Shalva and the brave ones from Avanti[Vinda and Anuvinda.] were killed. Even then, there was no peace. Jayadratha, the rakshasa
Alayudha, Bahlika and Somadatta were slain. Even then, there was no peace. The brave Bhagadatta, Sudakshina
from Kamboja and Duhshasana were killed. Even then, there was no peace. O Krishna! There were many brave
kings, lords of their separate dominions. Even when those powerful ones were killed in the battle, there was no
peace. Even when he[Duryodhana.] saw that an entire akshouhini was brought down by Bhimasena, either because of his delusion or because of his avarice, there still was no peace. Other than Kourava Suyodhana, who else would have been
born in a noble lineage and generated this large and pointless enmity? Knowing that we were superior in qualities,
strength and valour, which sensible person would attempt to fight, other than a foolish one unable to differentiate
good from evil? He could not make up his mind that he should listen to your beneficial words and make peace with
the Pandavas. Instead, he listened to the advice of another. Shantanu's son, Bhishma, Drona and Vidura spoke in
favour of peace, but were disregarded. What medicine will he resort to today? O Janardana! Because of his stupidity, he rejected his aged father and mother's beneficial words, when they spoke about what was good for him. How
can he accept good advice? O Janardana! It is evident that he was born to bring an end to his lineage. O lord of the
earth! That is the direction his policy has followed. O Achyuta! It is my view that he will still not give us the kingdom. O father[The word used is tata. This means father, but is affectionately used towards anyone who is older or superior.]! On several occasions, the great-souled Vidura has told me that Dhritarashtra's son, as long as he
is alive, will never give us a share. O venerable one! He also said, "As long as Dhritarashtra's son is alive, that
wicked one will continue to act in evil ways towards you. You will not be able to defeat him, without engaging
with him in battle." O Madhava! Vidura, who sees the truth, always spoke to me in this way. I now see that the
evil-souled one's deeds have been exactly in accordance with the words of the great-souled Vidura. He also heard
the beneficial and appropriate words spoken by Jamadagni's son[Parashurama.]. But the evil-minded one disregarded them and
set himself along a path of certain destruction. As soon as Suyodhana was born, many siddhas had said that this
evil-souled one would bring about the destruction of kshatriyas. O Janardana! Those words have now been realized. Because of Duryodhana's deeds, the kings are headed towards fearful destruction. O Madhava! I will kill all
the warriors in the battle today. When the kshatriyas have been speedily killed and their camps emptied, for the
sake of his own destruction, Duryodhana will desire to fight with us. O Madhava! I think that will bring an end to
the enmity. O Varshneya! Using my intelligence, on due reflection, I think this will be the end, borne out by Vidu-
ra's words and the evil-souled one's efforts. O brave one! Take me to the Bharata army, so that I can use my sharp
arrows to slay the evil-souled Duryodhana's soldiers in the battle. O Madhava! Today, I will accomplish what
Dharmaraja wants. While Dhritarashtra's son looks on, I will destroy this weakened army.' Thus addressed by
Savyasachi, Krishna, with the reins in his hand, fearlessly penetrated the large army of the enemy in the battle.

' "The spot was terrible with the best of bows and arrows, and the javelins were like thorns[There is an imagery of a forest.]. Clubs and maces
were the paths and chariots and elephants were the large trees. The immensely illustrious ones immersed themselves in horses and foot soldiers. Govinda roamed around there, on a chariot with several flags. O king! Those
white horses bore Arjuna in the battle. Controlled by Dasharha, they were seen in every direction. Savyasachi, the
scorcher of enemies, advanced on his chariot. He showered down hundreds of sharp arrows, like torrents of rain
pouring down on a mountain. In the battle, Savyasachi shot and enveloped everything with arrows with drooping
tufts, which made a loud noise. Torrents of arrows penetrated armour and fell down on the ground. Shot from Gan-
diva, those arrows were like Indra's vajra to the touch. O lord of the earth! Men, elephants and horses were struck.
The arrows whizzed like insects and brought them down in the battle. Everything was covered by arrows shot from
Gandiva. In the encounter, the directions and the sub-directions could not be distinguished. Everything was covered by arrows marked with Partha's name. They were gold-tufted, washed in oil and polished by artisans. They
were consumed by Partha, like elephants by a fire. The Kouravas were afflicted and slaughtered by those sharp arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Wielding the bow and arrows, Partha blazed. In the battle, he consumed the warriors, like a flaming fire among dead wood. He was like a fire with black trails kindled on the outskirts of a forest by the residents of the forest, roaring loudly and consuming dead wood. Many trees and heaps of
dry creepers seemed to be burnt by the blazing and powerful one. The innumerable iron arrows of the powerful
one were like extremely energetic flames. The spirited one burnt all the soldiers of your son, swiftly and intolerantly. His gold-tufted arrows were shot well and could not be countered by armour. They robbed lives. He did not
have to shoot a second arrow at a man, a horse, or a supreme elephant. The arrows were of many different kinds of
forms and penetrated the arrays of the maharathas. He single-handedly killed the soldiers of your son, like the
wielder of the vajra against the daityas." '
