'Shakuni said, "O king! The carpet has been spread out in the sabha and these people have found the time. O Yudhishthira! The time for gambling and fixing the nature of the dice has come."

'Yudhishthira replied, "O king! Dishonest gambling is evil. There is no kshatriya valour in that. Nor is there any
good policy in it. Why do you then praise playing with the dice? O Shakuni! The learned do not praise deceitful
gambling. Like a cruel person, do not defeat us through a crooked path."

'Shakuni said, "He who knows the numbers and is knowledgeable about deceptions, is tireless in the art of gambling and is extremely intelligent in gambling, is the one who knows all the techniques. Through handling the dice,
one can defeat the enemy. Blaming destiny is pointless. O king! Let us gamble and have no anxiety. Let us immediately decide on the stakes and not tarry."

'Yudhishthira replied, "Asita-Devala are supreme among sages and always frequents the doors of the worlds.
They have said that it is a sin to play with deceitful gamblers. It is best to win a battle through dharma, in which
case, gambling is sanctioned. Aryas do not use mleccha language, nor use deceit in behaviour. Men who are truthful in their vows do not use trickery in a battle. We have always sought to protect deserving brahmanas with our
strength. O Shakuni! Do not play beyond those limits and do not win in excess[The sense is that Yudhishthira uses his wealth for the sake of brahmanas. Therefore, Shakuni should limit
his winnings.]. I do not desire happiness and
riches through deceit. But even if a gambler plays without deceit, gambling is never praised."

'Shakuni said, "O Yudhishthira! The learned triumph over non-learned only through trickery. That is how the
wise triumph over the stupid, but people don't call it trickery. In approaching me for the game, if you think that I
will resort to trickery, if that is your fear, then refrain from the game."

'Yudhishthira replied, "O king! Once challenged, I will not withdraw. That is the vow I have taken. Fate is the
powerful one and we are in the power of destiny. Who in this assembly will I play with? What is the counter-stake?
Let the gambling begin."

'Duryodhana said, "O lord of the earth! I will stake all my jewels and my riches. My maternal uncle, Shakuni,
will gamble on my behalf."

'Yudhishthira replied, "To me, it seems unfair that one man should gamble in another's place. O learned one!
You know this. However, if that is what you want, so be it."'

Vaishampayana said, 'When arrangements had been made for the gambling, all the kings, with Dhritarashtra at
the forefront, entered the sabha-Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, the immensely intelligent Vidura. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Others also followed, not at all pleased in their minds. Those immensely energetic ones, with
necks like those of lions, sat separately and together, on many colourful seats. O king! With the assembled kings,
that sabha was radiant, like resplendent heaven when the gods have assembled. O great king! They were all brave
warriors, learned in the Vedas and their forms were like that of the sun. Then the gambling between the well-wishers started.

'Yudhishthira said, "O king! This is a beautiful chain of gems, inlaid in supreme gold. It represents a lot of riches and has been procured from the whirl of the ocean[The gems were presumably pearls.]. O king! This is my stake. What is your counter-stake?
Let it be placed in the proper order and I will win this gamble."

'Duryodhana replied, "I also possess many gems and riches. But they serve no particular end for me. I will win
this gamble."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Then Shakuni, who knew the heart of the dice, grasped the dice. And Shakuni told Yudhishthira, "I have won."'
