'Yudhishthira said, "Here and there, beings can be tormented by different kinds of sentiments. How can
they tide over difficulties? O grandfather! Tell me that."

'Bhishma replied, "The cited ashramas for brahmanas have already been recounted. If they follow
these with controlled souls, they will be able to tide over difficulties. Those who are without deceit,
those who meditate, those who remain within the confines of prescribed conduct and those who restrain
material desires are able to tide over difficulties. Those who always offer their dwellings to guests, those
who are always without malice and those who are always engaged in studying are able to tide over difficulties. Those who follow the conduct of their mother and father, those who know about dharma and
those who do not sleep during the day are able to tide over difficulties. Those who have intercourse with
their own virtuous wives, at the right season and not outside the season, and those righteous ones who
observe agnihotra are able to tide over all difficulties. Kings who give up excessive desire for riches,
who are full of the rajas quality and who protect the kingdom are able to tide over all difficulties. Brave
ones who give up the fear of death in battles and desire to triumph in accordance with dharma are able to
tide over all difficulties. Those who do not commit sins in deeds, thought and speech and impose the rod
of chastisement on beings are able to tide over all difficulties. Those who speak the truth, even if life is
at stake, and those who set an example to all beings are able to tide over all difficulties. Brahmanas who
do not study what should not be studied and are always engaged in asceticism and good austerities are
able to tide over all difficulties. Those whose acts do not have fraudulent objectives, those whose words
are extremely truthful and those who obtain riches through virtuous means are able to tide over all difficulties. Those who torment themselves through austerities, those who observe brahmacharya in their
youth and those who have cleansed through their learning of the Vedas and vows are able to tide over all
difficulties. Those who have controlled rajas, those who have controlled tamas and those great-souled
ones who are based on truth are able to tide over all difficulties. Those who cause no fear, those who are
never frightened and those who look on all people as their own selves are able to tide over all difficulties. Those bulls among men who are not tormented by the prosperity of others and those who refrain
from common norms of behaviour are able to tide over all difficulties. Those who worship all the gods,
those who listen to all kinds of dharma and those who are faithful and controlled are able to tide over all
the difficulties. Those who do not desire respect but respect others instead, and those who pay no attention to any honours they obtain, are able to tide over all difficulties. Desiring offspring, those who perform shraddha ceremonies from one tithi to another and those who are extremely pure in their minds are
able to tide over all difficulties. Those who are not enraged, those who pacify the anger of others and
those who are not enraged at the servants are able to tide over all difficulties. Those men who have always avoided, since birth, madhu, flesh and liquor are able to tide over all difficulties[We have deliberately not translated the word madhu. The text uses a
general word for liquor, madya, and madhu is mentioned in addition.
Madhu could be honey, fermented or otherwise. It could also be a specific kind of liquor, such as madhvi.]. Those who
only eat to remain alive, those who have intercourse only for the sake of having children and those who
speak only to state the truth are able to tide over all difficulties. Those who are devoted to Narayana, the
lord of all beings, the creator and the destroyer of the universe, are able to tide over all difficulties. His
eyes are like red lotuses. He is attired in yellow garments. He is mighty-armed. He is Achyuta. He is
your well-wisher, brother, friend and ally[Krishna was a cousin by birth. He was also linked through matrimonial
alliances.]. Like a strip of leather, all these worlds are wrapped around
his person. He is the lord of riches. His soul cannot be thought of. He is Govinda Purushottama. O bull
among men! He is engaged in ensuring Jishnu's[Arjuna's.] welfare. O king! You cannot withstand him. He is
Vaikuntha[Vaikuntha is Vishnu's name, as well as the name of his abode.] Purushottama. A person who faithfully seeks refuge with Narayana Hari is able to tide over
difficulties. There is no need for me to even think about this. A person who reads or hears about this account of tiding over difficulties and a person who has it read out to brahmanas is able to tide over difficulties. O unblemished one! I have instructed you about what must be done, so that a man can tide over
difficulties, in this world and in the next."'
