Bhishma said,  "Narada,  the  illustrious  rishi,  Narada's  well-wisher,  spoke  about  the  conversation  between
Shankara and Uma. '"Narada said, 'The lord of the gods, the one with dharma in his soul and the one with the
sign of the bull was engaged in austerities on sacred Mount Himalaya, frequented by the siddhas and the charanas.
The place was beautiful because of the numerous herbs and diverse flowers. It was inhabited by large numbers of
apsaras and surrounded by hundreds of bands of bhutas. They had many forms and some were malformed. Some
were divine and extraordinary to see. Others had faces like lions, tigers, elephants and all kinds of other species.
There were those with faces like jackals and leopards. Others had faces like bears and bulls. There were those with
faces like owls. There were others with faces like hawks and kites. Some had faces like many kinds of deer. All
kinds of species assembled there. There were large numbers of kinnaras, gods, gandharvas, yakshas and bhutas.
The place was full of divine flowers and was adorned with celestial garlands. There was divine sandalwood and the
smell of celestial incense. The one with the mark of the bull was seated there. Celestial musical instruments were
sounded-drums, kettledrums, conch shells and trumpets. With peacocks surrounding them, the large numbers of
bhutas danced. The place was populated by celestial women and the divine apsaras also danced. It was a beautiful
sight and was divine and wonderful to see. The lord of the bhutas practised austerities on that mountain. O Madhava! The mountain was unmatched. The supreme brahmanas studied there and there were the sounds of the brahman and vashatkara, combined with singing. It was as if a great festival was being observed, though the place also
had a terrible appearance. O Janardana! On seeing this, the large numbers of sages were overcome by great delight.
There were the immensely fortunate sages, successful ones who had held up their seed, the Maruts, the Vasus, the
Sadhyas, the eternal Vishvadevas, the yakshas, the serpents, the pishachas, the guardians of the worlds, the fire god
and all the different kinds of sentiments. All of them assembled, to reside there. There were the seasons, scattering
flowers, and the great elements. There were the blazing herbs, illuminating the forest. Filled with delight, the birds
sang and danced. They sported on the slopes of that beautiful mountain and people found this very pleasant.

'"'The great-minded god was seated on the slope of that mountain, which was adorned with divine minerals. It
seemed like a bed. His lower garment was the skin of a tiger and his upper garment was the skin of a lion. A snake
was his sacred thread and he was adorned with red armlets. His beard and matted hair were tawny. His form was
terrible,  one  that  created  terror  among  the  enemies  of  the  gods.  However,  Vrishabhadhvaja[Vrishabhadhvaja is the same as Vrishadhvaja.]  granted freedom
from fear to all creatures who were devotees. On seeing him, all the rishis bowed down their heads. Those forgiving ones were cleansed from all their sins and freed from all their taints. Bhutapati's[Bhutapati means lord of creatures, or more specifically, the bhutas. Shiva's name.] place had an extremely terrible appearance. It was extremely difficult to approach and was populated by large serpents. O Madhusudana! But
in a short instant, everything became wonderful. The one with the bull as his sign was seated there, assuming a terrible form. However, the daughter of the mountain[Parvati.] arrived there, surrounded by the wives of the bhutas. Her garments were like Hara's and the vows that she followed were also similar to his. She held a sparkling golden pot
that was filled with water from all the tirthas. All the sacred mountainous streams followed the auspicious one.
Flowers were showered down and many kinds of fragrances began to blow. The one who resided on the slopes of
the Himalayas approached Hara's side. Smilingly and in sport, the auspicious and beautiful goddess suddenly covered Hara's eyes with her hands. As soon as his eyes were covered, everything lost consciousness and was enveloped in darkness. Suddenly, oblations and vashatkara disappeared. Everyone was distressed and overwhelmed
by terror and fright. As soon as Bhutapati's eyes were covered, it was as if the sun had vanished. However, in a
short instant, the darkness that pervaded the worlds was dispelled. A great and blazing flame emerged from his
forehead, from the mouth of the third eye and it was like the sun. It blazed like the fire of destruction at the end of
a yuga and it began to destroy the mountain.

'"'The daughter of the mountain saw the blazing fire emerge from the eye. On seeing this, the large-eyed one
bowed her head down before Hara. The forest of shala and sarala trees was being burnt. So were the beautiful
groves of sandalwood. The celestial herbs were ablaze. Large numbers of animals were terrified. They swiftly appeared before Hara and sought his protection. It was simultaneously terrible and beautiful. The flames were like
the fickle touch of lightning and rose up and touched the sky. It was as if all twelve Adityas were together. It was
like the fire at the time of the destruction of a yuga. It was as if Mount Himalaya was burnt down in an instant. The
summit and its minerals were consumed. The herbs were burnt and destroyed. On seeing that the mountain had
been destroyed, the daughter of the king of the mountains sought refuge with the illustrious one. She joined her
hands in salutation and stood there. Sharva[Shiva. Bhava is also Shiva's name.] saw Uma standing there, mild in her feminine nature. She did not desire that her father should face this disaster. Bhava glanced affectionately towards the mountain and everything became beautiful again, returned to the natural state. The birds were delighted and the trees in the forests blossomed.

'"'On seeing that the mountain had returned to its natural state, the goddess was happy. The unblemished one
spoke to her husband, Maheshvara, the lord of all creatures. "O illustrious one! O lord of all creatures! O one who
wields the trident! O one who is great in vows! A great doubt has been generated in me and you should explain
this. Why did a third eye manifest itself on your forehead? Why was the mountain, with its large numbers of birds
and forests, burnt down? After a short instant, why did it regain its natural state? O Maheshvara! Having destroyed
it, why did you cover it with trees again?" Maheshvara replied, "O goddess! O unblemished one! In your childishness, you covered my eyes. Since the light was destroyed, in a short instant, the world was destroyed[There is a pun on aloka (light) and loka (world).]. O daughter of the mountain! When the sun was destroyed, the world was pervaded by darkness. I created the blazing third
eye to protect the subjects. In a short while, that great energy destroyed this mountain. O goddess! To ensure your
pleasure, in a short instant, I restored it to its natural state." Uma said, "O illustrious one! Those of your faces that
are towards the east, the north and the south are handsome and beautiful to see, like the moon. Why is the face towards the south terrible? Why do you possess tawny, matted and erect hair? Why is your throat blue, like the
plumage of a peacock? Why is the Pinaka[The name of Shiva's bow.] always there in your hand? Why are you always in the form of a matted brahmachari? I have a doubt about all of this. O Bhutapati! O unblemished one! Tell me. O Vrishadhvaja! I am
your companion in the pursuit of dharma." The daughter of the mountain spoke to the illustrious wielder of the
Pinaka in this way. The lord was pleased with her conduct and her intelligence. The god therefore said, "O extremely beautiful one! O one with the beautiful face! I will tell you the reason behind these forms."'"'
