'Sanjaya said, "Those on your side beheld the supreme ones from the Vrishni-Andhaka and Kuru lineages. Each
one desired to be the first to kill them and Vijaya also rushed against the enemy. The giant chariots were colourful,
decorated in gold and tiger skins. They thundered and blazed in all the directions, like flaming fires. O lord of the
earth! The handles of the bows were inlaid with gold and were difficult to look at. The chariots rumbled deeply and
the horses that drew them were angry. Bhurishrava, Shala, Karna, Vrishasena, Jayadratha, Kripa, the ruler of
Madra and Drona's son, supreme among rathas-these eight maharathas seemed to devour the sky. They were armoured and angry. They blazed in the ten directions in chariots that roared like masses of clouds and were decorated with tiger skins and golden moons. From all directions, they enveloped Partha with sharp arrows. Colourful
horses from good lineages bore those maharathas. They possessed great speed and illuminated the ten directions.
These extremely swift and supreme horses came from many lineages and many countries. They were from mountainous and riverine regions and from Sindhu. O king! The best of warriors from among the Kurus wished to protect your son and swiftly dashed towards Dhananjaya's chariot from every direction. Those best of men grasped
giant conch shells and blew on them. O king! They filled the sky, the earth and the oceans. Vasudeva and Dhananjaya, supreme among beings, also blew on their supreme conch shells, best among all the conch shells on earth.
Kounteya's was Devadatta and Keshava's was Panchajanya. Sounded by Dhananjaya, there was a loud blast from
Devadatta. It spread through the earth, the sky and the directions. Blown by Vasudeva, Panchajanya was also like
that. It surpassed all sounds and filled heaven and earth[The word used is rodasi, meaning heaven and earth taken together.]. There was thus a terrible and loud noise. It generated
fear among cowards and increased the delight of those who were brave. O Indra among kings! Drums, tambourines, cymbals and other drums were sounded in large numbers. Those maharathas had been assembled for the
sake of Duryodhana's welfare. Those supreme archers became angry and intolerant at this sound. There were kings
from many countries, protected by their own soldiers. Those brave maharathas wished to answer Keshava and Arjuna's sound and intolerantly blew on their giant conch shells. Your soldiers were urged by the sound of those
conch shells. O lord! The rathas, elephants and horses became anxious and seemed to be ill. Agitated by the sound
of the conch shells blown by the brave ones, they became extremely anxious and were like the sky, agitated by a
hurricane. O king! All the directions echoed with that great sound. It terrified the soldiers, as if the end of the yuga
had arrived.

'"Duryodhana and the eight maharatha kings assigned to protect Jayadratha then surrounded Pandava[However, the list of the eight mentioned earlier includes Jayadratha. There are eight only if Duryodhana is also
included.].
Drona's son struck Vasudeva with seventy-three arrows, Arjuna with three broad-headed arrows and his standard
and horses with five. Arjuna was extremely angry at Janardana having been struck and pierced Angiras's descendant back with a hundred arrows[Ashvatthama was descended from Angiras.]. He pierced Karna with twelve arrows and Vrishasena with three. The valiant
one then sliced down Shalya's bow and arrows from his hand. Having picked up another bow, Shalya pierced Pan-
dava. Bhurishrava pierced him with three arrows that were gold-tufted and had been sharpened on stone, Karna
with thirty-two and Vrishasena with five. Jayadratha pierced him with seventy-three arrows and Kripa with ten. In
that battle, the lord of Madra pierced Phalguna with ten arrows. Drona's son countered Partha with sixty arrows.
Yet again, he pierced Vasudeva with seventy arrows and Partha with five. The tiger among men, the one with the
white horses and with Krishna as his charioteer, laughed and pierced all of them back, displaying the dexterity of
his hands. He pierced Karna with twelve arrows and Vrishasena with three. In that battle, he sliced down Shalya's
bow from his hand. He pierced Somadatta's son with three arrows and Shalya with ten. He used eight arrows that
were sharp and were like the flames of fires to pierce Drona's son. He pierced Goutama with twenty-five and
Saindhava with a hundred. He again struck Drona's son with seventy arrows. Bhurishrava became angry and cut
down Hari's whip. He then struck Arjuna with seventy-three arrows. The one with the white horses became wrathful. He brought down hundreds of sharp arrows and struck them, like a mighty storm shredding clouds."'
