'Sanjaya said, "O king! Listen. I will describe exactly the wonderful battle that commenced between the Kurus and
the Pandavas. Bharadvaja's son was stationed at the mouth of the vyuha. In that battle, the Parthas approached and
fought, seeking to penetrate Drona's force. Drona himself, and the soldiers, sought to protect the vyuha. They
fought against the Parthas in that battle, desiring great fame. Desiring the welfare of your son, Vinda and Anuvinda
from Avanti angrily struck Virata with ten arrows. O great king! While those two valiant ones and their followers
were stationed in battle, Virata bravely advanced against them and fought with them. The battle between them was
terrible and blood flowed like water. It was as if a lion and two foremost elephants with shattered temples had met
in the forest. Bahlika prided himself in the battle and Yajnasena's immensely powerful son[Shikhandi.] struck him with
sharp and terrible arrows that were capable of penetrating the inner organs. Bahlika became extremely angry and
used nine gold-tufted arrows with drooping tufts, which had been sharpened on stone, to strike Yajnasena's son.
The encounter between them was terrible and there was a profusion of arrows and lances. It generated fear among
cowards and increased the delight of the brave. The arrows released by those two covered the sky and the directions and enveloped everything, so that nothing could be seen. In the battle, together with his soldiers, Shaibya
from Govasana fought against the maharatha who was the son of Kashi. It was like one elephant against another
elephant. In the battle, the enraged King Bahlika fought against Droupadi's maharatha sons and this was as beautiful as the mind battling against the five senses. They[Droupadi's sons.], supreme among beings, fought fiercely and showered arrows in every direction, like the senses fighting for possession of the body. Your son, Duhshasana, struck Varshneya Satyaki with nine sharp arrows that had drooping tufts. Having been thus grievously struck by that great
archer, the archer Satyaki, for whom truth was his valour, quickly lost his senses somewhat. But having regained
his composure, Varshneya swiftly pierced your maharatha son with ten arrows that were shafted with the feathers
of herons. O king! They pierced each other firmly with arrows and the wounded in the battle, were dazzling, like
blossoming kimshukas. The angry Alambusa was afflicted by Kuntibhoja's arrows, which found their mark. He
was as beautiful as a flowering kimshuka. The rakshasa pierced Kuntibhoja with many iron arrows. At the forefront of your army, he then roared loudly. Those two brave ones fought against each other in that battle. To all the
beings, they seemed to be like Shakra and Jambha in ancient times[Jambha was a famous asura. He is sometimes described as having been killed by Indra, and sometimes described as having been killed by Vishnu.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The
sons of Madri were angry and violent against Shakuni in the battle, since he had caused the enmity earlier. In the
battle, they afflicted him with arrows.

'"O great king! That was the reason behind the destruction of men[This seems to be a reference to the injuries caused by Shakuni.]. It was created by you, extended by Karna
and maintained by your sons. O king! That fire of rage[On the part of the Pandavas.] has now arisen and is consuming the entire earth. Because of the arrows of the sons of Pandu[Nakula and Sahadeva.], Shakuni was forced to retreat. He was unable to exhibit his valour in
battle and did not know what to do. On seeing that he was retreating, Madri's maharatha sons again showered
down arrows on him, like clouds raining down on a large mountain. He was struck by many arrows with drooping
tufts. Using his swift horses, Soubala fled towards Drona's array. Ghatotkacha rushed against the brave rakshasa
Alayudha. But in that battle, he used only a medium violence and force[Suggesting that though Ghatotkacha was capable of more, he did not need it against Alayudha.]. O great king! The wonderful battle between the two was like the battle that had taken place in earlier times between Rama and Ravana. In the battle,
King Yudhishthira pierced the king of Madra with five hundred arrows and again pierced him with another seven.
O king! An extraordinary battle raged between them. It was like the great battle that had taken place in earlier
times between Shambara and the king of the immortals[There were several asuras named Shambara. One of these was killed by Indra.]. Your sons, Vivimshati, Chitrasena and Vikarna, were
surrounded by a large army and fought against Bhimasena."'
