'Bhishma said, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted. Among people, this has always been cited as
an instance of good conduct and this illustrates the point. I heard it in the hermitage of Rama, Jamadagni's son,
when it was recounted by that supreme among rishis. There was a great forest, inhabited by no other men. There
was only a self-controlled rishi who had restrained his senses and subsisted on roots and fruit. He had initiated
himself into the task of supreme control. He was tranquil, pure and devoted to great studies. He had cleansed himself through fasting and was always established in the path of the virtuous. The intelligent and righteous one was
seated there, looking upon all beings as equal. All the residents of the forest approached him-lions, tigers,
sharabhas, large and crazy elephants, leopards, rhinos, bears and others that were terrible to behold. All these
predatory beasts would ask him about his welfare. They were like the rishi's disciples and did what was agreeable
to him. All of them would ask about his welfare and then depart.

'"But there was a village animal that would never leave the great sage and this was a dog. It was faithfully devoted to him and was weak and thin because of the constant fasting. It ate fruits and roots, was calm and acted in
virtuous ways. When the rishi was seated, it would be near the great sage's feet. It was severely bound to him by
ties of affection and its behaviour was like that of a human. Once, an immensely valorous and carnivorous leopard
arrived there. It was cruel, like Death, and the wicked one came there for the sake of the dog. It was thirsty and
licked its lips. It lashed its tail around. Since it was hungry, it was in search of some flesh and its mouth gaped. O
lord of men! O immensely intelligent one! Listen. On seeing that cruel one advance, to save its life, the dog went
to the sage and said, 'O illustrious one! A leopard, the enemy of dogs, wishes to kill me. O great sage! Through
your favours, ensure that I face no fear from it.' The sage replied, 'O son! Do not be frightened. You will never
face death from a leopard. You will give up your form of a dog and become a leopard.' The dog became a leopard
and its complexion became golden. Its limbs were spotted and its teeth were large. It dwelt fearlessly in the forest.
However, an extremely terrible tiger arrived there. It was hungry and its mouth gaped open. It desired some blood
and approached the leopard, licking the corners of its mouth. On seeing the hungry tiger with a gaping mouth arrive in the forest, the leopard wished to save its life and sought refuge with the rishi. Since they used to live together, the rishi acted affectionately towards it, as he had always done. He changed the leopard into a tiger that was
stronger than its enemy. O lord of the earth! On seeing this, the tiger no longer attacked it. Having become a strong
tiger that lived on flesh, the dog no longer had any desire to touch and enjoy roots and fruit. A lord of deer always
desires residents of the forest. O great king! This tiger also acted in this way. Once, having killed a deer and satisfied itself on this, the tiger was asleep at the foot of a tree. A crazy elephant, which looked like a newly arisen
cloud, arrived there. It was huge and its temples were shattered. It was excellent[This is inaccurate, but there is nothing else one can do. The word used is
padmi (padmini for female elephants). These are elephants with the
marks of lotuses on their bodies.] and possessed a broad head. It
had superb tusks and was gigantic in form. Its roar was like the rumbling of the thunder. On seeing that mad elephant advance, insolent and crazy, the tiger was terrified of the elephant and sought refuge with the rishi. The
supreme among rishis turned the tiger into an elephant. On seeing its form, which was like that of a giant cloud,
the other elephant was frightened. It[The dog that had become an elephant.] was delighted and roamed around amidst clusters of lotuses and frankincense thickets, adorning its body with pollen from lotuses. The handsome elephant roamed around near the rishi's
cottage and time passed. After several nights, a maned lion arrived at that spot and its mane was tawny. The lion
was terrible and hailed from mountainous regions, having slain families of elephants. On seeing the lion advance,
the elephant was terrified on account of the lion. It was afflicted and, trembling out of fear, sought refuge with the
rishi. The sage then turned that king of elephants into a lion and the wild lion ignored the elephant, taking it to belong to the same species. On seeing a more powerful one, the wild lion was terrified and disappeared. The lion
dwelt happily in that forest hermitage. However, the other smaller animals that dwelt in the hermitage were terrified to be seen there and were always frightened for their lives. But it so happened with the progress of time that a
sharabha arrived in the sage's residence, desiring to kill the lion. It was powerful, carnivorous and sought to kill all
beings. All beings found it to be fearful. It dwelt in the forest and it possessed eight legs that extended upwards. O
scorcher of enemies! The sage turned it[The lion.] into an extremely strong sharabha. The wild sharabha saw the sage's
sharabha in front of him and on seeing that it was strong and fierce, quickly fled out of fear.

'"Once the sage had reduced it to the state of a sharabha, the sharabha was full of happiness and always dwelt
by the side of the sage. The large numbers of animals in the forest were all terrified of the sharabha. O king! Desiring to save their lives, they fled in all the directions. Always engaged in the killing of animals, the sharabha was
extremely satifisied. It was a flesh-eater and no longer desired to be peaceful and subsist on fruits and roots. Desiring blood, the powerful sharabha, born in the womb of a dog, was ungrateful and wished to kill the sage. Through
the strength of his austerities and the sight of knowledge, the immensely wise sage divined this and spoke to the
dog. 'You became a leopard from a dog and from a leopard you became a tiger. From a tiger you became an elephant with musth and from an elephant you became a lion. From an immensely strong lion you again became a
sharabha. Because I was overcome with affection, I had forgotten about your lineage. O wicked one! You desire to
act violently towards me, though I have caused you no harm. Therefore, you will go back to your own species. Become a dog.' The stupid one, evil in his soul, became a dog because it hated the sage and people. Because of the
rishi's curse, the sharabha again assumed the form of a dog."'
