Dhritarashtra asked, "O suta! On seeing that the king had been brought down through adharma, what did the immensely strong Baladeva, the best of the Madhava lineage, say? He knew about the rules of fighting with clubs. He
was skilled in fighting with clubs. O Sanjaya! What did Rohini's son do?"

'Sanjaya replied, "On seeing that Bhimasena had kicked your son in the head, Rama, supreme among strikers
and strongest among the strong, became angry. In the midst of those kings, the one with the plough as his weapon
raised up his arms. In terrible words of lamentation, he spoke words of shame. 'Shame that one should exhibit the
valour of a shudra and strike below the navel. In a duel with clubs, the likes of what Vrikodara has done have never been seen. It is certain that the sacred texts have said that one should not strike below the navel. But he is stupid
and ignorant of the sacred texts. He has easily done what he wanted.' While speaking in this way, he was overcome by great rage. The powerful one raised his plough and advanced towards Bhima. As he raised his arms, the
form of the great-souled one was like that of the great mountain Shveta, coloured with many minerals. However,
as he descended, Keshava humbly seized him. The powerful one grasped the powerful one in his thick arms. The
fair and the dark one[Balarama was fair and Krishna was dark.], best among the Yadu lineage, looked even more radiant. O king! They were like the sun
and the moon in the sky, at the end of the day. To pacify the angry one, Keshava said, 'One can have six kinds of
prosperity- one's own prosperity, the prosperity of friends, the decay of enemies, the decay of the friends of enemies, the decay of the friends of friends of enemies and the prosperity of the enemies of enemies[The shloka is slightly cryptic. The six types have to be deduced and are
not obvious.]. When there
are reversals to one's own self or that of friends, the learned know that one should quickly strive for peace. The
Pandavas are pure men and are our natural friends. They are the sons of our father's sister[Pritha (Kunti) was from the Yadava lineage and Vasudeva's (Krishna's
father) sister.]. They have been severely oppressed by the enemy. The accomplishment of a vow is the dharma of kshatriyas. Earlier, in the assembly
hall, Bhima had taken the pledge that in a great battle, he would shatter Suyodhana's thighs with a club. O scorcher
of enemies! Earlier, maharshi Maitreya had cursed him that his thighs would be shattered by Bhima with a club[The sage Maitreya had cursed Duryodhana. This has been described in
Section 29 (Volume 2).].
O slayer of Pralamba[Pralamba was a demon killed by Balarama.]! Therefore, I do not see a transgression. Do not be angry. Our alliance with the Pandavas is
based on birth and bonds of affection. Their prosperity is our prosperity. O bull among men! Therefore, do not be
angry.'

' "Rama said, 'Dharma is followed by the virtuous. But dharma is also followed for two reasons-artha, for
those who are addicted to artha, and kama, for those who are addicted to it. Those who obtain great happiness follow dharma, artha and kama, without oppressing dharma and artha, or dharma and kama, or kama and artha[The idea is that all three must be followed. One must not follow one at
the expense of the other two objectives.].
Bhimasena has not followed all of them and has oppressed dharma. O Govinda! This is despite what you have told
me.'

' "Vasudeva replied, 'In this world, you have always been spoken of as one without rage, one with dharma in
your soul and one who is devoted to dharma. Therefore, be pacified and do not yield to anger. Know that kali yuga
has almost arrived and also remember Pandava's pledge. Pandava has paid his debts to the enmity and accomplished his pledge.'"

'Sanjaya said, "O lord of the earth! Hearing this deceptive exposition of dharma on Keshava's part, Rama was
not happy and spoke these words in the assembly. 'King Suyodhana had dharma in his soul and was slain through
adharma. Pandava will be known in this world as someone who fought deceitfully. Duryodhana, with dharma in
his soul, will obtain the eternal end. Dhritarashtra's son, king among men, fought fairly and has been slain. He consecrated himself for the encounter and entered the sacrifice that was the duel. He offered himself as an oblation
into the fire and has obtained fame.' Speaking these words, Rohini's powerful son, who was like the crest of a
white cloud, ascended his chariot and left towards Dvaraka. O lord of the earth! When Rama left for Dvaravati, the
Panchalas, the Varshneyas and the Pandavas were cheerless.

' "Yudhishthira was miserable and with his head hanging down, was immersed in thought. Immersed in grief, he
thought about what should be done. Vasudeva told him, 'O Dharmaraja! Why did you permit such an act of adharma? His relatives had been killed. He had been brought down, bereft of his senses. Yet, Bhima struck Duryodhana's head with his foot. O one who knows about dharma! O lord of men! Why did you ignore this?' Yudhishthira
replied, 'O Krishna! I did not like what Vrikodara did to the king. Because of anger, he kicked his head with his
foot and I am not happy at this extermination of my lineage. Dhritarashtra's sons have always deceived us and acted fraudulently. They have spoken many harsh words towards us and exiled us to the forest. That has led to great
unhappiness in Bhimasena's heart. O Varshneya! Thinking about all this, I ignored it. He slew the deceitful and
avaricious one who was always overcome by his passion. Pandava has accomplished his desire. How does it matter
whether it was dharma or adharma?' Having been thus addressed by Dharmaraja, Vasudeva, the extender of the
Yadu lineage, agreed with a considerable amount of difficulty. With Bhima's welfare in mind, Vasudeva spoke, approving of everything Bhima had done in the battle.

' "The intolerant Bhimasena brought down your son. He stood there cheerfully, his hands joined in salutation.
The immensely energetic one spoke to Dharmaraja Yudhishthira. O lord of the earth! He[Bhima.] had wished for victory
and his eyes were dilated with joy. 'O king! The pacified earth is now yours, without any thorns. O great king!
Rule over it and follow your own dharma. O lord of the earth! He was the source of the enmity. He was fraudulent
and loved deceit. He has been brought down and is lying down on the ground. All the enemies, Duhshasana, Rad-
heya, Shakuni and the others, harsh in words, have been slain. The earth, with its many jewels, forests and mountains, is yours again now. O great king! The enemies have been killed.' Yudhishthira replied, 'With King Suyodhana brought down, the enmity is over. We have conquered the earth because of Krishna's advice. It is through
good fortune that you have paid off your debts to your mother and to your anger. O invincible one! It is through
good fortune that you have triumphed. It is through good fortune that your enemy has been brought down.'" '
