'Brihadashva said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having heard the words of the swan, on account of Nala,
Damayanti no longer had control over herself. Thinking about this, she became dejected, pale of complexion and
thin. Damayanti became prone to sighing deeply. She would cast her glance up at the sky. She looked like one demented. She found no pleasure in her bed, in her seats or in enjoyment. She did not rest during the day or the night
and continuously lamented and wept. Her friends saw her state and her form and knew from the signs that she was
ill. O lord of men! Damayanti's crowd of friends reported this to the king of Vidarbha. They recounted her state.
On hearing about this from Damayanti's crowd of friends, King Bhima began to think about the great task that he
would have to perform for his daughter's sake. The king reflected on this and decided that his daughter had attained maturity. He saw that his task was to organize a svayamvara for Damayanti. O lord of the earth! O illustrious one! He invited all the brave lords of the earth to attend the svayamvara. On hearing that Damayanti's svayamvara would be held, on Bhima's instructions, all the kings came to King Bhima. The earth was filled with the roar
of elephants, horses and chariots. Those great-souled kings could be seen with their decorated armies, bedecked in
colourful garlands and ornaments.

'"At this time, the two supreme and ancient rishis, the great-souled Narada and Parvata, who were greatly rigid
in their vows, were roaming around and those great-souled ones went to Indra's world. They entered the palace of
the king of the gods and were received with homage. The lord with the thousand eyes[Indra.] worshipped them and
asked about their welfare, their health and about everything else. Narada said, 'O lord! O god! O illustrious one! O
Maghavan[Maghavan is Indra's name.]! We are well in every respect. The entire world is well and so are the kings.' Hearing the words of
Narada, the slayer of Bala and Vritra[Bala and Vritra were demons killed by Indra.] asked, 'The righteous lords of the earth give up their lives in fighting.
When the time for death arrives through weapons, they go towards it without hesitation. This eternal world is
theirs and every object of desire, as it is for me. But I no longer see those brave kshatriyas. Why do those kings no
longer come to me as my beloved guests?' Thus addressed by Shakra, Narada replied, 'O illustrious one! Listen as
to why these lords of the earth can no longer be seen. The king of Vidarbha has a famous daughter by the name of
Damayanti. In her beauty, she surpasses all the women on earth. O Shakra! Her svayamvara is due to take place
soon. All the kings and the princes are going there. O destroyer of Bala and Vritra! All the kings crave for this jewel of the world and desire her immensely.' When they were conversing thus, the lords of the world[The lords (pala) of the worlds (loka) are eight in number-Indra, Vahni (Agni), Yama, Nairrita, Varuna,
Maruta, Kubera and Isha (Ishana). Sometimes, Vayu is listed instead of Indra. However, especially since Agni is
mentioned separately, in this context, the word lokapala is being used in a less specific sense. As will become clear
later, only Indra, Agni, Varuna and Yama are meant.], together
with Agni, all supreme among the immortals, came before the king of the gods. All of them then heard the great
words that Narada spoke. On hearing these words, they happily said that they would go too. O great king! With
their followers and with their vehicles, all of them went to Vidarbha, where all the lords of the earth had gone. O
Kounteya! On hearing about that gathering of kings, King Nala also set out, happy in his heart and with his mind
fixed on Damayanti. On their way, the gods saw Nala on the ground. He was like Manmatha[The god of love, Kandarpa is another of his names.] personified in his
richness of beauty. The lokapalas saw that he was as resplendent as the sun. They wondered at the richness of his
beauty and forgot about their resolution[That is, they gave up the intention of soliciting Damayanti for themselves.]. The gods stopped their vimanas in the sky and descending from the sky,
addressed the king of Nishadha, 'O Nala! O Nishadha! O Indra among kings! You are always devoted to the truth.
O supreme among men! Help us and become our messenger.'"
