Bhishma said, "Having been thus addressed by the intelligent Tuladhara, the intelligent Jajali, supreme among
ascetics, replied in these words. 'O trader! You sell all the juices and all the scents, trees and herbs and their
roots and fruits. How has this steadiness in intelligence come to you? From where has this knowledge come? O
immensely wise one! Tell me everything about this.' O king! Having been thus addressed by the illustrious brahmana, the vaishya Tuladhara, who knew about the true objectives of dharma and the subtleties of dharma, spoke to
Jajali, who had performed difficult austerities, but was still not content with his knowledge. 'O Jajali! I know eternal and ancient dharma, with all its mysteries. People who know say that it is nothing but friendliness and being
engaged in the welfare of all beings. There should be no violence towards living beings, or limited violence. O Jajali! Such conduct is said to follow supreme dharma and that is the way I live. My house is built with wood and
grass that has been cut by other people. O brahmana rishi! Lac, lotus roots, lotus filaments, scents, the agents for
cleaning, superior and inferior, and the juices and many other objects, with the exception of liquor, are bought by
me from other people. I sell them again, without any deceit. O Jajali! If there is a person who regards everyone as a
well-wisher and is engaged in everyone's welfare, in deeds, thoughts and words, he knows dharma. I do not praise
or censure the deeds of others. O brahmana rishi! I look upon these colourful people, the way I look at the sky. I do
not obstruct or oppose. I do not hate or desire. O Jajali! I look upon all beings as equal. That is my vow. I have
been freed from good and bad. I have cast aside love and hatred. O Jajali! I hold up my pair of scales equally towards everyone. O Jajali! O best among intelligent ones! That is the way I look at you and at all the other people.
A lump of earth, a piece of iron and gold are the same to me. The blind, the deaf and the mad, despite being adversely affected by destiny, are always full of joy. That is the way I look at everything. Those who are old, those
who suffer from disease and those who are emaciated are indifferent towards objects of pleasure. In that way, I
have lost all interest in objects of desire and pleasure. When a person is not frightened and no one is terrified of
him, when he does not desire and does not hate, then he obtains success and becomes a brahmana. A person who
does not harbour wicked sentiments towards all beings, in deeds, thoughts and words, attains the brahman. A person who grants fearlessness to all beings attains a state that is without fear. For him, there is no past and no future
and no dharma. A person who agitates people through cruel words and harsh punishment, as if he is the face of
death, suffers from great fear. Great-souled and aged ones observe the conduct of non-violence towards their sons
and grandsons and I follow them. A person who knows, an ascetic or a powerful person can be deluded and from
that confusion, eternal dharma and good conduct can be destroyed. However, if a wise person follows good conduct, he can swiftly obtain dharma. Such a virtuous person wanders around, self-controlled, without any violence
in his consciousness. In a river, a piece of wood drifts along as it wishes and sometimes comes into contact with
another piece of wood, which is also flowing along, as it wills. There are other pieces of wood that come together
and then drift apart. Grass, wood and refuse are sometimes seen to come together. This is the nature of conduct,
seen here and there. If there is a person who does not agitate any being and if he grants fearlessness to all beings,
that person always attains the state of a sage. O learned one! There may also be a person who agitates all the people, like a wolf. Like an aquatic animal, he makes people shriek and climb onto the shore. A person who has aides
is extremely fortunate and obtains riches, in this world and hereafter. That is what wise people have spoken about
in the sacred texts. Some practise a little bit of what has been mentioned. Other accomplished ones follow it in entirety. All the fruits that are obtained through austerities, sacrifices, donations and wisdom can be obtained by ensuring fearlessness. In this world, a person who grants the dakshina of fearlessness to all beings accomplishes all
the sacrifices and himself obtains the dakshina of fearlessness. There is no dharma that is the equal of non-violence
towards beings. A person who never agitates beings and grants all beings fearlessness attains the state of a great
sage. A person who agitates beings, like a snake that has arrived inside a house, does not obtain dharma, in this
world or in the next. When a person looks on all beings as his own self and treats all beings equally, the gods themselves are confused when they try to follow his path and his footsteps. The donation of fearlessness to beings is the
supreme among all donations. O Jajali! I am telling you the truth. Listen to it with devotion. A person who is fortunate is not born again. An unfortunate person is born again. Obsessed with their tasks, people are always seen to be
asleep. There is nothing that is without a reason. O Jajali! Dharma is subtle. In the words of dharma, tasks have
been ordained for the past and the future. There are subtleties and so many contradictions that one is incapable of
knowing it. Some understand this internally. Others  only comprehend conduct. There are those who  kill bulls,
making them bear heavy burdens, binding and restraining them, inserting rings in their noses. Why aren't these
people killed? There are those who kill beings for eating them. Why are they not censured? Men make other men
slaves and enjoy the results. They kill, bind and restrain them, making them work day and night. This is despite
they themselves knowing the misery from killing and striking. The gods dwell in the five senses of all beings-
Aditya, Chandrama, Vayu, Brahma, Prana, Kratu[Intelligence or a sacrificial rite, personified.] and Yama. But there are those who kill and trade beings, without even thinking about it. O brahmana! I am not speaking about oil, clarified butter, honey, other objects and
herbs[Those are the objects Tuladhara trades in.]. There are many animals that are happily reared in regions where there are no gnats. Despite knowing that
their mothers love them, many men oppress them. They take them to regions where there is a lot of mud, with
many gnats. They make them mounts and beasts of burden. Others oppress them in other ways. I think that these
deeds are no different from killing a foetus. Agriculture is regarded as a virtuous livelihood. But it is extremely terrible. Wooden implements with iron at the mouth injure the earth and kill beings that live in the ground. O Jajali!
Look towards the bulls that have been yoked. Cows have been named as unslayable. How can this person then kill
them? The person who kills a cow for the sake of gain commits a great offence. Many rishis and ascetics spoke to
Nahusha. "A cow is a mother. You have killed a bull, which is like Prajapati. O Nahusha! You have perpetrated a
wicked deed and we are frightened on this account." They divided it[The sin.] into a hundred and one parts and inflicted it
as diseases on all living beings. O Jajali! The immensely fortunate rishis passed this on to the subjects and told
Nahusha, who had committed a sin like that of killing a foetus, "We will not be able to offer oblations at your sacrifices." This is what those great-souled ones, who knew about the truth, said. However, the rishis and the ascetics
got to know the truth and were quickly pacified[They got to know that Nahusha had not killed the bull intentionally.]. O Jajali! These are the kinds of inauspicious and terrible conduct practised in this world. These are practised even by accomplished people who know, simply because these are
norms of conduct. One should seek out the reasons behind dharma and not follow it because it is the conduct of the
world. O Jajali! Listen to the conduct I follow towards those who hurt me or praise me. They are equal before me
and I do not like or dislike either. This is the kind of dharma that is praised by the learned. This is full of reason
and is practised by the ascetics. This is always seen among those who observe dharma in their conduct and are accomplished.'"'
