'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! I am struck by great fear and wonder on hearing of the deeds of the sons of Pandu.
Even the gods will find it extremely difficult to accomplish these. O Sanjaya! O suta! On hearing about the defeat
of my sons in every way, I am overcome with grave thoughts about what will happen. Vidura's certain words are
oppressing my heart. O Sanjaya! Because of destiny, it is seen that everything is occurring as he said it would.
Bhishma is the foremost among brave ones and is supreme among those who possess the knowledge of weapons.
That warrior is fighting with the army of the Pandavas. What do the great-souled and immensely strong sons of
Pandu possess? O son[The word used is tata.]! What supreme boons have they obtained? What knowledge have they accumulated?
They do not suffer any decay, like masses of stars in the firmament. I cannot endure the repeated slaughter of my
soldiers at the hands of the Pandavas. Because of destiny, this extremely terrible punishment is descending on me.
The sons of Pandu cannot be killed and my sons are being slaughtered. O Sanjaya! I cannot detect any reason as to
why this should be the case. Nor do I see any means of overcoming this misery. I am like a man who is trying to
cross the mighty ocean with his arms. There is no doubt that all my sons will meet a terrible death. I do not see a
brave one who can protect those on my side in battle. O Sanjaya! In this battle, the destruction of my sons is certain. O suta! Tell me the specific reason for this. I am now asking you about the true reason and you should tell me
everything. What did Duryodhana do, on seeing that his troops were running away in battle? What about Bhishma,
Drona, Kripa, Soubala, Jayadratha, the mighty archer who is Drona's son and the immensely strong Vikarna? What
did those great-souled ones determine to do then? O immensely wise one! O Sanjaya! Did my sons retreat?"

'Sanjaya replied, "O king! Listen attentively to what you wish to hear. Nothing was accomplished because of
mantras and nothing was caused by maya. O king! Nor did the Pandavas create a fresh calamity. They are fighting
in a just cause and they are fighting according to their powers. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They have
performed all their deeds and tasks in accordance with dharma. The Parthas have always acted so as to obtain great
fame. Resorting to dharma, those immensely strong ones have never retreated from a fight. They have obtained
supreme prosperity. Where there is dharma, victory exists there. O king! That is the reason the Parthas cannot be
killed in battle and that is the reason they are victorious. Your evil-souled son has always acted according to evil.
He is cruel and has performed inferior deeds. That is the reason he is decaying in this battle. O lord of men! Your
son has performed many violent deeds. He has deceived the sons of Pandu, acting like inferior men. They disregarded all the offences committed by your son. O Pandu's elder brother! The Pandavas have always ignored them.
O lord of the earth! Your son has not shown them appropriate honour. This is the outcome of those evil deeds.
These are the extremely terrible fruits of that, like that of kimpaka[Kimpaka is a pretty but bitter fruit, probably of the Trichosanthes variety.]. O great king! With your sons and well-
wishers, you are tasting that. O king! Though you were restrained by your well-wishers, Vidura, Bhishma and the
great-souled Drona, you did not realize this. I also tried to restrain you, but you did not accept those words. Those
were beneficial words. They were like medicine. But you rejected them, like a dying man who does not accept
medicines. You accepted the views of your sons and hoped to defeat the Pandavas. Listen to my words about the
true reasons. You have asked me about them. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! I will tell you about the reasons behind the victory of the Pandavas. O scorcher of enemies! I will tell you exactly as I have heard it. Duryodhana himself asked the grandfather about this, when he saw that all his maharatha brothers were vanquished in the
battle. When night fell, Kourava was overwhelmed with sorrow in his heart. In humility, he went to the immensely
wise grandfather. O lord of men! Hear from me what your son said at that time.

'"Duryodhana said, 'You, Drona, Shalya, Kripa, Drona's son, Hardikya Kritavarma[Kritavarma was the son of Hridika.], Sudakshina from Kamboja, Bhurishrava, Vikarna and the valiant Bhagadatta-all of these are renowned as maharathas and all of them
have been born in noble lineages. It is my view that they are sufficient for all the three worlds. All the assembled
Pandavas cannot stand before them in valour. A doubt has therefore arisen in my mind and I am asking you about
this. How are the Kounteyas obtaining victory at every step? Who is their support?'

'"Bhishma replied, 'O king! O Kourava! Listen to the words that I am going to speak to you. I often spoke to
you. But you did not act in accordance with my words. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! I asked you to act
so that there might be peace with the Pandavas. O lord! I thought that this would have been beneficial for both you
and the world. O king! You would have happily enjoyed the earth with your brothers. You would have chastised all
ill-wishers and delighted your relatives. O son[The word used is tata.]! But on earlier occasions, you did not heed my words. Because
you dishonoured the Pandus, you are now confronted with this calamity. They are the performers of unsullied
deeds. O lord! O great king! I will tell you the reasons why they cannot be killed. Listen. There is no one in this
world who can vanquish the Pandavas in battle. There has been no such person, nor will there be. They are protected by the wielder of the Sharnga bow[Sharnga is the name of Krishna's bow, made out of horn.]. O son! O one learned in dharma! Listen exactly to what was chanted and
recounted in the ancient accounts, by sages whose souls were controlled. In ancient times, all the gods and rishis
assembled and worshipped the grandfather[Brahma.] on Mount Gandhamadana. Seated in their midst, Prajapati[Brahma.] saw
an excellent and blazing vimana stationed in the sky. Having got to know everything about it through his powers of
meditation, Brahma joined his hands in salutation. With his soul filled with delight, he bowed before the supreme
being, the supreme lord. On seeing that Brahma had stood up, all the rishis and gods also stood, hands joined in
salutation, beholding that great marvel.

'"'Brahma, supreme among those who have knowledge of the brahman, worshipped him and said, "You are the
end of the universe. You are the creator of the universe. You are supreme. You are supreme dharma. You are the
glory of the universe. You are the manifestation of the universe. You are the refuge of the universe. You are the action of the universe. You are the controller. You are the lord of the universe. You are Vasudeva. You are the soul of
yoga. You are divinity and I seek refuge in you. Victory to the great god of the universe. Victory to the one who is
engaged in the welfare of the worlds. Victory to the illustrious lord of all yoga. Victory to the one who is before
and after yoga. The lotus was created from your navel. You possess large eyes. Victory to the one who is the lord
of all the lords in the universe. You are the past, the present and the future. Victory to the one who creates tranquillity in the soul. You are the store of innumerable qualities. Victory to the one on whom everything depends. You
are Narayana. You are impossible to comprehend. Victory to the one who is the wielder of the Sharnga bow. You
are the one who possesses all the secret qualities. The universe is your form. You are free from disease. You are the
lord of the universe. You are mighty-armed. Victory to the one who is engaged in the welfare of the worlds. O
mighty serpent! O great boar! O one with the tawny mane! Victory to the lord. O one with the yellow garment! O
one who is the lord of the directions. O one in whom the universe resides! O one without decay! You are the manifest. You are the unmanifest. You are in control of your senses. You possess vigorous senses. Your soul is beyond
measure. You are the only one who knows about your own self. Victory to the deep one who satisfies all desires.
You are infinite. You are known as the wise one. You are eternal. You are the one who causes all the worlds to be
manifest. You accomplish all your tasks. You act according to wisdom. You know about dharma. You are the one
who is the harbinger of victory. Your soul is mysterious. You are the soul of all beings. You are the origin of everything that comes into existence. You know about the nature of all beings. You are the lord of the worlds. Victory to
the one who makes all beings appear. You are the self-creating one. You are the immensely fortunate one. You are
the one who acts so as to bring about the destruction of everything. You are the one who inspires all thoughts in the
mind. Victory to the brahman, beloved of all beings. You act for the sake of creation and destruction. O lord of desire! O supreme lord! You are the origin of amrita. You are the origin of virtue. You are the fire at the end of a
yuga. You are the one who grants victory. You are the lord of all Prajapatis. O god! The lotus was created from
your navel. O immensely powerful one! You are the one who was created from his own self. You are the great being. You are the one with action in his soul. Victory to the one who is active. The goddess earth constitutes your
feet. The directions are your arms. The firmament is your head. I am your form. The gods are your limbs. The sun
and the moon are your eyes. O lord! Austerities performed because of truth, dharma and desire are your strength.
The fire is your energy. The wind is your breath. Water is created from your sweat. The Ashvins are always your
ears. The goddess Sarasvati is your tongue. The devoted sacraments of the Vedas are vested in you. The universe
finds refuge in you. You are the lord of yoga. It is impossible to know your measure, your dimensions, your energy,
your valour, your strength or your yoga. The gods are devotedly faithful to you. They are immersed in your rules.
O Vishnu! O supreme lord! O great lord! They always worship you. Through your favours, I have created rishis,
gods, gandharvas, yakshas, rakshasas, serpents, pishachas, men, animals, birds and reptiles on earth. O one who
created the lotus in your navel! O large-eyed one! O Krishna! O dispeller of all misery! You are the destination of
all beings. You are the leader. You are the mouth of the universe. O lord of the gods! It is through your favours that
the gods are always happy. O god! It is through your favours that the earth is always without fear. O large-eyed
one! You have taken birth to extend the lineage of the Yadus, so that dharma may be established and the daityas
destroyed. O lord! For upholding the universe, do what I have asked you to. O lord! O Vasudeva! Through your
favours, I have exactly sung all that is extremely mysterious in your essence. Create the god Samkarshana[Balarama.] out
of your own self. O Krishna! Create Pradyumna out of your own self[Pradyumna is the son of Krishna and Rukmini. Aniruddha is Pradyumna's son and Krishna's grandson.]. Aniruddha is known as the undecaying
Vishnu and create him out of Pradyumna. It is Aniruddha who created me, Brahma, the upholder of the
universe[Aniruddha as part of Vishnu and not as Pradyumna's son.]. I have been created by Vasudeva's essence and I have therefore been created by you. O lord! Divide
yourself into different parts and take birth in the world of men. There, for the welfare of all the worlds, act so that
all the asuras can be killed. Establish dharma. Obtain fame. Obtain the essence of yoga. O infinitely valorous one!
The brahmarshis of the world and the gods are devoted to you and chant your names and about your supreme soul.
They are all established in you. All beings find refuge in you. You are the one who provides them sanctuary. O
well-armed one! You are the granter of boons. You have no beginning. You have no middle. You have no end. You
possess the supreme yoga. You are a bridge for the worlds. That is what the brahmanas sing."'"'
