'Yudhishthira said, "I have heard about the four kinds of ashramas followed by men earlier. O grandfather! I am
asking you to explain them in detail."

'Bhishma replied, "O Yudhishthira! O mighty-armed one! Everything about dharma, as revered by the virtuous,
is known to you, as it is to me. O Yudhishthira! However, you have asked me about differences in practice. O lord
of men! O best among those who uphold dharma! Hear about dharma. O Kounteya! O bull among men! All of
these are found in those who are of virtuous conduct and engaged in the duties of the four ashramas. O Yudhishthira! If one follows dandaniti without being attached to desire or anger and regards all beings as equal, he is in the
ashrama of a mendicant[The reference is to a king, who is then in a state of renunciation.]. He knows about acquisition and giving away, about encouraging and restraining and
about the appropriate conduct for valiant ones. He is then established in the ashrama of conferring prosperity[Alternatively, the ashrama of tranquility.]. O
Yudhishthira! When his kin, allies and friends confront a disaster and he rescues and sustains them, he is established in the ashrama of consecration. O Partha! If he performs rites[The text uses the word ahnika, which means a rite performed twice a
day.] and sacrifices for beings, ancestors and
men, then he is established in the broad ashrama of vanaprastha. If a king protects all beings and protects his own
kingdom, he is effectively consecrated in many ways and established in the ashrama of vanaprastha. If he always
studies the Vedas, is forgiving, worships his teachers and serves his preceptors, then he is established in the ashrama of brahmacharya. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If he always follows a path that is upright and without
deceit and treats all beings in this way, he is established in the ashrama of brahmacharya. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! There are brahmanas who know about the three kinds of learning and are in vanaprastha. If he
gives them large quantities of riches, he is established in the ashrama of vanaprastha. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! If he does not cause injury to any being and practises non-violence, he is established in a state that has all
the stages. O Kouravya! O Yudhishthira! If he is compassionate towards all, young or old, he is established in a
state that has all the stages. O extender of the Kuru lineage! O Kouravya! If he acts and uses his force to save beings and save those who have sought refuge, he resides in the stage of garhasthya. If he protects all beings and mobile and immobile objects and always worships them in accordance with what they deserve, he resides in the stage
of garhasthya. O Partha! If he encourages and restrains elder and younger wives, brothers, sons and grandsons, his
austerities are like those of garhasthya. O tiger among men! If he protects and worships virtuous ones who look on
all subjects as their own selves, he is established in the ashrama of garhasthya. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O Yudhishthira! When those in different ashramas are welcomed in his house and offered food, he is in the
state of garhasthya. A man who is appropriately established in the dharma promulgated by the Creator obtains the
supreme fruits of all the ashramas. O Kounteya! O Yudhishthira! It is said that a man whose qualities are never destroyed is the best of men, whatever be the ashrama he is established in. O Yudhishthira! If he acts so as to make
everyone dwell and honours according to age and lineage, he is established in all the ashramas. O Kounteya! O
tiger among men! A king who protects the dharma of the country and the dharma of families is established in all
the ashramas. O tiger among men! At the right time, if he offers riches and gifts to those who should be honoured,
he dwells in the ashrama of the virtuous. O Kounteya! Even if he is in the dharma of the tenth decade[That is, even if he is aged.], if a king
glances towards the dharma of all the people, he is said to dwell in an ashrama. When people who are accomplished in dharma and virtuous ones who act in accordance with dharma are protected within the kingdom, the
king receives one-fourth[Of their merits.]. O tiger among men! When kings do not protect those who take delight in dharma and
others who follow dharma, they take away their sins[The sins devolve on the king.]. O Yudhishthira! O unblemished one! Those who aid kings
in the task of protection also obtain a share in all the dharma obtained by others. O tiger among men! It has been
determined that, among all the ashramas, garhasthya is the blazing one. We regard it as the one that purifies. If a
man regards all beings as his own self and conquers anger when wielding the rod of chastisement, he obtains happiness after death. This is like a boat that is raised up through dharma and is full of spirit and valour. Its ropes are
the bridge of dharma. It is swift, driven by the wind of renunciation, and it will enable you to cross. When the desire in the heart has withdrawn from every object, one is established in the universal essence and attains the brahman. O lord of men! Use yoga to become extremely content. O tiger among men! When you are engaged in protection, you will obtain dharma. There are brahmanas who are engaged in studying the Vedas and the performance
of virtuous deeds. O unblemished one! Make efforts to protect them and all the people. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Dharma is obtained through the ashrama of vanaprastha. However, through protecting, a king can obtain a hundred times the qualities of that dharma. O foremost among Pandavas! The different kinds of dharma have
been recounted and you should follow this eternal path, witnessed in earlier times. O Pandava! O tiger among
men! If you single-mindedly engage yourself in protecting, you will obtain the dharma of the four ashramas and
the four varnas."'
