Indra answered, 'Indeed, the strength of brahmanas is superior in this way. There is nothing that is superior to
a brahmana. But I cannot tolerate the strength of Avikshit's son. I will strike him with the terrible vajra. O
Dhritarashtra[This is not to be confused with Duryodhana's father. This is a gandharva named Dhritarashtra.]! Go to Marutta and tell him and Samvarta, "O king! Accept Brihaspati as your preceptor. Otherwise, I will strike you with the terrible vajra."'"

'Vyasa continued, "Dhritarashtra went to that Indra among men and told him about Vasava's words. 'O Indra
among kings! Know me to be the gandharva Dhritarashtra. Desiring to say something, I have come here. O lion
among kings! Listen to me. I will convey Indra's words. This is what the great-souled lord of the worlds said.

"Choose Brihaspati as your officiating priest. Otherwise, I will strike you with the terrible vajra. Act in accordance
with my words." This is what the one with the incomprehensible deeds has said.'

'"Marutta replied, 'You, Purandara, the Vishvadevas, the Vasus and the Ashvins know the truth about this. In
this world, it has always been said that there is never any escape for someone who acts injuriously towards a
friend. Let Brihaspati be the officiating priest for the great Indra, who is the excellent wielder of the vajra and the
foremost among the gods. O king[Dhritarashtra was a king of the gandharvas.]! Samvarta will be my officiating priest now. I do not find any pleasure in your
words or in his[Indra's.].'
'"The gandharva said, 'O lion among kings! You can hear Vasava's terrible roar. He is roaring in the firmament.
It is evident that the great Indra will release his vajra. O king! At this time, think of what is good for you.'"

'Vyasa  continued,  'He  was  thus  addressed  by  King  Dhritarashtra  and  heard  Vasava's  roar.  Samvarta  was
supreme among those who knew about dharma and was always devoted to austerities. He told him everything and
asked him about what should be done.

'"Marutta said, 'It is showering down, with thunderbolts. Though he cannot be seen yet, the immortal cannot be
far. O Indra among brahmanas! For the sake of peace, I am seeking refuge with you. O foremost among brahmanas! Grant me freedom from fear. The wielder of the vajra is advancing from the ten directions. He is superhuman and terrible. Our assisting priests have become frightened.'

'"Samvarta replied, 'O lion among kings! I will pronounce mantras and remove this extremely terrible fear that
comes from Shakra. I will quickly stupefy him with my learning. It will soon be evident that you have nothing to
fear. O king! I will stupefy him. Do not be frightened of Shakra. Let all the gods hurl their weapons towards me.
Let the vajra blaze in all the directions. Let the wind blow. Let showers pour down and bring down forests. Let a
flood rain down from heaven. Let the lightning be seen. Do not be terrified. All of this will be futile. Let Vasava
shower down as much as he wants. Vahni will protect you in every way. Let him fling his vajra wherever he wants,
let him make the wind blow. Let torrents of water flow in a terrible deluge.'

'"Marutta said, 'The terrible sound and great roar of the vajra can be heard, mixed with that of the wind. My
soul is repeatedly distressed. O brahmana! All my tranquility has vanished now.'

'"Samvarta replied, 'O Indra among men! Your anxiety on account of the vajra and the wind will soon be dispelled. I will destroy the vajra. Abandon your fear and ask for a boon from me. What do you desire my austerities
to accomplish for you?'

'"Marutta said, 'O brahmana! I desire that Indra should suddenly manifest himself at this sacrifice and receive
the oblations that are being offered. Let all the gods accept their respective shares and receive the soma that has
been extracted.'

'"Samvarta replied, 'O king! I have invoked Indra with his horses and with all the gods, so that they come and
drink soma. They have now been summoned to this sacrifice because of the mantras. Behold their forms, terrified
by the mantras.'"

'Vyasa continued, "The king of the gods was on a chariot, to which, the best of tawny horses were yoked. With
the gods, he came to the sacrifice of the immeasurable king who was Avikshit's son, to drink the soma. He came
with a large number of gods. With his priest, Marutta arose to greet them. Following the ordinances laid down in
the sacred texts, he cheerfully worshipped the king of the gods with the best of honours.

'"Samvarta said, 'O Puruhuta! Welcome. O learned one! O slayer of Bala and Vritra! O Indra! Through your
presence here, this sacrifice has become more resplendent. Drink the soma that I have extracted.'

'"Marutta added, 'I bow down before you. Look on me benevolently. While I am alive, may I successfully obtain the fruits of the sacrifice. O Indra of the gods! This sacrifice has been conducted by the one who is younger to
Brihaspati in birth.'

'"Indra replied, 'I know this preceptor, who is a store of austerities. He is sharp in his energy and is Brihaspati's
younger brother. O Indra among men! I have come because of his summons. I am pleased with you now and my
anger has been destroyed.'

'"Samvarta said, 'O king of the gods! If you are pleased, then instruct us about the rites of the sacrifice yourself.
O Indra of the gods! O god! You yourself determine the modes that must be followed and let all the worlds know
that this has been done by you.'"

'Vyasa continued, "Shakra was thus addressed by the son of Angiras. He himself instructed the gods that an assembly hall, with the best of rooms, should be constructed. These had colourful and expensive floors. Large staircases were swiftly erected for the large numbers of gandharvas and apsaras. These were constructed in the sacrificial ground, so that thousands of apsaras could dance along these and ascend towards heaven. O Indra among men!
Thus addressed by Shakra, the residents of heaven happily and quickly acted in accordance with his words. O
king! Delighted at being worshipped by King Marutta, Indra spoke these words to him. 'O king! All the other
kings who were your ancestors have come here to meet you. O king! All the other gods are also delighted. They
have accepted the oblations from you. On my instructions, let the bulls among brahmanas now offer a bull with a
reddish complexion to Agni and a multicoloured bull with blue eyes that have the complexion of the clouds to the
Vishvadevas.' Thus, the king's sacrifice prospered. The gods themselves offered the food and oblations. Shakra,
the king of the gods, with the horses, was worshipped by the brahmanas and himself became an assistant priest at
the sacrifice. The great-souled Samvarta ascended the altar, like a second fire that had been kindled. He summoned
the large numbers of gods with mantras that were pronounced extremely well and offered oblations into the fire.
The slayer of Bala drank the best of soma. The other residents of heaven also drank soma. They were satisfied and
delighted. Having taken the king's permission, all of them then departed. The king, the slayer of enemies, cheerfully arranged for large piles of gold, here and there. He gave away a large amount of riches to the brahmanas and
was as dazzling as the lord of riches. The king collected many kinds of wealth and built up his treasury. Then, with
the permission of his preceptor, he returned[To the kingdom.] and ruled the entire earth, up to the frontiers of the ocean. These were
the qualities of the king who performed a sacrifice with large amounts of gold. O Indra among men! You should
collect those riches. Following the prescribed rites, you should perform a sacrifice and satisfy the gods."'

Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing the words of Satyavati's son, the Pandava king was delighted. He made up his
mind to perform a sacrifice with that wealth. Therefore, he again consulted his advisers.'
