'Karna said, "O Duryodhana! In my view, your opinions are not distinguished by wisdom. O extender of the Kuru
lineage! The Pandavas cannot be overcome through trickery. O brave warrior! In the past, you have used subtle
tricks to suppress them, but you did not succeed. O king! Then they lived near you and were children who had not
developed friends and allies. But you could not hold them down. They now live far away and have grown up. They
have developed friends and allies. It is my firm conviction that Kunti's sons cannot be injured through trickery.
Nor can they be subjugated through vices, because they are protected by fate. They desire to have the kingdom of
their fathers and grandfathers back. We can't injure them through such means. It is impossible to create dissension
among them. It is impossible to create dissension among those who have taken a common wife. Nor will we succeed in alienating Krishna[Droupadi.] from them. She chose them in a time of adversity and they are now prosperous.
Women have a quality that they desire many husbands. Krishna has got this and can't be alienated. The king of
Panchala[Drupada.] is virtuous and does not crave for riches. Even if we give him our entire kingdom, it is certain that he
will not desert the sons of Kunti. His son[Dhrishtadyumna.] also has all the good qualities and is attached to the Pandavas. Therefore, I do not think that any subtle strategy that you think of will ever be able to injure them.

'"O bull among men! But today, this is what is good and advisable for us. O lord of the earth! The Pandavas can
be struck down as long as they have not established their roots. O lord! Agree to smite them with arms. As long as
our side is strong and that of the Panchalas is weak, we should strike them with arms, without hesitation. O son of
Gandhari! Strike them with arms quickly and with valour, before their chariots, their friends and their relatives
gather. O king! Display your valour before the king of Panchala and his immensely brave son decide to take action.
Show your valour before Varshneya[Descendant of Vrishni, meaning Krishna.] arrives with his Yadava army to restore the Pandavas to their kingdom. O
ruler of the earth! Riches, diverse objects of pleasure, kingdoms-there is nothing that Krishna will not sacrifice
for the sake of the Pandavas. The great-souled Bharata[A distant ancestor of both the Kouravas and the Pandavas; the son of Dushyanta and Shakuntala and the origin of the name Bharatavarsha.] acquired the earth through his valour. The slayer of
Paka[The slayer of Paka, a demon, is Indra.] obtained lordship of the three worlds through his valour. O lord of the earth! Valour is always praised
among Kshatriyas. O bull among kings! Valour is the natural dharma of those who are brave. O king! Therefore,
without any more delay, let us defeat Drupada with a large army with four components[A complete army had four components (chaturanga)-elephants, chariots, cavalry and infantry.] and bring the Pandavas
here. The Pandavas cannot be defeated through conciliation, gifts or dissension. Therefore, vanquish them with
your valour. O ruler of men! After defeating them through your valour, rule over the extensive earth. I do not see
any other way of accomplishing our objective."'

Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing Radheya's words, the immensely powerful Dhritarashtra praised him and said,
"O son of a suta! You are blessed with great wisdom and are skilled in the use of weapons. Such words that speak
of valour are worthy of you. But let Bhishma, Drona, Vidura and the two of you consult each other and arrive at a
course of action that is the best for our welfare." Thereupon, the immensely famous King Dhritarashtra summoned
all his advisers and consulted them.'
