Vaishampayana said, 'On seeing that Bhimasena had become extremely strong and Dhananjaya extremely skilled,
the evil Duryodhana was tormented. Then, Vaikartana Karna and Subala's son, Shakuni, tried to kill the Pandavas
through various means. However, the Pandavas, slayers of enemies, discovered all of them. But because of Vidu-
ra's advice, they refrained from revealing these plots.

'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing that the sons of Pandu were blessed with all the qualities, the
citizens began to speak about their qualities in squares and assemblies. "Lord of men, Dhritarashtra, though possessing the sight of wisdom, could not inherit the kingdom then because he was blind. How can he be king now?
Shantanu's son, Bhishma, is rigid in his vows and is devoted to the truth. Having given up the kingdom earlier, he
will never accept it now. The eldest Pandava is young, but has the conduct of the old, is truthful and compassionate
and has knowledge of the Vedas. With due ceremonies, it is up to us to crown him. Since he follows the path of
dharma, he will certainly worship Shantanu's son Bhishma and Dhritarashtra and his sons and give them objects
for sustenance." The evil Duryodhana heard these words of affection for Yudhisthira and burnt in grief. Burning
thus, the evil-souled one could not condone such talk.

'Inflamed with jealousy, he went to Dhritarashtra. Finding his father alone, he paid homage to him, and burnt by
the partiality of the citizens, said, "O father! I have heard words of ill omen uttered by the citizens. Ignoring you
and Bhishma, they desire that the Pandava should be their king. Bhishma will agree to this, because he does not
wish to rule the kingdom. It seems that the citizens wish to impose a great injury on us. Earlier, Pandu obtained
this kingdom from his father because of his own qualities. Though you possessed every quality required to inherit
the kingdom, you did not get it because of your defect. If Pandu's son now receives it after Pandu, his son will certainly receive it thereafter and his son and so on. We and our sons will be excluded from the royal succession. O
lord of the earth! In future, we will be ignored by the worlds. We will always be dependent on others for our rice
cakes and will always live in hell. O king! Therefore, quickly find a way so that this does not happen. O king! If
you had obtained the kingdom earlier, you would have become established and we would have certainly succeeded
to it, regardless of how unwilling the people are."'
