'Dhritarashtra said, "What should a tormented and sleepless person do? Tell me what you think is the right course
of action. O son[The word used is tata.]! Amongst us, you are skilled in knowledge of dharma and artha. O Vidura! Instruct me and tell
me exactly. O one who is not weak in spirit! Use your wisdom to tell me what you think to be the best for
Ajatashatru and tell me what you think to be the best for the Kurus. I am anxious about evil and can foresee evil. O
learned one! Tell me completely and truthfully about everything that Ajatashatru desires."

'Vidura replied, "Even if one is not asked, one should speak to one whom one does not wish to see defeated-be
it good or bad, hateful or pleasant. O king! Therefore, since I desire the welfare of the Kurus, I will tell you. I will
speak words that ensure welfare and are in accordance with dharma. Listen. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Do not set your mind on deeds that can only be attained through falsehood and inappropriate means. O king! If a
deed undertaken correctly through appropriate means does not succeed, a learned one does not distress his mind
over that. Deeds have consequences and one should duly reflect on a deed and its consequences. An act should not
be undertaken in haste. Examining a deed and its consequences, and one's own capacity, a wise one decides
whether an act should be done or should not be done. If he[This refers to a king.] does not know about the expanse of his kingdom,
about how it can be extended, how it might decay, the treasury, population and punishments, his kingdom does not
remain. One who remembers these measures and knows about dharma and artha, is one who retains the kingdom.
Having obtained a kingdom, one should not become haughty, because haughtiness destroys prosperity, just as old
age destroys physical beauty. Because it does not consider the consequences, a greedy fish goes by appearances
and swallows an iron hook that is concealed in a dainty morsel. One who desires prosperity should consider what
can be swallowed, whether it can be digested if swallowed, and whether it will ensure welfare if digested. If one
plucks fruits that are not ripe from a tree, one does not obtain any juice from them. But then again, the seed is destroyed. If one obtains right fruit at the right time, one obtains juice from the fruit, and again fruit from the seed.
Bees suck honey, but protect the flowers. In that way, one[Referring to a king.] should take riches from people, but without causing
them violence. Flower can be collected after flower, but the root must not be severed. One should be like the maker
of a garland in a grove and not like a burner of charcoal[Angara is charcoal and a burner of charcoal (angarakaraka) is a common image for someone who ruins himself.]. Think about an intended action. 'How will I gain from
it? How will I gain if I don't do it?' Having thought in this way, a man should decide whether to do something, or
not do it. There are acts that should not be undertaken, because the exertions spent on them will be fruitless. There
are others that bring gain, require little effort and bring great gain. A wise man undertakes these swiftly and removes obstacles from these. If he[The king.] looks at everything in a straightforward way, as if he is drinking it with his
eyes, his subjects love him, even if he is seated immobile and silent. When one looks favourably at the world in
four ways-through sight, thoughts, speed and deeds-the world also looks upon one favourably. But if beings are
frightened of him, like deer fear the hunter, he may obtain the earth, up to the frontiers of the ocean, but will still
lose it.

'"One may obtain the kingdom of fathers and grandfathers through one's own energy. But if one uses inappropriate deeds, one can cause its destruction, like wind scattering the clouds. The earth is full of riches. It promotes
and increases the prosperity of a king who follows the dharma followed by virtuous ones from the beginning. If
one abandons dharma and resorts to adharma, the earth contracts, like a piece of leather inserted into fire. The efforts made to protect one's own kingdom should be similar to those that are made to destroy another one's kingdom. A kingdom should be obtained through dharma. It should be protected through dharma. With dharma as the
root, the kingdom will be prosperous and will not decay or be destroyed. One should look for substance in everything, the ravings of a lunatic or the crawling of an infant, like gold extracted from rock. A wise man collects good
conduct, good speech and good deeds, like one who lives off ears of corn gathers them[Shila is an ear of corn and one who lives off them is one without a regular occupation. He sustains himself by
gathering these wherever he can find them.]. Cows see through their
sense of smell. Brahmanas see through the Vedas. Kings see through spies. Ordinary people see through their eyes.
A cow that is difficult to milk faces a great deal of discomfort. O king! But one that is easy to milk is not discomforted. That which is bent without heating, is not heated. The wood that is bent on its own is never heated. Because
of this image, a wise one bends to one who is stronger. Bending before someone who is stronger is like bending
before Indra himself. Animals are sustained by clouds[Because clouds bring rain.], kings by their friends and relatives. Husbands are the relatives of wives. The Vedas are the relatives of brahmanas. Dharma is sustained through truth. Learning is sustained
through yoga. Beauty is sustained through ablutions. Lineage is sustained through conduct. Grain is sustained
through it being measured. Horses are sustained through exercise and cows through constant supervision. Women
are sustained through bodices[A liberty has been taken with the text here, which uses the word kuchelata. This translates as bad (ku), garment
(chelata), and makes no sense. There could be a typo, and might actually be suchelata, translated as good garment.
However, non-Critical versions also have ku. So this might be derived from the female breast (kucha) and kuchelata might be a garment used to cover the female breast. Hence, we have used the word bodice.].

'"It is my view that if there is inferior conduct, noble lineage signifies nothing. Good conduct stands out, especially among one who is low-born. He who is envious of another one's riches, beauty, valour, lineage, happiness,
fortune and honour, suffers from a disease that has no cure. If one is frightened of doing the wrong thing, not doing
the right thing, or of one's counsel being disclosed at the wrong time, this is like getting intoxicated on liquor.
Those who are prone to intoxication get drunk because of knowledge, get drunk because of riches, and as a third
reason, get drunk because of noble birth. But the virtuous are strong because they control such intoxication. If
those who are virtuous ask those who are not virtuous for a small favour, those who are not virtuous think that they
have come to be regarded as virtuous. The soul is the refuge of the virtuous. The virtuous are the refuge of the virtuous. The virtuous are the refuge of those who are not virtuous. But those who are not virtuous are never the
refuge of those who are virtuous. A well-dressed one triumphs in an assembly, a possessor of cattle triumphs in a
congregation. One with a vehicle triumphs over a road. One with good conduct triumphs everywhere. Good conduct is most important in a man. If that is destroyed, there is nothing to be gained from life, riches, wealth or relatives. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Meat is the supreme dish for the rich, cow's milk for those who are in the
middle and salt for those who are poor. But the poor always have the best of food. Their hunger generates succulence in the food, extremely rare among those who are opulent. Those who are rich in the world have no capacity
to eat. O Indra among kings! But the poor digest pieces of wood. Those who are inferior fear a loss in livelihood
and those who are in the middle fear death. The greatest fear for those who are supreme on earth is disrespect. The
evil intoxication with riches is worse than intoxication with liquor and similar objects. He who is intoxicated with
riches does not come to his senses until he confronts a downfall. In this world, men are obsessed with their senses,
unless they control the objects of their senses, just as the nakshatras are tormented by the planets. For one who is
conquered by attraction towards the natural five senses, calamities increase, like the moon waxing during shukla-
paksha. One who wishes to conquer his advisers without conquering himself and one who wishes to conquer his
enemies without conquering his advisers are eventually destroyed. He who first conquers his soul, as it is in the
form of a country, will certainly conquer his advisers and his enemies. He who controls his senses, conquers his
advisers, wields his staff against those who cause offence, acts with deliberation and is patient, is blessed with
prosperity.

'"O king! A man's body is like a chariot. The soul is the charioteer and the senses are the horses. When those
excellent horses are skilfully controlled, the patient charioteer is happy. When they[The senses.] are not controlled, that leads
to destruction, just as uncontrolled and untrained horses bring calamity to a charioteer on the road. One who is
foolish is guided by his senses. He sees good where there is evil and evil where there is good. He thinks that unhappiness is happiness. If one gives up dharma and artha and comes under the control of the senses, one swiftly
decays and loses prosperity, life, riches and wife. One who owns riches but is himself owned by the senses, is dislodged from this riches because he is conquered by his senses. One should seek to know the soul, with the mind,
the intelligence and the senses controlled. The soul is one's friend and the soul is also one's enemy. O king! Desire
and anger are like two large fish that are caught in a small net and lead to the destruction of wisdom. If one considers dharma and artha before accumulating possessions, then having obtained the possessions, one is always happy.
He who does not conquer the five inner enemies[The senses.] that lead to the destruction of intelligence, but wishes to conquer
other enemies, is subjugated by his enemies. It can be seen that great-souled kings are killed through their own
deeds, because they have not been able to control their senses and because they lust for other kingdoms. Those
who commit sin and those who do not commit sin receive equal punishment if they consort with each other, just as
wet kindling burns when it is mixed with the dry. Therefore, one should never ally with the wicked. A man who is
deluded and does control the five enemies and their five needs, is swallowed by disaster. Lack of malice, uprightness, purity, contentment, pleasant speech, self-control and truthfulness are not the attributes of those who are evil
in their souls. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Those who are inferior are not characterized by knowledge of
the soul, steadfastness, patience, constant adherence to dharma, carefulness in speech and generosity. Those who
are stupid try to cause injury to the wise through anger and slander. The speaker[Of slanderous speech.] bears the guilt, but one who forgives is freed. Violence is the strength of the evil and decreed punishment is the strength of kings. Service is the
strength of women. Forgiveness is the strength of those who possess qualities.

'"O king! It has been thought that control of speech is the most difficult. It is not possible to speak wisely and
copiously on many and varied subjects. Words spoken well bring many benefits. O king! In the same way, words
spoken ill bring many evils. A forest pierced by arrows or cut down by axes grows again. But a terrible wound
caused by harsh speech is never healed. Shafted arrows, hollow arrows and iron arrows can be plucked out from a
body. But it is impossible to uproot the stakes of words from the heart. The arrows of words are released from the
mouth. Pierced by these, one sorrows night and day. They descend on the weak spots of others. Therefore, learned
ones do not release these on others. When the gods wish to vanquish a man, they distract his intelligence and they
see right in what is wrong. The intelligence is tainted and destruction is nigh. Wrong, in the appearance of right, is
not removed from his heart. O bull among the Bharata lineage! That clouded intelligence has now overcome your
sons because of their enmity towards the Pandavas, and you do not know this. O Dhritarasthra! Yudhishthira has
all the auspicious marks and is fit to rule the three worlds. He is your pupil and should reign. Even more than all
your sons, he has been honoured by fortune. He has energy and wisdom and knows about the nature of dharma and
artha. O Indra among kings! He is supreme among those who uphold dharma and because of his compassion and
non-violence, and because of his respect towards you, he has undergone many hardships."'
