Janamejaya asked, 'What austerities did the great ascetic Utanka perform? How could he desire to curse Vishnu?
Vishnu is the source of all power.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'O Janamejaya! Utanka performed great austerities. The energetic one was devoted to
his preceptor and did not worship anyone else. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the sons of the rishis harboured the wish that they should be as devoted to their preceptors as Utanka was. O Janamejaya! Among the many
disciples that he had, Goutama loved Utanka the most and was always affectionate towards him. Goutama was
pleased  because  of  his  self-control,  purity,  valour,  deeds  and  proper  conduct.  Thousands  of  disciples  received
Goutama's permission[To return home after their studies.]. However, because of his great affection for Utanka, he did not wish to let him go. O son!
In the course of time, the great sage became aged. But because he was so devoted to his preceptor, the sage did not
realize it. O Indra among kings! One day, he set out to fetch wood. Utanka was overwhelmed by that great burden
of wood. O king! He was exhausted and hungry. O scorcher of enemies! Overwhelmed by carrying that great burden of wood, he flung it down on the ground. One of the locks of his matted hair, silvery in complexion, had got
entangled in the wood. With the wood, it fell down on the ground. Bhargava was crushed by the burden and was
afflicted by hunger. On seeing that sign of old age, he lamented in loud tones and wept. His preceptor's daughter
possessed eyes that were like the petals of a lotus. Her hips were wide and her eyes were large. On the instructions
of her father, with her head lowered, the one who knew about dharma received those drops in her hand. Those
teardrops fell down on her hands and burnt them. Unable to hold those teardrops, she flung them down on the
ground. Delighted in his mind, Goutama spoke to Utanka. "O son! Why is your mind overcome with grief now? O
brahmana rishi! Tell me yourself. I wish to hear your words."

'Utanka answered, "My mind has been devoted to you and I have always sought to do what brings you pleasure.
I have been faithful towards you and I have followed you. Without realizing it, I have aged. I have not experienced
any happiness. I have resided with you for one hundred years, but you have not granted me permission[To leave.].  You
have granted leave to disciples who are younger than me. O best among brahmanas! Indeed, there have been hundreds and thousands of them."

'Goutama said, "O bull among brahmanas! Because of my affection towards you and because of your devotion
towards your preceptor, a long period of time has elapsed and I have not realized it. O Bhargava! But if your mind
has turned towards returning, you have my permission to go home. Leave without any delay."

'Utanka asked, "O supreme among brahmanas! Tell me, what will I give my preceptor[As dakshina.]? O lord! After having
gratified you, I will take your permission and leave."

'Goutama replied, "The virtuous have said that gratification of the preceptor is dakshina. O brahmana! There is
no doubt that I have been satisfied by your conduct. O extender of the Bhrigu lineage! Therefore, know that I am
satisfied with you. O brahmana! Had you now been a young man sixteen years old, I would have given you my
own daughter as your wife. There is no one else who is capable of tolerating your energy and serving you."'

Vaishampayana continued, 'At this, having taken his preceptor's permission, he became young and accepted the
illustrious one. He next spoke to his preceptor's wife. "Instruct me. What will I give, so that I can satisfy my preceptor? I desire what is agreeable to you, even at the cost of riches and my life. Whatever is extremely rare in this
world, whatever wonderful jewels exist, there is no doubt that I will use my austerities to bring all of that here."

Ahalya[Goutama's wife.] replied, "O son! Together with the illustrious one, I have always been content with you. Your devotion
has been enough. O son! Go wherever you wish." O great king! But Utanka again spoke these words. "O mother!
Command me. What task will bring you pleasure?" Ahalya replied, "It is known that Soudasa's wife possesses divine earrings. O fortunate one! For the sake of your preceptor, bring those here and perform a good deed." O
Janamejaya! Having  agreed  to  this,  he  departed.  For  the  sake  of  bringing  pleasure  to  his  preceptor's  wife,  he
wished  to  bring  them.  Utanka,  bull  among  brahmanas,  went  swiftly.  He  went  to  Soudasa,  who  had  become  a
maneater, to beg those earrings from him[King Soudasa was cursed by Vasishtha that he would become a man-eating rakshasa. The story has been recounted in Section 11 (Volume 1).]. Goutama told his wife, "Utanka is not to be seen today?" Thus asked,
she told him that he had gone to fetch the earrings. He told his wife, "You have not acted properly. That king has
been cursed and there is no doubt that he will kill the brahmana." Ahalya replied, "O illustrious one! In my ignorance, I asked the brahmana to do this today. However, through your favours, he will not face any fear." Thus addressed by his wife, Goutama agreed. In the desolate forest, Utanka saw the king.'
