'Sanjaya said, "O king! Meanwhile, Duhshasana attacked Shini's descendant. He showered thousands of arrows,
like a cloud pouring down rain. He pierced Satyaki with sixty arrows, and yet again with sixteen. But in that battle,
he could not make him tremble. He[Satyaki.] was like Mount Mainaka. The brave one covered Duhshasana with a severe
storm of arrows. It was as if a spider had got a mosquito[Alternatively, gnat.] within its strands. On seeing that Duhshasana was afflicted by hundreds of arrows, the king[Duryodhana.] urged the Trigartas to advance towards Yuyudhana's chariot. Those performers of evil deeds approached near Yuyudhana. There were three thousand Trigartas, skilled in fighting. They
surrounded him with a large army of chariots. They had resolved to fight and had sworn to be samshaptakas[That is, they had taken a pledge to die, rather than retreat.].
They advanced in that battle and released showers of arrows. Five hundred foremost warriors were stationed at the
forefront of that array. But the supreme one of the Shini lineage quickly uprooted, brought down and killed them
with his arrows. They were like giant trees that had been shattered by the force of a violent wind. O lord of the
earth! Many chariots and standards were shattered. Horses with golden harnesses fell down on the ground. O great
king! The arrows released by Shini's descendant made them flow with blood and they were as beautiful as flowering kimshukas. In that battle, those on your side were slaughtered by Yuyudhana. They could not find a protector,
like elephants that have sunk into a swamp. All of them fled towards Drona's chariot. They were like giant serpents, penetrating a hole, because of fear of the king of the birds[Garuda.]. The brave one killed five hundred warriors
with arrows that were like venomous serpents and then slowly advanced towards Dhananjaya's chariot.

'"As that best of men was advancing, your son, Duhshasana, quickly pierced him with nine arrows that had
drooping tufts. The great archer[Satyaki.] pierced him back with five sharp arrows that were gold-tufted and had the
feathers of vultures. O great king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Duhshasana laughed and pierced Satyaki
with three arrows, and yet again with five. Shini's descendant pierced your son with five arrows. In that battle, he
severed his bow and while smiling, proceeded towards Arjuna. Duhshasana became angry. As the brave one from
the Vrishni lineage was proceeding, he wished to kill him and hurled a javelin that was entirely made out of iron at
him. O king! Your son hurled that terrible javelin. But Satyaki used sharp arrows tufted with heron feathers to shatter it into a hundred fragments. O lord of men! Your son then grasped another bow. He pierced Satyaki with ten arrows and roared like a lion. In that encounter, Satyaki became enraged and confounded your son. He struck him
between the breasts with arrows that were like the flames of fires. He again pierced him with ten sharp and pointed
arrows that were completely made out of iron. Duhshasana pierced Satyaki back with twenty arrows. O great king!
Satvata pierced him between the breasts with three arrows that were extremely powerful and had drooping tufts.
The maharatha used some sharp arrows to kill his mounts and extremely angry, slew his charioteer with arrows
with drooping tufts. He severed his bow with a broad-headed arrow and his arm-guard with another five. The one
who was skilled in the use of supreme weapons then used a couple of broad-headed arrows to sever his standard
and the pole of his chariot. He then used sharp arrows to bring down the two parshnis. His[Duhshasana's.] bow was severed.
He was without a chariot. His horses were slain. His charioteer was killed. The general of the Trigartas then picked
him up on his own chariot. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Shini's descendant followed him for some time.
But remembering Bhimasena's words, the mighty-armed one did not kill him. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In the assembly hall and in everyone's presence, Bhimasena had sworn to kill your sons in battle. O lord! O
king! Thus did Satyaki vanquish Duhshasana in that encounter and quickly proceeded along Dhananjaya's route."'
