Janamejaya asked, 'O brahmana! What did the immensely energetic Dhritarashtra say when he heard of the extraordinary deeds of the infinitely energetic Partha?'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having heard from Dvaipayana, best of rishis, that Partha had gone to Shakra's world, the
king who was Ambika's son[Dhritarashtra was Ambika's son.] spoke these words to Sanjaya, "O charioteer! O suta! By any chance, do you know
of the deeds of the intelligent Partha? Tell me everything in detail. My son is mad and follows the dharma of the
vulgar[The word used is gramya, which means vulgar, as well as rustic.]. He is evil in his soul and fixed on sin. That one of wicked intelligence will destroy the earth. The words
of the great-souled one[Yudhishthira.] are always true, even in jest. He has Dhananjaya as his warrior and will win the three
worlds. When Arjuna shoots his barbed iron arrows, pointed at the tips and sharpened on stone, is there anyone
who has conquered death and old age so as to withstand him? All my evil-souled sons are under the sway of death.
A fight with the invincible Pandava confronts them. I think about this all the time. Yet I do not see a charioteer
who can withstand Gandivadhanva in battle, even if Drona or Karna advance against him in battle, or Bhishma
himself. There is no doubt a great calamity confronts the world. But I do not see our victory. Karna is
contemptible[The word used (ghrini) means both compassionate and contemptible. Since Karna is being described disapprovingly, contemptible is more appropriate than compassionate.] and negligent. The preceptor is old and also his teacher[The preceptor is Drona. Since Drona is Arjuna's teacher, the implication is that Drona will not fight properly
with Arjuna.]. Partha is wrathful, driven by vengeance
and powerful, steady in valour. Since all these are incapable of being vanquished, a terrible battle will occur. All
these warriors are skilled in the use of weapons and all of them will attain great fame. None of them will wish for
the lordship of everything if that were to be obtained through defeat. Therefore, there will be certain peace only
when they have been killed, or when Phalguna is. But no one exists who can kill Arjuna, or even vanquish him.
How will his wrath towards the evil ones be pacified? That warrior is the equal of the thirty gods and gratified
Agni in Khandava. He conquered all the lords of the earth at the great rajasuya sacrifice. O Sanjaya! O son[The word used is tata. While this means son, it can generally be used for anyone who is a junior.]!
When a bolt of thunder strikes the peak of a mountain, it leaves some remnants. But the arrows shot by Kiriti leave
no remnant. Like the arrows of the sun scorch everything that is mobile and immobile, the arrows shot by Partha's
arms will scorch my sons. It seems as if the armies of the Bharatas have already been scattered, frightened at the
roar of Savyasachi's chariot. Kiriti stands like an assassin in battle, unleashing showers of arrows. The creator has
created him like the destroyer of everything. But that which is bound to happen cannot be avoided."

'Sanjaya replied, "O king! What you have said about Duryodhana is exactly as you have stated it. O lord of the
earth! Nothing that you have said is untrue. On seeking the famous Krishna, their wife according to dharma,
brought into the assembly hall, the infinitely energetic Pandavas have been filled with wrath. O great king! On
hearing Duhshasana's words that have terrible consequences, and those of Karna, I think that they have not been
able to sleep. O great king! I have heard how Partha has used his bow in battle to satisfy Sthanu, who has eleven
forms[Sthanu is Shiva's names. Shiva has eleven manifestations in the form of the eleven Rudras.]. Kapardin, the illustrious lord of all the gods, himself fought with Phalguna in the disguise of a hunter, so
as to test him. It was then that the lords of the world showed themselves to Arjuna, the valorous bull among the
Kouravas, who performed austerities for the sake of weapons. There is no other man on earth, except Phalguna,
who can dare to see those gods in their direct forms. O king! What man can wear out in battle a warrior whom Maheshvara could not wear out in the form that he had assumed? Having oppressed Droupadi and angered the Pandavas, they have brought this terrible and hair-raising calamity on themselves. On seeing Duryodhana display his
thighs to Droupadi, Bhima's lips trembled and he spoke these mighty words, 'O evil one! O one who cheats with
dice! After thirteen years have elapsed, I will smash your thighs with my club, which is like the vajra.' All of them
are supreme among warriors. All of them have infinite energy. All of them are skilled in every weapon. All of them
are invincible, even to the gods. The Parthas are full of valour and vengeance. Because of their wrath, I think that
they will kill your sons in battle."

'Dhritarashtra said, "O suta! What has Karna achieved by uttering those harsh words? It was extreme enmity
that brought Krishna to the assembly hall thus. How can my sons be other than evil-minded when their eldest
brother and superior[Meaning Duryodhana.] is not established in propriety? O suta! On seeing that I lack eyes, that bringer of misfortune thinks I lack enterprise and intelligence, and does not pay heed to my words. And those evil advisers, Karna,
Soubala and the others, are bereft of intelligence and extend his many vices. Even if the infinitely energetic Partha
shoots arrows playfully, they will scorch my sons, not to speak of when they are shot in wrath. Unleashed from the
great bow with the strength of Partha's arms and energized with celestial mantras, they can strike down even the
gods. What can one who has Hari Janardana, the protector of the three worlds, as his adviser, protector and wellwisher, not conquer? O Sanjaya! This is a great wonder that has been heard, that Arjuna clasped Mahadeva with
his arms. All the worlds witnessed what had been done in Khandava earlier. With Damodara[Krishna.], Phalguna aided the
fire. When Partha, Bhima, Vasudeva and the Satvatas[The Yadavas.] are angered, nothing will be left of my sons, with their advisers and their relatives."'
