'Dhritarashtra said, "O Vidura! Perform all the royal funeral rites for Pandu, that lion among kings, and also specially for Madri. For the sake of Pandu and Madri, give away animals, garments, jewels and all kinds of riches to
any that ask for them and as much as they want. Perform her rites the way Kunti would. Let her body be covered
well, so that the sun and the wind cannot see it. Let there be no lamentations for the unblemished Pandu. He was a
king to be praised. And five brave sons have been born to him, like the sons of the gods."'

Vaishampayana said, 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Vidura, with Bhishma, did as he had been asked. He
performed Pandu's funeral rites in an extremely pure spot. Without any waste of time, the royal priests left the city,
carrying with them a fragrant and flaming fire for Pandu. He was laid on a bier and covered with the best of scents
and garlands and covered from all sides with cloth. This bier was also adorned with garlands, garments and great
riches. Advisers, relatives and friends arrived. The lion among men was placed on a supremely decorated hearse,
to be drawn by men. With the well-covered Madri, the hearse was then pulled by men. A white umbrella was held
above the hearse and whisks made of yak tails were waved. With every musical instrument being played, it was a
majestic scene. At the time of Pandu's funeral ceremony, hundreds of men distributed jewels among the crowd.
Large white and pale umbrellas and beautiful garments were brought for the Kourava. The sacrificial priests wore
white and poured offerings into the blazing and strong fire that went ahead. Thousands of Brahmanas, Kshatriyas,
Vaishyas and Shudras followed the king, lamenting in grief: "O king! O protector! Where are you going, leaving
us unprotected and immersing us in eternal grief?" Bhishma, Vidura and Pandu's sons wept.

'At last they came to a beautiful, sacred and wooded region on the banks of the Ganga. On the plain, Pandu's
hearse, truthful lion among men whose deeds were untainted, and that of his wife were laid down. The bodies were
then scented with all kinds of perfumes, sanctified with pure fragrances, consecrated with the best of oils and
bathed. Water was sprinkled from a hundred golden pots. White sandalwood paste was smeared, mixed with black
aloe and the juice of coconuts. They were then draped in white cotton garments. Dressed in these garments, that
bull among men, tiger among men, seemed to be alive, as if sleeping on an expensive bed. When the other funeral
rites were over, the sacrifical priests gave their consent. The ornamented bodies of the king and Madri were covered in ghee. Fragrances like sandalwood, tunga, padmaka and many other scents were applied and a fire was lit.
On seeing the two bodies in flames, Kousalya lamented in her son's name and fell down on the ground, unconscious. Seeing her fall down in this way, the citizens of the town and the country also wept in grief, out of the affection they bore for the king. Along with men, all the other beings also cried out, even those of inferior births.
Shantanu's son Bhishma wept in great sorrow, as did the immensely wise Vidura. All the other Kurus were also
extremely miserable and unhappy. Then Bhishma, Vidura, the king, the relatives and the women of the Kuru lineage offered the water. O king! When the water ceremony was over, all the ordinary people sorrowed and consoled
the Pandavas, who were overcome with grief.

'O king! With their relatives, the Pandavas slept on the ground. The Brahmanas and the citizens also slept on the
ground. The Pandavas and the city, young and old, grieved for twelve nights, unhappy and miserable.'
