Yudhishthira said, "O descendant of the Kuru lineage! O bull among the Bharata lineage! I wish to hear the
truth about the fruits obtained from trees and ponds."

'Bhishma replied, "Land that is beautiful with forests, adorned with many kinds of colourful minerals and grows
all kinds of seeds is said to be the best. Among fields, the one that have ponds are superior. I will progressively tell
you about all kinds of waterbodies. I will tell you about the qualities associated with those who dig ponds. Those
who create ponds are honoured everywhere in the three worlds. Even when dwelling with friends, in places that
enhance friendship, it is best to dwell in houses that have ponds. Those lead to the greatest fame. To obtain the
fruits of dharma, artha and kama, the learned say that it is best to dig a pond properly. A field with a pond is a great
refuge. Four kinds of creatures are noticed near a pond[Ones born from wombs, eggs, sweat and plants and trees.]. When there are ponds in every direction, this brings
supreme benefit. Gods, humans, gandharvas, ancestors, serpents, rakshasas and all mobile objects resort to waterbodies. Therefore, I will tell you about the qualities that are said to be associated with ponds. The rishis have spoken about these fruits being obtained. The learned have said that if one's pond has water when the rains are meagre, one obtains the fruits of an agnihotra. If one's pond has water during autumn, after death, one obtains the
supreme fruits of donating one thousand cows. If one's pond has water during the cold season[The cold season is hemanta, between autumn and winter. Winter proper is shishira.], one obtains the
fruits  of  performing  a  sacrifice  where  a  lot  of  gold  is  donated.  If  one's  pond  has  water  during  the  winter,  the
learned have said that the fruits obtained are like those of an agnishtoma sacrifice. If one's well-contructed pond
provides excellent refuge during the spring, the fruits obtained are those of an atiratra sacrifice. If one's pond has
drinking water during the summer, the learned sages have said that the fruits are like those of a vajapeya sacrifice.
A man whose wells and waterbodies are such that cattle can always find drinking water there, is virtuous and saves
his entire lineage. If a person's pond is such that thirsty cows, animals, birds and humans find drinking water there,
he obtains the fruits of ashvamedha. If everyone drinks water, bathes and rests in a person's pond, after death, he is
thought of as obtaining everything infinite. O son! Water is extremely difficult to obtain, especially after death.
Eternal pleasure results from offering water to drink. If a person remains awake and donates sesamum, water and a
lamp, after death, with his relatives, he obtains bliss that is extremely difficult to get. O tiger among men! The giving of water is heavier than all gifts. It is superior to all gifts. Therefore, drinking water must always be given. I
have thus spoken to you about the supreme fruits associated with ponds. I will next tell you about the planting of
trees. Among immobile objects six kinds of species are spoken about-trees, bushes, creepers, smaller creepers[Lata is a creeper, valli is a smaller creeper.],
bamboos and grass. Among these different species, the planting of trees brings the greatest benefit. It brings fame
in the world of men and leads to auspicious fruits in the hereafter. Such a person obtains a name in this world and
greatness with the ancestors. He goes to the world of the gods and his name is never destroyed. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! A person who plants trees saves his lineage, both ancestors and descendants. Therefore, plant
trees. There is no doubt that a person who plants trees will obtain sons. When he dies, he will obtain the undecaying world of heaven. There will be blossoming trees with large numbers of gods there. There will be fruits, with
the ancestors. The trees there will honour him as a guest and offer him shade. The trees offer refuge to kinnaras,
serpents, rakshasas, gods, gandharvas, humans and large numbers of rishis. They satisfy humans with their flowers
and their fruit. If a person plants trees, those trees save him in the world hereafter, like a son. Therefore, a person
who desires benefit must always dig ponds and plant trees. These will protect you, like sons. O son! This is said to
be your dharma. If a person digs ponds and plants trees, he is like a brahmana who speaks the truth or performs desirable sacrifices. He will obtain greatness in heaven. Therefore, dig ponds and plant trees. This is like a sacrifice
among all kinds of sacrifices. This is like always speaking the truth."'
