Vaishampayana said, 'Maharshi Krishna Dvaipayana again spoke these words, deep in purport, to Ajatashatru
Kounteya. "O son[The word used is tata.]! O great king! O Yudhishthira! These brothers of yours dwelt in the forest like ascetics. Their
desires that they cherished then must be satisfied. O best of the Bharata lineage! Let these maharathas get what
they want. O Partha! Rule the earth, like Yayati, the son of Nahusha. You dwelt in the forest like ascetics and were
full of sorrow. But that misery is over and these tigers among men must obtain happiness. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! With your brothers, enjoy dharma, artha and kama. O lord of the earth! After having experienced
that, do what you wish to do. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O Kounteya! You must first free yourself of the
debts to guests, ancestors and gods. Only then will you go to heaven. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Perform
the sarvamedha and ashvamedha sacrifices. O great king! After that, you will go towards the supreme objective.
Engage your brothers in all the sacrifices, with abundant donations. O Pandaveya! After that, you will obtain unsurpassed fame. O tiger among men! O descendant of the Kuru lineage! We know what you will say. But listen to
my words about how a king acts, so as not to deviate from dharma. O Yudhishthira! O lord of men! Those who
know about dharma have determined that a person who takes away someone else's property should be fined exactly the same amount. A king who follows the sacred texts, resorts to intelligence and, considering the time and the
place, punishes bandits in this way, is right. A king who levies a tax of one-sixth, but does not protect the kingdom,
obtains one-fourth of the kingdom's sins. Listen to how a king does not deviate from dharma. If he punishes in accordance with the dharma laid down in the sacred texts, if he does not fall prey to desire and anger, if he treats
everyone equally, like a father, he has no reason to be scared. O immensely radiant one! When it is the time for undertaking a task, if a king is afflicted by destiny and distracted, not undertaking the task, this is not regarded as a
transgression. However, enemies must be punished, either immediately, or after proper reflection. There must be
no alliances with the wicked, nor must the kingdom be sold[The text uses the word panya, which is a commodity that is bought or
sold. This might be punya, as it is in some non-Critical versions. In that
case-the kingdom must be made pure.]. O Yudhishthira! Brave ones, aryas and those who
are learned must be treated well. In particular, those who possess cattle and those who possess riches must be protected. Those who are extremely learned must be employed in all tasks connected with dharma. An accomplished
one[That is, an accomplished king.] does not repose his faith on any single individual, no matter how many qualities he possesses. A king who
does not protect, is insolent, proud and arrogant, and is also envious, is said to be one who is uncontrolled. When a
king is struck by destiny and all the unprotected subjects are robbed by bandits, this is a sin devolving on the king.
O Yudhishthira! If a task is performed with good advice, is based on good policy and is undertaken with enterprise,
in accordance with the prescribed rites, that is not adharma. When something is undertaken, depending on destiny,
it may, or may not, succeed. However, if there is enterprise, no sin touches the king.

'"O tiger among kings! A story is recounted about this. O king! This is an ancient account about rajarshi Hayagriva. He was brave and unblemished in his deeds. O Yudhishthira! Having killed many enemies in a battle, he was
himself slain. The brave one was without any aides and was defeated. Having done all that could be done to restrain the enemy and having protected men, he resorted to the best of yoga. Having performed deeds in that excellent battle, he obtained fame. Vajigriva[Hayagriva, Vajigriva and Ashvagriva mean the same thing. Griva is
neck and haya, vaji and ashva mean horse.] now finds delight in the world of the gods. In the battle, he was mangled
by assassins armed with weapons and attacked by bandits. But he was ready to give himself up. The great-souled
Ashvagriva was devoted to his duties. He perfected his soul and finds delight in the world of the gods. The bow
was his sacrificial stake. The bowstring was the rope. The arrow was the smaller ladle. The sword was the larger
ladle. Blood was the clarified butter. The chariot, which could go anywhere at will, was the sacrificial altar. The
battle was the fire. The best of horses were the four officiating priests. Having offered his enemies and himself as
oblations into that sacrificial fire, the spirited lion among kings became free from all sins. Like taking a bath at the
end of a sacrifice, he offered his life in the battle. Vajigriva finds delight in the world of the gods. Earlier, he protected the kingdom with intelligence and policy. The great-souled one performed sacrifices and then gave himself
up. The spirited one pervaded all the worlds with his fame. Vajigriva finds delight in the world of the gods. He obtained divine and human success. He used the rod and protected the earth, resorting to yoga. That is the reason the
great-souled king Hayagriva, who followed dharma in his conduct, finds delight in the world of heaven. He was
learned. He renounced. He was faithful. He was grateful. Having performed deeds, he gave up the world of men.
There are worlds for those who are intelligent, learned and revered. Having given up his body, the king obtained
those. He acquired the Vedas well. He studied. The great-souled one protected the kingdom well. He established
the four varnas in their own dharma. Vajigriva finds delight in the world of the gods. Having been victorious in
battles, having protected the subjects, having drunk soma, having satisfied the best of brahmanas, having sustained
the subjects with the use of the rod and having been destroyed in the battle, he delights in the world of the gods.
His conduct was praiseworthy. Virtuous and learned men, themselves deserving honour, show him reverence. He
conquered heaven and went to the world meant for heroes. The great-souled one, the performer of auspicious
deeds, obtained success."'
