Yudhishthira said, "O one who knows about dharma! I wish to hear the story of that rajarshi. O Dvaipayana! O
unblemished one! Tell me about Marutta's account."

'Vyasa replied, "Earlier, in krita yuga, there was the lord Manu, the wielder of the staff. His son was the great
archer, famous as Prajati. Prajati had a famous son named Kshupa. Kshupa's son was the lord, King Ikshvaku. O
king! He had one hundred sons and they were supremely devoted to dharma. The lord Ikshvaku made all of them
kings. The eldest, Vimsha, was unmatched as an archer. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Vimsha had a fortunate son named Vivimsha. O king! Vivimsha had fifteen sons. All of them were brave archers, devoted to brahmanas and truthful in speech. They were virtuous and devoted to the dharma of giving. They were always agreeable in speech. The eldest one was Khaninetra and he oppressed all the other brothers. The valiant Khaninetra conquered the kingdom and removed all its sons[Khaninetra seems to have won over the kingdoms of his brothers.]. However, he was incapable of protecting the kingdom and the subjects weren't happy. They took away the kingdom from him and gave it to his son, Suvarcha. O  Indra among
kings! They instated him and were delighted. He[Suvarcha.] saw the action taken against his father and the fact that he had
been banished from the kingdom. Therefore, he was devoted to the law and engaged in the welfare of the subjects.
He was devoted to brahmanas. He was truthful in speech and pure. He was tranquil and self-restrained. Since the
learned one was always devoted to dharma, the subjects found joy in him. Because of his devotion to dharma, the
treasury and vehicles became exhausted[Since Suvarcha was generous in giving.]. When the treasury was exhausted, the vassals oppressed him from all
directions. With his treasury and vehicles diminished, he was afflicted by many. The king, the servants and the city
faced  supreme  suffering  and  hardships.  O  Yudhishthira!  The  king  was  always  completely  devoted  to  dharma.
However, since his strength was diminished, he was incapable of offering protection. When the king and the city
faced the ultimate in hardships, he blew violently into his hand and from this, soldiers emerged. The soldiers generated in this way defeated all the kings along the boundaries. O king! It is because of this reason that he became
famous as Karandhama[From kara (hand) and pradhma (blowing violently).]. Karandhama's son was born at the beginning of treta yuga. He was supreme and handsome and like Indra. Like the gods, he was extremely difficult to defeat. All the kings were always under his subjugation. Because of his conduct and his strength, he became the emperor of all creatures. His name was Avikshit
and he possessed dharma in his soul. He was Indra's equal in valour. He was devoted to sacrifices and addicted to
rites. He possessed fortitude and was in control of his senses. He was Aditya's equal in energy and the earth's
equal in forgiveness. He was Brihaspati's equal in intelligence and like the Himalayas in steadfastness. The king
sustained the minds of the subjects through his deeds, thoughts, words, self-control and tranquility. Following the
rites, the lord performed hundreds of horse sacrifices. The learned lord Angiras himself was the officiating priest at
these sacrifices. His son surpassed the father in qualities. His name was Marutta and he was knowledgable about
dharma. He was an immensely illustrious emperor. His strength was equal to that of ten thousand elephants. He
was like a second Vishnu. Wishing to perform a sacrifice, the one with dharma in his soul accumulated a lot of
molten gold. He had thousands of sparkling vessels constructed. He went to Mount Meru, to the north of the Himalayan slopes. He performed the rites on the great golden slopes there. He had golden bowls, vessels, pans and
seats constructed and they were innumerable. The sacrificial area was arranged near that spot. Following the ordinances, the king, with dharma in his soul, performed the sacrifice there. All the other kings were also with King
Marutta."'
