Vaishampayana said, 'When Sanjaya had returned, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira told Dasharha, the bull among the
Satvatas. "O Janardana! The time has arrived for friends. I can see no one other than you who can help to tide over
our difficulties. O Madhava! It is only by resorting to you that we can fearlessly obtain our share from the son of
Dhritarashtra. He is insolent because of his delusion and his advisers. O destroyer of enemies! Just as you protect
the Vrishni's from all hardships, you should also protect the Pandavas. Save us from this great danger." Bhagavan[Krishna. Since the text uses the word Bhagavan, we have retained it, instead of using Krishna.]
replied, "O mighty-armed one! I am present. Tell me what you wish to say. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I
will do everything that you ask for."

'Yudhishthira said, "You have heard what Dhritarashtra and his sons wish to do. O Krishna! What Sanjaya told
me, is exactly what Dhritarashtra is thinking. His soul stands revealed. A messenger says what he is told to speak.
If he speaks otherwise, he should be killed. He wishes for peace with us without returning our kingdom. He is
greedy and wicked in his mind. He treats others worse than his own self. On Dhritarashtra's instructions, we have
lived in the forest for twelve years, and yet another autumn in concealment. O lord! We did that under the assumption that Dhritarashtra would abide by the agreement with us. O Krishna! The brahmanas who are with us know
that we have not broken the covenant. The aged King Dhritarashtra cannot see his own dharma. Or even if he sees
it, out of affection, he follows the instructions of his evil son. O Janardana! The king follows Suyodhana's counsel.
He is greedy and deceitful, because he acts so as to ensure his own welfare. O Janardana! What can be more miserable than my not being able to take care of my mother and friends? O Madhusudana! The Kashis, Chedis, Pancha-
las and Matysas are on my side and you are our protector. O Govinda! But I only asked for five villages-
Kushasthala, Vrikasthala, Masandi, Varanavata and any other village as the fifth and last one. 'O father[Meaning Dhritarashtra.]! Give us
any five villages or towns, where we can reside together and sustain a living without difficulty.' But the evil-souled
Dhritarashtra did not grant even this, thinking that everything belongs to him[Strictly speaking, that refusal hasn't happened yet.]. What can be more miserable than
that? When a man is born and brought up in a noble lineage, but covets the possessions of others, avarice destroys
his wisdom. When wisdom is destroyed, so is modesty. When modesty is destroyed, dharma is constrained. When
dharma is destroyed, prosperity is destroyed. When prosperity is destroyed, a man is killed. Lack of prosperity is
like death to a man. O son[The word used is tata, affectionately used for anyone who is younger or junior, though it means son. Krishna is
younger to Yudhishthira in age.]! Relatives, well-wishers and brahmanas turn away from one who has no riches, like
birds fly away from a tree that has no blossoms or fruit. O son! In my view, this is like death. When a man has fallen and his relatives turn away from him, it is like the spirit and breath of life leaving one who is dead. Shambara[It is not clear who this Shambara is. There was an asura named Shambara and there was also a King Shambara
(king of hunters) who fought with King Divodasa.]
has said that there is nothing worse for a man than a situation where he cannot see how food can be obtained, today
or tomorrow. Riches are said to constitute supreme dharma. Everything is established in prosperity. The rich live in
this world. Men who do not possess riches are dead. If one resorts to one's strength and robs a man of his riches,
along with him, one destroys his dharma, artha and kama too. Having reached that state, some men prefer death.
Others resort to villages, still others resort to forests. Some wander around, seeking to destroy themselves. Some
become insane. Others come under the control of their enemies. Still others become slaves, so as to obtain the riches of others. For a man, the destruction of prosperity is a worse calamity than death. Prosperity is the source of
dharma and kama. Death is the eternal dharma of the world. It is the end of all beings and there is no one who is an
exception. O Krishna! A man who has naturally been poor, does not suffer as much as one who has possessed fortune and prosperity and enjoyed happiness, having subsequently descended to an inferior state. When one faces
great hardships because of one's own crimes, one blames Indra and the other gods, but never one's own self. Familiarity with all the sacred texts cannot reduce that suffering. Sometimes, he is angry with his servants. Sometimes, he censures his well-wishers. He is always subject to anger and loses his senses. Having come under the
control of confusion, he resorts to cruel deeds. From these evil deeds, mixed births[Mixed across varnas, miscegenation.] result. Mixed births are the
way to hell and are the final outcome of evildoers. O Krishna! If he does not wake up on time, he goes to hell. Wisdom alone is the awakening. The eye of wisdom can save him. When a man regains his wisdom, he looks towards
the sacred texts. When he is established in the sacred texts, he regains dharma and modesty becomes his best limb.
A modest man avoids evil and his prosperity increases. When he obtains prosperity, he truly becomes a man. He is
always established in dharma and he is calm in his soul. He is always engaged in deeds and does not follow adharma. His intelligence does not turn towards evil. One who is without modesty and without senses, is neither a
woman, nor a man. According to dharma, he has no rights and is just like a shudra. A man who is modest satisfies
the gods, the ancestors and his own self. He becomes immortal because of this. This is the ultimate objective for
those who perform pure deeds.

'"O Madhusudana! You have seen all this directly in me. You have seen how I have spent those nights, deprived
of the kingdom. There is no way for us to give up that prosperity. It would be better for us to die, while striving towards that. O Madhava! Our first intention is that we should enjoy that common prosperity, in peace with each other and treating each other equally. The stage that comes beyond that is terrible and will lead to the destruction of
deeds, if we are to obtain the kingdom after killing the Kouravas. O Krishna! No enemy deserves to be killed, even
if he is not related and even if he is not an arya. On the contrary, they are our relatives and our seniors are their
aides. Their death will be evil. How can a war be desirable? That is the evil dharma of kshatriyas. But we have
been born as kshatriyas. It happens to be our dharma, even if it is adharma. Any other form of conduct is not recommended for us. A shudra performs servitude. A vaishya lives by selling goods. Killing is the means of livelihood for us, while begging is the conduct for brahmanas. A kshatriya kills another kshatriya. A fish lives on another fish. A dog kills another dog. O Dasharha! Behold how each follows the decreed dharma. O Krishna! Dissension
is always present in a fight. Lives are lost in a battle. In spite of strength and adherence to policy, there can be victory or defeat in a battle. Life and death are not determined by a being. O supreme among the Yadu lineage! Until
the right time has come, one does not find happiness or unhappiness. One man may kill many. Many may unite to
kill a single man. A coward may kill a brave one. An infamous one may kill one who is famous. Victory may go to
either side. Either side may confront defeat. This is also true of destruction. If one tries to flee, there will be death
and destruction. But in all cases, a war should be avoided. Where is the killer who is not killed in return? O
Hrishikesha! For one who has been killed, victory and defeat are equal. I do not think that defeat is different from
death. O Krishna! It is certain that one who is victorious also suffers from a loss. At the end, a beloved one will be
killed by someone from the other side. O Krishna! When he is rendered weak because he can no longer see his
sons or brothers, he will be completely overwhelmed by a disdain for life. Those who are modest, brave, aryas and
compassionate are killed in battle. But an inferior one may escape. O Janardana! Even after killing others, we are
overcome by remorse. There is evil, even for those who survive. The survivors gather their strength so as to destroy those who remain. In a desire to end the enmity, they seek complete annihilation. But victory engenders enmity, because those who are defeated are unhappy. A man who can cast aside victory and defeat is both happy and
peaceful. But a man who has created enmity always sleeps in misery. He doesn't have ease of mind, like living in a
house full of snakes. He who annihilates everybody is bereft of fame and always obtain ill fame among all beings.
Enmity is not pacified and is sustained for a long period of time. There are those who remain to recount it to men
who are born in the lineage. O Keshava! Enmity is never settled through another enmity. O Krishna! It becomes
stronger, like fire fed with oblations. There is no exception to this and peace will always remain unattainable. This
is the continual taint in those who seek to establish their own superiority. Manliness is a strong weakness in the
heart. One can find peace only by completely casting it aside from one's mind. O Madhusudana! By uprooting the
enemy by the roots, we may be able to accomplish our objective. But that will be crueller still. We can gain peace
by giving up our claim, but that will be like death. There is no doubt that this leaves the prospect of destruction, for
our enemies and our own side[Because the enmity remains.]. We do not wish to give that up. Nor do we desire a destruction of the lineage.
Peace through submission is desirable. There are those who are striving in a desire to avoid the war. If those attempts at pacification fail, a war is unavoidable and is not a sign of weakness. When attempts at pacification fail,
the results are terrible. Learned ones have seen these signs in a quarrel between dogs. There is a wagging of tails
first. Then there is a bark. Then there is a bark in return. After that, there is a retreat and the display of teeth. Then
there is loud barking and the quarrel. O Krishna! The stronger one wins and eats the other one's flesh. That is the
case with men too and there is no difference. The stronger always acts in the same way with the weak. There is disregard and aggression and the weak one surrenders to the strong. It is always appropriate that a father, a king and
an aged one should be revered. O Janardana! That is the reason Dhritarashtra is worthy of our honour and worship.
O Madhava! But Dhritarashtra's affection towards his son is strong. As long as he is under his son's control, he
will laugh at our submission. O Krishna! Now that the time has come, what do you think should be done next? O
Madhava! How can we avoid the diminishing of artha and dharma? O Madhusudana! O supreme among men! In
this difficult situation, you are the most appropriate person for us to consult. You are our friend. You wish us well.
You know the consequences of all deeds. O Krishna! You are our well-wisher and you know the answer to everything."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Thus addressed, Janardana replied to Dharmaraja. "For the welfare of both the sides, I
will myself go to the assembly of the Kurus. O king! If I succeed in obtaining peace without giving up your interests, I will obtain great merits and the deed will have great consequences. I will free the masses of Kurus and Srinjayas from the noose of death. I will also free the Pandavas, the sons of Dhritarashtra and the entire earth." Yudhishthira said, "O Krishna! It is not my view that you should go to the Kurus. However well you articulate your
words, Suyodhana will not listen to them. All the assembled kshatriya kings follow Suyodhana. O Krishna! It does
not appeal to me that you should arrive in their midst. O Madhava! If hatred is exhibited towards you, we will not
obtain any pleasure from gaining objects, or happiness from attaining divinity, or the prosperity of all the immortals." Bhagavan replied, "O great king! I know the wicked nature of Dhritarashtra's son. But through this, we will
not be blamed by all the kings of the world. All the kings of the earth combined are not enough to withstand me, if
I am enraged in battle, like inferior animals before a lion. If they act against me in any way, I will burn up all the
Kurus. That is my intention. O Partha! My going there will not be fruitless. There will be some gain in going there,
since we will not be blamed by the others." Yudhishthira said, "O Krishna! If it pleases you, then go in peace to the
Kouravas. Perhaps there will be some gain from it. I will see you again when you return. O lord! O Vishvaksena[A relatively rare name for Krishna.]!
Go to the Kurus and bring peace among the Bharatas. Let us all live in peace, with happy minds and happy hearts.
You are a brother. You are a friend. You are dear to Bibhatsu and to me. We have no doubt that you wish us well.
Go safely for our welfare. You know us and you know the others. You know artha. You know how to speak. O
Krishna! Tell Suyodhana what will be good for us. O Keshava! You can tell them whatever is in conformity with
dharma, whether it is for peace, or whether it is for enmity."'
