'Dhritarashtra said, "O son! You are the eldest and the son of my eldest wife[This is an odd statement, since Dhritarashtra is not reported to have had any other wives. Dhritarashtra
probably means that Gandhari is older than Kunti and Madri.]. Do not bear hatred towards the
Pandavas. He who bears hatred is always as unhappy as in death. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Yudhishthira
is inexperienced. He is your equal in goals and in friends. He does not hate you. Why do you hate him? O king! O
son! You are his equal in birth and valour. Why do you covet your brother's riches? Do not desire out of delusion.
Be calm and virtuous. O bull among the Bharata lineage! If you wish to accomplish the glory of a sacrifice, let the
priests arrange for the great sacrifice known as saptatantu. The kings will bring you great riches, gems and ornaments, from affection and respect. O son! The terrible act of desiring another's property brings misery. He who is
satisfied with his own, remains anchored in his own dharma and is happy. The signs of wealth are lack of concern
for another's prosperity, constant perseverance in one's own tasks and the protection of what one has obtained. The
man who is unmoved in calamities and always skilled and engaged in his own, vigilant and humble, will always
witness good fortune. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Give at sacrifices, enjoy the pleasures you desire, sport in
the company of women and be at peace."

'Duryodhana replied, "You know. But you confuse me, like a boat tied to another boat. Are you not attentive to
your own interests? Do you have hostile feelings towards me? Dhritarashtra's sons[The other sons.] follow your command and I
don't rule them. You always say that everything must be done for the sake of the future. If the leader has lost the
path because he has been deluded by the enemy, how can his followers follow that path? O king! You are old in
your wisdom, you follow the elders and you have control over your senses. You should not confuse us, when we
are engaged in our own tasks. Brihaspati has said that the royal path must be different from that followed by the
worlds. Therefore, a king must always be vigilant in protecting his own self-interest. O great king! A kshatriya's
path is one devoted to victory. O bull among the Bharata lineage! As long as one follows one's creed, dharma and
lack of dharma are irrelevant. O bull among the Bharata lineage! A charioteer uses his whip to drive out in all the
directions, wishing to attack the blazing fortunes of his enemy. Those who are skilled in weapons say that the
weapon isn't only the one that cuts. A weapon is that which vanquishes the enemy, be it open or hidden. O king!
Discontent is the root of prosperity. That is the reason I wish to be discontented. The supreme one is one who
strives for prosperity. In attaining prosperity and riches, shouldn't self-interest be our way? Others take away what
has been obtained before. That is known as the dharma of kings. It was during a period of truce that Shakra cut off
Namuchi's[A demon killed by Shakra (Indra).] head, because he knew that enmity towards a foe is eternal. Like a snake swallows rats, the earth
swallows up two-the king who does not strive and the brahmana who does not live at home. O lord of the earth!
No one is by nature another man's enemy. The enemy is that one whose pursuits are the same as one's own, and
not anyone else. He who stupidly watches the ascendance of the enemy's party, leaves a disease unattended and
cuts off his own roots. An enemy may be insignificant. But if he is allowed to grow in valour, he will destroy one,
the way an anthill destroys the roots of a tree it has grown on. O Ajamidha[Ajamidha is Dhritarashtra's name, in addition to being Yudhishthira's name.]! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Do not be pleased at the enemy's prosperity. The wise ones should not bear the burden of this policy on their
heads. A person who wishes for an increase in his prosperity, the way he has himself grown since birth, grows and
prospers with his relatives. Valour brings swift growth. As long as I do not obtain the wealth of the Pandavas, I
will always be in doubt. I will either obtain those riches, or lay down my life in the field of battle. O lord of the
earth! If I cannot equal him[Yudhishthira.], what is the point of being alive today? The Pandavas are always prospering and
we are stagnating."'
