The brahmana said, 'I do not smell scents. I do not know taste. I do not see form. I do not touch. I do not hear
different kinds of sound. I do not entertain the slightest bit of resolution. It is nature that desires agreeable
objects. It is nature that dislikes disagreeable objects. Like prana and apana when they enter the bodies of living
creatures, it is nature that experiences desire and hatred. There are other sentiments that are permanent. The atman
in creatures does not discern them in the body. When I am based there[In the body.], I am capable of being distracted by desire, anger, old age and death. I do not desire all the objects of desire. I do not hate all the sins. There is no taint in
my nature, like a drop of water is not left on a lotus. When one glances at many kinds of nature, the eternal is everlasting. The net of enjoyment is no longer attached to deeds, just as the blazing rays of the sun are not attached to
the firmament. In this connection, there is an ancient history about a conversation between an officiating priest[A special kind of officiating priest, adhvaryu, associated with the Yajur Veda.]
and a mendicant. O illustrious one! Listen to it. On seeing an animal prepared for a sacrificial rite, a mendicant
censured the violence and spoke to an officiating priest who was seated there. The officiating priest replied, "This
goat will not be destroyed. If the sacred texts are right, this animal will obtain great benefit. This part, constituted
of earth, will enter the earth. This part, constituted of water, will enter the water. The eyes will enter the sun. The
ears will enter the directions. The breath of life will enter the firmament. I follow the sacred texts and there is no
sin in this." '"'The mendicant said, "If you perceive a benefit from the sacrifice of the goat, then the sacrifice is for
the sake of the goat. Why does the sacrifice need you? Take the permission of the goat's mother, father, brother and
friends and let them pronounce the mantras. In particular, the goat depends on them. You should ask them and obtain their consent. It is only after their permission has been obtained that one can think about what should be done.
The life-breath of the goat has left[The goat has already been sacrificed.] and returned to its own origin. It is my view that only the immobile body is
left. This body, bereft of senses, is like kindling. Those whose desire is addicted to violence have thought of this as
an animal and have reduced it to kindling. Non-violence is the ancient instruction of all dharmas. I know that a rite
is indeed a rite if it does not involve any violence. I have a pledge of non-violence. If I wish to say anything beyond this, I am capable of saying many things. Your deed is reprehensible. All of us always find delight in non-violence towards all beings. We see this directly manifest. We do not worship what is indirect."

'"'The officiating priest replied, "You enjoy the qualities of smell that belong to the earth. You drink and taste
the quality of the water. You see form, the quality of fire. You touch the quality of the wind. You hear sound, which
originates in space. You use your mind to think of different things. You think that all these elements have life. You
are always engaged in taking away life. You are engaged in violence. There is no endeavour without violence. O
brahmana! What do you think?"

'"'The mendicant said, "The indestructible and the destructible are the two opposite aspects of the soul. The indestructible is existence. The destructible is said to be non-existent nature. Life, the tongue, the mind, the spirit,
sattva and rajas are part of nature. When one has been freed from the opposite pairs of sentiments, one is without
hope. Such a person looks upon all creatures impartially. He has no sense of ownership and has conquered his atman. When one has been freed in every possible way, there no longer is any fear."

'"'The officiating priest replied, "O supreme among intelligent ones! One should always reside with those who
are virtuous. Hearing your views, my intelligence has been illuminated. O illustrious one! Realizing that you were
an enlightened one, I spoke to you in this way. O brahmana! I showed honour to the customs in performing this
sacrifice. No crime attaches to me because of this sacrifice."'

'"The brahmana continued, 'When this was said, the mendicant remained silent. The officiating priest was freed
from his confusion. He engaged in the supreme rite of the great sacrifice. In this way, learned brahmanas know
about the extremely subtle nature of moksha. They know and follow the instructions of kshetrajna.'"'
