Vaishampayana said, 'The brave and great-souled Anakadundubhi[Vasudeva's name.] was lying down. The bull among the Kurus
saw him, tormented by grief over his son. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Partha's chest was broad and
his arms were mighty. With his eyes overflowing with tears and with his voice afflicted with grief, he seized his
feet. The mighty-armed and aged one embraced Arjuna with his arms. Remembering his sons, his brother's sons,
and all his sons' sons, daughters' sons and friends, he was extremely distracted and wept. 'Vasudeva said, "O Arjuna! There were hundreds of times when they conquered kings and daityas. O Arjuna! Though I am alive, I do not
see them. Death will come to me with great difficulty. Those two[Satyaki and Pradyumna.] were your disciples. O Arjuna! You always
loved them and showed them a great deal of respect. O Partha! It is because of their sins that the Vrishnis have
faced  destruction.  Among  the  best  of  the  Vrishnis,  those  two  were  held  to  be  atirathas.  In  speaking  about
Pradyumna and Yuyudhana, you used to boast. O tiger among Kurus! In addition to Krishna, they were always like
my sons. O Dhananjaya! Those two are the main reason behind the destruction of the Vrishnis. O Arjuna! However, I do not censure Shini's descendant or Hardikya, or for that matter, Akrura or Rukmini's son. The curse was the
true reason. The lord of the universe used his valour to defeat Keshi and Kamsa. O Partha! He beheaded the lord of
Chedi[Shishupala, described in Section 26 (Volume 2).], who was proud of his valour. Madhusudana defeated the nishada Ekalavya, Kalingas, Magadhas, Gandharas, the king of Kashi, kings from the desert regions and kings from the east, the south and the mountainous regions. Why did he disregard what was going to happen? On seeing his sons, grandsons, brothers and friends slain
and lying down, he told me, 'O bull among men! The time for the end of our lineage has arrived. Bibhatsu will
come to this city of Dvaravati. Tell him about the great carnages that has happened among the Vrishnis. O lord!
When that greatly energetic one hears about the destruction of the Yadus, without thinking about it, he will swiftly
arrive here. Know that I am Arjuna and Arjuna is me. O Madhava! Know that you must do whatever he asks you
to. Pandava will know what the occasion demands for the women and the children. Bibhatsu will also perform
your funeral rites. When Dhananjaya has left, this city, with its walls and mansions, will instantly be swallowed up
by the ocean. I will go to some sacred spot and resort to the rituals. With the intelligent Rama, I will wait for the
right time.' Hrishikesha, whose valour is unimaginable, told me this. The lord then left me with the children and
went to whichever direction he desired. I have thought about those two great-souled brothers[Balarama and Krishna.] and about the terrible destruction of the kin. Afflicted by grief, I have not eaten. O Pandava! I will not eat. Nor will I live. It is
through good fortune that I have met you. O Partha! Do everything that Krishna spoke about. O Partha! This kingdom, these women and these jewels are yours. O slayer of enemies! I wish to cast aside my breath of life."'
