'Yudhishthira said, "This time, which brings about the destruction of all beings, moves on. O grandfather! What is
the supreme benefit one should try for? Tell me."

'Bhishma replied, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted. This is a conversation between a father
and a son. O Yudhishthira! Listen to it. O Partha! There was a certain brahmana who was devoted to studying. He
had an intelligent son named Medhavin[The word medhavin also means learned or intelligent.]. The son was accomplished in the objective of moksha dharma and was
also conversant with the true nature of the world. He spoke to his father, who was engaged in the act of studying.

'O father! Since the lifespan of beings passes so quickly and men are destroyed, what should a wise person do? O
father! Tell me about proper yoga and about the progressive way one should follow dharma.'

'"The father replied, 'O son! In brahmacharya, one must study the Vedas. Then, one must desire sons, so that the
ancestors can be saved. Next, one must accept the sacrificial fire and perform sacrifices, in accordance with the
prescribed rites. Finally, one must enter the forest and strive as a hermit.'

'"The son asked, 'The world is surrounded from all sides and is afflicted. A fall is certain. How can you speak
with such patience?'

'"The father replied, 'How is the world afflicted? By what is it surrounded? Why is fall certain? Why are you
scaring me?'

'"The son said, 'The world is afflicted by death. It is surrounded by old age. Day and night, there is downfall.
How can you not comprehend this? I know that death does not wait for anyone[That is, death touches everyone.]. How can I wait for it, with my
feet tied in that net? As one night follows another night, the lifespan is decreased. Being like a fish in shallow water, how can one then be happy? The learned person knows that every day is fruitless. Before all desires are satisfied, a man encounters death. It is as if a ram is inattentive and is roaming around, feeding on young grass, when a
she-wolf grabs him and conveys him to death. Do what is best today, lest you are overtaken by death. Death attracts, even if tasks are left incomplete. Tomorrow's task should be done today, the afternoon's in the forenoon.
Death does not wait, to see if a task has been done or is yet undone. Who knows that he will not be approached by
death today itself? When one is young, one must accept the pursuit of dharma as the only reason for remaining
alive[Instead of going through the four ashramas, which is what the father had
suggested.]. Observing dharma, one obtains deeds in this world and happiness after death. Overcome by confusion, one
strives for the sake of sons and wives. In an attempt to sustain them, one performs desirable and undesirable acts.
A man thinks in his mind that sons and animals are important and is devoted to this. While he is thus asleep, death
grasps him, like an extremely powerful tiger. He has still not been satisfied by obtaining the objects of desire. Nevertheless, like a tiger grabbing an animal, death takes him away and goes. He is still thinking about the tasks that
have been done, those which have been done and those which have partly been done. While he is attached to happiness in this death, he comes under the subjugation of death. This happens even before he has obtained the fruits
of the deeds that have been completed. He is attached to the field, the shop and the home and attached to the fruits
of deeds, but death takes him and goes away. There is death, old age and disease-and many other reasons for misery. All of them dwell in the body. How can you then remain, as if you are healthy? From the moment a being is
born, death and old age pursue him, to bring about his end. Everything, mobile and immobile, is afflicted by these
two. The learned texts have said that the pleasure[There is a problem with the text of the Critical edition. It says devaanam
(belonging to the gods), which makes it impossible to understand it. We
have taken it as devanam and interpreted it as pleasure.] from attachment to dwelling in homes in villages and habitations is just like death. However, this can be contained in the forest. The attachment to villages and habitations
binds one down with ropes. The performer of good deeds can sever these. But the performer of evil deeds cannot
sever these. A person who does not unnecessarily injure beings through thoughts, words and deeds, is not destroyed by those who seek to take away life and wealth. He is not tied down by his action. When the soldiers of
death advance, nothing can withstand them, with the exception of truth and the abandonment of falsehood. There
is amrita in truth. Therefore, one must follow the vow of truth and be devoted to the yoga of truth. There is delight,
peace and tranquility in truth. It is through truth that one triumphs over death. Both immortality and death exist in
the body. Through confusion, one obtains death. Through truth, one obtains immortality. That is the reason I am
non-violent and pursuing the truth. I have cast aside desire and anger. I am impartial towards happiness and unhappiness. I am tranquil and look on death, as if I am immortal. I will be a hermit who will be devoted to sacrifices for
peace, sacrifices for the brahman, sacrifices through words and sacrifices through deeds, thereby making myself
awaken. How can one perform such violent sacrifices that involve the slaughter of animals? How can a wise person acts like a flesh-eater, injure himself internally, and observe the sacrifices of kshatriyas? If a person is singleminded in his words, thoughts, austerities, renunciation and yoga and follows these well, he obtains everything.
There is no sight that is equal to knowledge. There is no strength that is equal to knowledge. There is no misery
that is like that of attachment. There is no joy that is equal to renunciation. My atman has been generated from the
atman[The first atman is the jivatman and the second atman is the paramatman,
the brahman.]. Though I have no offspring, I will base myself on the atman[Meaning, the brahman. He will shun the standard prescription of first
having offspring before embarking on vanaprastha and sannyasa.]. My salvation will come from the atman,
not from offspring. There are no riches for a brahmana that are equal to solitude and truth. Basing himself on good
conduct, not chastising anyone, resorting to uprightness-he performs the supreme rites. Where are your riches?
Where are your relatives? Where are your wives? O brahmana! They will all die. Your atman is hidden inside a
cave. Where have your grandfather and your father gone[Reiterating the point that they are mortal.]?'"
'Bhishma said, "O king! Hearing the words of the son, the father acted accordingly. You should also conduct
yourself in that way, observing the dharma of truth."'
