'Sanjaya said, "Kunti's son, Dhananjaya, whose valour was inconceivable, began to think about how he might accomplish his pledge. He thought of mantras[The text doesn't directly explain what these mantras were for. One can deduce that they were for making
Krishna appear before him. Krishna appeared in Arjuna's sleep.] and was soon immersed in sleep. The one with the ape on his banner was tormented by sorrow. As he thought about the one with Garuda on his banner in all situations, Krishna appeared before Dhananjaya. Because of devotion and affection, the one with dharma in his soul, never failed to
stand up, welcome Govinda and offer him a seat. But having given it to him, Bibhatsu did not think of taking a seat
for himself. The immensely energetic Krishna knew about Partha's resolution. Having seated himself, he spoke
these words to Kunti's son, who was standing. 'O Partha! Do not sorrow in your mind. Destiny is impossible to
defeat. Destiny conveys all beings to the supreme end. O supreme among eloquent ones! Tell me. Why are you
grieving? Learned ones do not grieve. Sorrow is the destroyer of all deeds. Sorrow delights enemies and afflicts
relatives. Such a man confronts decay. Therefore, you should not sorrow.' Vasudeva spoke these words to the unvanquished and learned Bibhatsu and he spoke these meaningful words in return. 'I have taken a great vow of
killing Jayadratha. O Keshava! Tomorrow, I will slay the evil-minded one who killed my son. O Achyuta! But the
sons of Dhritarashtra will act so as to frustrate my pledge. They will place Saindhava at the rear and have him protected by all the maharathas. O Krishna! They possess eleven akshouhinis that are extremely difficult to vanquish.
If my pledge is not satisfied, how can someone like me remain alive? O brave one! The misery of failure is circling
around me. Let me tell you that the sun moves swiftly now[Since it is the winter season, the days are shorter.].' Hearing the reasons for Partha's sorrow, Krishna,
the one with the bird on his banner[Krishna (Vishnu) has Garuda on his banner.], touched water and seated himself with his face towards the east.

'"For the welfare of Pandu's son, who was engaged in Saindhava's death, the lotus-eyed and immensely energetic one spoke these words. 'O Partha! There is a supreme and eternal weapon named pashupata. With this, the
great god Maheshvara killed all the daityas in battle. Had you known about it today, you would have been able to
kill Jayadratha tomorrow. So that you may obtain the knowledge, think about the god with the bull on his banner in
your mind[Shiva has a bull on his banner.]. As his devotee and with his favours, you will obtain that great object.' On hearing Krishna's words,
Dhananjaya touched water. He seated himself on the ground and single-mindedly fixed his mind on Bhava[Shiva's name.].
While he thus concentrated, the auspicious brahma moment arrived[There are several muhurtas (moments) in a day. Some are auspicious, others less so. Brahma muhurta is an auspicious one and occurs one-and-a-half hours before sunrise.]. Arjuna perceived himself and Keshava to
be travelling through the sky, full of stellar bodies and frequented by siddhas and charanas. With Keshava, Partha
travelled through the sky with the speed of the wind and it seemed as if Keshava had grasped him by the right arm.
They seemed to behold many extraordinary sights as they passed. The great-souled one saw Mount Shveta in a
northern direction. He saw Kubera's sporting ground and a lake adorned with lotuses. He saw the Ganga, supreme
among rivers and full of water. There were trees always full of flowers and fruit. There were stones like crystal.
Those parts were frequented by lions and tigers and inhabited by many kinds of deer. They were full of beautiful
and sacred hermitages that were inhabited by beautiful birds. The region around Mandara resounded with the
sounds of songs sung by kinnaras. There were gold and silver peaks, illuminated with many kinds of herbs. They
were adorned with beautiful and blossoming mandara trees[The first Mandara is Mount Mandara, a sacred mountain and the region being described is around Mount Mandara. Mount Mandara is believed to be between Bhagalpur and Dumka, though that does not fit the geography
given here. The second Mandara is a reference to the mandara tree, the Indian coral tree, of the erythrina variety.]. He reached Mount Kala, which was as lovely as a
mass of collyrium. It was a bejewelled mountain, on the foothills of the sacred Himalayas. He reached Brahmatunga and many rivers and countries. He reached Sushringa, Shatashringa and the forest known as Sharyati[Brahmatunga seems to have been a mountain. There is also a reference to it in Section 33 (Volume 3). Sushringa
and Shatashringa are clearly mountains.], the sacred spot known as Horse-Head and the spot known as Atharvan. He reached Vrishamdamsha, the king of mountains, and the great Mandara, which was full of apsaras and adorned by kinnaras. Together with Keshava, Partha
roamed around that mountain and saw sacred springs, adorned with golden minerals. That spot on earth was as radiant as the rays of the moon and was garlanded with many cities. Travelling through the sky, the firmament and
the earth with Krishna, he roamed and saw Vishnupada and wondered. He was then flung down, like an arrow.
Partha then saw a flaming mountain. Its radiance was like that of the planets, the nakshatras, the moon, the sun and
the fire.

'"Approaching that mountain, on the summit of the mountain, he saw the great-souled one who has the bull on
his banner. He was always engaged in austerities. He blazed in his own energy, like a thousand suns. He held a trident and his white hair was matted. His attire was made out of bark and skin. The immensely energetic one's limbs
were wonderful and he possessed a thousand eyes. The god was seated with Parvati and masses of radiant beings.
His attendants sang and played on musical instruments. They laughed and danced and clapped their palms. They
shouted and the place was full of fragrant perfume. Divine sages, who knew about the brahman, praised him with
chants. He was the protector of all beings. He was the wielder of the bow. He was the one without decay. On seeing him, together with Partha, Vasudeva, the one with dharma in his soul, lowered his head down on the ground
and praised the eternal brahman. He was the origin of the worlds. He was the origin of the universe. He was without beginning. He was Ishana[Shiva's name.], the one without decay. He was the supreme origin of the mind. He was the reservoir for the sky, the wind and stellar bodies. He was the creator of torrents of rain. He was the lord of supreme and
original nature. He was the one who was worshipped by gods, danavas, yakshas and humans. He was the supreme
brahman, as manifested to yogis. He was the store of all knowledge about the brahman. He was the creator of
everything mobile and immobile, and their great-souled and angry destroyer too, at the time of destruction. He was
Shakra and Surya and the source of all qualities. Krishna bowed down before the source of words, thoughts, intelligence and deeds. Those who seek subtle spiritual knowledge see him. He is without origin and is the origin of all
souls and he[Krishna. Bhava is Shiva's name.] sought refuge with Bhava. Arjuna also repeatedly worshipped him, knowing that he was the source
of the past, present and the future and the origin of all beings. On seeing them, Sharva[Shiva's name.] smiled and said, 'O foremost among men! Welcome! Arise! Be free of exhaustion. O brave ones! What is the desire in your minds? O ones
without decay! Tell me quickly. What is the reason for your coming here? I will accomplish your purpose. Tell me
what will be beneficial for you and I will grant you everything.' On hearing his words, they stood up, hands joined
in salutation.

'"The immensely intelligent Vasudeva and Arjuna satisfied Sharva with a hymn. 'O Bhava! O Sharva! We bow
down before you. O Rudra! O one who grants boons! O one who is the lord of all beings! O one who is always
fierce! O Kapardin[Shiva's name, meaning the one with matted hair.]! O Mahadeva! O Bhima! O Tryambaka! O Shambhava! O Ishana! O destroyer of Bhaga[The word Bhaga has several meanings. This is a reference to Shiva creating Virabhadra and Virabhadra blinding
the god Bhaga in Daksha's sacrifice.]!
We bow down before you. O destroyer of Andhaka[Andhaka was a demon slain by Shiva.]! O father of Kumara[Kartikeya.]! O one whose throat is always blue!
O intelligent one! O one who is red! O one who has the colour of smoke! O one who is the hunter! O one who is
unvanquished! O one whose locks are always blue! O one with the trident! O one with divine eyes! O one who is
the officiating priest! O protector! O one with three eyes! O hunter! O one whose seed is the source of riches! O
one who cannot be thought of! O husband of Ambika[Ambika is Parvati's name.]! O one who is worshipped by all the gods! O one with the
bull on the standard! O tawny one! O matted one! O brahmachari! O one who performs austerities in water! O one
devoted to the brahman! O undefeated one! O soul of the universe! O creator of the universe! O one who is stationed everywhere in the universe! We bow down before you. We show obeisance to you. O one who is worshipped by all beings! O one who is always powerful! O Brahmavaktra[Literally, one whose mouth is the brahman.]! O Sharva! O Shankara! O Shiva! We
bow down before you. O lord of words! O lord of beings! We bow down before you. We worship you. O lord of
the universe! O great lord! We bow down before you. O one with the thousand heads! We bow down before you. O
one with the thousand arms! We honour you. O one with a thousand eyes and feet! We worship you. O one whose
deeds are innumerable! We bow down before you. O one with the golden complexion! O one with the golden armour! O one who is always compassionate towards devotees! O lord! Make us successful through a boon.' Having
worshipped Mahadeva and gratified him, Vasudeva and Arjuna obtained the weapon. Partha was delighted and
worshipped the one with the bull on his banner. With dilated eyes, he gazed at the one who was the receptacle of
all energy. He always used to make offerings to Vasudeva every night and he beheld these, lying near Tryambaka.
Pandava worshipped Krishna and Sharva in his mind and addressed Shankara, desiring the divine weapon.

'"On learning Partha's intention and the purport of the boon, the lord god smiled and spoke to Vasudeva and Arjuna. 'O destroyers of enemies! Near this spot, there is a divine lake that is full of amrita. There, my divine bow
and arrow have been secreted a long time ago. I used them to bring down all the enemies of the gods in battle. O
Krishnas[Meaning both Krishna and Arjuna.]! Bring the supreme bow, with the arrow, here.' Having been thus addressed, those two brave ones went
there, with Sharva's attendants. They went to the celestial lake, as indicated by the one with the bull on his banner,
and which was surrounded by hundreds of divine wonders. It was sacred and was the granter of all objects. Without any fear, the rishis Nara and Narayana went there. They went to the lake, which possessed the complexion of
the solar disc. Arjuna and Achyuta saw a terrible serpent in the water. There was a second supreme serpent too,
with a thousand heads. They saw it vomit giant flames, with radiance like that of the fire. Krishna and Partha
touched water and joined their hands in salutation. They worshipped the one with the bull on his banner and approached those serpents. They were learned in the Vedas and chanted one hundred hymns in praise of the brahman
and Rudra. They bowed before the immeasurable Bhava, who is in every soul. Because of this praise of the greatness of Rudra, those giant serpents gave up their serpent forms and assumed the form of a bow and arrow, the slayer of enemies. Delighted, they grasped the resplendent bow and arrow. Those great-souled ones took them and
gave them to the great-minded one[Shiva.]. A brahmachari emerged from the side of the one with the bull on his banner.
He was tawny-eyed and he was the resort of austerities. He was powerful and bluish-red. He grasped the best of
bows and stood in that spot. He stretched the bow and fixed the arrow to the supreme bow. Pandava noticed how
the bow was grasped with the hand and the position. He heard the mantras spoken by Bhava. The one whose valour was unthinkable[Arjuna.] grasped everything. The immensely energetic lord[The brahmachari.] then released the arrow into the lake.
The brave one again flung the bow into the lake. Arjuna, whose memory was good, knew that Bhava was gratified.
He remembered the boon he had given him in the forest and how he had beheld Shankara[This has been described in Section 31 (Volume 2).]. In his mind, he
wished that all this might come true[All this was part of a dream.]. Knowing what he desired, Bhava happily gave him the boon. He granted
him the terrible pashupata and the fulfilment of his pledge. The body hair of the invincible one[Arjuna.] stood up and he
thought that his task had been accomplished. Arjuna and Keshava were delighted and praised Maheshvara, with
their heads bowed. The brave ones took their leave of Bhava and instantly returned to their own camp. They were
filled with great joy. They were as delighted as Indra and Vishnu, when they desired to kill Jambha."'
