'Vasudeva said, "Having been thus addressed, on that field of battle, the son of a suta then spoke to Pradyumna in
soft and placating words, 'O Rukmini's son! I am not afraid to drive horses in battle. I know the conduct of the Vrishnis in battle and it is not different from what you have said. But it has been said that the duty of charioteers is to
always protect the life of the warrior. And you were greatly afflicted. O hero! You were badly pierced through the
arrows unleashed by Shalva. You had also lost consciousness and that is the reason I retreated. O foremost among
the Satvatas! O son of Keshava[The word used is nandana.]! Now that you have regained your senses, in accordance with your wishes, you
will see my skill in handling horses. I have been born from Daruka and I have been trained by him. Without any
fear, I will now penetrate Shalva's great army.' O brave one! Having uttered these words, he tugged at the reins of
the horses and drove them speedily. He drove them in circular motions, withdrawing them and releasing them
again. In beautiful motions, the horses turned to the left and to the right, and everywhere. O king! Controlled by
the reins, those supreme horses seemed to fly through the sky. O king! Knowing Daruki's light touch of hand, it
seemed that the horses were on fire, but did not touch the ground with their feet. O bull among the Bharata lineage!
He wheeled around Shalva's army so easily from the right that those who witnessed it thought that it was
extraordinary.

'"Unable to tolerate this penetration by Pradyumna from the right, the king of Soubha suddenly unleashed three
arrows at the charioteer. But Daruka's son gave no thought to these swift arrows. O mighty-armed one! He continued to drive the horses. Then the king of Soubha once again shot many arrows at my brave son, Rukmini's son[The word used is nandana.].
But before they could strike, Rukmini's son, the destroyer of enemy warriors, exhibited his lightness of touch and
smilingly, sliced them off with his own sharp arrows. On seeing all his arrows sliced down by Pradyumna, the king
of Soubha resorted to the terrible maya of the asuras and unleashed his arrows. Knowing that daitya weapons had
been released, he[Pradyumna.] sliced them off by unleashing enormously powerful brahma arrows. Those weapons always
drink the blood of others and driving the other weapons away[Repulsing Shalva's weapons.], pierced him[Shalva.] in the head, chest and face, so
that he was knocked down unconscious. Thus, oppressed by arrows, the mean Shalva fell down. So as to destroy
the enemy, Rukmini's son fixed another supreme arrow. All the bulls of the Dasharhas used to worship this arrow,
which was as radiant as the sun and the fire. On seeing it fixed to the bow, sounds of lamentation were heard in the
sky. All the masses of gods, together with Indra and the lord of riches[Kubera.], sent Narada and the immensely strong
god of the wind. These two went to Rukmini's son and delivered the message of the gods, 'O brave one! You
should never kill King Shalva. Restrain the arrow, because he is not to be killed by you in battle. There is no man
who cannot be killed by this arrow. O mighty-armed one! But it has been destined by the creator that he will be
killed in battle by Devaki's son[The word used is nandana.] Krishna and that should not become false.' At that, Pradyumna was extremely
delighted and withdrew that supreme arrow from the excellent bow and returned it to the quiver. O Indra among
kings! Then Shalva arose, in an extremely miserable frame of mind. Oppressed by Pradyumna's arrows, he swiftly
retreated with his troops. O Indra among kings! Vanquished by the Vrishnis, the cruel one left Dvaraka. He ascended Soubha and went up into the sky."'
