Brahma said, "One is incapable of speaking about all the qualities separately. Rajas, sattva and tamas are
seen to be together. They are attached to each other and depend on each other. All of them seek refuge
with each other and follow each other. There is no doubt that where there is sattva, tamas also proliferates. It is
said that as long as tamas and sattva exist, rajas also coexists. They progress together along the path. They combine and adhere to each other. Their conduct is also collective, sometimes with reason, sometimes without reason.
However, even when they follow each other, the outcomes may be different. Collectively, they can progress in a
superior way and also in an inferior way. When there is an excess of tamas, the progress is downwards. A little bit
of rajas will be discerned there and sattva will be lesser still. When there is an excess of rajas, the progress is then
medium. A little bit of tamas will be discerned there and sattva will be lesser still. When there is an excess of sattva, the progress is upwards. A little bit of rajas will be discerned there and tamas will be lesser still. Sattva is the
origin for any transformation of the senses. There is no other attribute that is superior to sattva. The progress of
sattva is upwards, that of rajas is medium. People who have tamas possess inferior qualities and progress downwards. The three qualities course in the three varnas-tamas in shudras, rajas in kshatriyas and the excellent sattva
in brahmanas. Even from a distance[That is, from a cursory examination.], they are seen to exist together and collectively. We have not heard of tamas,
sattva or rajas existing separately. When they see the sun rising, wicked thieves suffer from fear. Those who are
below are tormented. They are afflicted by thirst and suffer from hardships. The rising sun is like sattva. Wicked
thieves are tamas. The heat that torments those who are below is said to be the quality of rajas. The radiance in the
sun is sattva. The torment is the quality of rajas. The invasion on the right day is known as the quality of tamas[When the sun is invaded by Rahu, causing an eclipse.].
In this way, all the three qualities exist in luminous bodies. In due course, they manifest themselves, here and
there. Even in immobile objects, tamas leads to an inferior state. Rajas and sattva also exist in the oils. Know that
the day has three parts. The night has also been divided into three parts. There are months, fortnights, years, seasons and the intervals that join these. Three kinds of gifts can be given. Three kinds of sacrifices can be undertaken. There are three worlds. There are three Vedas. There are three kinds of knowledge. There are three destinations. The past, the present and the future exist. Dharma, artha and kama exist. The three qualities are also there in
prana, apana and udana. Everything that exists in the world has three components. The three qualities always exist
in unmanifest form. The creation of the three qualities, sattva, rajas and tamas, is eternal. The eternal and ever-lasting origin is unmanifest and represents tamas. This is auspicious and without birth. There are also Prakriti, transformation, destruction, Pradhana and creation. These cannot be discerned. But they are indeed certain and fixed.
Everything that is manifest and unmanifest is said to possess the three qualities. A man who thinks about adhyatma
must know these names and meditate about them. Such a person will know the names and the truth about the qualities of the unmanifest. He will know about all the destinations. He will know the truth about the different kinds of
divisions and will be freed from his body. He will be liberated from all the qualities and be without disease."'"'
