'Shalya said, "Then Shakra was praised by the masses of gandharvas and apsaras. He ascended Airavata, the king
of elephants, who possessed all the auspicious marks. The immensely energetic god of the fire was there, maharshi
Brihaspati, Yama, Varuna and Kubera, lord of riches. Surrounded by all the gods, gandharvas and apsaras, Shakra,
the destroyer of Vritra, went to the three worlds. Having been united with the great Indrani, Shatakratu, the king of
the gods, was supremely delighted and began to rule as the king of the gods.

'"The illustrious Angira[Alternatively, Angirasa.] appeared. He honoured Indra of the gods with mantras from Atharva Veda and he
bestowed a boon on Atharva Angirasa[Indra bestowed the boon. The word atharva has various meanings. Atharva (or Atharvan) was the name of a
sage and Atharva Veda (the fourth Veda) is derived from this sage. A descendant of Atharva, or someone conversant with Atharva Veda, can be addressed as Atharva. The word atharva also means wise or learned, so it could
also have been an adjective for angirasa.]. 'This Veda will be known by the name of Atharva Angirasa. For example, you will also obtain a share in the sacrifice[The Atharva Veda belonged to a slightly different category, as compared to the Rig Veda, the Sama Veda and
the Yajur Veda. This probably signifies acceptance of the Atharva Veda as a part of the ritual recitations in
sacrifices.].' O great king! Having thus honoured the illustrious Atharva
Angirasa, Shatakratu, the king of the gods, gave him permission to leave. Indra honoured the thirty gods and the
rishis, rich in austerities. O king! He happily ruled over the subjects, in accordance with dharma. Such were the
difficulties confronted by Indra, together with his wife. With a desire to kill his enemies, he lived in disguise.

'"O Indra among kings! You should not be angry because you confronted difficulties in the great forest, together
with Droupadi and your great-souled brothers. O Indra among kings! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O descendant of the Kourava lineage! You will also regain your kingdom, the way Shakra obtained it after killing Vri-
tra. The evil-acting Nahusha was evil in intelligence and hated brahmanas. Because of Agastya's curse, he was destroyed for an eternal period of time. O destroyer of enemies! This will also happen to your evil-souled enemies.
Karna, Duryodhana and the others will soon confront their destruction. O brave one! O lord! With your brothers
and Droupadi, you will then enjoy the earth, up to the frontiers of the ocean. This is the account of Shakra's victory, equal in importance to the Vedas. It should be heard by a king who wishes for victory. O supreme among victorious ones! It is for that reason that I have recounted it, for the sake of your victory. O Yudhishthira! Great-souled
ones are strengthened when they are praised. O great-souled Yudhishthira! Because of Duryodhana's crimes and
the strength of Bhima and Arjuna, the defeat of the kshatriyas will occur. He who always reads this account of Indra's victory, has his soul cleansed and having won heaven, rejoices in the afterlife. That man does not have any
fear from enemies and he is never without sons. He never confronts a calamity. He always has a long life. He is triumphant everywhere and is never vanquished."'

Vaishampayana said, 'O bull among the Bharata lineage! The king was thus assured by Shalya. In accordance
with the prescribed rites, the supreme among those who uphold dharma showed Shalya homage. Having heard
Shalya's words, Kunti's son, Yudhishthira, spoke these words to the mighty-armed king of Madra. "There is no
doubt that you will be Karna's charioteer and your task is to destroy Karna's energy through your prowess." Shalya
replied, "I will do as you have asked me to do and everything else that I am able to do for your sake." O destroyer
of enemies! Having taken his leave from Kounteya, Shalya, the handsome lord of Madra, then went with his army
to Duryodhana.'
