'Yudhishthira said, "O grandfather! Some brahmanas are engaged in their own
tasks, while others are engaged in tasks they should not do. Tell me the difference between them."

'Bhishma replied, "There are those who have the signs of learning. In considering anything, they look to the sacred texts. O king! These brahmanas are
celebrated as being equal to the brahman. There are those who are accomplished as officiating priests and preceptors and are engaged in their own tasks.
O king! These brahmanas are regarded as the equals of the gods. There are
those who are officiating priests, priests, ministers, ambassadors and supervisors of the treasury. O king! These brahmanas are regarded as the equivalent of
kshatriyas. There are those who ride horses, ride elephants or chariots, and are
also foot soldiers. O king! These brahmanas are regarded as the equivalent of
vaishyas. There are also reprehensible ones who are brahmanas only in name.
They have abandoned the deeds they should have undertaken by virtue of birth.
O king! These brahmanas are said to be the equals of shudras. There are brahmanas who have not studied the sacred texts. Nor have they consecrated the
sacred fire. All of these do not follow dharma. The king should make them pay
taxes and force them to undertake manual labour. There are those who are employed as ordinary messengers, work as priests in temples, study the nakshatras, work as officiating priests for ordinary people and fifthly, undertake great
journeys[The text uses the word mahapathika. Literally, this means someone who
undertakes a great journey. But the sense seems to be of a great journey
that takes one beyond the seas.]. These brahmanas are chandalas. If the treasury suffers from a
shortage, the lord of the earth should exact taxes from these[Meaning all brahmanas, with the exception of the categories excluded.], with the exception of those who are equals of the brahman and the equals of the gods. The
Vedas say that the king is the lord of the riches of those who are not brahmanas
and also of brahmanas who perform wrong deeds. The king must never ignore
wrong deeds. If he wishes to follow dharma, he must control and divide
them[The different categories of brahmanas.]. If a brahmana becomes a thief in a king's kingdom, learned people
think that this is the king's crime. O king! If a brahmana who knows the Vedas
and is a snataka is forced to become a thief because of lack of means of sustenance, those who are learned about dharma say that it is the king's duty to support him. O scorcher of enemies! If he does not change himself after he has obtained a means of subsistence, then, with his relatives, he should be exiled from
the country."'
