Brahma said, "One must properly follow the path mentioned earlier. One must study to the best of one's capacity and observe brahmacharya. A sage will be engaged in his own dharma. He will be learned and will
control all his senses. He will be engaged in what brings pleasure to his preceptor. He will be pure and devoted to
the dharma of truth. Having taken the preceptor's permission, he will eat the food, without criticizing it. He will
eat havishya obtained through begging for alms[Havishya means food that is fit to be offered as an oblation. This means that it is vegetarian and free from oil
and spices, cooked in a single vessel.]. He will sit, stand, or roam around[As instructed by the preceptor.]. Pure and controlled, he
will offer oblations into the fire twice a day. He will always wield a staff made out of bilva or palasha[Respectively, wood apple and flame of the forest.]. A brahmana must wear linen or cotton clothes, or deerskin, or garments that are dyed reddish brown. There can be a girdle made out of munja grass. His hair must be matted and he must bathe every day. He must wear the sacred
thread. He must study. Without any greed, he must always observe the vows. He must purify himself and always
offer water to the gods. A brahmachari who controls himself in this way is praised. He is self-restrained and controls his seed. Such a person conquers heaven. Having obtained the best kind of birth[As a brahmana.], he is not dislodged from
that state. He must cleanse himself and observe all the sacraments in the stage of brahmacharya. After that, he can
leave the village and dwell in the forest as a mendicant sage[As opposed to becoming a householder.]. He will be clad in hides and bark and have his bath
in the morning. He will always roam around in the forest and never return to the village again. When guests arrive,
he will worship them and offer them refuge. He will subsist on fruits, leaves, ordinary roots and dark millet[Not cultivated.]. He
will subsist on water and air and everything else that is obtained from trees in the forest. Single-mindedly and in
due progression, he will eat according to his initiation[The initiation into vanaprastha prescribes the diet. The progression refers to first surviving on roots and fruits,
then leaves, then water, and finally only air.]. If a guest arrives, he will offer him roots and fruits as
alms. He must always, single-mindedly, offer as alms whatever food there is available. He must always control his
speech and eat after the gods and the guests have eaten. His mind should not be effusive. He must eat limited quantities and seek refuge with the gods. He must be self-controlled, friendly and forgiving. He must wear his hair and
beard long. He must be engaged in offering oblations and studying. He must be devoted to the dharma of truth. He
must abandon all attachment to the body. He must be accomplished and always controlled in the forest. He must
conquer his senses. A person in the vanaprastha stage who acts in this way conquers heaven.

'"'"After having followed garhasthya, brahmacharya and vanaprastha, a person who desires moksha can resort
to the supreme conduct[Sannyasa.]. He grants fearlessness to all creatures and no longer performs any tasks. He is engaged
in the welfare of all beings. He is friendly. Such a sage controls all his senses. As he wishes, he eats food that has
not been solicited or has not been prepared, but has just presented itself. He must approve of whatever food has
presented itself and must wish to eat only a mouthful. He must eat only for surviving on this journey of life and
only for the sake of sustaining life. He will eat whatever has been obtained through dharma and not to satisfy desire. He will accept only a mouthful of food and garments and nothing more than that. He will accept what he can
eat and never more than that. He will not accept gifts from others. Nor will he ever give to them. Because of the
helplessness of beings, a learned person will always share with them. He will not seize the possessions of others.
Nor will he receive without having been asked to. Having enjoyed some object, he will not desire it again. He will
only use earth, water, stones, leaves, flowers and fruits that are lying around[Not owned by anybody.]. His action will not be driven by desire. He will not earn a living as an artisan. He will not desire gold. He will not hate. Nor will he teach. He will not
own any possessions. He will only eat what has been purified through devotion. He will stay away from arguments. He will not be addicted to futile occupations. He will not have any associations with any creatures. Having
ignited a fire, he will roam around for alms. However, he will only seek these from a house where the fire has been
put out and the residents have eaten[He will beg only when the fire for cooking has been put out and the householders have eaten.]. A person who knows about moksha will only wish to beg after the kitchen
vessels have been washed. He will not rejoice at having obtained something. Nor will he be distressed if he doesn't
obtain something. When he wishes to beg, he will be controlled and will only seek what is sufficient for the moment. He will not seek gains that ordinary people want. Nor will he eat when he has been honoured. A mendicant
will hide himself, so that he is not given things as a mark of respect. He will not eat food that is putrid, acidic, bitter, astringent, pungent, succulent, sweet or not fit to be tasted. He will only eat enough to sustain life, enough to
remain alive on this journey. A person who knows about moksha will not desire to earn sustenance through a conduct that causes conflict with other creatures. When he seeks alms, he should never follow another person who is
also begging. He  should never reveal the dharma he practises. He  should be pure and roam around alone. He
should seek refuge in an empty house, in the forest, under a tree, near a river or in a mountainous cavern. During
the  summer,  he  can  spend  a  night  in  a  village.  During  the  monsoon,  it  can  be  more  than  one  night.  With his
progress determined by the movement of the sun, he should roam around on the earth like a worm. He should roam
around on earth with an eye of compassion towards all beings. He should not accumulate anything and should not
become attached to where he resides. A person who knows about moksha will always perform his rites with pure
water. Such a man will always perform his ablutions with water that has been taken[The sense seems to be that he should bathe by taking water from rivers, ponds and lakes and not plunge into
these.]. He will always practise
non-violence, brahmacharya, truth, uprightness, lack of anger, lack of jealousy, self-control and lack of calumny.
He will possess these eight attributes and control his senses in following the vows. He will always have a conduct
that is without sin, without deceit and without falsehood. He will never perform tasks for the sake of obtaining
benedictions or those that are associated with violence. Nor will he follow the dharma of accumulation followed in
the world. He will overcome all the sentiments and wander around, satisfied with only a little. He will be impartial
towards all creatures, mobile and immobile. He will not seek to defeat another person. Nor will he be defeated by
another. A person who is trusted by all creatures is said to be someone who knows about moksha. He will not reflect on the future. Nor will he think about the past. He will be indifferent towards the present. He will be controlled and wait for the time[For death.]. He will not soil anything through sight, thoughts and words. Directly or indirectly,
he will not do anything that is a sin. He will withdraw his senses, like a tortoise draws in all its limbs. He will
make the senses decay. Devoid of the senses, he will look towards his mind and his intelligence. He will be without the opposite pairs of sentiments. He will not bow down before anyone. He will be without sounds of svaha. He
will be without a sense of ownership. He will be without ego. He will be without yoga and kshema[Kshema is protecting what one already possesses and yoga is acquiring what one does not possess.]. He will be
without hope. He will be unattached towards all creatures. He will be without refuge. He will know everything. He
will  be  free  in  every  way.  There  is  no  doubt  that  he  will  be  emancipated.  He  will  only  base  himself  on  the
sparkling one[The atman.]. It is without hands, feet and back. It is without a head and without a stomach. It does not receive
any of the qualities and is without tasks. It is without smell, without touch, without form and without sound. It is
without touch, without base and without flesh. It is without anxiety and without decay. It is eternal and is always
based in the heart. A person who sees the atman in all creatures knows that they do not die. Intelligence cannot
reach it. Nor can the senses, the gods, the Vedas, sacrifices, the worlds, austerities, or valour. It cannot be comprehended through signs. It is said that the learned obtain it through knowledge. Therefore, those who know about
dharma and follow the vows of dharma do not follow signs. A learned man knows the nature of true conduct and
follows this mysterious dharma. He may not be foolish. However, he does not censure dharma[The ordinary rites of dharma.] and follows it, as
if he is foolish. He always does this, even if others disrespect him. A virtuous one follows the conduct of true dharma, even if he is censured. A person who possesses this kind of conduct is said to the best among sages. He properly understands the senses, the objects of the senses, the five great elements, mind, intelligence, the atman, the unmanifest Purusha and everything else that is enumerated. However, he abandons all this for the sake of what is
sparkling. Such a person is freed from all his bonds and obtains heaven. A person who knows the truth knows what
has been enumerated about the time that brings about an end. He meditates single-mindedly, without any refuge,
and is emancipated. He is free from all attachments, like the wind in the sky. Even when everything that he has accumulated is destroyed, he is without terror. He obtains the supreme destination."'"'
