Vaishampayana said, 'Having roamed in all the directions separately and having killed deer, boars and buffaloes,
the Parthas, foremost among archers on earth, assembled together. The great forest teemed with deer and predators
and was full of birds. On hearing the resounding cries of the deer, Yudhishthira spoke to his brothers. "The birds
and animals are headed in the direction that has been lit up by the sun. They are making harsh noises and seem to
be in great excitement, as if this mighty forest has been invaded by enemies. Let us hasten, forgetting the deer. My
mind is burning with a raging fire. My intelligence is clouded. The breath of life in my body is tormented. Kamyaka now appears to me like a pond that has been robbed of its serpents by Suparna[Garuda.], a kingdom that is without its
king and its fortune, or a pot that has been emptied of its liquor by drunkards." The brave ones then headed for the
hermitage on excellent chariots, yoked to Saindhava[From the region of the Sindhu.] steeds that had the speed of the wind or a storm. While they
returned, they beheld a jackal howling hideously on the left hand side. On noticing it, the king[Yudhishthira.] spoke to Bhima
and Dhananjaya. "This jackal has appeared on our left hand side and the inferior animal is speaking. This clearly
shows that the evil Kurus must have mounted a fierce attack on us." They had gone out for a hunt in the great forest. They now entered the grove[Where the hermitage was.] and saw the maid who used to serve their beloved wife. She was weeping.

'O Indra among kings! Indrasena swiftly descended from the chariot and rushing to the maid, who was stricken
with grief, spoke these words. "Why are you lamenting and why have you fallen down on the ground? I hope evil
ones have not caused violence to the princess Droupadi. Her form is without blemish and her eyes are extremely
large. Her form is equal to the bulls among the Kurus. Even if the goddess has entered into the earth, ascended to
heaven or plunged into the sea, the Parthas will follow her steps there, because Dharmaraja is gravely tormented.
They are the destroyers of their enemies and bear their difficulties, unvanquished. This supreme jewel is as dear to
them as their own lives. Who is the foolish one who will dare to carry her away? Does he not know that she has
protectors now? She is like the walking heart of the Pandavas. Whose body will now be horribly pierced by sharp
and terrible arrows that will then enter the earth? O timid one! Do not sorrow over her. Know that Krishna will return today. Having killed all their enemies, the Parthas will be united with Yajnaseni." Wiping her beautiful face,
the maid then spoke to the charioteer Indrasena. "Ignoring the ones who are like five Indras, Jayadratha violated
this place and abducted Krishna. The traces remain and are still fresh. The broken branches have not yet faded.
Swiftly turn[The chariots.] and pursue. The princess cannot have gone far. All of you are the equals of Indra. Prepare yourselves with large, expensive and handsome armour. Grasp your great bows and arrows and swiftly travel along her
steps. Else, she may be confounded through scolding and sticks. Her face will dry and her mind will be bewildered. She may give up her body to an unworthy person, like sacred oblations thrown into ashes[The maid's suggestion is fairly obvious. Jayadratha may rape Droupadi, or force her to submit against her
wishes.]. Else, she may
become an oblation to the fire, like a chaff of grain. Else, a wreath may be flung onto a burning ground. While the
officiating brahmana is inattentive, the offering of soma on the altar may be licked by a dog. When you went for a
hunt in the great forest, the jackal has destroyed the lotus[Alternatively, lily.]. Your loved one's face has a fine nose and beautiful
eyes. Her brilliant and pure face is as beautiful as the moonlight. Let it not be touched by an evil one, like a dog
that eats up a sacrificial cake. Follow her swiftly. Hasten, lest time passes you by."

'Yudhishthira said, "O fortunate one! Be quiet and control your words. You should not speak harsh words while
we are here. Whether kings or princes, if they are deluded because of the insolence of their strength, they are certain to be deceived."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Saying this, they departed swiftly. They followed the remaining trails of the others. Like
predatory beasts, they sighed repeatedly. They twanged their mighty bows. Then they saw the dust raised by the
soldiers, thrown up from the hooves of the horses. Dhoumya was in the midst of the infantry and he addressed Bhi-
ma, asking him to attack. The princes comforted Dhoumya, who was extremely miserable in his mind, and asked
him to return happily. Then they swooped down on that army, like hawks on raw meat. They were like the great
Indra in their valour. They were angered at Yajnaseni's molestation. On seeing their beloved stationed on
Jayadratha's chariot, their rage flared up. Vrikodara, Dhananjaya, the twins and the king, all mighty archers, called
out to the king of Sindhu to stop. At this, the enemies lost all sense of direction.'
