'Sanjaya said, "The brave and great archer was like a crazy elephant in his valour. He grasped a giant bow that was
capable of restraining a crazy elephant. He brandished that best of bows and drove away the maharathas. The maharatha slaughtered the army of the Pandaveyas. The valiant one was skilled in reading portents and glanced in
every direction. Having tormented the soldiers, Drona addressed his son. 'O son! This is the day when maharatha
Partha will try his utmost to slay Bhishma in battle. My arrows are rising up and my bow is outstretched. But when
I try to fix my weapons, they are falling off. My mind is without cheer. The peaceful directions have turned terrible
and birds and animals are wandering around. Inferior vultures are swooping down towards the army of the
Bharatas. The sun has lost its splendour and all the directions have turned red. The earth seems to be suffering and
the mounts seem to have been destroyed. Herons, vultures and cranes are repeatedly shrieking. Jackals are howling
in inauspicious tones and this signifies a great calamity. Giant meteors are falling down from the centre of the sun's
disc. The headless torso of parigha is stationed, covering the sun[In astrology, parigha is an inauspicious yoga or conjunction of the stars, signifying obstructions.]. The discs of the sun and the moon have become terrible. They signify a terrible danger, pertaining to the mangling of the bodies of kings. In the temples of
the Indra among the Kouravas, the gods are trembling, laughing, dancing and weeping. The planets are circling inauspiciously, keeping the moon to the left. O illustrious one! The moon is rising with its crescent inverted. The
bodies of the kings seem to be destroyed. Though they are armoured, the soldiers of the sons of Dhritarashtra are
no longer radiant. A great sound has arisen amidst both the armies, because of Panchajanya's roar and Gandiva's
sound. It is certain that Bibhatsu will use supreme weapons in this battle. He will avoid all the others in the encounter and advance towards the grandfather. The pores in my body are contracting. My mind is weakening. O
mighty-armed one! I am thinking about the encounter between Bhishma and Arjuna. Partha is conversant with deceit. He will place the evil-minded Panchala at the forefront of the battle and advance to fight with Bhishma.
Bhishma had earlier said that he would not kill Shikhandi. The creator made him a woman and he later became a
man through destiny. Yajnasena's maharatha son[Shikhandi. Yajnasena is Drupada's name.] bears an inauspicious mark on his standard. The son of the
one who goes to the ocean[Ganga.] will not strike someone who bears an inauspicious mark on his standard. Having
thought of all these things, my mind is severely distressed. In the battle today, Partha will attack the aged one of
the Kuru lineage. Yudhishthira's anger, the encounter between Bhishma and Arjuna and the rage of my weapons in
battle certainly portend ill for all subjects. Pandava is spirited, powerful and brave. He is skilled in the use of
weapons and is firm in his valour. He can shoot from a great distance and can strike powerfully. He is skilled in understanding the signs. He is invincible in battle, even by the gods, with Vasava. He is strong and intelligent. He has
conquered exhaustion. He is supreme among warriors. Pandava possesses terrible weapons and is always victorious in battle. Avoid his path and go to the spot where the one who is rigid in his vows is stationed. O mighty-
armed one! Behold the visage of what is about to transpire. The armours of the brave ones are decorated with gold.
They are expensive and beautiful. They will be shattered with straight-tufted arrows. The tops of the standards, the
javelins and the bows will be fragmented. There are polished and sharp spears and lances blazing in gold. There
are pennants on elephants and all these will be destroyed by the angry Kiriti. O son! This is not the time when dependents should seek to protect their lives. Go, placing heaven at the forefront, and fame and victory. The
whirlpool of horses, elephants and chariots is extremely terrible and is difficult to cross. The one with the ape on
his banner is crossing the river of battle on his chariot. Regard for brahmanas, self-control, generosity, austerities
and greatness in conduct-these can be seen in the king[Yudhishthira.]. Dhananjaya is his brother. Bhimasena is powerful and
so are the Pandavas who are Madri's sons. Varshneya Vasudeva is stationed as their protector. The evil-minded
sons of Dhritarashtra are overcome by anger. While he[Yudhishthira.] has scorched his body through austerities, the Bharatas
have been scorched through anger. Partha can be seen, with Vasudeva as his refuge. He is shattering all the soldiers
of the sons of Dhritarashtra, in every direction. Kiriti can be seen to be agitating the soldiers, like a giant whale agitating large fish at the mouth of a river. Sounds of lamentation and woe can be heard at the head of the army. Go
and confront the son of Panchala. I will go and confront Yudhishthira. The centre of the infinitely energetic king's
vyuha is difficult to penetrate. It is like the interior of the ocean and atirathas are stationed in every direction.
Satyaki, Abhimanyu, Dhrishtadyumna, Vrikodara and the twins, lords among men, are protecting the king. He is
like Upendra[Indra's younger brother, Vishnu. This is a description of Abhimanyu.] and is dark. He is as tall as a giant shala tree. He is advancing amidst the soldiers, like a second
Phalguna. Take up your supreme weapons and grasp your giant bow. Advance against King Parshata[This is probably a reference to Dhrishtadyumna. Shikhandi is also possible, but unlikely.] and fight
with Vrikodara. Who does not wish that his beloved son may live for an eternal period? However, placing the
dharma of kshatriyas at the forefront, I am employing you in this task. In this battle, Bhishma is scorching the great
army. O son! In battle, he is the equal of Yama and Varuna.'"'
