'Dhritarashtra said, "O Kshatta[Vidura.]! Janardana has set out from Upaplavya. He is now residing in Vrikasthala and
will arrive here in the morning. Janardana is the lord of the Ahukas and the foremost among all the Satvatas. He is
immensely intelligent, immensely valorous and immensely spirited. Madhava is the lord and the protector of the
prosperous kingdom of the Vrishnis. The illustrious one is the great-grandfather of the three worlds. Happy in their
minds, the Vrishnis and the Andhakas honour his wisdom, just as the Adityas, the Vasus and the Rudras listen to
Brihaspati's intelligence. I will show my homage to the great-souled Dasharha. O one learned in dharma! Listen to
what you will see. I will give him sixteen golden chariots. Each will be yoked to four excellent horses from the
Bahlika region and they will be extremely dark in complexion. I will also give Keshava eight war elephants with
tusks that are like poles and they will always ooze musth. Each will have eight attendants. I will give him one hundred servant maids who are beautiful and possess golden complexions. They have never given birth. I will give
him an equal number of male servants. I will give him eighteen thousand woollen garments that are extremely
pleasant to the touch. They have been brought by those who dwell in the mountainous regions. I will give him one
thousand deerskins that have been brought from the country of China[China, which probably meant Tibet, rather than China.] and whatever else deserves to be given to
Keshava. I will give him this extremely energetic and clear jewel that sparkles by day and night. I will give it to
him, because Keshava deserves it. I will also give him a cart drawn by a mule, which can travel fourteen yojanas in
a single day. Every day, I will give him eight times the food that his mounts and men can consume. With the exception of Duryodhana, all my sons and grandsons will adorn themselves, and mounting excellent chariots, will go
out to meet Dasharha. Thousands of the best courtesans, beautiful, immensely fortunate and adorned with ornaments, will go out to meet Keshava on foot. Beautiful maidens, who have not been seen by men, will leave the city
and go and meet Janardana and they will go without their veils. Let all the subjects of the city, women, men and
children, see the great-souled Madhusudana, who is like the sun. Let all the directions be covered with large flags
and pennants. Let the roads be sprinkled with water and cleaned of dust. Duhshasana's house is superior to Duryodhana's house. Let it be quickly decorated for him. It is adorned with many beautiful pavilions and is pure and
lovely. It is full of riches in every season. All my riches, and those of Duryodhana, are in that house. There is no
doubt that Varshneya should be given everything that he deserves."'
