'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! You have described Jambukhanda exactly to me. Now tell me exactly about its
expanse and dimensions. O Sanjaya! Without leaving any gaps, also tell me exactly and accurately about the dimensions of the oceans, Shakadvipa, Kushadvipa, Shalmalidvipa and Krounchadvipa. O son of Gavalgana! Tell
me everything about Rahu, the moon and the sun."

'Sanjaya said, "O king! There are many dvipas spread throughout the earth. But I will tell you about seven of
them and about the moon, the sun and the planet[The word planet is in the singular. So Sanjaya will only tell Dhritarashtra about Rahu.]. O lord of the earth! The mountain of Jambu extends, in its entirety, over eighteen thousand and six hundred yojanas. It is said that the salty ocean is double this in expanse. It[The ocean.]
has many countries and is decorated with jewels and coral. It is decorated with many beautiful mountains that have
diverse kinds of minerals. Inhabited by siddhas and charanas, the ocean is circular. O king! I will tell you exactly
about Shakadvipa. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Listen to me, as I describe it to you appropriately. O lord of
men! In dimensions, it is double the size of Jambudvipa. O great king! The ocean is double this in expanse. O foremost among Bharatas! It[Shakadvipa.] is surrounded on all sides by the milky ocean. There are many sacred countries there.
People who are there, do not die. How can there be famine there? They[The people who live there.] are endowed with forgiveness and energy.
O bull among the Bharata lineage! I have briefly and exactly told you about Shakadvipa. O great king! What else
do you desire to hear?"

'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! You have, briefly and exactly, told me about Shakadvipa. O immensely wise
one! Now accurately, tell me everything in detail."

'Sanjaya said, "O king! There are seven mountains there and they are adorned with gems. They are stores of
jewels. Listen to the names of the rivers that are there. O lord of men! Everything there is supreme in qualities and
sacred. The supreme one is known as Meru and is the abode of gods, rishis and gandharvas. O great king! The
mountain named Malaya extends towards the east. The clouds are generated there and spread out in all the directions. O Kouravya! Next is the large mountain Jaladhara. Vasava always extracts supreme water from there. O lord
of men! It is from this that we obtain showers during the monsoon. The tall mountain of Raivataka is always established there. The grandfather has decreed that Revati nakshatra should be above it in the sky[The grandfather is Brahma. Revati is the twenty-seventh nakshatra.]. O Indra among
kings! To the north, is the large mountain named Shyama. O lord of countries! All the people there are dark in
complexion."

'Dhritarashtra asked, "O Sanjaya! A great doubt has arisen in my mind now, because of what you have said. O
son of a suta! Why are the people there dark in complexion?"

'Sanjaya said, "O immensely wise one! O descendant of the Kuru lineage! In all the dvipas, there are those who
are fair and those who are dark in complexion. O king! There is also a mixture of the two complexions. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! But because it is full of such people, it is known as Shyama[Shyama means dark.]. O illustrious one! Because the people there are dark, this mountain is called Shyama. O Indra among Kouravas! Beyond this, there is
the great mountain Durgashaila. Then there is Kesara. The wind that blows there has the fragrance of saffron[Kesara means saffron, which is why the mountain is so named.].
Measured in yojanas, each[Each mountain.] is twice the height of the one that has preceded it. O Kouravya! The learned have said
that there are seven varshas there. O great king! That of the great Meru is Mahakasha, that of Jalada is Kumudottara, that of Jaladhara is said to be Sukumara, that of Raivata is Koumara, that of Shyama is Manichaka and that of
Kesara is Modaki[There is a varsha corresponding to each of the seven mountains. Raivata is the same as Raivataka. Malaya is being referred to as Jalada, jalada meaning something that provides water, such as a cloud. The clouds strike
against mountains and provide water.]. Beyond that, is Mahapuman[The name of another mountain.], in the middle of Shakadvipa. O Kouravya! O great king! In
length, breadth and circumference, this is as large as the famous and large tree that is in the midst of Jambudvipa.
There are many sacred countries there, where Shankara[Shiva.] is worshipped. The siddhas, the charanas and the gods
go there. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the people follow dharma there, and so do the four varnas. They are engaged in their own tasks and no instances of theft can be seen. O great king! They have long lives
and are free from old age and death. The people there prosper, like rivers during the monsoon. The rivers there are
full of pure water. O Kouravya! O supreme among the Bharata lineage! Ganga divides herself into several flows-
Sukumari, Kumari, Sita, Kaveraka, Mahanadi, the river Manijala and Ikshuvardhanika. O extender of the Kuru lineage! There are many other sacred rivers there, in hundreds and thousands, and Vasava draws water from them to
shower down. It is impossible to enumerate the names, lengths and dimensions of these. All these rivers are holy.
As the worlds know, there are four sacred countries there-Maga, Mashaka, Manasa and Mandaga. O king! Magas
are usually brahmanas and are devoted to their own tasks. The kings of Mashaka are devoted to dharma and tend to
every desire[Of the brahmanas.]. O great king! The vaishyas of Manasa earn their living through deeds. With all their desires gratified, they are brave and are firmly devoted to dharma and artha. The shudra men of Mandaga always follow the
conduct of dharma. O Indra among kings! There is no king there, no punishment, and no one to be punished. They
are devoted to their own dharma and protect dharma and each other. One is capable of saying this much about that
dvipa. Only this much can be heard about the immensely energetic Shakadvipa."'
