'Sanjaya said, "Bharadvaja's maharatha son became the commander. He arranged the soldiers in the form of a
vyuha and set out to do battle, together with your sons. Saindhava, Kalinga and your son, Vikarna, were armoured
and stationed themselves on the right flank. Shakuni supported them, with the best of horse-riders, and advanced
with the warriors from Gandhara, wielding polished lances. Kripa, Kritavarma, Chitrasena and Vivimshati, with
Duhshasana at the forefront, advanced and protected the left flank. They were supported by the Kambojas, with
Sudakshina leading the way. They advanced on extremely swift horses, together with the Shakas and the Yavanas.
The Madras, the Trigartas, the Ambashthas, the residents of the west and the north, the Shibis, the Shurasenas, the
Shudras, the Maladas, the Souviras, the Kitavas and all those from the east and the south placed your son at the
head, with the son of the suta at the rear. They delighted all the soldiers and added force to the army. Vaikartana
Karna advanced at the head of all the archers. His blazing standard was giant in size and delighted his own army.
That giant standard was resplendent with the sign of a healthy elephant and dazzled like the sun. On seeing Karna,
no one thought about the calamity consequent to Bhishma's downfall. All the kings, together with the Kurus, were
freed from their grief. In joy, the large number of warriors began to converse with one another. 'On seeing Karna
in battle, the Pandavas will not be able to remain on the field of battle. Karna is capable of vanquishing the gods,
together with Vasava, in battle. The sons of Pandu are inferior in bravery and valour. How can they remain in battle? The strong-armed Bhishma saved the Parthas in the battle. But there is no doubt that Karna will destroy them
with his sharp arrows.' O lord of the earth! In delight, they spoke to each other in this way. They honoured and
praised Radheya and advanced.

'"Drona instructed that our vyuha should be in the form of a cart[Shakata, meaning carriage or cart. The array was probably in the form of a wedge.]. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The vyuha of the enemy was in the form of a curlew[Krouncha, curlew or osprey.]. Cheerfully, the great-souled Dharmaraja instructed
this. Those bulls among men, Vishvaksena[Krishna.] and Dhananjaya, with the monkey on the standard, were at the front
of their vyuha. This was the hump[Kakuda, which means hump. The suggestion is that this standard was the centre of the army.] of all the soldiers and the objective of all the archers. The infinitely energetic
Partha's standard fluttered in the path of the sun. It illuminated the army of the great-souled Pandava, like the blazing sun on the earth at the end of a yuga. Arjuna is foremost among archers, Gandiva is supreme among bows, Vasudeva is supreme among beings and Sudarshana is supreme among chakras. These four kinds of energy[Krishna, Arjuna, Gandiva and Sudarshana.] were
borne by the chariot with white horses and it stationed itself in front of the hostile army, like the upraised wheel of
time. Thus did the great-souled ones stand in front of those powerful armies-Karna before yours and Dhananjaya
before that of the enemy. There was enmity between them and they wished to kill each other. In that battle, Karna
and Pandava glanced towards each other.

'"Bharadvaja's maharatha son powerfully advanced. There was dreadful lamentation and the earth began to
tremble. The wind raised a violent and terrible dust that was as tawny as silk. This covered the sky and the sun.
Though there were no clouds in the sky, a shower of flesh, bones and blood fell down. O king! Thousands of vultures, hawks, wild crows, herons and crows repeatedly swooped down on the soldiers[Meaning the Kourava soldiers.]. Jackals howled hideously
and many fearful creatures swooped down on the left side of your army, desiring to eat the flesh and drink the
blood[The left side is inauspicious.]. Flaming and blazing meteors were seen to descend, covering the field of battle in every direction with
their tails. They roared and caused a trembling. O king! When the commander of the army[Drona.] advanced, the gigantic solar disc thundered and seemed to emit lightning. There were many other fearful portents, inauspicious for the
warring heroes and signifying a destruction of lives. Thus the battle between the Kuru and Pandava soldiers commenced, each side wishing to kill the other. The entire earth was full of that noise. The Pandavas and the Kouravas
were extremely enraged. They grasped weapons and sought to kill each other with sharp arrows. The immensely
radiant and great archer[Drona.] rushed towards the Pandava soldiers with great force, showering hundreds of sharp arrows. O king! On seeing Drona advance, the Pandavas and the Srinjayas countered him, separately showering arrows. That great army was agitated and shattered by Drona. The Panchalas were destroyed, like a mountain by a
storm. In a short instant, Drona unleashed many kinds of divine weapons in that battle and oppressed the Pandavas
and the Srinjayas. With Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, the Panchalas were slaughtered by Drona and trembled,
like the danavas before Vasava. The brave maharatha, Yajnasena's son[Yajnasena is Drupada and by Drupada's son, one means Dhrishtadyumna here. Prishata is also one of Drupada's
names and Dhrishtadyumna is Parshata.], skilled in the use of divine weapons,
used showers of arrows to penetrate Drona's army in many places. He repulsed Drona's shower of arrows with
several showers of arrows. The powerful one killed the Kuru soldiers. In the battle, the mighty-armed Drona restrained his own soldiers and attacked Parshata. He released a great shower of arrows towards Parshata, like the
angry Maghavan forcefully attacking the danavas. Drona's arrows made the Pandavas and the Srinjayas tremble.
They were repeatedly routed, like deer by a lion. O king! The powerful Drona travelled through that army of the
Pandvas like a circle of fire[More accurately, a circle made out of firebrands.] and it was wonderful. His chariot was like a city in the sky, constructed by one conversant with sacred texts. The harnessed horses were controlled well. The standard fluttered in the wind. The pole
of the standard was as bright as crystal and he tormented the enemy with his arrows. He was astride that supreme
chariot and slaughtered the soldiers of the enemy."'
