Yudhishthira said, "O grandfather! Tell me about what is best among all the tirthas, the place where one can obtain
supreme purification. You should explain this to me."

'Bhishma replied, "The learned say that all the tirthas indeed possess qualities. Hear attentively about the
tirtha that leads to purification. One should bathe in the tirtha of Manasa[Bhishma answers the question figuratively, rather than geographically. This does not mean Lake Manasa. Instead, it means the soul.]. It is fathomless, sparkling and pure. It
has truth as its water and fortitude as its lake. It is eternal and one must resort to its spirit. This tirtha leads to purification of the mind, uprightness, truthfulness, mildness, non-violence, lack of hatred towards all beings, selfcontrol, tranquility, lack of ownership, lack of ego, freedom from opposite pairs of sentiments and lack of desire
for possessions. One should seek alms at this tirtha of purification. A person who possesses this wealth of the truth
and whose intelligence has no sense of pride is said to be the supreme tirtha. In looking for signs of purity, one
should look for them everywhere. The rajas, tamas and sattva in their atmans have been washed. Without considerations of purity and impurity, they follow the tasks of their own paths. They are devoted to renouncing everything. They know everything and can see everything. Through purity, they cleanse their impure conduct. They are
the tirthas of purification. A person who has sprinkled his body with water isn't regarded as having bathed. A person who hasn't bathed through self-control hasn't really bathed. Purification isn't outside, but inside. They do not
look towards what has happened in the past. They do not desire objects and have no sense of ownership. Those
who have no desire are said to be the ones who are supremely pure. Wisdom is the special purification of the body.
Freedom from desire and tranquility of the mind is also like that. Purity of conduct and purity of the mind are the
pure tirthas that yield supreme benefit. The purification that results from knowledge is said to be the supreme purification. A person who uses the lamp of his mind and the strength of knowledge about the brahman is known to
bathe in the tirtha of Manasa. He is the kshetrajna who knows. A person who always possesses these sentiments of
purification and is only devoted to these qualities is a man who is always pure. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I have spoken about the tirthas that are in the body. Listen to the other sacred tirthas that exist on earth. Just
as specific aspects of the body are said to be pure, there are sacred waters in parts of the earth too. By praying at
these tirthas and bathing and offering oblations to the ancestors, one cleanses one's sins. Those sacred tirthas enable one to obtain happiness in heaven. Because of association with virtuous people and because of the earth's energy, those waters are extremely energetic and those regions are extremely auspicious. If one bathes in the sacred
tirthas both of the mind and of the earth, one swiftly obtains success. Strength without exertion and exertion without strength are unable to ensure success in tasks. In that way, these two bring success together. Thus, both types,
purification through the body and purification through tirthas, lead to success and represent supreme purification."'
