Shuka asked, 'In detail, tell me about adhyatma again. O illustrious one! O supreme among the rishis! What
is this adhyatma?'

'"Vyasa replied, 'O son! For men, there is something known as adhyatma. I will recount this to you. Listen to
the explanation. Earth, water, fire, wind and space are the great elements in beings and are like the waves of the
ocean[They are like the waves of the ocean because while all the water in the ocean is one, the waves are regarded as
separate and distinct.]. A tortoise stretches out its limbs and draws them back again. Like that, the great elements extend and
withdraw in beings. They pervade all the mobile and immobile objects. Creation and destruction are determined on
the basis of these. The five great elements exist in all the beings that have been created. O son! But it is also seen
that these exist unevenly in different beings.'

'"Shuka asked, 'How can one discern this in the bodies? What are senses? What are qualities? How can they be
felt?'

'"Vyasa replied, 'I will accurately describe what has been comprehended about this. Listen attentively to the
truth about how it occurs. Sound, hearing and space inside beings-these three originate in space. The breath of
life, exertion and touch-these three are the qualities of the wind. Form, sight and digestion-these three are said
to result from fire. Taste, tongue and juices-these three are the qualities of water. Scent, nose and the body-these
three are the qualities of the earth. The five elements that I have described to you mix with the senses and undergo
transformations. Touch is said to be associated with the wind, taste with water and form with fire. Sound is said to
be created by space and smell is the attribute of the earth. The mind, intelligence and sentiments-these three are
created by their own selves[Because of the deeds undertaken in earlier lives.]. Though these are beyond the qualities, it is the view that they are not superior to the
qualities. There are five senses in men and the mind is said to be the sixth. Intelligence is said to be the seventh and
the kshetrajna is the eighth. Rajas, sattva and tamas-these three are created by their own selves. Those qualities
are seen to exist equally in all beings. A tortoise extends its limbs and draws them back again. In that way, intelligence extends the qualities and draws them back. A person who is supreme in intelligence acts so as to look for
it[The atman.] above the feet, the hands, the face and the head. Intelligence is controlled by the qualities, and the senses are
controlled by intelligence. Among all of these, the mind is the sixth. If there is no intelligence, how can there be
qualities? When a person is full of cheerfulness and is seen to be tranquil in his soul and pure, that is held up by
sattva. When a person is full of torment in deeds and thoughts, rajas is always the originator and this confuses beings. When a person is confused about the unmanifest and finds this imcomprehensible and impossible to know,
this is driven by tamas. Delight, joy, bliss, peace and satisfaction in the consciousness, regardless of whether something unexpected occurs or does not occur-these are the qualities of sattva. Insolence, falsehood in words, greed,
confusion, lack of forgiveness, whether there is a reason for this or whether there is no reason for this-are the
signs of rajas. Delusion, distraction, lassitude, sleep and lack of exertion-whenever these are indulged in, that is
known to be the quality of tamas.'"'
