Vaishampayana said, 'The Pandavas yoked excellent horses, swift as the wind, to their chariots. When ascending,
they sorrowfully touched the feet of Bhishma, King Dhritarashtra, the great-souled Drona, Kripa, Vidura and others who were old. Since they were rigid in their vows, they paid homage to all the elders of the Kuru lineage and
embraced their equals. Even the children said farewell. Taking leave of all the mothers[The word 'mothers' is used in a general sense, to indicate all the women who were elderly.] and circling them with
respect, they said farewell to the citizens and set out for Varanavata.

'The immensely wise Vidura, other bulls among the Kurus and the citizens sorrowfully followed those tigers
among men. O bull among the Bharatas! There were some fearless Brahmanas there. Aggrieved over what had
happened to Pandu's sons, they said, "The evil King Dhritarashtra isn't impartial and is immersed in darkness.
Dhritarashtra doesn't follow the path of dharma. The Pandava who has no sin in his heart[Yudhishthira.], Bhima, supreme
among those who are strong, and Kunti's son, Dhananjaya, cannot commit a sin. Nor can the immensely wise sons
of Madri. Dhritarashtra cannot bear that they have inherited the kingdom from their father. How could Bhishma
have allowed such a great act of adharma, so that Kunti's sons, bulls of the Bharata lineage, have been banished to
another city without reason? Vichitravirya, Shantanu's son and Kuru's descendant, and rajarshi Pandu were like
our fathers. Since that tiger among men[Pandu.] has now met his destiny, Dhritarashtra cannot bear his sons, these
princes, though they are young. We cannot sanction this. Therefore, let us leave this supreme city and our houses
and go to the place where Yudhishthira is going." Dharmaraja Yudhishthira thought about this for a while and then
sorrowfully addressed the sorrowing citizens. "The lord of the earth[Dhritarashtra.] is like our father, he is our greatest preceptor. It is our duty to unhesitatingly obey whatever he commands. O illustrious ones! You are our well-wishers. Circle around us and make us happy with your blessings. Then return home. When the time comes for you to do
something for us, do that which is pleasing and is good for us." Having been thus addressed, the citizens circled
the Pandavas and gave them their blessings. Then they returned to the city.

'When the citizens had returned, Vidura, who knew all the principles of dharma, spoke to the eldest Pandava so
as to warn him. The learned one[Vidura.] spoke to the learned one[Yudhishthira.] in nonsensical words[That is, in a riddle, so that no one else could understand. But Vidura and Yudhishthira were both learned, so
Yudhishthira understood what Vidura said. Indeed, the text is such that it is difficult to understand what is being
obliquely said, except that a sense of danger is being communicated. But since this was a riddle, that's probably
understandable.], "One who knows will act
so as to avoid danger. There is a sharp weapon that can pierce the body, but is not made of iron. He who knows this
is not killed and can turn it against the enemy. The burner of grass and the drier of dew do not kill animals in holes.
He who protects himself through knowledge lives. The blind man doesn't see the way, because the blind man has
no sense of direction. He who doesn't have perseverance is never prosperous. Know this and be alert. He who accepts an ironless weapon from the untrustworthy, can escape from the fire like a porcupine. Through travelling, a
man gets to know the way and from the stars can deduce the directions. He who keeps the five[The five senses.] under self-control
is never oppressed by the enemy." Having thus addressed the Pandavas, Vidura circled them, and having said
farewell, returned to his house.

'After Vidura, Bhishma and the citizens had returned, Kunti went to Ajatashatru[Yudhishthira.] and said, "What did
kshatta[Vidura.] tell you among so many people? He spoke as if he said nothing and you replied similarly. We have not
understood. If it is not inappropriate that we should know, I wish to know what you spoke to each other." Yudhishthira replied, "Vidura said that there is danger from poison and fire and that there should be no path that I do
not know. He told me that the man who is self-controlled wins the entire world. I told Vidura that I had understood." On the eighth day of the month of Phalguna, when Rohini[A nakshatra.] was in the ascendant, they left for Varanavata
and saw the city and its people.'
