Yajnavalkya said, 'O supreme among men! These are the foremost signs of the three qualities. They always
attach themselves to everything in the universe and are established there. He[Purusha.] divides himself into hundreds, thousands, hundreds of thousands and crores of different selves. Those who have thought about adhyatma
say that sattva has a superior spot, rajas a medium one and tamas an inferior one. Through auspicious deeds alone,
one  heads  towards  an  upwards  destination.  As  a  result  of  both  good  and  wicked  deeds,  one  becomes  human.
Through adharma, one obtains a destination that is downwards[Tamas leads to birth as inferior species, rajas as humans and sattva as gods.]. There is also the truth about what happens if two
or three of the qualities are mixed. Sattva may exist with rajas or tamas. Listen to me. Sattva can be seen with rajas
and rajas with tamas. Sattva can exist with tamas and sattva may exist with the unmanifest[Prakriti.]. When sattva is united with the unmanifest, one obtains the world of the gods. When rajas is united with sattva, one becomes human.
When rajas is united with tamas, one is born as inferior species. When rajas, tamas and sattva are united, one becomes human. It is said that learned ones obtain a region that is separated from both good deeds and wicked ones.
It is eternal and immutable. It is without decay and there is no fear there. Learned ones obtain births in that best of
places, without faults and without decay. They go beyond the senses. That does not lead to any generation and is
beyond birth and death. O lord of men! You asked me about the supreme and the unmanifest[Purusha.]. He is established
in his own nature. O lord of the earth! It is the view that he resides in Prakriti, without any consciousness. She can
create and destroy only when she is presided over by him.'

'"Janaka replied, 'O great sage! Both of them are without beginning and without end. They are without form
and without change. They are without blemish and without decay. O tiger among rishis! They cannot be comprehended. How can one of them be without consciousness? How can one have consciousness? Why is one called
kshetrajna? O Indra among brahmanas! You are the one who has practised everything about the dharma of emancipation. It is my resolution that I wish to hear the truth about the dharma of emancipation, about the existence of the
absolute and about non-existence, about the regions that creatures progressively go to and about their separation
from those. With the progress of time, what regions do they obtain? O brahmana! Tell me this. Tell me the truth
about the knowledge of sankhya and separately about yoga. O supreme one! You should also tell me the truth
about misfortune. You know everything about these, like a myrobalan that is held in your hand.'"'
