Vaishampayana said, 'O Janamejaya! Having been thus addressed, the Pandavas headed for the southern part of
Panchala, ruled by King Drupada. On their way, the brave Pandavas met the great-souled, pure-souled, unblemished and illustrious sage Dvaipayana and paid their respects to him, in accordance with the prescribed rites. He
too showed them his respect and after their conversation was over, on his instructions, they proceeded to Drupada's palace. Those maharathas proceeded slowly, stopping when they saw beautiful forests and lakes. At last,
Kuru's descendants, devoted to learning, pure, amiable and sweet of speech, arrived in Panchala. After seeing the
city and the royal residence, the Pandavas lodged in a potter's house. Adopting the lifestyle of Brahmanas, they
begged for their food. No one recognized those warriors when they stayed there.

'Yajnasena always desired to give Krishna to Kiriti[One of Arjuna's names.], Pandu's son, but he never revealed this to anyone. O
Janamejaya! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thinking of Kunti's son, the Panchala got a very hard bow constructed, one that no one else would be able to bend. He had an artificial machine[Yantra.] set up above and onto this machine he fixed a golden target. Drupada said, "He who can string this bow and, after stringing, shoot the target
above with these arrows, will obtain my daughter." With these words, King Drupada announced the svayamvara
everywhere. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Hearing this, all the kings assembled. Many great-souled rishis
also came there, wishing to witness the svayamvara. O king! The Kouravas, led by Duryodhana, also came there,
accompanied by Karna. Many illustrious Brahmanas also came from many countries. The great-souled Drupada
duly worshipped the kings. All the citizens and all the kings took their seats, resulting in a roar like that of the
ocean full of porpoises.

'The platform was constructed on the north-east of the city, on a flat and auspicious piece of ground. The beautiful meeting place was surrounded by houses on all sides. It was enclosed by a wall and a moat on all sides, decorated with gates and covered everywhere with a colourful canopy. It echoed to the sound of many musical instruments, was scented with agaru[Agallochum, a soft, resinous wood with an aromatic smell burnt as perfume.], adorned with garlands and sprinkled with sandalwood water. Large and white
palaces that were well built surrounded it on all sides, like the peaks of Kailash when they touch the sky. The windows were covered with golden trellises and the walls sparkled with mosaic work of precious stones. The stairs
were easy to climb. The seats were covered with expensive cloth that was not like those that came from villages.
They were white like swans and scented with agaru, so that the fragrance could be smelt one yojana away. Each
palace had 100 doors and had beautiful seats and couches. The expensive beds had many metals on them, like the
peaks of the Himalayas. All the kings were seated on the many storeys of these palaces, each one decorated with
many ornaments and boastful of his success. Those tigers among kings were scented with the paste of black agaru
and were greatly fortunate, devoted to the Brahmanas, protectors of their realms and loved by all the worlds because of their good deeds. When they were seated on their royal seats, the inhabitants of the city and of the country
who had come to see Krishna also took their seats. The Pandavas took their seats with the Brahmanas and witnessed the unrivalled splendour of the king of Panchala. O king! For many days, the numbers who had assembled
increased. Many jewels were distributed and many dancers and actors provided entertainment.

'O bull of the Bharata lineage! On the sixteenth day, when there was a crowd, Droupadi bathed, wore the best of
clothing and adorned herself with many ornaments. She descended into the arena, carrying in her hand a beautifully adorned golden prize for the winner. After pouring offerings of ghee into the sacrificial fire according to prescribed rites, the priest of the Somakas[That is, those of the lunar dynasty, an epithet for the Panchalas.], a pure Brahmana, learned in the mantras, uttered salutations of peace to
the fire and to Brahmanas and stopped the playing of all musical instruments.

'O ruler of the earth! When everything was quiet, Dhrishtadyumna went to the centre of the arena and spoke, in
a thundering voice, words that were deep with meaning and sweet. "O assembled kings! Hear that this is the bow,
that is the target and these are the arrows. With these five arrows, shoot the target through the hole in the centre of
the machine. I truly say that the handsome and strong one, born in a noble family, who accomplishes this great feat
today, will obtain as his wife my sister Krishna." Having thus addressed the assembled kings, Drupada's son spoke
to Droupadi, recounting to her the lineages and deeds of the assembled kings.'
