Vaishampayana said, 'The kings and lords of the earth, knowledgable about the Vedas, arrived. On seeing this,
King Yudhishthira spoke to Bhimasena. "Make arrangements for honour to be shown to these tigers among
men and lords of the earth. These lords of men deserve to be honoured." O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Thus addressed by the illustrious Indra among men, the greatly energetic Bhimasena, together with the twins, acted
in that way. Govinda, supreme among all those who are alive, arrived before Dharma's son with the Vrishnis, placing Baladeva ahead of them. He was also with Yuyudhana, Pradyumna, Gada, Nishatha, Samba and Kritavarma.
The mighty-armed Bhima showed them supreme respect too. The bulls among men entered their bejewelled residences. Conversing in Yudhishthira's presence, Madhusudana told him that Arjuna was exhausted because of the
many battles. Kounteya repeatedly asked him about that scorcher of enemies and the lord of the universe told
Dharmaraja about his brother, Jishnu. "O king! A messenger, a resident of Dvaraka, came to me. He had seen that
the best among Pandavas had been exhausted because of numerous battles. O lord! He also said that the mighty-
armed one is near. O Kounteya! Now perform the acts that must be undertaken to make the horse sacrifice successful." Thus addressed, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira replied, "O Madhava! It is through good fortune that Jishnu is returning safely. O descendant of the Yadu lineage! I wish to hear from you whatever has been said about Pandava,
foremost among strong ones." O tiger among kings! Thus addressed, the lord of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas, the
eloquent one, spoke these words to Yudhishthira, who had dharma in his soul. "O great king! That man reported
Partha's words to me. 'At the right time, my words should be reported to Yudhishthira and Krishna[The text doesn't have this within quotes. But these are clearly Arjuna's words, being reported by the messenger.]. All the
kings are coming towards Kourava. Since we are capable, it is our task to exhibit many kinds of honour towards
them. O one who shows honours[This seems to be addressed to the messenger.]! However, also convey to the king these words of mine. We should avoid a
calamity at the time of offering the arghya[This is a reference to the dispute in Section 24 (Volume 2), when the arghya offered to Krishna after the rajasuya
sacrifice was contested.]. The king must ensure that there is no display of intolerance. O king!
Because of enmity between the kings, let the subjects not be destroyed again.' O Kounteya! These are the words
that man reported to me. O king! I will tell you Dhananjaya's words. Listen. 'The king who is the lord of Manipura
will come to the sacrifice. He is my extremely energetic and beloved son, Babhruvahana. Out of consideration towards me, honour him in the appropriate way. O lord! He has always been devoted towards me and faithful.' On
hearing these words, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira honoured these words. He replied in the following words."'
