Vaishampayana said, 'Bhishma wanted his grandsons to do especially well and wished to instil discipline. He
therefore asked around for a preceptor who would be learned in archery and would be valorous. A man of little intelligence, who wasn't illustrious, wasn't an expert in all weapons and didn't have divine prowess, would never
have been able to discipline the immensely powerful Kurus.

'In ancient times, maharshi Bharadvaja was once getting ready to pour oblations into the fire. The rishi saw the
apsara Ghritachi herself, bathing[There is a break in continuity in the critical edition. Bharadvaja had gone to the Ganga for a bath before
making the offerings into the fire.]. The wind blew her garment away. At that, his semen issued out and the wise
one placed it in a vessel[Drona. This is usually a wooden vessel.]. The wise Drona was then born from that pot. He studied all the Vedas and the Vedangas. The powerful Bharadvaja, supreme among those who know dharma, taught the knowledge of the agneya
weapon to the illustrious Agniveshya. O supreme among those of the Bharata lineage! The sage who was born
from the fire[Agniveshya.] gave knowledge of the great weapon agneya to Bharadvaja's son.

'Bharadvaja had a friend and he was a king named Prishata. A son named Drupada was born to him. Prishata's
son, that bull among Kshatriyas, always used to go to Drona's hermitage to play and study with him. When Prishata died, Drupada became the king, a mighty-armed lord of men over northern Panchala. The illustrious Bharadvaja
also ascended to heaven. Obeying the instructions of his father and driven by the desire to obtain a son, the immensely famous Drona took Sharadvat's daughter Kripi for a wife. This descendant of Goutama was always engaged in agnihotra, the pursuit of dharma and self-control. She obtained a son named Ashvatthama. As soon as he
was born, he neighed like the horse Ucchaihshrava. On hearing this, an invisible voice said from the sky, "Since
this boy neighed like a horse and his voice carried over a long distance, he will be known as Ashvatthama[Ashva means horse and sthaman means strength or stamina.]."
Bharadvaja's son was extremely pleased with his son. He continued to live there and became extremely skilled in
Dhanur Veda.

'The great-souled son[Parashurama.] of Jamadagni was a conqueror of enemies. O king! He[Drona.] heard that he was giving
away all his wealth to Brahmanas. Bharadvaja's son spoke to him when Rama[Parashurama.] was already leaving for the forest. He said, "I have come in search of riches. Know that I am Drona, a bull among Brahmanas." Rama replied, "O
one blessed with the power of austerities! Nothing is left of the gold or other riches that I possessed. I have given it
all away to Brahmanas. I have given to Kashyapa, the goddess earth, right up to the boundaries of the ocean, with
all her settlements and garlands of cities. Now I only have this body with me, weapons and many precious
weapons. O Drona! Tell me quickly what you want. I will give it to you." Drona said, "O descendant of the Bhrigu
lineage! Give me all your arms and weapons of destruction, especially the knowledge of releasing them and withdrawing them." Agreeing to this, the descendant of the Bhrigu lineage gave him all his weapons, especially all the
mysteries of Dhanur Veda. Having received this, that supreme among Brahmanas became accomplished in the use
of weapons and happily went to see his beloved friend Drupada.'
