Vaishampayana said, 'After the deer's death, the king and his wives lamented grievously, as if they had lost a
relative.

'Pandu said, "Even if born in righteous families, deluded by the net of desire, men confront calamity because of
their deeds and when their intelligence is destroyed. I have heard that my own father was born from a man always
devoted to dharma. But he died when he was still young, because he lived a life addicted to desire. Through the
illustrious rishi Krishna Dvaipayana, self-controlled in speech, I was born in the field of that lustful king. Despite
that, I have become evil-hearted and my lowly mind is spent on the evil chase of deer, deserted by the gods. I am
tied down by a great vice and I will now seek salvation. Following the undecaying example set by my father, I will
now follow a meritorious way of life. I will certainly tie myself to a life of extreme austerities. I will live alone,
spending each day under a single tree[That is, a different tree for every night.]. I will shave off my head and become a hermit who begs for his food as
he roams the earth. I will cover myself with dust and be without a home and without refuge. The foot of a tree will
be my home. I will renounce everything that is loved or hated. I will neither grieve nor rejoice, and praise and
blame will be the same to me. I will not seek homage or greetings. I will be at peace and without possessions. I
will not mock anyone, nor will I furrow my brow at anyone. With a smiling face, I will always devote myself to
the welfare of all creatures. I will never transgress the four orders, movable and immovable, and will treat them all
equally, like my own children. Once every day, I will beg my food from two or five families and sustain myself. If
it is impossible to obtain food in this way, I will fast. I will eat only a little and will never be greedy. I will never
beg for more and never include more than seven[Not beg from more than seven families.]. I will think of the cutting off of one arm with an axe and the
covering of the other with sandalwood the same way. I will not think of one as good and the other as evil, since
both are equal. I will not act so as to live, nor act so as to die. Life and death are the same and I will not welcome
one and hate the other. I will give up all the rituals for prosperity that those who are alive indulge in and times for
their observance. I will always give up everything that makes the senses work. I will cleanse myself of all sin and
even give up that done in the name of dharma. I will be free from all sin and all traps. I will not be under anyone's
powers, but will follow the dharma of being as free as the wind. I will always sustain myself in this way and no
other. I will make my body walk the path of fearlessness and not deviate. I will not follow the miserable path of
dogs, followed by those without virility. I will follow my own righteous dharma and tread the lovely path of not
using one's virility. He who is honoured and dishonoured and lusts for another life with hungry eyes, becomes full
of desire and treads the path of dogs." When he had uttered these words, the king sorrowfully sighed.

'He looked at Kunti and Madri and said, "Tell Kousalya, kshatta[A name for Vidura, a man born from a Kshatriya woman and a Shudra man.] Vidura, the king and all his relatives, the
lady Satyavati, Bhishma, the royal priests, great-souled soma-drinking and rigid-vowed Brahmanas and old citizens who live here under my protection that Pandu will leave for the forest." Hearing these words of their husband,
who had made up his mind on leaving for the forest, both Kunti and Madri addressed him in these words. "O bull
of the Bharata lineage! We are your wives under dharma. There are other stages of life[The four ashramas-brahmacharya, garhasthya, vanaprastha and sannyasa.] that you can observe
with us and still perform great austerities. There is no doubt that even then, you will attain heaven. We will also
control our senses, devote ourselves to our husband's world, give up all happiness and desire and perform great
austerities. O lord of the earth! O immensely wise one! If you forsake us, there is no doubt that we will give up our
lives today." Pandu replied, "If this decision of yours is in conformity with dharma, I will follow the undecaying
path shown by my father with both of you. I will give up the pleasant life of villages and perform great austerities.
I will eat roots and fruit, wear the bark of trees and roam in the great forest. I will bathe in the morning and
evening and make offerings to the fire. I will make my body thin by eating less. I will wear skins and my hair will
be matted. I will expose myself to hot and cold winds, hunger, thirst and exhaustion. Through difficult austerities, I
will reduce my body. I will seek solitude and live on fruits, be they ripe or unripe. I will worship the ancestors and
the gods with food found in the forest, water and words. The sight of a man living for vanaprastha has never affected superior residents. How can it affect those who are inferior[There is a problem of translation here. What has been translated as superior residents should literally be
translated as residents of families. And inferior residents should literally be translated as residents of villages. This
doesn't quite seem right. Hence village is probably being used in an inferior and normative sense.]? Until my body perishes, I will perform the
severest penances laid down in the sacred texts for those who live in forests." Having said this to his wives, the
king, a descendant of the Kuru lineage, gave the jewel from his crown, necklace, earrings, bracelets and valuable
garments and ornaments belonging to his wives to the Brahmanas.

'Pandu then again said, "Go to Nagapura[Hastinapura.] and say that Pandu has left for the forest. He has given up riches,
desire, happiness and the supreme joy of sex. The descendant of the Kuru lineage has left with his wives." Hearing
these words of the lion of the Bharata lineage, the servants and attendants sorrowed and lamented. They bewailed
in loud and pitiable voices. They shed hot tears and took their leave of the lord of the earth. Then they left for
Hastinapura with his message. On hearing the details of all that had happened in the great forest, Dhritarashtra,
best among kings, mourned for Pandu.

'Living on roots and fruit, the Kourava prince Pandu went with his wives to the mountain named Nagasabha. He
went to Chaitraratha and crossed the Varishena. Then he crossed the Himalayas and went to Gandhamadana. Protected by the great beings[Alternatively, the primary elements.], the siddhas and the supreme rishis, the king lived for some time on the mountains
and for some time on the plains. He then went to the lake Indradyumna and crossed Hansakuta. Then the ascetic
king arrived at Shatashringa[Mountain with a hundred peaks.].'