Janamejaya asked, 'On hearing about the duel with the clubs in the lineage of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas and
on hearing that Krishna had ascended to heaven, what did the Pandavas do?'

Vaishampayana replied, 'Hearing about the great carnage caused among the Vrishnis, King Kourava made up
his mind to give up his life and spoke these words to Arjuna. "O immensely wise one! Time cooks all creatures. I
think all this has happened because of that. You should also consider that." Thus addressed, Kounteya[Meaning Arjuna.] only uttered
the words, "Time! Time!" He agreed with the words his valiant elder brother had spoken. Discerning Arjuna's intention, Bhimasena and the twins also agreed with the words that had been spoken by Savyasachi. Desiring dharma, they decided to depart and summoned Yuyutsu. Yudhishthira handed over the entire kingdom to the son of a
vaishya[Yuyutsu was Dhritarashtra's son through a vaishya woman. The king was Parikshit. Yuyutsu was given
the task of supervision.]. Parikshit was instated as the king in his own kingdom[Parikshit became the king in Hastinapura and Vajra became the king in Indraprastha. Indraprastha is the
same as Shakraprastha. Vajra was Aniruddha's son, Pradyumna's grandson and Krishna's great
grandson.]. The king who was the eldest of the Pandava sorrowfully told Subhadra, "This son of your son will be the king of the Kurus. The last of the Yadus, Vajra, has also
been made a king. Parikshit will rule in Hastinapura and the Yadava in Shakraprastha. King Vajra should be protected by you and do not think of adharma in your mind[In terms of taking Vajra's kingdom away.]." Having said this, the intelligent Dharmaraja, with dharma in his soul, together with his mothers[This is probably a typo and should read brothers.], attentively offered water to Vasudeva, his aged maternal uncle, Rama
and the others. Following the prescribed rites, he instructed that the funeral ceremonies should be performed for all
of them. He gave away jewels, garments, villages, horses and chariots, women and hundreds and thousands of cattle to the best among the brahmanas. The supreme among the Bharata lineage honoured Kripa and reverentially
instructed that he would be the preceptor, handing over Parikshit to him as a disciple.

'Yudhishthira honoured all the ordinary people. The rajarshi told all of them what he desired to do. On hearing
his words, all the people of the city and the countryside were extremely anxious in their minds and did not welcome these words. They told the king, "This should not be done." However, knowing about the progress of time
and about dharma, the king did not listen to them. The one with dharma in his soul took the permission of the residents of the city and the countryside. He had made up his mind to leave and so had his brothers. Dharma's son,
Kouravya, King Yudhishthira, took off the ornaments from his body and donned the bark of trees. O lord of men!
Bhima, Arjuna, the twins and the illustrious Droupadi-all of them donned garments made from the barks of trees.
O bull among the Bharata lineage! They performed all the recommended beneficial rites. All the bulls among men
then cast the sacred fire into water[The sacrificial fire that burns in a household, the casting away symbolizing the giving up of the householder stage.]. On seeing the bulls among men, all the women wept. They departed, with
Droupadi as the sixth, just as in earlier times, they had left after being defeated in the game with the dice. But at
the prospect of departure, the brothers were cheerful. After seeing the destruction of the Vrishnis and ascertaining
Yudhishthira's view, there was no other course.

'There were the five brothers. Krishna was the sixth and a dog joined as the seventh. Including him, there were
seven and the king left Gajasahvya[Hastinapura.]. For some distance, the citizens and the ladies of the inner quarters followed
them. However, none of them was capable of speaking to them and urging them to return. Then, all the men who
resided in the city returned and stood around Kripa, Yuyutsu and the others. O Kouravya! Ulupi, the daughter of a
serpent, entered the waters of the Ganga. Chitrangada left for the city of Manipura. All of Parikshit's mothers[The word mothers is being used in a broad sense.] surrounded him and began to instruct him.

'O Kouravya! The great-souled Pandavas and the illustrious Droupadi fasted and headed in an eastern direction.
The great-souled ones immersed themselves in yoga, having decided to follow the dharma of renunciation. They
passed through many countries, rivers and mountains. Yudhishthira walked in front, followed by Bhima. Arjuna
came after him, followed by the twins, in the right order. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! The beautiful
Droupadi, best among women, was at the rear. She was dark and her eyes were like the petals of lotuses. When the
Pandavas left for the forest, a dog followed them. Gradually, the brave ones reached Louhitya[By Louhitya or Lohitya, one usually means the Brahmaputra.], an ocean full of
water. O great king! Because of his love for precious things, Dhananjaya had still not let go off the divine bow,
Gandiva, or the two inexhaustible quivers. They saw Agni standing before them, like a mountain. He stood there,
barring their way, adopting a human form. The god with the seven flames addressed the Pandavas. "O sons of Pandu! Listen! O brave ones! Listen! Know me to be the god of fire. O mighty-armed one! O Yudhishthira! O scorcher
of enemies! O Bhimasena! O Arjuna! O brave sons of the Ashvins! Listen to my words. O best among the Kurus!
Using the powers of Arjuna and Narayana, I burnt down Khandava[Described in Section 19 (Volume 2).]. Your brother, Phalguna, can only go to the
forest after casting aside the supreme weapon, Gandiva, not otherwise. The jewel, the chakra, which used to be
with the great-souled Krishna, has vanished. When it is time, it will again appear in his hands. For Partha's sake, I
had earlier brought Gandiva, best among bows, from Varuna. It should now be returned to Varuna." At this, all the
brothers urged Dhananjaya to do this. He flung it into the water, together with the two great and inexhaustible
quivers. O best of the Bharata lineage! After this, Agni vanished. The brave Pandavas now headed in a southern
direction. O tiger among the Bharata lineage! On the northern shores of the salty ocean, they proceeded in a southwestern direction. Then they again headed in a western direction. They saw Dvaraka, flooded by the ocean. The
supreme among the Bharatas then again headed towards the north. Devoted to the dharma of yoga, they desired to
circle the entire earth.'
