Vaishampayana said, 'As was appropriate, he entered the residence of the Pandavas. In extremely gentle and
comforting tones, he greeted his grandmother. The queen Chitrangada and Kouravaya's daughter[This is liable to cause confusion. There was a serpent (naga) named Kouravaya and this thus means Ulupi.] met Pritha
and Krishna with humility. As is proper, they also met Subhadra and the other women of the Kuru lineage. Kunti
gave both of them many kinds of jewels. So did Droupadi, Subhadra and the other women. Desiring to do what
was agreeable to Partha, Kunti herself honoured the queens[Especially Chitrangada and Ulupi, but Droupadi and Subhadra too.] and they made themselves comfortable on extremely
expensive beds and seats. Babhruvahana, the immensely valorous king, was honoured. Then, following the appropriate rites, he presented himself before King Dhritarashtra. Resorting to humility, the immensely energetic one approached King Yudhishthira and Bhima and the other Pandavas. They affectionately embraced him and following
the  rites,  showed  him  honours.  Delighted,  the  maharathas  gave  him  large  amounts  of  riches.  In  that  way,  the
king[Babhruvahana.] humbly presented himself before Krishna, the wielder of the chakra and the gada, like Pradyumna presenting himself before Govinda. Krishna honoured the king and gave him an extremely expensive chariot that was decorated with gold and was yoked to divine and supreme horses. Dharmaraja, Bhima, the twins and Phalguna separately honoured the one who deserved to be shown respect.

'On the third day, the sage who was Satyavati's son[Vedavyasa.], the eloquent one, approached Yudhishthira and spoke
these words. "O Kounteya! From today, the time for conducting the sacrifice has arrived. The time for the sacrifice
has arrived and the officiating priests are urging us. O Indra among kings! Let arrangements be made for the sacrifice, so that there are no blemishes. Because of the large amount of gold that has been used, this sacrifice will be
famous as a golden one. O great king! Let three times the normal dakshina be offered. The brahmanas who have
come for the sacrifice deserve to be given three times the norm. O king! You will then obtain three times the merits
of a horse sacrifice performed with a large quantity of dakshina. O lord of men! You will be freed from the sin of
having slain your kin. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! When you bathe after completing the horse sacrifice, that
will be the supreme of the supreme and you will become cleaner than the most clean." The spirited and infinitely
energetic Vyasa spoke in this way. The one with dharma in his soul[Yudhishthira.] initiated himself into the horse sacrifice. The
king engaged himself in the great horse sacrifice. O king! The officiating priests were knowledgable about the
Vedas and performed the rites. They were virtuous and learned and knowledgable about the sacred texts. Everything was performed in the proper way. There were no deviations and nothing was done in an inappropriate way.
The bulls among brahmanas did everything, both for what was laid down and what was not laid down[Some rituals are not necessarily laid down in the sacred texts.].  The
supreme among brahmanas, knowledgable about dharma, performed the preliminary rites. O king! Following the
ordinances, the brahmanas extracted soma juice. O king! The supreme among those who drank soma extracted the
soma juice. In due order, they followed the sacred texts and completed the concluding ceremony of the sacrifice.
No man who came to the sacrifice remained distressed or poor. There was no one who was hungry, miserable or
vulgar. On the instructions of the king, the immensely energetic Bhimasena was always engaged in providing food
to those who sought food. The officiating priests skilfully performed all the rites. From one day to another day,
they oversaw that all the intentions of the sacred texts were met. Among the officiating priests who were there,
there was one who was not intelligent, or did not know the Vedangas. There was no brahmana who did not follow
vows, or was incapable of being an instructor. There was no one who was incapable of speaking. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! At  the  right  time,  sacrificial  stakes  were  erected-six  were  made  of  bilva,  six  were  made  of
khadira[Kind of acacia.] and six were made out of sarvavarnina[Another name for palasha, the flame of the forest.]. In the sacrifice of the lord of the Kurus, two stakes were
made out of devadaru[Kind of pine.]. The officiating priests created two out of shleshmataka[Kind of plum tree.]. O bull among men! On Dharmaraja's instructions, Bhima had other golden sacrificial stakes created, but these were purely ornamental. O rajarshi! O Indra among men! These were beautiful, as if the sapatarshis and the other gods had assembled around
Vasava in heaven. Golden bricks were used for the chayana[It is not clear what a chayana was. The word means collection or pile. It was obviously some kind of structure.]. The chayana there was as beautiful as Daksha Prajapati's. It has four layers and measured eighteen cubits. It was triangular in shape, in the form of Garuda, and the
sides were golden. Following the sacred texts, the learned ones then tied the animals and the birds to the respective
stakes, offering each to the appropriate god[Each sacrificed bird and animal was earmarked for a specific god.]. After the fire rites had been performed and the sacred texts recited,
all the bulls and aquatic creatures were also yoked to the stakes. In the great-souled King Kounteya's sacrifice,
three hundred animals were tied to the stakes and there was also the supreme horse. The sacrifice was beautiful, as
if large numbers of devarshis were directly present and the place was full of a large number of gandharvas and
adorned by large numbers of apsaras. There seemed to be the songs of kimpurushas and ornamented with the beauty of kinnaras[Kimpurusha and kinnara are synonymous.]. In every direction, there were the abodes of successful brahmanas. Supreme among brahmanas,
the disciples of Vyasa, the composer of all the sacred texts, were always there. They were accomplished and skilled
in all the sacrificial rites. Narada was there and the immensely radiant Tumburu. There were Vishvavasu, Chitrasena and others who were accomplished in singing. The gandharvas were accomplished in singing and skilled in
dancing. When there were gaps in the sacrificial rites, they delighted the brahmanas.'
