'Sanjaya said, "O venerable one! When the battle formations had thus been arrayed and a great sound arose, drums
and kettledrums were beaten. When the battle formations roared and musical instruments were sounded, conch
shells were blown and the sound made the body hair stand up. The ground was slowly covered with those among
the Bharata lineage who wished to fight. The roudra muhurta[A muhurta is a unit for measurement of time and is equal to forty-eight minutes. Some muhurtas are good, others are bad. The rudra or roudra muhurta is generally bad or inauspicious. While the precise timing of a muhurta
depends on when the sun rises, the roudra muhurta starts at around six in the morning.] arrived and Savyasachi was seen. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Many thousand wild crows and crows sported themselves in front of Savyasachi. Animals
howled in terrible tones, and jackals, inauspicious to look at, howled and advanced on our right, as we proceeded.
Flaming meteors roared and fell down in every direction. The entire earth trembled and a dreadful fear arose. Dry
and harsh winds began to blow, attracting gravel. They manifested themselves when Kounteya arrived to do battle.
Shatanika, Nakula's son, and Parshata Dhrishtadyumna-those two wise ones arrayed the Pandava soldiers into a
vyuha. Your son, Durmarshana, stationed himself in front of all the soldiers, with one thousand chariots, one hundred elephants, three thousand horses and ten thousand foot soldiers. These covered terrain measuring fifteen hundred bows. He said, 'The wielder of Gandiva is unassailable in battle. He is a scorcher. But today, I will repulse
him, like the shoreline against the abode of makaras. Let everyone witness the invincible and intolerant Dhananjaya clash against me in battle today, like a mass of stones against another mass of stones.' O great king! Having
said, this, the great-souled and high-minded and great archer stationed himself there. O king! He was surrouned by
great archers. He was as angry as the Destroyer and like Vasava with the vajra. Urged by destiny, he was like
Death with a staff in his hand. He was as unagitated as the one with the trident[Shiva.], or like Varuna with his noose.
He was like the blazing fire that arrives at the end of a yuga to consume beings. The angry and intolerant Jaya[Arjuna.],
the destroyer of the nivatakavachas, was established in victory and truth. He desired to accomplish his great vow.
He was armoured. Kiriti wielded a sword that was embellished with gold. His armour and garments were white.
He sported a sword and wore beautiful earrings. Nara, with Narayana, was stationed on a supreme chariot. Shaking
Gandiva in battle, he was as resplendent as the rising sun. Dhananjaya stationed his prepared chariot at the forefront of the array, where the great shower of arrows would descend. The powerful one blew on his conch shell. O
venerable one! Together with Partha, Krishna also fearlessly blew on Panchajanya, supreme among conch shells,
with great energy. O lord of the earth! Because of the sound of the conch shells, your soldiers trembled. Their body
hair stood up and they lost their senses. Like all beings are terrified at the sound of thunder, all your soldiers were
frightened at the sound of the conch shells. All the mounts released urine and excrement. The entire army, with all
the mounts, became anxious. O king! O venerable one! The men were distressed at the sound of the conch shells.
Some of them lost their senses. O king! Some were terrified. Together with all the other beings who dwelt on the
standard, the ape let out a mighty roar. To frighten your soldiers, it opened its mouth wide. At this, so as to delight
your soldiers, conch shells, drums, kettledrums and tambourines were again sounded. This mixed with the sound
of many musical instruments, with the roars and the slapping of arms. To the sound of musical instruments, the
maharathas roared like lions and issued challenges. There was a tumultuous sound that increased the fear of
cowards.

'"The son of the chastiser of Paka[Indra killed a demon named Paka.] was extremely delighted. He told Dasharha, 'O Hrishikesha! Urge the horses to the spot where Durmarshana is stationed. I will shatter the army of elephants and penetrate the enemy's
force.' Having been thus addressed by Savyasachi, the mighty-armed Keshava urged the horses to the spot where
Durmarshana was stationed. A tumultuous and extremely fierce clash commenced between one and many[Arjuna was alone.], one
that destroyed chariots, elephants and men. Partha showered down arrows on the enemy, like Parjanya[Indra.] pouring
down rain. He was like a cloud raining down on a mountain. All the rathas swiftly displayed their dexterity of
hand. They enveloped Krishna and Dhananjaya with a net of arrows. When the foe fought against him, the mighty-
armed and valiant Partha became enraged. With his arrows, he severed the heads of the rathas from their bodies.
The earth was strewn with these, with handsome heads with eyes jutting out and frowning, with teeth biting the
lips. They were adorned with earrings and helmets. In every direction, they were like lotuses that had been destroyed. The heads of the warriors were scattered around. Colourful armour was spattered with blood. O king!
They were seen there, like masses of clouds, tinged with lightning. O king! There was the sound of heads falling
down on the surface of the earth, like palm fruit that has ripened in time and is falling down. Some torsos were stationed, with the hands still wielding bows. Some upraised arms were stationed with unsheathed swords. Those
bulls among men did not even know when their heads were severed and fell down. They could not tolerate
Kounteya and wished to defeat him in battle. The earth was strewn with the heads of horses, trunks of elephants
and the arms and heads of brave ones. 'This is Partha. Where is Partha? This one is Partha!' O lord! Thus, your
soldiers and warriors only thought about Partha. Deluded by destiny, they thought that the entire world was full of
Partha alone. Thus, they struck and killed each other. Others struck their own selves. They destroyed themselves.
They were covered in blood. They were bereft of their senses. Their bodies were in deep pain. Many brave ones
lay down and called out to their well-wishers. The arms held slings, lances, spears, swords, battleaxes, helmets,
scimitars, bows, arrows, javelins, darts, armour, ornaments, clubs and armlets in that battle. The arms were like
clubs and giant snakes. Having been severed by those supreme arrows, they seemed to forcefully jump, twitch and
jerk in every direction, as if in anger. Any man who wrathfully advanced against Partha in that battle was killed by
his arrows, piercing the body. As he brandished his bow and danced around on the coursing chariot, no one could
detect any weakness in Partha. He swiftly picked up arrows, affixed them and shot them. All the enemy soldiers
marvelled at the dexterity of Pandu's son. Phalguna used his arrows to pierce elephants and elephant-riders, horses
and horse-riders and rathas and their charioteers. There were many who whirled around and surrounded and fought
with Pandava. There was not a single one who stood before him and was not killed. Like the sun arises in the sky
and destroys great darkness, thus did Arjuna use arrows tufted with heron feathers to slay that army of elephants.
Because of the shattered and fallen elephants and soldiers, the earth seemed to be strewn with mountains, as if it
was the time of destruction. Beings are always incapable of looking at the midday sun. Like that, the angry
Dhananjaya was incapable of being glanced at by the enemy warriors. O scorcher of enemies! Your son's soldiers
were shattered and fled. They were routed and oppressed by those arrows. Like a mass of clouds scattered by a giant wind, those soldiers were slain and no one was capable of looking at him. Those on your side used goads, the
tips of their bows, shouts, whips, lashes on the flanks and eloquent words to swiftly urge their well-controlled horses to run away. The riders, the charioteers and the foot soldiers were afflicted by Arjuna. Others used goads and
their toes to urge the elephants on their flanks. Others were confounded by the arrows and fled in his direction.
Your warriors lost their endeavour. They were confused and distracted in their minds."'
