Vaishampayana said, 'During a break in this conversation, Arjuna again spoke. He
spoke these words to the lord who was his eldest brother, whose mind was cheerless. "O
one who is knowledgeable about dharma! You have obtained this supreme kingdom
through the dharma of kshatriyas. O best among men! Having conquered it, why are you
so severely tormented? O great king! It has been said that being slain in a battle is better
for kshatriyas than many sacrifices. Remember the dharma of kshatriyas. It has been
said that for brahmanas, austerities and renunciation are the best prescribed dharma for
the state beyond death. O lord! Being slain in battle is recommended for kshatriyas. It
has been said that the dharma of kshatriyas is extremely terrible, since weapons are always involved. O best among the Bharata lineage! At the right time, they should be
slain by weapons in a battle. O king! Even when a brahmana bases himself on the dharma of kshatriyas, his life is praised in this world, because kshatriyas are based on brahmanas. O lord of men! Renunciation, begging, austerities and living off others are not
recommended for kshatriyas. O bull among the Bharata lineage! You know about all
forms of dharma! You know about everything. You are an intelligent and accomplished
king. You can distinguish the bad from the good. Abandon this torment and sorrow and
armour yourself for action. In particular, the hearts of kshatriyas are as hard as the vajra.
Having vanquished the enemy through the dharma of kshatriyas, you have obtained this
kingdom, without any thorns. O Indra among men! Conquer your soul now and devote
yourself to sacrifices and donations. Indra was the son of a brahmana, but he became a
kshatriya through his deeds[Indra was the son of the sage Kashyapa.]. He killed his own wicked relatives eight hundred and ten
times[The wicked relatives are the demons, also descended from Kashyapa.
Indra is believed to have attacked the demons 810 times.]. O lord of the earth! Those deeds of his should be honoured and praised. It has
been said that this was how he became Indra among the gods. O great king! O Indra
among men! When your fever eventually goes, perform sacrifices with many donations,
just as Indra sacrificed. O bull among the kshatriyas! You should not sorrow at all about
what has already happened. Following the dharma of kshatriyas, they have been purified
by weapons and have attained the supreme end. O bull among the Bharatas! What has
happened was going to occur. It was ordained. O tiger among kings! No one is capable
of thwarting destiny."'
