'"Arjuna said, 'O Janardana! If in your opinion knowledge is superior to action, then why are you engaging me in
this terrible action? These mixed words seem to be confounding my intellect. Tell me definitely that one thing that
is best for me.'

'"The lord said, 'O pure of heart! I have said it before that in this world, there are two paths. There is jnana yoga
for those who follow sankhya and there is karma yoga for yogis. 133 Without performing action, man is not freed
from the bondage of action. And resorting to sannyasa 134 does not result in liberation. No one can ever exist,
even for a short while, without performing action. Because the qualities of nature 135 force everyone to perform
action. The ignorant person who exists by controlling his organs of action, 136 while his mind remembers the
senses, is said to be deluded and is a hypocrite. 137
O Arjuna! But he who restrains the senses through his mind and starts the yoga of action with the organs of action,
while remaining unattached, he is superior. Therefore, do the prescribed action. 138 Because action is superior to
not performing action. And without action, even survival of the body is not possible. O Kounteya! All action other
than that for sacrifices shackles people to the bondage of action. 139 Therefore, do action for that purpose, without
attachment. Earlier, 140 Prajapati 141 created beings, accompanied by a sacrifice 142 and said-with this, 143
may you increase, and may this grant you all objects you desire. Through this, 144 cherish the gods and those gods
will cherish you. By cherishing each other, you will obtain that which is most desired. Because, cherished by the
sacrifice, the gods will give you all desired objects. He who enjoys these without giving them 145 their share, is
certainly a thief. Righteous people who enjoy the leftovers 146 of sacrifices are freed from all sins. But those sinners who cook only for themselves live on sin. Beings are created from food and food is created from rain clouds.
Rain clouds are created from sacrifices and sacrifices are created from action. Know that action is created from the
Vedas and the Vedas are created from the brahman. Therefore, the omnipresent brahman is always present in sacrifices. 147 In this way, the cycle goes on and he who does not follow this, is addicted to his senses and lives a sinner's life. O Partha! He lives in vain. But the man who takes pleasure in the atman, is content with the atman and is
satiated with the atman, has no duties. In this world, he has no need for action, nor anything to lose from inaction.
He doesn't need the refuge of any being for anything. Therefore, be unattached and always perform prescribed action. Because a man who performs action when unattached attains the highest liberation.

'"'Janaka 148 and others attained liberation through action. One should perform action with an eye to preserving
the worlds. Whatever a great man does, ordinary people also do that. Whatever he accepts as duty, others also follow that. O Partha! In the three worlds, I have no duties. There is nothing I haven't attained, there is nothing yet to
be attained. Yet, I am engaged in action. O Partha! If I ever relax and stop performing action, then men will follow
my path in every way. If I don't perform action, then all these worlds will be destroyed. I will be the lord of hybrids 149 and responsible for the destruction of these beings. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Ignorant people
perform action by being attached to that action. But the wise perform similar action unattached, for the welfare and
preservation of the worlds. The wise will not befuddle the minds of the ignorant who are attached to action. Being
knowledgeable, they will themselves perform all action and keep them 150 engaged. All action is completed, in
every way, through the qualities of nature. 151 He who is deluded by the ego, thinks that he is the doer. O mighty-
armed one! But he who truly knows the division of the qualities 152 and different types of action 153 knows that
qualities manifest themselves in senses and does not get attached. 154 Those who are deluded by nature's qualities
are attached to action by senses and organs. The omniscient should not disturb 155 those ignorant and misguided
people. Focusing your mind on the supreme being, vest all action in me. Be without desire, without ownership and
without fever 156 and fight. People who, faithfully and without finding fault, always follow this view of mine, they
too are freed from the bondage of action. 157 But know that those who in an attempt to find fault don't follow this
view of mine, they have no sense and all their knowledge will be deluded and destroyed. Even a wise person acts
according to his own nature. Nature drives all beings. Why should one use restraint? 158 For each sense, in its respective area, attachment and aversion are certain. 159 But don't be overcome by those. They are obstacles. One's
own dharma, 160 even if followed imperfectly, is superior to someone else's dharma, even if followed perfectly. It
is better to be slain while following one's own dharma. Someone else's dharma is tinged with fear.'

'"Arjuna said, 'O descendant of the Vrishni lineage! By whom are these men compelled? Despite being unwilling, it is almost as if they are forced into evil action.' 161
'"The lord said, 'This is desire. This is anger. These are born from the rajas quality. These are insatiable and
great sins. 162 Here, 163 know them to be enemies. Like smoke covers the fire, like dust covers the mirror, like the
womb covers the foetus, in that way, this 164 is covered by that. 165 O Kounteya! This is the perennial enemy of
the wise. Knowledge is covered by this desire that is insatiable like the fire. All senses, the mind and intellect, are
its 166 seat. This 167 uses these 168 to veil knowledge and delude beings. O bull among the Bharata lineage!
Therefore, you should first control your senses. Destroy this 169 that is like sin and is the destroyer of knowledge.
170 It is said the senses are superior. 171 The mind is superior to the senses. Intellect is superior to the mind. That
172 is superior to intellect. O mighty-armed one! In this way, use intellect to realize that which is superior to the
intellect. Use your inner strength to calm the atman 173 and destroy the enemy that is difficult to defeat, in the
form of desire.'"'
