Samvarta said, 'How did you get to know about me? Who told you about me? If you desire that I should do
something agreeable for you, tell me the truth about this. If you speak the truth, you will obtain everything
that you desire. If you utter a lie, your head will be shattered into seven fragments.'

'"Marutta replied, 'Along the road, Narada told me about you. He said that you are the son of our preceptor[Angiras.]
and will give me great delight.'

'"Samvarta said, 'You have told me the truth. He  knows  me as  an officiating priest. Now  tell me, where is
Narada?'

'"Marutta replied, 'The excellent devarshi told me about you. Having done that, he took my leave and entered
the fire.'"

'Vyasa said, "On hearing the king's words, Samvarta was greatly delighted. He said, 'I am also capable of doing
that.' O king! The brahmana repeatedly seemed to censure Marutta through these crazy and harsh words. 'I suffer
from disease of the wind[Wind is vata and this means cerebral disorders.]. I am capricious and wilful. Why do you want such an abnormal person to be your officiating priest? My brother is capable and has been honoured by Vasava. He is engaged in performing sacrifices.
Get your rites done by him. He has taken away my house and all my rights as an officiating priest. He has taken
away all my gods. My elder brother has taken all these away and has only left me with this body. O Avikshit's son!
Without his permission, I can never act as an officiating priest. How can I? He deserves my worship. Therefore, go
to Brihaspati. Obtain his permission and then return to me. If you desire to engage me as an officiating priest at
your sacrifice, this is what you must do.'

'"Marutta replied, 'O Samvarta! Listen to me. I went to Brihaspati earlier. Restrained by Vasava, he did not desire to be my officiating priest. "O rishi! You are an officiating priest for the immortals now and cannot be one for
humans. You cannot be an officiating priest for Marutta, who suffers from having to follow the dharma of mortals.
O brahmana! That king always seeks to rival me." This is what your brother was told by the slayer of Bala and Vri-
tra and he agreed. O bull among sages! I affectionately went to him and sought him as an officiating priest. But
having resorted to the king of the gods, he did not accept my request. I wish to surpass Vasava in all the qualities.
Therefore, I will expend all my riches in a sacrifice, with you as the officiating priest. O brahmana! Since I went to
Brihaspati and have been rebuffed by him, I no longer have the inclination to go back to him.'

'"Samvarta said, 'O king! I will certainly do everything that you desire, but only if you do everything that I intend. However, when Brihaspati and Purandara know that I am the officiating priest, they will be angry and seek to
cause injury. They have the capacity. Therefore, you must assure me that you will be steadfast. If I am enraged
with you, I will reduce you and your relatives to ashes.'

'"Marutta replied, 'If I abandon the association with you, may I not obtain the worlds for as long as the one with
the one thousand rays radiates heat, or as long as the mountains exist. If I abandon the association with you, may I
never obtain proper intelligence and may I always be immersed in the improper ignorance of material possessions.'

'"Samvarta said, 'O Avikshit's son! Your intelligence is pure and I will undertake the act. O king! I will be your
officiating priest. O king! I will plan it so that your excellent riches are inexhaustible and superior to those of the
gods and the gandharvas, together with Shakra. My mind does not turn towards the sacrifice for the sake of riches.
However, I wish to do what is disagreeable to both my brother and Indra. It is certain that I will make you Indra's
equal. I will do what is agreeable to you. I am telling you this truthfully.'"'
