Yudhishthira asked, "O lord! Which is the object that, if donated to ancestors, becomes inexhaustible? What
oblation lasts for many nights? Indeed, what is thought to last for an eternity?" 'Bhishma replied, "O Yudhishthira! Those who are learned about funeral ceremonies have thought of oblations for funeral ceremonies. Listen to the desirable fruits associated with each. O king! If sesamum, rice, barley, kidney beans, roots and fruits are
given at funeral ceremonies, the ancestors are satisfied for a month. Manu has said that if a large quantity of sesamum is given at a funeral ceremony, it becomes inexhaustible. Among all the objects that are eaten, sesamum is
said to be the best. When fish is offered, the large number of ancestors is satisfied for two months. Lamb is said to
satisfy for three months and rabbit meat for four months. O king! With the meat of goats, the ancestors are delighted for five months. It is six months with the meat of boar and seven months with the flesh of birds. With the meat
of parshata[The spotted antelope. Ruru is another kind of antelope.], it is eight months. It is nine months with the meat of ruru. With the meat of gavaya[The gayal or mithun.], they are content for ten months. With the meat of buffaloes, the ancestors are delighted for eleven months. If the product from
a cow[We haven't glossed over this in the translation. The text doesn't say meat, it says product.] is given at a funeral ceremony, the satisfaction is said to last for an entire year. The product from a cow
can be mixed with payasam and ghee. With the flesh of vardhinasa[Probably a large bird.], the satisfaction lasts for twelve years. When
the flesh of a rhinoceros is offered to the ancestors, the fruits are infinite and indestructible. The fruits of basil, the
petals of the kanchana flower and goat meat are also said to be eternal. O Yudhishthira! In this connection, there
are some hymns and chants sung by the ancestors. In earlier times, the illustrious Sanatkumara told me about these.

'In the month of Magha[January-February.], during uttarayana, on the thirteenth day, a person who has been born in our lineage
must give us payasam mixed with ghee. When the nakshatra Magha is in the ascendant, he must observe the vows
and offer us petals of the kanchana flower, with goat meat. When the nakshatra Hasta is in the ascendant[We have taken a liberty. The text literally translates as, under the shadow of an elephant (hasti). This doesn't
seem to make any sense. We have thus taken hasti as Hasta.], he
must offer this in accordance with the rites, using whisks made from the leaves of the Indian laburnum tree. Many
sons are desired so that at least one of those can go to Gaya and render offerings at the banyan tree there, famous in
the worlds as one that makes the fruits inexhaustible. On the anniversary of a father's death, even if a little bit of
water, roots, fruits, meat and rice are offered, mixed with honey, that is thought of as becoming inexhaustible."'
