Vaishampayana said, 'In earlier times, Asita-Devala dwelt there[Asita-Devala is sometimes described as a single sage and sometimes as two different sages.
This is true of this section too. While the singular is generally used, in some shlokas, there is
the dual too.]. He was a store of austerities and had dharma in his souls. He resorted to the dharma of a householder. He was pure and controlled and always devoted to
dharma. The great ascetic never punished anyone. He treated all beings equally, in his deeds, thoughts and speech.
O great king! He never resorted to anger and treated the pleasant and the unpleasant as equal. The great ascetic
treated gold and stones equally. He honoured gods, guests and brahmanas. He was always devoted to brahmacharya and always devoted to dharma. O great king! Once, while that intelligent sage was controlled and engaged in yoga in that tirtha, a mendicant named Jaigishavya came to him. O king! The immensely radiant one began to dwell in Devala's hermitage. O great king! Always devoted to yoga, the great ascetic[Jaigishavya.] attained success
there. While the great sage Jaigishavya dwelt there, Devala always looked towards his needs and never deviated
from dharma. O great king! They spent a long period of time in this way. There was an occasion when Devala did
not see the sage Jaigishavya. O Janamejaya! However, when it was time to take food, the intelligent mendicant,
learned in dharma, presented himself before Devala. On seeing the great sage appear in the form of a mendicant,
he honoured him greatly and was full of great delight. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Devala honoured him
to the best of his capacity, controlling himself in many ways and following the rites indicated by the rishis. O king!
However, on one occasion, on seeing the immensely radiant sage, a grave thought arose in the mind of the great-
souled Devala. "I have spent a long time, honouring him in many ways. However, this idle mendicant never speaks
to me." Having thought this, Devala travelled through the sky and went to the great ocean, carrying a handsome
pot with him. The one with dharma in his soul went to the ocean, the lord of the rivers. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having gone there, he found that Jaigishavya had reached before him. Seeing this, the lord Asita was
supremely astounded. He thought, "How could the mendicant have arrived at the ocean and bathed here[Before Asita-Devala reached there.]?" Maharshi Asita thought in this way. Having bathed in the ocean in accordance with the rites and purifying himself, he
chanted. O Janamejaya! The handsome one chanted, performed the daily rituals and returned to the hermitage, filling the pot with water. As the sage entered his hermitage, he saw Jaigishavya seated in the hermitage. Jaigishavya
never spoke a word. The immensely ascetic one lived in that hermitage, as if he was a piece of wood. He was like
an ocean. He[Asita-Devala.] had seen him bathe in the waters of the ocean and now saw him enter the hermitage before him.
O king! On seeing the powers of the ascetic Jaigishavya, immersed in yoga, the intelligent Asita-Devala began to
think. O Indra among kings! The supreme among sages reflected. "How could I see him in the ocean and again in
the hermitage?" O lord of the earth! The sage, learned in the use of mantras, thought in this way and then rose up
into the sky from his hermitage. Devala wished to find out who the mendicant Jaigishavya was.

'As he travelled through the sky, he saw many controlled siddhas. He saw that those siddhas were worshipping
Jaigishavya. Asita made efforts to be firm in his vows and was enraged at this. Devala next saw Jaigishavya ascend
to heaven. He next saw him roaming around in the world of the ancestors. From the world of the ancestors, he saw
him travel to Yama's world. From Yama's world, he rose to Soma's world. He saw the great sage Jaigishavya travel around in this way, ascending to the sacred worlds of those who perform special sacrifices. He next arose to the
world of those who perform agnihotra sacrifices and worlds of ascetics who perform darsha and pournamasa sacrifices[Different kinds of sacrifices. Agnihotra sacrifices are performed with fire, darsha sacrifices
on the day of the new moon and pournamasa sacrifices on the day of the full moon.]. The intelligent one saw him in the worlds meant for those who sacrifice with animals and roaming
around in the unblemished worlds revered by the gods. He went to the regions meant for ascetics who perform
many chaturmasya sacrifices[Performed once every four months.], those who perform agnishtoma sacrifices and also ascetics who perform agnishtuta sacrifices. Devala saw him reach all those regions. He saw him in the worlds meant for the immensely wise
ones who perform vajapeya, the best of sacrifices, and give away a lot of gold. Devala also saw Jaigishavya in the
worlds meant for the performers of pundarika and rajasuya sacrifices. He saw him in the worlds meant for the best
of men who perform the best of sacrifices, ashvamedha and naramedha[Ashvamedha is a horse sacrifice, in which, a horse is sacrificed. In a naramedha sacrifice, a
human being is sacrificed.]. Devala saw Jaigishavya in the worlds
meant for those who sacrifice everything that is difficult to obtain and for those who perform soutramani
sacrifices[Sacrifice in Indra's honour.]. O king! There are those who perform dvadashaha[Sacrifices that go on for twelve days.] and diverse other sacrifices. Devala saw
Jaigishavya in the worlds meant for them. Asita next saw him attain the worlds of Mitra, Varuna, Adityas, the
Rudras, the Vasus and Brihaspati's region. Asita saw him transcend all these worlds and go to Goloka[Vishnu's world.] and the
world meant for those who know about the brahman. Asita saw Jaigishavya go to all these worlds. Through his energy, he rose up, beyond the three worlds and was seen to travel to the worlds meant for those who are devoted to
their husbands. O scorcher of enemies! However, then Asita could no longer see Jaigishavya, the supreme sage.
Using his powers of yoga, he disappeared.

'The immensely fortunate Devala began to think about Jaigishavya's powers, the discipline of his vows and his
unmatched success in the use of yoga. Asita controlled himself. He joined his hands in salutation and asked the
supreme ones who were in the worlds of the siddhas and the revered ones who knew about the brahman. "I do not
see Jaigishavya, the greatly energetic one. I wish to hear about him. My curiousity is great." The siddhas replied,
"O Devala! O one who is firm in vows! Listen to the truth. Jaigishavya has gone to the eternal and undecaying
world of the brahman. On hearing the words of the siddhas, who are knowledgeable about the brahman, Asita-De-
vala also tried to rise up, but swiftly fell down. At this, the siddhas again spoke to Devala. "O Devala! You cannot
go where the one who is rich in austerities has gone. The brahmana Jaigishavya has attained the abode of the brahman." On hearing the words of the siddhas, Devala descended from those worlds, one after the other. Like an insect, he descended to his own sacred hermitage. As he entered, Devala saw Jaigishavya there. Devala, devoted to
dharma, comprehended the powers of Jaigishavya, who was immersed in yoga.

'Having understood, Devala spoke to the great-souled Jaigishavya. O king! Bowing in humility, he approached
the great sage. "O illustrious one! I wish to resort to the dharma that brings moksha[Release, liberation, salvation, emancipation.]." On hearing these words,
he[Jaigishavya.] instructed him about the rites of supreme yoga and about what the sacred texts say about what should be
done and what should not be done. On seeing that he[Asita-Devala.] had made up his mind about sannyasa[Sannyasa cannot be satisfactorily rendered in English. Literally, it means resorting to the
path of virtue. Loosely, it is the path of an ascetic who renounces the world. But it also
means casting aside one's body.], the great ascetic told him about all the rites and the ordained tasks. On seeing that he had made up his mind about sannyasa,
all the beings and the ancestors started to lament. "Who will henceforth feed us?" Having made up his mind to
seek moksha, Devala heard the piteous lamentations of the beings in the ten directions. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! At this, the sacred fruits and roots and the flowers and the herbs began to lament, in their thousands.

"The evil-minded and inferior Devala will sever us again. He has offered to save all the beings, but does not know
what he is doing[In case Asita-Devala gives up his pursuit of moksha and continues to feed the beings by
plucking fruit, roots, flowers and herbs.]." The supreme among sages used his intelligence to reflect on this again. "Which is superior,
moksha or the dharma of a householder?" O supreme among kings! Having thought about this, Devala made up his
mind. He abandonded the dharma of a householder and adopted the dharma of moksha. Having thought in this
way, Devala made up his mind. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Resorting to supreme yoga, he obtained
supreme success. With Brihaspati at the forefront, the gods approached Jaigishavya and praised the ascetic's austerities. Narada, supreme among rishis, addressed the gods then. "Since he has astounded Asita, there are no austerities left in Jaigishavya[Presumably because the austerities have been inappropriately used.]." The residents of heaven replied to the resolute one[Narada.]. "Do not speak about the
great sage Jaigishavya in this way." The great-souled wielder of the plough bathed there and gave away riches to
the brahmanas. Having performed that supreme act of dharma, he then went to Soma's great tirtha.'
