'Markandeya said, "When Agni's illustrious son was instated as the general, the radiant lord Hara[Shiva. Pashupati is another of Shiva's names.] was delighted and left for Bhadravata[Bhadravata, to the east of Kailasa, is one of the three places where Shiva is said to reside.] in a chariot that had the complexion of the sun, together with Parvati. One thousand
lions were yoked to that supreme chariot. Driven by destiny, it ascended into the bright firmament. It seemed to
drink up the sky and terrified mobile and immobile objects. Those lions with handsome manes roared and went up
to the sky. Pashupati was resplendent, seated on that chariot, together with Uma. It looked like the sun amidst
clouds thick with lightning and Indra's bow[Indra's bow is the rainbow.]. The illustrious Naravahana, lord of riches[Kubera is the lord of riches. He is known as Naravahana because he rides a man. Pushpaka is Kubera's
chariot.], together with the
guhyakas, advanced in front on the beautiful Pushpaka. Behind Vrishadhvaja, the granter of boons, Shakra followed, ascended on Airavata, accompanied by the gods. The great yaksha Amogha was on the right side, with
jambhakas[Jambhakas are demons or evil spirits. They are also Shiva's companions.], yakshas and rakshasas adorned with garlands. Also on the right advanced the gods, the Maruts,
armed with many different weapons, together with the Vasus and accompanied by the Rudras[In addition to Rudra being Shiva's name, there were also minor gods (eleven in number) known as Rudras.]. Yama, together
with Mrityu[Death.], terrible in form, advanced, surrounded on all sides by hundreds of terrible diseases. Behind Yama
followed Rudra's beautiful, sharp and decorated trident, by the name of Vijaya. There was also the illustrious
Varuna, lord of the ocean, advancing slowly with his terrible noose and surrounded by innumerable aquatic animals. Vijaya was followed by Rudra's spear, with maces, clubs, lances and several other supreme weapons. O
king! The spear was followed by Rudra's extremely radiant umbrella and his water pot[Kamandalu.], served by masses of
maharshis. On the right was his radiant staff, accompanied by Shri, with Bhrigu, Angiras[The words Bhrigu and Angiras are in the plural, suggesting those of these two lineages, rather than Bhrigu
and Angiras individually.] and the gods worshipping it. Behind these was Rudra on his unblemished chariot, gladdening all the gods with his energy. The
rishis, the gods, the gandharvas, the serpents, female rivers, male rivers, trees, masses of apsaras, nakshatras, planets, the children of the gods and different types of women followed Rudra at the rear. The lovely and beautiful
women scattered showers of flowers. Parjanjya followed, worshipping the wielder of the pinaka[Shiva.]. Soma[The moon.] held
a white umbrella over his head. Agni and Vayu held whisks on either side. O king! Shakra was behind them, accompanied by Shri and all the rajarshis, singing praises of Vrishadhvaja[The text actually says Vrishaketana, but Vrishadhvaja and Vrishaketana have the same meaning.]. Gouri, Vidya, Gandhari, Keshini and
Mitrasahrya-all of them followed Parvati at the rear, together with Savitri. The different branches of knowledge,
created by those who are wise and recited by Indra and the other gods, were in the vanguard. The rakshasas and
grahas, holding pennants, were in front, as was Rudra's friend Pingala, the Indra of the yakshas, who ensures happiness to the world and is always busy in burning grounds. Accompanied by all these, the god happily travelled.
His course was not certain. He was sometimes in the front, and sometimes at the back. Those on earth worship the
god Rudra through good deeds, using the name Shiva. He is also known as Isha, Rudra and Pinaki. Maheshvara is
worshipped with all kinds of objects. Thus, Krittika's son, the general of the gods and with the qualities of a brahmana, followed the lord of the gods, surrounded by the army of the gods.

'"Then Mahadeva spoke words of great import to Mahasena. 'Always, steadfastly, protect the seventh corps of
the Maruts.' Skanda replied, 'O lord! I will protect the seventh corps of the Maruts. O god! Tell me quickly what
else I should do.' Rudra said, 'O son! You will always see me in every task you undertake. By looking at me devotedly, you will ensure supreme welfare.' Having said this, Maheshvara embraced him and gave him permission
to leave. O great king! When Skanda was allowed to go, a great portent suddenly appeared. To bewilder all the
gods, the firmament, with all its nakshatras, blazed. The earth trembled and groaned. The entire universe was enveloped in darkness. On witnessing this terror, Shankara[Shiva.] was disturbed. So were the immensely fortunate Uma
and the gods, together with the maharshis. While they stood around in bewilderment, a great army appeared. It was
like a mass of mountains or rain clouds. It was terrible to see and had many weapons. This terrible army roared and
uttered diverse sounds. It advanced towards the illustrious Shankara and the gods to do battle. They hurled many
showers of arrows on them, and mountains, shatagnis[Missiles that can kill one hundred at one go.], javelins, clubs and maces. From that great and terrible
shower of weapons, the entire army of the gods was scattered in an instant and was seen to waver. Oppressed by
the danavas, the army of the gods was mauled. The soldiers, the elephants and the horses were sliced down. The
weapons and the maharathas were shattered. They were killed by the asuras, like a grove by many fires. It fell
down burnt, like a forest full of large trees. The gods were mowed down, heads severed from bodies. They were
slaughtered in that great battle and were without a protector. On seeing the army destroyed, the god Purandara, the
slayer of Bala, spoke comfortingly to the army that was oppressed by the danavas. 'O fortunate ones! O brave
ones! Discard your fear. Grasp your weapons. Set your minds on valour. Do not be disheartened. Vanquish the extremely evil danavas, terrible in form. O fortunate ones! Attack those great asuras with me.' Having heard Shakra's
words, the residents of heaven were comforted. Seeking refuge with Shakra, they attacked the danavas. Then all
the thirty gods, the immensely strong Maruts and the Sadhyas, together with the Vasus, returned the attack with
great force. The weapons that they angrily unleashed on the armies in battle, and the arrows, drunk up large quantities of blood from the daityas. The sharp arrows pierced their bodies, which could be seen to fall down, like serpents from a mountain. O king! The bodies of the daityas were sliced by the arrows and fell down on the ground
everywhere, like shredded clouds. In that battle, attacked by all the masses of gods with their diverse arrows, the
army of the danavas was terrified and retreated. On seeing this, all the gods raised their weapons. There was great
rejoicing and the sounding of many musical instruments. Thus an extremely terrible and fearful battle raged between the gods and the danavas, creating muck out of flesh and blood.

'"But suddenly those from the world of the gods were seen to be worsted. The terrible danavas slaughtered the
residents of heaven. The chiefs among the danavas uttered terrible roars like lions. They sounded their musical instruments and there was a great noise from their kettledrums. An extremely strong and terrible danava emerged
from the army of the daityas then. His name was Mahisha and he grasped a giant mountain. He looked like the sun,
surrounded by dense clouds. O king! On seeing him raise the mountain, the gods fled. But Mahisha pursued the
gods and flung the mountain. O king! The army of the gods was struck by that falling mountain, which was terrible
in form. They were killed in large numbers and fell down on the ground. With the other danavas, Mahisha terrified
the gods. He shattered them in battle, like a lion on small animals. On seeing Mahisha descend on them, Indra and
the other gods fled from the field of battle. Their weapons and their pennants were strewn around. Then Mahisha
was extremely angered and advanced towards Rudra's chariot. Approaching it, he seized the pole of Rudra's chariot. When the angry Mahisha suddenly seized Rudra's chariot, the sky and the earth groaned deeply and the maharshis fainted. Gigantic daityas, that were like clouds, roared. They were certain that they would triumph. But
even in this state, the illustrious one[Rudra.] did not kill Mahisha in battle. He knew that the evil-minded one's death
would be at Skanda's hands. The fearful Mahisha exulted at having seen Rudra's chariot. He roared, delighting the
daityas and terrifying the gods.

'"When the gods confronted this terrible danger, Mahasena arrived. He flamed like the sun in his wrath. He was
attired in red garments. He was adorned in red garlands and ornaments. His mouth was red. The mighty-armed lord
was clad in golden armour. He was astride his chariot, golden in hue and like the sun. On seeing him, the army of
the daityas suddenly lost their hearts in battle. O Indra among kings! The immensely strong Mahasena hurled a
flaming spear, which was capable of shattering, at Mahisha. Once unleashed, it struck Mahisha's gigantic head.
The head was severed from the body and Mahisha fell down, having lost his life. He hurled that spear again and
again, slaying enemies by the thousands. As the gods and the danavas looked on, it then returned to Skanda's hand.
The residual masses of the terrible daitya army were mostly killed by the wise Mahasena with his arrows. They
were frightened and terrified and Skanda's unassailable companions killed and devoured them in hundreds. They
ate the danavas and drank their blood. In a short time, they exterminated all the danavas and began to rejoice. Like
the sun destroys darkness, a fire destroys trees and the wind dispels clouds, the famous Skanda destroyed enemies
through his own valour. He was shown homage by the thirty gods and he worshipped Maheshvara. The son of the
Krittikas was resplendent, like the gorgeous sun amidst its rays. When the enemies were destroyed by Skanda and
Maheshvara had left, Purandara embraced Mahasena and spoke to him. 'O Skanda! You have killed Mahisha, who
had received a boon from Brahma. The gods were like straw to him. You are foremost among victorious ones. O
mighty-armed one! You have destroyed the thorn of the gods. In battle, you have killed a hundred danavas who
were the equals of Mahisha. You have slain the enemies of the gods, who had oppressed us earlier. Your followers
have devoured hundreds of other danavas. You are as invincible in battle as the illustrious husband of Uma[Meaning Shiva.]. O
god! This will be famous as your first deed. Your fame will be eternal in the three worlds. O son of a god! The
gods will be under your suzerainty.' Having spoken these words to Mahasena, Shachi's husband[Indra.] stopped. He
took the permission of the illustrious Tryambaka[The one with three eyes, Shiva.] and left, together with the other gods. Rudra returned to
Bhadravata. The gods returned. Rudra spoke to the gods, 'Regard Skanda as you regard me.' Having killed masses
of danavas, Agni's son subjugated all the three worlds within a single day and was worshipped by the maharshis.
He who attentively reads this account of Skanda's birth, obtains prosperity here and Skanda's world in the hereafter."'
