'Sanjaya said, "O great king! After Bhishma, Shantanu's descendant had become silent, all the kings again returned to their own abodes. On hearing that Bhishma had been brought down, Radheya, bull among men, swiftly
came to him, partly because he was terrified. He saw the great-souled one, lying down on his bed of arrows, like
the lord, the god Kartikeya, lying down after his birth[Kartikeya was born in a clump of reeds.]. The brave one's eyes were closed. His voice choked
with tears, Vrisha[Karna's name.] worshipped the feet of the immensely radiant one who had fallen down. 'O best of the Kurus! I am Radheya. I have been in your sight, but you have always regarded me with hate.' He spoke these words.
On hearing these words, the aged Kuru used his strength to slowly open his closed eyes and glanced at him. He
spoke these affectionate words. He asked the guards to leave and once they were alone, glanced at him with
benevolence.

'"Gangeya embraced him with one arm, like a father towards a son. 'Come. Come. You have always been my
adversary and have always sought to rival me. If you had not come before me, there is no doubt that it would not
have been good for you. You are a Kounteya. You are not Radheya. I have known this from Narada and from
Krishna Dvaipayana[Vedavyasa.] and Keshava. There is no doubt about this. O son[The word used is tata.]! I do not hate you. I am telling you
this truthfully. I have spoken harsh words towards you for the sake of reducing your energy. It is my view that you
hated the Pandavas without any reason. O descendant of the sun! That is the reason I have spoken many harsh
words to you. I know your valour in battle and that the enemy cannot withstand you. I know your devotion towards
brahmanas, your valour and your supreme attachment to generosity. There is no man like you and you are like an
immortal. I spoke harsh words towards you to prevent dissension in the lineage. In the use of arrows, in aiming at a
target, in dexterity and in the strength of your weapons, there is no one like you, with the exception of Phalguna
and the great-souled Krishna. O Karna! You went to the king's capital and as a single archer, defeated all the kings
in battle, for the sake of the king of the Kurus. The powerful King Jarasandha was invincible in an encounter and
prided himself in battle. But even he wasn't your equal. You are devoted to brahmanas. You are truthful. You are
like the sun in your energy and are superior to anyone else. You have been born from a god. You are invincible in
battle. You are more than a man on earth. Today, I am giving up the anger I felt towards you earlier. Human endeavour is incapable of overturning destiny. O destroyer of enemies! The brave Pandavas are your brothers. O
mighty-armed one! If you wish to please me, go to them. O son of the sun! With my end, let all the enmity be over.
Let all the kings on earth be free from all danger.'

'"Karna replied, 'O immensely wise one! I know all this. There is no doubt about anything that you have said. O
invincible one! I am a Kounteya and have not been born from a suta. But Kunti abandoned me and I was brought
up by a suta. I have enjoyed Duryodhana's prosperity and have no interest in making that false now. My prosperity,
body, life and fame are all for Duryodhana's sake. O one who is greatly generous! I am prepared to give all that up.
I have depended on Suyodhana and have always angered the Pandavas. The outcome is inevitable and no one is
capable of counteracting it. Who can overcome destiny through human enterprise? O grandfather! The omens indicate the destruction of the earth. These were noticed and spoken about in the assembly by you. I know everything
about the Pandavas and Vasudeva being invincible to all other men. Nevertheless, I am interested in fighting. O father[The word used is tata.]! You have always cheerfully given me permission to fight. O brave one! Since I have decided to fight,
please give me permission. You should also forgive me any harsh and unpleasant words that I may have spoken
against you, out of anger or folly, and any injurious acts that I may have performed.'

'"Bhishma replied, 'O Karna! If you cannot discard the extremely terrible enmity that has been created, I grant
you permission. Fight with a desire to attain heaven. Be free of anger and intolerance and perform the acts of the
king to the best of your capacity and endeavour. Observe the conduct of the virtuous. I grant you the permission.
May you obtain what you desire. There is no doubt that you will attain the worlds obtained through the practice of
the dharma of kshatriyas. Resort to strength and valour and fight, without any vanity. There is nothing more desired by a kshatriya than a battle in accordance with dharma. I tried for a very long time to bring about peace. But I
was not successful. Where there is dharma, victory will be there.'"

'Sanjaya said, "When Gangeya had spoken in this way, Radheya honoured him and obtained his favours. He
then ascended his chariot and drove towards your son."'

This ends Bhishma Parva.