'Vasudeva said, "Hamsa and Dibhaka have fallen. Kamsa and his advisers have been killed. The time has therefore
arrived for Jarasandha's killing. He is incapable of being defeated in battle by all the gods and the demons. But we
understand he is capable of being vanquished in a battle of breath[There is a problem of translation here. The text says prana yuddha. Prana is the breath of life and yuddha is
battle. What ensues is a duel and wrestling match between Bhima and Jarasandha. Why is it described as a battle
of breath? Some regional versions say bahu (arm) yuddha, which fits in with a wrestling match. Is it the case that
the strength of one's breath is important in a wrestling match?]. Policy exists in me. Power exists in Bhima.
Valour exists in Arjuna. O king! We will overcome him like three fires. If that lord of men is confronted by the
three of us alone, there is no doubt that he will engage one of us in a duel. Out of contempt for the worlds and his
pride in himself, he will certainly challenge Bhimasena to a duel. The mighty-armed and immensely strong Bhimasena is his match, like death is of the worlds that confront their destruction. If your heart knows and if you have
confidence in me, then, without losing any more time, entrust Bhimasena and Arjuna to me."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having been thus addressed by that illustrious one and on seeing Bhima and Partha[Arjuna.]
standing there with smiles on their faces, Yudhishthira replied, "O Achyuta! O Achyuta! Do not speak to me in that
fashion. You are the lord of the Pandavas. We seek refuge with you. O Govinda! Everything that you have said is
right. You never lead those whom Lakshmi has forsaken. As I follow your instruction, Jarasandha is dead. The
kings have been set free. I have achieved the rajasuya. O supreme among men! You are the one who acts fast. Act
so that I can accomplish this task for the world. Like a miserable and diseased man and like one without dharma,
kama and artha, I have no incentive to live without the three of you. There is no Partha[In this case, Arjuna.] without Shouri[Krishna. Shouri is also a name for Balarama.] and there
is no Shouri without Pandava[In this case, Arjuna.]. It is my view that there is nothing in the world that cannot be conquered by the two
Krishnas[Although used relatively infrequently, Krishna is also one of Arjuna's names.]. This handsome Vrikodara is supreme among all strong ones. What can this immensely famous and valorous one not accomplish when he is with the two of you? When led properly, forces perform supreme deeds. The
learned say that forces without skilled leadership are blind and benumbed. The wise always conduct water to
places that are low. Those who are wise always lead their forces to places where there are holes[The sense probably is that forces must be directed to places where the enemy possesses weaknesses. Holes or
gaps are symbolic of weaknesses.]. For accomplishing our task, we will therefore seek refuge with Govinda, who is a man famous in the worlds and is knowledgeable
about policy. Krishna's strength comes from his wisdom and he knows the method and the means. If one wishes to
accomplish one's objectives, one should place him at the forefront. For the accomplishment of our objective, let
Partha Arjuna follow Krishna, the best of the Yadavas, and let Bhima follow Dhananjaya. Policy, victory and
strength will find success in valour." Having been thus addressed, the three brothers[Krishna was the Pandavas' cousin.], Varshneya and the two Pandavas, left for Magadha.

'They were radiant in the attire of brahmanas who had completed their studies[The word used is snataka, meaning a brahmana who has completed his period of celibate student life and is
about to step into the householder stage.]. Their well-wishers bade them
farewell with affectionate words. Their bodies were like the sun, the moon and the fire. Inflamed with anger at the
oppression of their relatives, their bodies were then terrible to behold. On seeing the two Krishnas, invincible in
battle, united in the same purpose and with Bhima at their forefront, it was thought that Jarasandha was already
dead. The two great-souled ones were the lords of all deeds, everything that drove the deeds of dharma, artha and
kama. Having left the land of the Kurus, and traversing the middle of Kurujangala[Literally, the forest (jangala) of the Kuru kingdom. It roughly corresponds to Haryana today.], they reached the beautiful
Padmasara[Literally, a lake with lotuses.] and traversed Kalakuta[A mountain towards the north.]. They then crossed Gandaki and Shona and Sadanira[Geographically, this cannot be in sequence. In sequence, the journey to Magadha would have involved crossing the rivers Gandaki, Sadanira and Shona, in that order.]. All these rivers
arise from that same mountain. After crossing the beautiful Sarayu, they saw the eastern Koshala kingdom[The river Sarayu flows through Koshala, a region around Ayodha. Again geographically, they should have
crossed the Sarayu earlier.].
Passing through it, they went to Mithila, crossing the rivers Mala and Charmanvati[Charmanvati is today's Chambal and actually takes them in a completely opposite direction. The next sentence takes them back to the right route.]. Crossing the Ganga and the
Shona, all the three headed eastwards and arrived at the indestructibe region of Magadha, covered with kurava
trees[The amaranth tree.]. Ascending Mount Goratha, they saw the city of Magadha[Obviously meaning the capital of Magadha, Girivraja or Rajagriha. Girivraja is surrounded by five hills, but
none of them is today known as Goratha. These hills will be named in the next chapter.], always resplendent with cattle, overflowing
with water and full of beautiful groves.'
