Vaishampayana said, 'Yudhishthira, with dharma in his soul, was anxious and unconscious because of his sorrow.
He remembered maharatha Karna and tormented by grief, sorrowed over him. Overcome by grief and sorrow, he
sighed repeatedly.

'He was oppressed by grief and on seeing Arjuna, spoke these words. "Had we survived by begging in the city
of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas, we would not have confronted this catastrophe and would not have deprived our
relatives of all their menfolk. Our enemies have been successful in their objectives and the Kurus have obtained
what they tried for. We have ourselves slain those who are our own. What fruits of dharma will we obtain? Shame
on the conduct of kshatriyas and shame on the strength that chests hold. Shame on the intolerance that has taken us
to this calamity. Forgiveness, self-control, purity, lack of enmity, lack of selfishness, non-violence and truthfulness
in words are to be praised. Those who dwell in the forest practise these. But because of our greed and our delusion,
we have resorted to arrogance and insolence. We have been brought to this state because of our hunger for a trifling kingdom. Even sovereignty over the three worlds will not delight us now, since we can see that those of our
relatives who desired the flesh of the earth[The word flesh is being used in a figurative sense.] have been slain. They did not deserve to be killed and were like the
earth. But they have been slain for the earth. Having given them up, deprived of prosperity and with our relatives
killed, we remain alive. We are not dogs. But like dogs, we fought over meat. That flesh has now been destroyed
and so have those who would have eaten the meat. We shouldn't have abandoned those who have been killed for
the sake of the entire earth, heaps of gold or for all the cattle and horses. They were full of desire and passion.
They were overcome by wrath and intolerance. They climbed onto the road to death and have gone to
Vaivasvata's[Yama's.] eternal abode. For the sake of their sons, fathers seek a lot of welfare on earth. They observe austerities and brahmacharya, chant and practise renunciation. In a similar way, mothers conceive after fasts, sacrifices,
vows and auspicious ceremonies and bear them for ten months. 'If they are born safely and remain alive after they
are born, if they are full of strength, they may give us happiness in this world and the next.' In pursuit of fruits, this
is what those pitiable ones hope for. Those young sons, decorated with earrings, have been killed. At a wrong time,
those hopes have become unsuccessful and have been abandoned. They have not enjoyed the pleasures of the
earth. They have not repaid their debts to the ancestors and the gods. They have gone to Vaivasvata's eternal
abode. When they were born, the parents had wishes for them. But those kings have been slain when they became
full of strength and beauty. They were full of desire and intolerance and experienced anger and delight. None of
them enjoyed any of the fruits of birth. Because of our deeds, the Panchalas and Kurus who have been killed, and
those of us who have not been slain, will obtain the worst of worlds. We will be known as the ones who caused the
destruction of the world, even though we were deceived by Dhritarashtra's son. He was skilled in deceit. He was
full of enmity and subsisted through the use of maya. Though we had never caused him injury, he always used
falsehood towards us. We have not succeeded in vanquishing them, nor have they defeated us. They have not enjoyed the earth, nor women, singing and music. They paid no attention to their advisers, nor did they listen to those
who knew about the sacred texts. They could not enjoy the jewels, the earth or the wealth they had obtained. When
he[Duryodhana.] saw our prosperity, he turned pale, ashen and lean. This was reported to King Dhritarashtra by Soubala[This has been described in Section 27 (Volume 2).]. Because of his affection, the father remained established in the ways of the son. He disregarded his father, Gangeya
and Vidura. There is no doubt that Dhritrashtra is in the same state as I am. He did not control his inauspicious and
greedy son who was overcome by desire. With his brothers, Suyodhana has fallen from his blazing fame. He has
hurled these two aged ones[Dhritarashtra and Gandhari.] into the flames of grief. The evil-minded one was always full of enmity towards us.
Which other relative, born into a noble lineage, would speak to well-wishers they way he did? In the presence of
the one from the Vrishni lineage, the inferior one, wishing to fight, used such words[The one from the Vrishni lineage is Krishna. This is a reference to the incidents in Section 54 (Volume 4).]. We have also been destroyed for an eternal period because of our own sins. Like the sun, we have scorched all the directions with our
energy. That man, full of enmity towards us, came under the clutches of an evil planet that gave bad advice[This is probably a reference to Shakuni.]. Because of Duryodhana's deeds, our lineage has been brought down. Having slain those who should not be slain, we
will earn censure in this world. King Dhritarashtra made that evil-minded one the lord of the kingdom. He was
wicked in his deeds and the exterminator of the lineage. Therefore, he[Dhritarashtra.] is grieving now. The brave ones have been
slain. The wicked deed has been done. The prosperity has been destroyed. Having slain them, our anger has been
overcome. This sorrow is restraining me now. O Dhananjaya! A wicked deed can be countered through a beneficial
one. The sacred texts say that someone who has renounced does not perform a wicked deed again. The sacred texts
say that someone who has renounced does not have to go through birth and death. Having attained perfection, that
person, firm in his resolution, unites with the brahman. O Dhananjaya! He attains the knowledge of the sages and
is without any sense of opposites[Sentiments like unhappiness and happiness, like and dislike, friend and
foe.]. O scorcher of enemies! I will take my leave from all of you and go to the forest. O destroyer of enemies! The sacred texts say that someone with possessions is not capable of attaining the best
forms of dharma. I can see that. Because I desired possessions, I committed wicked acts and the sacred texts say
that this can cause birth and death[That is, cause the cycle of death and rebirth.]. I will give up my possessions and the entire kingdom. I will depart, completely free, bereft of sorrow and devoid of fever. With the thorns having been removed, you rule over this pacified
earth. O best of the Kuru lineage! This kingdom and the pleasures are not for me." Having spoken these words,
Dharmaraja Yudhishthira stopped and the youngest Partha[Arjuna.] replied.'
