'Vidura said, "O great king[Vidura is addressing Dhritarashtra.]! Listen to what I am going to tell you and learn, even though a dying man finds no
pleasure in medicine. In earlier times, when the evil-minded Duryodhana, the destroyer of the Bharata lineage, was
born, he cried out in the voice of a jackal. He is destined to cause our destruction. A jackal lives in your house in
Duryodhana's form and you do not know this. From me, listen to what Kavya[Shukracharya's name. Shukracharya is the preceptor of the demons.] said. 'The collector of honey obtains the honey, but does not know about the fall[The collector of honey has climbed a tree and is liable to fall down.]. Having climbed, he will later be immersed, or fall down and
perish.' Like the collector of honey, he[Duryodhana.] is drunk at the prospect of gambling with dice. He does not know of the
fall, consequent to the enmity with these maharathas. O great king! You know the normal royal practice[There is a break in continuity in the critical edition. Some regional versions have an additional shloka, to the
effect that it is normal royal practice to abandon an unworthy son.]. The
Andhakas, Yadavas and Bhojas assembled and abandoned Kamsa. At their request, Krishna, the slayer of enemies,
killed him[Kamsa.] and all the relatives rejoiced for a hundred years. On your instructions, let Savyasachi oppress Suyo-
dhana[Duryodhana's name.]. Let the Kurus be happy through the oppression of the evil one. O king! Purchase peacocks for this
crow[That is, give up Duryodhana and resort to the Pandavas, and so on.]. Purchase tigers for this jackal. Purchase the Pandavas and do not sink into this ocean of grief. 'For the
sake of a family, a man should be sacrificed. For the sake of a village, a family should be sacrificed. For the sake of
a country, a village should be sacrificed. For the sake of the soul, the earth should be sacrificed.' Thus spoke
Kavya, the omniscient one, knowledgeable in all sentiments and terrible to all enemies, when he asked the great
asuras to abandon Jamba[The name of a demon killed by Indra.].

'"O king! It is said that there were forest-dwelling birds that vomited gold. A man took them to live in his house,
but then killed them out of greed[So that he could get all the gold at once.]. O scorcher of enemies! He was blinded because of his temptation for gold.
Because of his greed, he destroyed both what he had and what he could have had. O bull among the Bharatas! Do
not oppress the Pandavas because of your immediate desire. You will later rue your delusion, like the man who
killed the birds. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Like a maker of garlands, take flowers affectionately from
the Pandavas one by one, as they flower. Like a maker of charcoal, do not burn down the roots of the tree. Do not
go to your destruction with your sons, advisers and troops. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Who is capable of
fighting with the Parthas when they stand together? O king! Not even the lord of the Maruts[Indra.], together with the
Maruts."'
