Bhishma said, "O Yudhishthira! In this connection, the ancient history of a conversation between Shatakratu
and Namuchi is recounted. He[Namuchi.] was seated, bereft of prosperity, like an ocean that wasn't agitated, knowledgable about the creation and destruction of all beings. Purandara spoke to him. 'O Namuchi! You have been tied
down in bonds. You have been dislodged from your place. You are under the subjugation of your enemies. You are
devoid of prosperity. Are you grieving, or are you not grieving?'

'"Namuchi replied, 'Nothing changes because of sorrow. The body alone is afflicted and enemies are delighted.
No help is brought by grieving. O Shakra! I know that everything has an end. Therefore, I am not sorrowing. O
lord of the gods! Grief destroys beauty and dharma. One must indeed subdue the sorrow that arises in one's mind.
Knowing what is beneficial, one must meditate on that in one's mind and in one's heart. There is no doubt that this
is capable of ensuring success in everything. There is one ordainer. There is no second ordainer. The ordainer ordains the man, as he lies down in the womb. I am instructed by him, like water flowing downwards. I flow as I am
appointed. I know about existence and non-existence and about that which is superior[Moksha or emancipation.]. However, despite knowing what is best, I do not act in that way. Submerged in hopes, dharma and well-wishers, I do good deeds and their
reverse. I flow as I am appointed. Whatever can be obtained is what will be obtained. Whatever is meant to happen
is what will happen. As has been decided by the creator, one will repeatedly dwell in different wombs. One doesn't
go there because of one's own wishes. The existence that I have obtained is because of my destiny. A  person
whose sentiments are like this will never be confused. Respect and the lack of a name occur progressively. Only a
person who thinks his own self to be the actor sees unhappiness in this[A wise person doesn't regard himself as an actor and thinks of this as destiny. But a foolish person is miserable
because he ascribes it to his own action.]. In this world, who is not afflicted by catastrophes-the sages, the gods, the great asuras, the aged ones who know the three Vedas and hermits in the forest? Those who know the supreme are not frightened by this. No anger is generated in a learned person. He does
not suffer. Nor is he delighted. He does not sorrow if there is a hardship on account of lack of riches, or some other
kind of difficulty. He is established, as naturally immobile as the Himalayas. If riches and success do not delight
him and a time of hardship does not confuse him, such a person is superior. A man who can bear the burden when
faced with happiness or unhappiness is medium. A man must always be cheerful and must not torment himself,
even when he confronts a downfall. He must control the torment that grows in his mind, because that harms the
body. If there is an assembly with virtuous people gathered there and if, on entering it, a person is not freed from
fear, then that is not a virtuous assembly[This sentence hangs loose and there is no obvious connection with what comes before or after.]. If an intelligent man immerses himself in dharma and then decides, he
is capable of bearing a burden. The deeds of a wise man are difficult to fathom. Even when it is a time for confusion, a wise person is not confused. Even when he is dislodged from his position and faces a hardship and a disaster because of this, like Goutama in his old age, he is not confused[The sage Goutama's wife, Ahalya, was seduced by Indra, who adopted Goutama's form. Goutama cursed
Ahalya that she would turn to stone. However, in the process, Goutama also suffered.]. In the world of the mortal, one cannot obtain
what is not meant to be obtained through mantras, strength, valour, wisdom and manliness. Why should one sorrow on account of that? In ancient times, the creator ordained this, before I was born. What was ordained has happened. What can death do to me? One obtains what was meant to be obtained. One goes where one is meant to go.
One gets what is meant to be got, unhappiness or happiness. A man who knows all of this is not confused. He is
skilled in the midst of joy and misery and is the lord of all riches.'"'
