Vaishampayana said, 'O great king! All of them then went to Duryodhana. They told him what had been said about
the Kourava. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Dhritarashtra's powerful son was filled with anger that his army
had been restrained by the gandharvas. He told his soldiers, "Chastise the ones who do not follow dharma and dare
to do that which brings me displeasure, even if Shatakratu and all the gods happen to be sporting there." On hearing Duryodhana's words, the immensely strong sons of Dhritarashtra and thousands of soldiers armed themselves
for battle. Repulsing the gandharvas, they forcibly entered the forest. They filled the ten directions with giant roars,
like those of lions. The gandharvas sought to restrain the Kuru soldiers. O lord of the earth! But though restrained
by the gandharvas peacefully, they ignored those gandharvas and entered the great forest. When Dhritarashtra's
sons and their servants did not stop, despite their words, they took to the sky and reported this to Chitrasena[Gandharvas can fly in the sky. Chitrasena is the king of the gandharvas.]. On
hearing everything, the king of the gandharvas had the following to say about the Kouravas. In anger, Chitrasena
said, "They do not behave like aryas. Punish them." O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Taking their leave of
Chitrasena, all the gandharvas grasped weapons and rushed at the sons of Dhritarashtra.

'On seeing the gandharvas swiftly descend on them with raised weapons, the sons of Dhritarashtra could be seen
to flee in all the directions. On seeing that the sons of Dhritarashtra were fleeing from the field of battle, the brave
Vaikartana[Vaikartana is Karna's name. Radheya is also Karna's name.] was the only one who wasn't reluctant to do battle. On seeing the great army of gandharvas descend
on him, Radheya repulsed them with a mighty shower of arrows. With great lightness of hand, the suta's son killed
hundreds of gandharvas with kshurapras[Arrows with sharp heads in the form of horseshoes.], vishikhas[Small arrows.], bhallas[Missiles or arrows.], vatsadantas[Arrows with heads like the teeth of a calf.] and iron arrows. The maharatha sliced off the heads of many gandharvas and in a short while, dispersed all of Chitrasena's army. Although
the gandharvas were killed by the intelligent son of the suta, they returned again in hundreds and thousands. In a
short instant, the earth was covered with gandharvas and Chitrasena's soldiers descended with great force. Then
King Duryodhana, Shakuni Soubala, Duhshasana, Vikarna and other sons of Dhritarashtra ascended chariots that
screeched like Garuda and began to kill those soldiers. They fought again, placing Karna at the forefront. There
was the giant roar of chariots and the stamping of the feet of horses. Supporting Vaikartana, they repulsed the
gandharvas. Then all the gandharvas descended on the Kouravas and the battle that raged was extremely terrible. It
made the body hair stand up. Oppressed by the arrows, the gandharvas began to wilt. On seeing that the gandharvas were suffering, the Kouravyas roared loudly. On seeing that the gandharvas were frightened, Chitrasena was
overcome with anger. He angrily flew up from his seat, resolving to kill them. That brave one began to fight with
weapons of maya, following wonderful paths. The Kouravyas were bewildered because of Chitrasena's maya. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! It seemed as if each one of Dhritrarashtra's sons was assailed and surrounded
by ten gandharvas.

'O king! Being thus oppressed by a great army, they were frightened. They fled the field of battle and went to
where King Yudhishthira was, seeking refuge with him. Everywhere, the soldiers of the sons of Dhritarashtra were
being destroyed. O king! Vaikartana Karna was the only one who stood immobile like a mountain. Duryodhana,
Karna and Shakuni Soubala were severely wounded in the field of battle, but kept fighting the gandharvas. With a
desire to kill Karna in battle, hundreds and thousands of gandharvas rushed collectively towards him. With a desire
to kill the son of the suta, the immensely strong ones surrounded him from all sides, with swords, javelins, spears
and maces. Some sliced off the yoke[Of the chariot.], others brought down the flagpole. Some brought down the shafts, the horses and the charioteer. Some sliced down the umbrella, others the fenders[A chariot was surrounded by a wooden fender that acted like armour. This was called varutha.] and the diadem. In many thousands, the
gandharvas shattered the chariot. Holding a sword and a shield in his hand, the son of the suta jumped down from
the chariot. He leapt onto Vikarna's chariot and whipped the horses, so that he might escape.'
