Dhritarashtra said, "You must know the provinces[Mandala, alternatively, groups.] that are devoted to you, devoted to the enemy, those who
are indifferent to both and those who are neutral. O afflicter of enemies! You must know the four kinds of enemies, all the kinds of assassins, friends and the enemy of an enemy[The mandalas are like concentric circles. Radiating outwards in those circles, neighbouring countries that are
numbered 1, 3, 5 and 7 are likely to be allies or friends. 2, 4, 6 and 8 are likely to be enemies. In more convoluted language, the four kinds of enemies are enemy, enemy's friend, friend's enemy and friend's friend's enemy.
The enemy of an enemy is a friend. The six kinds of assassins (atatayi) are poisoners, arsonists, those who attack with deadly weapons, those who steal one's property, those who invade one's fields and those who steal
one's wife.]. O foremost among the Kuru lineage! Advisers, the countryside, forts, uneven ground and soldiers must not be wilfully tampered with. O Kounteya! These are
the twelve different attributes of the kingdom[The king, the countryside, cities, ministers, forts, soldiers, treasury, allies, spies, peace, war and neutrality. While
there is consensus about the first five or six, there is no consensus about the list of twelve though.]. O lord! Out of the seventy-two attributes, the ministers are the
foremost[There are different ways of working out the number seventy-two, all subject to interpretation. For instance, each
kingdom has the six components of the king, ministers, the kingdom, forts, soldiers and treasury. The mandalas
have been thought of as twelve concentric circles. Twelve multiplied by six gives seventy-two.]. Teachers who know about policy have spoken about these mandalas. O Yudhishthira! In this connection, listen to the six techniques[Peace, war, marching, halting, seeking refuge and conciliation.]. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! One must know the determinants of growth,
decay and maintenance of the status quo. O mighty-armed one! Therefore, one must act in accordance with the
seventy-two and the six. O Kounteya! When one's own side is strong and the enemy is relatively weak, that is the
time when a king should try to seize the enemy. When one's own side is weak, one must try for an alliance. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! One must then try to build up one's store of riches. As soon as one is strong, one
must advance without delay. At that time, it is recommended that everyone must be in his own place, without a division in the ranks. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When obliged to surrender territory, it should be infertile
land. When obliged to give gold, it should be adulterated. As with the treasury, when obliged to surrender friends,
it should be relatively weak ones. When receiving back in turn, those who are skilled about alliances know that the
opposite should be practised[One should give the worst and receive the best.]. O bull among the Bharata lineage! At the time of an alliance, one should try to obtain a prince as a hostage. O son! However, if one faces a calamity and has to give, the opposite should be practised. One must resort to counsel and seek means to escape from that calamity. O Kounteya! When the king is distressed, so are ordinary people. Depending on strength and weakness, he must simultaneously fight and seek to get
rid of the calamity. While himself protecting his own kingdom, he must try to afflict and paralyse the enemy and
reduce his treasury. If one desires prosperity, one should not cause injury to vassals who have accepted subjugation. O Kounteya! One should not cause injury to someone who desires to conquer the entire earth[Presumably, that king is too powerful.]. Using one's
ministers, one must seek to create dissension among the tribes[Ganas. The idea is that if the tribes or nobles are hostile or otherwise united, they can cause injury to the king.]. The virtuous must be nurtured and the wicked
must be punished. O tiger among kings! If a weak king is attacked by a stronger one, he must follow the behaviour
of cane, and yield[Cane bends and yields.]. When a strong king advances against a weak king, the weak one must use conciliation and
other means to gradually dissuade him. If he fails, he must fight, using his advisers, his treasury, the citizens, using
the staff, and all those who wish to do him good[Some citizens naturally wish to help the king. For those who are unwilling, the staff of punishment must be used.]. Despite attacking with all his best devices, one after another, if
it becomes an impossible task, he must then seek emancipation by giving up his body."'
