Vaishampayana said, 'Having got to know from messengers about Madhusudana's departure, Dhritarashtra was
filled with delight. He honoured the mighty-armed Bhishma and told him, Drona, Sanjaya, the immensely intelligent Vidura and Duryodhana and his advisers, "O descendant of the Kuru lineage[Dhritarashtra is primarily addressing Bhishma.]! I have heard of a great and
extraordinary wonder. Women, children and aged people are talking about it in every house. Some are doing it out
of faith. Others are doing it in groups. Different accounts are circulating in squares and in assembly halls-the valorous Dasharha has arrived for the sake of the Pandavas. Madhusudana should always be revered and honoured by
us. The course of the entire world depends on him. He is the lord of all beings. Madhava possesses fortitude, valour, wisdom and energy. That foremost among men should be revered because he is the eternal dharma. He must
be worshipped for the sake of happiness. If he is not honoured, there is unhappiness. If Dasharha, the scorcher of
enemies, is satisfied with our veneration, in the midst of all the kings, we will be successful in all our objectives. O
scorcher of enemies! Make immediate arrangements for his worship. Erect pavilions along the route and let them
be stocked with all desirable objects. O Gandhari's son[Addressing Duryodhana.]! O mighty-armed one! Act so that satisfaction towards
you is created in him. O Bhishma! What do you think?" Bhishma and all the others approved these words of King
Dhritarashtra. They said that these words were excellent. Having obtained their approval, King Duryodhana began
to look for beautiful sites for those pavilions. In one beautiful site after another, he had pavilions built and filled
them with every kind of gem, colourful seats that possessed many different qualities, women, fragrances, ornaments, fine garments, excellent food and drink of different types and perfumed garlands. The king donated all
these. So that they could live in the village of Vrikasthala, King Kourava specially built a residence and filled it
with many beautiful jewels. All these superhuman arrangements were made worthy of the gods. King Duryodhana
then informed Dhritarashtra about what had been done. However, Dasharha Keshava ignored all those pavilions,
with their many different kinds of jewels, and went to the abode of the Kurus.'
