'Bhishma said, "O Indra among kings! The unblemished sun arose in the morning and Bhargava's battle with me
resumed again. Rama, supreme among those who wield weapons, stationed on a fast-moving chariot, showered a
net of arrows on me, like Shakra at a mountain. My charioteer, my well-wisher, was hurt by that shower of arrows
and fell down from the chariot. I was dejected. Being greatly struck by the force of those arrows, my charioteer became deeply unconscious and fell down on the ground. Oppressed by Rama's arrows, my charioteer gave up his
life. O Indra among kings! For an instant, I was also overcome by fear. O king! When my charioteer was killed and
my mind was agitated, Rama hurled deadly arrows at me. While I was still overwhelmed on account of the charioteer, Bhargava powerfully drew his firm bow and pierced me with an arrow. O king! It was an arrow that drank
blood. It struck me on the clavicle. O Indra among kings! When I fell down, it fell down with me on the ground. O
bull among the Bharata lineage! Rama then thought that I was dead. He repeatedly roared in delight, thundering
like a cloud. O king! When I fell down, Rama rejoiced. Together with his followers, he emitted a loud roar. The
Kurus were at my side and there were others who had come to witness the fight. When I fell down, they were
supremely distressed.

'"O lion among kings! When I fell down, I saw eight brahmanas. They possessed the radiance of the sun and the
fire. They surrounded me from every direction and in that field of battle, supported me with their arms. Supported
by those brahmanas, I did not actually touch the ground. I was held up in the air by them, as if they were relatives.
It was as if I was asleep in the air and they sprinkled drops of water on me. O king! The brahmanas who were supporting me spoke to me. 'Do not be scared. Everything will be fine.' Sustained by those words, I suddenly arose
and saw my mother, foremost among rivers, stationed on my chariot. O Indra among Kouravas! I saw that the great
river was controlling and steering my horses. I touched my mother's feet and those of Arshtishena[Arshtishena is a sage (rajarshi) whom the Pandavas visited, such as in Section 35 (Volume 3). While he could
have also arrived to witness the battle, there is no obvious reason for Arshtishena to be mentioned here. Though
the Mahabharata never makes it clear, Arshtishena could have been Shantanu's elder brother, Devapi, who resorted to the forest. But there is no connection between Arshtishena and Parashurama. Some non-critical editions do not mention Arshtishena, but ancestors. It does make sense for Bhishma to show obeisance to his
ancestors.] and ascended
my chariot. She had protected my chariots, my horses and my implements. I joined my hands in salutation and
asked her to leave. I then myself controlled those horses, which were as fleet as the wind. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! I fought with Jamadagni's son, until the day was over. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! In
that battle, I shot an arrow at Rama. It was fast and extremely powerful. It pierced him in the heart. Oppressed by
that arrow, Rama lost his senses. He let go of his bow and sank down on the ground on his knees. When Rama, the
one who gave away thousands[Thousands of gifts and stipends.], fell down, clouds covered the sky and showered copious quantities of blood.
Meteors fell down in hundreds. There were storms and earthquakes. Suddenly, Svarbhanu[Rahu.] swallowed up the
blazing sun. Harsh winds began to blow. The earth trembled. Vultures, crows and cranes were delighted and circled around. The directions blazed. A jackal repeatedly howled in a terrible voice. Drums sounded in horrible
tones, though they had not been struck. When the great-souled Rama became unconscious and fell down on the
ground, there were all these terrible and fearful portents. The soft rays of the sun were covered. Enveloped in dust,
it prepared to set. Night arrived, with a cool and pleasant breeze. Both of us withdrew from the fight. O king! In
this way, there was a ceasefire then. When day dawned, it started again. From one day to another, it thus went on
for twenty-three days."'
