'Sanjaya said, "O king! Ghatotkacha spiritedly advanced towards the chariot of the son of a suta, desiring to kill
Karna in the battle. On seeing this, your son[Duryodhana.] spoke these words to Duhshasana. 'On witnessing Karna's valour
in the battle, this rakshasa is swiftly advancing. Advance quickly and prevent this maharatha from reaching Karna.
Surround yourself with a large army and go to the spot where the immensely strong Karna is stationed. Vaikartana
is fighting with the rakshasa in this battle. O one who grants honours! Surrounded by the soldiers, make an effort
to protect Karna in the battle.' O king! At this time, Jatasura's powerful son approached Duryodhana. He was
supreme among strikers and spoke. 'O Duryodhana! Your enemies are famous and invincible in battle. But with
your permission, I wish to kill the Pandavas and their followers. In earlier times, my father, Jatasura, was the foremost among rakshasas. Performing a deed that could kill rakshasas, the inferior Parthas brought him down[The Jatasura story has been recounted in Section 34 (Volume 3).]. O
lord! I wish to satisfy the one who has departed[Jatasura.] and you should grant me permission.' Having been thus addressed, the king was delighted and repeatedly said, 'Aided by Drona, Karna and the others, I am capable of slaying the enemy. But with my permission, go. Slay Ghatotkacha in the battle.' Having been thus addressed, the one
with a gigantic form challenged Ghatotkacha.

'"Jatasura's son countered Bhimasena's son with diverse kinds of weapons. However, Hidimba's son crushed
Alambala[The name of Jatasura's son.], Karna and the unassailable Kuru soldiers, like a giant wind driving away clouds. On seeing that the
ratha Ghatotkacha was using maya, Alambala quickly shot many different kinds of arrows at him. Alambala
pierced Bhimasena's son with many arrows. He drove away the Pandava soldiers with his storm of arrows. O venerable one! The Pandava soldiers were thus driven away in the night, like clouds dispelled by the wind. O king!
Similarly, the Kuru soldiers were mangled by Ghatotkacha's arrows and fled in the night, throwing away thousands
of flaming torches. Alambala became angry in that great battle. He struck Bhimasena's son with many arrows, like
a giant elephant being goaded. Ghatotkacha shattered into tiny fragments his[Alambala's.] chariot, his charioteer and all the
fierce weapons, capable of destroying life, that were hurled at him. Like clouds raining down on Mount Meru, he
showered down thousands of storms of arrows on Karna, the other Kurus and Alambala. Afflicted by the rakshasa,
the Kuru soldiers were agitated. The four kinds of forces[Chariots, horses, elephants and infantry.] began to crush each other down repeatedly. O great
king! Jatasura's son was without a chariot. His charioteer was slain. In that battle, he angrily struck Ghatotkacha
with a firm blow of the fist. Having been struck by the fist, Ghatotkacha wavered, like a mountain, with its large
number of trees and creepers, as if during an earthquake. He then raised his arms, which were like clubs and capable of slaying the enemy. Bhimasena's son severely struck Jatasura's son with his fist. Hidimba's son angrily
crushed him and swiftly hurled him down. He seized him with arms that were like Indra's standard and forced him
down on the ground. Alambala also seized the rakshasa Ghatotkacha in the encounter and wrathfully seizing him,
forced him down on the ground. There was a duel between those gigantic ones, Ghatotkacha and Alambala. As
they roared, it was tumultuous and made the body hair stand up. In particular, they were well versed in maya and
resorted to maya to overpower each other. Those immensely valiant ones fought, like Indra and Virochana's
son[Virochana's son was Bali.]. They became fire and the ocean[Resorting to the powers of maya.] and Garuda and Takshaka[The serpent.]. They again became a cloud and a giant
wind, or thunder and a giant mountain. They then became an elephant and a tiger and again became Svarbhanu[Rahu.]
and the sun. In this way, wishing to kill each each other, they created a hundred different kinds of maya. Alambala
and Ghatotkacha fought wonderfully well. They struck each other with clubs, maces, lances, bludgeons, battleaxes,
mallets and the summits of mountains. The foremost among rakshasa warriors resorted to great powers of maya
and fought as horses, elephants, infantry and chariots. O king! Wishing to kill Alambala, Ghatotkacha descended
violently, like a hawk. The Indra among rakshasas seized Alambala, whose form was gigantic. He raised him and
pressed him down in the battle, like Vishnu against Maya[There is a problem of interpretation here. The famous demon, Maya, was the architect of the gods. But there
are no obvious stories connecting Vishnu with the killing of Maya. This might be a different Maya. Alternatively, and more likely, it might be a reference to Vishnu destroying maya (illusion).]. Ghatotkacha grasped a sword that was extraordinary
to look at. He severed the terrible head from the body and it was dreadful to see.

'"The rakshasa grasped the head by the hair, with the blood dripping from it. Ghatotkacha then swiftly advanced
towards Duryodhana's chariot. The mighty-armed rakshasa approached and smiling, flung the head, with a distorted face and dreadful hair, onto the chariot. He then roared loudly, like a cloud during the monsoon. O king! He
spoke these words to Duryodhana. 'Witness the valour of your friend. He has been killed. You will now witness
Karna's destruction and that of your own self.' O lord of men! Having said this, he departed in Karna's direction.
He shot hundreds of sharp arrows towards Karna's head. O great king! A duel commenced between the man and
the rakshasa in that battle and it was terrible in form. It gave rise to great fear and was wonderful."'
