Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing the words of King Dhritarashtra, Sanjaya went to Upaplavya to meet the infinitely energetic Pandavas. Having approached King Yudhishthira, who had dharma in his soul, the son of the suta
first bowed down before him. Sanjaya, Gavalgana's son, the son of the suta, then said, "O king! O Ajatashatru! It is
fortunate that I see you healthy, with all your aides, who are the equals of the great Indra. The wise and aged King
Dhritarashtra, Ambika's son, has asked about your health. Is Bhima, foremost among the Pandavas, well, and also
Arjuna and Madri's two sons? How about the princess Krishna Droupadi, devoted to truth, the wife of warriors and
the mother of sons? O descendant of the Bharata lineage! She is the spirited one for whom you offer sacrifices and
wish for good fortune."

'Yudhishthira replied, "O son of Gavalgana! O Sanjaya! You are welcome. O suta! I am delighted and honour
you. O learned one! Let me tell you that I am well and my younger brothers are also well. O suta! It has been a
long time since I heard about the welfare of King Bharata, the aged one of the Kuru lineage[Referring to Dhritarashtra.]! O Sanjaya! I am
looking at you with delight, because I think that it is like looking at that Indra among men in person. Our grandfather is aged, intelligent, immensely wise and has all the qualities of dharma. O son[The word used is tata.]! Is Kouravya Bhishma well?
Does he conduct himself as he used to do earlier? Is the great-souled King Dhritarashtra, Vichitravirya's son, well,
together with his sons? O son of a suta! Is Pratipa's son, the intelligent and great King Bahlika, well? O son! Are
Somadatta, Bhurishrava, Satyasandha, Shala, Drona and his son and the brahmana Kripa, all great archers, well?
Are they free from disease? O Sanjaya! They are the foremost archers on earth and all of them are on the side of
the Kurus. They are immensely wise and are learned in all the sacred texts. They are foremost among archers on
this earth. O son! Are they being treated with due honours? Are those wielders of bows free from disease? Drona's
son, the handsome and great archer whose conduct is good, lives in that kingdom. O son! Is the immensely wise
Prince Yuyutsu, the son of a vaishya, well[Yuyutsu was Dhritarashtra's son through a servant maid.]? O son! Is the adviser Karna well? He is the one whose advice the evil
Suyodhana follows. O son! Are the aged ladies, the mothers of the Bharatas, the cooks and the wives of the servants well? How about the daughters-in-law, the sons, the nephews, the sisters and the sons of the daughters? Are
they at peace? O son! Does the king continue to properly support the brahmanas, as he used to do earlier? O Sanjaya! I hope Dhritarashtra's sons have not discontinued what I used to give to the brahmanas. Does King Dhritarashtra, together with his sons, overlook the transgressions committed by brahmanas? He is the refuge. Does he
overlook any shortages they confront in their livelihood? The creator has decreed this pure light in the world of the
living for the welfare of all beings. If those evil ones do not restrain their avarice, there will be complete destruction for the Kouravas. Does King Dhritarashtra, together with his sons, make arrangements for the livelihood of
the advisers? Are there ill-wishers, who dwell as well-wishers, and bring about dissension and ruin? O son! Do all
the Kurus talk about the crimes committed by the Pandavas? When they see the masses of dasyus[Bandits, dacoits, robbers. Also used as a term for those who are outcasts.] assemble, do
they remember Partha[Arjuna.], the foremost warrior? O son! Do they remember the straight-flying and whirring arrows
released from the string of the bow? Do they remember the roar of Gandiva? I have not seen anyone on earth who
is Arjuna's equal or superior in battle. With a single stroke, he can release sixty-one sharp and well-shafted arrows
that have been sharpened on stone. With the club in his hand, Bhimasena is spirited. He makes masses of his enemies tremble. He is like a rutting elephant that tears down a bed of reeds. Do they remember him? Sahadeva,
Madri's son, vanquished the assembled Kalingas and Dantakura[This is a reference to Sahadeva's conquest of the south, described in Section 23 (Volume 2). However, Section
Twenty Three (Volume 2) says Dantavakra.]. The immensely strong one fought with his left
hand and his right. Do they remember him? O son of Gavalgana! O Sanjaya! You saw when I sent Nakula out and
he brought the western direction under my sway[Described in Section 23 (Volume 2).]. Do they remember Madri's son? They were defeated in Dvaita-
vana, when they embarked on their ill-advised expedition with the cattle. The evil-minded ones were taken captive
by the enemy and were freed by Bhimasena and Jaya[Jaya is Arjuna's name. This is a reference to the Kouravas being captured by the gandharvas. The story has been
told in Section 39 (Volume 3).]. I protected Arjuna from the rear and Bhimasena and the
twins guarded his flanks. The wielder of the Gandiva defeated the enemies and was unhurt. Do they remember
him? O Sanjaya! Through good deeds one cannot make everything all right. With all our souls, we have not been
able to sway Dhritarashtra's son."'
