Vaishampayana said, 'While they were living there, the rainy season, which brings an end to the summer's heat
and ensures happiness to all beings, arrived. Clouds heavy with thunder enveloped the sky and all the directions.
Through night and day, it rained down continuously in hundreds and thousands of torrents, ending the heat. The
net of the sun's rays disappeared and it was radiant with lightning. Grass sprouted from the earth and flies and reptiles were intoxicated. Sprinkled with water, everything was peaceful and the smoke and the dust vanished. When
everything was covered with water, nothing could be discerned, plain and uneven terrain or rivers and land. The
rivers were turbulent with water and made a loud whistling noise, like arrows. At the end of the summer, they
made the groves look beautiful. Many different sounds could be heard in the groves-of boars, animals and birds,
drenched with rain. Stokakas[Stokaka is another name for the chataka bird, believed to live on drops of rain.], peacocks and male cuckoos were maddened and fluttered around, together with
proud frogs. Thus, while they safely roamed around in the desert regions, the rainy season arrived in many forms
and the roar of the clouds passed.

'Autumn arrived, with masses of curlews and swans. The forest was covered with new enclosures. The water
that flowed downwards became clear. Everything was peaceful in autumn and the great-souled Pandavas found it
infested with animals and birds. The sky and the stars were clear. They saw that the nights were cooled by clouds,
with the dust pacified, and shining with planets, many stars and the moon. They saw auspicious rivers and ponds,
the bearers of cool water, adorned with white water lilies[Kumuda.] and white lotuses[Pundarika.]. They found great delight in roaming
around the sacred tirtha of Sarasvati. Its banks were as wide as the sky and were covered with nipas[The kadamba tree.] and wild rice.
The brave ones, the wielders of firm bows, were extremely happy on seeing the sacred Sarasvati, overflowing with
clear water. O Janamejaya! While they dwelt there, the sacred night of parvasandhi in autumn, in the month of
Kartika, arrived[Parvasandhi is the junction between the fifteenth day of a lunar fortnight and the first day of the next lunar
fortnight. Thus, the night of the full moon in Kartika arrived.]. All the Pandavas, the best of the Bharata lineage, spent that great and supreme conjunction in
the company of the holy and great-souled ascetics. When the dark fortnight set in, the Pandavas, together with
Dhoumya, the charioteers and the cooks, travelled to Kamyaka.'
