'Sanjaya said, "O lord of the earth! When three-fourths of the night had passed, the battle again commenced between the delighted Kurus and Pandavas. Dispelling the rays of the moon, the sun was in the front and Aruna became manifest[Aruna is a name for the sun. It is also the name of the sun's charioteer and in addition, means dawn. It was thus
nearing dawn.]. The sky became coppery red. The soldiers[The Kourava soldiers.] were divided into two. Drona, with Duryodhana at
the forefront, advanced against the Vatsas[This should read Matsyas.] and the Panchalas. On seeing that the Kurus were divided into two,
Madhava was delighted and spoke to Arjuna. 'Place this division of the army on your left and the other one on the
right[That is, keep Drona's division to the right.].' Dhananjaya acted in accordance with Madhava's words. He placed himself to the left of the great archers,
Drona and Karna[He was to their left and they were on his right. It is not quite clear where Karna was positioned.]. Discerning Krishna's intention and on seeing that he[Arjuna.] was stationed at the front, the destroyer of enemy cities, Bhimasena, approached and spoke these words.

'"Bhimasena said, 'O Arjuna! O Bibhatsu! O Arjuna! Listen to the words that I am telling you. The time for
which kshatriya ladies bear sons has now arrived. At this time, you must strive for what is best. If you do not act
accordingly, you will perform a cruel deed. You must resort to your valour and pay the debts to truth, prosperity,
dharma and fame. O best of warriors! Penetrate this division and keep that one to your left[That is, ignore Drona's division.].'"
'Sanjaya said, "Thus urged by Bhima and Keshava, Savyasachi passed over Karna and Drona and attacked the
army from all sides. Bulls among kshatriyas placed themselves at the forefront and were scorched. Those bulls
among kshatriyas were brave. They resorted to their valour. But none of them were capable of resisting that raging
conflagration. Duryodhana, Karna and Shakuni Soubala showered down storms of arrows on Dhananjaya, Kunti's
son. O Indra among kings! However, he was supreme among those who possessed knowledge of weapons. With
his shower of arrows, he countered them and rendered all their weapons unsuccessful. Displaying the dexterity of
his hands, Dhananjaya countered all those weapons with his own weapons. He pierced each of them with ten sharp
arrows. A dust arose and the shower of arrows was like rain. In that darkness, a great and tumultuous sound arose.
The sky, the earth and the directions could no longer be distinguished. Covered in darkness, the soldiers were confused and all of them seemed to be blind. O king! We could no longer distinguish each other, friend or foe. The
kings continued to fight, on the basis of guessing. O king! As they clashed against each other, rathas lost their chariots. They were submerged in a mass of hair, armour and arms. Horses were slain. Charioteers were killed. The
rathas lost all enterprise. When they were alive, they were seen to be afflicted by fear. Deprived of their lives, horses and their riders were seen to lie down against slain elephants that were like mountains.

'"Drona abandoned that field of battle and moved towards the northern direction. He was stationed in that battle,
like a fire without smoke. O lord of the earth! On seeing him stationed there, in the forefront of the battle, the Pan-
dava soldiers lost their peace of mind and trembled. He dazzled in his resplendence, flaming in his energy. O venerable one! On seeing Drona, they abandoned their weapons and were rendered immobile. He challenged the enemy soldiers, like an elephant with a shattered temple. They lost hope of defeating him, like the danavas against
Vasava. Some lost all their initiative. Other spirited ones became angry. Others were astounded. And still others
were filled with intolerance. Some kings rubbed one hand against the other. Others lost their senses because of
anger and bit their lower lips. Some whirled their weapons. Others slapped their arms. There were others who possessed great energy and were ready to give up their lives. They attacked Drona. In particular, the Panchalas were
afflicted by Drona's arrows. O Indra among kings! Though they were in severe pain, they continued to try in that
battle. In that encounter, Virata and Drupada advanced against Drona, as the one who was invincible in battle was
roaming around in the field of battle. O lord of the earth! Three of Drupada's grandsons and the great archers
among the Chedis advanced to fight against Drona. With three sharp arrows, Drona robbed the three of Drupada's
grandsons of their lives. Slain, they fell down on the ground. In that encounter, Drona then defeated the Chedis, the
Kekayas, the Srinjayas and the Matsyas. Bharadvaja's maharatha son defeated all of them. O great king! In that
battle, Drupada became angry and countered Drona with a shower of arrows and so did Virata. However, Drona,
the scorcher of enemies, used a couple of yellow-hued and broad-headed arrows. With these, he dispatched Drupada and Virata to Vaisvasvata's[Yama's.] eternal abode. Virata and Drupada were slain and so were the Kekayas, the
Chedis, the Matsyas and the Panchalas. Three of Drupada's brave grandsons were also killed.

'"On witnessing Drona's deeds, the great-minded Dhrishtadyumna took a pledge in the midst of those rathas,
having become overcome with anger and sorrow. 'Let the fruits of my sacrifices and all my kshatriya and brahmana qualities be destroyed, if Drona escapes from me today, as long as Drona does not retreat from the battle.' He
thus took an oath in the midst of all the archers. With his soldiers, Panchala, the destroyer of enemy heroes, advanced against Drona. The Panchalas attacked Drona from one side and the Pandavas from the other. Duryodhana,
Karna, Shakuni Soubala and the other foremost brothers[Duryodhana's brothers.] protected Drona in the battle. When Drona was thus
protected by those great-souled ones in the battle, the Panchalas made efforts, but were incapable of glancing at
him. O venerable one! At this, Bhimasena became angry with Dhrishtadyumna. O bull among men! The eloquent
one wounded him with these fierce words. 'You have been born in the lineage of Drupada. You are supreme among
those who have knowledge of all weapons. You are honoured as a kshatriya. How can such a person merely look
on, when his enemy is stationed before him? Having seen his father killed, what man leaves the task unfinished,
especially when he has taken a pledge in the midst of the assembly of kings? With his bow and arrows as kindling,
Drona is like a fire, which is growing because of his energy. He is consuming the kshatriyas with his energy. He
will soon destroy all the Pandava soldiers. All of you remain here as spectators and behold my deeds, as I myself
advance against Drona.' Having said this, Vrikodara angrily penetrated Drona's army. He firmly drew his bow
back all the way and routed your army. Panchala Dhrishtadyumna also penetrated that large army. A battle commenced with Drona and a great and tumultuous sound arose. A battle like that has not been seen earlier, nor heard
of. O king! When the sun arose, the great battle commenced. O venerable one! Large numbers of chariots were
seen to be engaged. Living beings were slain and their bodies were strewn around. Others wished to go elsewhere,
but were attacked along the way. There were those who fled and were struck on their backs. Others were struck on
their sides. That extremely terrible engagement and fight continued. In a short while, it became morning and the
sun arose."'
