Vaishampayana said, 'Hearing that the Pandavas were coming, the citizens of Varanavata were delighted and swiftly came out in thousands, in various conveyances. In order to receive those best of men, they carried with them
auspicious gifts, as laid down in the shastras. Coming to Kunti's sons, the citizens of Varanavata reverently surrounded them in a circle and uttered the blessed word "Jaya[Victory.]". Thus surrounded by them, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira, tiger among men, looked like the one with the vajra in his hand[Indra.], surrounded by gods.

'Welcomed by the citizens and paying homage to them in return, those unblemished ones entered Varanavata,
populated and decorated for the festival. O protector of the earth! Entering the city, the warriors first went to the
houses of the Brahmanas engaged in their duties. They then went to the houses of the city officials and next to the
houses of those with chariots[Meaning the Kshatriyas.]. Next they went to the houses of the Vaishyas and even to the houses of the Shudras. The citizens paid homage to the Pandavas, bulls among men. Next, with Purochana leading the way, they
went to their house[As will become clear, this was not the house Purochana had built.]. Purochana gave them beautiful food, drinks, beds and seats. Served by Purochana and worshipped by the town's citizens, they lived there, attired in expensive garments. When they had lived there for ten
nights, Purochana told them about a house that was blessed, though it was actually unblessed. Attired in expensive
garments, those tigers among men then entered the house at Purochana's request, like the guhyakas enter Kailasha.
Inspecting the house, Yudhishthira, supreme among those who know all the dharma, told Bhimasena, "O scorcher
of enemies! From the smell of fat and ghee mixed with lac, it is clear that this house is made of inflammable materials. The evil Purochana has used trusted and well-skilled artisans to build a house with straw, bark and cane,
sprinkled all over with ghee. After winning my confidence, he wishes to burn me to death. O Partha[Pritha's son. In this context, Bhimasena.]! This is the
danger that the immensely intelligent Vidura foresaw and warned me about earlier. But now that he has told us, we
know this house to be full of danger, constructed by skilled artisans under Duryodhana's control." Bhimasena said,
"If you think this house is inflammable, then let us go back to our earlier house."

'Yudhishthira said, "I think we should live here as if we are keen and suspect nothing and thus doomed to be destroyed. But we must find a certain way of escaping. If Purochana deduces from our appearance that we suspect,
he may act quickly and suddenly burn us to death. Purochana does not shrink from outrage and sin. The evil one is
based here on Suyodhana's[Duryodhana.] orders. The question remains whether grandfather Bhishma will be angry if we are
burnt alive. Will he anger the Kouravas by displaying his anger to them? It may be that if we are burnt, grandfather
Bhishma and other bulls of the Kuru lineage may be angry for the sake of dharma. But if we flee from this place,
scared of being burnt, Suyodhana, avaricious for the kingdom, may kill us through assassins. The evil Suyodhana
has position, we have none. He has allies, we have none. He has a large treasury, we have no riches. There is no
doubt that he can kill us through diverse means. Deceiving this evil one[Purochana.] and that evil one, Suyodhana, let us live
here for some time, hiding where we go. Let us roam the earth the way hunters do, so that we become aware of all
the routes that exist for escape. We will now secretly dig a hidden tunnel in the ground. If we can keep that a secret, the fire will not be able to destroy us. Let us live here in a way that neither Purochana nor the inhabitants of
the city know what we are doing."'
