Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing Yudhishthira's words, the intelligent and accomplished rishi, Dvaipayana,
thought for some time and then spoke to Pandava. "O king! Remember the dharma of kshatriyas and do not sorrow
pointlessly. O bull among the kshatriya lineage! While following their own dharma, those kshatriyas were slain.
They desired complete prosperity and great fame on earth. They followed the rules of death and, following time,
were killed. They were not killed by you, Bhima, Arjuna, or the twins. Following the dharma of time, those living
beings gave up their lives. Time has no mother or father, nor is it partial towards anyone. It is a witness to the
deeds committed by people. O bull among men! This[The destruction in the war.] is an instrument of time. In its form as lord, it uses beings
to slay other beings. Know that time is the essence of deeds and is witness to the good and the bad. Time leads to
happiness and unhappiness. Time is the one that yields the fruits. O mighty-armed one! Think of the deeds they[The ones who have been killed.]
performed. Those led to their destruction and they have come under the subjugation of time. Know your own self
and the rules and vows that you observe, and also that these deeds have been ordained by fate. An implement constructed by an artisan is under the control of the one who handles it. In that way, the universe is driven by deeds
that are controlled by time. On seeing that the birth and destruction of men have no evident cause, sorrow and delight are both pointless. O king! However, your heart has been ensnared by that which is unreal. Because of that,
perform deeds of atonement. O Partha! It has been heard that, in ancient times, the gods and the asuras fought with
each other. The asuras were elder brothers and the gods were younger[The gods and the demons were descended from the sage Kashyapa, but
had different mothers.]. Because of rivalry over prosperity, they
fought a great battle that lasted for thirty-two thousand years. The earth became a large ocean of blood. At that
time, the gods killed the daityas and obtained possession of heaven. The brahmanas, knowledgeable about the
Vedas, obtained the earth. However, because they were confounded by insolence, they began to help the danavas.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They were known in the three worlds as shalavrikas[The brahmanas who helped the demons. Literally, shala means jackal
and vrika means wolf.]. There were eighty-
eight thousand of them and they were killed by the gods. Those who destroy dharma, and those who seek the
spread of adharma, should be killed, just as the evil-souled daityas were killed by the gods. If by killing a single
person the rest of the lineage becomes virtuous and healthy, or if by killing a family the kingdom is saved, then
that must be done. O lord of men! Sometimes, dharma has the appearance of adharma. Learned people should
know that dharma may assume the form of adharma. O Pandava! Therefore, control yourself. You are learned. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! You have followed a path that has been travelled by the gods. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! People like these do not go to hell. O scorcher of enemies! Assure your brothers and well-wishers. A person who begins wicked acts and does not think about it, and, despite continuing to act in this way, does
not feel any shame, then it has been said that all the sins accrue to him. There is no atonement for him. Nor are his
wicked deeds ever diminished. You have been born in a pure lineage. Your deeds have been caused by someone
else's crimes. You performed those tasks unwillingly. Having performed them, you are repenting. As atonement, a
great horse sacrifice is indicated. O great king! Perform that and you will be cleansed of your sin. Having defeated
his enemies with the help of the Maruts, Maghavan, the chastiser of Paka, performed one hundred sacrifices one by
one and came to be known as Shatakratu[Indra's name is Shatakratu, shata meaning one hundred and kratu meaning sacrifice.]. He purified himself and won heaven. He obtained worlds that yield
happiness. Surrounded by large numbers of the Maruts, Shakra was radiant and illuminated the directions. Shachi's
consort is glorified in heaven by the apsaras. The lord of the gods is worshipped by the rishis and the gods. You
have conquered this earth through your valour. O unblemished one! The kings have been defeated through your
valour. O king! Surrounded by your well-wishers, go to their cities and kingdoms[The kingdoms of the kings who have been slain.] and instate their brothers, sons
and grandsons in their respective kingdoms. Assure the children who are still in the wombs. Delight all the citizens
and rule the earth. Where there is no male child, instate a maiden. As a class, women are addicted to desire and
will laugh away their sorrow. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In this way, assure all the kingdoms. Perform a
horse sacrifice, just as the victorious Indra did in ancient times. O bull among the kshatriyas! You should not sorrow about those great-souled kshatriyas. Their destruction has been brought on by their own deeds and they have
been confounded by the power of death. You have practised the dharma of kshatriyas and have obtained a kingdom
that is free from taint. O Kounteya! Follow dharma and after death, you will obtain the best."'
