Vaishampayana said, 'I will now describe the deeds and conquests of Nakula and how that lord vanquished the region that had once been conquered by Vasudeva[Krishna.]. Taking a large army with him, the intelligent one left Khandavaprastha and headed towards the west. The earth trembled with the lion-like roars of his warriors and sounds
made by the edges of his chariot wheels.

'He first marched on the prosperous and beautiful Rohitaka, beloved of Kartikeya. It was rich in cattle, horses,
wealth and grain. There was a great battle there with the Mattamayuraka warriors. The immensely radiant one then
conquered the desert region, the land known as Sairishaka that was rich in grain, Maheccha, the Shibis, the Trigartas, the Ambashthas, the Malavas, the five groups of Karpatas and the brahmanas known as Madhyamikaya and
Vatadhana. Having circled again, that bull among men defeated the clans known as Utsavasamketa who dwelt in
the forests of Pushkara, the immensely powerful Gramaneyas who lived on the banks of the Sindhu[The Indus River.], the clans of
shudras and abhiras[Abhiras are cowherds.] who lived along the Sarasvati[That is, the river.], all those who live on fish and all those who live in the
mountains, the land of the five rivers, the western Paryatas, the northern Jyotika, the city named Vrindataka and
Dvarapala. The immensely radiant one defeated them all and the Harhunas and all the kings who dwelt to the west.

'Having brought all this under his rule, the Pandava[Nakula.] sent messengers to Vasudeva and he[Vasudeva.] and his ten kingdoms accepted his[Nakula's.] rule. Then he marched to Shakala, the city of the Madras. Using conciliation, the powerful
one made an ally of his maternal uncle Shalya[Nakula's mother Madri was Shalya's sister.]. O lord of the earth! The king honoured him, as was due to a deserving guest. The lord of warriors took a large quantity of riches and departed. He then defeated the extremely
fearful mlecchas who lived along the sides of the ocean, the Pahlavas and the Barbaras[This can also be translated, instead of as a proper name, as barbaras, meaning those who were barbarians or
not Aryas.]. Having conquered all
these kings and extracted tribute, Nakula, supreme among men, returned. O great king! Such were the riches collected by the great-souled one that ten thousand camels carried it with difficulty. In Indraprastha, Madri's brave
and fortunate son went to Yudhishthira and offered the riches to him. Thus did Nakula, bull among the Bharata lineage, conquer the western regions, protected by Varuna and conquered earlier by Vasudeva[Dvaraka is to the west and when Dvaraka was established, these regions were conquered by Krishna.].'