Sanjaya said, "O venerable one! On hearing the words of Adhiratha's son, who delighted himself in battle, Shalya
again spoke to Karna, citing an example. 'You seem to be like one who is intoxicated with liquor. But whether you
are like that or not, and irrespective of your intoxication, as a well-wisher, I will try to cure you. O Karna! I will
tell you about the story of the crow. Listen to me. O wicked one! O worst of the lineage! On hearing this, do what
you wish. O Karna! O mighty-armed one! I do not recollect a single taint in me, as a result of which you wish to
kill an unblemished one like me. Had you known what was good for you, you would certainly have listened to my
words, especially because I am your charioteer and the king's[Duryodhana's.] well-wisher. The even and uneven terrain, the
strengths and weaknesses of the chariot, the fatigue and perspiration of the horses and the charioteer, the knowledge of the weapons, the cries of animals and birds, what is burdensome and what is extremely burdensome[For the horses to bear.],
antidotes to wounds from weapons, the use of different weapons in battle and knowledge of portents-all of these
are known to me. And I am familiar with this chariot. O Karna! Therefore, let me recount the example to you once
more. On the other side of the ocean, there lived a vaishya and he possessed a lot of riches and foodgrains. He performed sacrifices, was generous and quiet and established in the deeds he ought to perform[Appropriate for a vaishya.]. He was pure. He
had many sons whom he loved and he was compassionate towards all beings. Without any fear, he dwelt in the
kingdom of a king who observed dharma. His illustrious sons were young. There was a crow that lived there and it
subsisted on many kinds of leftover food. The young sons of the vaishya always gave it meat, curds, milk,
payasam[Rice mixed with milk and sugar.], honey and butter. The crow subsisted on the leftovers that were given by the young sons of the
vaishya. It became insolent and showed no respect to birds that were its equal or superior. Once, it so happened
that swans descended on the other side of the ocean. They were cheerful in their hearts and could go anywhere at
will. Their speed was like that of Garuda. On seeing the swans, the young boys spoke to the crow. "O bird! You are
superior to all the winged birds." The one who was born from an egg was thus addressed by those who were of
limited intelligence. Because of his stupidity and insolence, he regarded those words to be true. He asked those
who could travel long distances[The swans.] who among them was the swiftest in speed. The swans could travel long distances. But because of insolence and evil intelligence, the crow that fed on leftovers challenged that bird to a test
of flight. On hearing these words of the crow, the swans that had assembled there, powerful and supreme birds, began to laugh. Those birds, which could go anywhere at will, spoke these words to the crow. "We are swans that
roam the earth. We live in Lake Manasa. Among birds, we are always revered as those that can travel long distances. A swan is powerful. Its limbs are like a vajra. It can travel a great distance. O evil-minded one! You are a
crow. How can you issue such a challenge? O crow! How will you fly with us?" They laughed and told him that.
Because of the limited intelligence of its species, the stupid crow repeatedly questioned the words of the swans.
Eventually, it replied, "There is no doubt that I will fly in one hundred and one different kinds of ways. I will fly
each span of a hundred yojanas in a beautiful and varied way. I will rise up and swoop down. I will circle and fly
straight. I will fly slowly and I will fly fast. I will fly diagonally. I will traverse slowly. I will whirl around. I will
move gently and fast. I will then fly extremely fast and even faster than that. I will swoop down and rise up again.
Forward, backwards and sideways, I will show many techniques of flight. I will show all these to you. Behold my
strength." Having been thus addressed by the crow, one of the swans laughed. The swan spoke these words to the
crow. "Listen to me. O crow! There is no doubt that you will fly in one hundred and one different kinds of ways. I
will however fly in the only way that all the birds know. O crow! That is the way I will fly, because I do not know
any other. O red-eyed one! You fly in whichever way you think appropriate." At this, the crows who had assembled there began to laugh. "How will the swan fly in only one kind of way and defeat flight in one hundred different ways?" They began to fly, one in one technique, and the other used one hundred and one flying techniques.
Powerful and swift in strength, the swan and the crow flew. The swan and the crow flew, rivalling each other. The
one that could fly anywhere[The swan.] flew. The crow also flew. Each flew so as to cause wonder in the rival and praised
his own deeds. The crow flew in a myriad and colourful ways. On seeing this, the assembled crows were delighted
and started to caw loudly. The swans laughed at them and uttered many unpleasant words. From one instant to another, they[The swan and the crow involved in the match.] repeatedly rose up and swooped down. Descending and ascending, they were on the tops of trees
and on the ground. They uttered many kinds of noises, signifying their victory. O venerable one! With that single
and gentle motion, the valiant swan continued to fly and for an instant, it seemed as if it had been defeated by the
crow. Slighting the swans, the crows spoke these words. "The swan that rose up into the sky is clearly being defeated." On hearing these words, the swan flew in a westward direction. It increased its speed and flew over the
ocean, Varuna's abode. At this, fear penetrated the crow and it lost its senses. It did not see any islands or trees,
where it could descend and rest, when it was tired. "When I am tired, where will I descend in this ocean of water?
This ocean is the abode of a large number of beings and is intolerable. There are many large beings that reside here
and it is superior to the sky[The crow is thinking this.]." O worst of your lineage! The ocean is superior to everything in depth. O Karna! It
is as limitless as the sky. The ocean is impossible to conquer. O Karna! Given its extremely long distance, what
could a crow do? In a short while, the swan travelled a long distance. It could not leave the crow behind and
glanced back at it. Having overtaken the crow, the one that could travel anywhere at will glanced back at it[The swan waited for the exhausted crow to catch up.].
Seeing that it was exhausted, the swan wished to rescue the one who was sinking and remembered the vows observed by righteous people. It said, "You repeatedly spoke about many different kinds of flight. You should not
speak about these techniques of flight. They are a mystery to us. O crow! What is the name of this pattern of flight
that you are now being forced to fly? Your wings and your beak are repeatedly touching the water. You are touching the waters of the ocean with your wings and your beak. O crow! You are extremely exhausted and you will
suddenly fall down."

' "'The swan said, "O crow! You spoke about one hundred and one different techniques of flight. Earlier, you
spoke about many techniques. All of those have come to nought now."

' "'The crow replied, "O swan! Having fed on leftovers, I became insolent. I thought myself to be the equal of
Suparna[Garuda.]. I showed disrespect to many other crows and all birds. I seek my life back from you. Take me to the
shores of an island. O swan! Let me obtain assurance and let me return to my country again. I will never show disrespect to anyone again. Save me."

' "'It was distressed and spoke in this way[This is Shalya speaking again.]. Devoid of its senses, it lamented. Submerged in the great ocean,
it cawed. The crow was drenched in water and faced a great hardship. The swan picked it up with its feet and gently raised it onto its[The swan's.] back. O Karna! The swan made the crow, bereft of its senses, climb astride its back. They
again quickly flew to the island where the match had started. Having placed the bird down there, it comforted
it[The swan comforted the crow.]. The swan, as swift as thought, then flew away to the country it wished to. This is what happened to the crow
that fed on leftovers from a vaishya household. There is no doubt that you have subsisted on leftovers from the
sons of Dhritarashtra. O Karna! That is the reason you show disrespect to all those who are your equal and superior. You were protected by Drona, Drona's son, Kripa, Bhishma and the other Kouravas in Virata's city. Partha was
single-handed. Why didn't you kill him then[The seizure of the cattle, described in Section 47 (Volume 4).]? All of you were distressed and vanquished by Kiriti, like jackals
defeated by a lion. Where was your valour then? When you saw that your brother was defeated and killed by
Savyasachi, while all the brave ones among the Kurus looked on, you were the first to run away[Arjuna killed three of Karna's brothers in Section 66 (Volume 5).]. O Karna! Like
that, when you were attacked by the gandharvas in Dvaitavana[The incident described in Section 39 (Volume 3).], you abandoned all the Kurus and were the first
to run away. Partha killed and defeated the gandharvas, with Chitrasena at the forefront, in battle. O Karna! He
freed Duryodhana and his wife. Then again, in earlier times, in the assembly of the kings, Rama[Parashurama, this is a reference to Section 54 (Volume 4).] himself spoke
about the power of Partha and Keshava. In the presence of the kings, Bhishma and Drona have always said that the
two Krishnas cannot be killed. You have heard that. I have only told you a little bit about how Dhananjaya is superior to you in various ways, like a brahmana is superior to all other beings. You will soon see that expensive chariot and Vasudeva's son and Pandava Dhananjaya stationed on it. Those two bulls among men are famous among
gods, asuras and humans. They are renowned among men because of their radiance and you are like a firefly. O son
of a suta! Know this to be your state. Those two lions among men, Achyuta and Arjuna, will destroy you. Do not
indulge in self-praise.'" '
