'Dhritarashtra said, "O suta! You have told me about the battle between the one and the many. It was extremely
terrible and the great-souled one triumphed. The valour of Subhadra's son was extraordinary and impossible to believe. But this wonderful deed is possible for those who resort to dharma. When the one hundred princes were
slain, Duryodhana retreated. What did those on my side do to counter the influence of Subhadra's son?"

'Sanjaya replied, "Their faces were dry and their eyes lolled out. They perspired and their body hair stood up.
They were interested in running away. They were no longer interested in defeating the enemy. They abandoned
their slain brothers, fathers, well-wishers, relatives and those with whom they had matrimonial alliances. They
swiftly urged their horses and elephants and fled. On beholding that they were shattered, Drona, Drona's son, Brihadbala, Kripa, Duryodhana, Karna, Kritavarma and Soubala angrily attacked Subhadra's unvanquished son. O
king! Most of them were beaten back by your grandson. There was only one who had been reared in happiness. He
was a child, but proud and fearless. Lakshmana[Duryodhana's son.] was extremely energetic and used his arrows and weapons to
attack Arjuna's son. Out of anxiety and affection for the son, the father returned. Other maharathas also returned
and followed Duryodhana. They drenched him with a cloud of arrows, like clouds pouring down rain on a mountain. But he countered them single-handed, like a dry wind driving away the clouds. Your grandson Lakshmana
was invincible and handsome. The brave one was stationed near his father, the outstretched bow in his hand. He
had been reared in great happiness and was like a son of the lord of riches[Kubera is the lord of riches. Lakshmana was like Kubera's son.]. Krishna's son encountered him in
battle, like a crazy elephant clashing against another crazy elephant. Subhadra's son, the destroyer of enemy heroes, approached Lakshmana and was pierced on his arms and his chest by extremely sharp arrows that were released from the bow[Lakshmana's bow.]. The mighty-armed one was enraged, like a serpent that has been struck with a staff. O
great king! Your grandson spoke to your grandson[Abhimanyu and Lakshmana respectively.]. 'Glance well at this world. You will soon go to the other
world. In the sight of your relatives, I will convey you to Yama's abode.' Saying this, Subhadra's mighty-armed
son, the destroyer of enemy heroes, used a broad-headed arrow. It looked like a snake that had just cast off its skin.
It was released from his arms and severed Lakshmana's beautiful head, with an excellent nose, eyebrows and beautiful hair, and adorned with earrings. On seeing that Lakshmana had been slain, the people let out sounds of woe
and lamentation. When his beloved son was brought down, Duryodhana was enraged. The bull among the kshatriyas loudly urged the kshatriyas to kill him. Six rathas surrounded him-Drona, Kripa, Karna, Drona's son, Brihadbala and Kritavarma, Hridika's son. But Arjuna's son pierced them with sharp arrows and drove them back.
Angrily and forcefully, he then descended on Saindhava's large army. The armoured Kalingas, Nishadas, and
Kratha's valiant son obstructed his path with an array of elephants. O lord of the earth! The engagement between
them was extremely fierce. Arjuna's son crushed that army of elephants, like a wind courses in every direction in
the sky and drives away hundreds of clouds. Kratha's son enveloped Arjuna's son with a storm of arrows. In addition, other rathas, with Drona at the forefront, also returned. They attacked Subhadra's son, using supreme and other weapons. Arjuna's son repulsed them with his arrows and swiftly afflicted Kratha's son with a continuous flood
of arrows, wishing to kill him. He brought down his bow, arrows, armlets, arms, diademed head, umbrella, standard, charioteer and horses. He[Kratha's son.] was born in a noble lineage and possessed the strength of learning. He was the
performer of deeds and possessed the strength of weapons. When such a brave one was killed, most of the others
fled from the field of battle."'
