'Yudhishthira said, "O Bhimasena! O twins! O Panchali! Listen. There exists nothing in beings that is destroyed.
Look at us roaming in the forest. We may tell each other that we are weak and oppressed, but though incapable,
must travel in a desire to see Dhananjaya. It[Arjuna's absence.] burns my body, like fire on a pile of cotton. I do not see the brave
Dhananjaya by my side. In a desire to see him, I live with my younger brothers in the forest. Because of the extreme oppression meted out to Yajnaseni, that brave one must also be burning[Referring to Arjuna. Yajnaseni is Droupadi's name.]. I do not see the infinitely energetic Partha, Nakula's elder, the terrible wielder of the invincible bow. O Vrikodara! I am tormented on that account. With a desire to see him, I have visited beautiful tirthas, forests and lakes, together with you. I have not seen
the brave Dhananjaya, devoted to the truth, for five years. O Vrikodara! Since I do not see Bibhatsu, it is consuming me. O Vrikodara! Since I do not see the dark and mighty-armed Gudakesha[Arjuna's name.], whose brave gait is like that of
a lion, I am tormented. O Vrikodara! I do not see that best of men, accomplished in the use of weapons, skilful in
battle and the equal of any archer. It is for this reason that I am tormented. Among the masses of enemies, he
strides like angry Yama, the destroyer. Dhananjaya has the shoulders of a lion and is like a maddened elephant. He
is not inferior to Shakra in strength and valour. Partha, the one with the white horses, is infinitely brave and is elder
to the twins. On not being able to see Phalguna, I am immersed in immense grief. Even when he was insulted by
an inferior man, he was always forgiving in his conduct. He gave shelter and protection to those who walked the
straight path. But to those who were crooked and to those who sought to kill him through deceitful means, even if
it happened to be the wielder of the vajra himself[Indra.], he was like virulent poison. The greatly strong Bibhatsu is
infinite in his soul. The powerful one always granted protection to an enemy who sought refuge with him. He was
always our refuge. He destroyed his enemies in battle. He robbed all their jewels and he brought all of us happiness. In earlier times, it was through his valour that I obtained many celestial jewels of different types, those that
Suyodhana now possesses. O brave one! In earlier times, through the strength of his arms, I once possessed an assembly hall. O Pandava! It was full of all kinds of gems and was famous in the three worlds. He is like Vasudeva
in his valour. He is Kartavirya's equal in war. He is invincible and unconquered in battle. I do not see Phalguna.
The one who slew enemies with his valour was born after the immensely valorous Sankarshana[Balarama.], after Bhima
who is unvanquished in battle and after Vasudeva. The strength of his arms is equal to the power of Purandara. He
is equal to the wind in his speed, to the moon in the beauty of his face and to eternal death in his anger.

'"O might-armed one! O brave one! Desiring to see that tiger among men, all of us will now enter Mount Gandhamadana. The exetensive Badari is there and the hermitage of Nara and Narayana. It is always inhabited by yak-
shas. We will see that supreme mountain. We will see Kubera's beautiful lotus pond, protected by rakshasas. Observing great austerities, we will traverse on foot. O Vrikodara! One who has failed in austerities cannot reach that
region. Nor can one who is cruel or avaricious, or one who has not calmed himself. O Bhima! In order to follow
Arjuna's footsteps, all of us will go there. We will be armed and strap our swords. We will be accompanied by
brahmanas who observe great vows. Those who are not controlled encounter flies, gnats, mosquitoes, tigers, lions
and reptiles. O Partha! But those who are controlled do not see them. Therefore, let us control our souls. Let us be
restrained in our food. We will enter Mount Gandhamadana to see Dhananjaya."'
