'Kanva said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The immensely strong Garuda heard the account about how
Shakra had granted the serpent a long life. Suparna was extremely enraged and went to Vasava, stopping the three
worlds with the great wind created by his wings.

'"Garuda said, 'O illustrious one! When I was hungry, you gave me a boon of your own accord[The boon of feeding on snakes.]. Why are you
ignoring that and going back on it? The creator, the lord of all beings, has ordained my food, ever since all beings
have been created. What is the reason for your going against that? I have chosen this great naga for my sustenance
and have chosen the time. O god! I have to sustain my large offspring through him. O king of the gods! Now that
this decision has been frustrated, I cannot cause violence to another, unlike you, sporting according to your wishes
and your whims. Therefore, I will have to give up my life now, together with my relatives and the servants in my
house. O Vasava! I hope you are happy. O slayer of Bala and Vritra! But this is certainly what I deserve. When I
was a lord of the three worlds, I chose to become the servant of another one[Garuda opted to serve Vishnu. The story has been recounted in Section 1 (Volume 1).]. As long as you are the lord of the
gods, Vishnu is not responsible for this. O Vasava! The kingship of the three worlds and the kingdom is vested in
you for eternity. I also have Daksha's daughter as my mother and Kashyapa as my father[The sage Kashyapa had several wives. Garuda was descended from Vinata and Indra was descended from Aditi. Both Vinata and Aditi were Daksha's daughters.]. With ease, I can also
bear the burden of the worlds. I am also unassailable by all beings and I also possess great strength. In the war with
the daityas, extremely great deeds have also been performed by me. Diti's sons have also been killed by me 134-
Shrutashri, Shrutasena, Vivasvan, Rochanamukha, Prasabha and Kalakaksha. I make efforts to station myself on
your younger brother's[Vishnu is Indra's younger brother.] standard and serve and bear him. Is that the reason you disrespect me? Who else is capable of bearing that load? Who else is stronger than I am? Though I am distinguished in this way, yet I bear him and
his relatives. Since you have restrained me from my food, I have been shown disrespect by you and have also lost
his[Vishnu's.]. O Vasava! Among all those who have been born from Aditi and possess strength and valour, you are certainly the one who is strongest among them all. But without any exhaustion, I can bear you on a single one of my
feathers. O father[The word used is tata.]! Therefore, reflect on who is the stronger one.'"

'Kanva said, "When the one who wields the wheel of the chariot[This is like a metaphor. Vishnu wields the chakra, likened to the wheel of a chariot.] heard these extremely threatening words of
the bird, he spoke to Tarkshya[Garuda.], desiring to trouble the one who cannot be troubled. 'O Garuda! You think yourself to be strong, but you are extremely weak. O one who has been born from an egg! In our presence, you should
not praise yourself in this way. Even when they are together, the three worlds are incapable of bearing my body. I
myself bear myself and bear you too. To establish the truth of your words, bear my right arm alone. If you can bear
it, your self-praise will be established to be true.' Then the illustrious one placed his[Vishnu's.] arm on his[Garuda's.] shoulder and
he fell down oppressed by that load, unconscious and bereft of his senses. The entire weight of the earth, together
with its mountains, was as much as a single arm of his body. Achyuta, supreme among strong ones, did not press
down with all his strength. He did not want to rob him of his life. The bird was bereft of its wings. His body was
spread out. He was unconscious. He was bereft of his senses. Oppressed by that great burden, he began to shed his
feathers. The bird who was Vinata's son then bowed his head before Vishnu. He was unconscious and bereft of his
senses. In misery, he spoke these words. 'O illustrious one! You have extended a well-formed arm that is like the
essence of the worlds and have pressed me down on the face of the earth. O god! You should forgive me. I am confused and am a bird with limited intelligence. Dwelling on your standard, I was consumed by the fire of my
strength. O god! O lord! I did not know of your supreme strength. That is the reason I thought myself to possess a
valour that was unmatched by anyone else.' The illustrious one was then pleased with Garuda and affectionately
told him that he should not act in this way again. O Gandhari's son! O son! Like that, you are alive only as long as
you do not attack the sons of Pandu in battle. Bhima, Vayu's extremely strong son, is foremost among the wielders
of weapons. Dhananjaya is Indra's son. Who will they not kill in battle? Vishnu, Vayu, Shakra, Dharma and the
two Ashvins are gods[Vishnu is equated with Krishna. Bhima is the son of Vayu, Arjuna of Shakra, Yudhishthira of Dharma and
Nakula and Sahadeva are the sons of the two Ashvins.]. You are incapable of even looking at them. O son of a king! Therefore, end the hostilities
and seek peace. With Vasudeva as a sanctuary, you should protect your lineage. The immensely ascetic Narada has
witnessed all this and Vishnu's greatness with his own eyes. He is the wielder of the chakra and the club."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Duryodhana had listened to all this with sighs and frowns on his face. He glanced towards
Radheya then and laughed out aloud. Ignoring the words of the rishi Kanva, the evil-minded one slapped his thigh,
which was like the trunk on an elephant, and said, "I will act as the creator has created me, according to what is in
the future and my destiny. O maharshi! What will this pointless conversation achieve?"'
