'Sanjaya said, "On seeing that the large army of the Pandavas had been stirred up and thinking that it could not be
resisted, Duryodhana spoke to Karna. 'O one who is devoted to friends! The time for friends has arrived[That is, the time for helping friends has arrived.]. O
Karna! In the battle, save all these extremely powerful warriors. The Panchalas, Matysas, Kekayas and the maharatha Pandavas have angrily surrounded them and are sighing like serpents. Desiring victory, these Pandavas are
roaring in delight. There are many Panchalas on chariots and they are like Shakra in valour.'

'"Karna replied, 'Even if Purandara arrives as a saviour, I will quickly defeat and kill Pandava[Meaning Arjuna.]. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! I know this to be the truth. Be comforted. I will slay the son of Pandu and the assembled
Panchalas. I know that there will be victory, like Pavaka's son giving it to Vasava[Pavaka's (Agni's) son is Kartikeya and he is the general of the gods.]. O lord of the earth! I am
alive to do that which brings you pleasure. Among all the Parthas, Phalguna is supreme in strength. I will hurl this
invincible spear towards him, one that has been created by Shakra. O one who grants honours! Once that great
archer has been slain, his brothers will come under your control and will again be exiled to the forest. O Kouravya!
As long as I am alive, you should never sorrow. I will defeat all the Pandavas in the battle, together with the Panchalas, the Kekayas and the assembled Vrishnis. I will use torrents of arrows to make them porcupines and give the
earth to you.'"

'Sanjaya said, "When Karna said this, the mighty-armed Kripa Sharadvata smiled and spoke these words to the
son of the suta. 'O Karna! Wonderful. This is wonderful. The bull among the Kuru lineage has a protector. O Rad-
heya! With you as a protector, if only words could bring success. O Karna! In Kouravya's presence, you speak a
lot. But one rarely witnesses your valour or your strength. We have seen you in many encounters with the son of
Pandu. O son of a suta! You have always been defeated by Pandava. O Karna! When the son of Dhritarashtra was
being taken away by the gandharvas, all the soldiers fought. You were the sole exception and you ran away[This incident has been described in Section 39 (Volume 3).]. O
Karna! In the city of Virata, all the united Kouravas were defeated by Partha in a battle and that included you and
your younger brother[This incident has been described in Section 47 (Volume 4).]. In the field of battle, you are incapable of withstanding Phalguna alone. How can you
have the enterprise to defeat all the Pandavas, together with Krishna? O Karna! O son of a suta! You have spoken a
lot about fighting. Do not speak and show your valour now. That is the vow which virtuous men follow. O son of a
suta! You are always thundering, like clouds in the autumn, which do not have any water. O Karna! You are seen to
be without success. But the king does not understand this. O Radheya! You will roar as long as you do not see
Partha. When you see Partha in front of you, your roars will become rare. You will roar as long as you are beyond
the reach of Phalguna's arrows. Once you are pierced by Partha's arrows, your roars will be rare. Kshatriyas show
their valour through their arms. Brahmanas show their valour through their eloquence with words. Phalguna's
bravery is in his bow. Karna's bravery is in his fancies.'

'"When Sharadvata addressed these harsh words to him, Karna, supreme among strikers, spoke these words to
Kripa. 'Brave ones always roar, like clouds that shower down rain. Once seeds have been sown in the soil, the
fruits are soon obtained. I do not see any faults in brave ones who are in the vanguard of the battle and having taken up heavy burdens, indulge in boasting. When a man bears a burden, it is also established in his mind. It is certain that destiny also aids him then. In my mind, I have resolved to take up an extremely heavy and unmatched
burden. O brahmana! If I decide to thunder then, how does it harm you in any way? Like clouds that are full of water, brave ones do not roar in vain. Knowing their own capacity, the Pandavas are roaring. I will make endeavours
in the battle today, against the united Krishna and Pandava. O Goutama! I am thundering because of the initiative
that has been generated. O brahmana! With your followers, behold the fruits of that roaring. I will kill the sons of
Pandu, together with Krishna and the Satvatas. I will give Duryodhana the earth, bereft of all thorns.'

'"Kripa replied, 'O son of a suta! These fancies are delusions and I do not accept them. You have spoken about
flinging away the two Krishnas and Pandava Dharmaraja. O Karna! Victory is certain for the side that has those
two, skilled in fighting[Krishna and Arjuna.]. Even if gods, gandharvas, yakshas, men, serpents and rakshasas armour themselves,
Krishna and Pandava cannot be conquered in a battle. Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, is devoted to brahmanas. He is
truthful in speech and self-controlled. He worships his seniors and the gods. He is always devoted to dharma. In
particular, he is skilled in the use of weapons. He is intelligent and grateful. His brothers are strong and have practised the use of all weapons. They are devoted to serving their superiors. They are wise, always devoted to dharma
and illustrious. Their relatives have Indra's valour. They are skilled in striking and are devoted to them. Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi, Durmukha's son[This is unlikely to be a reference to Durmukha, Duryodhana's brother.], Janamejaya, Chandrasena, Bhadrasena, Kirtidharma, Dhruva, Dhara,
Vasuchandra, Damachandra, Simhachandra, Suvedhana, Drupada's sons, Drupada, who knows about the use of
great weapons, the king of Matsya and his followers, Shatanika, Sudashana, Shrutanika, Shrutadvaja, Balanika,
Jayanika, Jayashva, Rathavahana, Chandrodaya, Kamaratha, Virata's handsome brothers, the twins, Droupadi's
sons and the rakshasa Ghatotkacha are fighting for their sake. When these are on their side, they cannot be destroyed. If they so desire, the entire universe, with gods, asuras and men, with the yakshas, masses of rakshasas,
beings, serpents and elephants can be destroyed through the valour of the weapons of Bhima and Phalguna. Yudhishthira can consume the earth with his sight. The armoured Shouri is engaged in their cause and his strength is
immeasurable. O Karna! How can you contemplate vanquishing the enemy in a battle? O son of a suta! You have
always been extremely stupid, since you are thinking of engaging with Shouri in the battle.'"

'Sanjaya said, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! Thus addressed, Radheya laughed. Karna spoke these words
to the preceptor, Kripa Sharadvata. 'O brahmana! The words that you have spoken about the Pandavas are indeed
true. That apart, there are many other qualities vested in Pandu's son. Partha cannot be vanquished in battle, even
by the gods, with Vasava, and by the daityas, yakshas, gandharvas, pishachas, serpents and rakshasas. But even
then, I can defeat Partha because of the spear that has been given to me by Vasava. O brahmana! The spear that
Shakra has given me is incapable of being repulsed. In the battle, I will kill Savyasachi with this. Once Pandava
has been killed, Krishna and his brothers will never be able to enjoy the earth, since Arjuna won't be there. All of
them will be destroyed. O Goutama! Without making any efforts, the earth, with all its oceans, will come under
Kourava's suzerainty. There is no doubt that good policies can ensure success in everything. O Goutama! I am
roaring because I know all this. You are a brahmana and are aged. You are incapable in battle. You are deluded by
affection towards Partha and are insulting me. O brahmana! O evil-minded one! If you again speak such injurious
words to me, I will take out my sword and slice off your tongue. O brahmana! You wish to praise the Pandavas in
this encounter, in order to frighten all the soldiers and the Kouravas. O brahmana! Listen to the words I have to say
on this. Duryodhana, Drona, Shakuni, Durmukha, Jaya, Duhshasana, Vrishasena, the king of Madra, you, Soma-
datta, Bhuri[Bhurishrava's brother.], Drona's son and Vivimshati have stationed themselves in this battle. All of them are skilled in
fighting. They are brave and skilled in the use of weapons. They wish to attain heaven. They are knowledgeable
about dharma. They are skilled in fighting. In a battle, they can kill even the gods. They are stationed in this battle,
wishing to kill the Pandavas. These armoured ones wish for Kouraveya's victory. Even for extremely powerful
ones, I think that victory depends on destiny, since the mighty-armed Bhishma is lying down, having been pierced
by a hundred arrows. Vikarna, Chitrasena, Bahlika, Jayadratha, Bhurishrava, Jaya, Jalasandha, Sudakshina, Shala,
best among rathas, the valiant Bhagadatta and many other brave kings, who were extremely difficult even for the
gods to vanquish, have been killed in this battle, though they were stronger than the Pandavas. O worst of men! Do
you not think that this is nothing but destiny? O brahmana! You have always sought to satisfy Duryodhana's enemies. Even among them, hundreds and thousands of brave ones have been killed. All the soldiers, of both the Kurus and the Pandavas, have been destroyed. I do not see any power on the part of the Pandavas. O worst of brahmanas! You have always thought them to be strong. I will fight against them in this battle, to the best of my capacity, for the sake of ensuring Duryodhana's welfare. Victory is determined by destiny.'"'
