'Yudhishthira said, "O grandfather! O immensely wise one! O extender of the deeds of the Kuru lineage! I will ask
you a question. You should explain this to me completely. What kind of men are amiable and who are the ones towards whom one can have great affection? Tell me who can be depended upon, in the present and in the future. It
is my view that a growing store of wealth, kin and relatives cannot occupy the space that well-wishers do. A wellwisher who listens is extremely difficult to get. A well-wisher who does good is extremely difficult to get. O best
among those who uphold dharma! You should explain all this to me."

'Bhishma replied, "O king! O Yudhishthira! I will tell you everything in detail. Listen to me about the true nature of men one should have alliances with, and those with whom one should not. O bull among men! O lord of
men! Greedy, cruel, one who has forsaken dharma, deceitful, fraudulent, inferior, one who is wicked in conduct,
one who is suspicious of everyone, lazy, one who is a procrastinator, one who is not upright, a sufferer, one who
has molested his preceptor's wife, one who abandons you at the time of a calamity, an evil-souled person, one who
is without shame, one who sees wickedness everywhere, a non-believer, one who criticizes the Vedas, one who
cannot control his senses in this world, one who incessantly follows kama, a liar, one who hates people, one who
does not adhere to agreements, a person who slanders, one who does not possess wisdom, one who is envious, a
person who has made up his mind about doing evil, one who is evil in behaviour, one who has not cleansed his
soul, a person who is violent, a gambler, one who causes injury to friends, one who always desires the wealth that
belongs to others, an evil-minded person who is not satisfied even if someone gives him a lot and to the best of
giver's capacity, one who always behaves with friends as if they are enemies, one who is enraged for the wrong
reasons, one who suddenly loses interest, one who is wicked and swiftly abandons his well-wishers for a benefit,
one who behaves foolishly when a trifling and involuntary injury has been done to him, one whose friendship is for
an ulterior motive, one who pretends to be a friend but is actually an enemy, one who is confused and is blind to
his own good, one who does not find delight in what is beneficial-such a man must be avoided. If a man drinks
liquor, is hateful, cruel, devoid of compassion, harsh, takes delight in the sufferings of others, injures friends, is engaged in the killing of beings, is ungrateful and wicked-you must never have an alliance with him. You should
never have an alliance with someone who is looking for your weakness.

'"Now listen to me about the ones you should have an alliance with-one who is noble, eloquent in speech, accomplished in jnana and vijnana, devoted to friends, grateful, knowledgeable about everything, devoid of sorrow,
possessing the quality of pleasantness, devoted to the truth, one who has conquered his senses, one who is always
devoted to physical exercise, one who comes from a noble lineage and has servants and sons, one who is handsome, possesses the qualities, one who is not greedy, one who has conquered exhaustion, one who is bereft of
taints and one who is famous. These are the ones a king should accept. O lord! There are also those who act to the
best of their abilities, are virtuous and content, are not angered for the wrong reasons, do not suddenly change their
inclinations, are not angered when opposed, are mentally accomplished about artha, are devoted to the tasks of
well-wishers even if this causes a suffering to themselves, in the manner of a red garment, find delight in their
friends[A red woolen garment does not change its colour easily.], do not suffer from the vices of greed and delusion and pursue riches and young women, do not show
such paths to well-wishers, trust and are devoted to their friends, regard gold and rock to be equal in value, do not
have fraudulent tendencies towards their well-wishers, are modest in their conduct, are not interested in acquiring
riches and ornaments, collect their followers and are always supremely interested in ensuring the prosperity of
their master. These kinds of men are the best and a king must have an alliance with them. That is the means for extending the kingdom, like moonlight emanating from the lord of the planets. You must always have alliances with
the best of men-those who are always based on the sacred texts, those who have conquered their anger, those
who have power, those who take delight in war, those who are forgiving and those who possess the qualities of
good conduct. O unblemished one! O king! Among the wicked men that I have mentioned, the worst are those who
are ungrateful and kill their friends. Under all circumstances, it is certain that such a person, evil in conduct, must
be cast aside."

'Yudhishthira said, "O king! I wish to hear in detail about the reason for not allying with those who kill their enemies and are ungrateful, as stated by you. Please tell me."

'Bhishma replied, "Indeed, on this, there is an ancient history that occurred. O lord of men! It happened in the
northern direction, where the mlecchas dwell. There was a brahmana from the central regions. He was dark in
limbs and had abandoned the brahman. He saw a village that was full of people and entered there, desiring to beg
for alms. A rich bandit lived there and he knew specifically about all the varnas. He was devoted to brahmanas, devoted to the truth and always engaged in donations. He[The brahmana.] went to his house and begged for alms. He begged for a
place where he could reside and alms that would last him for a year. He gave the brahmana all this and also a garment that seemed to be new[It was not torn off from an old piece of cloth.]. He also gave him a mature woman who had then lost her husband. Having obtained all this from the bandit, the brahmana was delighted in his mind. O king! In that supreme house,
Goutama[The brahmana's name.] found pleasure with her. He aided in the household work of the bandit who had helped him. He lived
in Shabara's[Being used as a proper name for the bandit, or indicating that the bandit
was a hunter.] prosperous house throughout the monsoon. Goutama made supreme efforts to learn archery. O
king! Like the large number of bandits, in every direction, Goutama could always kill the cranes that came within
the range of his arrows. He lost all compassion and became addicted to violence. He was always engaged in slaying beings. Because of his association with them, Goutama became just like the bandits. In this way, he resided
happily in that village of the bandits. Many months passed and he slew many birds.

'"On one occasion, another brahmana arrived at that spot. He had matted hair and was dressed in rags and hides.
He was extremely pure and devoted to studying. He was humble and controlled in his food. He was devoted to the
brahman and accomplished in the Vedas. The brahmachari, who hailed from the same country[As Goutama.] as his beloved
friend, came to that village of the bandits. Since he avoided food cooked by shudras, he looked for the home of a
brahmana. In the village, which was inhabited by a large number of bandits, he roamed around in every direction.
That supreme among brahmanas then entered Goutama's house. When Goutama returned, they met each other.
When he returned, he had a load of cranes in his hand and wielded a bow in his hand. His limbs were covered in
blood and he appeared at the door of the house. On seeing this flesh-eater, who had deviated and fallen, he still recognized him as the brahmana and in shame, spoke these words. 'Why are you acting in this stupid way? You were
born in the lineage of a brahmana. You were known in the central regions. How have you come to act like a bandit? Remember the first and foremost among the brahmanas, renowned for their knowledge of the Vedas. You were
born in that lineage! The way you are now, you are the worst of your lineage. Awake and realize your own self of
truthfulness, good conduct, learning and self-control. O brahmana! Remember your compassion and give up this
attire.' O king! He was thus addressed by his well-wisher, who had his welfare in mind. Having decided, he miserably replied, 'O best among brahmanas! I possess no riches. I am not learned in the Vedas. O supreme among brahmanas! Know that I have come to this state in search of a means of subsistence. O brahmana rishi! On seeing you,
I know that I will be successful. We will leave together in the morning. Dwell here during the night.'"'
