The preceptor said, 'All mobile and immobile beings belong to four categories. They are not manifest, alive,
manifest and dead. Know that the mind exists in the atman, which is not manifest. It[The mind.] is not manifest and it
is destroyed. A giant tree may be hidden inside the small blossom of an ashvattha flower. It is seen only when it
has emerged. Like that, the manifest is created from what is not manifest. A piece of iron has no consciousness,
but advances towards a lodestone. Some reasons and attributes are natural. But others are not like that[This is difficult to understand, since it is left dangling. The sense probably is that one can transcend the natural
propensities.]. Having
become manifest, those attributes provide reasons and objectives to the doer. However, there are also unconscious
attributes that provide reasons for the consciousness to be collected[This shloka is also difficult to understand. The plain meaning seems to be that there are inferior propensities and
superior propensities.]. The earth, the sky, heaven, beings, the rishis,
the gods, the asuras and nothing else existed, with the exception of the soul. It conveys everything. It goes everywhere. It is the cause behind the mind, which then possesses attributes. It has been said that reasons and characteristics are based on ignorant deeds. Because of being united with those reasons, it is made to engage in deeds again
and the great wheel continues to revolve, without beginning and without end. That which is not manifest is the
nave, while the manifest transformations represent the circumference. As the smooth axles revolve, the kshetrajna
is certainly established in that wheel[The kshetra is the body. The kshetrajna is someone who knows the body, that is, the soul.]. Those who extract oil crush sesamum seed in presses. Like that, because of
the sentiments of desire and ignorance, the entire universe is crushed in that wheel. Having been seized by ego, the
being performs acts. In the combination of acts and reasons, further reasons are generated[Because of ignorance, further reasons for acts.]. There are no reasons
behind acts. Nor are acts associated with reasons. In what is thought to be deeds and effects, it is time which is actually the doer. But prakriti is united with the reasons and the transformations work against each other. They transgress each other. However, the purusha is always established over them. Like dust following the wind, dust, darkness, impure sentiments and powerful reasons follow the kshetrajna. But they do not touch or effect the great-
souled one. It is like the wind, which bears dust, but is itself without dust. Just as the two[Wind and dust.] are different, a learned
person knows the difference between kshetra and kshetrajna. If one practises, one does not have to go to prakriti
again[The text does not state this. But Bhishma clearly takes over again.].'
'"The illustrious rishi thus severed the doubt that had arisen. Having considered this view, which has all the
signs of accomplishment, the seeds[Of ignorance and desire.] must be burnt, so that they do not sprout again. If they are burnt through
knowledge, the atman is not tied down to hardships again."'
