'Dhritarashtra asked, "There may be a brahmana who has learnt the chants of the Rig, the Yajur and the Sama
Veda. If he performs a sin, will he be tainted, or will he not be tainted?"

'Sanatsujata replied, "One who is learned in the chants of the Sama, the Rig and the Yajur will not be saved
from his evil deeds. I am not speaking a falsehood to you. The metres do not save a deceitful one, who has resorted
to deceit, from sin. When their wings have grown, birds flee a nest. Like that, the metres desert one whose time of
destruction has come."

'Dhritarashtra asked, "O learned one! If the Vedas are incapable of saving one who is without dharma, why have
the brahmanas eternally talked about them?"

'Sanatsujata replied, "The austerities performed in this world are seen to yield fruits in another. When they are
established in rich austerities, brahmanas obtain those worlds."

'Dhritarashtra asked, "How can austerities be prosperous and how can they fail to be so? O Sanatsujata! Tell me
this, so that we may get to know."

'Sanatsujata replied, "O king! There are twelve vices like anger and another six like cruelty. Brahmanas who
know about the sacred texts are knowledgeable about the qualities that prevent dharma-anger, desire, avarice,
delusion, possessiveness, compassion[This doesn't quite fit. Perhaps one means lack of compassion.], discontent, pride, sorrow, lust, jealousy and aversion-these are the
twelve human vices that men must always avoid. O Indra among kings! Every single one of them waits for a weakness in a man, like a hunter waits for a deer. Maligning others[Alternatively, speaking well of themselves.], covetousness, vanity, vindictiveness, anger and
fickleness-if these six vices are left uncontrolled, they incite men towards evil in their dharma. They do not perform any good in extremely difficult situations. Scheming to enjoy, hatred, pride in deceit, regrets after giving, the
weakness of miserliness, praise of one's kin and hatred of women-these are the seven cruel vices. Dharma, truthfulness, self-control, austerities, lack of envy, modesty, forgiveness, contentment, sacrifices, generosity, fortitude
and learning-these are the twelve great vows for a brahmana. If one dwells with these twelve, one is capable of
ruling the entire earth. Even if one is distinguished by the presence of three, two or only one of these, know that
one does not possess anything. Self-control, renunciation and lack of ignorance-immortality is vested in these.
Learned brahmanas say that truthfulness is the foremost. There are eighteen qualities that work against self-control
-perverseness in what is done or not done, falsehood, discontent, desire, acquisitiveness, covetousness, anger,
sorrow, thirst, desire, treachery, jealousy, possessiveness, regret, gloating, forgetfulness, slander and vanity. The
learned say that one who is free from these vices is self-controlled. There are six types of renunciation regarded as
superior-lack of rejoicing when one obtains something pleasant; lack of misery when something unpleasant is
generated; giving to worthy supplicants without being asked for, as long as it is not a beloved wife or sons. Even if
one is asked for what should not be asked, this is known as the third quality. Relinquishment of objects, non-fulfilment of desire and giving up the fruits of deeds[The list of six continues.]-if one possesses these qualities, even if one possesses objects, a
man is one who renounces, with the intelligence of a student. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There are eight
vices that lead to ignorance and these vices must be avoided-those that come from the five senses, the mind, the
past and the future. A person who is freed from these is happy. Only austerities which are free from these vices,
and are united with the qualities, become prosperous and successful. O Indra among kings! This is what you asked
me. What else do you wish to hear?"

'Dhritarashtra said, "Some people have said that there are five Vedas, with ancient accounts as the fifth[The four Vedas are Rig Veda, Sama Veda, Yajur Veda and Atharva Veda. Sometimes, the Atharva Veda is not
included and there is a list of three. Itihasa (Ramayana, Mahabharata) and the Puranas are regarded as the fifth
Veda.]. Others
say that there are four Vedas and still others say that there are three Vedas. Others say that there are two Vedas and
still others say that there is one Veda. There are others who accept no hymns. O brahmana! Therefore, what should
I now regard as the true Veda?"

'Sanatsujata replied, "Because there is ignorance about the single Veda, many Vedas have been thought of. O
Indra among kings! There is one truth and all of them are established in that truth. Ignoring the Vedas, wisdom is
sought in the great one[The brahman or the paramatman.]. If gifts, studying and sacrifices are followed out of greed, the resolutions of those proud
ones deviate from the truth. Therefore, one should undertake a sacrifice only for the sake of the truth. When a man
performs this with the mind, speech and deeds, he is successful in his intentions and is established in his intentions.
Without being secretive, one should be consecrated in a rite. The word satyam is derived from the root sat[Meaning righteous.] and is
the supreme objective and truth. The results of knowledge are direct. Those of austerities are generated indirectly.
A brahmana who recites a lot, should only be known as one who recites a lot. O kshatriya! Therefore, do not regard a brahmana to be superior only because he recites. He who has not deviated from the truth should be known
as a brahmana. O kshatriya! When the class of rishis was created, Atharvan[Ancient sage from whom the Atharva Veda is traced.] chanted these ancient hymns. Those
who learnt them were known as those who recited hymns. But they do not know the one[The brahman or the paramatman.] who should be known
through the Vedas. O king! There are some who know the Vedas and there are some who know what should be
known through the Vedas. He who knows the Vedas knows what should be known through the Vedas. He who
knows what should be known through the Vedas is established in truth. I know him to be a brahmana who explains
skilfully and is capable of removing doubts, having dispelled all his own doubts. The One[The brahman or the paramatman.] cannot be found by
going to the east or the south, or the west, or diagonally, or in any direction at all. One should think about this
while meditating in silence, being immobile even in one's thoughts. The brahman that is established in the inner
soul will then manifest itself. He who maintains silence is a muni[Muni means sage or hermit, with a root in mouna or silence.]; one does not become a muni by residing in the
forest. He who knows the one without decay is said to be the supreme hermit. One who knows the grammar behind
everything is said to be a grammarian. But a man who can directly see all the worlds is a man who sees everything.
O kshatriya! A brahmana who is established in the truth sees the brahman, by following in due order, what is prescribed in the Vedas. This is what I am telling you. Know this."'
