Janamejaya said, 'O brahmana! What I have heard from you is exceedingly wonderful. You have told me in detail about how Kumara was duly consecrated. O one rich in austerities! After hearing this, I know that I have
been purified. My body hair has stood up and my mind is delighted. After hearing about Kumara's consecration
and the slaughter of the daityas, I am supremely happy. However, I am still curious. How was the lord of the waters consecrated by the gods and the asuras? O immensely wise one! O supreme one! You are skilled in narrating.
Tell me about this.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'O king! Listen to this wonderful account, exactly as it happened in another kalpa[We have deliberately retained the word kalpa, since a kalpa is much
more than an era (yuga). It is more like an aeon or epoch. A cycle of
satya (or krita) yuga, treta yuga, dvapara yuga and kali yuga constitutes a
mahayuga and 1000 mahayugas constitute a kalpa, one of Brahma's days.
A kalpa is divided into fourteen manvantara, with a Manu presiding over
each of these.].
During that original krita yuga, all the gods assembled, went to Varuna in the proper fashion and said, "Just as
Shakra, lord of the gods, always protects us from fear, in that way, you become the lord of all the rivers. O god!
Always dwell in the ocean, the abode of makaras. May the ocean, the lord of the rivers, be under your control. Together with Soma[The moon.], you will also wax and wane." Varuna spoke to the gods, signifying his acceptance. All of
them assembled and made Varuna, whose abode was the ocean, the lord of the waters, in accordance with the decreed rites. Having consecrated Varuna as the lord of the waters, the gods worshipped the lord of the waters and
returned to their respective abodes. The immensely illustrious Varuna was thus consecrated by the gods. In accordance with what was required, he protected flowing water, oceans, rivers and lakes, like Shatakratu protects the
gods. The immensely wise destroyer of Pralamba[Name of a demon killed by Balarama.] touched the waters there and gave away many riches. He
then went to Agnitirtha. The fire god was destroyed there and became invisible inside shami. O unblemished one!
When the lord and light-giver of the worlds disappeared in this way, the great-souled gods presented themselves
before the grandfather of all the worlds and said, "The illustrious Agni has disappeared and we do not know the
reason. Let all the worlds not be destroyed. Please create fire again." '

Janamejaya asked, 'Why was the illustrious Agni, the creator of all the worlds, destroyed? How did the gods
discover him again? Please tell me everything about this.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'The powerful fire god was extremely frightened because of Bhrigu's curse[The sage Bhrigu's wife was Puloma. A demon was enamoured of her
and asked Agni who she was. To avoid telling a lie, Agni said that she
was the sage Bhrigu's wife. The demon abducted her. At that time, Pulo-
ma was pregnant and had a miscarriage. Though the child (Chyavana)
survived, Bhrigu cursed Agni for revealing Puloma's identity. The curse
was that Agni would devour everything. The story has been recounted in
Section 1 (Volume 1).]. The illustrious one sought refuge inside a shami tree and could no longer be seen. When the fire god disappeared, all the
gods, together with Vasava, were extremely unhappy. They searched for the fire that had vanished. Having reached
Agnitirtha, they found Agni inside a shami tree. They found the fire god dwelling there. O tiger among men! With
Brihaspati at the forefront, and with Vasava, all the gods were delighted at having found the fire god. They returned to the places that they had come from and he became the devourer of everything. O lord of the earth!
Bhrigu was knowledgeable about the brahman and this happened because of his curse. Having bathed there, the
intelligent one[Balarama.] went to Brahmayoni. In earlier times, the illustrious lord Brahma, the grandfather of all the
worlds, had bathed there, with the gods, in accordance with the rites that are laid down for the gods. Having bathed
there, he[Balarama.] gave away many riches. He then went to the tirtha named Koubera. O king! The lord Ailabila tormented himself through great austerities there and became the lord of riches. O king! O best of men! At that spot,
many stores of riches manifested themselves before him[According to some accounts, Vishrava was the son of Pulastya and
Vishrava's wife was Ilavida or Ilavila. The son of this union was Ailavida
or Ailabila. Ailabila performed austerities and became Kubera, the lord of
riches.]. The one with the plough presented himself at that
tirtha. Having gone and bathed there, in the prescribed way, he gave away riches to the brahmanas. He saw the
place known as Koubera, with the best of groves. In earlier times, the extremely great-souled King Kubera tormented himself through great austerities there and obtained a large number of boons. He became the lord of riches
and became a friend of the infinitely energetic Rudra. He became a god and a guardian of the world there. He also
obtained a son named Nalakubara. O mighty-armed one! The lord of riches swiftly obtained all these things there.
Large numbers of Maruts assembled there and consecrated him. He also obtained a vehicle there, yoked to beautiful horses. This was the celestial vimana Pushpaka. He also got the riches of the gods. O king! Having bathed
there, Bala gave away many kinds of gifts. Smearing himself with white sandalwood paste, Rama quickly went to
the tirtha known as Badarapachana. It was inhabited by all kinds of living beings. Auspicious flowers and fruit are
always found in the groves there.'
