The brahmana said, 'Good and bad acts committed in this world are never destroyed. As one body is obtained after another body, the fruits are cooked there. A high-yielding fruit tree produces large quantities of
fruit. In that way, deeds performed with an auspicious mind yield a great deal. This is also true of wicked deeds
perpetrated with an evil mind. In this world, the atman places the mind at the forefront and then undertakes action.
After this, listen to how a man enters a womb, when deeds are instructed by desire and anger. Semen is created
from blood and enters a woman's womb. The body is derived from acts and is a function of good and bad acts. The
brahman[Meaning the jivatman.] is subtle and unmanifest in nature. It resorts to the body, but is not attached to anything. That is the reason, it is the eternal brahman. This is the seed of all beings and it is because of this that all creatures are alive. Having entered the womb, the jivatman penetrates all the different limbs in the body. Basing itself on the place meant
for the breath of life, it instantly imparts consciousness. The limbs begin to move and the foetus has consciousness.
When liquid iron is drained and poured into a mould, it assumes the form of an idol. Know that this is the way the
jivatman approaches and penetrates a foetus. When fire enters a lump of iron, it heats it up. Know that this is the
way the jivatman approaches and penetrates a foetus. When one uses a lamp, the light illuminates everything. In
that way, consciousness illuminates different parts of the body. Whatever deeds have been committed, good or bad,
in an earlier life, all of these must certainly be enjoyed. These are thus extinguished and others are again gathered
together. This continues as long as one does not understand the dharma that leads to moksha. O excellent one!
When one is born and is repeatedly circling around, I will tell you about the dharma that ensures happiness. Donations, vows, brahmacharya, sustaining the prescribed rites, self-restraint, tranquility, compassion towards all beings, self-control, lack of injury, not appropriating the possessions of others, uprightness, abstention from futile
censure of all creatures on earth, serving the mother and the father, worshipping gods and ancestors, worship of
seniors, tenderness, purity towards others, constant restraint of the senses and ensuring what is auspicious-these
are said to be virtuous conduct. Dharma flows from this and protects subjects eternally. This conduct is always
seen among the virtuous and they obtain a state that is permanent. Conduct in conformity with dharma is said to be
that which is resorted to by those who are virtuous. They immerse themselves in dharma and this is the dharma
that is eternal. If one resorts to this, one never has to confront extreme hardship. When the world is deluded, it is
through such rules that it is brought back to the path of dharma. Yogis and those who are emancipated are superior
to these[Virtuous people.]. If a man follows the appropriate dharma, he is freed from this cycle of life after a long period of time. In
this way, all creatures have to follow their earlier deeds. All the wicked deeds are the reason why one has arrived
in this world. Who first determined the acceptance of a body[The adoption of a body is determined by the deeds committed in earlier lives. But what determined the adoption
of the first body?]? There is a doubt in the world about this. I will tell
you about this next. The grandfather of all creatures first created his own body. Brahma then created the three
worlds and all the mobile and immobile objects. Having adopted a body, Pradhana created consciousness. This
pervades all the worlds and is known as supreme. This is said to be Kshara. The other one is immortal and Akshara[Kshara is destructible, akshara is indestructible. The body is destructible, but the atman is indestructible. The
second part of the shloka is difficult to understand. The three possibly mean the physical body, the jivatman and
the paramatman. These exist together and they also exist separately. One can form different couples out of these
three.]. There are couples formed of these three. They all exist together, but they also exist separately. In his first
creation, Prajapati created all the creatures and the immobile objects. This is what the sacred texts say about that
ancient account. Thereafter, the grandfather determined the measurement of time and decreed the going and coming of creatures[Death and rebirth respectively.]. There may be a person who has seen his atman and knows about his earlier birth. I will accurately tell you everything that such a person would say, or has experienced. Such a person always looks upon happiness and unhappiness as transitory. He regards the body as a vigorous arena for conflicting action, certain to decay.
Whenever there is happiness, he remembers all the unhappiness. Such a person is able to cross this ocean that is
the cycle of life and which is so very difficult to traverse. Immersed in birth, death and disease, he knows about
Pradhana. Basing his consciousness on that universal consciousness, he looks upon all creatures impartially. He is
indifferent towards everything and seeks for the supreme path and destination. O excellent one! I will tell you and
instruct you about the true nature of that. That is the eternal and undecaying state. That is supreme knowledge. O
brahmana! I will tell you about it in detail. Listen to me.'"'
