Vaishampayana said, 'Emerging from the city, the brave and armed ones arranged themselves in battle formsations.
The Matsyas encountered the Trigartas when the sun had gone down. The Trigartas and the Matsyas were powerful and irrepressible in battle. The immensely strong ones roared at each other in anger, eager to grasp the cattle.
Brave ones, skilled in handling elephants, were ascended on elephants and goaded them with spikes and hooks.
There ensued a terrible and tumultuous fight, which made the body hair stand up. O king! As the sun went down, it
was like that between the gods and the asuras. Dust arose from the ground and nothing could be seen. Covered
with dust raised by the soldiers, birds fell down on the ground. The sun disappeared behind the thick shower of arrows that were released. The firmament was ablaze, as if with fireflies. The bows of the archers were plated with
gold. Those brave ones in the world shot with the right hand and the left and were smitten down. Chariots fought
with chariots and infantry with infantry. Cavalry fought with cavalry and elephants with mighty elephants. O king!
As they engaged in battle, they struck each other with swords, sharp spears, lances, spikes and javelins. The brave
ones possessed arms that were like clubs. They struck each other in that battle, but the brave ones were unable to
vanquish the enemy heroes. Severed heads could be seen, covered with dust, with mangled lips, but with the noses
intact, ornamented and adorned with earrings and with the hair dressed. In that great battle, the bodies of kshatriyas
could be seen there, shattered into many parts by the arrows, resembling the trunks of shala trees. The earth was
covered with heads wearing earrings and smeared with sandalwood, like the bodies of serpents. The earth was covered with dust and the flow of blood made this subside. But the terrible and dreadful combat went on, without any
restraint.

'Shatanika killed one hundred. Vishalaksha killed four hundred[Vishalaksha hasn't been mentioned before and is probably another one of Virata's brothers.]. Those maharathas penetrated the large army
of the Trigartas. They engaged in hand to hand, hair to hair and nail to nail combat. On noticing the collection of
chariots of the Trigartas, they penetrated with Suryadatta at the front and Madirashva at the back[Madirashva must be another one of Virata's brothers.]. Virata destroyed five hundred chariots in that battle. He killed hundreds of horses and five maharathas. Following different
routes, that leader of charioteers penetrated that mass of chariots, until he encountered Susharma of Trigarta,
mounted on a golden chariot, in that field of battle. Those two great-souled and immensely strong ones struck each
other, roaring at each other like bulls in a pen of cows. Those charioteers circled each other on chariots. They
swiftly discharged arrows, like clouds unleashing torrents of rain. Intolerant and angry, skilled in use of weapons,
they attacked each other with sharp arrows, swords, lances and clubs. Then the king pierced Susharma with ten arrows and each of his four horses with five arrows each. But Susharma was irrepressible in battle and supreme in
use of weapons. He struck the king of the Matsyas with fifty sharp arrows. In the evening, with everything covered
in dust, the soldiers of the king of Matsya and Susharma could not see each other.'
