Yudhishthira asked, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! Having obtained prosperity, great riches and a long
lifespan, how can one overcome death? Can one overcome old age and death through extremely great austerities, deeds, learning and the application of medicines?"

'Bhishma replied, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about the conversation between the mendicant Panchashikha and Janaka. To dispel his doubt about dharma, King Janaka of Videha progressively asked the
great rishi Panchashikha, who was supreme among those who knew about the Vedas. 'O illustrious one! What is
the conduct through which one can overcome old age and death? Is it through austerities, intelligence, deeds or
learning?' Having  been  thus  addressed  by  the  ruler  of  Videha,  the  one  who  knew  about  the  supreme  replied,
'These two cannot be overcome. But it is not true that they can never be overcome. Days, nights and months pass.
Though a person is temporary, he can obtain what is permanent and certain. All creatures are destroyed. Without a
raft, they are continuously borne along on a flow and submerged in the ocean of time. Old age and death are the
giant crocodiles and there is no escape from them. There is no one who can aid a person. Nor can he help anyone
else. Along that path, one gets to know wives, relatives and others. There is no one with whom one has spent a
great deal of time earlier. Because of time, they are repeatedly brought together and repeatedly thrust apart. They
are like accumulations of clouds, moved around by the wind. Like wolves, old age and death devour all creatures,
regardless of whether they are strong or weak, short or tall. Though creatures are impermanent, in those creatures,
there is a being[The atman.] who is eternal. Why should one take delight at birth? Why should one suffer anxiety on account
of death? Where have I come from? Who am I? Where will I go? To whom do I belong? Where am I established?
Where will I be? Therefore, why are you grieving? Even if you see heaven or hell, you will not remain there. This
cannot be overcome through sacred texts, gifts or sacrifices.'"'
