'"The lord said, 'They say the ashvattha tree, 524 with a root above and branches below, is indestructible. He who
knows that its leaves are the metres 525 knows the truth. Specially nurtured by the gunas, with objects 526 as its
shoots, its branches extend upwards and downwards. In the world of men, its rootlings 527 stretch downwards, the
cause of action. In this, 528 this form 529 is not felt, nor the end, nor the beginning. Nor even its establishment.
Slicing the thick root of this ashvattha with the weapon of firm detachment, thereafter, one must seek that goal, the
attainment of which means no return, 530 stating, "I seek refuge in that original being, from whom this eternal
process is created," without pride and delusion, having conquered the fault of attachment, constant in the knowledge of the atman, having restrained desire, freed from the opposites of happiness and unhappiness, the wise go to
that indestructible goal. Attaining that, there is no return. The sun cannot light that, 531 nor the moon, nor fire.
That is my supreme abode. Indeed, part of my eternal form is established as beings in nature and attracts the mind
and six 532 senses to the world of beings. Like the wind carries away fragrance from receptacles, 533 the lord, 534
when it discards one body and attains another one, takes these 535 with it and leaves. This 536 is established in the
ears, the eyes, touch, the tongue, the nose and also the mind and enjoys objects. The deluded do not see the establishment and also the enjoyment and progress, with the qualities as attributes. 537 Those with eyes of wisdom, see
this. Careful 538 yogis, established in the atman, see this. Despite care, those who are not established in the atman,
and are without consciousness, don't see this. The energy in the sun that lights up the entire world, that in the
moon and that too in the fire, know that energy to be mine. I enter the earth and hold up the beings with my energy.
As the watery moon, I nourish all the herbs. 539 I am established in the bodies of beings as the fire of digestion. I
mingle with the prana and apana breath 540 and digest the four types of food. 541 I am established in the hearts of
all beings. I result in memory and knowledge and their lack. Indeed, it is I who am the knowledge of the Vedas and
the origin of Vedanta. And I am the knower of the Vedas. 542 The destructible and the indestructible, these two purushas exist in the world. All these beings are destructible. 543 The fixed is known as the indestructible. 544 That
apart, there is a supreme purusha known as the paramatman, who enters the three worlds and sustains them-the
indestructible Lord. Because I am beyond destruction and superior even to the indestructible, therefore, I am
known as the supreme being 545 in this world 546 and in the Vedas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Without
delusion, he who knows me as the supreme being, he is omniscient and worships me in every way. O pure one! O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thus, this extremely secret knowledge has been related by me. This understanding leads to knowledge and accomplishment.'"' 547