'Sanjaya said, "That invincible army was protected by Bharadvaja's son. With Bhimaseana at the forefront, the
Parthas advanced against it. Satyaki, Chekitana, Parshata Dhrishtadyumna[Parshata, or Prishata's (Drupada) son, is one of Dhrishtadyumna's names.], the valiant Kuntibhoja, maharatha
Drupada, Arjuna's son[Abimanyu.], Kshatradharma, the brave Brihatkshatra, Dhrishtaketu the king of Chedi, the sons of
Madri[Nakula and Sahadeva.], Ghatotkacha, the brave Yudhamanyu, the unvanquished Shikhandi, the unassailable Uttamouja, maharatha Virata, Droupadi's enraged sons, Shishupala's brave son[Dhrishtaketu, Shishupala's son, and the king of Chedi, has already been mentioned. So this is a reference to
Suketu, Dhrishtaketu's brother.], the immensely valorous Kekayas, thousands of
Srinjayas and many others, skilled in use of weapons and irresistible in battle, suddenly advanced, together with
their followers, wishing to fight against Bharadvaja's son. However, Bharadvaja's valiant son was not agitated. As
they approached, he repulsed all of them with a mighty shower of arrows. Like a large mass of water confronting
an impenetrable hill, or like the shoreline driving back the ocean, they were driven back by Drona. O Indra among
kings! They were oppressed by the arrows released from Drona's bow. The Pandavas were incapable of standing
before Bharadvaja's son. The strength of Drona's arms was seen to be extraordinary, in that the Panchalas, together
with the Srinjayas, could not advance before him. On seeing that Drona was advancing wrathfully, Yudhishthira
thought about many ways whereby Drona could be countered. Having formed the view that Drona was incapable
of being resisted by anyone else, Yudhishthira imposed that heavy and unbearable burden on Subhadra's son. He
was not inferior to Vasudeva. His energy was superior to that of Phalguna. And he[Yudhishthira.] spoke these words to Abhimanyu, the slayer of enemy heroes. 'O son[The word used is tata. While this means son, it can be affectionately used for anyone who is younger or junior.]! Act so that Arjuna does not censure us on return[Arjuna has been persuaded to leave for another part of the field, to fight with the samshaptakas.]. There is no one
amongst us who knows how to penetrate the chakra vyuha. O mighty-armed one! With the exception of you, Arjuna, Krishna and Pradyumna[Pradyumna was the son of Krishna and Rukmini.], there is no fifth person who can penetrate the chakra vyuha. O Abhimanyu! O son!
I am asking this boon and you should grant it to me, for the sake of your fathers, your maternal uncles and all the
soldiers. O son! Otherwise, on returning from the fight, Dhananjaya will censure us. Grasp your weapons and act
so as to strike Drona's army.'

'"Abhimanyu replied, 'Desiring the victory of my fathers, I will soon enter and penetrate that firm and supreme
array of warriors, created by Drona. My father instructed me about entering and penetrating an array like this. But
if I confront a calamity there, I do not know how to emerge.'

'"Yudhishthira said, 'O foremost among warriors! O son! Penetrate the array and create an entry for us. All of us
will follow the path you traverse. O son! You are the equal of Dhananjaya in battle. On seeing you enter, we will
follow and protect you from all the directions.'

'"Bhima said, 'I will follow you and so will Dhrishtadyumna, Satyaki, the Panchalas, the Kekayas, the Matsyas
and all the Prabhadrakas. Once you have shattered the vyuha, we will repeatedly enter it and slaughter the best of
the warriors who are inside it.'

'"Abhimanyu replied, 'Like an angry insect entering a flaming fire, I will penetrate Drona's unassailable array.
Today, I will do what is good for both the lineages[The father's lineage and the mother's lineage. Subhadra, Abhimanyu's mother, was Krishna's sister.]. I will bring pleasure to my maternal uncle and my father. In
the battle, a single child will be like death to masses of enemy soldiers and all the beings will witness my deeds
today.'

'"Yudhishthira said, 'O Subhadra's son! As you speak, may your strength increase. You are seeking to penetrate
Drona's impenetrable array. These tigers among men, great archers who are skilled in striking, will protect you.
They are like the Sadhyas, the Rudras and the Maruts. They are like the Vasus, Agni and Aditya in valour.'"

'Sanjaya said, "On hearing these words, he[Abhimanyu.] instructed his charioteer, Sumitra, and in that battle, asked him to
swiftly drive towards Drona's array."'
