Vaishampayana said, 'Having been kicked by the son of a suta, the beautiful princess Krishna blazed forth and
planned the general's death. Drupada's daughter then went to her own residence and having purified herself, the
slender-waisted Krishna washed her body and her garments with water. Weeping, she thought about how she might
emerge from her misery. "What will I do? Where will I go? How will my task be accomplished?" While she was
thinking in this way, Bhima surfaced in her mind. "Other than Bhima, no one can act so as to bring pleasure to my
mind." She arose from her bed in the night. The spirited and chaste Krishna possessed a protector. Afflicted with
great grief in her mind, the sweet-smiling Panchali swiftly went to Bhimasena in the kitchen, like a three-year old
cow born in the forest approaches a bull, or a she-elephant approaches a large bull-elephant. She was like a creeper
embracing a large and flowering sala tree[Large tree.] on the banks of the Gomati, like the wife of the king of animals[The king of animals is a lion and the wife is a lioness.] waking up a sleeping lion in the deserted forest. Unblemished Panchali spoke to Bhimasena in words that were as
sweet as a veena uttering gandhara notes[A veena is a musical instrument. Gandhara is the third of the seven primary notes, often written as ga.]. "O Bhimasena! Arise! Arise! How can you sleep as if you are dead?
The evil one, who molested the wife of someone who is not dead, is still alive. My enemy, the evil-doing general,
is still alive." Awoken by the princess, Kouravya arose from his bed and seated himself on a couch covered with
cushions, looking like a monsoon cloud. He asked his beloved queen, "Why have you come to me in this hurried
fashion? Your complexion is not natural. You appear to be pale and wan. Tell me everything in detail, whether it is
pleasant or unpleasant, agreeable or disagreeable, so that I know. Having heard everything, I will decide what
should be done next. O Krishna! I am trusted by you in all deeds. I have repeatedly saved you from all dangers.
Quickly tell me what you desire, what task needs to be done. Then return to your bed before the others arise."'
