Sanjaya said, "O king! On seeing that your soldiers were being driven away by the Pandavas, your son loudly
tried to rally them. In that battle, the flanks, the distant flanks, the even more distant flanks and the right wings of
the the Kurus raised their weapons and attacked Bhima. O great king! On seeing that the army of the sons of Dhritarashtra was running away, Karna asked Shalya, the adornment of a battle, to drive towards Vrikodara, on the
foremost of horses that possessed the complexion of swans. Those horses reached Bhimasena's chariot and engaged. On seeing that Karna had approached, Bhima was full of anger. O bull among the Bharata lineage! He
made up his mind to destroy Karna. He told brave Satyaki and Parshata Dhrishtadyumna, 'Protect King Yudhishthira, who has dharma in his soul. In my sight, he escaped from a great calamity. In front of me, for the sake of
Duryodhana's pleasure, the evil-minded Radheya deprived the king of all his garments[This is a reference to the gambling match.]. O Parshata! Today, I
will bring an end to that misery. In the battle, I will kill Karna, or he will kill me. Either will happen in this extremely terrible battle. I am telling you this truthfully. Today, I am handing over the king in trust to you. Do not be
anxious. But protect him in every way.' Having said this, the mighty-armed one headed in the direction of the
chariot of Adhiratha's son. He roared loudly like a lion and this made all the directions resound.

' "On seeing that Bhima, who delighted in a battle, was swiftly advancing, the lord who was the king of Madra
spoke to the son of the suta. 'O Karna! Behold the enraged and mighty-armed descendant of the Pandava lineage.
He has conquered his wrath for a long time and certainly wishes to release it towards you. O Karna! I have never
seen him in such a form earlier, not even when Abhimanyu and rakshasa Ghatotkacha were killed. In his ire, he is
capable of resisting the three worlds. The form that he has assumed is like the resplendent fire of destruction.' O
king! While the lord of Madra was speaking these words to Radheya, Vrikodara, flaming in his anger, attacked
Karna. On seeing that Bhima, who delighted in fighting, had thus arrived, Radheya laughed and spoke these words
to Shalya. 'O lord of Madra! O lord! There is no doubt that the words that you have spoken to me now about Bhimasena are true. Vrikodara is brave, valiant and angry. He is indifferent towards protecting his body and his life
and is superior in strength. When he lived in disguise in the city of Virata, for the sake of bringing pleasure to
Droupadi, resorting only to his arms, he secretly killed Kichaka and his followers[This has been described in Section 46 (Volume 4).]. He is senseless with anger
and armoured now. He is stationed in the forefront of this battle. He is roaming around in this battle, like Death
with a staff, and wishes to do something. I have also harboured a desire for a long time, that either I will kill Arjuna in a battle, or Dhananjaya will kill me. Now that Bhima has advanced against me, perhaps that wish may come
true today. If I kill Bhimasena or deprive him of his chariot, and Partha advances against me, that will be fortunate.
Please do whatever needs to done, quickly.' On hearing the words of the great-souled Radheya, Shalya spoke these
words to the son of the suta. 'O mighty-armed one! Advance against the immensely strong Bhimasena. If you restrain Bhimasena, you may be able to reach Phalguna. O Karna! The desire that you have harboured in your heart
for a long time, may well be accomplished. I am telling you this truthfully.' Having been thus addressed, Karna
again spoke to Shalya. 'Arjuna will kill me in the battle, or I will kill Dhananjaya. Fix your mind on the battle.
Drive. Drive there.' O lord of the earth! Having been thus instructed, Shalya swiftly drove the chariot to the spot
where Bhima, the great archer, was driving away the army. At this, there was the extremely loud noise of trumpets
and drums. O Indra among kings! This arose as Karna and Bhima clashed.

' "The powerful Bhimasena was extremely angry. He was invincible and drove your soldiers away in different
directions, using sharp and sparkling iron arrows. O lord of the earth! O great king! That fierce battle between Karna and Pandava was tumultuous and terrible in form. O Indra among kings! In an instant, Pandava attacked Karna.
On seeing that he was descending, Karna Vaikartana Vrisha angrily struck him between the breasts with an iron
arrow. The one who was immeasurable in his soul again covered him with a shower of arrows. Having been thus
pierced, he enveloped the son of the suta with arrows. He pierced Karna with nine sharp arrows with drooping
tufts. Karna used his arrows to sever his bow into two fragments from the middle. When he was deprived of his
bow, he struck him between the breasts with extremely sharp iron arrows that were capable of penetrating all armour. O king! Vrikodara picked up another bow and struck the son of the suta with extremely sharp arrows that
were capable of penetrating the inner organs. He roared powerfully and made heaven and earth tremble. Karna
struck him with twenty-five iron arrows, like a maddened and proud elephant attacked in the forest with flaming
torches. With his limbs mangled by the arrows, Pandava became senseless with rage. His eyes were coppery red
with anger and intolerance and he wished to kill the son of the suta. His bow was extremely powerful and supreme
and capable of bearing a great load. He affixed an arrow that was capable of shattering mountains. The son of the
wind god[Bhima.] powerfully stretched the bow back, all the way up to his ears. Wishing to kill Karna, the great archer
angrily released the arrow. Having been thus released by the powerful one, the arrow, with a sound like that of the
vajra or thunder, struck Karna in that battle, with a force like that of the vajra against a mountain. O extender of the
Kuru lineage! Thus struck by Bhimasena, the son of the suta, the leader of an army, lost his senses and sank down
on the floor of his chariot. On seeing that the son of the suta had lost his senses, the lord of Madra bore Karna, the
adornment of a battle, away on the chariot. When Karna was defeated, the large army of the sons of Dhritarashtra
was driven away by Bhimasena, like an army of the danavas by Indra." '
