Vaishampayana said, 'When that foremost among brahmanas had departed and some time had passed, the maiden
began to think about the strength and weakness of that sequence of mantras. "What is this sequence of mantras that
the great-souled one has given me? I will soon find out its strength." While thinking in this fashion, the young girl
noticed that with puberty, her menses had arrived and she was ashamed. Pritha saw that the one with the thousand
rays was blazing. On seeing the beauty of Bhanu in the morning, she was not satisfied. She became gifted with divine eyesight and she saw the god whose form was celestial, clad in armour and adorned with earrings. O lord of
men! She became curious about the mantra. The beautiful one invoked the god. Having performed pranayama, she
summoned the sun-god. O king! The sun-god swiftly appeared before her. His complexion was as yellow as honey.
He was mighty-armed. His neck was like a conch shell. He seemed to be smiling. He wore bracelets on his upper
arms and a diadem. He seemed to set the directions on fire. Resorting to yoga, he divided himself into two. While
one heated from the sky, the other arrived before Kunti and spoke to her in sweet words. "O fortunate one! I have
appeared here because I am under your control, thanks to the strength of the mantra. O queen! Now that I am under
your control, what do you wish me to do? I will do whatever you ask me to." Kunti replied, "O illustrious one! Return to the place you arrived from. O illustrious one! I summoned you out of curiosity. Please be gracious."

'The sun said, "O slender-waisted one! I will go as you have asked me to. But having invoked a god, it is not
proper to send him away in vain. O extremely fortunate one! Your desire is to have a son through Surya. He will be
unrivalled in this world in valour and he will wear armour and earrings. O one whose gait is like that of an elephant! Give yourself to me. O beautiful one! I will beget a son, like the one that you desire. O fortunate one! O
sweet-smiling one! I will depart after having united with you. Else, I will leave in anger and will curse that brahmana[Durvasa.] and your father. There is no doubt that I will consume them because of what you have done. Though he
does not know about this offence, your father is stupid. That brahmana gave you this mantra without knowing
about your character and conduct and I will impose extreme humility on him. O beautiful one! All the gods in
heaven, with Purandara at the forefront, have seen how you have deceived me and seem to be smiling. Behold
those masses of gods through your divine eyesight. I gave that to you earlier, so that you could see me."'

Vaishampayana said, 'The princess then saw the thirty gods, all stationed in the sky in their respective places, as
resplendent and beautiful as the great and dazzling Aditya. On seeing them, the maiden was overcome with shame.
Terrified, the goddess spoke these words to Surya. "O lord of the cows! Leave in your vimana. I am a maiden and
this conduct of yours is causing me unhappiness. My father, my mother and other elders are the only ones who
have the power to give the body away. In this world, preserving the body is honoured as the greatest dharma of
women. O Vibhavasu! I summoned you to learn about the strength of the mantra. O lord! I have done this out of
childish folly. Please pardon me." Surya replied, "It is because you are a child that I am requesting you. Others do
not obtain this from me. O Kunti! O maiden! Give yourself to me. O timid one! You will then obtain peace. You
have invoked me and I cannot depart in vain. O one with the unblemished limbs! If I go away, the world will laugh
at me. O beautiful one! All the gods will speak about me in jest. Therefore, unite with me and obtain a son who
will be like me. O beautiful one! There is no doubt that he will be special in all the worlds."'
