'Yudhishthira said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He[The king.] may be weak. He may be a procrastinator. He may be excessively affectionate towards his relatives. The citizens of the city and the
countryside may be disenchanted. He may be without supplies of stores. He may suspect the foremost people[His advisers.]. His secret counsel may be divulged. He may be assailed by the enemy. All his advisers may be divided. Despite being weak, he may have to advance against a stronger enemy. When
his senses are agitated, tell me what else he can do."

'Bhishma replied, "The external one who seeks to conquer him may be pure and may be accomplished in dharma and artha. He should swiftly conclude an agreement and try to free those parts
that have already been conquered. Even if the other person wishes to conquer through adharma, is
more powerful and is wicked in his intentions, there should be an attempt to conclude a pact, even if
this leads to restrictions on himself[These restrictions might amount to giving up some more territory.]. Alternatively, he can abandon the capital and use other means
to avoid the calamity. Though that situation[Of running away.] continues, as long as he is alive, he can accumulate objects again. There are some calamities that can only be handled by giving up everything. However,
no one who knows about artha and dharma should give up the more expensive possession of one's
own life[This can be interpreted as an injunction against suicide.]. One must protect oneself against being taken captive. How can one find compassion
amidst the enemy's riches? If it is possible, one must never give oneself up."

'Yudhishthira said, "Those inside may be enraged and those outside may cause oppression. The
treasury may be exhausted. The secret counsel may be divulged. What remains to be done then?"

'Bhishma replied, "One should be swift in concluding a pact, or one must be swift in exhibiting
one's fierce valour. Or one can swiftly retreat and protect oneself. O lord of the earth! A king can
conquer the entire earth with a few soldiers, if they are devoted, nourished and cheerful. If he is
slain, he will ascend to heaven. If he is victorious, he will gain the earth. If he gives up his life in the
battle, he will obtain Shakra's world. When he has conquered all the people, he must tread gently. If
he cannot inspire trust in them through his humility, he should use his shoes[To run away.]. He should retreat only
when he wishes to. Should he desire to use conciliation, he should remove all signs from his own
self and advance with a friend[Advance towards the enemy with a friend, removing all signs of royalty.]."'