'Bhishma said, "A lord of the earth should not desire to conquer the earth through the use of adharma. Even if a
lord of the earth has obtained victory through the use of adharma, who will endorse this? A victory that is full of
adharma is not permanent and it does not lead to heaven. O bull among the Bharata lineage! It weakens the king
and the earth. There may be an adversary whose armour has been shattered. He speaks and says, 'I am yours.' He
joins his hands in supplication. He casts aside his weapons. Such a person should be seized, but not injured. If a
person has been conquered through the use of force, a lord of the earth should not fight against him. He should be
affectionately made to stay for a year[In the house of the captor.] and it will be as if he has been born again. A maiden who has been abducted through the use of valour should not be touched for a year. This is also true of all the riches that have been
violently seized. However, the riches should not be sterile. The brahmanas should drink the milk of the cows and
everything should be pardoned and restored to what it was[This is a difficult shloka to translate. The idea seems to be that property
seized from those in the enemy's kingdom must be resorted to the original owners.]. A king must fight with a king. That is what dharma
decrees. One who is not a king should never fight against a king. If a brahmana wishes to ensure peace and advances between the two armies that have engaged, one should then refrain from fighting. One should not contravene an eternal agreement that one should not injure a brahmana. If someone who calls himself a kshatriya breaks
this agreement, he is not praised. Thereafter, he is not received in assemblies. A lord of the earth who desires victory should not follow a conduct that leads to the destruction of dharma and the violation of an agreement. There is
no gain greater than a victory that has been obtained through the use of dharma.

'"When the people have been forced to bow down[The people in the country that has been invaded.], they must be quickly placated. They must be comforted
through gifts of objects of pleasure. This is the supreme policy for the king. If they are forced to bend down and
confront oppression in their own country, they will serve the enemies and wait for a calamity to descend[On the king.]. When
there is a calamity, they will quickly resort to the enemy. O king! They will be ill-disposed in every way and will
desire that the king should face a disaster. One should not abuse the enemy, or struck severely in any way. If struck
severely, the man's life may be over[This abuse refers to deceit and a fight through unfair means. The injunction against killing thus applies to an unfair fight. Alternatively, it may
refer to torturing an enemy who has been captured.]. If one possesses only a little, one should be satisfied that a great crime has
not been committed. Thus one repeatedly thinks that life alone is left[This is a difficult shloka to translate. It could conceivably apply to the
enemy who has been captured.].

'"When the countryside is prosperous and wealthy, when the king is loved, when the servants and advisers are
satisfied, the king has a firm foundation. When the officiating priests, priests, preceptors and those with learning
are honoured, when those who deserve worship are worshipped, he is said to be a conqueror of the worlds. Having
followed this kind of conduct, the supreme among the gods obtained the earth. Following Indra's triumph, other
kings desired victory. In ancient times, King Pratardana[The king of Kashi.] defeated the king in a battle and conquered the city,
leaving the countryside alone. He took away their immortal herbs and grain. However, Divodasa seized the agnihotra sacrifices, the remnants of the fire, the oblations and the vessels and suffered[That is, King Pratardana took what should be taken, but King Divodasa
took what should not be taken.]. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! Nabhaga gave away the kingdoms and the kings as dakshina, with the exception of what belonged to
learned brahmanas and ascetics. O Yudhishthira! They knew about dharma, but behaved both in superior and inferior ways. I find delight in the ancient accounts of all those kings. The lord of the earth who wishes for his own
prosperity should seek to obtain victory by acting in accordance with every kind of learning and not use deceit or
fraud."'
