Vaishampayana said, 'When Shakra had departed the way he had come, together with his brothers and Krishna,
Bibhatsu showed homage to Dharma's son. Having inhaled the fragrance of the head of Pandava Arjuna, who had
bowed down before him, he[Yudhishthira.] happily told him in a voice that was broken from delight, "O Arjuna! How did you
spend this time in heaven? How did you satisfy the king of the gods and how did you obtain the weapons? O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Have you obtained all the weapons completely? Have the king of the gods and
Rudra given you the weapons happily? How did you see Shakra and the illustrious wielder of the pinaka[The wielder of the pinaka is Shiva.]? How
did you obtain the weapons and how did you worship them? O destroyer of enemies! Why did the illustrious
Shatakratu say that you had done that which brought him pleasure? What did you do to please him? O immensely
radiant one! I wish to hear all this in detail, how you satisfied Mahadeva and the king of the gods. O unblemished
one! O destroyer of enemies! O Dhananjaya! How did you please the wielder of the vajra? Tell me everything."

'Arjuna replied, "O great king! Listen to the way in which I beheld the god Shatakratu and the illustrious lord
Shankara. O king! O destroyer of enemies! Having studied as you had asked me to, I retired to the forest according
to your instructions to practise austerities. From Kamyaka, I went to Bhrigutunga and practised austerities there.
When I had spent a night there, I met a brahmana on the road. O Kounteya! He asked me, 'Where are you going?
Tell me.' O descendant of the Kuru lineage! I then told him everything. O supreme among kings! O king! On hearing everything from me, the brahmana offered me homage and was pleased at me. He cheerfully told me, 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Practise austerities. You will soon behold the lord of the gods.' Then, following
his instructions, I ascended Mount Shaishira[Shaishira can be either a proper name or an adjective. If it is an adjective, it means the cold mountatin.] and practised austerities. O great king! For one month, I lived on
roots and fruit. O descendant of the Pandava lineage! For the second month, I lived on water alone. And in the
third, I abstained from food. In the fourth month, I stood with my arms upraised. It is extraordinary that I did not
lose my strength. When the fourth had passed and the first day arrived[The first day of the fifth month.], a being in the form of a boar appeared
before me. It dug the ground up with its tasks. It scratched it with its hooves. It rubbed it with its belly and continuously rolled over. It was followed by another great being in the form of a kirata[Kiratas are hunters, typically inhabiting mountainous regions.]. He carried a bow, arrows and a
sword and was accompanied by masses of women.

'"Taking up my bow and the quivers, I pierced that being[The boar.], which made one's hair stand up, with an arrow. At
the same time, the kirata drew his powerful bow and pierced it even more firmly, as if making my mind tremble. O
king! He told me, 'Why have you disregarded the rules of hunting and shot it? It was struck by me first. Stand still.
I will destroy your insolence with my sharp arrows. Then that gigantic being rushed at me. While I stood like a
mountain, he covered me with his great arrows. I also covered him with a mighty shower of arrows. I pierced him,
like a mountain pierced by the vajra, with arrows that flamed at the tips and had feathered shafts, with mantras
chanted over them. At that, he multiplied his body a hundred times and a thousand times. I pierced each of these
bodies with my arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! At that, all the bodies became one again. O great
king! On seeing this, I pierced it again. He now assumed a very small body with a large head and then a very large
body with a small head. O king! Then assuming a single body, he rushed at me to do battle. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! When I could not vanquish him in combat with arrows, I resorted to my vayavya weapon. But it
was extraordinary that I could not hurt him with this. When that weapon was repulsed, I was struck with great
wonder. O great king! Therefore, I resorted to greater endeavours. In that great battle, I enveloped him with many
mighty weapons. I unleashed a shower of arrows at him-sthunakarna, ayojala, sharavarsha, sharolbana, shailastra and ashmavarsha[Depending on the tips and the shafts, arrows had different names and it is difficult to pin these down more
precisely. For example, sthunakarna probably meant an arrow that was stocky at the shaft, ayojala probably had
iron in the head, sharavarsha simply means a shower of arrows, sharolbana has the same meaning, shailastra must
have had iron in the head and ashmavarsha also must have had iron in the tip.]. O unblemished one! But he smilingly gobbled up all the weapons unleashed by me.
When he had pacified all of them, I grasped my brahmastra[Powerful, magical and divine weapon.]. He was then completely covered with flaming arrows. Thus covered by my great weapon, his body began to expand. Because of the energy unleashed by me, the
world began to burn. In an instant, the directions and the sky began to blaze. But that immensely energetic one
pacified that weapon in a moment. O king! When the brahmastra weapon was conquered, I was overcome by great
fear. I grasped my bow and inexhaustible quivers and struck him with these. But he devoured those weapons too.
With all the weapons repulsed and with all the weapons devoured, that being and I engaged in a wrestling bout. We
dealt blows at each other with our fists and with the flats of our hands. But that being vanquished me and I fell
down immobile on the ground. Then that being laughed and disappeared at that spot and time, with all the women.
O great king! On seeing this, I thought that it was extraordinary.

'"O great king! Having done this, the illustrious one discarded the form of a kirata and appeared in another divine form, dressed in a wonderful garment. The illustrious god himself, with the bull on his banner[Shiva has a bull (vrisha) on his banner (dhvaja) and is known as Vrishadhvaja.], yellow-
eyed and capable of assuming many forms, the wielder of the pinaka[A pinaka can be either a trident or a bow. Shiva is the wielder of the pinaka.], could be seen in his own form, accompanied by Uma. O scorcher of enemies! After the battle, I stood there, and the wielder of the trident[Shula (trident).] told me, 'I
am pleased with you.' Grasping the bow and the inexhaustible quivers that never run out of arrows, the illustrious
one returned them to me and said, 'Ask for a boon. O Kounteya! I am satisfied with you. Tell me what I can do for
you. O brave one! What is the desire of your heart? Tell me and I will grant whatever is in your heart, as long as it
is not immortality.' Then, I joined my hands in salutation, with my mind set on obtaining weapons. I bowed to
Sharva[Shiva's name.] and spoke these words, 'If the illustrious one is pleased with me, I ask for this boon. I wish to know
about all the weapons that the gods possess.' The illustrious Tryambaka[Shiva's name, meaning the one with three eyes.] told me, 'I will give. O Pandava! My
own weapon, roudra, will always be present before you.' Satisfied, the lord granted me that pashupata
weapon[Roudra is another name for the pashupata weapon. Pashupati and Rudra are Shiva's names.]. Having given me that eternal weapon, Mahadeva told me, 'This should never be used against humans.
O Dhananjaya! This powerful weapon should only be used if you are hard-pressed. It can be used to counter all
other weapons.' Because of Vrishadhvaja's favours, that divine weapon, capable of countering all other weapons,
the destroyer of all enemies and capable of annihilating the armies of enemies, unassailable and impossible for
gods, danavas and rakshasas to endure, stood personified by my side. After obtaining his[Shiva's.] permission, I sat
down there. In my very sight, the god disappeared."'
