'Yudhishthira said, "I bid farewell to all the descendants of the Bharata lineage, my old grandfather[Bhishma.], King Soma-
datta and the great king Bahlika. And to Drona, Kripa, all the other kings, Ashvatthama, Vidura, Dhritarashtra and
to all of Dhritarashtra's sons. And to Yuyutsu[One of Dhritarashtra's sons.], Sanjaya and all the others who are in this assembly. I am bidding
farewell to all of you before I go. I will no doubt see you again on my return."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Out of shame, the righteous ones who were there could not say a word to Yudhishthira.
But in their minds, they wished for the welfare of the intelligent one.

'Vidura said, "Arya Pritha[Kunti.] is a princess. She should not go to the forest. She is delicate and old and has always been used to comfort. The illustrious one will remain in my house and be shown proper homage. O Parthas!
Know this. And may you have welfare in every way. O Yudhishthira! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Know
this to be my view that one who has been vanquished against dharma, never suffers from that defeat. You know
dharma. Dhananjaya is knowledgeable in war. Bhimasena is the slayer of enemies. Nakula is one who collects
wealth. Sahadeva is the one who administers. Dhoumya is supreme among those who know the brahman. Droupadi always follows the path of dharma and is skilled in the ways of dharma and artha. You love one another and always have kind words for each other. Because you are satisfied, you cannot be divided by enemies. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! This tranquillity brings welfare of every kind. No enemy can attack it, even if he is the
equal of Shakra. In ancient times, when you lived in the Himalayas, Meru-Savarni[A sage.] instructed you. So did
Krishna Dvaipayana in the city of Varanavata, Rama[Parashurama.] on the peak of Mount Bhrigu and Shambhu[Shiva.] by the Drishadvati[A river.]. Near Anjana, you have heard maharshi Asita. Dhoumya is your priest and there is Narada, who is always a witness. Do not give up the insight and intelligence that the rishis show homage to. O Pandava[This is specifically addressed to Yudhishthira.]! With
your intelligence you surpass Pururava, the son of Ila; with your strength you surpass the other kings; and in your
service of dharma, you surpass the rishis. Set your minds on victory with Indra's resolution, Yama's control over
anger, Kubera's charity and Varuna's self-control. In giving up one's self, you are like the moon. Obtain the sustenance of life from the water, forbearance from the earth, energy from the sun's disc and strength from the wind.
Know that your own prosperity is due to the elements. May you be fortunate. May you be free from disease. I will
see you return. O Yudhishthira! May you always act properly in all your deeds, in accordance with the principles
of dharma and artha for times of calamity and distress. O Kounteya! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I give
you leave to depart. May you find what is good for you. I will see you again when you return, successful and content."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Thus addressed, the Pandava, whose valour was his truth, replied, "Thus shall it be."

Bowing to Bhishma and Drona, Yudhishthira went away.'
