Vaishampayana said, 'Thereupon, Narayana and Indra agreed that, together with the gods, they would descend
from heaven and be born on earth in their respective parts. Having instructed the gods, Shakra[Indra.] returned from
Narayana's abode. One after another, for the destruction of the enemies of the gods and for the welfare of all the
worlds, the dwellers of heaven took birth on earth. O tiger among kings! Thereupon, as it pleased them, the gods
took birth in the dynasties of the rajarshis and the maharshis. They killed the danavas, the rakshasas, the gandharvas, the nagas and other creatures that killed men, in great numbers. O best of the Bharata lineage! The danavas,
the rakshasas, the gandharvas and the nagas could not kill the gods. Because, even when they were infants, they
were strong.'

Janamejaya said, 'I wish to hear accounts of the births of gods, danavas, gandharvas, apsaras, men, yakshas, rakshasas and other beings, from the beginning and in detail. You know everything. Please tell me.' Vaishampayana
replied, 'Bowing down to the god who creates himself[Brahma.], I shall narrate to you the origins and end of the worlds of
the gods and other beings.'

Vaishampayana said, 'Through the powers of his mind, Brahma had six sons[One should not expect consistency in accounts of creation. In some accounts, Marichi was born from Brahma
and Marichi's son was Kashyapa, from whom all humans are descended through Manu. In other accounts, Brahma
had seven sons born from his mental powers, with Vashishtha added to the list of six that is given in the text. These
seven (or six) are prajapatis or rulers of the world. In other accounts, ten prajapatis were born from Brahma's right
thumb and one of these was Daksha. Daksha had several daughters, thirteen were married to Kashyapa and twenty-
seven were married to the moon or Chandra. Section 1 states that Daksha had seven sons and that Daksha was born
from an ancient sage named Prachetas. But this is a rare reference. Daksha's birth from Brahma is more common.]-Marichi, Atri, Angiras, Pulastya, Pulaha and Kratu. Marichi's son was Kashyapa and all beings were born from Kashyapa. Daksha had thirteen daughters who were illustrious. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Daksha's daughters[The world was being populated by offspring of the gods, and the demons are also descended from Daksha's
daughters. In fact, every living species is descended from Daksha's daughters.] were Aditi, Diti,
Danu, Kala, Anayu, Simhika, Muni, Krodha, Prava, Arishta, Vinata, Kapila and Kadru. The sons and grandsons of
these daughters were immensely powerful and infinite in number.

'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! From Aditi were born the twelve adityas, the rulers of the worlds. I shall
now mention their names to you-Dhata, Mitra, Aryamana, Shakra, Varuna, Amsha, Bhaga, Vivasvana and Pusha.
In the tenth place was Savita, the eleventh was Tvashta and the twelfth was Vishnu. However, the youngest surpassed all the other adityas in qualities.

'It is heard that Diti had only one son, named Hiranyakashipu. But he had five great-souled sons and their names
were famous. Prahlada was the eldest, followed by Samhrada. After that was Anuhrada. And after him, Shibi and
Bashkala. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Three sons of Prahlada are known everywhere-Virochana,
Kumbha and Nikumbha. Virochana had one son, the immensely powerful Bali. Bali in turn had a son, the great
asura named Bana.

'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Danu's forty sons are known everywhere. The first one was the famous
king Viprachitti. In addition, one knows of Shambara, Namuchi, Puloman, Asiloman, Keshi, the danava Durjaya,
Ayahshira, Ashvashira, the valorous Ashvashanku, Gaganamurdhana, Vegavan, Ketuman, Svarbhanu, Ashva, Ashvapati, Vrishaparva, Ajaka, Ashvagriva, Sukshma, the great asura Tuhundu, Isripa, Ekachakra, Virupaksha, Hara,
Ahara, Nichandra, Nikumbha, Kupatha, Kapatha, Sharabha, Shalabha, Surya and Chandrama. Thus is recited the
names of the famous danavas in Danu's lineage. The gods Surya[The sun.] and Chandrama[The moon.] are different. O great king!
Besides these, ten other immensely powerful and great danavas are known as Danu's sons-Ekaksha, the valorous
Mritapa, Pralamba, Naraka, Vatapi, Shatrutapana, the great asura Shatha, Gavishtha, Danayu and the danava
Dirghajihva. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Their sons and grandsons were innumerable.

'Simhika gave birth to a son named Rahu, the persecutor of the sun and the moon, and to three others-Suchandra, Chandraharta and Chandravimardana. The numerous sons and grandsons of Krodha were as cruel as she herself was. That line was the performer of evil and cruel deeds, oppressing their enemies. Anayu had four sons, the
best among the asuras-Vikshara, Bala, Vira and the great asura Vritra. Kala's sons were like Yama himself, immensely famous on earth, great danavas who were powerful oppressors of their enemies and of great valour-
Vinashana, Krodha, Krodhahanta and Krodhashatru. It is heard that Kala also had other sons, including those
known as the kaleyas.

'Shukra, the son of a rishi, was the great preceptor of the asuras. The famous Shukra Ushanas[One of Shukra's names.] had four sons,
who were also officiating priests for the asuras. Their names were Tvashtavara and Atri and two others who knew
about the incantations of mantras. In energy, they were like the sun and they always tried to influence Brahma's
world. Thus I have narrated to you, as I heard it in the ancient tales, the origins of the dynasties of the gods and the
powerful and strong demons. O ruler of the earth! Their progeny were so many and multiplied so much that I cannot count them.

'Tarkshya[Tarkshya is also a name for both Garuda and Garuda's elder brother Aruna. The text suggests that Garuda and
Aruna had another brother named Tarkshya.], Arishtanemi, Garuda, Aruna, Aruni and Varuni are known as the sons of Vinata. Shesha, Ananta,
Vasuki, the serpent Takshaka, Kurma and Kulika are known as the sons of Kadru.

'O king! Bhimasena, Ugrasena, Suparna, Varuna, Gopati, Dhritarashtra, Suryavarcha the seventh, Pattravan,
Arkaparna, the famous Prayuta, Bhima, Chitraratha, all famous and learned in all matters, Shalishira, Pradyumna
the fourteenth, Kali the fifteenth and Narada the sixteenth, these divine gandharvas are known as the sons of Muni.

'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I shall now recount to you many other beings-Anavadya, Anuvasha,
Anuranuna, Priya, Anupa, Subhaga and Bhasi were born to Prava, while Siddha, Purna, Barhi, the famous Purnayu, Brahmachari, Ratiguna, the seventh Suparna, Vishvavasu, Bhanu and the tenth Suchandra, these divine
gandharvas are also known as the sons of Prava. It is also known that in times long past, the lady of good fortune
known as Prava, through a devarshi[Kashyapa.], gave birth to the race of apsaras with holy qualities-Alambusha,
Mishrakeshi, Vidyutparna, Tulanagha, Aruna, Rakshita, the lovely Rambha, Asita, Subahu, Suvrata, Subhuja and
Supriya. Atibahu, and the famous Haha and Huhu and Tumbura-these four are known as the supreme among
gandharvas[Obviously, they were Prava's progeny.].

'The ancient accounts tell us that the ambrosia, the Brahmanas, cattle, gandharvas and apsaras were the progeny
of Kapila[There is an inconsistency with what the text has just said about Prava's progeny, the gandharvas and the
apsaras.]. Thus, I have recounted to you the origins and exact numbers of all beings, including the gandharvas,
the apsaras, the serpents, Suparna, the rudras, the maruts, cattle and the fortunate Brahmanas who perform holy
deeds. This history brings long life, is sacred, and is worthy of being heard and is also worthy of praise. It should
always be heard and recited to others in the right frame of mind. He who reads this account of the origins of great
souls with proper rites and in the presence of gods and Brahmanas, obtains progeny, good fortune, prosperity, fame
and a beautiful outcome after death.'
