'Sanjaya said, "When night passed and it was morning, the king arose. The king instructed all the warriors, 'Prepare for battle. In the encounter today, the angry Bhishma will kill all the Somakas.' O king! On hearing Duryodhana's many lamentations in the night, he[Bhishma.] regarded them as instructions unto himself. He was supremely depressed and censured what the other had said. Shantanu's son thought for a long time and desired to encounter Arjuna in battle. O great king! Duryodhana understood from the signs what Gangeya had been thinking about and instructed Duhshasana. 'O Duhshasana! Let chariots quickly be yoked, so that Bhishma can be protected. Let thirty-
two entire divisions be instructed accordingly. What we have thought about for many years has now come to pass.
With their soldiers, the Pandavas will be slain and the kingdom will be obtained. I think that Bhishma's protection
is our task now. Protected by us, he will cheerfully slaughter the Parthas in this battle. The one with the pure soul
said, "I will not kill Shikhandi. He was a lady earlier. Therefore, I should avoid him in battle. O mighty-armed one!
The world knows that, in an attempt to bring pleasure to my father, I gave up women and a prosperous kingdom
earlier[Referring to Bhishma's vow of celibacy, so that Shantanu could marry Satyavati.]. O foremost among men! Therefore, I will not kill in battle anyone who has been born a woman, or has
been a woman earlier. I am telling you this truthfully. O king! Shikhandi was a woman earlier and you have heard
me tell you this when preparations were being made for the war. She was born as Shikhandini. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Having been a woman, she was born as a man and wishes to fight. But I can never release arrows
at her. O son[The word used is tata.]! But if there are any other kshatriyas who desire the victory of the Pandavas in battle, I will kill
them all-as soon as they come within reach of my arrows." These were the words spoken to me by Gangeya,
foremost among the Bharata lineage and skilled in knowledge of the sacred texts. Therefore, with all my heart, I
think that Bhishma's protection is most important. In the great forest, a wolf can kill a lion that is unprotected. Let
Shikhandi not be like a wolf that kills a tiger. Let our maternal uncle, Shakuni, Shalya, Kripa, Drona and
Vivimshati make endeavours to protect Gangeya. If he is protected, victory is certain.' On hearing Duryodhana's
words, all the kings surrounded Gangeya from every direction, with a large number of chariots. Your sons surrounded Gangeya and got ready to fight. The earth and the firmament trembled and the Pandavas were agitated.
The maharathas[On the Kourava side.] possessed chariots and well-trained elephants. Armoured, they stationed themselves and surrounded Bhishma in that battle. Just as the thirty gods protect the wielder of the vajra in a battle between the gods
and the asuras, in that way, all of them were stationed to protect the maharatha.

'"King Duryodhana again spoke to his brothers. 'Yudhamanyu is protecting Arjuna's left wheel and Uttamouja
the right, while Arjuna is protecting Shikhandi. O Duhshasana! Act so that he cannot kill Bhishma, while protected
by Partha and while he[Bhishma.] is abandoned by us.' On hearing his brother's words, your son, Duhshasana, left with
the army, with Bhishma at the forefront. On seeing Bhishma surrounded by that large number of chariots, Arjuna,
best of rathas, spoke to Dhrishtadyumna. 'O unblemished one! Let Shikhandi, tiger among men, be placed in front
of Bhishma. O one without decay! Establish the Panchala there and I will myself be his protector.' Bhishma, Shantanu's son, then advanced with his soldiers. In that encounter, he stationed his soldiers in the form of a large vyuha
known as saravatobhadra[Literally, something that is fortunate in every direction. Probably in the form of a square.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Kripa, Kritavarma, maharatha Shaibya,
Shakuni, Saindhava, Sudakshina from Kamboja and all your sons were stationed in front of all the soldiers and in
front of the vyuha, together with Bhishma. O venerable one! Drona, Bhurishrava, Shalya and Bhagadatta armoured
and stationed themselves on the right flank of the vyuha. Ashvatthama, Somadatta and the two maharathas from
Avanti protected the left flank, together with a large army. O great king! O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! To counter the Pandavas, Duryodhana stationed himself in the midst of the vyuha, surrounded by the Trigartas. Alambusa, best among rathas, and maharatha Shrutayu armoured and stationed themselves at the rear of the
vyuha and behind all the soldiers. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thus did those on your side construct a
vyuha. When they were armoured, they looked like blazing fires. At this, King Yudhishthira, Pandava Bhimasena
and Madri's sons, Nakula and Sahadeva, armoured and stationed themselves in the vyuha, ahead of all the soldiers.
Dhrishtadyumna, Virata and maharatha Satyaki, the destroyers of enemy ranks, stationed themselves, with a large
army. O great king! Shikhandi, Vijaya[Arjuna.], the rakshasa Ghatotkacha, the mighty-armed Chekitana and the valiant
Kuntibhoja were ready for battle, surrounded by a large army. The great archer, Abhimanyu, maharatha Drupada
and the five brothers from Kekaya were armoured and stationed ready for battle. O venerable one! Thus did the
brave Pandavas, invincible in battle, create a great vyuha as a counter-vyuha in that encounter and were ready to
fight.

'"In that encounter, the kings on your side suddenly rushed, with great enterprise, to do battle. O king! Placing
Bhishma in the front, they advanced against the Parthas in that battle. O king! In a similar way, the Pandavas
placed Bhimasena at the forefront, wishing to fight against Bhishma and desiring victory in that encounter. There
were war cries and sounds of joy. There were the sounds of saws and cow horns. The Pandavas played on battle-
drums, drums, cymbals and smaller drums and there was a terrible roar, as they advanced. There were the sounds
of battledrums, drums, other drums and conch shells on our side. There were delighted roars, like those of lions,
and other shouts, as we roared back in return and quickly advanced against them. We advanced forcefully and angrily and a tumultuous sound arose. They rushed against each other and struck each other. Because of that great
sound, the earth began to tremble. Birds uttered terrible shrieks and began to fly around. The sun had risen with all
its rays, but now seemed to be dimmed. There was a turbulent wind, signifying great disaster. Fearful jackals began to roam around, howling terribly. O great king! All of this seemed to tell us that a great calamity was at hand.
O king! The directions blazed and ash began to shower down. There was a shower of bones mixed with blood. The
mounts began to weep and tears began to fall from their eyes. O lord of the earth! Because of their anxiety, they
discharged urine and excrement. Man-eating rakshasas began to roar in terrible tones. We saw that jackals, cranes
and crows began to swoop down. Dogs uttered many terrible howls. Flaming meteors struck against the sun and
suddenly fell down on the ground. All this signified a great fear. In that great encounter, the two large armies of the
Pandavas and the sons of Dhritarashtra clashed. There was the din of conch shells and drums and this caused a
tremor, like that of a forest agitated by a storm. In that inauspicious moment, kings, elephants and horses clashed
against each other and the tremendous noise was like that of oceans agitated by a tempest."'
