The preceptor said, 'O bull among men! Delusion is brought about by rajas. Anger, avarice, fear and insolence-these are brought about by tamas. Purity[Sattva.] leads to the supreme paramatman, the god who is without decay and without change. This is Vishnu, who is not manifest, but pervades everything. He is the supreme
god. It is because of his skilful maya that the bodies of men are dislodged from knowledge and the beneficial. With
their knowledge confounded, they are led towards desire. Desire leads to anger, avarice and delusion in men and
they perform deeds full of pride, insolence, ego and selfishness. From deeds, bonds of attachment arise and that
attachment then leads to sorrow. Because these are undertaken, there is happiness and unhappiness and one is liable to birth and death. Since one is born from the mixture of semen and blood, one resides in the womb and that
abode is full of excrement, urine, moisture and blood. Overcome by thirst, the being is flooded by these. One must
know that women are the strands through which this cycle[We have translated samsara, the cycle of worldly existence, as cycle.] is borne along. They are naturally the kshetra and men
possess the qualities of kshetrajna. Therefore, learned men in particular must not follow young women. They are
sorceresses[Kritya, evil female spirits.], terrible in form, and confuse those who are not learned. They are immersed in rajas and are the eternal embodiment of the senses. It is because of attraction for them that semen is created and beings are born. There
are worms that get attached to one's body. One knows that these are not really part of one's body and flings them
away. In that way, one should know that the offspring are also not really part of one's body and should cast them
aside, like worms. Beings are born from semen, juices and affection, determined naturally by the acts that they
have performed earlier. An intelligent person ignores them. Rajas is established in tamas and sattva also bases itself on tamas[Tamas clouds both sattva and rajas.]. Know that knowledge is based on ignorance and that there are signs of ego. There is a seed in beings and that seed is known as the jiva of consciousness[Jiva has multiple meanings. Here, it means the principle of life in beings and intelligence and consciousness. For
present purposes, jiva can be equated with the atman.]. Because of deeds performed and because of time, it is
whirled around in this cycle. It takes pleasure in this body, like the mind does in a dream. Because there are qualities of a womb in those deeds, the living being obtains a womb. The seeds of deeds performed goad the senses in
beings[There is the implied suggestion that the atman remembers these past deeds in the womb.]. Ego, attachment and consciousness are generated. The attachment to sound leads to the atman obtaining
ears. Because of the attachment to form, the eyes result and desire for scent leads to the nose. There is touch and
the five kinds of wind, prana, apana, vyana, udana and samana, which lead to the sustaining of the body. The
limbs are created because of attachment and the brahman[Being used here for the atman.] is engaged in action. In the body and in the mind, in the
beginning, the middle and the end, there is sorrow and nothing but grief. Know that misery is inherent in birth and
ego enhances it. It can be restrained through renunciation and a person who knows about renunciation is freed.
Both the creation and the destruction of the senses result from rajas. Using the sight obtained from the sacred texts,
a learned person must act so as to test them. Even if one accomplishes the objective of satisfying the senses, a person who knows can use the senses of knowledge to determine the reasons. Such a being does not have to accept a
body again.""