'Bhishma said, "O Indra among kings! Having spoken in this way, Narada, knowledgeable about the brahman,
went and told the wind everything that the shalmali had said. 'There is a shalmali tree and its followers on the
slopes of the Himalayas. It has a gigantic trunk and many branches. O wind! It shows you disrespect. It spoke
many words of irreverence towards you. O wind! O lord! It is not appropriate that I should repeat those words before you. O wind! I know that you are the supreme upholder of all living beings. You are best and the greatest. In
your rage, you are like Vaivasvata[Yama.].' Having heard these words of Narada, the wind went to the shalmali and angrily spoke these words. 'O shalmali! You have spoken disrespectful words before Narada. I am the wind. I will
show you my influence and my own strength. I know who you are. O tree! You are known to me. The lord, the
grandfather[Brahma.], ended his act of creation with you. Because he ended with you, he showed you favours. O evil-
minded one! O worst among trees! That is what has protected you against my valour. Since you have disrespected
me as any other natural force, I will show myself to you, so that you know who I am.' Having been thus addressed,
the shalmali tree seemed to smile when it replied. 'O wind! Go to the woods and show your enraged self to your
own self. Release your anger towards me. What will you do in your rage? O wind! I would not have been frightened of you, even if you had been the lord of beings.' Having been thus addressed, the wind said that it would exhibit its energy the next day.

'"It was night and the shalmali thought about what should be done. It saw that it was not the equal of the wind.
'I spoke inappropriate words about the wind to Narada. I cannot match the wind in strength. It is stronger than me.
Narada was right when he said that the wind is always strong. There is no doubt that I am weaker than other trees.
However, I do not think there is any other tree that is my equal in intelligence. By resorting to that intelligence, I
can free myself from the fear that comes from the wind. There is no doubt that if the trees in the forest used their
intelligence, they would always be able to save themselves from any injury on account of the enraged wind. But
they are foolish and do not know the wind. Unlike me, they do not know how the angry wind blows.' Having made
up its mind, the shalmali began to shake itself. It itself cast off its trunk, branches and smaller branches. It cast off
its branches, leaves and flowers. Having done this, the tree waited for morning and for the approach of the wind.
The wind blew and angrily brought down large trees. It came to the spot where the shalmali was standing. It was
without leaves and the tips of the branches had fallen down. The flowers had fallen down. The wind glanced at it
and smiling, cheerfully spoke these words to the shalmali tree, which was without any branches. 'O shalmali! In
my anger, I would have done exactly this to you and brought down all your branches. You have done this yourself.
You are without flowers and the tips of your branches. Your buds and foliage have been destroyed. Through your
own evil intelligence, you have come under the subjugation of my valour.' Addressed in these words by the wind,
the shalmali tree was ashamed. It remembered the words that Narada had spoken to it and was tormented.

'"O tiger among kings! In this way, if a weak person engages in hostilities with someone who is stronger, he is
foolish and will be tormented like the shalmali tree. Therefore, a weak person should have enmity with someone
who is superior in strength. If he engages in such enmity, he will sorrow, like the shalmali tree. Even against those
who cause grievous injury, great-souled ones do not display their enmity. O great king! Instead, they exhibit their
strength gradually and gently. A man without intelligence should not act in enmity towards someone who lives by
his intelligence. An intelligent person's intelligence is like a fire raging through dry grass. O king! Among men,
there is nothing that is equal to intelligence. O Indra among kings! One might think that there is nothing that is
equal to strength. O Indra among kings! O slayer of enemies! You have thus seen that one must tolerate the foolish,
the dumb, the deaf and those who are superior in strength. O immensely radiant one! O king! The eleven and seven
akshouhinis[Respectively on the Kourava and Pandava side.] were not equal in strength to the great-souled Arjuna. The illustrious Pandava, the son of the chastiser of Paka, roamed around and slew and shattered them in the battle. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You
have been told about rajadharma and apad dharma in detail. O great king! What shall I tell you about next?"'
