Yudhishthira said, "O Madhusudana! You should explain to me the vijnana you obtained through Durvasa's favo
O supreme among intelligent ones! I wish to know the truth about the names of that immensely fortunate and
great-souled one."

'Vasudeva replied, "After bowing down to Kapardin[The one with knotted hair, Shiva's name.], I will recount them to you. O great king! It is through
this that I obtained what is beneficial. It is through this that I obtained fame. O lord of the earth! When I arise in
the morning, I control myself, join my hands in salutation and recite the shatarudriya[This is a hymn to Shiva/Rudra from the Taittariya Samhita, linked to the Yajur Veda.]. Listen attentively to this.
At the end of his austerities, the great ascetic, Prajapati, created him[Shiva.]. O son! It is Shankara who created all the
subjects, mobile and immobile. O lord of the earth! There is no other being who is superior to Mahadeva. He is the
creator of all the beings in the three worlds. No one is capable of standing before that great-souled one. There is no
being who is his equal in the three worlds. When he is enraged in battle, his scent makes the enemies tremble, lose
their senses and fall down. Those that remain are slain. His fierce roars are like the thunder of the clouds. On hearing these in a battle, even the hearts of the gods are shattered. When the wielder of the Pinaka is angry, he assumes
a terrible form. On seeing this wrathful visage, the gods, the asuras, the gandharvas and the serpents in the worlds
can find no peace, not even when they seek shelter inside caves. Prajapati Daksha wished to perform a sacrifice.
When that sacrifice was spread out, the fearless Bhava[Shiva's name.] roared loudly. He angrily shot an arrow from his bow
and struck that sacrifice. There was no peace or tranquility then and the gods were filled with sorrow. Enraged,
Maheshvara sought to violently strike the sacrifice. O Partha! All the worlds were anxious at the sound of his bowstring slapping against his palm. The gods and the asuras were incapacitated and miserable. The oceans were agitated and the earth began to tremble. The mountains started to move and the firmament was shattered. The worlds
were enveloped in a blinding darkness and nothing could be seen. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The radiance of the sun and all the stellar bodies was destroyed. Everyone was extremely terrified. Desiring the welfare of
all the creatures and of their own selves, the rishis pronounced benedictions of peace. The valorous Rudra angrily
rushed towards the gods. In rage, he struck Bhaga and tore out his eyes. He then attacked the handsome Pushan.
As  he ate the sacrificial cake, he struck down  his[Pushan's.]  teeth. Trembling with fear,  the gods  bowed  down  before
Shankara. Rudra again affixed an extremely sharp and blazing arrow. Witnessing Rudra's valour, the gods and the
rishis were terrified. The supreme among the gods sought Sharva's[Shiva's name.] favours. The gods joined their hands in salutation and meditated on the shatarudriya mantra. Praised by the thirty gods, Maheshvara was pacified. O king!
Scared, the thirty gods sought refuge with me and earmarked a special share in the sacrificial offerings for Rudra.
Because of his great anger, the sacrifice had been divided into many parts and these were brought together again.
Everything that had been destroyed was restored.

'"In ancient times, the valiant asuras had three cities in the firmament and these were made out of iron, silver
and gold. Despite using all his weapons, Maghavan was incapable of shattering them. Afflicted, all the immortals
sought refuge with Rudra. All the assembled gods spoke to the great-souled one. 'O Rudra! Those animals are terrible in all their acts. O one who deserves honours! To save the worlds, slay the daityas and destroy their cities.'

He agreed. Having agreed, he made Vishnu his supreme arrow. He made Agni the shaft of the arrow and Vaivasvata Yama the tuft. He made the Vedas his bow and the supreme Savitri the bowstring. He yoked all the gods to his
supreme chariot. He shattered them with an arrow that had three joints and three heads. That arrow was like the
sun in its complexion. It was like the fire of destruction in its energy. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The
asuras and their cities were burnt down by Rudra.

'"Later, on seeing Panchashikha[The one with five tufts of hair on the head. There is a sudden break in continuity in the text. As will become
clear, Shiva assumed the form of Panchashikha.] lying down on her lap in the form of a child, Uma asked, 'Who are you?'

Shakra was jealous[Indra was concerned that the child might threaten his supremacy.] and struck him with the vajra. However, he paralysed the arm, which was like a club, with
the hand still holding the vajra. The gods did not understand that this was the lord of the universe. With the Prajapatis, all of them were repeatedly confused about the lord's nature. The illustrious and infinitely energetic Brahma
meditated and got to know that this was the foremost one. He worshipped Uma and her consort. The gods also
sought the favours of Uma and Rudra. The arm of Bala's slayer was restored to its normal state.

'"He became a valiant brahmana named Durvasa. He spent a long period of time in my house in Dvaravati.
While residing in my house, he tried to perform many injurious acts. Though difficult to tolerate, I ignored them
because of my generosity[Durvasa was testing Krishna and the members of his household. Perhaps one should explain that the sage Dur-
vasa is often equated with Shiva, having been born as a part of Shiva.]. He is Indra of the gods. He is Vayu. He is the Ashvins. He is lightning. He is the
moon. He is Ishana. He is the sun. He is Varuna. He is time. He is the destroyer. He is death. He is darkness. He is
night. He is day. He is the months. He is the fortnights. He is the seasons. He is the sandhyas. He is the years. He is
the creator. He is the ordainer. He is Vishvakarma. He is the one who knows everything. He is the nakshatras. He is
the directions. He is the sub-directions. He is the planets. The universe is his form. His soul cannot be measured.
The illustrious one is infinitely resplendent. He is one. He is two. He is also many. He is one hundred. He is one
thousand. He is also hundreds of thousands. This is the nature of Mahadeva, the illustrious one. Even if I try for
one hundred years, I am incapable of speaking about his qualities."'
