Tuladhara said, 'Those who are virtuous live in this way. Those who are virtuous resort to this path. Look at
the deeds performed by the virtuous and you will know the truth. There are many birds that roam around in
every direction. There are some that were born on your head. There are also hawks and others of different species.
O great brahmana! Here and there, they are seeking to enter[The birds are seeking to enter their own nests.]. Behold. They have contracted their wings, feet and
bodies everywhere. Summon them. Though they have been born through their father, they have also been generated from you. There is no doubt that you are their father. O Jajali! Therefore, summon your sons.'"

'Bhishma said, "At this, Jajali summoned the birds. They replied in divine words, words that were full of dharma. 'For this world and for the next, one must perform acts of non-violence. O brahmana! Desire destroys and
with that, men are also destroyed. When faith declines in words and thoughts, no sacrifices can lead to salvation. In
this connection, Brahma recited a song and it is chanted by those who know about the sacred accounts. The gods
regard the sacrificial deeds of those who have purity, but lack faith, and those who have faith, but lack purity,
equally and ignore them both. The gods have also held that a miserly and learned brahmana and an eloquent and
prosperous person are equal. However, Prajapati told them that they had erred in treating two unequal things equally. "Faith purifies a prosperous person. Lack of faith destroys him. Even if there is only one person in the world
and he is without faith, the gods do not accept his oblations. Those learned about dharma also know that his food
should not be eaten. Lack of faith is a supreme sin. Faith releases from all sin. A faithful person discards sin, like a
snake casting off its skin[The text does not indicate which part is Brahma's song, so these quotation marks are somewhat arbitrary.]." Renunciation with faith is superior to all sacred deeds. If a person refrains from all
evil conduct and is faithful, he is purified. What need does he have of austerities, deeds or conduct? There can be a
man with faith and there can be a man without faith. This is what virtuous and knowledgable people who know
about the purpose of dharma have said about dharma. We were curious and obtained this insight about dharma. O
immensely wise one! If you conquer the urge to compete, you will obtain the supreme. The trader possesses faith
and follows the dharma of faith. O Jajali! A person established in his own path is superior[There is abruptness in the text, with the words of the birds ending suddenly.].' In this way, Tulad-
hara told him about many things and he obtained a complete realization of what has been spoken of as eternal
dharma. O Kounteya! Having heard those famous and valorous words spoken by Tuladhara, the brahmana obtained tranquility. In a short while, he and Tuladhara, those two immensely wise ones, went to heaven and found
delight in the happiness there. Having earned the fruits of their own deeds, they went to their respective places. A
person who looks at everything equally, is faithful and controlled and possesses an excellent intelligence, performs
sacrifices in this way. Without sacrifices, a person is not taken there. O king! Faith is the virtuous goddess Savitri,
the daughter of the sun. She is the one who gives birth to faith in the world of the living. I have instructed you appropriately. What more do you wish to hear?"'
