'Arjuna said, "O Janardana! Yudhishthira has said everything that there is to be said. O scorcher of enemies! O
lord! But listening to your words, it seems to me that you think that peace will not be obtained easily. That may be
because of the avarice of Dhritarashtra's son, or because of our weakness. You also think that human valour may
be fruitless and that human endeavour may not bear fruit, even when it is accompanied with deeds. What you have
said may be true, or it may not be true. But there is nothing that should be looked upon as impossible. You think
that our hardships have not been good for our cause. But they have performed deeds and have no fruits to show for
it. O lord! When performed correctly, deeds do bear fruit. O Krishna! Therefore, act so that we may find refuge
with the others. You are the foremost well-wisher of the Pandavas and the Kurus, just as the brave Prajapati is of
the gods and the asuras. Do what is healthy for the Kurus and the Pandavas. I think that it will not be difficult for
you to accomplish what is good for us. O Janardana! If that is the case, your task will be carried out. There is no
doubt that you will accomplish this merely through the act of going there. O brave one! Deal with that evil-souled
one as you deem appropriate. Do everything depending on what you think is proper. O Krishna! Whether you want
us to seek refuge with them, or whatever else it is that you desire, the matter will have weight. Does that evil-
souled one not deserve death, together with his relatives? O Madhusudana! He could not tolerate the prosperity he
saw with Dharma's son[Yudhishthira.]. Unable to find a way that was in conformity with dharma, he violently stole it, with the
aid of one who was deceitful with dice. How can a man who is an archer and a kshatriya refuse when he is challenged, even if it means the loss of his life? O Varshneya! When I saw us vanquished through adharma and exiled
to the forest, Suyodhana became mine to kill. O Krishna! It is not strange that you should wish to do something for
your friends. But how will the chief task be implemented, through mildness or enmity? If you think that their immediate slaughter is better, let it be instantly done, without any more reflection. You know how Droupadi was molested by the evil-minded one in the midst of the assembly hall and that the others tolerated it. O Madhava! I do not
think that such a person will treat the Pandavas fairly. Good counsel to him will be like seed sown on barren land.
Therefore, do what you think is best for the welfare of the Pandavas. O Varshneya! Let us act swiftly on whatever
needs to be done next."'
