Sanjaya said, "O king! Shalya saw that his charioteer had been killed. He quickly picked up a club that was completely made out of iron and stood immobile, like a mountain. He was like the blazing fire of destruction, or like
Yama with a noose in his hand. He was like the summit of Kailasa, or Vasava with the vajra. He was like the
tawny-eyed one[Shiva.] with a trident, or like a crazy elephant in the forest. Bhima grasped a mighty club and swiftly
dashed towards him. At that time, thousands of conch shells and trumpets blared. The brave ones roared like lions
and this increased one's delight. All the warriors saw them fight against each other, like giant elephants. Those on
your side, and on the side of the enemy, uttered words of praise. With the exception of the lord of Madra, Rama[Parashurama.]
and the descendant of the Yadu lineage, who else was capable of withstanding Bhimasena's force in an encounter?
With the exception of the great-souled lord of Madra and the force of his club, which other warrior was capable of
fighting against Vrikodara? They roared like bulls and circled each other. With clubs in their hands, the king of
Madra and Vrikodara wheeled around each other. In the circles that they executed, or in the way they roamed
around with the clubs, there was nothing to differentiate those two lions among men in the encounter. Shalya's
club was made of gold. It was radiant and sparkling and increased one's terror. It was tied in cloth that looked like
a net of fire. The great-souled Bhima roamed around in circles with a radiant club that looked like clouds tinged
with lightning. O king! The king of Madra struck Bhima's club with his club and this generated blazing sparks of
fire. In that way, Bhima struck Shalya's club with his club and this released a shower of flames. It was extraordinary. They were like giant elephants with tusks, or gigantic bulls with horns. They struck each other with the
tips of their clubs, wishing to kill each other. Struck by the clubs, in a short while, blood began to flow from their
bodies. They were beautiful to behold, like two flowering kimshukas. Bhimsena was struck on the right and the left
by the king of Madra's club. However, the mighty-armed one was immobile, like a mountain. O king! In that fashion, Shalya was repeatedly struck by the force of Bhima's club. But he did not waver, like a mountain struck by a
tusker. The sounds generated by those two lions among men could be heard in all the directions. The clubs descended and struck, with a sound like that of the vajra. Those two immensely valorous ones stopped for a while
and then again attacked with their clubs. They again roamed around, executing circular motions. Raising those iron
staffs, they advanced eight steps forward and struck each other, performing a superhuman deed. They roamed
around, executing circular motions and seeking to strike each other. Those accomplished ones exhibited great
deeds. They raised those terrible clubs, which were like the summits of mountains. They struck each other, like
mountains at the time of an earthquake. They were severely struck from the force of each other's clubs. Both of
those brave ones simultaneously fell down, like Indra's standards. Sounds of lamenation arose from the brave ones
in both armies. They were severely struck in their inner organs and lost their senses. Shalya, bull among the
Madras, was severely struck by the club and Kripa used his chariot to swiftly bear him away from the field of battle. Bhimasena was also weakened and senseless. However, he raised himself in an instant. With the club in his
hand, he challenged the king of Madra.

' "The brave ones on your side raised many kinds of weapons. To the sound of diverse kinds of musical instruments, they fought with the Pandu soldiers. They held weapons in their hands and made a great noise. O great
king! With Duryodhana at the forefront, they attacked. On seeing those soldiers, the sons of Pandu roared like lions and advanced, wishing to kill Duryodhana. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On seeing that they were swiftly
descending, your son severely pierced Chekitana[The prince of Chedi, Dhrishtaketu's son.] in the heart with a javelin. Struck thus by your son, he fell
down from his chariot. With blood flowing from his body, he was submerged in great darkness. On seeing that
Chekitana had been killed, the maharatha Pandavas engaged and showered down arrows on the different divisions.
O great king! The Pandavas could be seen to roam around and attacked your soldiers from every direction, desiring
victory. With the king of Madra at the forefront, Kripa, Kritavarma and the immensely strong Soubala fought with
Dharmaraja. O great king! Duryodhana fought with Dhrishtadyumna, who was the slayer of Bharadvaja's son and
great in his valour and bravery. O king! Goaded by your son, with Drona's son at their head, three thousand rathas
on your side fought Vijaya.

' "O king! Setting their minds on victory and ready to give up their lives, those on your side penetrated, like
swans into a large lake. As they sought to kill each other, an extremely terrible battle raged on. They wished to kill
each other and were delighted at being able to strike each other. O king! The battle that led to the destruction of the
best among brave ones continued. The earth was covered with a terrible dust that arose in the air. We could ascertain who the Pandavas were, only when they called out to each other. We fought fearlessly. O tiger among men!
That dust was pacified by the blood. When the dust was pacified, the directions could clearly be seen. The fearful
battle, terrible in form, continued between those on your side and the enemy. No one wished to retreat. With Brahma's world as the supreme objective, they wished for victory in the battle. Wishing to go to heaven, those brave
men fought an excellent war. Setting their minds on the tasks of their masters, they wished to repay the debts of
their masters. With their minds set on heaven, they fought and clashed against each other. The maharathas released
many different kinds of weapons. They roared at each other and struck each other. 'Strike. Pierce. Seize. Hit. Sever.' These were the words that were heard amongst the armies on your side and that of the enemy.

' "O great king! Wishing to kill maharatha Dharmaraja Yudhishthira, Shalya pierced him with sharp arrows. O
great king! However, Partha knew about the inner organs. He smiled and struck him in the inner organs with fourteen iron arrows. The immensely illustrious one wished to kill Pandava and repulsed him with arrows. In the battle,
he angrily pierced him with many arrows tufted with the feathers of herons. O great king! While all the soldiers
looked on, he again struck Yudhishthira with an arrow with a drooping tuft. Dharmaraja became extremely angry.
The immensely illustrious one pierced the king of Madra with sharp arrows that were tufted with the feathers of
herons and peacocks. The maharatha then struck Chandrasena with seventy arrows, his charioteer with nine and
Drumasena with sixty-four[As the next sentence makes clear, Chandrasena and Drumasena were
guarding Shalya's chariot wheels.]. O king! When the protectors of his chariot wheels were slain by the great-minded
Pandava, Shalya killed twenty-five Chedis. He pierced Satyaki with twenty-five sharp arrows, Bhimasena with five
and Madri's two sons with one hundred. O supreme among kings! While he was thus roaming around in the battle,
Partha shot sharp arrows at him and these were like venomous serpents. In the battle, with a broad-headed arrow,
Yudhishthira, Kunti's son, brought down the tip of his adversary's standard from his chariot, while he looked on.
Severed by the great-souled son of Pandu, the standard was seen to fall down, like the summit of a mountain. On
seeing that his standard had been brought down and on seeing Pandava stationed, the king of Madra angrily showered down arrows. Shalya showered down arrows, like Parjanya pouring down rain. The bull among the kshatriya
lineage, immeasurable in his soul, showered down arrows on the kshatriyas-Satyaki, Bhimasena and the two Pandavas who were the sons of Madri. He pierced each of them with five arrows and afflicted Yudhishthira. O great
king! We saw a net of arrows spread over Pandava's chest, like a mass of clouds that had risen. In the battle, maharatha Shalya angrily used straight-tufted arrows to envelop the directions and the sub-directions. King Yudhishthira was afflicted by that net of arrows. He seemed to have been deprived of his valour, like Jambha by the
slayer of Vritra." '85