'Vyasa said, "O king! In ancient times, the gods performed a great sacrifice in Naimisha forest. There, Vivasvata's
son[Yama.] was the priest who killed the animals. O king! Since he was consecrated in that role, Yama did not kill any
creatures[Meaning, human beings.]. Since death and time were suspended among creatures, the number of beings increased greatly. Then
Shakra[Indra.], Varuna, Kubera, the sadhyas, Rudra, the vasus, the Ashvins-these and other gods gathered together
and went to Prajapati, the creator of the world. Alarmed at the increase in the number of humans, they assembled
and addressed the preceptor of the worlds. 'We are trembling with fear. We wish to be happy again. We have come
to seek protection with you.' Brahma replied, 'Why are you frightened of humans, when all of you are immortal?
There should not be any fear in you from mortals.' The gods said, 'Since the mortals have become immortals,
there is no difference any more. Upset at this equality, we have come to you to seek a distinction.' Brahma replied,
'Vivasvata's son is now engaged in the great sacrifice. It is for this reason that humans are not dying. When he has
single-mindedly finished his sacrificial acts, death will again return among them. When that time comes, Vivasvata's son will be strengthened through your energies. When the time of death comes at the end, humans will have no
energy left in them.' Hearing these words of the first-born god[Brahma.], they[The gods.] went where the gods were sacrificing.
When those immensely strong ones assembled there, they saw a lotus[Pundarika, usually a white lotus.] in the Bhagirathi[The river Ganga.].

'"On seeing that lotus, they were surprised. Indra, chief among the warriors among them, went where the Ganga
always issues and saw a lady as radiant as the fire. The lady had come there to fetch water and was immersed in
the goddess Ganga. But she was weeping and teardrops fell from her eyes into the water and became golden lotuses. On seeing this wonderful sight, the wielder of the vajra[Indra, the vajra is Indra's weapon.] went up to the lady and asked, 'Who are you and
why are you crying? I want to know the truth. If you wish, please tell me.' The woman replied, 'O Shakra[Indra.]! I am
unfortunate and you may know who I am and why I am weeping. O king! I will lead the way. Come with me and
you will yourself see why I am crying.' He[Indra.] followed her and soon saw a handsome young man. He was surrounded by young women, was seated on a throne and was playing dice on the peak of the king of mountains[The king of mountains (giriraja) means high and lofty mountains, but is also a name for the Himalayas.].

'"The king[Indra.] of the gods spoke to him, 'Know that this universe and this world are under my sway. Know me to
be the lord of everything.' But the person took no notice of what he had said and continued to be immersed in the
dice. Indra became angry and repeated what he had said. On seeing that Shakra was angry, that god cast a glance at
him and smiled. At that glance, the king of the gods was paralysed and stood motionless at the spot, like a pillar.
When the game of dice was over, he[The other god. As will become clear, this other god was none other than Shiva or Mahadeva.] spoke to the weeping goddess, 'Bring him here. I will make sure that pride
never enters his heart again.' As soon as the woman had touched him, Shakra's limbs were paralysed and he fell
down on the ground. Then the god with the fierce energy told him, 'O Shakra! Never act like this again. Remove
this great king of the mountains, because your strength and energy are beyond measurement. Enter the centre of
the hole and wait with the others, who are like you and the sun in splendour.' He[Indra.] rolled away the peak of the
great mountain and saw four others who were like him in radiance. On seeing them, he was extremely saddened
and said, 'Shall I also become like them?' Then, the god Girisha[Shiva or Mahadeva; literally the lord of the mountains.] looked at the wielder of the vajra with eyes dilated with anger and said, 'O Shatakratu[One of Indra's names; literally the performer of a hundred sacrifices.]! Enter this cavern, because in your folly, you have insulted me in front
of my eyes.' Thus addressed by the lord, the king of the gods shuddered and shook, because of the curse. His limbs
went limp, like the leaf of a fig tree stirred by the wind on the peak of the king of the mountains.

'"Shuddering at the god's sudden words, he[Indra.] joined his palms and told the terrible god who has many manifestations, 'O Bhava[Shiva.]! Show me a way out today.' Smilingly, the god with the terrible bow replied, 'Those who act
like this, do not find an escape. These others were like you and will become again. Therefore, enter the cavern and
lie down there. There is no doubt that all your fates will be the same. All of you will have to be born in human
wombs. Having achieved great feats of violence there and having sent a large number towards their deaths, you
will again attain the world of Indra through the merit of your actions. You will achieve all that I have said and
much more, with varied significance.' The earlier Indras said, 'We will go from the world of gods to that of men.
Salvation is difficult to obtain there. Let the gods Dharma, Vayu, Maghavan[Indra.] and the Ashvins beget us on our
mother.' Having heard this, the wielder of the vajra once again spoke to the greatest of the gods[Shiva.], 'With my semen, I will create a man who can accomplish this task. He will be my son and will be the fifth among these.' In his
good nature, the illustrious lord with the terrible bow granted them the wishes they desired. He ordained that the
woman, the most beautiful in the worlds, who was none other than Shri[Lakshmi.] herself, would be their wife in the world
of men. Thereafter, accompanied by them[The five Indras.], he[Shiva.] went to the god Narayana, who is beyond measure. He[Narayana.] approved of everything and thus it was that they were born on earth.

'"Hari[Narayana.] plucked two hairs from his body. One was white and the other was black. These two hairs entered the
wombs of two women from the Yadu lineage, Rohini and Devaki. One of them[The white hair.] became Baladeva and the second
one that was black became Keshava. Those ones who were like Shakra and were earlier confined in the mountain
cavern are none other than the valorous Pandavas, while the Pandava Savyasachi[Arjuna.] is a part of Shakra. O king!
Thus it was that the former Indras were born as the Pandavas, and the celestial Lakshmi, earlier ordained to be
their wife, was born as the divinely beautiful Droupadi. She whose radiance is like the sun and the moon and
whose fragrance can be smelt from the distance of one krosha, cannot have arisen from the earth. At the end of the
sacrifice, she arose through divine intervention. O ruler of men! I will happily grant you a most wonderful boon.
With this divine eyesight, behold Kunti's sons, in their earlier divine forms."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Then the pure Brahmana Vyasa, performer of extremely generous deeds, gave divine sight
to the king through his ascetic powers. The king saw them in their earlier forms. He saw them divine and young,
broad-chested and 5 cubits tall, adorned with golden garlands, crowns and jewels, with complexions as radiant as
that of the fire or the sun, each resembling Shakra, dressed in divine garments that were beautiful and golden, resplendent with fragrant garlands that were the best, the equals of the three-eyed god[Shiva.], the vasus and the celestial
adityas, with every quality. On seeing the earlier Indras, King Drupada was surprised and pleased. With the power
of divine maya that is beyond measure, he saw that supreme of women, Shri personified. In beauty, splendour and
fame, he saw her to be the right wife for those Indras on earth. On seeing this wonderful sight, he touched the feet
of Satyavati's son and said, with a tranquil mind, "O supreme rishi! For you, this is no wonder."

'Vyasa replied, "In a hermitage in a forest, there was once the daughter of a great-souled rishi, who was beautiful and pure, but could not get a husband. It is said that through her austerities, she pleased the god Shankara[Shiva.].
Pleased with her, the god himself spoke to her, 'Tell me what you want.' Thus addressed, she repeatedly told the
boon-granting supreme god, 'I wish to have a husband who is accomplished in every way.' Then the god Shankara
happily granted her the boon and said, 'O fortunate one! You will have five excellent husbands.' The one who had
pleased the god said, 'O Shankara! I wish to have only one husband who possesses all the qualities.' The god of
gods, extremely pleased with her, again uttered these holy words. 'You have addressed me five times, asking for a
husband. O fortunate one! It shall be as you have asked. You will have good fortune and all this will happen in one
of your future births.' O Drupada! So this daughter, with the form of a goddess, was born to you. Krishna
Parshati[Parshata is one of Drupada's names.] was preordained to be the wife of five and remain unblemished. The divine Shri was born out of the
great sacrifice to be the wife of the Pandavas. After performing severe austerities, she was born as your daughter.
O King Drupada! That resplendent goddess, sought after by the gods themselves, was ordained to be the wife of
five through her own actions. She was created by the self-creating one[Brahma.] to be the wife of these gods. On hearing
this, act as you wish."'
