'Duryodhana said, "All the Parthas have been born like other men. Why do you think that they alone can be victorious? All of us have been born in the same way. All of us are from human wombs. O grandfather! How do you
know that the Parthas will be victorious? For victory, I do not depend on you, or Drona, Kripa and Bahlika, or the
other Indras among men. I, Vaikartana Karna and my brother Duhshasana will kill the five Pandavas in battle with
sharp arrows. O king! I will then perform a great sacrifice and offer a large quantity of stipends. I will satisfy the
brahmanas with cattle, horses and riches."

'Vidura replied, "O son[The word used is tata.]! We have heard the aged ones tell us the story of a fowler who spread his net out on
the ground to catch birds. Two equally strong birds were captured in that net. But they grasped the net and took to
the sky. When the fowler saw them rise up into the sky, he did not lose his senses, but dashed after them. There
was a sage in a hermitage, and he had finished his ablutions, when he saw the fowler running after the birds that he
was trying to catch. They were in the sky and he was swiftly following them on the ground. O Kouravya! The sage
then addressed him with this shloka. 'O hunter! It seems to me extraordinary that with your feet on the ground, you
are chasing those in the sky.' The fowler replied, 'Together, these two are carrying my net away. But once they begin to quarrel, they will come under my control.' Doomed to die, the birds began to quarrel. When they quarrelled,
the stupid ones fell down on the ground. Ensnared by the noose of death, they began to fight ferociously with each
other. Undetected, the fowler approached them and caught them. In a similar way, relatives who fight over possessions are overcome by their enemies, like those birds. Relatives should eat together, converse together, ask about
each other and assemble together. They should never quarrel. As long as they serve their elders with excellent intentions, they are as invisible as a forest protected by lions. O bull among the Bharata lineage! But those who have
obtained extensive prosperity, but continue to remain mean, hand over their riches to those who hate them. O son
of Dhritarashtra! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Relatives are like kindling that smoke when separated. But
when they are together, they blaze away. I will tell you about something that I once saw on a mountain. O
Kouravya! When you have heard this, do what you think is best. Together with kiratas and brahmanas, the equals
of the gods, who were learned in incantations and medicines, we once travelled to the northern mountains. We
went to Mount Gandhamadana, which is like a grove. It was lit up with a large quantity of herbs and was frequented by siddhas and gandharvas. All of us saw some yellow honey there, but it didn't come from bees. It was placed
in an uneven mountainous crevice and was as large as the amount a pot can hold. This was Kubera's favourite
drink and was guarded by virulent serpents. On drinking it, a mortal man becomes immortal. One without sight
gets his eyesight back. One who is aged becomes young. This is what those brahmanas, conversant with herbs, told
us. O lord of the earth! When the kiratas saw it, they wished to grasp it. They were destroyed in that mountainous
cavern that was full of snakes. In that way, this son of yours wishes for the earth alone[This is being addressed to Dhritarashtra now.]. Because of his delusion,
he sees the honey, but does not see the downfall. Duryodhana wishes to fight with Savyasachi in battle. But I do
not see that he possesses the requisite energy and valour. On a single chariot, he[Arjuna.] conquered the entire earth. Patiently, that brave one is looking towards you and is waiting. Drupada, king of the Matsyas, and an enraged
Dhananjaya will be like fires fanned by the wind and will leave no remnants in battle. O Dhritarashtra! Take King
Yudhishthira on your lap. When two sides fight in battle, there is no clear victory for either side."'
