'Markandeya said, "O Yudhishthira! Thus did the hunter who knew about dharma speak to the brahmana[The words that follow are by the hunter.].

'"'There is no doubt that the deeds that I perform are terrible. O brahmana! But destiny is powerful. And it is
impossible to overcome deeds committed earlier. The sins committed earlier are the taints of karma[Karma is action, the fruits of that action and also the consequent destiny.]. O brahmana! I have endeavoured to kill this sin. When destiny has already killed something earlier, the killer is only the
instrument. O supreme among brahmanas! We are only instruments of our karma. O brahmana! When they are
killed and their meat sold, it is only their dharma that they should be used and eaten, so as to serve the gods, the
guests, the servants and the ancestors. According to the shrutis, herbs, creepers, animals, deer and birds are the decreed food for all beings. O supreme among brahmanas! The compassionate King Shibi Ushinara obtained a heaven that is difficult to attain by offering his own flesh[This story has been told in Section 33.]. O brahmana! Earlier, in King Rantideva's great kitchen,
two thousand animals were slaughtered every day[Rantideva was a king of the lunar dynasty, known for his generosity.]. Rantideva gave food with meat every day. O supreme
among brahmanas! His fame is unmatched. He always killed animals at chaturmasya[Seasonal festivals after every four months, held in the months of Kartika, Phalguna and Ashada.]. It has been said in the
shrutis that the fire desires meat. O brahmana! A brahmana always kills animals at sacrifices. They are purified
through mantras and we have heard that they go to heaven. O brahmana! O supreme among brahmanas! If the fire
had not desired meat earlier, who would have eaten it now? Even now, sages have articulated rules on the eating of
meat. "He who always eats after offering to the gods and the ancestors, in accordance with the rules and with faith,
no sin attaches to him from the act of eating." It has been said in the shrutis that such a person is the equal of one
who does not eat meat. A brahmana who has intercourse with his wife during her season is the equal of a brahmachari. The rules that differentiate truth from falsehood are recited even now. O brahmana! In earlier times, King
Soudasa ate men[This story has been told in Section 11 (Volume 1).]. He had been overtaken by a terrible curse. What do you think of that? O supreme among
brahmanas! I cannot give up my own dharma. Knowing that this is due to my earlier deeds, I perform this task for
my livelihood. O brahmana! It is considered to be adharma to give up one's own dharma. It is certainly dharma to
adhere to one's own dharma. Deeds committed earlier never leave a being. The creator's ordinances foresaw the
determination of these different forms of karma. It is seen that a being who is engaged in a cruel task has to think
of performing good deeds so that he can be freed from its influence. There are different ways of freeing oneself
from terrible karma-such as donations, truthfulness in speech, the service of superiors and the worship of brahmanas. I have always devoted myself to this dharma. O supreme among brahmanas! I should refrain from pride
and from speaking too much. Agriculture is known to be a virtuous occupation. But it has been said that there is
great violence in this. Ploughing kills many beings that lie inside the ground and many other hundreds of beings.
What is your view on this? O supreme among brahmanas! Vrihi[Kind of rice.] and other seeds of rice are all living organisms.
What is your view on this? O brahmana! Man hunts, kills and eats animals. They also cut trees and herbs. O brahmana! There are many living beings in trees and fruit. There are many in water too. What is your view on this? O
brahmana! Everything is full of life and living beings. Fish eat fish. What is your view on this? O supreme among
brahmanas! Beings live on other beings. What is your view on this? O brahmana! Through the mere act of walking, men trample with their feet many beings that resort to the ground. What is your view on this? Even wise and
learned ones kill many beings when they are seated or asleep. What is your view on this? The entire earth and the
sky are full of living beings. One causes injury to them unknowingly. What is your view on this? Those men of
earlier times wondered and spoke about non-violence. O supreme among brahmanas! But in this world, who does
not injure living beings? After reflecting a lot on this, there is no one who does not cause violence. O supreme
among brahmanas! Even ascetics who are devoted to non-violence cause violence, though their efforts make it
less. It can be seen that there are men who have great qualities and who are born in noble lineages. They may perform extremely terrible deeds. But they are not ashamed. Well-wishers do not praise well-wishers. Evil-wishers do
not praise evil-wishers. Men who are righteous do not praise other righteous ones. Relatives do not praise relatives,
even if they are prosperous. Foolish ones, thinking themselves to be learned, criticize preceptors. O supreme
among brahmanas! There are many things in this world that can be seen to be contrary. Is this dharma or is it adharma? What is your view on this? Many things can be said about the dharma or adharma of our deeds. But he
who adheres to his own dharma attains great fame.'"'
