Shuka said, 'I have understood that there is a creation that is destructible, one united with qualities and the
senses. But there is another kind of auspicious and eternal creation that can be comprehended by meditating
on the atman. However, I again wish to hear about the reasons for virtuous conduct in this world. That is what
righteous ones have ordained. I desire to hear those described. The words of the Vedas say that tasks should be undertaken and also that they should be renounced. How will I know which is better? You should explain this to me.
Once I  have been purified through instructions from my preceptor,  I  will know  the truth about conduct in the
world. Using the intelligence to separate and delink my atman from my body, I will then obtain that which is without decay.'

'"Vyasa replied, 'In ancient times, Brahma himself laid down rules for conduct. The supreme and virtuous rishis
followed this earlier. The supreme rishis conquered the worlds through brahmacharya. In their hearts, they placed
their atmans in what was most beneficial. They placed their minds in their atmans. They dwelt in the forest and
survived on roots and fruits. They tormented themselves through extremely great austerities. They dwelt in auspicious spots. They showed no injury towards living beings. At the right time, they went to seek alms from the
abodes of those who were in the vanaprastha stage, when there was no smoke and when the pestles were silent[That is, when the time for cooking was over.].
They obtained the brahman. They did not praise. They did not bow down. They gave up both the good and the bad.
They roamed around alone in the forest, surviving on whatever little was available.'

'"Shuka said, 'In the words of ordinary people, the words of the Vedas are contradictory. In matters of proof,
when there is such a conflict, which is then the sacred text? I wish to hear about this. O illustrious one! Tell me
about it. How should one act, so as not to violate any rites that have been laid down?'"

'Bhishma  said,  "Having  been  thus  addressed,  Gandhavati's  son[Vedavyasa was the son of Satyavati and she was also known as Gandhavati.]  spoke  to  his  son.  The  rishi  honoured  the
words  that  his  infinitely  energetic  son  had  spoken.  'Whether  a  person  is  a  householder,  a  brahmachari,  in  the
vanaprashta stage or a mendicant, if he undertakes all the prescribed tasks, he attains the supreme objective. Even
if a person follows any one of these ashramas in the appropriate way and is free from desire and hatred, he will obtain greatness after death. These are four steps in a ladder that vests with the brahman. By resorting to this ladder, a
person obtains greatness in Brahma's world. For one quarter of the life, a person should follow brahmacharya,
without any malice. Learned about dharma and artha, he should dwell with his preceptor or with his preceptor's
son. He must be compliant and must not censure anybody. Having performed all his tasks, he must study with his
preceptor, but only when his preceptor has summoned him for a lesson. In his preceptor's house, he must eat and
sleep after his preceptor, and awake before his preceptor does. A disciple must perform all the tasks that a servant
would have. Having done all this, he must stand at the side. He must be like a servant who performs all tasks and is
accomplished in all the duties. He must be pure and skilled. He must possess all the qualities. He must be limited
and pleasant in speech. He must conquer his senses and must not look at his preceptor with fierce eyes. He must
not eat before he has eaten. He must not drink before he has drunk. He must not be seated before he has sat down.
He must not sleep before he has slept. He must gently touch his preceptor's feet with upturned palms and knead
them, the right with the right and the left with the left. He must respectfully greet his preceptor and say, "O illustrious one! Instruct me. I have done this. O illustrious one! I will do whatever else you ask me to." Having told him
all this, he must offer all his riches to the preceptor. He must again tell his preceptor about all the tasks that he has
undertaken and ask about what needs to be done. There are some scents and tastes a brahmachari must refrain
from. However, it is the determination of dharma that once he has graduated, he can use these again. These are the
detailed rules that have been laid down for a brahmachari. Practising all these, he must remain near his preceptor.
To the best of his strength, he must try to please his preceptor. Having done this, the disciple can move on from
this ashrama to another ashrama and observe the duties of that. One quarter of his life will thus be spent on the
vows of the Vedas and fasting. Having given the dakshina to the preceptor, following the prescribed ordinances, he
will graduate. Desiring to accomplish dharma, he will follow dharma and ignite a fire[The household fire.], accepting a wife. This is
the state of a householder, in which, he spends the second quarter of his life.'"'
