Vaishampayana said, 'It is known that Brahma gave birth to six maharshis through the powers of his mind.
Sthanu[One of Shiva's names.] had eleven great sons through the powers of his mind-Mrigavyadha, Sarva, the famous Nirriti, Aja,
Ekapada, Pinaki the destroyer of enemies, Dahana, Ishvara, the greatly radiant Kapali, Sthanu and the great lord
Bhaga. These are known as the eleven rudras. The powerful maharshis Marichi, Angiras, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha
and Kratu are Brahma's six sons. It is well known in all the worlds that Angiras had three sons, Brihaspati, Utathya
and Samvarta, all of whom were rigid in their vows. O ruler of men! It has been heard that the sons of Atri were
many. They were all maharshis, learned in the Vedas, tranquil in their souls and attained salvation. From Pulastya
were born the rakshasas, the monkeys and the kinnaras[Mythical beings with human bodies and heads of horses.]. From Pulaha were born the deer, the lions, the tigers and
the kimpurushas[This is a little confusing, because there doesn't seem to be any difference between kinnaras and kimpurushas.]. The sons of Kratu were the equals of Kratu and were companions of the sun[These were the valakhilya sages, 60,000 in number. Generated from the creator's body, they are the size of a
thumb and precede the sun's chariot.]. They were famous in the three worlds because of truthfulness and rigidity of their vows.

'O protector of the earth! The revered rishi Daksha, great son and great father, was born from Brahma's right
toe. From the left toe was born the great-soul's[Daksha's.] wife. Through her, the sage had fifty daughters. These daughters
were lotus-eyed and were all unblemished in features. Since Prajapati[Daksha. Prajapati is also one of Brahma's names.] had no sons, he made these daughters his
putrikas[The daughters effectively become sons in one of two ways. Either, the daughter, since she is regarded as a
son, returns to her father's house after marriage, or the daughter's son is adopted as a son by his maternal
grandfather.]. O king! In accordance with the divine rites, he gave ten to Dharma, twenty-seven to Indu[The moon, or Chandra.] and thirteen to Kashyapa. Listen to me as I recite the names of Dharma's wives-Kirti, Lakshmi, Dhriti, Medha, Pushti,
Shraddha, Kriya, Buddhi, Lajja and Mati. As decreed by the one who created himself[Brahma.], these ten wives of Dharma are the doors to Dharma. The twenty-seven wives of Soma[The moon, or Chandra.] are known throughout the worlds. These wives of
Soma are pure in their vows and have been appointed to measure the progression of time. They are the magical
nakshatras[Constellations or stars.], used to regulate the movement of the worlds.

'The grandfather[Brahma.] had another son named Manu. He was a prajapati[Ruler of the worlds.] and his sons were the eight vasus. I
shall name them in detail-Dhara, Dhruva, Soma, Aha, Anila, Anala, Pratyusha and Prabhasa. These are known as
the eight vasus. Dhara was the son[The word son doesn't always mean son in a literal sense. It can also mean progeny.] of Dhumra, and so was Dhruva, who had knowledge of the brahman. Chandra was the son of Manasvini and Shvasa's son was Shvasana[The wind, or Anila.]. Aha was Rata's son and the fire[Anala, or Hutashana.] was
Shandilya's son. It is known that Pratyusha and Prabhasa were the sons of Prabhata. Dhara again had two sons,
named Dravina and Hutahavyavaha. Dhruva's son was the illustrious Kala, the regulator of the worlds. Soma's son
was the lustrous Varcha and the beautiful Varcha had sons named Shishira, Prana and Ramana. The sons of Aha
were Jyoti, Shama, Shanta and Muni. Agni's son[That is, Anala.] was the illustrious Kumara, born in a bed of reeds. Since he
was reared by the krittikas[There are twenty-seven lunar mansions (nakshatras) and krittika is the third, identified with the Pleiades.
However, there are actually six stars in the Pleiades. Hence the use of the plural krittikas, and the krittikas reared
Kumara, which is why he is known as Kartikeya.], he is also known as Kartikeya. Other sons[Of Agni.] were Shakha, Vishakha and Naigamesha, as the youngest. Anila's wife was Shiva and her sons were Purojava and Avijnatagati. These were the two
sons of Anila. It is known that Pratyusha's son was the rishi Devala. Devala himself had two sons who were
learned and forgiving. Brihaspati's[Famous sage, preceptor of the gods.] sister was celibate and the first among women. Unattached to the world and
attached to yoga, she roamed the world and became the wife of the eighth vasu, Prabhasa. Thus was born the illustrious Vishvakarma, founder of all crafts, creator of a thousand arts, artisan to the thirty gods, maker of all ornaments, best of craftsmen and maker of celestial chariots for the gods. Men thrive on the arts created by this great
soul and it is for this reason that the everlasting Vishvakarma is eternally worshipped.

'The illustrious Dharma emerged by cleaving Brahma's right breast, assuming human form and bringing happiness to all the worlds. Dharma had three supreme sons, beautiful to all beings-Shama, Kama and Harsha. They
support the worlds through their energy. Kama's wife was Rati, Shama's was Prapti and Harsha's was Nanda. The
worlds depend on them for sustenance. Kashyapa was Marichi's son and Kashyapa's sons were the gods and the
demons. O tiger among kings! He is therefore the origin of the worlds. Tvashtri[Vivasvat's son. Identified with Vishvakarma, architect of the gods.], in the form of a mare, became
the wife of Savita[Daughter of the sun.] and this fortunate one gave birth to the two Ashvins in the sky. O ruler of men! Aditi had
twelve sons, headed by Shakra[Indra.]. The youngest of them was Vishnu, on whom the worlds depend. These are the
thirty-three gods. I shall now recount to you their progeny, according to their groups[Paksha.], families[Kula.] and classes[Gana.].
One must know that the rudras, saddhyas, maruts, vasus, bhargavas and vishvadevas are each a group. Vinata's son
Garuda, the powerful Aruna and the illustrious Brihaspati are counted among the adityas. The two Ashvins and all
herbs and animals are counted among the guhyakas[A class of demi-gods; a semi-divine species, Kubera's attendants.]. O king! These are the classes of the gods, recited in sequence. When a man recites this narration, he is cleansed from all sins.

'The illustrious Bhrigu emerged by cleaving open Brahma's heart. Bhrigu's son was the learned Shukra, wise
and the son of one who was wise, and a planet. On being appointed by the one who created himself[Brahma.], he travels
the sky to sustain life in the three worlds, presiding over rain and drought, fear and freedom from fear. He is celibate, faithful in his vows, wise, learned in yoga and has great intelligence. He is the preceptor of the gods and the
demons. Bhrigu's son was thus appointed by the mighty one[Brahma.] to look after that which should be obtained and preserve that which has been obtained. Bhrigu had another son named Chyavana, learned, righteous and radiant in his
austerities. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In his anger, he emerged from his mother's womb and set her
free[That is, set her free from her pregnancy.]. Manu's daughter Arushi became that wise one's[Shukra's.] wife and Ourva[Ourva is another name for Chyavana. He was thus named because he was born through splitting open the
thigh (uru).], of great fame, was born from her,
ripping open her thighs. Even when young, he had great energy and all the qualities and practised great austerities.
His son was Richika and Richika's son was Jamadagni. Jamadagni had four great-souled sons-the youngest of
them was Rama[Parashurama.], superior to the others in all qualities, skilled in the use of all weapons and the destroyer of
Kshatriyas. Ourva had one hundred sons, Jamadagni[Not to be confused with Richika's son Jamadagni. Richika's son is the more famous Jamadagni.] being the foremost. He[Jamadagni.] had thousands of sons and thus
Bhrigu's offspring proliferated.

'Brahma had two other sons, whose signs can be seen in the worlds. They are Dhata and Vidhata and they lived
with Manu. Their sister is the beautiful goddess Lakshmi, whose abode is the lotus and her sons, born of the mind,
are the horses that travel in the sky. The goddess Jyeshtha was born from Shukra and became Varuna's wife. She
gave birth to a son known as Bala and a daughter named Shura[The goddess of liquor.], who brings joy to the gods.

'When hungry creatures began to devour each other for food, Adharma, the destroyer of all beings, was born.
His wife was Nirriti and so rakshasas[Her sons.] are known as nairritas. She also had three other terrible sons, always engaged in evil deeds-Bhaya[Fear.], Mahabhaya[Great fear.] and Mrityu[Death.], the destroyers of beings. The divine Tamra gave birth
to five daughters known in the worlds as Kaki, Shyeni, Bhasi, Dhritarashtri and Shuki. O, ruler of men! Kaki gave
birth to the owls, Shyeni gave birth to the hawks, Bhasi gave birth to the cocks and vultures, Dhritarashtri gave
birth to all the ducks, swans and geese and the learned and righteous Shuki, blessed with the best qualities and
adorned with the best marks, gave birth to the parrots.

'Krodha gave birth to nine daughters who were prone to anger-Mrigi, Mrigamanda, Hari, Bhadramana, Matan-
gi, Sharduli, Shveta, Surabhi and the famous Surasa, blessed with every fortunate mark. O best of men! Mrigi's
offspring are all the deer. O scorcher of enemies! Mrigamanda's offspring are bears, other forms of deer and yaks.
Bhadramana had the elephant Airavata as her son. Her son Airavata is a great elephant and the divine elephant.
Hari's progeny were tawny monkeys and nimble monkeys. It is said that the golangula[Monkeys with tails like those of cows, with dark bodies and red cheeks.] monkeys are also Hari's
sons. O fortunate one! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Sharduli gave birth to lions and tigers and certainly
also to big panthers and leopards. O ruler of men! The offspring of Matangi are the elephants. Shveta gave birth to
a swift cardinal[The cardinal points are guarded by elephants.] elephant named Shveta. O king! Surabhi gave birth to two daughters, the beautiful Rohini and
the famous Gandharvi. In addition, cattle were born from Rohini and horses from Gandharvi. Surasa gave birth to
the nagas and Kadru to the pannagas[Snakes or serpents.]. Anala gave birth to the seven kinds of trees that produce round fruit.

'Anala had another daughter named Shuki. Surasa[There were probably two Surasas, one who was Kadru's daughter and another who was Krodha's daughter.] was Kadru's daughter. Shyeni was Aruna[A shyena is a hawk or falcon, Shyeni is the feminine. So Shyeni could have been married to Vinata's son
Aruna, though the text doesn't make it clear if the two Arunas were the same.]'s wife. She
gave birth to two mighty and powerful sons, named Sampati and the valorous Jatayu. Vinata had two famous sons,
Garuda and Aruna. O lord over men and chief among those who are wise! Thus have I completely described to you
the origins of all principal creatures. The man who hears this is cleansed from all his sins, gets to know everything
and finally attains the highest state after death.'
