'Narada said, "On hearing Suparna's supreme words, the king thought repeatedly and at last made up his mind.
The lord who had performed one thousand sacrifices was generous and was the lord of gifts. Yayati, the king of all
the Vatsas and the Kashis, spoke these words. On seeing his beloved friend Tarkshya and Galava, bull among the
brahmanas, an example of austerities, and considering that this act of giving alms was praiseworthy and would
bring renown to himself, he thought, 'These two have come to me, ignoring all the other kings of the solar dynasty.' He said, 'My birth has become successful today. O Tarkshya! O unblemished one! My country has been
saved by you today. O friend! But I wish to tell you that I am no longer as wealthy as you knew me to be earlier. I
don't possess that kind of riches. O friend! My wealth is lesser now. O traveller in the sky! But at the same time, I
cannot render your arrival here unsuccessful. Nor do I dare to frustrate the desires of this brahmana rishi. I will
give him something that will make his endeavour successful. If one arrives and is frustrated in one's wishes, one
burns down the lineage. O son of Vinata! It is said that there is nothing more evil in the world of the living than
saying, "I have nothing." This destroys and frustrates the hopes of a man who has arrived for something. A man
who is thus unsuccessful causes damage to the sons and grandsons[Of the person who has been solicited.]. This daughter of mine will establish four
lineages. She is as beautiful as a daughter of the gods and follows every kind of dharma. O Galava! Because of her
beauty, this maiden has always been solicited by gods, men and asuras. Therefore, accept my daughter. Kings will
certainly give their kingdoms for her as a bride price, not to speak of eight hundred horses with black ears. Accept
Madhavi, this daughter of mine. O lord! The only boon that I ask for is that I should have grandsons through my
daughter.' Having accepted the maiden, Galava left with the bird. Saying, 'Let us look again,' he left with the
maiden. The bird said, 'The path for obtaining the horses has now been obtained.' Having said this, he took Gala-
va's leave and returned to his own abode.

'"When the king of the birds had left, Galava, travelled with the maiden, thinking about kings who had the capacity to pay the bride price. He thought of Haryashva Ikshvaku of Ayodhya, supreme among kings, immensely
valorous and with the four constituent parts[Elephants, horses, chariots and infantry.] in his army. He loved brahmanas and was the beloved of the citizens. He possessed treasuries, granaries and soldiers. He desired peace for his subjects and performed supreme
austerities. The brahmana Galava went to Haryashva and said, 'O Indra among kings! This maiden of mine will
give birth and extend lineages. O Haryashva! Accept her as your wife and give me a bride price. I will tell you
what the bride price is. Hearing this, arrive at a decision.'"'
