'Dhritarashtra said, "O illustrious one! This affair of the gamble did not bring me pleasure. O sage! I think it was
destiny which overcame me and made me agree. It did not bring pleasure to Bhishma, Drona or Vidura either, nor
to Gandhari. There is no doubt that the gambling was caused by delusion. O illustrious one! I cannot abandon the
insensible Duryodhana. O one with vows! Though I know, I am bound by affection for my son."

'Vyasa replied, "O king! O Vichitravirya's son! What you have said is true. I know that a son is supreme and
nothing is superior to a son. Indra himself realized this through the flow of Surabhi's[The name of a famous cow that yielded everything one desired. Also, the divine cow that was the mother of
all cows.] tears. He understood that a
son surpasses all other riches, no matter how expensive. O lord of the earth! In this connection, I will recount that
great and supreme account, the conversation between Surabhi and Indra. O king! O son! In times long past, it is
said that Surabhi, the mother of all cows, cried out in heaven. Out of compassion for her, Indra asked, 'O fortunate
one! Why are you crying like this? Is everything well with the gods, men and cattle? Or is there some misfortune
that is more than slight?' Surabhi replied, 'O lord of the thirty gods! I do not see any calamity looming before you.
O Koushika[One of Indra's names.]! I am sorrowing for my son and that is the reason I am weeping. My son is small and weak and he
is burdened by the plough. See that terrible peasant beat him with a stick. O lord of the gods! I see him terribly exhausted and close to death. O lord of the gods! I am overcome with compassion for him and my mind is agitated.
One of those two[There are two bulls yoked to the plough.] is stronger and bears the burden of greater weight. But the other one has little strength of life
and is thin, with nothing but veins. O Vasava! He bears the burden with great difficulty and that is the reason I am
grieving. He is close to death and is repeatedly beaten with the stick. O Vasava! Look. He is unable to bear the burden. Driven by compassion for him, I am sorrowful and extremely miserable. I am weeping and tears of sorrow are
flowing from my eyes.' Indra asked, 'O beautiful one! Thousands of your sons are equally oppressed. Why are you
driven by compassion for this one? He is only one among several oppressed.' Surabhi replied, 'I have thousands of
sons everywhere and I look upon them equally. O Shakra! But my compassion is truly greater for the son who is
oppressed.' On hearing Surabhi's words, Indra was greatly surprised. O Kouravya! He became convinced that a
son was dearer than one's own life. At that, the illustrious chastiser of Paka suddenly let loose a great shower of
rain there and caused an obstruction to the act of ploughing.

'"O king! As Surabhi had said, all your sons may be equal to you. But among all your sons, your compassion
should be greatest towards the one who is oppressed. O son! Just as Pandu was my son, you are also my son, and
so is the immensely wise Vidura. It is out of affection towards you that I am telling you all this. O lord of the earth!
You have one hundred and one sons to outlive you[Dhritarashtra had one hundred sons through Gandhari. In addition, he had Yuyutsu as a son, through a
vaishya woman.]. But Pandu's are seen to be only five and they are in a bad
state and extremely miserable. How will they manage to remain alive? How will they prosper? Such thoughts
about the miserable sons of Pritha torment my mind. O lord of the earth! If you wish the Kouravas to live, let your
son Duryodhana go to the Pandavas and make peace."'
