'Sanjaya said, "The soldiers heard that Yudhishthira would be captured. They roared like lions and this mingled
with the sounds of their arrows and their conch shells. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Dharmaraja got to
know everything about this through his spies, and about what Bharadvaja's son desired to do. He summoned all his
brothers and all the soldiers. Dharmaraja spoke these words to Dhananjaya. 'O tiger among men! You have heard
about what Drona wishes to do today. Let all appropriate measures be taken accordingly. O destroyer of enemies!
It is true that Drona has taken a pledge. But it is not infallible and everything depends on you. O mighty-armed
one! Therefore, fight near me today, so that Duryodhana cannot obtain what he desires from Drona.'

'"Arjuna replied, 'O king! Just as I can never act so as to bring about the preceptor's death, I will never forsake
you. O Pandava! I would rather give up my life than fight against my preceptor and kill him. O king! Dhritarashtra's son wishes to capture you in the battle. He will never accomplish his desire in the world of the living. As long
as I am alive, Drona will never be able to capture you. Even if the wielder of the vajra himself, together with the
gods and the daityas, were to try to capture you in battle, they will fail. O Indra among kings! As long as I am
alive, you should not be frightened. Drona is foremost among wielders of weapons and among those who wield all
weapons. I do not remember having ever uttered a falsehood. I do not remember ever having been vanquished. I do
not remember having not fulfilled a pledge I have made, even partially.'"

'Sanjaya said, "O great king! Conch shells, drums, cymbals and tambourines were then sounded in the residence
of the Pandavas. The great-souled Pandavas roared like lions. The fearful twang of bowstrings and the slapping of
palms rose up into heaven. On hearing the conch shells sounded by the great-souled Pandavas, your army also
caused musical instruments to be played. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The arrays and divisions, on your
side and theirs, slowly advanced towards each other, wishing to fight in the battle. A tumultuous battle commenced
between the Pandavas and the Kurus and Drona and the Panchalas, and it made the body hair stand up. O king!
Though they made every endeavour, the Srinjayas were unable to drive back Drona's army, because it was protected by Drona himself. The armed and mighty rathas of your son were unable to drive back the Pandava soldiers, because they were protected by Kiriti. Protected thus, the respective soldiers seemed to be subdued, like blossoms
that are asleep in the forests in the night. O king! He[Drona.] was on a golden chariot, as radiant as the sun. He shattered
the divisions and roamed around, amidst the ranks. He was on a single chariot. But he acted so quickly in that battle, that the terrified Pandus and Srinjayas thought there were several of him. He released terrible arrows that travelled in every direction. O great king! There was fright in the army of the Pandaveyas. He seemed to be like the
sun when it has attained midday, radiating a hundred rays and quickly drawing out sweat. That is what Drona
looked like then. O venerable one! The Pandaveyas were incapable of glancing towards him in that battle, like the
danavas towards the great Indra, when enraged. Bharadvaja's powerful son confounded the soldiers. He swiftly
pierced Dhrishtadyumna's army with his sharp arrows. He seemed to cover and obstruct all the directions and the
sky with his arrows. He crushed the army of the Pandus, even where Parshata was."'
