'Yudhishthira asked, "O grandfather! How should the king employ himself in the protection of the subjects so that
he does not cause an offence to dharma? Tell me that."

'Bhishma replied, "O son[The word used is tata.]! I will tell you briefly about what has been determined to be dharma. If I were to
describe dharma in detail, I would never reach the end. There will be qualified brahmanas who are learned, devoted to dharma and immersed in the Vedas and rites. Make them dwell in your house and act as officiating priests.
When you get up in the morning, greet your priest by clasping his feet. Make him perform all the rites. When the
tasks of dharma have been completed and the auspicious pronouncements have been made, make brahmanas pronounce benedictions for prosperity, success and victory. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You must possess
uprightness, fortitude and intelligence. You must seek to obtain artha, but must give up desire and anger. A foolish
king who strives for artha while placing desire and anger at the forefront, obtains neither dharma, nor artha. For
matters connected with kama and artha, do not employ those who are avaricious and stupid. In all tasks, those who
are intelligent and not greedy should be employed. If a fool is given a position of authority in matters concerning
artha, or if an unskilled person is put in charge of a task, or if he is overcome by desire and hatred, he will oppress
the subjects with wrong policies.

'"The desire for revenue and riches will come through one-sixth of income collected as taxes, monetary penalties levied on wrongdoers and other levies sanctioned by the sacred texts. The tax imposed on the kingdom must
always be in accordance with dharma and in accordance with what has been decreed. The king must be attentive in
ensuring unlimited yoga and kshema. If he is like a herdsman and is generous, always attentive towards dharma
and without desire and hatred, then men will always be devoted to him and find delight in him. Do not desire to
obtain an inflow of riches or gain through adharma. If one deviates from the sacred, one's dharma and artha will
both be uncertain. A king who deviates from the sacred texts cannot advance towards accumulation. All that he obtains is destroyed on inappropriate things[Even if he obtains artha, he does not obtain dharma.]. If artha alone is the foundation, he harms his own self. In his confusion, he oppresses the subjects by imposing taxes that are not sanctioned by the sacred texts. For the sake of milk,
if one slices off the udders of a cow, one does not obtain any milk. In that way, a kingdom oppressed through bad
policy does not prosper. A person who is caring towards a milk-yielding cow always obtains milk. In that way, a
person who cares for the kingdom enjoys the fruits. O Yudhishthira! If the kingdom is administered and enjoyed
while protecting it well, it always leads to an unsurpassed increase in the treasury. When the earth is protected
well, it provides grain, gold and offspring to the king, just as a satisfied mother always provides milk to her own
and those of others. O king! Be like one who makes garlands. Do not be like one who makes charcoal[The maker of charcoal burns trees and plants to make charcoal. The
maker of garlands tends to trees and plants.]. If you
act in this way and protect, you will be able to enjoy the kingdom for a long time.

'"If the riches are exhausted because of invasion by an enemy, in a desire to collect riches, one can use conciliation and take it from non-brahmanas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Even when you confront extreme distress, do not let your mind be disturbed when you see wealthy brahmanas, not to speak of when you are prosperous. You must give them riches, according to your capacity and according to what they deserve. If you comfort
them and protect them, you will obtain the heaven that is extremely difficult to get. In this way, protect the subjects
according to the conduct of dharma. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! You will then obtain eternal and auspicious
fame. O Pandava! Protect the subjects through virtuous conduct. O Yudhisthira! Acting in this way, you will not
suffer any anxiety. This is the supreme dharma, the protection of subjects by a king. Protecting subjects in their observance of dharma is the supreme form of compassion. Those who are learned about dharma think that this is
supreme dharma. A king who is engaged in protecting beings performs an act of compassion. If a king fails to protect the subjects from fear for a single day, then it takes one thousand years for him to get out of that sin. If the
king performs the auspicious task of following dharma and protecting the subjects for a single day, then he enjoys
the fruits in heaven for ten thousand years. There are worlds won through sacrifices, studying and great austerities.
By protecting the subjects in accordance with dharma, all those are obtained in an instant. O Kounteya! Endeavour
to protect dharma in this way. You will obtain auspicious fruits in this world and have no reason for anxiety. O
Pandava! You will obtain great prosperity in the world of heaven. In places where there are no kings, it is impossible to obtain this dharma. Therefore, it is the king, and no one else, who can obtain these great fruits. Use dharma
to protect this prosperous kingdom that you have obtained. Satisfy Indra through soma and meet the desires of the
ones who are your well-wishers."'
