Vaishampayana said, 'O Janamejaya! On seeing that his sons, brothers and friends had been slain in the encounter,
his[Yudhishthira's.] soul was immersed in great grief. The great-souled one was overcome by deep sorrow. He remembered his
sons, grandsons, brothers and relatives. His eyes were full of tears. He trembled and was senseless. The well-wishers became extremely anxious and comforted him.

'At that time, when it was morning, Nakula brought Krishna[Droupadi.] there, on a chariot that was as radiant as the sun.
She was extremely distressed and he brought her with him. She had gone to Upaplavya and had heard the extremely unpleasant news there, that all her sons had been destroyed. She was miserable. She trembled like a plantain tree
stirred by the wind. Having approached the king, Krishna was afflicted by grief and fell down on the ground. Her
face, with eyes like full-blown lotuses, was afflicted by misery, as if the sun had been covered by darkness. On seeing that she was falling down, the angry Vrikodara, for whom truth was his valour, approached her and grasped her
in his arms. The beautiful one was comforted by Bhimasena. Krishna wept and addressed Pandava, together with
his brothers. "O king! It is through good fortune that you will now enjoy the entire earth. Following the dharma of
kshatriyas, you have offered your sons to Yama. O Partha! It is through good fortune that you have obtained the
entire earth and do not remember Subhadra's son[Abhimanyu.], who was skilled and whose gait was like that of a maddened
elephant. While residing in Upaplavya, I heard that my brave sons had been brought down, in accordance with
dharma. It is good fortune that you do not remember this with me. I have heard that they were slain while they
were sleeping, by Drona's son, who acted wickedly. O Partha! That sorrow is tormenting me, as if I am in the
midst of a fire. Drona's son acted in a wicked way. O Pandavas! Listen to me. If, in an encounter today, you do not
exhibit your valour and destroy him and his followers, and he remains alive in the encounter, I will resort to
praya[Act of giving up one's life by fasting to death.] here. Drona's son must be made to reap the fruits of his wicked deed." Having spoken these words to Pan-
dava Dharmaraja Yudhishthira, the illustrious Krishna sat down there.

'On seeing that his beloved queen had sat down there, rajarshi Pandava, with dharma in his soul, replied to the
beautiful Droupadi. "O beautiful one! O one who knows about dharma! Your sons and your brothers have followed
dharma and have attained their ends in accordance with dharma. You should not grieve. O fortunate one! Drona's
son has gone to a forest that is far away. O beautiful one! How do you think that he can then be brought down in a
battle?" Droupadi replied, "I have heard that Drona's son possesses a natural jewel on his head. I wish to see that
jewel brought to me, after the wicked one has been slain in an encounter. O king! I have formed a resolution that I
will live only if that is placed on your head." Having spoken these words to the Pandava king, the beautiful
Krishna angrily approached Bhimasena and spoke these words. "O Bhima! You should remember the dharma of
kshatriyas and save me. Slay the one whose deeds are wicked, like Maghavan against Shambara[Shambara was a demon killed by Indra.]. There is no other man who is equal in valour to you. All the worlds have heard that when the Parthas confronted a great calamity
in the city of Varanavata, you were the refuge[A reference to the incidents in Section 8 (Volume 1).]. When we saw Hidimba, you were the refuge again[The incidents of Section 9 (Volume 1). However, Droupadi wasn't
around then.]. In the city of
Virata, I was severely oppressed by Kichaka. You saved me from that calamity, like Maghavan saved Poulami[Kichaka was slain by Bhima in Section 46 (Volume 4). Maghavan is Indra and Indra's wife is Shachi or Poulami, the daughter of Puloma, a demon. Indra killed Puloma.]. O
Partha! You have performed many other great deeds earlier. O destroyer of enemies! Slay Drona's son now and be
happy." In this way, she lamented a lot, in misery and grief. The immensely strong Kounteya Bhimasena could not
tolerate this. He climbed onto his great chariot, which was wonderfully decorated with gold. He grasped his
colourful and wonderful bow, bowstring and arrows. Having appointed Nakula the charioteer, he embarked on the
task of killing Drona's son. He brandished his bow and arrows and swiftly goaded the horses. O tiger among kings!
Those horses were as swift as the wind. Thus urged, they proceeded swiftly. The one without decay spiritedly left
the camp on his chariot. The valiant one quickly followed the footsteps that Drona's son had taken and the route
that his chariot had taken.'
