'Bhimasena said, "O great king! You have made an agreement with time, the arrow[The word used is patatrina, which etymologically, means the one with wings. Specifically, patatrina means
a bird or an arrow, but the latter fits the text better.] that brings an end to everything. It has no end, it is without measure and it is like a current that carries everything away. I think that it follows
the dharma of foam and the dharma of fruit. You are a mortal and you are tied down by time. How can you think
that time is directly before you? O Kounteya! Like collyrium becomes less every time it is picked with a blade of
grass[Collyrium is a black pigment applied to the eye with a stick or pencil. The word sucha is used. This means
needle, but it also means a pointed shoot or blade of kusa grass. Since collyrium is applied to the eye, blade of
grass seems to be a better translation than needle.], one's life becomes less in an instant. Why should it[Time.] wait? Only one whose life has no end or one who
knows the measure of one's life can wait for time, since one can then see everything clearly. O king! If we wait for
time and for thirteen years, our lives will be shortened and we will be nearer death. The bodies of those who have
bodies are always overtaken by death. Therefore, we should work towards obtaining the kingdom before death.
One who should extend the earth[A king.], but does not avenge enmity, fails to achieve fame and remains incomplete,
like a useless cow. If a man does not avenge enmity because he has little strength and enterprise, I think that his
birth has been useless and that he has been born in an inferior lineage. O lord of the earth! Your arms will be laden
with gold, you will attain fame. Use the strength of your arms to kill those who hate you in battle and enjoy the
riches. O king! O destroyer of enemies! If a man goes to hell after killing a deceitful person, that instantly becomes
like heaven to him.

'"The torment born from anger burns more than fire. I am tormented by it and cannot sleep during the day or at
night. Partha Bibhatsu is foremost among those who draw the string of the bow. He is now supremely tormented
like a lion in its den. Like a giant elephant, he is suppressing the great heat that arises inside him, though unaided,
he can take on all the archers in the world. So as to please you, Nakula, Sahadeva and the aged mother[Kunti.] who has
given birth to warriors are seated, benumbed and dumb. All our relatives, together with the Srinjayas, wish you
well. But I and Prativindhya's mother[Droupadi. Prativindhya is Droupadi's son.] are greatly tormented and speak to you, though what I am saying will be
agreeable to them too. All of them have attained great grief and all of them will welcome war. O king! No calamity
can be greater than this. Mean and weaker ones have stolen our kingdom and are now enjoying it. O scorcher of
enemies! You are bearing this misery so that your conduct is not tainted out of tenderness and gentleness. But no
one will praise you for this. Your gentleness is like that of a brahmana. How have you been born as a kshatriya?
Those who are born in that womb are usually cruel-minded. You have heard about the dharma of kings, as recounted by Manu. They are cruel, characterized by deceit and are against pacification. O tiger among men! There is
work to be done. Why are you behaving like a crippled one? You have intelligence, valour, knowledge and birth.

'"O Kounteya! You wish to conceal us, like hiding the Himalaya Mountains in a handful of grass. You are famous throughout the earth. You will not be able to live secretly, undetected. O Partha! The sun cannot pass undetected in the sky. How can Jishnu remain unrecognized? He is like a giant shala tree, like a palasha tree with
branches and flowers. He is like a white elephant. O Partha! How will these two young brothers who are like lions,
Nakula and Sahadeva, remain hidden? The princess Droupadi is the mother of brave ones and the performer of sacred deeds. O Partha! Krishna is famous. How will she remain unrecognized? O king! All the subjects know me,
even the children. I see myself as unrecognized as Mount Meru. Besides, we have exiled many kings and the sons
of kings from their kingdoms and they will now follow Dhritarashtra. Deprived and exiled by us, they will not
have pacific feelings towards us. They will certainly try to injure us, so as to cause him pleasure. They will employ
many spies against us. There will be a great danger that they will detect us and inform against us. We have already
lived in this forest for thirteen months. Regard that as equal to that number of years. The learned ones have said
that a month can substitute for a year, like putika[A kind of herb.] is a substitute for soma. Act accordingly. O king! You can
also free yourself from this single sin[From violating the agreement.] by satisfying with sacred food a bull that pulls a sacred burden. O king!
Therefore, make up your mind to kill your enemies. For kshatriyas, there is no dharma other than that of fighting."'
