Sanjaya said, "On hearing that the immensely valorous Karna was still alive, the infinitely energetic Partha[Yudhishthira.]
became angry with Phalguna. Tormented by Karna's arrows, Yudhishthira spoke these words to Dhananjaya. 'In
Dvaitavana, you should have said, "O king! I am not interested in fighting with Karna." O Partha! Had you said
that, at the right time, we would have thought of other arrangements. O brave one! But you promised me that you
would kill that powerful one. You have brought us into the midst of enemies and then you have shattered us by
flinging us down on the ground. O Arjuna! We showered down many blessings on you and we expected many
things that would be beneficial for us. O prince! All of that has been rendered unsuccessful, like an upper garment
expecting fruits, but obtaining flowers instead[The explanation has to be deduced. An upper garment has been held
under a tree, expecting fruit to fall. Instead, there are flowers.]. Like a fish hook covered with flesh, or like impure food covered
with pure food, I can only see worthless things in you. We desired the kingdom. But we are faced with destruction
in the form of the kingdom. O evil-minded one! On the seventh day after you were born, an invisible voice spoke
to Pritha[Kunti.] from the sky. "The son that has been born to you will be like Vasava in his valour. He will triumph
over all the brave enemies. He will be infinitely energetic and will defeat large numbers of gods and all the beings
in Khandava. He will vanquish the Madras, the Kalingas and the Kekayas and in the midst of the kings, kill the
Kurus. There will be no archer who will be superior to him. No being will be born who will be able to defeat him.
This noble one will bring all the beings under his subjugation and will accomplish all kinds of learning. He will be
as handsome as the moon and as swift as the wind. He will be like Meru in fortitude and like the earth in forgiveness. He will possess the radiance of the sun and the prosperity of the lord of riches[Kubera.]. He will be like Shakra in
his valour and like Vishnu in his strength. This great-souled son that has been born to Kunti will be like Aditi's son
Vishnu[All the gods are sons of Aditi, who was married to the sage Kashyapa.], the slayer of all enemies. He will bring victory to his own and slay the enemy. He will be famous and
infinitely energetic and will be the originator of a lineage." This was heard from the sky, on the slopes of the
Shatashringa mountains[When Pandu and Kunti and Madri left for the forest, the Pandavas were
born on the slopes of the Shatashringa mountain. This has been described
in Section 7 (Volume 1).]. The ascetics heard the words that were spoken. This is what was spoken about you.
But it has not come to pass. The gods have certainly uttered a falsehood. I heard words of praise spoken about you
by the supreme of rishis and have always honoured you. I did not know that you were affectionate towards Suyodhana. Nor did I know that you feared Adhiratha's son. You are borne on a vehicle that has been created by Tvashtra[Vishvakarma, the architect of the gods.]. Its axles rattle. The ape sits astride your auspicious standard. You have girded a sword that is decorated
with gold. Gandiva bow is as long as a palm tree. O Partha! Keshava drives you. How have you withdrawn as a
result of your fear of Karna? O evil-souled one! Had you given the bow to Keshava and become his charioteer in
the battle, then Keshava would have slain the fierce Karna, like the lord of the Maruts[Indra is the lord of the Maruts.] bringing down Vritra
with his vajra. It would have been better had you not been born in Pritha's womb, but had been aborted in the fifth
month itself. O prince! O evil-souled one! That would have been better than withdrawing from the field of battle.'"
