Vyasa said, 'In this way, a patient person accepts the raft of knowledge and accepts and bases himself on
peace. He is immersed and submerged, but seeks refuge in knowledge.'

'"Shuka asked, 'What is that knowledge? What is the learing that restrains opposite sentiments? According to
dharma, what are the characteristics of attachment and detachment?'

'"Vyasa replied, 'A person who thinks that everything is because of nature, without being established in any other foundation[Implying a denial of the existence of the brahman.], does not obtain the means of emanicipation, because of his lack of wisdom. Those who hold the
view that nature is the sole reason for existence are like sacred grass that has not been sprinkled. They obtain nothing. Foolish people who resort to either of these views[This is difficult to understand and needs explanation. In both views, nature is assumed to be everything and the
cause. But in one case, nature is itself held to be an illusion. In the other case, nature is real and is not an illusion, but is regarded as the cause.] and regard nature as the cause do not get what is best for
them. This belief in nature is an act that results from confusion in the mind and brings destruction. There are those
who hold that things exist because of nature and others who hold that they flow from other entities[But those other and preceding entities also originate with nature. Both doctrines thus ascribe nature alone to be
the primordial cause.]. Those who
are full of learning engage in tasks like agriculture, accumulation of crops, generation of offspring, collection of
means of transport, objects of pleasure, houses, seats and medicines. Those who speak about these are full of wisdom. Wisdom engages one in attaining objectives. Wisdom conveys one to what is most beneficial. Though kings
are the equals of others in attributes, it is through wisdom that they enjoy kingdoms. It is because of learning that
one can differentiate between superior and inferior beings. O son! Creation results from learning. Learning is the
supreme objective. Four kinds of birth have been laid down for all beings-from wombs, from eggs, from sweat
and plants. This can be discerned. Mobile entities are seen to be superior to the immobile. It is evident that enterprise is superior to material objects. It is said that there are two kinds of mobile entities, those with many legs and
those with two legs, those with two legs being superior. Those with two legs are said to be of two kinds, those that
live on land and those that do not[By bipeds that do not live on land, one means birds.]. Those that live on land are superior and enjoy many kinds of food. Bipeds
who live on land are of two kinds, medium and superior. Those who are medium follow the dharma of jatis and are
better[While jati is not varna, in this context, the dharma of jatis can be understood to be varnashrama dharma. Medium men follow this. Superior men have transcended the dictates of varnashrama dharma. Why should medium
men be better? This seems contradictory. The resolution of this is a matter of interpretation. Medium men being
better is a popular belief, but is not the truth. That is one possible line of reasoning.]. Among those who are medium, there are said to be two kinds-those who know about dharma and those
who do not. Those who know about dharma are superior because they undertake what should be done and do not
undertake what should not be done. Those who know about dharma are said to be of two kinds, those who are
learned about the Vedas and those who are not. Those who are learned about the Vedas are superior because the
Vedas are vested in them[Speculatively, the Vedas were not in writing and were passed down through oral transmission. The Vedas were
vested in them in the sense that they had learnt the Vedas by heart.]. Those who are learned about the Vedas are said to be of two kinds-those who expound on them and those who do not. Those who expound on them are superior, because they uphold all kinds of
dharma. They know about the Vedas and all the rites that lead to the fruits of dharma. The sacrifices and all the
Vedas flow from those who expound about them. Those who expound about the Vedas are said to be of two types
-those who know about the atman and those who do not. Those who know about the atman are superior, because
they have comprehension about birth and lack of birth[They are freed from the cycle of birth and death.]. He who knows about both kinds of dharma[Attachment to tasks and detachment from tasks.] knows
everything about all kinds of dharma. He is detached and firm in his resolution to the truth. He is pure. He is the
lord[In the sense of possessing powers.]. The gods know such a brahmana as someone who is established in knowledge about dharma. He is firm in
his determination about Shabda-Brahma and the one who is superior to that[Para-Brahma.]. Such people know the soul both inside and outside[Inside their own selves and outside.]. O son[The word used is tata.]! Such people are brahmanas. Such people are gods. The entire universe of beings and
everything that is beneficial in the universe is based on them. There is nothing that is equal to their sentiments of
greatness. They are beyond all deeds and beyond origin and destruction. They are like Svayambhu and the lords of
the four kinds of beings.'"'
