'Yudhishthira said, "There are no limits to misfortune. Nor effects or causes. Dharma distributes it, depending on
merits and demerits."

'Bhima said, "The attendant dragged Krishna into the assembly hall like a servant. There is no doubt that we are
confronted with this calamity because I did not kill him then."

'Arjuna said, "I tolerated the extremely harsh words spoken by the suta's son, which penetrated the bones. There
is no doubt that we are confronted with this calamity because of that."

'Sahadeva said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There is no doubt that we are confronted with this
calamity because I did not kill Shakuni when he defeated you at the game of dice."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Then King Yudhishthira spoke these words to Nakula. "O Madri's son! Climb a tree and
look in the ten directions. Look for water that is nearby, or trees that grow near water. O son[The word used is tata, which means son. But it is affectionately used for anyone who is younger.]! Your brothers are
exhausted and thirsty." Following these words, Nakula swiftly climbed a tree. After looking in all the directions, he
told his eldest brother, "O king! I can see many trees that grow near water. I can hear the cries of cranes. There is
no doubt that there is water somewhere here." Kunti's son Yudhishthira, steadfast in his truth, then told him, "O
peaceful one! Swiftly go and fetch some water." On his eldest brother's instructions, Nakula agreed and quickly
rushed towards the place where the water was. He saw the crystal clear water, surrounded by cranes. Just as he was
about to drink it, a voice was heard from heaven. "O son[The word used is tata, which means son. But it is affectionately used for anyone who is younger.]! Do not be foolish enough to do this. I have obtained
possession of this earlier. O Madri's son! Answer my question. You can then drink it and take it." But Nakula was
very thirsty and ignored these words. He drank the cool water. Having drunk it, he collapsed and fell down. When
Nakula did not return for a long time, Kunti's son Yudhishthira told his brave brother Sahadeva, the scorcher of enemies. "O Sahadeva! Your brother has been gone for a long time. He is your immediate elder. Go and fetch your
brother. Bring water too." On hearing these words, Sahadeva proceeded in that direction. He saw his brother Naku-
la, lying down dead on the ground. He was sorely tormented at the sight of his brother. But he was oppressed by
thirst. He rushed towards the water and the voice spoke these words. "O son[The word used is tata, which means son. But it is affectionately used for anyone who is younger.]! Do not be foolish enough to do this.
I have obtained possession of this earlier. Answer my question. You can then drink it and take it, as you wish." But
Sahadeva was very thirsty and ignored these words. He drank the cool water. Having drunk it, he collapsed and fell
down.

'Then Kunti's son Yudhishthira spoke to Vijaya[Vijaya is Arjuna's name, as is Bibhatsu, or Gudakesha. Shvetavahana (meaning the one whose steeds are
white) is also one of Arjuna's names and so is Savyasachi.]. "O Bibhatsu! O destroyer of enemies! Your brothers have
been gone for a long time. O fortunate one! Go and bring them and the water." At these words, Gudakesha grasped
his bow and arrows. The intelligent one grasped his unsheathed sword and proceeded towards the lake. Shvetavahana saw his brothers, the tigers among men who had gone to fetch water, lying down dead on the ground. On seeing them, as if asleep, Kounteya, lion among men, was extremely distressed. He raised his bow and looked around
in the forest. Savyasachi could not see any beings in that great forest. He was exhausted and rushed towards the
water. As he rushed towards it, the voice was heard from the sky. "Why are you approaching? You will not be able
to drink the water by force. O Kounteya! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If you are able to answer my questions, you will be able to drink the water and take it." Having been thus restrained, Partha said, "Show yourself and
then restrain me. You will not be able to speak again in this fashion when my arrows pierce you." Saying this,
Partha invoked his arrows with mantras. He displayed his skill at shooting arrows targeted at sound, enveloping the
directions. O bull among the Bharata lineage! He unleashed many showers of barbed arrows, hollow arrows and
iron arrows towards the sky.

'The yaksha said, "O Partha! What purpose do these exertions serve? Answer my questions and then drink. If
you do not answer the questions, you will cease to exist as soon as you drink."'

Vaishampayana said, 'But having unleashed his invincible arrows, he was overcome by thirst. Ignoring the
words, he drank and collapsed and fell down. Kunti's son Yudhishthira then spoke to Bhimasena. "O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Nakula, Sahadeva and the unvanquished Bibhatsu have been gone for a long time, having
gone to fetch water. O fortunate one! Go and fetch them and bring the water." Having been thus addressed, Bhimasena left in the same direction, where his brothers, tigers among men, had fallen down. On seeing them, Bhima
was distressed and was oppressed by thirst. The mighty-armed one thought that this must have been the work of
yakshas or rakshasas. He thought, "I will certainly have to fight today. But let me drink the water first." Partha
Vrikodara, bull among men, was thirsty and rushed towards the water.

'The yaksha said, "O son[The word used is tata, which means son. But it is affectionately used for anyone who is younger.]! Do not be foolish enough to do this. I have obtained possession of this earlier. O
Kounteya! Answer my question. You can then drink it and take it."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Bhima ignored the words of the infinitely energetic yaksha. He drank, collapsed and fell
down. O bull among men! At this, the king who was Kunti's son began to think. Tormented in his mind, the
mighty-armed one arose. He entered the great forest, bereft of the sounds of people. It was infested with ruru deer,
boar and birds. There were dark, colourful and beautiful trees, abuzz with the sounds of bees and birds. The immensely fortunate one entered the forest and saw the beautiful pond, as it was covered with a net of gold. It seemed
to have been created by Vishvakarma[The architect of the gods.]. It was covered with a bed of lotuses, sindhuvaras[Five-leafed tree (Vitex negundo) with medicinal properties, also known as nirgundi.], cane, ketakas[Flowering plant.], karaviras[Kind of tree.] and pippalas[The sacred fig tree.]. He was exhausted and approaching the lake, gazed at it with wonder.'
