Yudhishthira asked, "Without oppressing even a little, how should a king protect? O best among virtuous ones!
I am asking you. O grandfather! Tell me."

'Bhishma replied, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about a conversation between Dyumatsena
and King Satyavat. We have heard that on the instructions of his father[Dyumatsena was Satyavat's father.], some men were to be executed and
Satyavat spoke words, the likes of which, had never been spoken earlier. 'Dharma becomes adharma and adharma
seems to be dharma. Execution has assumed the form of dharma. But it should not be that way[Bhishma is quoting Satyavat, who has argued against capital punishment.].'
'"Dyumatsena said, 'If one does not execute in accordance with dharma, how will one be able to differentiate
dharma? O Satyavat! These are bandits who should be killed. Otherwise, there will be a mixing up[Of dharma and adharma.]. If I do not
act this way, I will bring about the advent of kali yuga. If you know how the world can progress without this, then
tell me.'

'"Satyavat replied, 'It is the task of the brahmanas to keep the other three varnas under restraint. If they are
bound in the noose of dharma, then there will be little deviation. The others look towards the conduct followed by
brahmanas. When they do not listen, it is only then that the king should restrain them. He will differentiate according to the sacred texts, but there should not be any execution. In such action, one should follow the tasks appropriately laid down in the sacred texts of policy. By slaying a single bandit, the king kills those who are innocent.
When that man is slain, his wife, mother, father and son are also killed. When a king has been injured, he must impose appropriate punishment. Sometimes, there may be a wicked person who imbibes good conduct from someone
virtuous. From wicked subjects, virtuous offspring can be born. The roots should not be severed. That is not eternal dharma. They should be punished lightly and atonement is recommended. Such people can be imprisoned and
disfigured. Their riches can be taken away. But the relatives should not be made to suffer through capital punishment. They may seek refuge with a priest and say, "O brahmana! I will not commit such a wicked act again." O
king! The instructions are that in such cases, they should be released. If a brahmana wears deerskin, holds a staff
and has shaved his head, he should nevertheless be punished, if he commits a crime. A great person's crime should
be considered against his greatness. However, unlike the first offence, if a person commits a crime repeatedly, he
does not deserve to be released.'

'"Dyumatsena said, 'As long as subjects remain within the agreements, that is said to be dharma, but not when
those boundaries are transgressed. If they are not killed, everything will break down. In earlier times, light punishments were sufficient to ensure good rule[Because people were naturally virtuous.]. They were mild and established in truth and their enmity was also
light. In earlier times, shaming was sufficient chastisement. Later, harsh words and censure became punishment.
Still later, seizure of property became punishment. Finally, chastisement through execution became common. Despite the threat of execution, there are people who are incapable of being restrained. Bandits pay no attention to the
sacred texts of men, gods, gandharvas and ancestors. Such a person does not belong to anyone. Nor does anyone
belong to him. He does not hesitate to steal ornaments from cremation grounds frequented by demons[He steals from dead bodies too.]. A person
who depends on an agreement with them is ignorant and is bereft of his senses.'

'"Satyavat replied, 'If there is no means of making them virtuous other than through violence, then act so that
one can at least gain through a sacrifice[Instead of simply executing them, execute them through a sacrifice. They will then be cleansed of their sins and
ascend to heaven.].'
'"Dyumatsena said, 'For the sake of the progress of the world, kings perform supreme austerities. When they[Bandits.]
proliferate, everyone follows that kind of conduct. They must be terrified to ensure good conduct. Evildoers are not
slain because of any other desire. Having ensured good deeds, a king can then rule his subjects. When he follows
superior conduct, the better people also follow him. Men always follow the conduct of superior people. A person
who controls himself is able to control others. However, if he is himself addicted to material objects and the senses, men laugh at him. If there is a person who acts against the king, driven by arrogance or delusion, he must be
restrained through every possible means, so that he is checked from evil. He[The king.] must restrain himself, so that he can
control evildoers. But he must also use the staff of severe punishment, even against those who are relatives and intimate. If a person who has committed a grave sin is not confronted with a great calamity, it is certain that wickedness will proliferate there and dharma go into a decline. A learned brahmana who possessed good conduct instructed me about this earlier. O son! I have also been instructed this by your grandfather. They were driven by great
compassion and gave this assurance to virtuous people. In the first era of krita yuga, this is what was thought of for
kings. During treta yuga, dharma diminished by one quarter. In the subsequent dvapara yuga, there was another decrease by one quarter and only two quarters were left. When kali yuga set in, kings became wicked in conduct.
With the progress of time, only one-sixteenth of dharma's kalas remains[The whole is made out of sixteen kalas. One quarter means four kalas and kali yuga should have four kalas of
dharma. But because of the wickedness of kings, a stronger assertion is being made that only one kala out of sixteen kalas is left in kali yuga.]. O Satyavat! If one follows the norms
of  the  first  era,  there  will  be  confusion.  It  has  been  instructed  that  punishments  should  be  in  proportion  to
lifespans[Down the eras, lifespans also decline.], strength and era. Out of compassion for beings, Svayambhu Manu said that for the sake of emancipation, there are great fruits from following dharma.'"'
