Sanjaya said, "O venerable one! O king! While the kshatriyas immersed themselves in that battle, the tremendous
roar of Gandiva was heard in that encounter, when Pandava was engaged in creating carnage among the samshaptakas, the Kosalas and the narayana army[The narayana army was given by Krishna to Duryodhana and an army
of gopalas (cowherds) is also mentioned. In Section 49 (Volume 4),
Duryodhana and Arjuna had to choose between an unarmed and neutral
Krishna and his army. Arjuna opted for Krishna and Duryodhana for the
narayana army. In descriptions of the war, the narayana army is often
mentioned in conjunction with the samshaptakas, though the two are different. The samshaptakas were warriors, mostly from Trigarta, who had
sworn to die rather than retreat. Arjuna destroyed most of the samshaptakas in Section 66 (Volume 6).]. In that encounter, the samshaptakas were intolerant and desired victory. From every direction, they showered down arrows on Partha's head. O king! However, the lord spiritedly
withstood that violent shower. Plunging into the battle, Partha slaughtered the best of rathas. He assaulted that
army of chariots with arrows that had been sharpened on stone and were tufted with the feathers of herons. In that
battle, Partha approached maharatha Susharma[The king of Trigarta.]. The foremost of rathas brought down a shower of arrows on
him and the samshaptakas did the same to Partha, who was stationed in the battle. Susharma pierced Partha with
nine swift arrows and Janardana in the right arm with three arrows. O venerable one! O king! With another broad-
headed arrow, he pierced the large standard that had been fashioned by Vishvakarma, with the best of apes astride
it. At this, the ape let out a large and fierce roar. On hearing this, your army was terrified. O king! That beautiful
army became immobile. It was like Chitraratha's grove, full of many flowers[Chitraratha was the king of the gandharvas.]. O best of the Kuru lineage! Having regained their senses, the warriors drenched Arjuna with their arrows, like clouds on a mountain. All of them
surrounded maharatha Pandava. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Swiftly and powerfully, they attacked his
horses, his chariot wheels and his chariot and roared like lions. O great king! Some of them seized Keshava by his
mighty arms, while others seized Partha, as he was cheerfully stationed on his chariot. In the field of battle, Kesha-
va flung his arms around and brought all of them down, like an elephant against a wicked elephant. In the encounter, on seeing that Keshava had been oppressed on the chariot, Partha became angry. He attacked and brought
down many maharathas and innumerable foot soldiers who had climbed onto the chariot. He covered all the warriors who were nearby with arrows that were meant for fighting at close quarters.

' "In that battle, he then spoke to Keshava. 'O Krishna! O mighty-armed one! Behold. Those large numbers of
samshaptakas wished to perform an extremely terrible deed against me and have been slaughtered in thousands. O
bull among the Yadu lineage! With my exception, there is no man on earth who is capable of withstanding such a
terrible attack, at close quarters, on the chariot.' Having spoken thus, Bibhatsu blew on Devadatta[The name of Arjuna's conch shell. The name of Krishna's conch shell
is Panchajanya.]. Krishna
blew on Panchajanya, filling heaven and earth. O great king! On hearing the blare of those conch shells, the army
of the samshaptakas wavered. They were extremely terrified. Pandava, the destroyer of enemy heroes, repeatedly
invoked the naga weapon and tied down their feet[Naga is a serpent. Their feet were tied down with serpents.]. Partha tied down their feet in the battle. O king! With their
feet tied down by the great-souled Pandava, they became immobile, as if they were made out of stone. The descendant of the Pandu lineage then slaughtered those immobile warriors, just as in ancient times, Indra had killed the
daityas in the battle with Taraka[Taraka was a demon who was eventually killed by Kartikeya.]. Slaughtered in the battle, they abandoned the best of chariots and threw away
all their weapons. O Indra among kings! On seeing that the army had thus been tied down, maharatha Susharma
quickly invoked the Suparna weapon[Suparna is Garuda, the enemy of serpents.]. Suparna birds descended and devoured the serpents. O king! On seeing
the birds, the serpents fled. O lord of the earth! Having been freed from the thongs on the feet, the army looked as
beautiful as the sun, which warms all beings, when it has been freed from a mass of clouds. O venerable one! Having been freed, the warriors released large numbers of arrows and large numbers of weapons towards Phalguna's
chariot. Having used his own shower of great weapons to sever that shower of arrows, Vasava's son, the destroyer
of enemy heroes, remained stationed on his chariot in the field of battle. O king! Susharma used arrows with
drooping tufts to pierce Arjuna in the chest and pierced him again with three other arrows. Having been severely
wounded and pained, he sank down on the floor of his chariot. When he regained his senses, the one with the white
horses, immeasurable in his soul and with Krishna as his charioteer, quickly invoked the aindra weapon[Divine weapon named after Indra.]. O
venerable one! Thousands of arrows were created from it and were seen to destroy men and elephants in every direction of the battle, in addition to horses, chariots and hundreds and thousands of weapons. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! When the soldiers were slaughtered, the large numbers of samshaptakas and gopalas were overcome with great fear. There was no man there who could fight back against Arjuna. While those brave ones looked
on, that large army was slaughtered. Despite witnessing the slaughter and despite their valour, they remained immobile. In the battle there, Pandu's son killed ten thousand warriors. O king! He was resplendent in that battle, like
a flaming fire without any smoke. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He killed fourteen thousand foot soldiers,
ten thousand rathas and three thousand tuskers. At this, the samshaptakas again surrounded Dhananjaya. They refused to retreat, and had determined to set their minds on death or victory. O lord of the earth! There was a great
battle there between those on your side and the brave and powerful Pandava Kiriti." '
