Yudhishthira said, "I have heard that cow dung has Shri[The goddess of wealth and prosperity.] in it. I have a great doubt about this and wish to hear
about it."

'Bhishma replied, "O supreme among the Bharata lineage! O king! In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about a conversation between cows and Shri. Shri assumed a beautiful form and entered amidst cattle. The
cows were astounded on seeing her wealth of beauty.

'"The cattle asked, 'O goddess! Who are you? Where have you come from? How do you possess a beauty that is
unmatched on earth? O immensely fortunate one! We are astounded at the wealth of your beauty. We wish to know
who you are and where you will go. O one with the extremely beautiful complexion! Tell us the entire truth.'

'"Shri replied, 'O fortunate ones! I am loved by the worlds. I am famous by the name of Shri. When I abandoned  the  daityas,  they  were  destroyed  for  eternity.  Having  obtained  me,  Indra,  Vivasvat,  Soma,  Vishnu,  the
water[Meaning Varuna.] and Agni have obtained prosperity and so have the rishis and the other gods. O cattle! Those who hate me
are destroyed in every way. They suffer misery and are devoid of dharma, artha and kama. O cattle! These are my
powers. Know that I am the one who grants happiness. I wish to always dwell in each of you. O unblemished ones!
I have come here to pray that you should be united with Shri.'

'"The cows replied, 'You are temporary and fickle. You dwell with many ordinary people. O fortunate one! We
do not desire you. Go wherever it pleases you. We think ourselves to be beautiful in every way. Why do we need
you now? Go wherever you want. You have already made us successful.'

'"Shri said, 'O cattle! Pardon me, but shouldn't you welcome me? Why don't you accept me? I am extremely
difficult to obtain. O ones who follow excellent vows in the world! It is certain that a saying in the worlds is true.

"If one presents oneself voluntarily, one is refused." Men, gods, danavas, gandharvas, serpents and rakshasas get
me after performing great and fierce austerities. O cattle! Pardon me and accept me. O amiable ones! I am not ignored by anything mobile and immobile in the three worlds.'

'"The cattle replied, 'O goddess! We are not disrespecting you. Nor are we slighting you. You are temporary and
fickle. That is the reason we are forsaking you. What is the need to speak a lot? Go wherever you wish. O unblemished one! All of us possess beautiful forms. Why do we need you?'

'"Shri said, 'O ones who grant honours! Refused by you, I will be ignored in all the worlds. Show me your
favours. O immensely fortunate ones! You offer protection to those who seek refuge. I am without blemish. Save
the one who is always worshipped. O auspicious ones! I desire your respect and will always reside with you. I
wish to dwell in any of your limbs, irrespective of how ugly it is. O unblemished ones! Indeed, I do not perceive
that any of your limbs is ugly. You are sacred, auspicious and extremely fortunate. Grant me a place. You should
indicate one of your limbs where I may dwell.'"

'Bhishma continued, "Thus addressed, the auspicious cattle were overcome with compassion. O lord of men!
All of them consulted each other and spoke to Shri. 'O illustrious one! It is indeed our task that we should show
you respect. O auspicious one! Therefore, reside in our urine and dung. Both of these are sacred.'

'"Shri replied, 'It is through good fortune that you have shown me your favours and your grace. O fortunate
ones! It shall be that way. O ones who grant happiness! I have been honoured by you.'"

'Bhishma continued, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! This was the agreement between Shri and the cattle.
While they looked on, she disappeared. O son! I have thus described to you the greatness of cow dung. I will again
tell you about the greatness of cattle. Listen to me."'
