'Yudhishthira asked, "From where was this universe created? When there is destruction, where does the world,
with all its mobile and immobile objects, go? O grandfather! Tell me this. Who is the one who constructed this
world, with its oceans, sky, mountains, clouds, earth, fire and wind? How were the beings created and how were
they divided into varnas? What about their purity and impurity? Where did dharma and adharma originate? How
do living beings live? Where do they go when they die? Tell me everything about this world and that other world."

'Bhishma replied, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted, about the great words Bhrigu spoke,
when he was asked by Bharadvaja. Bharadvaja saw maharshi Bhrigu seated on the peak of Kailasa, blazing in his
energy. He asked, 'Who created this world, with its oceans, sky, mountains, clouds, earth, fire and wind? How
were beings created and how were they divided into varnas? What about their purity and impurity? Where did
dharma and adharma originate? How do living beings live? Where do they go when they die? You should tell me
everything about this world and the world hereafter.' Bharadvaja asked the illustrious maharshi, who was like
Brahma himself, about his doubts.

'"He told him everything. 'The maharshis have earlier heard about the famous one named Manasa[Something connected with the mind or thought. In this context, created from
the mind.]. He is without beginning and without end. That god cannot be penetrated. He is without old age and without death. He is
known as Avyakta[The one who is not manifest.]. He is eternal. He is without decay. He is immutable. He is the one who created all the beings
that are born and die. He first created a great god named Mahanta[The great one.]. That lord and upholder of all beings created
Akasha[Space.]. Water was created from space. The fire and the wind were created from water. The earth was created
from the combination of the fire and the wind. Svayambhu[Meaning Manasa.] then created a celestial lotus that was full of energy.
From that lotus arose Brahma, the store of the essence of the Vedas. He is famous as Ahamkara[Ahamkara is usually ego and pride. In this context, a better explanation is that
Brahma said, 'Aham'. 'I am he.']. All the beings
were born from him and he is the creator of all beings. These five elements are the greatly energetic Brahma. The
mountains were generated from his bones. The earth is his flesh and fat. The oceans are his blood. The sky is his
stomach. The wind is his breath. The fire is his energy. The rivers are his veins. Agni and Soma, the sun and the
moon, are known as his eyes. The firmament that is above is his head. His feet are the ground. The directions are
his arms. There is no doubt that he is infinite and is impossible to comprehend, even by those who are successful.
The illustrious one is known as the infinite Vishnu. He is inside all living beings. However, those whose souls are
not cleansed cannot comprehend him. He is the one who created ego. He is the one who thought of all beings. The
entire universe was generated from him. He is the one you asked me about.' Bharadvaja asked, 'What are the dimensions of the sky, the directions, the earth and the wind? Tell me the truth about these and resolve my doubts.'

Bhrigu replied, 'The sky is infinite and is frequented by siddhas and charanas. It is beautiful and has many habitations. It is impossible to decipher its ends. As one ascends, there are regions the moon and the sun cannot see. The
stellar bodies[The text uses the word devas. Here, this doesn't mean gods, but means shining or stellar bodies.] are radiant in their own resplendence there, as radiant as the fire. O one who is famous for his energy! Where these end, the sky cannot be seen. O one who shows honours! Know that those regions are difficult to
reach and infinite. High above and higher still, there are bodies that blaze in their own radiance. Those are the limits of the sky. But they cannot be measured, not even by the gods. The oceans are at the extremities of the earth. It
is said that there is darkness where the oceans end. It is said that when darkness ends, there is water. Where water
ends, there is fire. There is water at the end of the nether regions[Strictly speaking, rasatala. There are seven nether regions-atala, vitala, suta-
la, rasatala, talatala, mahatala and patala.]. And where this water ends, there is the lord of
the serpents. Where this ends, there is the sky again. At the end of this sky, there is water again. In this way, the
boundaries of the illustrious one end in water. The fire and the wind are difficult to fathom, even by the gods. The
nature of fire, wind, water and the surface of the ground are like that of space. Because one lacks the sight, the differences cannot be understood. The sages read many kinds of sacred texts that have determined the measures of the
three worlds and the oceans. But these cannot be seen and one cannot go there. Who can speak about their measure? The siddhas and gods are restricted in where they can go. But even those minor regions seem to be infinite,
not to speak of the regions that are actually known as infinite. Its form is like its name, infinite. It is the great-
souled Manasa. His divine form sometimes waxes and sometimes wanes. Which other person is capable of knowing him, unless that other person is his equal? The omniscient lord Brahma was created and manifested himself
earlier from the lotus. He is the essence of dharma. He is the supreme Prajapati.' Bharadvaja said, 'If he was created from the lotus, the lotus should be regarded as the elder. Why should Brahma be regarded as the first? Remove
this doubt of mine.' Bhrigu replied, 'It is the earth that is known as the lotus. Manasa manifested himself in the
form of Brahma and needed a seat. Mount Meru extended up to the sky and became the stalk of that lotus. Situated
inside it, the lord created the universe and all the worlds.'"'
