Vaishampayana said, 'The maharatha Parthas lived in disguise in the city of Matsya and ten months elapsed. O
lord of the earth! O Janamejaya! Yajnaseni[Droupadi, Yajnasena's (Drupada's) daughter. Panchali is also Droupadi's name.] lived there in great unhappiness, serving Sudeshna, though she deserved to be served herself. Virata's general saw the lotus-eyed Panchali roaming around in Sudeshna's abode. As
soon as he saw her roaming around like a goddess, like a daughter of the gods, Kichaka[The name of Virata's general. As will become clear later, Kichaka was also Sudeshna's brother.] desired her and was oppressed by the arrows of love. Burning with the fire of desire, the general went to Sudeshna and smilingly said, "I
have not seen this beautiful one in Virata's abode earlier. This beautiful one's form intoxicates me, like scent generated from liquor. O beautiful one! Who is this one who steals the heart, with the form of a goddess? O beautiful
one! Where has she come from and whom does she belong to? She oppresses my mind and has brought me under
her control. I think that there is no medicine that can cure me now. Behold! It seems to me that your beautiful serving maid possesses extreme beauty. It is not fitting that she should work for you. She should command me and
everything that I possess. Let her grace my beautiful and grand residence, with all its many elephants, horses, chariots, great riches and opulence, with a lot of food and drink and with its handsome gold and colourful adornments."

After consulting Sudeshna, Kichaka went to the daughter of the king[Droupadi.] and spoke to Krishna in a comforting voice,
like a jackal confronting a queen of deer[A lioness is the queen of deer.] in the forest. "O beautiful one! Your supreme form and your youth are
useless if you are alone, like a beautiful garland that is not worn. O beautiful one! Though you are handsome, you
are lacking in radiance. O one with the beautiful smile! I will give up the wives I have had before. O beautiful one!
I will station myself as your servant. O one with the beautiful face! I will always be under your control."

'Droupadi replied, "O son of a suta[A suta is a charioteer. Though he was Virata's general, Kichaka was the son of a charioteer.]! You desire me. But I am not one who should be coveted. I am a sairandhri,
born from an inferior lineage. I am terrible to look at and I perform the duty of dressing hair. O fortunate one! I am
another one's wife. This conduct is beneath you. Wives are loved by all beings. Think of what is dharma. In no
way should your mind turn towards another one's wife. Men who are good in their vows always avoid that which
should be abhorred. Men who are evil-souled and overcome by delusion covet that which should not be coveted
and attain ill fame. They confront grave danger. O son of a suta! Do not rejoice. Otherwise, you may lose your life
today, by desiring that which is difficult to obtain. I am protected by brave ones. I cannot be obtained by you. My
husbands are gandharvas. They will be angered and will kill you. Cease and do not bring about your own destruction. You desire to traverse a path that men cannot walk on. You are like a stupid child who is on a bank and wants
to cross over to the other bank. You may enter the earth, or you may rise up into the sky. You may flee to the furthest shore of the ocean. But you will not be able to free yourself from them. My husbands are the powerful sons
of the gods. O Kichaka! You firmly desire me now, as if you are ill and the night of your death has arrived. You desire me, like a child who is asleep on his mother's lap and wishes to obtain the moon."'
