'Kunti said, "O king! I will restrain myself and honour and worship the brahmana, just as you have promised. O
Indra among kings! I do not lie. It is my nature to worship brahmanas. The performance of a pleasant task for you
is my supreme bliss. Whether the illustrious one arrives in the evening, the morning, at night or in the middle of
the night, he will not be angry with me. O Indra among kings! O supreme among men! The worship of brahmanas
is for my own gain. I will follow your instructions and do that which ensures welfare. O Indra among kings! Be
assured that the foremost among brahmanas will not be slighted while he resides in your house. I am telling you
this truthfully. O unblemished one! I will pay particular attention towards what is pleasing to the brahmana and ensures your welfare. O king! Therefore, banish all fever from your mind. O lord of the earth! The brahmanas are immensely fortunate. When worshipped, they are capable of saving. When it is the opposite, they can kill. I have this
knowledge and I will satisfy the foremost among brahmanas. O king! You will not suffer grief from that excellent
of brahmanas on my account. O Indra among kings! When brahmanas are disrespected, they can cause the downfall of kings, like Chyavana, because of Sukanya's deeds in earlier times[The Chyavana-Sukanya story has been recounted in Section 33.]. O Indra among men! Just as you have
instructed and told the brahmana, I will serve that best of brahmanas with all restraint."

'The king said, "O fortunate one! O daughter! For my sake, for my welfare, for the welfare of the lineage and
for your own sake, you must act in this way, without any hesitation."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having said this, the immensely famous Kuntibhoja, devoted towards his children, handed over his daughter Pritha to the brahmana, saying, "O brahmana! This is my young daughter. She has been
brought up in comfort. Do not take it to heart if she commits an act that is wrong. Immensely fortunate brahmanas
are usually not angry towards the aged, the young and ascetics, even if the transgression is regular. Brahmanas
should forgive even a great transgression. O foremost among brahmanas! Therefore, accept the homage that she
renders to the best of her ability." The brahmana said that it would be this way. In a happy frame of mind, the king
gave him a house that was as white as a swan or a beam of the moon. He arranged for a radiant seat in the place
where the fire was maintained. He also gave him food and every other object. The princess cast aside her laziness
and pride. With great effort, she devoted herself to worshipping and serving the brahmana. Pritha concentrated on
purification and went to the brahmana. She served and satisfied him in the appropriate way, as if he were a god.'
