'Jarasandha said, "I do not recall that I have ever exhibited any enmity towards you. After reflection, I cannot see
any evil act I have done towards you. O brahmanas! If I have never done an evil act and am innocent, why do you
regard me as an enemy? Tell me honestly, because that is the principle followed by the truthful. There is no doubt
that if injury is done to an innocent man, there is a violation of dharma and one's mind suffers, even if one is a
kshatriya. A man may be knowledgeable in the ways of dharma and may be great in the rigid observance of vows,
but if he acts perversely and wickedly, he hurts his own welfare. You know that in the three worlds, I am supreme
among righteous ones in the practice of the dharma of kshatriyas. I never hurt my subjects. Therefore, you speak in
delusion."

'Vasudeva replied, "O great king! There is someone from a lineage who has to undertake the tasks that lineage
requires. The three of us have acted against you at his request. O king! The kshatriyas who live in this world have
been abducted by you. Having committed this cruel act, how can you think of yourself as innocent? O supreme
among kings! How can a king do violence to honest kings? Having oppressed the kings, you wish to sacrifice them
to Rudra. O Brihadratha's son! This act of yours may touch us too. We follow dharma and are capable of protecting dharma. Human sacrifices have never been seen. Why do you wish to sacrifice humans to the god Shankara?
You are of the same varna. Yet, you are treating those of the same varna as animals. O Jarasandha! Is there any
other mind that is as perverted as yours? We help all those who are distressed. For the protection of our kin, we
have come here to counter you, the one who is acting so as to destroy our kin. O king! If you think that there is no
man among the kshatriyas of this world who can do this, your mind is greatly deluded. O king! Which kshatriya
who knows the nature of his own noble birth will not wish to attain unparalleled heaven by falling in the field of
battle? O ruler of Magadha! With their minds on heaven, know that kshatriyas of the world are consecrated in the
sacrifice of battles and worship them. O king! Victory is the womb of heaven. Great fame is the womb of heaven.
Austerities are the womb of heaven and so is the straight route of battle. These are the qualities of the ever-victorious Indra. It is by being focussed on this that Shatakratu defeated the demons and is the protector of the world.
What can be a better road to heaven than a battle with someone like you, since you are proud of the strength of
your extensive Magadha army? O king! Do not deprecate others. Valour exists in every man. O lord of men! You
are superior only if you don't know of valour equal to yours and as long as glory equal to yours is not known. O
king! Listen to me when I say we are capable of equalling it. O Magadha! Conquer your ego and pride when you
are in the presence of your equals. Do not go to Yama's abode with your sons, your ministers and your armies.
Dambhodbhava, Kartyavirya, Uttara and Brihadratha-these kings and their forces were destroyed here, because
they ignored their superiors. We who wish to liberate the captive kings are not self-proclaimed brahmanas. I am
Shouri Hrishikesha[Krishna's name.] and these two brave men are the two Pandavas. O king! O Magadha! Stand firm. We are
challenging you. Either liberate all the kings or go to Yama's abode."

'Jarasandha said, "I never take a king until I have vanquished him. Who is here who has not been vanquished?
Whom have I not conquered? O Krishna! It has been said that the livelihood and dharma of kshatriyas is to bring
others under his sway through valour and then do as he pleases. O Krishna! These kings have been collected for a
divine purpose. Remembering the duty of kshatriyas, how can I free them today out of fear? I am prepared to fight
-army against army, one against one, or one against two or three, all at the same time, or separately."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having said this, the king gave orders that Sahadeva should be instated[On the throne. Sahadeva was Jayadratha's son.] and readied
himself to do battle with those whose deeds were terrible. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O king! When the
time for battle approached, the king remembered his generals Koushika and Chitrasena, whose names in this world
had been Hamsa and Dibhaka. These were names that had earlier been renowned and worshipped by all the people
in the world of men. O king! O tiger among men! And the lord Shouri, supreme among strong ones, with a valour
equal to that of tigers, also remembered. This did the truthful Achyuta remember. It had been destined that
Jarasandha would be killed by the valorous Bhima. Madhusudana, the younger brother of Haladhara, foremost
among those who have controlled themselves, wished to show respect to Brahma and did not wish to kill him
himself.'
