'Bhishma said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As she departed from the city, she thought to herself. 'There
is no young woman on earth who faces such a difficult situation as me. I have been separated from my relatives. I
have been treated badly by Shalva. I am incapable of returning to the city of Varanasahrya[Varana means elephant and Varanasahrya is another name for Hastinapura.]. Bhishma granted me
permission because I wished to go to Shalva. Will I blame myself or the unassailable Bhishma? Or should it be my
foolish father who arranged for the svayamvara? Is it my own fault that I did not jump down from Bhishma's chariot? When that terrible war raged on earlier, should I have descended and run away to Shalva? The consequences
are that I have to endure the fruits of this conduct, like a foolish person. Shame on Bhishma. Shame on my evil father, whose intelligence is foolish. He offered me as viryashulka, as if I am a woman who can be offered at a price.
Shame on me. Shame on King Shalva. Shame on the creator. It is because of everyone's bad sentiments that I now
confront this calamity. In every way, a man must endure what destiny has determined. But Shantanu's son, Bhishma, is the chief reason for my hardship. I see that I now have to exact vengeance on Bhishma, through austerities
and fighting. It is my view that he is the reason behind my misery. But which lord of the earth is capable of withstanding Bhishma in battle?' Having reflected in this way, she left the city.

'"She went to the hermitages of great-souled ascetics who were sacred in their conduct. Surrounded by those ascetics, she spent a night there. O mighty-armed one! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The one with the sweet
smiles told them everything about herself and the details of what had happened, the abduction, the release and the
abandonment by Shalva. A great brahmana named Shaikhavatya lived there. He was rigid in his vows and aged in
his austerities. He was a preceptor in the sacred texts and in the aranyakas[The aranyakas are specific sacred texts, composed in the forest (aranya) and meant to be studied there.]. Shaikhavatya, the great ascetic and
sage, spoke to the distressed maiden, who was sighing and was overcome by grief and misery. 'O fortunate one!
Now that this has happened, what can ascetics do for you? We are immensely fortunate ones who live in hermitages. We are great souls engaged in austerities.' O king! But she told him, 'Show me a favour. I wish to wander
around and perform extremely difficult austerities. Because of my stupidity, I must have performed deeds in earlier
bodies. I have must acted in evil ways and this must certainly be the fruit. O ascetics! I am not interested in returning to my relatives. I have been rejected. I am unhappy. I have been wronged by Shalva. O ascetics! O those who
are devoid of sin! I wish to be instructed here. You are the equals of the gods. Be compassionate towards me.' He
then consoled the maiden with examples, sacred knowledge and reasons. Together with the other brahmanas, he
comforted her and promised that he would act accordingly."'
