Yudhishthira said, "O bull among the Kurus! Outside of the Vedas, there are other kinds of gifts that have been
mentioned. In your view, out of these, which one is special? O lord! I have a supreme curiosity about this.
When a giver gives a gift, how does that gift follow him[When a giver donates something, he receives the same kind of reward in return, whether in this life or in the next.
How does this happen?]? Tell me this."

'Bhishma replied, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! Assurance towards all creatures, compassion towards
someone who is suffering, giving what is desired to someone who is thirsty and asking for it and gifts that are given without thinking of them as gifts-such gifts are said to be the best. These gifts follow the giver. Gifts of gold,
gifts of cattle and gifts of land are regarded as purifiying. These liberate from evil acts. O tiger among men! Always donate these to virtuous people. There is no doubt that gifts save men from sins. A person who wishes to
make his gifts eternal must always give what is desired in this world and what is loved in his house to recipients
who possess the qualities. A person who does what is agreeable obtains what is agreeable and is loved in this
world. He is loved by beings, in this world and in the next. O Yudhishthira! If a person is proud and does not honour through gifts someone who is hopefully asking, despite possessing the capacity, is cruel. A person who shows
favours towards an enemy who has fallen on hard times and has sought refuge, is supreme among men. O son!
There is no man equal to a person who satisfies the hunger of a learned person who is emaciated and suffering because his means of subsistence have been disrupted. O Kounteya! One must use every means possible to aid a
humble, self-controlled and virtuous person who does not have sons and wives and is suffering, even if he doesn't
ask. There are those who subsist on whatever they have been able to obtain and do not pronounce benedictions on
gods and humans[As quid pro quo, expecting gifts.]. They deserve to be worshipped and are always spirited. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
They are like virulent serpents and protect yourself from them[Donate to them, so that they don't make you suffer.]. Use spies to test if they are the best among brahmanas. O Kouravya! They must always be honoured with good houses that have servants and garments and with
all the objects of desire that bring happiness. O Yudhishthira! Those who follow dharma and are the performers of
auspicious deeds think that such tasks have purified their devotion, if those gifts are accepted. There are brahmanas
who have bathed in learning and have bathed in vows. They do not depend on anyone else for a living. They are
rigid in their vows, study quietly and resort to austerities. They are pure, self-controlled and satisfied with their
own wives. Anything good done to them follows the donor in future worlds. Brahmanas obtain merits by offering
oblations into the agnihotra fire, morning and evening. The same merits are obtained by giving to brahmanas who
have cleansed their souls. This is like a sacrifice with dakshina, purified by devotion. O son! Perform this sacrifice
through giving, since it is superior to all sacrifices. O Yudhishthira! When one touches water and gives gifts, it is
like a sacrifice. It is like touching water and performing worship and one is freed from all debts[Due to gods and ancestors.]. There are people
who are not prone to anger and do not desire even a blade of grass. They, and others who are pleasant in speech,
are the ones who should be worshipped. They do not prize gifts highly, nor do they solicit them. But they must be
protected like sons and I bow down before them. They provide freedom from fear. Officiating priests, priests and
preceptors may be mild, but they hold the brahman. Those brahmanas can pacify the energy created by any kshatriya. O Yudhishthira! Since you are a king, you may think yourself to be powerful. However, without giving to
brahmanas, you will not enjoy that prosperity. O unblemished one! Remain established in your own dharma. For
the sake of your prosperity and for the sake of your power, use whatever riches you possess to honour brahmanas.
Wherever the brahmanas may be, bow your head down before them. Depending on their happiness and inclination,
let them take delight in you, as does a son. O supreme among the Kuru lineage! They are extremely favourably inclined and are your well-wishers. They are satisfied with only a little. Who other than you can look towards ensuring a means of subsistence for them? In this world, the eternal dharma of a woman is to depend on her husband.
He is like a god and she has no other objective. For us, the brahmanas are like that. O son! If the brahmanas see
that they are dishonoured and that the kshatriyas always base themselves on terrible deeds, they will abandon us.
In this world, we will then be without the Vedas, without name, without fame, without health and without sacrifices. Without resorting to brahmanas, what is the purpose of our remaining alive? This is the way eternal dharma
has been followed. O king! In earlier times, kings used to serve brahmanas. It has been heard that vaishyas used to
serve kings and shudras served vaishyas. The brahmana was like a blazing fire. Without being able to approach or
touch, the shudra used to worship him from a distance. But the vaishya and the kshatriya could approach and
touch. Brahmanas are mild in character. They are truthful in conduct and protect the true dharma. However, when
they are enraged, they can behave like venomous serpents. They are superior to what is inferior. But they are also
superior to what is superior. Kshatriyas can torment with their energy and strength. However, they are pacified
through the energy and austerities of brahmanas. My father is not loved more by me[As compared to brahmanas.]. My son is not as loved. O
king! My grandfather is not as loved, nor the life in my body. O bull among the Bharata lineage! It is the truth that
there is nothing I love more on earth than you. But it is also the truth that I love brahmanas more. O descendant of
the Pandu lineage! I am telling you this truthfully. Through this truth, I will go to the world where Shantanu has
gone. I can see that virtuous and pure world, with Brahma at the forefront. O son! I will go there and live there for
an eternal number of days. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! O king! I have seen those worlds, which I will
obtain because of what I have done for brahmanas. I am not tormented."'
