'"Arjuna said, 'O mighty-armed one! O Hrishikesha! O slayer of Keshi! 591 I wish to separately understand the
essence of renunciation and relinquishing.' 592
'"The lord said, 'The wise know the relinquishing of action that satisfies desires as sannyasa. The discriminating
call the relinquishing of the fruits of all action tyaga. Some learned people say that all action is associated with evil
and should be relinquished. Some others say that action like sacrifices, donations and austerities should not be relinquished. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! Listen to my decided views about that relinquishing. O tiger
among men! It has been said that relinquishing is of three types. Sacrifices, donations and austerities are not to be
relinquished. Those actions certainly have to be performed, because sacrifices, donations and austerities purify the
hearts of the learned. O Partha! But even these actions should be performed through relinquishing attachment and
fruits. 593 That is my decided and supreme view. It is not advisable to renounce indicated action. 594 Discarding
this through delusion is known as tamas-type. 595 He who relinquishes action because action leads to discomfort
and requires physical exertion, performs rajas-type relinquishing. He doesn't receive the fruits from relinquishing.
O Arjuna! Sattva-type relinquishing is known as that where attachment and fruits are relinquished and action is
performed only because it is indicated action. Immersed in the sattva quality, steady in learning and without doubt,
the relinquisher doesn't hate disagreeable action or become addicted to agreeable action. He who possesses a body
cannot give up action in its entirety. Because he relinquishes fruits of action, he is known as a true relinquisher.
Those who don't relinquish face three types of fruits of their action in the afterworld-bad, good and mixed. But
sannyasis don't. 596 O mighty-armed one! In the sacred texts, 597 five reasons are described in support of performing all action. Hear these from me. The abode and also the agent, different types of instruments and different
and various types of endeavour-and the fifth is the divine. 598 Whatever action, appropriate or inappropriate, a
man begins through the body, the mind and speech, is caused by these five. Although this is the state of affairs, 599
he who thinks of the absolute atman as the agent, his intelligence is unrefined and that ignorant person doesn't see.
600 He who has no sense of ego and whose intelligence is unattached, even if he slays all these people, doesn't really kill and is not tied down. 601 Knowledge, that which can be known and the knower, are the three impetuses
behind action. 602 The action, the instrument and the agent form the base for action. According to qualities, three
types of differences in knowledge and action and the agent are described in sankhya. 603 Listen properly to that
too. That which in all beings, in differentiated form, sees the undifferentiated and indestructible substance, 604
know that to be sattva-type knowledge. But the knowledge through which one sees in all beings, in differentiated
form, differentiated and separate substances, know that to be rajas-type knowledge. But that which is attached to a
single action, 605 is illogical, trivial and without true knowledge, that is known as tamas-type. 606 Action where
fruits have been relinquished, without attachment, without love or hate, performed only because it is indicated, is
known as sattva-type. 607 Again, action undertaken, with great difficulty, by those with desire for fruits or with a
sense of ego, is known as rajas-type. Action begun under delusion, without consideration of consequences, destruction, injury 608 and one's own capabilities, is known as tamas-type. An agent who is without attachment,
without sense of ego, patient and enthusiastic, equal in attitude towards success and failure, is known as sattva-
type. An agent who is attached, desirous of fruits of action, avaricious, injurious, 609 impure and swayed by joy
and sorrow, is known as rajas-type. An agent who is not steady, vulgar, 610 insolent,fraudulent, disrespectful, 611
lazy, despondent and procrastinating is known as tamas-type. O Dhananjaya! According to quality of intellect and
perseverance, there are three types of differences. Listen to what is being said, separately and comprehensively. O
Partha! The intellect 612 that knows inclination and disinclination, right action and wrong, fear and freedom from
fear, bondage and liberation, is sattva-type. O Partha! The intellect through which one does not correctly understand dharma and adharma and right action and wrong, is rajas-type. O Partha! The intellect through which one
thinks evil action is righteous, and in every way thinks the opposite, 613 shrouded in ignorance, that is tamas-type.
O Partha! The perseverance through which one uses unwavering yoga to focus the functions of the mind, the
breath of life and the senses, that perseverance is sattva-type. O Partha! O Arjuna! The perseverance through
which dharma, artha and kama are sought and according to the area, fruits desired, is known as rajas-type. O
Partha! The perseverance through which the misguided person doesn't discard dreaming, 614 fear, sorrow, despondency and ego, is known as tamas-type. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Now hear from me about the three
types of happiness. Where happiness comes from gradual practice and there is an end to unhappiness, that which is
initially like poison but at the end like ambrosia, based on the tranquility of one's intellect focused on the atman,
that is known as sattva-type. That which comes from association with objects and the senses and is initially like
ambrosia but at the end like poison, that happiness is said to be rajas-type. The happiness that, at the beginning and
at the end, binds and deludes the atman and that which is created from sleep, sloth and inadvertence, 615 is known
as tamas-type. On earth, in heaven and even among the gods, there doesn't exist anything that is free from these
three qualities generated from nature.

'"'O scorcher of foes! The actions 616 of brahmanas, kshatriyas, vaishyas and also shudras are separately segregated in accordance with qualities that result from their natures. Control over the mind, control over the senses,
meditation, purity, forgiveness, simplicity, knowledge, self-realization and indeed faith are natural actions for brahmanas. Valour, bravery, perseverance, dexterity, willingness to fight, generosity and capacity to rule 617 are natural
actions for kshatriyas. Agriculture, preservation of cattle and trade are natural actions for vaishyas. Servitude is
natural action for shudras. A man who faithfully follows his indicated course of action, attains liberation. Listen to
how liberation is obtained by following one's indicated course of action. Through his own action, man obtains liberation by worshipping him who is the origin of beings and their endeavour, and him who pervades all this. 618
Even when performed imperfectly, svadharma 619 is superior to someone else's dharma, performed well. Sin does
not result if one's natural action is undertaken. O Kounteya! Natural action should not be discarded, even if it is
tainted. Because all action is tainted, just as fire is shrouded by smoke. He who is detached everywhere, has conquered his atman, 620 has overcome desire through sannyasa, 621 attains the supreme liberation of freedom from
action. O Kounteya! Learn briefly from me how one who has attained liberation attains the brahman. That is the
supreme form of knowledge. United with pure intellect, controlling the atman with perseverance, discarding objects like sound and renouncing love and aversion, inhabiting a secluded place, eating little, restraining speech,
body and the mind, constantly practising meditation, seeking refuge in renouncement, discarding ego, power, insolence, desire, anger and possessions, 622 tranquil and without ego, he is fit for merging with the brahman. Tranquil
in merging with the brahman, such a person does not sorrow and does not desire. Looking upon every being equally, he attains supreme devotion towards me. Through devotion, he comprehends my true nature, who I am and my
different forms. Then, after knowing my true nature, enters. 623 Seeking refuge in me, he always performs all action and, through my blessings, attains the eternal and indestructible abode. Through the mind, offering up all action to me, devoted to me and seeking refuge in buddhi yoga, 624 always immerse your mind in me. With mind
immersed in me, with my blessings, you will overcome all difficulties. But if, through a sense of ego, you don't
listen to me, you will be destroyed. Through a sense of ego, you are thinking that you will not fight. But this resolution is false. Nature 625 will compel you. O Kounteya! Whatever you don't wish to do because of delusion, you
will have to undertake in spite of that, because you are tied down by your natural duty. O Arjuna! The lord is established in the hearts of all beings and through maya, makes all beings whirl, as if they are mounted on machines.
626 O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In every way, seek refuge in him alone. Through his blessings, you will
attain supreme tranquility and the eternal abode. I have explained to you this knowledge, which is the most secret
of all secrets. Having examined it completely, do what you wish to do. Listen yet again to my supreme words, the
most secret of all secrets. You are my dearly beloved. Therefore, I am telling you what is good for you. Immerse
your mind only in me, be devoted to me, worship me, bow in obeisance before me. I am pledging that you will attain me, because you are my beloved. Discard all dharmas 627 and seek refuge only in me. I will free you from all
sins. Do not sorrow. You should not state this 628 to those who do not meditate, 629 or are devoid of devotion or
do not wish to hear. Nor to those who show me disrespect. There is no doubt that he who explains this most secret
knowledge to my devotees, displays supreme devotion towards me and will attain me alone. Among men, there is
no one who does greater service to me. 630 In the world, there is no one, and there will be no one, more dear to
me. And he who will study this dialogue 631 of ours on dharma, my view is that he will worship me through jnana
yoga. The man who only listens with faith and without disrespect, he too will be freed from sin and attain the
worlds attained by those who are pure of deeds. O Partha! Have you listened to this with single-minded concentration? O Dhananjaya! Has your delusion of ignorance been destroyed?'

'"Arjuna said, 'O Achyuta! Through your blessings, my delusion has been destroyed. I have obtained knowledge about what should be done and what shouldn't be done. 632 I am steady. I no longer suffer from doubt. I will
do what you instruct.'"

'Sanjaya said, "I have thus heard this wonderful and thrilling 633 dialogue between the great souls Vasudeva
and Partha. Through the blessings of Vyasa, I have heard this supreme and secret yoga directly from Krishna, the
lord of all yoga, when he stated it. O king! Remembering again and again this sacred and wonderful dialogue between Keshava and Arjuna, I have repeatedly been exhilarated. O king! Remembering that extremely wonderful
universal form of Hari, I am greatly amazed and repeatedly exhilarated. Wherever 634 there is Krishna, the lord of
yoga, and Arjuna, the wielder of the bow, exist prosperity, victory, increase in wealth and sound policy. That is my
conviction."'
