'Sanjaya said, "On seeing Bhishma engaged in a fight with his brothers and the other kings, Dhananjaya raised his
weapons and rushed against Gangeya. At Panchajanya's[The name of Krishna's conch shell.] roar, Gandiva's twang and on seeing Partha's standard,
all those on our side were overcome with terror. It was like a tree that did not waver, like a comet that had
arisen[Referring to Arjuna's standard.]. It was colourful and possessed many hues. It was divine and bore the mark of the ape. O great king! We
saw the wielder of the Gandiva's standard to be of this type. It was like lightning in the midst of clouds, resplendent in the sky. The maharatha warriors saw Gandiva, with a back encrusted with gold. We heard his loud roars,
like the roars of Shakra himself, and the terrible sound with which he slapped his palms as he went about killing
your soldiers. As he showered arrows in every direction and enveloped all the directions, it was like a torrential
cloud that was charged with lightning. With terrible weapons, Dhananjaya advanced against Gangeya. We were
confounded by these weapons and could not distinguish between the eastern and the western direction. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! Your warriors could not distinguish between the directions. They were overcome with
exhaustion. They were bereft of their weapons. They were bereft of their senses. They clung to each other for comfort. With all your sons, they sought succour with Bhishma. In that battle, Bhishma, Shantanu's son, became the
refuge of the oppressed ones. Overcome with terror, charioteers jumped down from their chariots and horse-riders
from the backs of their horses. Even the infantry fell down on the ground. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Having heard the roar of Gandiva, which was like the rumbling of thunder, all your soldiers were frightened and
seemed to decay.

'"There were a large number of the best of Kamboja horses, fleet of foot. This was surrounded by a large army
from the land of Govasana[In the Mahabharata, Shaivya was the king of Govasana. In the Puranas, Govasana is given as the name of a
king, and his daughter, Youdheyi, was married to Yudhishthira.], with many thousand gopas[A gopa is a herdsman or cowherd. Govasana can be translated as a region where cattle reside.]. O lord of the earth! This was surrounded by
Madras, Souviras, Gandharas, Trigartas, all the best among the Kalingas, the king of Kalinga[There is an inconsistency, because the Kalingas have already been destroyed by Bhima and the king of Kalinga
has been killed.], nagas and a large
number of men, with Duhshasana at the forefront. It was accompanied by King Jayadratha and all the kings. Instructed by your son, there were fourteen thousand supreme horse-riders and they surrounded Soubala. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! In that battle, all these on your side assembled against Pandava, on separate chariots
and mounts. The chariots, elephants, horses and infantry raised an extremely thick cloud of dust and it made the
battle seem even more fearful. Bhishma was supported by a large army with spears, lances, iron arrows, elephants,
horses, chariots and warriors and attacked Kiriti. The king of Avanti engaged the king of Kashi and Bhimasena engaged Saindhava. Ajatashatru fought with Shalya, bull among the Madras, together with his sons and advisers.
Vikarna fought with Sahadeva and Chitrasena with Shikhandi. O lord of the earth! The king of Matsya engaged
Duryodhana and Shakuni. Drupada, Chekitana and maharatha Satyaki fought with the great-souled Drona, together
with his son. Kripa and Kritavarma advanced against Dhrishtaketu. In this fashion, there was a melee with horses,
elephants and chariots. In every direction, the soldiers fought with each other. Though there were no clouds, there
was terrible lightning. Dust enveloped the directions. O lord of the earth! With terrible sounds, large meteors were
seen to fall down. A mighty storm began to blow and a shower of dust fell down. The soldiers were shrouded in
dust and the sun disappeared in the sky. Covered by that dust, though they continued to fight with upraised
weapons, all the soldiers were confused and dispirited. As they were released from the arms of brave ones, the net
of arrows, capable of piercing every kind of armour, raised a loud noise. O bull among the Bharata lineage!
Weapons were released from excellent arms and blazed in the sky, like radiant stars. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Shields were seen to be scattered around in all the directions. They were colourful and made from the hides
of bulls. They were decorated with golden nets. Heads and bodies were seen to fall in every direction, sliced off by
swords with the complexion of the sun. Maharathas fell down on the ground there. The wheels, axles and shafts of
their chariots were shattered. Their giant standards were brought down. Their horses were slain. With the charioteers slain, some horses were maimed with weapons and fell down, dragging the chariots with them. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! Those best of horses still had their harnesses on. But they were wounded by arrows and
their bodies were mangled. They could be seen there, dragging the yokes after them. O king! Extremely powerful
elephants were seen to kill rathas who fought on chariots, with their charioteers and horses, single-handedly. While
large numbers of soldiers were being killed, many elephants were seen to sniff in the air, inhaling the scent of the
musth exuded by other elephants. In the midst of that large army, elephants were killed with lances and iron arrows
and fell down, deprived of their lives. In the midst of the army, the field was strewn with the dead bodies of the
best of elephants. The elephants crushed warriors as they fell down, with their elephant-riders and their standards.
O great king! In that battle, the shafts of chariots were seen to be shattered by the trunks of elephants that resembled the king of elephants[The king of elephants is Airavata.]. Tuskers shatterd large numbers of chariots. In that battle, they crushed and dragged
down charioteers by the hair, as if they were the branches of trees. As chariots fought with chariots, the best of elephants dragged them down, running in all the directions with a loud noise. As they were thus dragged away by the
elephants, they looked like masses of lotus stalks, dragged away from ponds by other elephants. Thus, the field of
battle was strewn with a large number of horse-riders, infantry and maharathas, and their standards."'
