Brahma said, "Some say that the tree is full of the brahman. Some say that Mahat is full of the brahman.
Some say that Purusha is unmanifest. Some say that it is supreme and is free from disease. Some think
that everything is created from the unmanifest and also dissolves into it. There may be a person who is indifferent
and breathes without agitation when the time for his death arrives. Such a person obtains his atman and deserves to
be immortal. Even if he controls himself with his atman even for a short instant, through the favours of the atman,
he becomes learned and obtains an end that is without decay. Such a person uses pranayama to restrain the breath
of life again and again. He does this for twelve times and for twenty-four times after that[These numbers relate to the cycle of pranayama. The technical term is matra and concerns the duration for
which the breath is inhaled, retained or exhaled. When this is for twelve matras, this is an inferior kind of
pranayama. An average kind of pranayama has twenty-four matras and a superior type has thirty-two matras.]. Having thus made the
soul tranquil, one obtains everything that one wants. When the quality of sattva arises from the unmanifest, such a
person deserves to be immortal. Those who know about sattva praise it, since there is nothing that is superior to
this. The learned have deduced that one can obtain Purusha by resorting to sattva. O brahmanas! One cannot reach
Purusha through any other means. Forgiveness, fortitude, non-violence, impartiality, truth, uprightness, knowledge,
renunciation and detachment-these are said to be the conduct that is associated with sattva. It is through such deductions that learned people think that sattva and Purusha are one and the same. There is no need for any further
reflection on this. Some learned people who have based themselves on knowledge have said that kshetrajna and
sattva are identical and there is no difference between them. However, these are always different and one should
not think about this. One should know the truth. These are naturally different. Those who are learned about policy
have determined the difference between unity and disassociation. It is evident that a gnat and a fig tree are together,
but are also different. Though a fish and water may be together, they are actually different. A drop of water may be
united with the leaf of a lotus, but they are different[Bits are left implicit and have to be deduced. The discussion seems to be about Purusha and Prakriti. Prakriti is
associated with qualities, including sattva. However, Purusha is independent of qualities and is distinct from
Prakriti. In these sections, the word sattva is being used as a synonym for Prakriti.]."'
'"The preceptor said, 'The brahmanas were thus addressed by the grandfather of the worlds[Non-Critical editions don't have this shloka and its insertion is strange. The dialogue between the preceptor and
the student ended many chapters ago. Unless Krishna is being addressed as Arjuna's preceptor, this shloka
doesn't belong.]. However, overcome by doubts, the excellent brahmanas asked again.

'"'The rishis asked, "Which of the many kinds of dharma is said to be the best? We see that the progress of different kinds of dharma is often contradictory. When the body is destroyed, some say nothing remains. Others say
something is left and have no doubts about this. Still others have doubts about everything. Some say that the eternal is not truly eternal. Others say that it is non-existent[These statements are references to the atman. The subsequent statements are references to the jivatman and the
paramatman.]. Some say that it has a single form. Others say that it has
two parts. And still others say that there are many. Some say that it is one and the same. Others that they are distinct. Others say that the situation is diverse. There are brahmanas who are wise and have seen the truth. They
think in this way. There are others who have matted hair, and are clad in deerskin. Others have shaved heads. Some
are naked. Some don't wish to bathe. Others wish to bathe. Some desire to eat. Others are engaged in fasting.
Some praise deeds. Others  praise tranquility. Some praise moksha. Others  praise different kinds of  enjoyment.
Some desire riches. Others wish to be poor. Some worship the means used. Others say that this is unimportant.
Some praise sacred deeds and fame. Others say that this is unimportant. Some are devoted to the path of virtue.
Others  are immersed in doubt. Some follow misery. Others  follow joy. Still  others  are  engaged  in  meditation.
Some patient ones are engaged in sacrifices. Others follow the practice of giving. Some praise only one method.
Others praise everything. Some praise austerities. Others praise studying. Some speak of knowledge and renunciation. Others think of the nature of beings. In this way, many kinds of dharma present themselves and brahmanas
follow them. O supreme among the gods! We are confused and undecided. We cannot understand. People present
themselves and say, 'This is best. That is best.' Everyone always worships the dharma that he practises. That is the
reason our wisdom is destroyed and our minds are dragged in different directions. O excellent one! That is the reason we wish that what is beneficial is explained to us. Thereafter, you should tell us what is supremely secret.
What is the connection between sattva and kshetrajna and what is the cause of this?"'"

'Vasudeva said, "The illustrious one, the creator of the worlds, was addressed by the brahmanas in this way. The
intelligent one, with dharma in his soul, instructed them about the truth."'
