Vaishampayana said, 'The horse wandered around the entire earth, up to the frontiers of the ocean. O king! It
then returned and headed for the city of Nagasahvya. The energetic one who sported the diadem also returned
and followed the horse. Wandering  around  as  it  willed,  it  arrived  at  the  city  of  Rajagriha.  The  king  who  was
Jarasandha's grandson[Jarasandha's son was Sahadeva. When Jarasandha was killed, his son, Sahadeva, was crowned in the kingdom
of Magadha. Sahadeva fought on the Pandava side in the Kurukshetra war and was killed.] saw that it had arrived in his territory. The brave one was established in the dharma of
kshatriyas and decided to issue a challenge for battle. Megasandhi emerged from his city on his chariot, with bow,
arrows and a guard for his palms. With foot soldiers, he attacked Dhananjaya. The immensely energetic Megasandhi approached Dhananjaya. O great king! He was childish in his sentiments and spoke without any skill. "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Why is this horse wandering around, as if in the midst of women? I will seize the
horse. Make efforts to free it. When requested to fight, my forefathers may not have treated you properly. I will offer you hospitality. Strike me and I will strike you back." Thus addressed, Pandava laughed and replied, "O king! I
must counter those who seek to obstruct me. That is the vow my elder brother has imposed on me. It is certain that
you know about this. Strike me to the best of your capacity. There is no anger in me." Thus addressed, the lord of
Magadha first struck Pandava. He showered down thousands of arrows, like the thousand-eyed one. O bull among
the Bharata lineage! At this, the brave one who was the wielder of Gandiva shot arrows from Gandiva and baffled
all the arrows that had been carefully shot. The one with the ape on his banner baffled that torrent of arrows. He
then shot blazing arrows that were like serpents with flaming mouths. He shot arrows at the standard, the flagpole,
the carriage of the chariot, the horses and all the other parts of the chariot, but not at his body, or at his charioteer.
His body was protected by Partha. However, Magadha did not realize this was because of Phalguna and thought
that it was due to his own valour. Therefore, he continued to shoot arrows. Struck by Magadha, the brave wielder
of Gandiva was as radiant as a giant and blossoming palasha tree[Tree with red flowers.] during the spring. The bull among Pandavas
did not wish to kill Magadha. O Kouravya! That is the reason why he remained successfully stationed within sight
of that brave one of the world. However, Savyasachi was enraged and powerfully stretched his bow. He slew his
horses and severed his charioteer's head from his body. He affixed a razor-sharp arrow and brought down his great
and colourful bow, the guard on his hands, his flag and his standard. The king was distressed. He was without horses and without a bow. His charioteer had been slain. He seized a club and powerfully attacked Kounteya. He then
swiftly descended, with a club that was ornamented with gold. However, this was shattered into many fragments
with many arrows that were shafted with vulture feathers. The club was shattered and its jeweled joints were broken into one thousand pieces. It fell down, like a she-serpent that has been released. The intelligent Arjuna, foremost in the field of battle, did not wish to attack an adversary who was without a chariot, without a bow and deprived of his club.

'He comforted the distressed one, who was following the dharma of kshatriyas. The one with the ape on his banner spoke these words of assurance. "O son! Depart. You have displayed enough of the dharma of kshatriyas. O
king! Though you are a child, you have exhibited many deeds in this battle. It was Yudhishthira's instruction that
kings should not be killed. O king! Though you have acted against me in the encounter, this is the reason you are
still alive." Magadha thought about what he should do. He approached, joined his hands in salutation and worshipped him. Arjuna comforted him and again said, "In the next month of Chaitra, you should come to the king's
horse sacrifice." Having been thus addressed, in the proper way, Sahadeva's son worshipped the horse and Phalguna, best among warriors, and signified his consent. As it willed, the maned animal[The horse.] began to wander along the
shores of the ocean, in Vanga, Pundra and Kerala. There were large numbers of many mlechccha soldiers there. O
king! Dhananjaya vanquished them with the Gandiva bow.'
