Vaishampayana said, 'When the great-souled Pandavas lived in Dvaitavana, the giant forest was filled with brahmanas. In every direction, the lake of Dvaitavana always resounded with chants of the brahman and became like
the world of Brahma. The charming chants of yajus, samas and riks, in poetry and in prose, were intoned everywhere by the brahmanas and pleased the heart. The wise intonations of the brahman mingled with the twangs of
the bowstrings of the Parthas and the beautiful unity between brahmana and kshatriya practices radiated.

'One evening, when Kounteya Dharmaraja Yudhishthira was seated and surrounded by all the rishis, Dalbhya's
son Baka[The name of a rishi.] spoke to him, "O Partha! O supreme among the Kurus! Look! In Dvaitavana, the hour has come for
brahmanas and ascetics to kindle their sacrificial fires. Under your protection, they are observing dharma by following secret and rigid vows-Bhrigus, Angirasas, Vasishthas, Kashyapa, the immensely fortunate Agastyas and
Atreyas of supreme vows[Each name in the list is a lineage descended from a famous sage.]. All the supreme brahmanas in the world have assembled here with you. O Partha! O
Kounteya! O Kourava! With your brothers, listen to the words I am going to say to you. Brahmanas are enriched
by kshatriyas and kshatriyas are enriched by brahmanas. Thus rendered strong, they burn down enemies, like fire
and wind together consume the forest. O son! If you wish to win this world and the next, do not wish to remain
without brahmanas. Having obtained a disciplined brahmana who knows the ways of dharma and artha, a king can
eliminate his enemies. Having conducted himself in accordance with supreme dharma and having protected his
subjects, Bali could find no other refuge in this world other than that of a brahmana[Prahlada's son was Virochana and Virochana's son was Bali. Vishnu appeared before Bali in his vamana
(dwarf) incarnation in the form of a brahmana. But that apart, we don't get to know details of the story about how
Bali allied with brahmanas and later oppressed them.]. It was because of this that
the asura Virochana's son satisfied all his desires and never lacked in prosperity. Having obtained the earth through
his alliance with brahmanas, he met misfortune when he began to oppress them. The earth and its riches do not remain eternally with one from the second varna[That is, a kshatriya.] who does not have a brahmana. But right up to the boundaries
of the ocean, the earth pays homage to one who is instructed by a disciplined brahmana. Like an elephant without
restraint[The text says an elephant without an ankusha or goad.] in battle, a kshatriya's strength declines, if it is not accompanied by brahmanas. The brahmana has unmatched insight, the kshatriya has unmatched strength. When the two are together, the entire world is delighted.
Just as a great fire aided by the wind burns up dry wood, kings aided by brahmanas consume the enemy. To acquire
what he has not got and to extend what he has got, an intelligent one should seek the advice of wise brahmanas.
Therefore, to obtain what you have not got and to extend what you have got and to obtain the right refuge, you
need a brahmana who is famous, knowledgeable in the vedas, wise and greatly learned. O Yudhishthira! Your conduct with brahmanas has always been excellent and your great fame therefore shines in all the worlds." At this, all
the brahmanas showed homage to Baka Dalbhya, as he praised Yudhishthira, and they were immensely delighted.
Dvaipayana, Narada, Jamadagnya, Prithushrava, Indradyumna, Bhaluki, Kritacheta, Sahasrapad, Karnashrava,
Munja, Lavanashva, Kashyapa, Harita, Sthunakarna, Agniveshya, Shounaka, Ritavak, Brihadashva, Ritavasu, Urdhvareta, Vrishamitra, Suhotra, Hotravahana-these and many other brahmanas of rigid vows spoke to
Ajatashatru[Yudhishthira.], the way rishis speak to Purandara[The sacker of cities, Indra's name.].'