Souti said, 'There is a mountain named Mandara, with soaring peaks that tower like clouds. Adorned with nets of
innumerable creepers, echoing with the melodies of many birds and with many fierce-toothed beasts of prey roaming on it, it is frequented by kinnaras[Mythical beings with human bodies and heads of horses.], apsaras and gods. It rises up 11,000 yojanas[A yojana is a measure of distance and is equal to four kroshas. A yojana is between 13 and 15 kilometres.] above and its base extends
11,000 yojanas downwards. Having failed to uproot it, all the gods came to Vishnu and Brahma, who were seated
together, and told them, "For the sake of our welfare and intelligence, endeavour to find a means to uproot Mandara." O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! Both Vishnu and Brahma said, "Let it be that way", and summoned by
Brahma and directed by Narayana to perform the task, the powerful Ananta[Ananta literally means without end and is a name for the naga Shesha, on whom Vishnu rests, and who is Va-
suki's elder brother. Instructed by Vishnu or Narayana, Ananta uprooted Mandara.] uprooted the king of mountains with
all his might, with all the forests and all the beings that lived in the forests. With the mountain[Mandara.], the gods then
went to the shores of the ocean and told him, "O ocean! We have come to churn your waters for the sake of the
ambrosia." The lord of the rivers replied, "Let it be that way, but give me my share. I shall then be able to bear the
great crushing when my waters are churned by Mandara." The gods and the demons then went to Akupara, the
king of the tortoises and said, "You will have to bear the mountain on your back." Thus addressed, the tortoise offered his back, and using instruments, Indra fixed the mountain on his back.

'O Brahmana! In days long past, having made Mandara the churning rod and Vasuki the rope, the gods and the
demons began to churn the ocean, the treasure house of waters. For the sake of the ambrosia, the asuras and the
danavas[In a loose sense, asuras and danavas are both demons. But asura is more of a general term and means the antithesis of suras or gods. Danavas are more specific demons, in the sense that they are the offspring of Danu.
Daityas are also specific demons, in the sense that they are the offspring of Diti.] grasped one end of the king of the snakes and the great gods grasped the tail. And Ananta stayed with
the revered Narayana and repeatedly raised and lowered the head of the naga. As the naga Vasuki was raised up
and down by the gods, black smoke and flaming winds issued from his mouth. From this smoke was created clouds
with lightning in them and showers rained down on all the gods, refreshing them when they were tired and fatigued. From the sides of the mountain, flowers showered down and refreshed all the gods and the demons. Tugged
by the gods and the demons as they churned the ocean, there arose from Mandara a terrible roar, like deep thunder
in the clouds. All kinds of marine creatures were crushed by the great mountain and in hundreds gave up their lives
in the salty ocean. Many living beings who dwelt in the underground depths, in the land of Varuna, met their destruction. From the whirling Mandara, great trees crashed against each other, were torn from their roots, and tumbled down, with all the nestling birds. Great fires frequently blazed forth from the friction of trees brushing against
each other. The mountain Mandara looked like dark clouds filled with streaks of lightning. It drove out and burnt
lions, elephants and many other creatures and killed them all. Then Indra, foremost among the gods, began to pacify the blazing fires that were everywhere by pouring down rain from the clouds. The juices of many herbs and the
resins of many large trees flowed into the waters of the ocean and the gods became immortal through the juices of
the milk, mixed with extracts of liquid gold, which had the powers of ambrosia. Through those juices and resins,
the waters of the ocean now turned into milk and the milk turned into clarified butter, mixed with the best of
essences.

'Then the gods came to where Brahma, the granter of boons, was seated and said, "O Brahma! We are tired out,
but the ambrosia has not yet emerged. Unless Narayana helps, devas, daityas and nagas have no strength to churn
the ocean any more, which has been going on for a long time." Then Brahma spoke to the god Narayana thus: "O
Vishnu! You are the last recourse. Give them divine strength." Vishnu said, "I grant strength to all those who have
devoted themselves to the task. All of you insert Mandara into the pot and turn it around." Their strength increased
on hearing Narayana's words and together they once more mightily churned the ocean's milk.

'Then from the ocean arose the calm, cool and radiant moon, whose light rivalled 100,000 of the sun's rays.
Then from the ghee arose Lakshmi, dressed in pale white; then arose the goddess of wine and the white horse[Ucchaihshrava.].
Then from the ghee arose the celestial jewel koustubha, which adorns Narayana's breast. Directed by Aditya[The sun.],
swift as the mind, Lakshmi, wine, the moon and the horse followed a path to where the gods were. Then arose the
beautiful god Dhanvantari[The physician of the gods.] with a white pot in his hand, in which the ambrosia was. Seeing this wonderful sight,
the danavas raised a great uproar for the ambrosia, saying, "It is ours." At that, Narayana used illusion to assume
the form of a beautiful woman and mixed with the danavas. Then, having lost their senses, their hearts bewitched
by the woman, the danavas and the daityas gave the ambrosia to her.'
