Vaishampayana said, 'There was a time when Narada, Parameshthi's son, resided there. Having performed rites
in honour of the gods, he thereafter got ready to perform rites in honour of the ancestors. At that time, the lord
who was Dharma's elder son spoke these words. "O best among brahmanas! What are these rites you are performing in honour of the gods and the ancestors? You are the best among intelligent ones. Tell us about these rites from
the sacred texts. Why are you undertaking these rites? What are the fruits you desire?"

'Narada replied, "Earlier, you yourself said that rites in the honour of the gods must be performed. You said that
sacrifices to gods are supreme, from the point of view of obtaining the eternal paramatman. It is because of what
you have determined that I perform sacrifices to the undecaying Vaikuntha. Brahma, the grandfather of the worlds,
was formerly generated from him. Parameshthi cheerfully gave birth to my father, though I was the first son that he
mentally thought of[This sounds confusing because of the conflicting accounts about Narada's birth. In some, he is Brahma's son,
created through Brahma's mental powers. In others, Daksha is Brahma's son and Narada is Daksha's son.]. I am performing this sacrifice for my virtuous ancestors and observing the rites in honour
of Narayana. The illustrious one is my father, my mother and my grandfather. I always perform these rites and sacrifices in honour of the ancestors, to worship the lord of the universe. The gods instructed the various sacred texts
to their sons and the latter offered sacrifices to their ancestors. However, when the Vedas and sacred texts were destroyed, they again had to study them from their sons[The gods taught the sacred texts to their sons, the sages. But the gods went to fight the demons and forgot the
sacred texts. On return, they had to relearn the sacred texts from the sages.]. Using the mantras, the sons therefore became like fathers. In this way, fathers and sons came to worship each other and these ancient accounts are certainly known to
both of you. Having first spread kusha grass on the ground, I have offered three pindas to the ancestors[A pinda is a ball of rice offered to the ancestors. The offering of three pindas is known as tripindi and there are
two equally valid explanations for the number three. The first is that these offerings are made for three successive years. The second is that these offerings are made in the months of Kartika, Chaitra and Shravana. The text
gives a different interpretation, with all three pindas offered simultaneously.]. In ancient times, why did the ancestors come to acquire the name of pindas?"

'Nara and Narayana replied, "In ancient times, the earth was destroyed and disappeared inside the girdle of the
ocean. Assuming the form of a boar, Govinda swiftly raised it up. Purushottama established the earth in its proper
place. He raised it to accomplish the objective of the worlds and his limbs were covered in water and mud. The sun
was at its midday position then and it was time to perform the afternoon ablutions. The lord violently shook his
tusks and three balls of mud fell down from there. O Narada! He laid these out on a bed of kusha grass on the
ground. Following the proper rites, he offered these to the ancestors, that is, to himself. Following the ordinances,
the lord thought of these as three pindas. The heat generated from his own body became the oil obtained from sesamum seeds. The lord of the gods faced the eastern direction and himself declared these special rules. So as to establish the ordinances, he spoke these words. 'I am the ancestor. I have readied myself to create the worlds.' Having thought this, he immediately began to think of rites in honour of the ancestors. There were those three lumps of
mud that fallen down from his tusk on the ground, in the southern direction. He declared that these balls on the
ground should thereafter be known as pindas offered to the ancestors. 'These three have no from. Let these pindas
on the ground be assumed to have form. I have thus created the eternal ancestors for the worlds. I am the father,
the grandfather and the great grandfather. It is I who will be regarded as being established in these three pindas.
There is no one who is superior to me. Whom can I myself worship? Who is my father in this world? Who is my
grandfather? I am the grandfather, the father and the cause.' These were the words that Vrishakapi, the god of the
gods, spoke. O brahmana! On the slope of a mountain, the boar spread out and offered those pindas. Having worshipped himself, he disappeared at that spot. Through this auspicious intelligence, the pindas came to be known as
the ancestors. Following Vrishakapi's words, they always obtain the worship. If a person worships the ancestors,
the gods, the preceptors, the guests, cattle, the foremost among brahmanas, the earth and the mother, in deeds,
mind and thoughts, then it is as if that person worships Vishnu. That illustrious one is inside all bodies. The lord is
impartial towards all creatures and towards happiness and unhappiness. He is the large and great-souled one. He is
inside all atmans. He is known as Narayana."'
