'Markandeya said, "The sage Vishrava was born from half of Pulastya's body, out of his anger. He glanced at
Vaishravana with great anger. O king! But on knowing that his father was extremely angry with him, Kubera, lord
of the rakshasas, always tried to please him. Living in Lanka, the lord of the yakshas[The text uses the word rajaraja. Raja is king, but the word raja also means yaksha. So Rajaraja is the king of
the yakshas. Kubera is known as Naravahana because he has a man (nara) as his mount (vahana).], Naravahana, sent three
rakshasis to serve his father. O tiger among the Bharata lineage! They were always ready to satisfy the great-souled
rishi and were skilled in dancing and singing. O lord of the earth! Their names were Pushpotkata, Raka and Malini.
O king! They were slender of waist and rivalled each other in trying to do their best. Being pleased with them, the
great-souled lord granted them boons. As they desired, he gave each of them a son, equal to a guardian of the
world. Pushpotkata gave birth to two sons who were the lords of the rakshasas-Kumbhakarna and Dashagriva[Dashagriva is Ravana's name, meaning ten-headed, or more accurately, ten-necked.],
unmatched on earth in strength. Malini gave birth to a single son named Vibhishana. Raka gave birth to twins-
Khara and Shurpanakha. Vibhishana surpassed all of them in beauty. He was immensely fortunate and always performed rites of dharma. Dashagriva was the eldest of them all and was a bull among the rakshasas. He was immensely energetic, immensely valorous, immensely spirited and brave. Kumbhakarna surpassed all of them in
strength. He was a terrible stalker of the night and was frightening in battle because of his skills of maya. Khara
was powerful in the use of the bow, hated brahmanas and ate raw flesh. The terrible Shurpanakha always used to
obstruct religious rites. All of those brave ones were learned in the Vedas and all of them were good in the observance of their vows. They lived with their father on Mount Gandhamadana.

'"They saw Vaishravana Naravahana there. He was seated with his father and possessed great prosperity. Jealousy was born in them and they resolved to perform austerities. They pleased Brahma with terrible austerities.
Dashagriva stood on one foot for a thousand years. He controlled himself and lived on the wind, amidst five
fires[This is probably a reference to the five sacred fires-dakshina, garhapatya, ahavaniya, sabhya and avasathya.]. Kumbhakarna lay down on the ground, controlled in his food and controlled in his vows. The wise and
generous Vibhishana fasted and meditated, surviving on one dry leaf and performing severe austerities throughout
the period. With delighted minds, Khara and Shurpanakha served them and protected them, while they tormented
themselves with austerities. When one thousand years had passed, the invincible Dashanana[Ravana, the one with ten faces.] cut off one of his
heads and offered it into the fire and the lord of the universe was pleased at this. Brahma then went there himself
and asked them to refrain from austerities.

'"He tempted each of them separately with a boon. Brahma said, 'O sons! Stop! I am pleased with you. Ask for
boons, except for immortality, and I will give you whatever you ask for. All the heads that you have offered into
the fire out of your great desire, will be reunited with your body according to your wishes[This means that Ravana had successively offered more than one head into the fire.]. There will be no disfigurement of your body and you will be able to assume any form that you desire. There is no doubt that you will
be able to vanquish your enemies in battle.' Ravana replied, 'May I never suffer defeat at the hands of gandharvas,
gods, asuras, yakshas, rakshasas, serpents, kinnaras and demons[Bhutas or ghosts.].' Brahma said, 'You will have no fear from all
those you have mentioned, but for man. O fortunate one! This is the way I have ordained it.' At these words,
Dashagriva was satisfied. Because of his evil intelligence, the man-eating one ignored men. In the same way, the
great grandfather addressed Kumbhakarna. But since his reasoning was clouded by darkness, he asked for a long
period of sleep. Granting this, he repeatedly spoke to Vibhishana, 'O son! Ask for a boon. I am pleased with you.'

Vibhishana replied, 'May my mind not turn towards adharma, even in times of supreme difficulty. O illustrious
one! The brahmastra weapon cannot be instructed. May it become manifest in me.' Brahma said, 'O destroyer of
enemies! Though you have been born in a rakshasa womb, your intelligence does not turn towards adharma. I am
granting you immortality.' O lord of the earth! Having obtained this boon, rakshasa Dashagriva defeated the lord
of riches[Kubera.] in battle and won Lanka from him.

'"The illustrious one left Lanka and went to Gandhamadana, followed by the gandharvas, the yakshas, the rakshasas and the kimpurushas. Ravana fought and won the Pushpaka vimana from him. Then Vaishravana cursed
him. 'This will not bear you. It will carry the one who will kill you in battle. Since you have treated your elder[Meaning Kubera.]
with contempt, you will soon perish.' O great king! Vibhishana, with dharma in his soul, followed him[Kubera.], united
with great prosperity. The illustrious lord of the riches was satisfied with his younger brother. The wise one made
him the general of the armies of both the yakshas and the rakshasas. All the immensely strong and man-eating rakshasas and pishachas assembled together and instated Dashanana as the king. Dashagriva could assume any form
at will and travel through the sky. Intoxicated with his strength, he attacked the daityas and the gods and robbed
them of their jewels. Because he made the worlds scream, he came to be known as Ravana[The word rava means to scream or roar.]. Dashagriva, with
strength at will, caused fear among the gods."'
