Vaishampayana said, 'Then King Kounteya, the giver of many gifts, departed. He went to Agastya's hermitage and
lived in Durjaya. The king asked Lomasha, supreme among eloquent ones, "Why was Vatapi immolated by
Agastya here? What was the power of that daitya, killer of humans? What excited the anger of that great-souled
one?"

'Lomasha replied, "O descendant of the Kourava lineage! There was once a daitya named Ilvala. In earlier
times, he lived in the city of Manimati and Vatapi was his younger brother. That son of Diti once spoke to a brahmana who had the power of austerities. 'O illustrious one! Grant me a son who is Indra's equal.' Since the brahmana did not give him a son who was Vasava's equal, the asura became extremely angry with the brahmana. If
he[Ilvala.] summoned with his words anyone who had gone to Vaivasvata's[Yama's.] world, that person would regain his
body and be seen to be alive. He changed the asura Vatapi and cooked him well. He fed this to the brahmana and
summoned him[Vatapi.] back. O lord of the earth! O king! The great asura Vatapi smilingly ripped the brahmana's side
apart and emerged. O king! He thus fed brahmanas again and again. The evil-minded daitya Ilvala caused violence
to them.

'"At that time, the illustrious Agastya saw his ancestors hanging in a cave, with their faces downwards. He
asked them, 'Why are you hanging upside down like this?' The ones learned in the nature of the brahman replied,
'For the sake of offspring.' They told him, 'We are your ancestors. We have reached this cave and are hanging upside down for the sake of offspring. O Agastya! If you give birth to excellent offspring for our sake, we will be
freed from this hell. O son! You will also attain the supreme objective.' The energetic one, always devoted to the
dharma of truth, told them, 'O forefathers! I will do what you desire. Remove the fever from your minds.' Then
the illustrious rishi began to think about offspring. He could not see a fit enough lady in whom he could procreate
himself[The father is believed to recreate himself in the form of his son.]. He then chose those limbs from different beings that are regarded as unsurpassed. Collecting those
limbs, he created a supreme woman. Having created her for himself, the immensely ascetic sage gave her to the
king of Vidarbha, who was desirous of offspring[As will become clear in the next chapter, the king of Vidarbha did not know that this had been done by
Agastya.]. The immensely fortunate one was born there, as radiant as
lightning. She grew and her face was beautiful, her body was handsome. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As
soon as she was born, on seeing her, the king of Vidarbha was delighted and announced this to the brahmanas. O
lord of the earth! All those brahmanas blessed her. The brahmanas gave her the name of Lopamudra. O great king!
She grew up and her beauty was supreme. She swiftly grew, like a lotus in the water, or the auspicious crest of a
fire. O Indra among kings! When she attained her youth, one hundred maidens adorned with ornaments and one
hundred female servants served the beautiful one, attending to her instructions. O lord! Surrounded by the one hundred female servants and in the midst of the one hundred maidens, that energetic maiden blazed like Rohini[The fourth of the twenty-seven nakshatras. The moon was married to all twenty seven, but was partial to the
beautiful Rohini.] in
the sky. When she attained her youth, though she was good in conduct and manners, no man asked for her hand,
out of fear for the great-souled one[Agastya.]. The truthful maiden surpassed the apsaras in her beauty. She satisfied her
father and her relatives with her good conduct. On seeing that Vidarbha's daughter was accomplished and had attained her youth, the father began to think in his mind, 'To whom shall I give my daughter?'"'
