Uma said, "O illustrious one! O one who plucked out Bhaga's eyes! O one who struck down Pushan's teeth[Brown.]!
one who destroyed Daksha's sacrifice! O three-eyed one! I have a great doubt. In ancient times, the illustrious Svayambhu created the four varnas. Through what perverse deeds does a vaishya become a shudra? How
does a kshatriya become a vaishya and a brahmana become a kshatriya? O god! By following what kind of dharma
is one capable of preventing this degradation of varnas? As a consequence of what deeds is a brahmana reborn as a
shudra? O lord! Through what deeds does a kshatriya become a shudra? O god! O lord of the bhutas! O unblemished  one!  I  have  a  doubt.  Tell  me.  How  can  those  who  naturally  belong  to  the  other  three  varnas  become
brahmanas?"

'"'Maheshvara replied, "O goddess! O auspicious one! The status of a brahmana is extremely difficult to obtain.
One is a brahmana as a result of creation. It is my view that kshatriyas, vaishyas and shudras are also created[By implication, through birth.].
However, because of wicked deeds, a brahmana can be dislodged from his state. Therefore, being the best of the
varnas, a brahmana must try to protect that status. If a kshatriya or vaishya follows a brahmana's dharma and lives
in the manner indicated for brahmanas, he too can obtain the status of a brahmana. If a person abandons the status
of a brahmana and follows the dharma of a kshatriya, he is dislodged from the status of a brahmana and is reborn
as a kshatriya. The status of a brahmana is extremely difficult to obtain. However, because of greed and confusion,
a brahmana may always resort to the work of vaishyas and this shows extreme folly. A brahmana can thus become
a vaishya and a vaishya can become a shudra. A brahmana can be dislodged from his own dharma and can become
a shudra. Such a brahmana is dislodged from his varna and becomes an outcast. He goes to hell and is dislodged
from Brahma's world. He is reborn as a shudra. An immensely fortunate kshatriya or vaishya can also deviate from
his own dharma and tasks and follow the tasks meant for a shudra. Dislodged from this own position, he causes a
confusion of varnas. In this way, brahmanas, kshatriyas and vaishyas can become shudras. If a person is pure and
is engaged in his own dharma, if he pursues jnana and vijnana without being sullied, if he knows about dharma and
follows dharma, he obtains the fruits of dharma. O goddess! After this, I will recount what was recited by Brahma.

'The virtuous faithfully pursue dharma, kama and adhyatma.' Food cooked by those who are fierce, food cooked
together for large groups and food at the funeral ceremony for a miscarriage at birth are condemened. Tainted food
and food served by a shudra must never be eaten. O goddess! Food cooked by a shudra is condemned. It is my
view that the proof for this lies in the words that emanated from the mouth of the grandfather, the great-souled god
of the gods. If one dies with some of the food from a shudra undigested in one's stomach, even if one has offered
oblations into the fire, one is reborn as a shudra. Because of the undigested food from a shudra, one is dislodged
from the status of a brahmana. Such a brahmana becomes a shudra. There is nothing to think about this. If a brahmana dies with undigested food in his stomach, whatever be the varna of the person from whom he received that
food, he is reborn as that varna. The status of a brahmana is extremely difficult to obtain and is sacred. If one disrespects it and eats food that should not be eaten, one is dislodged from the status of a brahmana. A brahmana who
drinks liquor, is guilty of killing a brahmana, is mean in behaviour, is a thief, breaks his vows, is impure, is negligent about studying, is wicked, greedy, deceitful and fraudulent, is without vows, is the husband of a vrishala lady,
eats directly from the cooking vessel, sells soma and serves those who are inferior is dislodged from a brahmana
birth. A brahmana who violates his preceptor's bed, hates his preceptor and maligns his preceptor is dislodged
from a brahmana birth, even if he happens to know about the brahman. However, by performing the acts associated with virtuous conduct, a shudra can obtain the status of a brahmana and a vaishya that of a kshatriya. Following
the law and the ordinances, a shudra must make efforts to serve and attend to the needs of the superior varnas.
Without any distraction, a shudra must always remain established in this path of the virtuous. He must honour gods
and brahmanas and observe the vow  of  showing  hospitality towards  all guests. He  must be controlled and restrained in diet and approach his wife when it is her season. He must search out accomplished people and separate
them from the unaccomplished. He must eat leftover food. A shudra who desires to become a vaishya must not eat
pointless meat. He must be truthful in speech. He must be without a sense of pride. He must be beyond the opposite pairs of sentiments and must be knowledgable about tranquility. He must always perform sacrifices. He must
be pure and supremely devoted to studying. He must be self-controlled. He must honour brahmanas and seek the
welfare of all the varnas. He must be in the state of a householder and must only eat in the morning and in the
evening[From here onwards, the reference seems to be to a vaishya.]. He must conquer the inclination to eat and subsist on leftovers. He must be without desire and without
ego. Following the rites, he must offer libations at agnihotra sacrifices. He should eat the food that is left after all
the guests have eaten. A vaishya must thus tend to the three fires. Such a vaishya is pure and obtains greatness by
being born in a family of kshatriyas. If such a vaishya is born as a kshatriya, observes all the sacraments from the
time of birth, performs virtuous deeds and observes all the vows, thereafter, he becomes a brahmana. Born as a
kshatriya, he must cleanse himself, perform sacrifices and donate copious amounts of dakshina. If he desires heaven, he must always study and tend to the three fires. He must always stretch out a hand towards the afflicted and
following dharma, protect the subjects. He must be truthful and always seek happiness in following the truth. Following dharma, he must use the rod of chastisement. He must not hesitate to use the rod of chastisement in ensuring adherence to dharma. In all acts, he must be bound by not extracting more than one-sixth[As taxes levied.]. A person who
knows about artha must be comfortable in matters of sexual intercourse. A person who has dharma in his soul must
always have intercourse with his wife when it is her season. He must be controlled in observing fasts. He must be
pure and supremely devoted to studying. He must always sleep on a bed of kusha grass. There must always be a
fire in his house. With a cheerful mind, he must attend to all the guests and pursue the three objectives. He must
always tell shudras who desire food that it is available. No desire should be discernible that is driven by selfish motives. He must seek to tend to ancestors, gods and guests. In his own house, he must live like a mendicant. Following the ordinances, he must render oblations into the fire thrice a day. He must not turn his back in a battle and
must lay down his life for cows and brahmanas. Or, he must give up his life by entering the three fires that have
sanctified with mantras. Such a person becomes a brahmana. A kshatriya who has cleansed himself, is full of jnana
and vijnana, is accomplished in the Vedas and has dharma in his soul can become a brahmana through his own
deeds. These are the fruits of deeds obtained by those who are born in inferior varnas. A shudra who cleanses himself in this way can become a brahmana. A brahmana who is indiscriminate about which varna he accepts food
from can become an outcast. He may have to give up the sacredness associated with the status of being a brahmana
and become a shudra. A shudra who is pure in his deeds, pure in his soul and has conquered his senses can obtain
the status of becoming a brahmana. Brahma himself said this. It is my view that a shudra who is naturally pure in
his deeds should be known as one who is purer than a brahmana. Birth, sacraments, learning and humility are not
sufficient reasons for a person to be a brahmana. Conduct is the only reason. All the brahmanas in the world obtain
that status because of conduct. O one with the beautiful hips! A person who possesses that good conduct obtains
the status of a brahmana. O fortunate one! It is my view that the nature of being a brahmana is equal everywhere[Regardless of varna.]
-wherever the sparkling brahman, devoid of qualities, exists, that person is a brahmana. O goddess! Depending
on the place, the fruits of birth are only for purposes of classification. Brahma, the granter of boons, created subjects and spoke of it in this way. The status of being a brahmana is like a great field that roams around on earth, using its feet. The seeds that are sown in that field lead to crops in the hereafter. A person who is always restrained in
diet and is always on the path of the virtuous is one who walks along Brahma's path and obtains greatness. When
he is in a house in the form of a householder, he must always show the traits of studying the samhitas. He must always devote himself to studies and earn a living through donations and studies. A brahmana who acts in this way
and is always based on the path of virtue, offering oblations into the fire, is regarded as one who is immersed in the
brahman. Once one has obtained the status of a brahmana, one must make all one's efforts to preserve it through
deeds and not accepting gifts from inferior varnas. O one with the sweet smiles! I have thus told you everything
about how a shudra can become a brahmana. I have also told you about how a brahmana can be dislodged from
dharma and can become a shudra."'"'
