'Lomasha said, "One day, in the month of Madhava[Madhava is another name for the month of Vaishakha.], Yavakrita, who was without any fear, roamed around and
arrived at Raibhya's hermitage. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He saw the beautiful hermitage, adorned with
trees in blossom. He saw his[Raibhya's.] daughter-in-law, roaming around like a kinnara lady. Having lost his senses because of desire, Yavakrita shamelessly told the bashful one, 'Come to me.' Knowing his conduct and fearing his
curse, as well as the energetic Raibhya, she went to him and said, 'Let it be that way.' O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! Taking her to a lonely spot, he injected her with seed. Raibhya, the destroyer of enemies, then returned to
his own hermitage and saw his daughter-in law, Paravasu's wife, distressed and weeping. O Yudhishthira! He comforted her with sweet words and asked her the reason. The fortunate one then told him everything that Yavakrita
had said and also what she had replied, after carefully thinking it over.

'"Having heard of Yavakrita's misconduct, Raibhya was consumed by great anger and it seemed as if his heart
would burn. The ascetic's anger was great. He plucked a lock from his matted hair, and observing the rites, offered
it into the fire. A woman arose, exactly like the other one[The daughter-in-law.] in beauty. He again plucked out another lock and offered it into the fire. A rakshasa with terrible eyes, fearful in form, arose. The two of them then asked Raibhya,
'What should we do?' In anger, the rishi replied, 'Kill Yavakrita.' They promised that they would act as they had
been asked to and went to kill Yavakrita. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The kritya[A kritya is a female deity, worshipped for magical and destructive purposes.] whom the great-
souled one had created went to Yavakrita, and having deluded him, robbed him of his water-pot[Kamandalu.]. Without his
water-pot, Yavakrita became unclean. The rakshasa then rushed at him, with an upraised spear. On seeing him approach with an upraised spear and with intent to kill, Yavakrita swiftly arose and dashed towards a pond. On finding that the pond was bereft of water, Yavakrita swiftly went to all the rivers. But they had also dried up.

'"Pursued by the terrible rakshasa with the upraised spear and in fear, he suddenly went to his father's agnihotra.
But his entry was forcibly barred by a shudra guard who was blind. O king! The doorkeeper restrained him by
force. While the shudra restrained Yavakrita, the rakshasa pursued him with the spear. His heart pierced, he fell
down. Having killed Yavakrita, the rakshasa returned to Raibhya. With Raibhya's permission, he began to roam
around with the one who was not an arya[The kritya.]."'