Brahma said, "Intelligence is the essence. The mind is the pole[There is the imagery of a wheel of life.]. The aggregate of senses constitute the
spokes. The great elements are the circumference and nimesha[In the sense of time.]sets the boundaries. It is overwhelmed
by old age and sorrow. It moves with disease and hardship. Depending on the time and the place, there is the sound
of toil and endeavour. Day and night constitute the revolutions. Hot and cold set the limits. Both happiness and unhappiness end in hardships. Hunger and thirst are like nails. Shade and heat leave marks along the path. Even a
brief instant of time and the twinkling of an eye can cause distraction. It is full of people who are terribly confused
and lack consciousness, being dragged along. Measured in months and fortnights, it moves unevenly in this world.
The store of tamas is the mud. Rajas provides the impulse for movement. The ornament of sattva provides illumination. The wheel is made out of the conflict of qualities. Sounds of not having obtained what one wants are like
the nave and increases grief as it revolves. It has cause and effect and attachment increases its size[Increases the size of the wheel.]. Greed and
ignorance are clearly responsible for making it unsteady. Fear and confusion become possessions and cause delusion among creatures. One hopes to obtain what brings joy and pleasure and is seized by desire and anger. Though
it is specially brought into existence by Mahat and the others, it is destroyed because of the influence of an attachment to tamas. Without tiring, the wheel of time moves on, with the speed of thought. This wheel of time is devoid
of  consciousness  and  is  united  with  opposite  pairs  of  sentiments.  The  entire  universe,  with  the  immortals,  are
awakened[Created.], extended and then contracted again. Among all creatures, a man who always knows about the pravritti associated with the wheel of time and the truth about nivritti is never confused. He is liberated from all kinds of
hardships. Such  a  sage  overcomes  all  kinds  of  opposite  sentiments.  He  is  freed  from  all  sins  and  obtains  the
supreme objective. Among all the four ashramas, garhasthya, brahmacharya, vanaprastha and the state of being a
mendicant[Sannyasa.], garhasthya is said to be the foundation. It has eternally been stated that the following of the ordinances of the sacred texts brings benefit and fame. A person who is born in a family with special qualities should
first observe the vows, practise the sacraments and cleanse his soul. Having got to know the Vedas, he should return[This is a reference to residing in the house of the preceptor and studying there. Having completed the studies,
the student graduates and returns to his own house.]. He must always be devoted to his own wife. He must be controlled and good in conduct. He must conquer
his senses. He must faithfully perform the five great sacrifices[A householder's sacrifices meant for gods, ancestors, sages, humans and animals.]. Always engaged in the rites mentioned in the
Vedas, he must eat what is left after serving the gods and the ancestors. According to capacity and following the
prescribed ordinances, he must donate at sacrifices. A sage will not excessively use his hands or feet. Nor will he
excessively use his eyes. He will not be excessive in speech. He will then be classified as someone virtuous. He
will always wear the sacred thread. He will wear clean and white clothes. He will be pure in his vows. He will always be controlled, restrained and generous. He will associate with those who are good. He will conquer his penis
and his stomach. He will be friendly, good in conduct and calm. He will sport a staff made out of bamboo and hold
a water pot filled with water. Having studied, he will teach[All this is meant for brahmanas.]. He will perform sacrifices and officiate at sacrifices.
He will give and receive. He will follow these six attributes of conduct[Studying, teaching, performing sacrifices, officiating at sacrifices, receiving gifts and giving gifts.]. In this world, there are three tasks brahmanas can use for earning a living. Studying, teaching and performing sacrifices are only for purification[Thus, officiating at sacrifices, receiving gifts and giving gifts are for purposes of livelihood. That seems to be the
sense.]. The
other three, studying, teaching and the performance of sacrifices are for purposes of dharma. A person who knows
about dharma will therefore perform these three tasks without any distraction. A sage is controlled, friendly, full of
forgiveness and looks upon all creatures impartially. A householder brahmana who does all this to the best of his
capacity, is rigid in his vows and is controlled and pure, conquers heaven."'"'
