'Markandeya said, "However, the rishis were concerned about ensuring the welfare of the worlds. On seeing these
extremely terrible portents of different kinds, they became anxious and performed tasks to pacify the worlds. The
people who lived in Chitraratha forest averred, 'These great calamities have descended on us because Agni had intercourse with the wives of the saptarshis.' Others, who had seen the goddess leave in the form of Garudi, said,
'You are responsible for this disaster.' No one knew that this deed had been done by Svaha. Having heard that
Skanda was her son, Suparni slowly went to him and said, 'I am your mother.' On learning that an immensely energetic son had been born, the saptarshis abandoned their six wives, with the exception of the divine Arundhati. All
the residents of the forest referred to him as the son of the six. O king! But Svaha repeatedly told the saptarshis, 'I
know that he is my son. What is being said is not true.' After performing sacrifices for the saptarshis, the great
sage Vishvamitra had followed Agni without being seen, when he had been tormented by desire. He knew everything, exactly as it had happened. Vishvamitra was the first to seek refuge with Kumara. He composed a celestial
hymn of praise to Mahasena. The great sage performed all the thirteen birth and other rituals for Kumara[There are thirteen samskaras or sacraments. The list varies a bit. But one list is vivaha (marriage), garbhalambhana (conception), pumshavana (engendering a male child), simantonnayana (parting the hair, performed in
the fourth month of pregnancy), jatakarma (birth rites), namakarana (naming), chudakarma (tonsure), annaprashana (first solid food), keshanta (first shaving of the head), upanayana (sacred thread), vidyarambha (commencement of studies), samavartana (graduation) and antyeshti (funeral rites).]. He
spoke about the greatness of the six-faced one, the virtues of the cock and the worship of the goddess Shakti and
her companions. Vishvamitra performed rituals for the welfare of the world. Thus, the rishi Vishvamitra came to
be loved by Kumara. The great sage came to know about Svaha's transformation of form and told all the sages that
the women had not committed any crimes. But though they heard those details, all of them abandoned their wives.

'"On hearing about Skanda, the gods went and told Vasava, 'O Shakra! Skanda's strength cannot be tolerated.
Kill him swiftly and without any delay. If you do not kill him now, he will become Indra. O Shakra! With his great
strength, he will oppress the three worlds, us and you.' He replied to the ones who were miserable, 'This child is
immensely strong. With his valour, he can destroy the creator of the worlds in battle. Let the mothers of the world
now go to Skanda[These divine mothers are sometimes described as companions of Shiva, sometimes as companions of Skanda. Their number is usually given as seven or eight, and more rarely, sixteen.]. They have the power and the will to destroy him.' They[The mothers.] agreed to these words and went.
But on seeing that his strength was unmatched, their faces became miserable. They thought that he was invincible
and sought refuge with him. They told him, 'You are our son. We hold up the universe. Welcome all of us. We are
overcome with affection for you. Our milk is flowing.' Mahasena worshipped them and complied with their wishes. Then the strongest of the strong saw his father Agni approach and together with the group of mothers, he[Agni.]
received his worship. He remained there with Mahasena, so as to protect him steadily. There was a lady among the
mothers who had been created out of anger. She nursed Skanda like her own son, with a spear in her hand. She was
the daughter of an ocean of blood and lived on blood. She embraced Mahasena and protected him like a son. Agni
transformed himself into goat-faced Naigameya with many offspring[These sentences are a bit obscure. Agni is often associated with a goat, specifically, a ram. So is Skanda.
Both Agni and Skanda are referred to as Naigameya and in this form, Skanda cures children of ailments. The
mother who is the daughter of the ocean of blood is Krura.]. He sported himself on the mountain with
the child, as if with toys."'
