Vaishampayana said, 'When all the soldiers had been slain, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira heard that his aged father had
left from Gajasahvya[Another name for Hastinapura.]. O great king! With his brothers, he sorrowed and was afflicted by grief on account of his
sons. He went to the one who was overwhelmed with grief on account of his sons. He was followed by the brave
and great-souled Dasharha[Krishna.], Yuyudhana[Satyaki.] and Yuyutsu[Dhritarashtra's son through a vaishya woman. Yuyutsu had sided with the Pandavas.]. They were followed by the extremely grief-stricken
Droupadi, who was oppressed by sorrow, and also the frightened Panchala women who had assembled there. O
supreme among the Bharata lineage! Along the banks of the Ganga, he[Yudhishthira.] saw large numbers of women shrieking
and lamenting, like female ospreys. Thousands of them wept and surrounded the king. They raised their arms in
lamentation and uttered pleasant and unpleasant words. "How can a king who knows about dharma commit such
an act of violence now? He has slain his fathers, brothers, preceptors, sons and friends. O mighty-armed one! What
was in your mind when you killed Drona and your grandfather, Bhishma, and when you slew Jayadratha? O descendant of the Bharata lineage! What is the use of the kingdom when you cannot see your fathers and brothers,
the invincible Abhimanyu and Droupadi's sons?" The mighty-armed one went past the ones who were shrieking
like female ospreys.

'Dharmaraja Yudhishthira showed homage to his eldest father[In the sense of Pandu being the younger father.]. In that way, those destroyers of enemies[The other Pandavas.] also
honoured their father, in accordance with dharma. All the Pandavas announced their names to him. However, the
father was afflicted because his sons had been killed. Oppressed by grief, he embraced Pandava[Yudhishthira.] reluctantly. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! He embraced Dharmaraja and comforted him. Like a fire that wished to burn,
he then looked for the evil-souled Bhimasena. The fire of his anger was fanned by the wind of his sorrow. He
wished to burn down the forest that was Bhimasena with his sight. However, Hari[Krishna.] realized that he[Dhritarashtra. Dhritarashtra wished to crush Bhima with his embrace.] harboured ill
intentions towards Bhima. He pushed Bhima aside with his arms and presented an iron Bhima. Through signs, the
immensely intelligent Hari had understood his intentions in advance. The immensely wise Janardana had therefore
thought of a contrivance. The strong king grasped the iron Bhimasena with his arms, thinking it to be Vrikodara.
The king possessed the strength and force of ten thousand elephants. When he grasped the iron Bhima and shattered it, his own chest was mangled and blood began to flow from his mouth. Covered with blood, he fell down on
the ground, like a parijata tree[The coral tree.], with blossoms at the ends of its branches. The learned suta, Gavalgana's son[Sanjaya.],
seized him and asked him not to act in this way. He spoke words to pacify and comfort him. The great-minded one
abandoned his anger and overcame his rage. Full of sorrow, he repeatedly exclaimed, "Alas, Bhima! Alas!" On
knowing that he had overcome his rage and was full of sorrow because Bhimasena had been killed, Vasudeva,
supreme among men, spoke these words to him. "O Dhritarashtra! Do not grieve. Bhima has not been killed by
you. O king! It was an iron image that has been brought down by you. O bull among the Bharata lineage! I knew
that you were overcome by rage. So I dragged Kounteya away, when he was in the jaws of death. O tiger among
kings! There is no one who is as strong as you. O mighty-armed one! Where is the man who can withstand being
crushed by your arms? When someone has been crushed by your arms, he cannot escape alive, just as one cannot
escape alive when one has confronted Death. O Kouravya! Therefore, I got your son to construct this iron image of
Bhima and offered it to you[No further details are given about the 'son'. If son is to be interpreted strictly, Krishna
must have asked Yuyutsu to construct the image.]. Because you were tormented by sorrow over your sons, your mind had deviated
from dharma. O Indra among kings! That is the reason you wished to kill Bhimasena. O king! However, it would
not have been proper for you to kill Vrikodara. O great king! Your sons will never become alive again. Therefore,
you should condone everything that we have done and approve of it. Do not unnecessarily have this sorrow in your
mind."'
