'Bhishma said, "O king! At this, there was the sound of a great tumult in the sky. 'O Bhishma! O descendant of the
Kuru lineage! Do not release prasvapan.' But I aimed that weapon at the descendant of the Bhrigu lineage. While I
was aiming prasvapan, Narada spoke these words to me. 'O Kourvaya! The masses of gods are established in the
firmament. They are restraining you now. Do not use prasvapan. Rama is an ascetic with brahmana qualities. He is
a brahmana and your preceptor. O Kouravya! You should never show him disrespect in any way.' Then I saw those
eight, who knew about the brahman, stationed in the sky. O Indra among kings! They smiled and spoke softly to
me. 'O foremost among the Bharata lineage! Do as Narada has asked you to. O bull among the Bharata lineage!
That will be supremely beneficial for the world.' In that field of battle, I then withdrew the weapon prasvapan. In
that battle, in accordance with the prescription, I readied the blazing brahmastra[Divine weapon named after Brahma.]. O prince! On seeing that the
weapon had been withdrawn, Rama was enraged. He suddenly raised his voice and spoke these words. 'I have
been defeated by the extremely evil-minded Bhishma[Because Bhishma had voluntarily withdrawn the weapon and in a way, Parashurama had been defeated.].' Then Jamadagni's son saw his father, and his father, and
his father also[Ourva's son was Richika, Richika's son was Jamadagni and Jamadagni's son was Parashurama. So Ourva,
Richika and Jamadagni had arrived. They were descended from Bhrigu. Bhrigu's son was Chyavana and Chya-
vana's son was Ourva.].

'"They surrounded him and in a comforting voice, spoke these words. 'O son! Never act in such a rash way
again, especially fighting with a kshatriya like Bhishma. O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! It is the dharma of
kshatriyas to fight. The supreme riches of brahmanas are studying and observing vows. Earlier, we asked you to do
this for a specific purpose[When Jamadagni was killed by Kartavirya Arjuna.] and you took up arms and performed a fierce deed. O son! You have fought enough
with Bhishma. You have been defeated. O mighty-armed one! Withdraw from the field of battle. O fortunate one!
Let there be an end to wielding the bow. O unassailable one! O Bhargava! Give it up and practise austerities.
Bhishma is Shantanu's son and he has been restrained by all the gods. They have asked him to withdraw from the
battle. They have repeatedly told him, "Do not fight with Rama, your preceptor. O extender of the Kuru lineage! It
is not proper for you to defeat Rama in battle. O Gangeya! In the field of battle, show respect to this brahmana. We
are your seniors and therefore, we are restraining you." Bhishma is foremost among the Vasus. O son! It is fortunate that you are still alive. Shantanu's son, Gangeya, is an immensely famous Vasu. How can he be defeated by
you? O Rama! Refrain. Arjuna is foremost among the Pandavas. He is Purandara's powerful son. He is the brave
Nara Prajapati, the ancient and eternal god[Nara and Narayana are ancient rishis, Nara is identified with Arjuna and Narayana with Krishna.]. He is famous in the three worlds as the valiant Savyasachi. At the
right time, it has been ordained by the self-creating one[Brahma.] that he will be the cause of Bhishma's death.' Thus addressed by his ancestors, Rama replied to his ancestors. 'I will not refrain from this battle. That is the vow that I
observe. I have never withdrawn from the forefront of battle earlier. O grandfathers! If it so pleases you, let the son
of the river withdraw from the fight. There is no way that I will withdraw from this fight.' O king! Then those
sages, with Richika at the forefront and with Narada, approached me and said, 'O son[The word used is tata.]! Honour the supreme
brahmana and withdraw from the battle.' I told them, 'No, because of my respect for the dharma of kshatriyas, my
vow in this world is that I will never withdraw from a fight. I will not withdraw and retreat. I will not be pierced by
arrows on my back. Greed, misery, fear or the possibility of gain cannot make me abandon this eternal dharma.
This is my firm resolution.' O king! Then all the sages, with Narada at the forefront and Bhagirathi, my mother,
stood in the midst of that field of battle. Firm in my resolution to continue fighting, I stood in that field of battle,
with an arrow fixed to my bow.

'"In that field of battle, they again spoke collectively to the descendant of the Bhrigu lineage. 'O Bhargava! Be
pacified. The heart of brahmanas is like butter. O Rama! O Rama! O supreme among brahmanas! Refrain from
fighting. O Bhargava! Bhishma is incapable of being killed by you and you by Bhishma.' All of them addressed
him in this way and obstructed him in the field of battle. His ancestors made the descendant of the Bhrigu lineage
lay down his weapons. Then I again saw those eight, who were knowledgeable about the brahman. They were as
resplendent as eight rising planets. While I stood on the field of battle, they spoke these affectionate words to me.

'Go to the mighty-armed Rama, your preceptor. Do what is beneficial for the world.' On seeing that Rama had
withdrawn because of the words of his well-wishers and for the welfare of the world, I acted in accordance with
the words that had been spoken to me. I was severely wounded. But I went up to Rama and honoured him. Rama,
the great ascetic, smiled affectionately at me and said, 'O Bhishma! In this world, there is no kshatriya like you
who roams the earth. Go. In this fight, I have been extremely satisfied with you.' In my presence, Bhargava summoned the maiden. In the midst of those ascetics, he spoke these miserable words."'
