'Sanjaya said, "O Pandava! You have described what you are capable of. O foremost among the Kuru lineage! You
have asked about the Kurus and the people. O father[The word used is tata. This means father (and son), but is also affectionately used towards anyone who is senior
or older.]! O Partha! Those intelligent ones, the best of the Kurus that
you have asked about, are well. O Pandava! Know that there are aged and virtuous men around Dhritrashtra's son,
but there are evil ones too. Dhritarashtra's son has given to enemies. Why should he then take away the shares of
brahmanas? If he follows adharma in his behaviour towards you, like injuring those who do not injure you, that
would not be right. If Dhritarashtra, together with his sons, hates those who like you are righteous, that would not
be right and would be like injuring one's friends. He does not approve of this and is extremely tormented. O
Ajatashatru! The aged one is sorrowing. Having consulted with brahmanas, he has heard that hating one's friends
is the most grievous of sins. O god among men! They remember you in their assemblies and Jishnu, the foremost
among warriors, in battles. When there is the sound of drums and conch shells, they remember Bhimasena, who
wields the club in his hand. In the midst of battle, they remember Madri's two sons, who advanced in all the directions, continuously showering arrows on soldiers. Those maharathas were never perturbed in battle. O king! I think
that no one knows the destiny that will befall a man. O Pandava! You have all the qualities of dharma, yet you
have had to confront difficulties in the form of hardships. O Ajatashatru! You have been able to overcome your
hardships, and even greater ones, because of your wisdom. All the sons of Pandu are like the equals of Indra and
will not deviate from dharma for the sake of desire. O Ajatashatru! With the aid of your wisdom, you will be able
to bring about the peace that will protect the sons of Dhritarashtra, the Pandavas, the Srinjayas and all the other
kings who have gathered. O Ajatashatru! O king! Listen to the words your father Dhritarashtra told me in the
night, when his advisers and his sons had gathered[Dhritarashtra is Yudhishthira's father in a general sense, by extension.]."'