Vaishampayana said, 'The time for initiation into the great sacrifice arrived. Following the prescribed rites, the
officiating priests initiated the king into the horse sacrifice. The sacrificial animals were tied and the descendant of the Pandu lineage was initiated. With the officiating priests, the immensely energetic Dharmaraja looked
resplendent. The infinitely energetic Vyasa, knowledgable about the brahman, followed the ordinances of the sacred texts and himself released the horse earmarked for the horse sacrifice. O king! The king who was Dharma's
son was initiated and looked radiant. He wore a golden garland around his neck. He looked like a blazing fire.
Dharma's son was clad in black antelope skin and a silken garment. He held a staff in his hand. Dazzling in his
splendour, he looked like Prajapati on a sacrificial altar. O lord of the earth! All the officiating priests were attired
in a similar way. Arjuna also dazzled, like a blazing fire. O lord of the earth! The horse was as dark as a black antelope and white horses were properly yoked to Dhananjaya's chariot, who waited for Dharmaraja's instructions. O
king! He stretched Gandiva and his fingers were covered in armour made out of the skin of lizards. O lord of the
earth! He was cheerful and ready to follow the horse. O king! O lord! All the people in the city, including the children, emerged with the desire of seeing Dhananjaya, foremost among the Kuru lineage, depart. Such a large number of them had assembled with the desire of seeing the horse and the one who would follow the horse that they
crushed each other in the process and a dust arose. O great king! The sound filled the ten directions. The men assembled to see Dhananjaya, Kunti's son. "There goes Kounteya. There is the shining horse. There is the mighty-
armed one, touching his supreme bow." Such were the words that were spoken and heard by the intelligent Jishnu.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O  Indra among men! There were other men who  spoke  different words.

"May you go safely and return safely. In the great crush, we can't see him, but we can see the bow. This is the terrible twang of the famous Gandiva bow. May you go safely and return safely. May you face no fear along the journey. We will see him again when he returns. It is certain that he will return." O bull among the Bharata lineage!
These were the pleasant words that were repeatedly spoken by the men and the women and he heard them.

'There was a disciple of Yajnavalkya who was accomplished in the performance of sacrificial rites. He  was
knowledgable about the Vedas. To perform benedictions of peace, he left with Partha. O lord of the earth! There
were many brahmanas who were accomplished in the Vedas. They followed the great-souled one and so did kshatriyas and vaishyas. The Pandavas had conquered the earth with the energy of their weapons. O great king! O excellent one! The horse wandered around in different countries and many battles ensued between them and Panda-
va. O brave one! I will tell you about those great and wonderful accounts. O king! O scorcher of enemies! The
horse circumambulated the earth. O lord of the earth! It began in the north and moved towards the east. Listen.
That excellent horse brought the kings of many countries under its subjugation. It was followed slowly by the maharatha with the white horses. O great king! There were tens of thousands of kings and kshatriyas who fought and
their relatives were slain. O king! Many kiratas, the wielders of swords and bows, were brought down. There were
many other kinds of mlechchhas, who had been defeated in the earlier encounter[In Kurukshetra.]. There were noble kings, cheerful men and mounts. They were indomitable in battle and many of them clashed against Pandu's son. O lord of the
earth! Here and there, many such encounters took place between Arjuna and kings who resided in different countries. O king! O unblemished one! I will only tell you about the great and terrible battles that Arjuna fought.'
