Janamejaya said, 'O illustrious one! If everything can be obtained through following dharma and renunciation,
you should tell me everything about it. You are accomplished in speaking. Great fruits were obtained by the one
who lived by the vow of unchha, by giving away saktu. O brahmana! You have spoken to me about it. But I suffer
from  a  great  doubt.  What  is  definitely  supreme  among  all  kinds  of  sacrifices?  O  bull  among  brahmanas!  You
should tell me everything about this.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'O scorcher of enemies! In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about what
happened in earlier times, in Agastya's great sacrifice. O great king! In earlier times, there was the greatly energetic Agastya. He was engaged in the welfare of all beings. He initiated himself into a sacrifice that would last for
twelve years. Many hotris came to the great-souled one's sacrifice and they were like the fire. They ate roots. Some
did not eat. Others were ashmakuttas[Ashmakuttas are sages who pound their bodies with stone. Dantolukhalinas (or dantolukhalikas) are sages who
use their teeth as mortar, that is, they only eat grain that has not been ground. Though the text says ashmakuttas,
given the context, it probably means dantolukhalinas. Parighrishtikas subsist on ground grain. Vaighasikas live
on leftover food. Samprakshalas incessantly perform ablutions.]. Still others subsisted on rays. There were parighrishtikas, vaighasikas and
samprakshalas. There were many mendicants and those who lived on alms who were present. All of them had conquered their anger and vanquished their senses. They had directly experienced dharma. All of them based themselves on self-control. They were devoid of insolence and confusion. They were always based on pure conduct and
were never constrained by their senses. Those maharshis were worshipped at that sacrifice and ate. To the best of
his capacity, the illustrious one[Agastya.] offered food that had been properly earned. Nothing at that sacrifice was not of
this nature. In this way, there were many other great sages who performed similar sacrifices.

'O supreme among the Bharata lineage! While Agastya's great sacrifice was going on, the thousand-eyed one
did not shower down. O king! During gaps in the great-souled Agastya's sacrifice, the sages, cleansed in their
souls, conversed about this. "This Agastya is conducting a sacrifice. However, when he is offering the food, it suffers from malice. If Parjanya does not rain down, how will there be food? O brahmanas! The sage's great sacrifice
will go on for twelve years. The god will also not shower down for twelve years. O intelligent maharshis! Think
about this. You should show some compassion for Agastya, whose austerities are great." Agastya was powerful
and eloquent. On hearing these words, he bowed his head down and gratified those sages. He  replied in these
words. "If Vasava does not shower down for twelve years, I will follow the eternal rituals and perform a mental
sacrifice. If Vasava does not shower down for twelve years, I will make great efforts and perform other sacrifices
with great vows. I have collected the seeds for this sacrifice over many years. I will accomplish tasks with these
seeds and there will be no obstruction to that. Under no circumstance, is anyone capable of rendering my sacrifice
unsuccessful. This is regardless of whether the god rains, or the god does not rain. Indeed, if Indra does not act in
accordance with what I wish, I will myself become Indra and revive the subjects. Every creature will obtain the
food that he is used to. I will specially do this, again and again. Let gold arrive here today and all the riches that are
extremely difficult to obtain. Let everything in the three worlds arrive here, of its own accord. Let large numbers of
divine apsaras come and gandharvas and kinnaras. Let Vishvavasu and all the others who are always worshipped
come here. Let all the riches that exist in Uttara Kuru arrive at this sacrifice on their own. Let heaven and all those
who reside in heaven come. Let Dharma himself come." Thus addressed by the intelligent one, everything arrived.

'The sages witnessed the strength of the sage's austerities. They were astounded and spoke words that were full
of great meaning. "We are pleased at your words, but we do not wish that your austerities should be diminished[The use of powers leads to the austerities diminishing.].
We have initiated ourselves in a sacrifice where we are only looking for oblations. We desire a sacrifice that we can
undertake ourselves. There is nothing else that we are looking for. We are engaged in our own tasks and subsist on
what is obtained through lawful means. We pray in the proper way, follow the Vedas and observe brahmacharya.
After having spent a period of following the law, we have emerged from our houses. We wish to follow the rituals
instructed by dharma. We wish to torment ourselves through those kinds of austerities. You should properly instruct that one's intelligence must always turn away from violence. O lord! You must always speak about sacrifices
that involve no violence. O supreme among the best of brahmanas! We will be pleased at this. After the sacrifice is
over, we will take our leave from you and depart." While they were conversing, the extremely energetic Purandara,
the king of the gods, showered down, having witnessed the strength of his austerities. O Janamejaya! Until the sacrifice of that infinitely valorous one was over, Indra of the gods showered down the rain that was desired. O rajarshi! Placing Brihaspati before him, the lord of the gods himself arrived there and gratified Agastya. When the
sacrifice was over, Agastya was extremely delighted. Following the prescribed rites, he worshipped the great sages
and gave them permission to leave.'
