'Dhritarashtra said, "Since his childhood, the brahmachari Pandava has possessed the energy of kshatriyas. Despite
my lamentations, these stupid ones wish to fight him. O Duryodhana! O best of the Bharata lineage! Refrain from
war. O destroyer of enemies! There are no circumstances under which war is praised. Together with your advisers,
half the earth should be enough for you to live on. O destroyer of enemies! Give Pandu's sons what is due to them.
All the Kurus think that it is in accordance with dharma that you should make peace with the great-souled sons of
Pandu. O son! Look at the different constituents of your army. This has been created for your detriment. But because of your folly, you do not realize this. I do not want a war. Nor does Bahlika want it. Nor do Bhishma, Drona,
Ashvatthama, Sanjaya, Somadatta, Shalya, Kripa, Satyavrata, Purumitra, Jaya and Bhurishrava desire war. When
they are oppressed by enemies, these are the ones the Kurus seek refuge with. O son! They do not applaud this war
and you should find that acceptable. You yourself do not desire it. Karna is making you do this, and Duhshasana,
with evil in his soul, and Shakuni Soubala."

'Duryodhana replied, "When I challenge them, I am not placing the burden of the war on you, Drona, Ashvatthama, Sanjaya, Vikarna, Kamboja, Kripa, Bahlika, Satyavrata, Purumitra, Bhurishrava, or any of the others on
your side. O father! Karna and I will perform this sacrifice of the war. O bull among the Bharata lineage! We have
been consecrated and Yudhishthira will be the sacrificial animal. The chariot will be the altar, the sword will be the
ladle, the club will be the larger ladle and the armour will be the assisting priests. The horses will be the four officiating priests. The arrows will be the darbha grass. Fame will be the oblations. O king! Having sacrificed ourselves to Vaivasvata[Yama, the god of death.] in this war, we will return in triumph, having slain our enemies and surrounded by prosperity. O father! Three of us-Karna, my brother Duhshasana and I, will kill the Pandavas in battle. I will kill the Pandavas and rule over this earth. Or the sons of Pandu will enjoy the earth after having killed me. O king! I can give
up my life, my riches and my kingdom. O king! O one without decay! But I cannot live together with the Pandavas. O venerable one! I will not give up to the Pandavas as much of land as can be pricked with the point of a
sharp needle."

'Dhritarashtra said, "O son! I sorrow for all you kings who are following this stupid one to the eternal world of
Vaivasvata. Duryodhana has been disowned by me. These supreme warriors will be like tigers among herds of ruru
deer. The Pandavas will gather together and kill the best of your warriors. It seems to me that the army of the
Bharatas is like a frightened woman who has fallen down and has been molested by one with long arms. Increasing
the overflowing strength that Partha already possessed, Shini's son, Madhava[Satyaki.], will station himself in the field of
battle, showering arrows like seeds. Bhimasena will be at the forefront of the army and he will be a rampart, behind which, all of them will fearlessly seek refuge. When you see the elephants brought down by Bhima in battle,
their tusks shattered, their temples broken and blood oozing, they will seem to be like splintered mountains. When
you are frightened at Bhima's touch, you will then remember my words. You will see your army burned down by
Bhimasena. The charioteers and elephants will be slain. You will see that destruction, like the trail of a fire, and remember my words. If you do not have peace with the Pandavas, you will confront a great danger. You will find
peace only when Bhimasena kills you with the club. When you see the army of the Kurus brought down in battle,
like a large forest that has been destroyed, you will then remember my words."'

Vaishampayana said, 'O great king! After the king had spoken in this way to all the kings, he again turned to
Sanjaya and asked him ...'
