Souti said, 'When the ministers saw their king in Takshaka's coils, their faces paled and they wept in great grief.
Hearing his roars, the ministers began to flee. As they were running away in their grief, they saw the wonderful
serpent Takshaka, the king of snakes, flying through the sky, like a streak with the colour of a lotus parting heaven's hair. The palace that the king had inhabited was set on fire from the snake's poison and blazed away. In panic,
they[The ministers and advisers.] abandoned it and fled in all directions. The king fell down, as if struck by lightning. When the king was
struck down with Takshaka's energy, the royal priest, pure Brahmanas and all the king's advisers performed the
funeral rites.

'All the citizens assembled and placed on the throne the king's young son. The people called him Janamejaya,
the slayer of enemies and a hero of the Kuru lineage. Though only a child, that best of kings, the eldest of the bulls
among the Kurus, was wise. Together with his ministers and priest, he ruled over the kingdom, like his brave greatgrandfather[Yudhishthira, who in a sense was also the great-grandfather, though not as directly as Arjuna.] once had.

'Seeing that the king was now able to burn down his enemies, the king's ministers went to Suvarnavarman, the
king of Kashi, and asked him to give his daughter Vapushtama in marriage. After enquiries, the king of Kashi married Vapushtama to that hero among the Kurus, in accordance with the precepts of dharma. After obtaining her,
he[Janamejaya.] was very happy and never gave his heart to any other woman. In pursuit of pleasure, the valorous one,
supreme among kings, roamed happily in lakes, blossoming woods and forests, like Pururava[An ancient king of the lunar dynasty and therefore an ancestor of the Kouravas and the Pandavas. Pururava
married the apsara Urvashi.] did in ancient
times, on obtaining Urvashi. Vapushtama, the most beautiful among women, obtained a king of the earth as her
handsome husband and at times of pleasure, pleased him with great love.'
