'Arjuna said, "Invisible, the daityas fought me with maya. With the power of invisible weapons, I continued to
fight with them. The shafted arrows from Gandiva, empowered with mantras, sliced off their heads, wherever they
were. At that, thus killed by me in battle, the nivatakavachas suddenly withdrew their maya and retreated into their
city again. The daityas having fled and everything visible again, I saw the dead danavas there, in hundreds and
thousands. There were shattered weapons and ornaments. Heaps of dead bodies and armour could be seen. There
was no room for the horses to move their feet. They[The demons.] suddenly rose up and took to the sky. Invisible, the nivatakavachas covered the entire sky and showered down large rocks. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Other
terrible danavas entered the interiors of the earth and restrained the feet of the horses and the wheels of the chariot.
While engaged in the fight, they seized the tawny horses and the chariot and covered me, ascended on the chariot,
in every direction with rocks. Because of the rocks that covered me, and because of the others that kept falling, the
entire region where we were stationed looked like a cave. I was sorely oppressed, being enveloped with rocks. The
horses had been restrained. On noticing that I was scared, Matali said, 'O Arjuna! O Arjuna! Do not be frightened.
Discharge the vajra weapon.' O lord of men! On hearing these words of his, I unleashed the vajra weapon, the vajra that is loved by the king of the gods. I resorted to an immobile spot and invoked Gandiva with the mantra. I discharged sharp iron arrows that had the force of the vajra. Having been discharged from the vajra, those arrows became like the vajra themselves. They penetrated all the maya of the nivatakavachas. Struck by the vajras, those
danavas clung to one another and fell down on the ground, like mountains. The arrows hunted out the danavas who
had entered the interiors of the earth and had seized the horses and the chariot, and dispatched them to Yama's
abode. That place was littered with the corpses of mountainous nivatakavachas, as if strewn with mountains. It was
extraordinary that the horses, the chariot, Matali or I did not suffer any injury.

'"O king! Matali smiled and told me, 'O Arjuna! The valour exhibited by you is not seen even among the gods.'

With masses of asuras having been slain, their wives began to lament in the city, like cranes during the autumn.
Accompanied by Matali, I entered the city, terrifying the nivatakavacha women with the roar of the chariot. On
seeing the tens of thousands of horses, like peacocks, and the chariot that blazed like the sun, masses of women began to flee. The sounds that those terrified women made with their ornaments was like that of hail descending on a
mountain. The frightened daitya women entered their houses, made of gold and decorated with many beautiful
gems. On seeing that supreme and wonderful city, superior to the city of the gods, I asked Matali, 'Why do the
gods not live in this wonderful place? I think that it surpasses Purandara's city.' Matali replied, 'O Partha! This
was earlier the city of the gods. But the gods were expelled from here by the nivatakavachas. They obtained the
grandfather's favours through great and terrible austerities and obtained the boon that they should live here, free
from all fear of the gods in battle. Then Shakra resorted to the illustrious one who creates himself[Brahma.] and said, "O
illustrious one! Bearing our welfare in mind, you decide what is appropriate in this case." The illustrious one told
Vasava what had been destined in this matter. "O slayer of Vritra! You yourself will assume another body and kill
them[Arjuna is Indra's son.]." Therefore, Shakra gave you weapons for their destruction. Even the gods could not kill the ones you
have now slain. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You arrived here when the time was right for their end and
you have accomplished the task. O Indra among men! Mahendra conferred on you the supreme power of those
supreme weapons for the destruction of the danavas.' Having killed the danavas and entering their city, I returned
to the abode of the gods, together with Matali."'
