Yudhishthira asked, "There are wicked and foolish men who perform cruel deeds and steal the possessions of
brahmanas.
Where do they go?"

'Bhishma  replied,  "O  descendant  of  the  Bharata  lineage!  In  this connection, an ancient history is recounted
about a conversation between a chandala and a kshatrabandhu[A kshatrabandhu is an inferior kshatriya. He is kshatriya in birth, but not in action.].

'"The king said, 'O chandala! You have the form of an aged person, but your behaviour is like that of a child.
Your body is covered with dust created by dogs and asses, but you are concerned with what has come from cows.
Tasks censured by the righteous are recommended for chandalas. Why are you using water from the tank to wash
off only the dust that has been raised by cattle?'

'"The chandala replied, 'O king! Earlier, cows that belonged to a brahmana were stolen and in the process, they
raised some dust and this descended on some soma plants. Brahmanas who drank this soma and the king who had
initiated himself into the sacrifice were swiftly submerged in hell, with the officiating priests, since all of them had
appropriated something that belonged to a brahmana. Men who partook of the milk, ghee and curds[From the stolen cows.], all the brahmanas and all the kings, were submerged in hell. When they shook their bodies, with the milk, they slew the sons
and the grandsons[The stolen cows shook their bodies and sprinkled milk on people who were then killed.]. Though the couple[The king and the queen.] was virtuous in conduct, because they had looked at the animals, they
were killed. O king! I used to reside there, as a brahmachari who had conquered his senses. O lord of men! The
food I had obtained as alms got sprinkled with the dust. O king! Having eaten that, when I died, I became a chan-
dala. The  king  who  stole  the  brahmana's  possessions  came  to  an  inglorious  end.  Therefore,  under  no  circumstances, should one steal a brahmana's possessions. I only ate food that was sprinkled with a brahmana's dust.
Look at what has happened to me. That is the reason a learned person must never sell soma. Learned people censure those who sell soma. O king! When they reach Vaivasvata's body, all the people who sell it or buy it go to
rourava[The name of a specific hell.]. Even if a person is learned and ignorantly sells dust that has been laced with soma, he is destroyed and,
for a long period of time, is reborn as a person who lives off lending money and usury. He goes to hell three hundred times and subsists on the excrement of dogs, in the companionship of dogs. If excessive insolence and transgression of a friend's wife are weighed on both sides of a balance, excessive insolence is heavier. Look at this
wicked dog. It is light brown and thin. It is through excessive insolence that beings attain such an end[The dog was a human in its earlier life.]. I was
born in a large and prosperous family. O lord! In that other life, I was accomplished in jnana and vijnana. I knew
that sins would lead to destruction. But I showed by anger towards beings and ate the flesh from the backbones. I
displayed that kind of conduct and ate that kind of food. That is the reason I have come to this present state. Behold the progress of time. I am like a person whose clothes have caught fire at one end, or like one who is pursued
by bees. Look at me. I am agitated and covered with dust and am running away. Those who are householders can
overcome great sins through studying. In addition, there are donations. That is what the learned ones have said. O
lord of the earth! If it is a brahmana who has committed sinful deeds, he must go to a hermitage and free himself
from all attachments and desire. O bull among kshatriyas! I have now been born in a wicked lineage. I am not certain about how I can liberate myself. Because of some good deeds that I performed then, I have not lost my memory. O king! I wish to be emancipated. I am seeking refuge with you and asking you. Dispel my doubt. O excellent
one! How can I free myself from this state of being a chandala?'

'"The king said, 'O chandala! Know about how you can be freed. If you cast aside your life for the sake of a
brahmana, you will obtain what is desirable. To ensure the welfare of brahmanas, give up your body in the field of
battle, or before predatory beasts. If you offer your life as an oblation, you will be freed. There is no other means
for your liberation.'"

'Bhishma continued, "O king! O scorcher of enemies! Thus addressed, to protect the possessions of a brahmana,
in the field of battle, he offered his life as an oblation, thus attaining a desirable end. O son! O bull among the
Bharata lineage! O mighty-armed one! Therefore, if you desire the supreme end, always protect the possessions of
brahmanas."'
