Vaishampayana said, 'Having been thus turned down by the princess, Kichaka was overcome by a terrible lust that
could not be controlled. He went to Sudeshna and told her, "O Kaikeyi[Sudeshna was the daughter of the king of Kekaya.]! Act so that I can be united with
Sairandhri. O Sudeshna! Otherwise, I will give up my life." Hearing his many lamentations, the goddess who was
Virata's queen felt compassion for him. She debated in her mind and thought about what would best serve her purpose, regarding Krishna. Sudeshna then told the suta, "Have some liquor and food prepared for the festive day. On
that day, I will send her to you, asking her to fetch some liquor for me. Thus sent, without any obstructions, you
can try to seduce her in private, comforting her according to your desires and uniting with her, if she agrees."

Hearing these words of his sister, Kichaka returned home. He procured supremely refined liquor, fit to be served to
a king. He made his excellent cooks prepare the meat of goat and lambs, large quantities of the meat of deer and
supreme food and drink.

'Once this was done, having been informed by Kichaka, Queen Sudeshna sent Sairandhri to Kichaka's residence. Sudeshna said, "O Sairandhri! Arise and go to Kichaka's house. O fortunate one! I am overcome by thirst.
Go and fetch me something to drink." Droupadi replied, "O princess! I will not go to his residence. O queen! You
know that he has no shame. O one with the unblemished limbs! O beautiful one! I will not be addicted to desire in
your house and I will not be unfaithful to my husbands. O goddess! O beautiful one! You know about the conditions I set when I entered your house earlier. O one with the beautiful hair! Kichaka is a fool and is insolent with
desire. On seeing me, he will cause me dishonour. O beautiful one! I will not go there. O princess! You have many
other servant maids who follow your instructions. O fortunate one! Send one of them instead. It is certain that he
will dishonour me." Sudeshna replied, "If you have been sent by me, he will not cause any violence to you." With
these words, she gave her a golden goblet with a cover. Anxious and weeping and seeking protection with fate, she
left for Kichaka's house to fetch the liquor. Droupadi said, "If it is true that I do not know anyone other than the
Pandus, then through that truth, let Kichaka not be able to overpower me when I reach that place." Then the weak
one worshipped Surya[The sun god.] for an instant. Surya got to know everything from the slender-waisted one and instructed
an invisible rakshasa to protect her. Under no circumstances was the rakshasa supposed to leave the side of the unblemished one.

'On seeing Krishna approach like a frightened doe, the suta arose, as if one wishing to cross a river has found a
boat.'
