'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! Tell me how the great archer Drona and Parshata Panchala fought and strove
against each other in that battle. O Sanjaya! It is my view that destiny is superior to human endeavour, since Shantanu's son, Bhishma, could not vanquish Pandava in battle. When Bhishma is enraged in battle, he can destroy all
mobile and immobile objects in the worlds. O Sanjaya! With his energy, why could he not escape from Pandava in
that encounter?"

'Sanjaya replied, "O king! Be patient and hear about that extremely terrible battle. Pandava is incapable of being
vanquished by the gods, together with Vasava. With sharp arrows, Drona wounded Dhrishtadyumna and used a
broad-headed arrow to bring down his charioteer from the safety of the chariot. O venerable one! Using the best of
arrows, the wrathful one wounded Dhrishtadyumna's four horses. The brave Dhrishtadyumna smiled, and asking
Drona to wait, pierced him with nine sharp arrows. At this, Bharadvaja's powerful son, immeasurable in his soul,
enveloped the intolerant Dhrishtadyumna with arrows. With a desire to kill Parshata, he then grasped a terrible arrow. It was like Shakra's vajra to the touch and resembled the staff of death. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
On seeing that Bharadvaja's son was about to use it in battle, a great lamentation arose from all the soldiers. We
then witnessed Dhrishtadyumna's extraordinary manliness. Like an immobile mountain, the brave one remained
stationed in battle. As the terrible and flaming arrow rushed towards him, like his own death, he sliced it down and
unleashed a shower of arrows on Bharadvaja's son. On witnessing that extremely difficult deed accomplished by
Dhrishtadyumna, all the Panchalas, together with the Pandavas, were delighted and roared loudly. With a desire to
kill Drona, the valiant one then hurled a lance, decorated with gold and lapis lazuli, with great force. On witnessing
the gold-adorned lance suddenly descending in the battle, Bharadvaja's son smiled and sliced it down into three
parts. O lord of men! Having seen that his lance had been thus repulsed, the powerful Dhrishtadyumna unleashed a
shower of arrows in Drona's direction. But the greatly famous Drona repulsed this shower of arrows and in the
midst of this, sliced down the bow of Drupada's son. When his bow had been sliced down in that battle, the immensely famous and powerful one hurled a giant club towards Drona. It was as firm as a mountain. Having been
thus forcefully hurled, the club headed towards Drona, for his destruction. We then witnessed the extraordinary
valour of Bharadvaja's son. He countered the gold-adorned club with dexterity. Having repulsed the club, he
despatched broad-headed arrows towards Parshata. They were extremely sharp and yellow. They were gold-tufted
and had been sharpened on stone. In that battle, they penetrated his armour and drank his blood. Then the great-
minded Dhrishtadyumna picked up another bow. In that encounter, he used his valour to pierce Drona with five arrows. Those two bulls among men were covered with blood. O king! They looked as beautiful as flowering
kimshukas in the spring. O king! Intolerant with anger and displaying his valour at the head of his troops, Drona
again sliced down the bow of Drupada's son. When the bow had been sliced down, the one with the immeasurable
soul covered him with arrows with drooping tufts, like clouds raining on a mountain. He used a broad-headed arrow to bring down his charioteer from the safety of the chariot. With four sharp arrows, he brought down his four
horses. He roared like a lion in that battle. With another broad-headed arrow, he sliced down the leather guard from
his[Dhrishtadyumna's.] hands. His bow was sliced down. He was without a chariot. His horses were killed. His charioteer was
slain. Displaying great manliness, he tried to leap down, with a club in his hands. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! But before he could descend from his chariot, he[Drona.] used his arrows to shatter the club into fragments and it
was an extraordinary feat. The powerful one with the excellent arms[Dhrishtadyumna.] then grasped a large and divine sword and
a huge and beautiful shield marked with the marks of one hundred moons. In a desire to kill Drona, he rushed towards him with force, like a lion looking for meat dashes towards a crazy elephant in the forest. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! We then witnessed the extraordinary manliness of Bharadvaja's son, his dexterity in the use of
weapons and the strength of his arms. He repulsed Parshata with a shower of arrows. Though he was strong, he
could not advance any further in that battle. We saw maharatha Dhrishtadyumna stationed there, using the shield in
his hands to ward off the shower of arrows.

'"Then the mighty-armed and powerful Bhima suddenly arrived, wishing to aid the great-souled Parshata in that
battle. O king! He pierced Drona with seven sharp arrows and swiftly took up Parshata on his own chariot. King
Duryodhana despatched Kalinga to protect Bharadvaja's son, with a large number of soldiers. O lord of men! On
the instructions of your son, that large army of Kalingas rushed towards Bhima. Drona, supreme among charioteers, abandoned Panchala and encountered and fought with the aged Virata and Drupada. In that battle, Dhrishtadyumna went to help Dharmaraja. A tumultuous battle commenced and it made the body hair stand up. This was
between the Kalingas and the great-souled Bhima. It was terrible in form and awful, and was destructive of the
universe."'
