'Sanjaya said, "O Pandava! You have always based yourself on dharma. O Partha! That is famous in the world and
can be seen. But this great flow of life is always transient. O Pandava! On noticing that, stay away from destruction. O Ajatashatru! If the Kurus refuse to return your share without a war, I think that it is better to be a beggar in
the kingdoms of Andhaka and Vrishni than to obtain a kingdom through war. A man's life lasts for a short time.
That flow is always subject to unhappiness and is unstable. Therefore, one should not shorten life. O Pandava! One
should never resort to an evil act. Desire is created in man. O Indra among men! This causes obstructions in the
path of dharma. If a persevering man strikes it[Desire.] down in advance, he obtains unparalleled praise in this world. O
Partha! The thirst for riches is a bond. It ties one down from the pursuit of dharma. He who chooses dharma is enlightened. He, who strives for desire, is diminished because of that. O father! He, who places dharma at the forefront of all deeds, obtains great radiance, like the sun. A man, who diminishes dharma, may obtain the earth. But
because of his evil intelligence, he will be ruined. You have studied the Vedas. You have followed brahmacharya.
You have observed sacrifices. You have donated to brahmanas. You know about the supreme objective. You have
given many of your years to pleasure. He, who devotes himself excessively to pleasure and does not perform deeds
according to the practice of yoga, is extremely unhappy when his riches are exhausted. He is incited by the force of
desire and is immersed in misery. In the same way, a foolish one, who abandons dharma and follows adharma in
the pursuit of riches, does not believe in the hereafter. When he gives up his body, that evil one is burnt in the hereafter. The deeds that have been performed are not destroyed in the hereafter, be they good or be they evil. The
good and evil deeds precede the doer. The doer only follows them from behind. Your deeds are as pure as the fragrant and succulent food offered with devotion to brahmanas and the stipends offered at sacrifices, in accordance
with the proper rites. O Partha! Deeds are performed in this world. In the hereafter, there are no deeds to be performed. You have performed great deeds, applauded by righteous ones, for the sake of the hereafter. Death brings
an end to old age and fear. There is no hunger or thirst, nor anything that causes unpleasantness. There is no deed
that remains to be done, but for the satisfaction of the senses.

'"O Indra among men! Such are the fruits of our deeds. O Pandava! Do not bear the load of what is pleasing to
the heart and arises out of anger or the pursuit of happiness. Do that which brings pleasure in both the worlds. After an act is over, there remains one's good name, truthfulness, self-control, honesty and non-violence. Horse-sacrifices, royal sacrifices and other sacrifices are evil deeds that transgress the limits[Yudhishthira has performed good deeds that have earned him merits. He should not transgress those limits now.]. O Parthas! After all this time, if
you follow common norms and perform evil deeds, what was the reason for the Pandavas to spend many unhappy
years in the forest, for the sake of observing dharma? You could have assembled an army without the exile. It was
under your control earlier. The Panchalas have always been your advisers and Janardana and the brave Yuyudhana.
That's also true of the king of Matsya, who rides a golden chariot, and his sons; and Virata, with his warrior sons;
and the kings whom you had conquered earlier. All of them would have gathered to your side. With all these great
aides and a powerful army, honoured by Vasudeva and Arjuna, you would have slain the best of warriors in the
arena of battle. You would have destroyed the insolence of Dhritarashtra's son. Why did you increase the strength
of your rivals? Why did you reduce the number of your aides? O Pandava! If you wished to fight, why did you
dwell for so many years in the forest and why have you picked the wrong time now? O Pandava! A foolish one desires to fight, or one who is unaware of dharma and deviates from the path that ensures welfare. Even a wise person, or one who knows about dharma, can deviate from the path of welfare because of anger. O Partha! But your
intelligence is not fixed on adharma. Never have you committed an evil act out of anger. What is the reason for you
to be attracted to a course of action that is counter to wisdom? O great king! Wrath is a bitter headache that does
not result from disease. It destroys fame and gives rise to evil fruits. Unlike those who are sinful, those who are
righteous should swallow it. Swallow your anger and be pacified. Who desires to be tied down by evil? Forgiveness is superior to pleasures, when the latter results from Shantanu's son, Bhishma, and Drona and his sons being
slain. O Partha! Kripa, Shalya, Somadatta's son, Vikarna, Vivimshati, Karna, Duryodhana-having killed all these,
tell me what kind of happiness you will obtain. O king! Having obtained the entire earth, up to the frontiers of the
ocean, you will not be able to conquer old age and death, pleasure and displeasure, happiness and unhappiness.
Knowing this, do not wage war. If you wish this because of the desires of your advisers, and it is because of them
that you are about to err like this, then give everything to them and go away. Do not deviate from the path that
leads you to the road followed by the gods."'
