Vaishampayana said, 'Those bulls among the Brahmanas shook their deerskins and water pots[Karaka, more specifically, water pots made out of coconut shells.] and said, "Do not
be frightened. We will fight with the enemies." Arjuna smilingly told those Brahmanas, "Stand aside as spectators.
I will repulse those kings, like poisonous snakes, with mantras, with showers of hundreds of sharp-pointed
arrows." Having said this, the maharatha took up the bow he had obtained as dowry and accompanied by his brother Bhima stood there like an immovable mountain. Seeing the Kshatriyas, with Karna leading them, furious to do
battle, they fell upon them, like two elephants against hostile elephants. Eager to fight, those kings then said, "It is
permissible to kill a Brahmana who is willing to fight." Then the mighty Vaikartana[One of Karna's names.] Karna rushed at Arjuna, eager to fight, like an elephant rushes at a rival over a female elephant. Shalya, king of the Madras, rushed at Bhimasena. Duryodhana and the others rushed at the Brahmanas, but they fought with them lightly and carelessly.

'Seeing Vaikartana Karna rush towards him, the wise Arjuna stretched his mighty bow and pierced him with
three arrows. The impact of these sharp arrows stunned Radheya[Radha's son, that is, Karna.] and he approached with greater circumspection. Then those two invincible warriors fought violently, each eager to vanquish the other. Such was the speed that
they became invisible[In the shower of arrows, because they were swiftly shooting arrows at each other.]. "Look at the strength in my arms", "See how I countered that", they taunted each other in
words that only warriors understand. Seeing the valour in Arjuna's arms, unparalleled on earth, Vaikartana Karna
fought even more vigorously. Repulsing Arjuna's swift arrows, Karna shouted out aloud and the warriors applauded his feat.

'Karna said, "O foremost among Brahmanas! I am pleased with the strength of your arms, which do not tire in
battle, and with your persistent control over weapons. O supreme among Brahmanas! Are you Rama[Parashurama.], the personification of the knowledge of weapons[Dhanur Veda.]? Or are you Harihaya[Indra.] himself? Or are you Achyuta Vishnu himself? Have you assumed the form of a Brahmana to disguise yourself and are now fighting strongly with me for
self-preservation, mustering the strength of your arms? When I am angry in the field of battle, no one except
Shachi's husband[Indra.] and Pandava Kiriti[Arjuna.] can withstand me." Hearing these words, Phalguni[Arjuna.] replied, "O Karna!
I am not the science of weapons personified. Nor am I the powerful Rama. I am only a Brahmana, chief among
warriors and supreme among those who have the knowledge of weapons. Through my preceptor's grace, I have
become skilled in the use of brahma and paurandara[Purandara is Indra's name. Hence, Indra's weapon.] weapons. O warrior! Wait for a bit. I stand here today, to
vanquish you in battle." At these words, Radheya Karna withdrew from the battle, because the maharatha thought
that Brahmana strength was invincible.

'In another part of the arena, Shalya and Vrikodara, both warriors with great strength and knowledge of fighting,
were engaged in battle. Calling out to each other, they fought like two mad and great elephants, striking each other
with clenched fists and knees. For a while, they dragged each other around in the duel. Then the immensely powerful Bhima raised Shalya up with his arms and hurled him down on the ground. The Brahmanas began to laugh.
Bhimasena, bull among men, surprised everyone[With this wonderful feat.]. But though he hurled the powerful one on the ground, he did
not kill him. When Shalya was thus hurled down by Bhima and Karna scared away, all the other kings were frightened and surrounded Vrikodara. They said, "These bulls among Brahmanas are supreme. Let us find out in what
lineage they were born and where they live. Who can fight with Radheya Karna in battle except Rama, Drona,
Sharadvata Kripa[Kripa was Sharadvata's son.], Devaki's son Krishna and Phalguni, the scorcher of enemies? Who can fight against Duryodhana and who can vanquish in battle the powerful Shalya, king of Madra and chief among warriors, except the
brave Baladeva and Pandava Vrikodara? Therefore, let us desist from this fight against the Brahmanas. Let us find
out who they are and then we will happily fight with them again." On witnessing Bhima's feat, Krishna believed
them to be Kunti's sons. He gently restrained the assembled kings and said, "This lady has been won according to
dharma." Thereupon, those best of kings, skilled in battle, refrained from the fight and returned to their kingdoms,
wonderstruck. Those who had assembled there went away, exclaiming that the Brahmanas had won the day and
Panchali had become the wife of a Brahmana.

'Surrounded by Brahmanas attired in the skins of deer and other animals, Bhimasena and Dhananjaya found it
difficult to pass. Eventually, those radiant warriors among men freed themselves from the crowd, followed by
Krishna. Their mother had been worried about various evils that might have occurred, since they were late in returning after begging for alms. She even thought that Dhritarashtra's sons might have recognized and killed those
bulls among the Kurus. Had some terrible rakshasas, versed with powers of maya and firm in their enmity, killed
them? However, could the great-souled Vyasa's predictions be wrong? Filled with love for her sons, these were the
thoughts that occurred to Pritha. Then, late in the afternoon, Jishnu, in the company of many Brahmanas, entered
with the Brahmana in the forefront[It is not very clear who this Brahmana leading the way is, and must be a reference to Dhoumya.], like the sun surrounded by clouds.'
