Vaishampayana said, 'He[Ashvatthama.] arrived with great speed, showering a great net of arrows, like clouds charged with
rain. Partha countered him. There was a great battle, like that between the gods and the asuras. Like Vritra and
Vasava, they covered each other with nets of arrows. The sun did not shine then. Nor did the wind blow. The sky
was enveloped and shadowed by a net of arrows in every direction. O conqueror of enemy cities! There was a
great sound of slapping, as the two warriors fought each other and tried to kill each other, like the sound of bamboos being burnt. Arjuna destroyed his horses and only a few were left alive. O king! They were so confused that
they could not make out the directions. Partha was roaming around. Drona's immensely valorous son detected a
subtle weakness and sliced off the string of his bow with an arrow that was as sharp as a razor. On witnessing this
superhuman feat, the gods applauded. From a distance of eight bow-lengths, Drona's son, bull among men, again
pierced Partha in the heart with an arrow that was shafted with feathers of herons. The mighty-armed Partha
laughed out aloud and powerfully corded Gandiva with a new string. Partha drew it in the shape of a half-moon
and countered him, like the mad leader of a herd of elephants against another crazy elephant. Those two warriors
were unrivalled on earth. In the midst of that field of battle, an extremely great duel ensued, making the body hair
stand up. On seeing those two great-souled and brave ones, like two leaders of herds engaged in combat, all the
Kurus were astounded. Those two brave bulls among men struck each other with arrows that were like virulent
poison and like flaming serpents. The great-souled Pandava possessed two divine and inexhaustible quivers.
Therefore, the brave Partha stood on that field of battle, immobile as a mountain. But Ashvatthama's arrows were
speedily discharged in that battle and were exhausted. Thus, Arjuna proved to be superior to him.

'Then Karna grasped an extremely large bow. He drew it in great anger and a great sound of lamentation arose.
Partha looked in the direction where the bow had been drawn and seeing Radheya there, his anger increased. He
was overcome by anger and wished to kill Karna. With dilated eyes, the bull among the Kurus glanced towards
him. O king! He turned away from Drona's son, although the soldiers swiftly brought thousands of arrows to him.
The mighty-armed Dhananjaya, conqueror of enemies, ignored Drona's son and suddenly rushed towards Karna.
With eyes red in anger, Kounteya approached him, hoping for a duel in battle. He said ...'
