'Yudhishthira asked, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! O grandfather! What kind of a conduct should the king
follow, so as to ensure power and prosperity? Tell me this."

'Bhishma replied, "The Vedas say that the king is the lord of the riches of those who are not brahmanas and also
of those brahmanas who do the wrong kind of work. The king must never ignore brahmanas who do the wrong
kind of work. The virtuous ones say that this was the ancient practice followed by kings. O king! If a brahmana is
a thief in the kingdom of a king, that king is regarded as the criminal. Since they hold themselves to be responsible
for the deed, all rajarshis have protected brahmanas. In this connection, an ancient history is recounted. The king
of Kekaya sung this when he was abducted by a rakshasa. O king! When the king of Kekaya was studying in the
forest, rigid in his vows, a terrible rakshasa seized him.

'"The king said, 'There is no thief in my country. Nor is there a wicked person or a drunkard. There is no one
who has not consecrated the sacred fire. Why have you then been able to penetrate me? In my dominion, there is
no brahmana who is not learned, without vows. Nor is there one who does not drink soma. Why have you then
been able to penetrate me? In my kingdom, there is no one who performs sacrifices without offering dakshina to
the officiating priests. There is no one who studies without following the vows. Why have you then been able to
penetrate me? They[The brahmanas.] are established in six tasks-studying, teaching, performing sacrifices, officiating at sacrifices, donating and receiving. They are honoured with their proper shares. They are mild and truthful in speech. In
my dominion, the brahmanas are engaged in their own tasks. Why have you then been able to penetrate me?
They[The kshatriyas.] do not beg. They give. They are accomplished in true dharma. They study, but do not teach. They perform
sacrifices, but do not work as officiating priests. They protect brahmanas and do not run away from battle. The
kshatriyas are engaged in their own tasks. Why have you then been able to penetrate me? They[The vaishyas.] earn a living
from agriculture, protecting cattle and trade and do not resort to deception. They are not distracted and perform
their tasks. They are good in their vows and truthful in speech. They are ready to share, self-controlled, pure and
fraternal in their dealings. My vaishyas are engaged in their own tasks. Why have you then been able to penetrate
me? My shudras are engaged in their own tasks. Without any resentment, they serve the three varnas. Why have
you then been able to penetrate me? All the women who are in distress, without protectors, weak and afflicted are
given their shares. Why have you then been able to penetrate me? I have not destroyed the dharma of specific families or regions. All these have been followed in the proper way. Why have you then been able to penetrate me? In
my kingdom, ascetics have been honoured and protected. They have been received well and given their proper
share. Why have you then been able to penetrate me? I do not consume anything without sharing. I do not have intercourse with the wives of others. I never sport when I am alone. Why have you then been able to penetrate me?
There is no brahmachari who is not a beggar. There is no beggar who is not a brahmachari. No oblations are offered without an officiating priest. Why have you then been able to penetrate me? I have not shown disrespect to
the aged, the learned and ascetics. When the kingdom sleeps, I am awake. Why have you then been able to penetrate me? My priest is skilled in studying the Vedas. He is an ascetic and knows about all forms of dharma. He is
prosperous and is the lord of the entire kingdom. I desire the celestial worlds through donations, truthfulness, protecting the brahmanas and serving the seniors. I should not have any fear from rakshasas. There are no widows in
my kingdom, nor those who are brahmanas in name alone. There are no brahmanas who are miserable or thieves.
There is no one who has intercourse with someone else's wife. There is no one who is evil in deeds. I should not
have any fear from rakshasas. There is no part of my body, not even the space of two fingers, which has not been
mangled by weapons, when I have fought for the sake of dharma. Why have you then been able to penetrate me?
The people in my kingdom have always sought benedictions for me in the form of cattle, brahmanas and sacrifices.
Why have you then been able to penetrate me?'

'"The rakshasa replied, 'Whatever be the circumstance, you always look towards dharma. O Kekaya! Therefore,
return to your home in safety. I am leaving. O Kekaya! He who protects cattle and brahmanas and protects his subjects has no reason to fear rakshasas, not to speak of men. Those who have brahmanas at their head, those who are
fortified by the strength of the brahman and those who love their guests and wives, are men who have conquered
heaven."

'Bhishma said, "You must therefore protect brahmanas. Protected by you, they will protect you. The desire of
kings should be that the kingdom should prosper well. Therefore, in particular, brahmanas who perform perverse
tasks must be restrained. For the welfare of the subjects, they must be treated separately. The king who acts in this
way towards residents of the city and the countryside experiences fortune and obtains the world of Indra."'
