Vaishampayana said, 'After meeting Vidura, Janardana Govinda, the destroyer of enemies, went to meet his father's sister[Kunti.] in the afternoon. When she saw Krishna approach, radiant as a pleasant sun, Pritha embraced him
around the neck. Remembering the Parthas, she began to weep. She had seen Varshneya Govinda after a long time
and he was always a companion to her spirited sons. Pritha began to shed tears. When Krishna, lord among warriors, had seated himself and the rites due to a guest had been performed, with her voice choked with tears and
with her mouth dry, she said, "They have always been devoted to serving their elders from childhood. They have
wished each other well and have been similar in their minds. They were deprived of their kingdom through deceit
and though they deserved to be with people, were banished to desolate regions. They were humble and had conquered anger and delight. They possessed the qualities of brahmanas. They spoke the truth. The Parthas have abandoned their beloved happiness and I have been left behind, in the midst of tears. They left for the forest and took
my heart, with its roots, with them. O Keshava! How did the great-souled Pandavas deserve this? O son[The word used is tata.]! They
lived in that great forest, infested by lions, tigers and elephants. They lost their father in their childhood and I have
always reared them. Without seeing their parents, how did they live in that great forest? O Keshava! Ever since
childhood, the Pandavas have woken up to the sounds of conch shells, kettledrums, drums and flutes. At home,
they were woken by the trumpeting of elephants, the neighing of horses and the roar of chariot wheels. There were
the sounds of conch shells and drums and notes of flutes and veenas. There were sounds of brahmanas honouring
the auspicious times of the day. They honoured brahmanas by distributing garments, gems and ornaments. The
great-souled brahmanas blessed them with hymns and benedictions. In the best of palaces, they slept on the skins
of ranku deer and awoke to chants uttered by the venerated, for those who deserve to be honoured. In the great forest, they heard the roars of cruel predators. O Janardana! They did not deserve this and they could not have slept
there. O Madhusudana! They awoke to the sweet sounds of kettledrums, drums, conch shells and flutes, the singing
of women and the praises of bards and minstrels. In that great forest, how could they awake to the roars of predatory beasts?

'"He is modest and firm in his truth. He is self-controlled and compassionate towards all beings. He has control
over desire and hatred. He follows the path followed by the virtuous. He bears the extremely difficult burdens of
Ambarisha, Mandhata, Yayati, Nahusha, Bharata, Dilipa, Shibi Oushinara and the ancient rajarshis. He is characterized by goodness of conduct. He is learned in dharma and follows the truth. He possesses all the qualities and
deserves to be the king of the three worlds. He is Ajatashatru, with dharma in his soul. He has the complexion of
pure gold. He is best among all the Kurus in dharma, learning and conduct. He is handsome and has long arms. O
Krishna! How is Yudhishthira?

'"Vrikodara has the strength of ten thousand elephants and the force of a storm. That Pandava is wrathful. But
he is loved by his brother and always does what brings pleasure to him. O Madhusudana! He is the brave one who
killed Kichaka and his relatives, the Krodhavashas, Hidimba and Baka. He is Shakra's equal in valour and the
equal of the force of the wind in speed. He is Maheshvara's equal in rage. He is Bhima, supreme among warriors.
That scorcher of enemies has controlled his anger, his strength and his intolerance. Despite his intolerance, the
Pandava has controlled his soul and follows the instructions of his brother. The great-souled one is a mass of energy and his strength is supreme because of his infinite energy. O Janardana! Bhimasena is terrible in his appearance.
O Varshneya! Tell me. How is Vrikodara now?

'"The strong Pandava in the middle has arms like clubs. O Krishna! O Keshava! With his two arms, Arjuna rivals the thousand-armed Arjuna[Kartavirya Arjuna.] and always surpasses him. With a single thrust, he unleashes five hundred arrows. In archery, the Pandava is the equal of King Kartavirya. He is the equal of the sun in his energy. He is the
equal of maharshis in his self-control. He is the equal of the earth in his forgiveness. He is the equal of the great
Indra in his valour. O Madhusudana! With his valour, he brought all the kings under the suzerainty of the Kurus
and they obtained a great, radiant and famous overlordship. All the Kouravas honour his terrible strength of arms.
The Pandava is supreme among all the charioteers. Truth is his valour. The Pandavas seek refuge with him, like the
gods with Vasava. He is your brother and your friend. How is Dhananjaya now?

'"He is compassionate towards all beings. He is restrained because of his modesty. He is great in the use of
weapons. He is mild and delicate. He follows dharma and I love him. Sahadeva is a brave and great archer and
shines in assemblies. O Krishna! He is devoted to serving his brothers. He is young and skilled in dharma and
artha. O Madhusudana! His brothers always honour the conduct of the great-souled Sahadeva, whose conduct is
always designed to ensure welfare. The brave Sahadeva is supreme among warriors and defers to his elders. He
used to serve me. O Varshneya! Tell me about Madri's son.

'"He is delicate, young and brave. He is a handsome Pandava. O Krishna! He is always as loved by his brothers
as their own lives, although he possesses a different body. Nakula is immensely strong and a great archer and his
valour is diverse. O Krishna! My son has been reared in comforts. Is he well? O mighty-armed one! Will I again
see Nakula? Since birth, he has been reared in comforts. He is delicate and a maharatha. He does not deserve this
unhappiness. I cannot find peace if I am separated from Nakula for even the twinkling of an eye. O brave one! But
look at me. I am still alive.

'"O Janardana! Droupadi is the beloved of all my sons. She has been born in a noble lineage and possesses good
conduct. She is endowed with all the qualities. She speaks the truth and chose the world of her husbands over the
world of her sons[Droupadi could have lived in comfort with her sons, instead of accompanying the Pandavas in their exile.]. Having left her beloved sons, she followed the Pandavas. She was born in a noble lineage and
has been honoured with all the objects of desire. She is fortunate in every way. O Achyuta! How is the illustrious
Droupadi? She has five husbands and they are brave warriors, equal to the fire. They are great archers. But
Droupadi has only faced unhappiness. O destroyer of enemies! I have not seen Droupadi, who is truthful in speech,
for fourteen years. Worrying about her sons, she must be tired out. Droupadi has such conduct, yet she has not obtained eternal happiness. It is then certain that a man does not obtain happiness because of his meritorious deeds.
Bibhatsu, Yudhishthira, Bhimasena and the twins are not dearer to me than Krishna[Krishnaa, Droupadi.]. When I saw her brought to
the assembly hall, it brought me greater pain than anything I had confronted before. Without wishing for it,
Droupadi was brought before her fathers-in-law. While all the Kurus watched, she was brought to the assembly
hall in a single garment. She was brought there by an ignoble one, who was overcome by anger and avarice[Duhshasana. Someone who is not an arya, and thus ignoble.].
Dhritarashtra, the great king Bahlika, Kripa, Somadatta and the distressed Kurus were present there. Among all
those who were there in the assembly, I respect Kshatta[Vidura.] alone. A man becomes an arya because of what he does,
not because of riches or learning. O Krishna! The great-souled Kshatta's great intelligence is profound. Because of
his conduct, he is established like an ornament of the world."

'She was both distressed and happy at having seen Govinda arrive[The text does not mention this explicitly. But this is Vaishampayana speaking again.]. She began to recount the many kinds of
unhappiness that she had faced. "O destroyer of enemies! Gambling with the dice and the killing of deer were sins
practised by evil kings in earlier times. Could those have brought them happiness? I am tormented because
Krishna[Krishnaa, Droupadi.] was molested in the assembly hall by Dhritarashtra's son, in the midst of the Kurus. This could not have
been good. O scorcher of enemies! They were exiled to the forest and banished. O Janardana! There are many
kinds of unhappiness that I have faced. O Keshava! They lived in concealment and were separated from their children. O scorcher of enemies! Nothing makes me and my sons suffer more than that we will now be deceived by
Duryodhana in the fourteenth year. If happiness does not follow unhappiness, the fruits of meritorious deeds will
be destroyed. I have not distinguished between the sons of Dhritarashtra and the Pandavas. O Krishna! That is the
truth and because of this, I will see you and the Pandavas emerge from this battle, surrounded by prosperity, and
with the enemies slain. They[The Pandavas.] have such spirit that they are incapable of being vanquished. But it is my father who
should be blamed, and not I, or Suyodhana. While I was still playing as a child, with a ball in my hands, my father
gave me away to Kuntibhoja, like a wicked man gives away riches[Kunti was born as Pritha and was the daughter of Shura, a Yadava. Shura was also Krishna's grandfather. Shura
promised his firstborn child to Kuntibhoja, who was childless, as a token of friendship. Pritha was thus reared as
Kunti and was Krishna's cousin sister.]. I was given to Kuntibhoja, a friend, as a
mark of great-souled friendship. O scorcher of enemies! I have been deceived by my father and my fathers-in-law.
O Krishna! I have been extremely unhappy. What has been the point of my being alive? When I was giving birth to
Savyasachi, a voice told me in the night, 'Your son will conquer the earth and his fame will touch heaven. Having
killed the Kurus in a battle among men, Dhananjaya Kounteya will obtain the kingdom and will perform three sacrifices with his brothers.' I have never doubted this. I bow down to what dharma has ordained and to the great
Krishna. Dharma always sustains subjects. O Varshneya! If there is any dharma, all this will become true. O
Krishna! You will accomplish everything that has been said. O Madhava! I am a widow. My prosperity has been
destroyed and I have enemies. But nothing distresses me as much as separation from my sons. I do not see
Dhananjaya, the wielder of the bow Gandiva, and supreme among those who are skilled in the use of all weapons.
How can there be peace in my heart? O Govinda! I have not seen Yudhishthira, Dhananjaya, the twins and Vriokodara for fourteen years. Men perform funeral ceremonies[Shraddhas.] for those whose lives have been destroyed. O Janardana! They seem to be dead to me, and I to them. O Madhava! Tell King Yudhishthira, who has dharma in his soul,
'O son! Your dharma is diminishing. Your deeds are in vain.' O Vasudeva! Shame on those who live like me, under the protection of others. It is better not to exist, than to obtain life through such inferior means. Also tell
Dhananjaya and Vrikodara, who is always ready, 'The reason why a kshatriya gives birth to sons, and the appropriate time, has arrived. The time has come. And if the time passes, no matter how respected you are by the worlds,
you will do that which is extremely cruel. If you act in this cruel way, I will abandon you for an eternity. When the
time has arrived, one should even give up one's own life.' Tell Madri's two sons, who are always devoted to the
dharma of kshatriyas. 'Even at the cost of your lives, choose the comforts that can only be obtained through valour.' O Purushottama! For a man who lives according to the dharma of kshatriyas, there is always delight at obtaining objects that are gained through valour. O mighty-armed one! Go there and speak to brave Pandava Arjuna,
supreme among those who wield all the weapons. 'Follow the path adopted by Droupadi[That of exacting vengeance.].' You know that when
Bhima and Arjuna are extremely enraged, they can despatch even the gods on the final destination[Death.]. It was an insult to them that Krishna[Krishnaa, Droupadi.] was brought to the assembly hall and Duhshasana and Karna addressed her in harsh
words. While the foremost among the Kurus looked on, Duryodhana assailed the intelligent Bhimasena, and will
now witness the consequences. Having once embarked on an enmity, Vrikodara cannot be pacified. Even an old
enmity with Bhima cannot be pacified until that destroyer of enemies has brought an end to all his foes. The robbing of the kingdom, the defeat at the game of dice and the exile of my sons has not caused me as much of unhappiness, as that of the large and dark lady brought to the assembly hall in a single garment. She was made to listen
to harsh words. What can be greater misery than that? She was in her seasons then[A literal translation is that she was following the dharma of women.]. The one with the beautiful
thighs has always been devoted to the dharma of kshatriyas. Though she had protectors, Krishna[Krishnaa, Droupadi.] found no one to
protect her then. O Madhusudana! But my sons and I have you as a protector, and Rama[Balarama.], supreme among strong
ones, and maharatha Pradyumna. O Purushottama! I can therefore bear all these miseries now, because the invincible Bhima and Vijaya[Arjuna's name.], who cannot be dislodged, are alive." She was overcome with grief because of her sons.

'Shouri, friend to the Parthas, comforted his father's sister, Pritha. "O sister of my father! Where is there a
woman like you in this world? You are the daughter of King Shura and went to the lineage of the Ajamidhas[Ajamidha was an ancestor of the Kouravas.].
You have been born in a great lineage and were transplanted from one lake to another. You are a goddess who is
fortunate in every way. You have been greatly honoured by your husband. You have given birth to warriors. You
were the wife of a warrior. You are adorned with all the qualities. O immensely wise one! Someone like you can
tolerate both happiness and unhappiness. Sleep, laziness, anger, delight, hunger, thirst, cold and heat have been
conquered by the Parthas. They are always engaged in that which brings bliss to warriors. The Parthas have given
up the happiness of ordinary people. They are always engaged in the happiness that brings delight to heroes. Those
immensely strong ones are great in their endeavour. They are not satisfied with mere trifles. Those who are patient
serve that which is ultimate. Those who are mediocre love the happiness of ordinary people. Those who are patient
bear supreme hardships for the sake of superhuman comforts, and obtain ultimate delight, not enjoyment that is
mediocre. They consider the ultimate to be happiness and anything that is intermediate to be unhappiness. The
Pandavas and Krishna[Krishnaa, Droupadi.] offer you their respects. Having conveyed that they are well, they ask whether you are
well. You will soon see the Pandavas in good health, having accomplished all their objectives, the lords of all the
worlds and surrounded by prosperity, with their enemies slain." Having been thus reassured, Kunti overcame the
darkness of ignorance, though she still suffered from grief on account of her sons. She replied to Janardana, "O
Madhusudana! O mighty-armed one! O Krishna! O scorcher of enemies! Do whatever you see and think to be
good for their sake, without transgressing dharma and without resorting to deceit. O Krishna! I know about the influence of your truth and your noble birth, and the intelligence and valour that you display in establishing your
friends. In our lineage, you are dharma, you are truth and you are the greatness of austerities. You are the saviour.
You are the great brahman. Everything is established in you. Everything will be as you say. Truth is established in
you." Govinda took his leave of her and circumambulated her. The mighty-armed one left for Duryodhana's
residence.'
