'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! What was the state of the warriors without Bhishma? He was powerful and was
like a god. He followed brahmacharya for the sake of his senior. When Bhishma did not strike Drupada's son because he despised him, I thought that the Kurus and the other kings had been killed. I cannot think of a greater misery. I am evil-minded and have heard about my father being brought down. O Sanjaya! My heart must certainly be
made out of stone. On hearing that Bhishma has been brought down, it has not shattered into a hundred fragments.
I cannot even think about Devavrata being brought down in the battle. In earlier times, he could not be slain by Jamadagni's son, despite his use of divine weapons. What did Bhishma, lion among men and the one who desired
victory, do when he had been brought down? O Sanjaya! Tell me."

'Sanjaya replied, "He was brought down on the ground in the evening. On seeing the aged grandfather of the
Kurus, the sons of Dhritarashtra were distressed and the Panchalas were delighted. He lay down on that bed of arrows, without touching the ground. A tumultuous sound of lamentation arose among all the beings. He was like a
tree that stood at the boundary of the assembly of the Kurus and he was brought down. O king! O lord of the earth!
On seeing Bhishma, Shantanu's son, with his armour and standard shattered, the kshatriyas in both the armies,
those of the Kurus and the Pandavas, were overcome with fear. The sky was covered in darkness and the sun lost
its splendor. On seeing that Bhishma, Shantanu's son, had been brought down, the earth seemed to be shrieking.
This was the best among those who were learned about the brahman. This was the best among those who knew
about the objective of the brahman. While the bull among the Bharata lineage lay down, this is what all the beings
said. In earlier times, when Shantanu was overcome by desire, he followed his father's command. The bull among
men held up his seed. As the middle one among the Bharata lineage[Middle because Bhishma represented a bridge between the earlier generation of the Kurus and the current
generation.] lay down on the bed of arrows, this is what
the rishis, the siddhas and the charanas reflected. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When Bhishma, Shantanu's
son and the grandfather of the Kurus, was brought down, your sons did not know what to do. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Their faces were pale and lost all their beauty. They were overcome with great shame and their
heads hung down. Having obtained victory, the Pandavas were stationed at the heads of their ranks. All of them
sounded great conch shells that were decorated with gold. O unblemished one! They loudly sounded trumpets. O
king! We saw the immensely strong Bhimasena in the field of battle. Kounteya was sporting, overcome with great
delight. The extremely strong one had killed many enemies in battle. The Kurus were overcome by great confusion. Karna and Duryodhana sighed repeatedly. When Bhishma, the chief among the Kouravas, was brought down,
a great lamentation of weakness arose amidst all of them.

'"On seeing that Bhishma had fallen, your son, Duhshasana, used great speed and proceeded towards Drona's
army. The brave and armoured one, and his own soldiers, had been instructed by his brother[To ensure Bhishma's protection.]. Urging his own
army on, that tiger among men now departed. O great king! On seeing Duhshasana, the Kurus surrounded him,
wishing to hear what he had to say. Kourava informed Drona that Bhishma had been brought down. Hearing this
unpleasant news, Drona suddenly fell down from his chariot. O venerable one! Having regained his senses,
Bharadvaja's powerful son restrained his soldiers[From continuing with the fight.]. On seeing the Kurus withdraw, the Pandavas and their soldiers also retreated. They sent messengers on swift horses to instruct the respective soldiers everywhere to refrain
from fighting. The kings removed their armour and went to the spot where Bhishma was. Hundreds and thousands
of warriors withdrew from the battle. They went to the great-souled one, like the immortals before Prajapati. They
approached the supine Bhishma, the bull among the Bharata lineage. The Kurus and the Pandavas showed him
their obeisance and stood there. The Pandus and the Kurus bowed before him and stood there.

'"The great-souled Bhishma, Shantanu's son, spoke to them. 'O immensely fortunate ones! Welcome. O maharathas! Welcome. I am delighted to see you. You are the equals of the immortals.' With his head hanging down,
he greeted them. 'My head is hanging down. Please give me a pillow.' The kings present there brought many soft
and delicate pillows that were excellent. But the grandfather did not accept them. The tiger among men laughed
and told those kings, 'O kings! These are not appropriate for a hero's bed.' The best of men then saw and addressed Pandava, the maharatha of all the worlds. 'O Dhananjaya! O long-armed one! My head is hanging down.
Give me a pillow that you think to be appropriate.' He honoured the grandfather and grasped his giant bow. With
his eyes full of tears, he spoke these words. 'O best of the Kurus! O supreme among those who wield all weapons!
Command me. O invincible one! O grandfather! I am your servant. What can I do for you?' Shantanu's son
replied, 'O son[The word used is tata.]! My head is hanging down. O best of the Kuru lineage! O Phalguna! Give me a pillow. O brave
one! Quickly grant me one that is appropriate for this bed. O Partha! O mighty-armed one! You are the best of all
archers. You know about the dharma of kshatriyas. You possess intelligence and qualities.' Having been thus addressed, Phalguna quickly prepared to do as he had been instructed. He grasped Gandiva and arrows with drooping
tufts. He took the permission of the great-souled one who was the middle one of the Bharata lineage. He shot three
extremely forceful and sharp arrows and supported the head of his senior. Bhishma, the best of the Bharata lineage
and learned about dharma and artha, was satisfied and praised Dhananjaya for having given him that pillow. Kunti's son was the best of warriors and brought delight to his well-wishers. He spoke to him. 'O Pandava! You have
done well by giving me something that is appropriate for this bed. Had you done otherwise, I would have cursed
you in rage. O mighty-armed one! This is the way in which kshatriyas should remain established in their dharma
and sleep on a bed of arrows.' Having spoken thus to Bibhatsu, he spoke to all the kings and princes. 'See what
Pandava has given me. I will sleep on this bed until the sun changes its path. Until it has traversed, the kings will
be able to see me. When the sun goes beyond Vaishravana's direction[In this context, Vaishravana is Yama and Yama's direction is that of the south.] and the supremely energetic rays scorch
the worlds from his chariot, I will give up my life, like a well-wisher who takes leave from a beloved one. O kings!
Let a ditch be dug around the spot where I am. Pierced by a hundred arrows, I will worship the sun. O kings! Abjure the enmity and give up this battle.' Many physicians came to him, those who were skilled in the knowledge of
uprooting stakes. They possessed every kind of implement and were skilled and well-trained. On seeing them, Jah-
navi's son spoke these words. 'Honour the physicians. Give them what needs to be given and let them go. I have
been reduced to this state. What do I have to do with physicians? I have attained the supreme state that is praised
by those who follow the dharma of kshatriyas. O lords of the earth! When I am lying on a bed of arrows, this
should not be my dharma now[Of being tended to by phyisicans and surgeons.]. O lords of men! I should be immolated with these arrows on my body.' Having
heard these words, your son, Duryodhana, honoured the physicians in accordance with what they deserved and
gave them permission to leave.

'"The lords of the different countries were overcome with great wonder. They beheld the supreme dharma on
which the infinitely energetic Bhishma was established. O lord of men! Having given a pillow to your father, all
the maharatha Pandavas and Kurus again approached the great-souled one, supine on that supreme bed. Having
bowed before Bhishma, they circumambulated him. Having arranged for Bhishma's protection, all those brave
ones went to their own camps in the evening and reflected in great misery. With bodies covered in blood, they retired. The maharatha Pandavas were delighted at Bhishma's downfall. At the appropriate time, Yadava approached
the maharatha Pandavas and spoke to Yudhishthira, Dharma's son. 'O Kouravya! It is through good fortune that
you have been victorious. It is through good fortune that Bhishma has been brought down. The maharatha was devoted to the truth and could not be slain by humans. He was skilled in the use of all weapons. O Partha! This was
destiny. He could kill with his eyes. He could burn down with his terrible sight.' Thus addressed, Dharmaraja
replied to Janardana, 'We have obtained victory through your favours. Your wrath is defeat. O Krishna! You are
our refuge. You assure your devotees freedom from fear. O Keshava! It is not extraordinary that those whom you
always protect in battle should be victorious. You are always devoted to our welfare. We always seek refuge in
you. It is my view that this is not extraordinary at all.' Having been thus addressed, Janardana smiled and said, 'O
supreme among kings! The words that you have spoken can only come from someone like you.'"'
