Parashara said, 'A person who drives the chariot[An image for the body.] in accordance with his wishes, controlling the horses that
are the objects of the senses with the reins of knowledge, is intelligent. A person who serves these with his
mind, even if he does not possess a means of sustenance, is praised. A brahmana and a person who has refrained
from action are not equal to each other[The person who has refrained from action is superior.]. O lord of the earth! Having obtained a designated span of life, one
should not diminish it. A man must strive for auspicious deeds, so that he can improve himself. A person who has
been dislodged from his varna deserves to be censured. A person who has obtained the consequences of good
deeds must not perform deeds associated with rajas. A man obtains a superior varna through auspicious deeds.
However, having obtained what is difficult to obtain, one destroys it because one is overcome with tamas and performs wicked deeds. Wicked deeds perpetrated due to ignorance can be destroyed through the practice of austerities. But a wicked deed that is perpetrated knowingly leads to evil consequences. Therefore, one must never perform wicked deeds. They lead to miserable consequences. An intelligent person will never be bound down by
wicked deeds, even if they lead to great fruits, just as an auspicious person will not touch water that has been tainted. As the fruits of wicked deeds, I see great hardships. Though virtue and the atman are evident, one acts perversely and contrary to this. If a foolish person does not turn back, he is like a person who is dead and faces great
wickedness. A garment that is not dyed can be cleaned, but not one that has been dyed black. O Indra among men!
Listen to me. That is also the case with sinful efforts. If a man knowingly performs wicked deeds and then performs good ones in atonement, he will separately obtain the fruits of both[The good and the evil.]. Brahmanas who know about the brahman mention the instructions of the sacred texts. If an act of injury is committed in ignorance, an act of non-injury
can correct it. However, if an act of violence is committed knowingly, brahmanas who are accomplished in the
Vedas and versed in the sacred texts, say that this is an act of adharma. I see that all the acts that are performed,
good or evil ones, lead to manifestations of their qualities. All deeds that are performed, using the intelligence and
the mind, lead to corresponding fruits, gross or subtle. O one who knows about dharma! But acts that are done involuntarily lead to smaller fruits. Fierce deeds performed knowingly always lead to strong consequences. There
may be acts that are performed by gods and sages[That is, inappropriate acts.]. If a person with dharma in his soul hears about these, he
should not censure them. But nor should he practise them. O king! One should use one's mind to reflect on one's
own capacity. A person who performs auspicious deeds sees what is fortunate. If a vessel is new[An earthen vessel that has not been baked.], water placed
into it gradually becomes less and less. But that is not the case if the vessel has been baked. One obtains happiness
through such sentiments. When water is poured into a vessel that already has water, the quantity of the water is increased. Intelligence is also increased in that way. O lord of the earth! That is the way one should perform deeds on
earth, using one's intelligence. One's store of merits is then not diminished, but added to. A king's proper duty is to
protect the subjects, raising his weapons to subjugate those who are unruly. He must kindle many fires and perform
sacrifices. Then, in middle or old ages, he must resort to the forest. Self-controlled and with dharma in conduct, a
man must look upon all beings as one's own self. One must worship those who are superior and disabled. O Indra
among men! Through truthfulness and good conduct, one obtains happiness.'"'
