Vaishampayana said, 'When Dharmaraja had heard these holy accounts, full of dharma, he again asked rishi
Markandeya. "In ancient times, why did Agni leave for the forest? In Agni's absence, how did the great rishi Angi-
ras become fire and carry the oblations? Agni is one. But his acts are seen to be many. O illustrious one! I wish to
know everything about this. How was Kumara[Kartikeya.] born? How did he come to be known as Agni's son? How did
Rudra beget him on Ganga and the Krittikas[The Pleiades, the third of the twenty-seven nakshatras.]? O descendant of the Bhargava lineage! I wish to hear about all
this exactly. O great sage! I am full of curiosity."

'Markandeya said, "Ancient history is recounted about this. The bearer of oblations[Agni is the bearer of oblations.] was angered and went to
the forest to perform austerities. The illustrious Angiras then transformed himself into Agni. Through his powers,
he destroyed distress and darkness. In his hermitage, the immensely fortunate one surpassed Agni. Having become
that, he then illuminated the world. Agni was then performing austerities and was tormented by this energy. The
energetic one was extremely distressed, but did not know what to do. The illustrious Agni then thought, 'This other
Agni has been unleashed in the world by Brahma. While I was engaged in austerities, my services as Agni have
been dispensed with. How can I become Agni again?' While he was thus reflecting, Agni saw the great sage, providing heat to the world. He approached slowly and fearfully and Angiras told him, 'Swiftly become Agni and
bring prosperity to the worlds again. You are known to the three worlds and all objects, mobile and immobile. O
Agni! You were the first to be created by Brahma, so that darkness could be dispelled. O destroyer of darkness!
Swiftly regain your own position.' Agni replied, 'My deeds have been destroyed in this world and you have become Agni. You have become Agni. You are known as Agni and people do not know me. I have thrown away my
role as Agni. You remain as the primary Agni. I will be the second, known as Prajapatyaka[Prajapatya is the act of giving away one's possessions before becoming an ascetic.].' Angiras said,
'Perform the auspicious deeds that take beings to heaven. Be Agni, the dispeller of darkness. O god! O Agni! Perform the act of obtaining your first son through me.' O king! On hearing these words of Angiras, Jataveda[Jataveda is Agni's epithet, meaning someone who is the source of the Vedas.] did
as he had been asked to. Angiras had a son by the name of Brihaspati. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On
knowing that Angiras's son was Agni's first son, the gods arrived and asked about the reason for this. Having been
thus asked by the gods, Angiras told them the reason for this and the gods accepted the explanation. I will now tell
you about the different immensely radiant fires used for rites. They are known to the brahmanas by their many
tasks and names."'
