'Yudhishthira asked, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O king! When men advance into a battle, what should
be their conduct? How should they uplift themselves? What should be their form? How should they armour themselves? What should be their weapons?"

'Bhishma replied, "It is recommended that weapons and vehicles should be those they are used to. A man's conduct should be in conformity with practice. Gandharas, Sindhus and Souviras fight with nails and javelins. The Abhiras are extremely strong and their army is skilled in every way. The Ushinaras are spirited and are accomplished
in the use of all weapons. Those from the eastern regions are skilled in fighting with elephants and are warriors
who fight with deceit. The Yavanas, the Kambojas and those who live around Mathura are accomplished in fighting with bare arms. The southerners use swords and shields. Brave ones who are extremely spirited and extremely
strong are born everywhere. I have told you about general indications. Listen to the specifics. Their voices and
eyes are like lions and tigers. Their gait is like that of lions and tigers. The eyes of all the brave ones who are strikers are like those of pigeons and sparrows. There are others with voices like deer, glances like leopards and eyes
like bulls. Some utter cries that are extremely terrible. When enraged, others have voices like kinnaris. With wrathful faces, some thunder like clouds. Some have sounds like young elephants[Alternatively, young camels.]. Some possess crooked noses and
legs, but they can travel far and strike from a long distance. Some have bodies that are curved like a cat. Some are
thin. Others are fair in hair and complexion. These brave ones are restless and difficult to assail. Some have eyes
like lizards. Others are mild in nature. Some accomplished men possess the gait and sounds of horses. Some possess robust frames, others are old. Some possess broad chests and symmetrical frames. They are delighted and
dance when there is a fight and musical instruments are sounded. Some possess grave eyes. Others have bulging
and tawny eyes. They have frowns on their faces. Some have eyes like mongooses. However, all of them are brave
ones who are ready to give up their lives. Some have crooked eyes and broad foreheads. Others possess very little
flesh. Some have crooked arms and fingers. Some are thin and seem to be made out of veins alone. When the enemy presents itself, they advance with great force. They are difficult to withstand and are like crazy elephants. For
some, the tips of the hair seem to blaze in radiance. Others possess stout flanks, jaws and faces. Some have peaked
noses, thick necks, fearful forms and thick calves. Others possess excellent necks that can be raised up or lowered,
like those of birds. Some possess round heads and faces like snakes. Others have faces like those of cats. When
they are wrathful, some make terrible sounds. They roar and rush into battle. They are insolent and terrible and
know nothing about dharma. They exhibit how horrible they are. All of them are ready to give up their lives. They
dwell in the frontier regions and do not retreat. They place themselves ahead of the soldiers and kill or are killed.
They do not follow dharma and have different codes of conduct. They regard virtue as defeat. They act in this
wrathful way towards their king too."'
