Vaishampayana said, 'When night had passed, Dhrishtadyumna's charioteer went to Dharmaraja and told him
about the carnage that had taken place when everyone was asleep. "O great king! They were sleeping in their own
camps in the night, assured and unattentive. Droupadi's sons, and those of Drupada, have been killed in the camp
by the wicked Ashvatthama in the night, together with the cruel Kritavarma and Goutama Kripa. In that way, thousands of men, elephants and horses have been destroyed, with lances, javelins and battleaxes. Nothing is left of
your army. It was like a giant forest severed with a battleaxe. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I heard the
great uproar raised by your troops. O lord of the earth! From among those soldiers, I am the only one who is left. O
one with dharma in his soul! I somehow managed to escape from Kritavarma, when he did not notice." On hearing
those inauspicious words, the invincible Yudhishthira, Kunti's son, was overcome with sorrow on account of his
sons and fell down, senseless. As he was falling down, Satyaki advanced and grasped him, as did Bhimasena, Arjuna and the Pandavas who were Madri's sons.

'Having regained his senses, Kounteya was overcome with great sorrow. "Having defeated the enemy, a conqueror is thereafter brought to distress by destiny[Yudhishthira is speaking these words.]. Even those with divine sight, find it difficult to fathom the
course of prosperity. Those who were defeated have triumphed. And we, who were victorious, have been conquered. Having slain our brothers, friends, fathers, sons, well-wishers, relatives, advisers and grandsons, we were
triumphant. But we have now been defeated. Adversity is like prosperity. And prosperity is seen to be like adversity. Our victory may have the form of a triumph, but our victory is actually a defeat. Having won, I later have to
lament, like an evil-minded person. How can I think of this as a victory? I have been defeated by the enemy.
Shame on a victory that has resulted from the death of well-wishers. We were unmindful and have been conquered.
There were those for whom we committed wicked deeds and they have been conquered by those who were in
search of victory[Referring to the enemy.]. In the encounter, they escaped from the fangs of barbed and hollow arrows and the tongues of
swords, from terrible bows and the slapping of bowstrings against palms. Karna was an angry lion among men,
one who never retreated from battle. They escaped from him and have been slain while they were distracted. The
chariots were like lakes. The showers of arrows were like waves. The ornaments[Worn by the warriors, the comparison is with gems in the ocean.] were like gems. The mounts
were like furrows[In the waves.]. The javelins and swords were like fish. The standards and elephants were like crocodiles. The
bows were the whirlpools. The giant arrows were the foam. The encounter was like the strong swell of the tide
when the moon rises. Drona was like an ocean. The twang of his bowstring against his palm was like the clatter of
an axle. They overcame all that, using their weapons as boats. While distracted, those princes have now been
killed. In this world of the living, there is nothing that causes the death of men as much as mindlessness. When a
man is distracted, prosperity abandons him from every direction and he is immersed in adversity. Bhishma was like
a giant conflagration. His white standard was like a fire at the tip. The arrows were like flames, fanned by the great
wind of his anger. The twang of his giant bowstring against his palm was like the clatter of an axle. The many
kinds of armour and weapons were like oblations being offered. In the great battle, the large army was like dead
wood before him. Having withstood the force of those weapons, the princes have now been slain through mindlessness. If a man is distracted, he cannot obtain learning, austerities, prosperity and great fame. Behold. The great
Indra enjoyed all the happiness and sacrifices after slaying the enemy attentively. The kings, sons and grandsons
were like Indra. Behold. They have been slain, especially because they were distracted. They were like prosperous
merchants who had crossed an ocean, but were destroyed because they were careless over an inferior stream.
While sleeping, they were killed by those intolerant ones. There is no doubt that they are in heaven now. I sorrow
for Krishna[Krishnaa, Droupadi.]. How will that virtuous one handle the ocean of grief that she will be submerged in now? On hearing
that her brothers, sons and her aged father, the king of Panchala[Drupada was killed much earlier, by Drona in Section 71 (Volume 6),
though Droupadi might not have known this.], have been killed, it is certain that she will be distressed and fall down on the ground, unconscious. Her body emaciated with grief, she will lie down. How will she
be able to tolerate that grief and sorrow? She is one who deserved happiness. On hearing about the destruction of
her sons and the slaughter of her brothers, she will be scorched, as if by a fire." The king of the Kurus lamented in
this way.

'He then spoke these words to Nakula. "Go and bring the unfortunate princess here, with all her maternal relations." The king was like Dharma and Nakula accepted the words that had been spoken to him, in accordance with
dharma. He swiftly went on a chariot to the queen's residence, where the wives of the king of Panchala also were.
Having sent Madri's son, Ajamidha[Yudhishthira's name.], together with his well-wishers, was overcome by distress and grief. Weeping,
he left for the spot where his sons had fought, a place that was still frequented by a large number of demons. Having entered that inauspicious and terrible place, he saw his sons, well-wishers and friends. They were lying down
on the ground, their bodies wet with blood. Their bodies were mangled and their heads had been severed. On witnessing that extremely hideous sight, Yudhishthira, foremost among those who uphold dharma, wept loudly. Along
with a large number of his followers, the foremost among the Kouravas lost his senses and fell down.'
