'Sanjaya said, "After that mighty battle, King Duryodhana went to Gangeya. He honoured him and in humility,
told him everything exactly as it had happened, about Ghatotkacha's victory and about his own defeat[However, there was no reason for Bhishma not to have known that. This is really a prelude to what follows.]. O king!
While narrating, the invincible one sighed repeatedly. He then spoke these words to Bhishma, the grandfather of
the Kurus. 'O lord! We sought refuge with you, just as the enemy resorted to Vasudeva, and we embarked on this
terrible conflict with the Pandavas. I possess eleven illustrious akshouhinis. O scorcher of enemies! They are with
me and follow your command. O tiger among the Bharata lineage! But I have been defeated by the Pandava warriors, led by Bhimasena. They have resorted to Ghatotkacha. My body is burning, like a dry tree being consumed
by a fire. O immensely fortunate one! O scorcher of enemies! I desire your favours. O grandfather! I wish to kill
that outcast among rakshasas myself.' O supreme among the Bharata lineage! On hearing these words of the king,
Bhishma, Shantanu's son, spoke these words to Duryodhana. 'O king! O Kourava! Listen to the words that I am
speaking to you. O great king! O scorcher of enemies! This is about how you should conduct yourself. O son[The word used is tata.]!
O destroyer of enemies! One's own self must always be protected in battle, in every situation. O unblemished one!
It is your duty to fight with Dharmaraja, Arjuna, the twins and Bhimasena. Upholding the dharma of a king, a king
must strike at a king. I, Drona, Kripa, Drona's son, Satvata Kritavarma, Shalya, Somadatta's son, maharatha Vikarna and your brave brothers, with Duhshasana at the forefront, will fight against the immensely strong rakshasa for
your sake. However, if your hatred for that terrible Indra among the rakshasas is great, let King Bhagadatta advance in battle and fight against the evil-minded one. He is Purandara's equal in battle.' Having said this, in the
presence of the king, the one who was eloquent with words, spoke these words to King Bhagadatta. 'O great king!
Swiftly advance against Hidimba's son, who is invincible in battle. While all these archers look on, take care and
counter the rakshasa, evil in deeds, in the battle, just as Indra resisted Taraka in ancient times[However, Indra was actually vanquished by Taraka.]. O scorcher of
enemies! Your weapons are celestial and so is your valour. In earlier times, you have had many encounters with
asuras. O tiger among kings! In this great battle, you will be able to resist him. O king! Surrounded by your own
soldiers, you will be able to vanquish the bull among the rakshasas.' On hearing Bhishma's words, the leader of an
army roared like a lion and swiftly advanced towards the enemy.

'"O venerable one! On seeing him advance, roaring like a cloud, the Pandava maharathas became enraged and
dashed towards him- Bhimasena, Abhimanyu, the rakshasa Ghatotkacha, Droupadi's sons, Satyadhriti, Kshatradeva, the lord of Chedi, Vasudana and the lord of Dasharna. Bhagadatta advanced against them on
Supratika[Supratika was the name of Bhagadatta's elephant.]. A terrible and fearful encounter started between the Pandus and Bhagadatta and it extended Yama's
kingdom. The rathas released extremely energetic arrows, fierce in their speed. O great king! These descended on
the elephants and the chariots. They shattered the great elephants that were urged by the elephant-riders. They
clashed and fell against each other, without any fear. They were blind with madness and overcome with rage and in
that great battle, attacked each other with the tips of tusks that looked like clubs. They gored each other with these.
The horses possessed bushy tails and their riders had lances in their hands. Goaded by the riders, they swiftly attacked each other. Foot soldiers attacked foot soldiers with spears and javelins. Hundreds and thousands fell down
on the ground. O king! In that encounter, brave rathas used barbed and hollow arrows and slew each other, roaring
like lions. The battle raged and it made the body hair stand up. The great archer, Bhagadatta, attacked Bhimasena
on an elephant with shattered temples, with musth strewing down in seven streams. It was like a mountain with
rainwater flowing down from it in every direction. O unblemished one! He was stationed on Supratika's head and
showered down thousands of arrows, like Maghavan showering rain from Airavata. The king tormented Bhima
with that shower of arrows, like the slayer of Bala showering down rain on a mountain during the monsoon. Bhimasena became angry. Enraged, the great archer showered down arrows and slew more than one hundred soldiers
who were protecting his[Bhagadatta's.] feet. On seeing that they had been slain, the powerful Bhagadatta became angry. He
urged that Indra among elephants towards Bhimasena's chariot. Thus urged, the elephant advanced forcefully towards Bhimasena, the scorcher of enemies, like an arrow released from the string of a bow. On witnessing it advance, the Pandava maharathas, with Bhimasena at the forefront, impetuously advanced towards it. O venerable
one! They were those from Kekaya, Abhimanyu, all of Droupadi's sons, the lord of Dasharna, the brave Kshatradeva, the lord of Chedi and Chitraketu. All of them were angry. These immensely strong ones exhibited their
supreme and divine weapons. They angrily surrounded the elephant from every direction. Pierced by many arrows,
that giant elephant was covered with blood from its wounds and looked like a colourful king of mountains with
minerals flowing from it.

'"The lord of Dasharna was on an elephant that looked like a mountain. Stationed on that, he attacked Bhagadatta's elephant. But in that encounter, Supratika, the king of elephants withstood the advancing elephant, like the
shoreline counters the ocean. On seeing that the great-souled Dasharna's king of elephants was repulsed, even the
Pandava soldiers applauded. O supreme among kings! Pragjyotisha then angrily hurled fourteen javelins towards
the elephant. These swiftly penetrated the excellent armour, embellished with gold, and shattered it, like serpents
entering a termite hill. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! Severely pierced and wounded, the elephant quickly
and forcefully retreated, its craziness pacified. It fled with great speed, uttering loud shrieks and crushing its own
ranks, like a violent storm amidst trees. When that elephant was vanquished, the Pandava maharathas roared like
lions and advanced to do battle. With Bhima leading, they attacked Bhagadatta. They released many kinds of arrows and used different kinds of weapons. O king! They were angry and intolerant. On seeing them advance and
on hearing their terrible roars, Bhagadatta, the great archer, angrily and fearlessly urged his own elephant. That
supreme of elephants was urged by the goad and the toe. It assumed the form of the fire of destruction[This fire is called samvartaka and appears at the time of the dissolution of the universe.]. It
crushed a large number of chariots, elephants and horses, together with their riders. It angrily crushed hundreds
and thousands of foot soldiers. O king! It began to rampage around everywhere in that battle. O great king! Agitated, that large army of the Pandus seemed to diminish, like leather that is exposed to the fire.

'"On seeing that his own ranks were scattered by the intelligent Bhagadatta, Ghatotkacha became angry and attacked Bhagadatta. O king! His visage was gruesome, harsh and flaming. His eyes burnt. Burning with rage, he assumed a terrible form. He grasped a giant spear that was capable of shattering a mountain. The immensely strong
one hurled it forcefully, wishing to kill the elephant. It was surrounded by sparks of flaming fire in every direction.
On seeing it forcefully descend towards him in that battle, flaming away, the king sliced it down with a beautiful
arrow that was in the shape of a half-moon. He severed that extremely large spear with a powerful arrow. Divided
into two and dislodged, the spear, decorated with gold, fell down on the ground. It was like the great vajra, released by Shakra and coursing through the sky. On seeing that the spear had been severed into two and brought
down, the king grasped a mighty javelin with a golden handle. It was like the flame of a fire. Asking the rakshasa
to wait, he hurled it at him. On seeing it descend towards him from the sky, like lightning, the rakshasa roared. He
leapt up and grasped it quickly. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! While all the lords of the earth looked on, he
placed it on his thighs and broke it. It was extraordinary. Having witnessed this deed accomplished by the powerful
rakshasa, the gods in heaven, together with the gandharvas and the sages, were astounded. With Bhimasena at the
forefront, the great archers among the Pandavas made the earth resound with their roars of applause.

'"However, the powerful Bhagadatta, the great archer, could not bear to hear the roars of delight uttered by those
great-souled ones. He stretched his great bow, which had a sound like that of Indra's vajra. He quickly attacked the
maharatha Pandavas. He shot many polished and sharp iron arrows that were as radiant as the fire. He pierced Bhi-
ma with one arrow and the rakshasa with nine, Abhimanyu with three and the Kekayas with five. In that battle, he
stretched his bow back to its full extent and used a gold-tufted arrow to pierce Kshatradeva's right arm, so that his
supreme bow, with the arrow affixed to it, fell down on the ground. He struck Droupadi's five sons with five. He
angrily killed Bhimasena's horses and used three arrows to bring down his standard, bearing the mark of a lion.
With three other arrows, he pierced his charioteer. O best of the Bharata lineage! Severely pierced and wounded by
Bhagadatta in that battle, Vishoka sank down on the floor of the chariot. O great king! Bereft of his chariot, Bhima,
supreme among rathas, quickly leapt down from his large chariot and grasped a club. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! On seeing him with the upraised club, like a mountain with a summit, all those on your side were overcome with terrible fear. At this time, Pandava, with Krishna as his charioteer, arrived, slaughtering the enemy in
thousands. Those tigers among men, scorchers of enemies, father and son, Bhimasena and Ghatotkacha, were
fighting with Pragjyotisha there. O king! O best of the Bharata lineage! On seeing that the maharathas were fighting there, Pandava quickly began to shower down arrows. Maharatha King Duryodhana swiftly urged his soldiers,
full of chariots, elephants and horses. As that great army of the Kouravas forcefully advanced, Pandava, borne on
white steeds, powerfully countered them. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Mounted on his elephant in that encounter, Bhagadatta scattered the Pandava army and advanced towards Yudhishthira. O venerable one! A tumultuous battle commenced between Bhagadatta and the Panchalas, Srinjayas and Kekayas, with the warriors raising
their weapons. In the course of that battle, Bhimasena told Keshava and Arjuna the detailed account of how Iravat
had been killed, exactly as it had occurred."'
