Vaishampayana said, 'After the lord of the earth had spent a night there, he, together with his brothers, showed the
best of homage to the ascetics. Lomasha told him the names of all the ascetics who were there-the Bhrigus, the
Angirases, the Vasishthas and the Kashyapas. On meeting them, the rajarshi[Yudhishthira.] greeted them, with his hands
joined in salutation. He then asked Akritavarna, the valorous follower of Rama[Parashurama.], "When will the illustrious
Bhargava Rama show himself to the ascetics? On that occasion, I also wish to see Bhargava." Akritavarna replied,
"Rama knows everything in his soul and your arrival is already known to him. The ascetics see Rama on the fourteenth and the eighth lunar day. When this night is over, it will be the fourteenth lunar day." Yudhishthira said,
"You are a follower of the immensely strong and valorous son of Jamadagni. Earlier, you have yourself witnessed
all his deeds. Therefore, tell us today how Rama vanquished all the kshatriyas in battle. Tell us everything about
how he did it and the reasons."

'Akritavarna said, "There was an immensely strong and great king in Kanyakubja. He was famous in the world
as Gadhi. He went to dwell in the forest. While he lived in the forest, a daughter was born to him and she was like
an apsara. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Bhargava Richika wished to marry her. Then the king told the
brahmana of the rigid vows, 'There is a custom in our lineage, one that has been established since ancient times. O
supreme among brahmanas! Know that a thousand swift and white horses must be given as a bride price and that
they must each possess one black ear. O illustrious one! O Bhargava! But you cannot be asked to give this. My
daughter should be given to a great-souled one like you.' Richika replied, 'I will give you one thousand swift and
white horses, each with one black ear. Let your daughter become my wife.' O king! Having promised this, he[Richika.]
told Varuna, 'As a bride price, give me one thousand swift and white horses, each with one black ear.' Varuna then
gave him one thousand horses. The place from where the horses arose is famous as the tirtha of horses. In
Kanyakubja, on the banks of the Ganga, Gadhi then bestowed his daughter Satyavati on him and all the gods were
present there. Having obtained one thousand horses, having seen the inhabitants of heaven and having obtained a
wife according to dharma, Richika, supreme among brahmanas, pleasured with the slender-waisted maiden as he
desired.

'"O king! When the marriage was over, the supreme of the Bhrigus came to see his son, together with his wife.
Having seen them, he was delighted. When the elder was seated, worshipped by the masses of gods, husband and
wife joined their hands in salutation and worshipped him. Then the illustrious Bhrigu was delighted and told his
daughter-in-law, 'O fortunate one! Ask for a boon. I will grant what you wish for.' She pleased the elder for the
sake of a son, for herself and for her mother. And he showed her his favours. Bhrigu said, 'At the time of your seasons, you and your mother must bathe and observe the ritual for having a son. Then you must embrace separate
trees-she an asvattha and you an udumbura[These are different types of fig trees.].' O king! But when they embraced the trees, they got them mixed
up[In a different version of the story, the two women were given two separate bowls of charu that they were
supposed to eat and they mixed these up.]. When Bhrigu returned one day, he realized the mix-up. The immensely energetic Bhrigu then told his
daughter-in-law Satyavati, 'Your son will be a brahmana who will live the life of a kshatriya and your mother's
great son will be a kshatriya who will live the life of a brahmana. His valour will be great and he will tread the path
of the righteous.' But she sought her father-in-law's favours again and again. 'Let my son not be like this. I desire
that my grandson should be like this.' O Pandava! He brought her satisfaction and said that it would be that way.
When the time came, her son Jamadagni was born. He was energetic and radiant and was loved by the Bhargavas.
O Pandava! The energetic one grew and surpassed many rishis in his knowledge of the Vedas. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! He was as brilliant as the sun and the knowledge of weapons was revealed to him, together with
that of the four types of weapons[The knowledge of weapons is dhanurveda. More specifically, dhanurveda is the knowledge of archery.
Weapons are of four types-mukta, amukta, muktamukta and yantramukta. Mukta weapons are released, such as a
chakra. Amukta weapons are not released, such as a sword. Muktamukta weapons can either be released or not released, such as a spear. Yantramukta weapons are released from an implement or machine, such as a missile.]."'