'Bhishma said, "Then, among those assembled rishis, a brahmana rishi named Rishabha, supreme among rishis,
smiled and spoke. 'O tiger among kings! O lord! In earlier times, I visited all the tirthas and arrived at the divine
hermitage of Nara and Narayana. There is the badari[The jujube tree.] tree there and the beautiful lake in the sky[The celestial Ganga is believed to originate from this lake in the sky.]. O king!
Ashvashira[With the head of a horse, Vishnu.] recites the eternal Vedas there. In those ancient times, I first rendered the recommended offerings to
the ancestors and the gods in that lake. I next went to the hermitage. The rishis Nara and Narayana always find delight there. To find an abode, I went a little distance away from the hermitage. There, I saw an extremely emaciated
rishi come towards me. He was dressed in rags and hides and he was extremely tall. He was a store of austerities
and his name was Tanu. O mighty-armed one! O rajarshi! Many other men have the eight qualities his form possessed[The eight qualities are intelligence, good conduct, self-control, studying, valour, restraint in speech, generosity
and gratitude.]. But I have never seen anyone as lean as him. O Indra among kings! His body was as thin as a little finger. His neck, arms, feet and hair were extraordinary to see. His head was as large as his body and so were his ears
and his eyes. O supreme among kings! His speech and movement were feeble. On seeing this extremely emaciated
brahmana, I was scared and very distressed. I touched his feet and joining my hands in salutation, stood before
him. O bull among men! I told him my name, my gotra and my father's name. Then I slowly sat down on the seat
he showed me. O great king! In the midst of those rishis, that supreme upholder of dharma recounted stories that
were full of dharma and artha. While he was talking, a king arrived on swift horses, with his army and his women.
His eyes were like blue lotuses and he was extremely distressed, thinking about his son, who had got lost in the
forest. He was the father of Bhuridyumna[The son's name was Bhuridyumna.] and he was intelligent and immensely illustrious, born in Raghu's
lineage. The king said, "I will see my son here. It is here that I will see him." In those ancient times, the king was
roaming around, driven thus by hope. However, he also said, "It is also extremely unlikely that I will ever see the
one who is supreme in dharma[Referring to the son.]. I only have one son and he has perished in the forest. It is extremely unlikely
that I will see him, but hopes run high. There is no doubt that I will die and cast aside my body." Hearing these
words, the illustrious Tanu, supreme among sages, lowered his head. For some time, he immersed himself in meditation. On seeing him meditating, the king was greatly distressed. Cheerless in his mind, he gently spoke these
words. "O brahmana rishi! What is difficult to get and rarer than hope? O illustrious one! If it is not a secret, please
tell me this." In the past, because of his misfortune and stupid intelligence, the illustrious maharshi had been insulted[It will become clear later that Bhuridyumna's father had insulted Tanu.]. O king! The brahmana rishi had asked for some riches, a golden pot and some bark for clothing, but his
hopes were belied and he was distressed. O supreme among men! Having spoken to the rishi, revered in the
worlds, the one with dharma in his soul[Bhuridyumna's father.] worshipped him. But he felt exhausted and sat down. The great rishi
offered him arghya, water for washing the feet and showed the king all the due honours, as is recommended for
someone dwelling in the forest.

'"'All the sages surrounded that bull among men[This is Rishabha speaking, not Bhishma. The sages sat down around Tanu.]. They honoured him and sat down, like the saptarshis
around Dhruva[Dhruva is the Pole Star and the saptarshis mean the constellation of Ursa Major.]. They asked the unvanquished king about the entire reasons behind his coming to the hermitage. The king said, "I am a king famous in all the directions by the name of Viradyumna. I have come to the
forest to look for my son Bhuridyumna, who has got lost. O foremost among brahmanas! O unblemished ones! He
is my only son. I have not seen him in the forest and am roaming around here." Having been thus addressed by the
king, the sage[Tanu.] remained with his head lowered. He was silent and did not reply to the king. O Indra among
kings! In the past, insolent because of his prosperity, the king had insulted the brahmana. With his hopes belied,
he[Tanu.] had engaged in austerities for a long time. He had resolved, "I will never accept anything from a king, or
from any of the other varnas." He had taken this pledge and had abided by it. "Hope agitates men who are foolish.
I will fling it away." The king said, "Can hope be made to wear thin? Is there anything else on earth that is more
difficult to get? O illustrious one! You have seen the nature of dharma and artha. Please tell me." Remembering
everything, the illustrious Tanu, emaciated in his body, reminded the king of the incident and said, "O king! There
is nothing that is as emaciated as hope. O king! I have asked many kings and have found that nothing is as difficult
to obtain." The king said, "O brahmana! I have understood the purport of your words, about it being emaciated and
also not emaciated[Hope is strong, but it can be controlled. The objects one hopes for are difficult to get.] and also about the difficulty of obtaining. O brahmana! Your words are the words of the
Vedas. O immensely wise one! However, a doubt has arisen in my heart. O supreme one! I am asking you and you
should tell me the truth about this. O illustrious one! Tell me, if it is not a secret, is there anyone more emaciated
than you? O brahmana! In this world, is there anything that is more difficult to get[Than the remarkable emaciation of the body.]?" Krishatanu[Krisha means emaciated and the text now refers to Tanu as Krishatanu.] replied, "It
is rarer to find a petitioner who is satisfied with what he has got[While not obvious, this may refer to judicial procedures too.]. O son[The word used is tata.]! It is rarer to find a person who does
not disrespect a petitioner. There are those who promise to help, but later, do not do so, to the best of their capacities, or do not help those who should be aided. However, even then, the hope that still remains in beings is thinner
than I am. There may be a father with a single son who is lost, or absent from home. When one doesn't know what
has happened to him, the hope that still remains is thinner than I am. There are aged women who give birth. They,
and rich people too, desire sons. O Indra among men! The hope that is in them is thinner than I am." O king! Having heard this, the king and his women prostrated themselves and touched the feet of that bull among brahmanas.
The king said, "O illustrious one! Through your favours, I desire to meet my son. O brahmana! If you so wish, follow the rites and please grant me this boon." The king, with eyes like blue lotuses, spoke these words. "O brahmana! What you have said is true. There is nothing false in those words." The illustrious Tanu, supreme among the
upholders of dharma, laughed. Through his austerities and his learning, he instantly brought the son there. Having
brought the son there, he reprimanded the king[Because of what the king had done earlier.]. He was supreme among the upholders of dharma and showed
himself to be none other than Dharma. He exhibited his own self and it was divine and marvellous to behold. He
was devoid of sin and devoid of anger and left for the nearby forest. O king! I saw this and I heard those words.
Quickly drive away your hope, which is thinner than what he was.'"

'Bhishma said, "O great king! Thus addressed by the great-souled Rishabha, Sumitra swiftly flung away his
hope, which was extremely thin. O Kounteya! You have also heard these words from me. O king! Be as firm as the
Himalayas, supreme among mountains. You will see and hear those who are distressed because they pursue objectives. O great king! Listen to me. You should not be tormented."'
