Vaishampayana said, 'O king! Listen to the large number of matrikas who became Kumara's followers. O brave
one! I will recount the names of the ones who slay large numbers of the enemy. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! Listen to the names of those illustrious matrikas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O Indra among
kings! O king! O Kouravya! Those fortunate ones pervade the three worlds and everything that is mobile and immobile[Some names are repeated more than once.] -Prabhavati, Vishalakshi, Palita, Gonasi, Shrimati, Bahula, Bahuputrika, Apsujata, Gopali, Brihadambalika, Jayavati, Malatika, Dhruvaratna, Bhayankari, Vasudama, Sudama, Vishoka, Nandini, Ekachuda, Mahachuda, Chakranemi, Uttejani, Jayatsena, Kamalakshya, Shobhana, Shatrunjaya, Krodhana, Shalabhi, Khari,
Madhavi, Shubhravaktra, Tirthanemi, Gitapriya, Kalyani, Kadrula, Amitashana, Meghasvana, Bhogavati, Subhru,
Kanakavati, Alatakshi, Viryavati, Vidyutjihva, Padmavati, Sunakshatra, Kandara, Bahuyojana, Santanika, Bahu-
dama, Suprabha, Yashasvini, Nrityapriya, Shatolukhalamekhala, Shataghanta, Shatananda, Bhagananda, Bhamini,
Vapushmati, Chandrashita, Bhadrakali, Samkarika, Nishkutika, Bhrama, Chatvaravasini, Sumangala, Svastimati,
Vriddhikama, Jayapriya, Dhanada, Suprasada, Bhavada, Jaleshvari, Edi, Bhedi, Samedi, Vetalajanani, Kanduti,
Kalika, Devamitra, Lambasi, Ketaki, Chitrasena, Bala, Kukkutika, Shankhanika, Jarjarika, Kundarika, Kokalika,
Kandara, Shatodari, Utkrathini, Jarena, Mahavega, Kankana, Manojava, Kantakini, Praghasa, Putana, Khashaya,
Churvyutirvama, Kroshanatha, Taditprabha, Mandodari, Tunda, Kotara, Meghavasini, Subhaga, Lambini, Lamba,
Vasuchuda, Vikatthini, Urddhvavenidhara, Pingakshi, Lohamekhala, Prithuvaktra, Madhurika, Madhukumbha,
Pakshalika, Manthanika, Jarayu, Jarjaranana, Khyata, Dahadaha, Dhamadhama, Khandakhanda, Pushana,
Manikundala, Amocha, Lambopayodhara, Venuvinadhara, Pingakshi, Lohamekhala, Shasholukamukhi, Krishna,
Kharajhangha, Mahajava, Shishumaramukhi, Shveta, Lohitakshi, Vibhishana, Jatalika, Kamachari, Dirghajihva,
Balotkata, Kaledika, Vamanika, Mukuta, Lohitakshi, Mahakaya, Haripindi, Ekakshara, Sukusuma, Krishnakarni,
Kshurakarni, Chatushkarni, Karnapravarana, Chatushpathaniketa, Gokarni, Mahishanana, Kharakarni, Mahakarni,
Bherisvanamahasvana, Shankhakumbhasvana, Bhangada, Mahabala, Gana, Sugana, Bhiti, Kamada, Chatushpatharata, Bhutitirtha, Anyagochara, Pashuda, Vittada, Sukhada, Mahayasha, Poyada, Gomahishada, Suvishana,
Pratishtha, Supratishtha, Rochamana, Surochana, Gokarni, Sukarni, Sasira, Stherika, Ekachakra, Megharava,
Meghamala, Virochana. O king! O Indra among kings! O lord of the earth! O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
There were these and many other matrikas. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Thousands of them followed Kartikeya, in many different forms. They had long nails and long teeth. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Their
mouths were long. They were simple, sweet, youthful and ornamented. They were full of greatness and could assume any form at will. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Some didn't have any flesh on their bodies. Some
were fair. Others possessed the complexion of gold. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Some were like dark
clouds. Others were like smoke. Some immensely fortunate ones were red in hue, long in the hair and dressed in
white garments. Some were in braids that were held up. Others were tawny-eyed and were attired in long girdles.
Some had long stomachs and long ears. Others possessed drooping breasts. There were others who were coppery-
eyed and green-eyed, with complexions like copper. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They were the ones who
granted boons. They could travel anywhere at will and were always cheerful. O scorcher of enemies! O bull among
the Bharata lineage! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Some assumed the traits of Yama, Rudra, Soma, the immensely strong Kubera, Varuna, the great Indra, Agni, Vayu, Kumara and Brahma. They were like apsaras in their
beauty and like the wind in speed. They were like cuckoos in their voice and like the lord of riches in prosperity.
They were like Shakra in their valour and like the fire in their resplendence. They lived on trees and open plains.
Others made their abodes at crossroads. Some lived in caves and cremation grounds. Others made their abodes in
mountains and springs. They wore many kinds of ornaments. They were attired in diverse kinds of garlands and
garments. They were dressed in many kinds of clothing. They spoke many different kinds of languages. There
were large numbers of others, terrifying to enemies. On the instructions of Indra of the gods, they followed the
great-souled one.

'O tiger among kings! The illustrious chastiser of Paka[Indra.] gave Guha[Kartikeya's name.] a javelin, for the destruction of the enemies of the gods. O bull among the Bharata lineage! It possessed large bells and made a loud noise. It blazed and
was sparkling in complexion. He also gave him a flag, with the complexion of the rising sun. Pashupati gave him a
large army consisting of all kinds of beings who were fierce and wielded many kinds of weapons. They possessed
austerities, valour and strength. Vishnu gave him a garland that ensured victory and increased one's powers. Uma
gave him two garments that were as resplendent as the sun. Ganga gave him a supreme and celestial water pot that
was created from amrita. In delight, Brihaspati gave Kumara a staff. Garuda gave him his beloved son, a peacock
with colourful feathers. Aruna gave him a red-crested cock, which used its feet as weapons. King Varuna gave him
a noose that possessed strength and valour. The lord Brahma gave him, devoted as he was to brahmanas, a black
antelope skin. The creator of the worlds also granted him victory in battles. Having become the general of the large
numbers of gods, Skanda blazed in radiance. He was like the rays of a second fire god. He was accompanied by the
companions and the matrikas and the terrible army of the nairrtas[Demons.]. The flags were decorated with bells. There
were penants and weapons. There were drums, conch shells and larger drums. The army looked like the autumn
sky, decorated with stars. That army of the gods and army of the bhutas advanced. They fiercely played on their
musical instruments, the drums and the conch shells. A large sound was created by the tambourines,
jharjharas[Kind of drum.], krakachas[Kind of musical instrument.], trumpets made of cow horn, trumpets[Adambara. Alternatively, drum.], gomukhas[Kind of musical instrument.] and smaller drums[Dindimas.]. All
the gods, together with Vasava, praised Kumara. The gods and gandharvas sang and large numbers of apsaras
danced.

'Delighted, Mahasena[Kartikeya.] granted a boon to the gods. "In the battle, I will kill the enemies who desire to slay
you." Having obtained this boon from that god, all the gods were delighted. The great-souled ones thought that
their enemies had already been killed. All the large numbers of bhutas raised a roar of delight. Once they had been
granted this boon by the great-souled one, this roar filled the three worlds. Mahasena advanced, surrounded by a
large army, for the sake of the protection of the gods and the destruction of the daityas. O lord of men! Resolution,
Victory, dharma, Success, Prosperity, Fortitude and Learning[All in personified form.] advanced ahead of Mahasena's terrible army, who
were armed with spears, clubs, maces, bludgeons, iron arrows, javelins and spikes in their hands. They roared like
proud lions. The god Guha advanced.

'On seeing him, all the daityas, rakshasas and danavas became anxious and frightened. They fled in all the directions. With diverse weapons in their hands, the gods pursued them. On seeing this, Skanda, energetic and powerful,
became enraged. The illustrious one repeatedly used the javelin as a weapon[The one he received from Indra.]. He displayed his energy, like a
fire into which oblations have been poured. The infinintely energetic Skanda repeatedly used the javelin as a
weapon. O great king! Like a blazing meteor, it fell down on the ground. Lightning and thunder also descended on
the earth. O king! Everything was terrible, like at the time of destruction. O bull among the Bharata lineage!
Whenever, Agni's son hurled the extremely terrible javelin, crores of javelins issued from it. The Indra among the
daityas was named Taraka. He was extremely strong and brave. The illustrious lord used the weapon of the javelin
to slay him[Taraka.] in the battle and also another ten thousand brave and powerful daityas who were around him. In the
battle, he slew Mahisha and eight padmas who surrounded him[Mahisha is a demon in the form of a buffalo. In some accounts, he was killed by Durga/Parvati. In others, he
was killed by Skanda. A padma is a large number.]. He slew Tripada and ten million who surrounded him. The lord then killed Hradodara and ten billion who surrounded him. He also slew his followers, who
had diverse weapons in their hands. O king! As they slaughtered the enemy, Kumara's followers roared loudly and
filled the ten directions. O Indra among kings! The weapon of the javelin generated flames in every direction and
consumed thousands of daityas. Others were killed because of Skanda's roars. Some enemies of the gods were
killed by the flags. Some were frightened by the bells and fell down on the ground. Some were mangled by the
weapons and fell down, deprived of their lives. There were many such who hated the gods, powerful assassins.
The immensely strong and valiant Kartikeya slaughtered them in the encounter.

'Bali's son was the immensely strong daitya named Bana. He resorted to Mount Krouncha and fought against
the large numbers of the gods. The intelligent Mahasena advanced against that enemy of the gods. Terrified of Kartikeya, he hid inside Krouncha. The illustrious Kartikeya was overcome by great rage. He shattered Krouncha with
the javelin that had been given to him by Agni and because of the shriek, it was called Krouncha[There is a slight anomaly, because we have been told that the javelin was given by Indra, not Agni. Krouncha
is a curlew/snipe. When it was shattered, the mountain shrieked like a curlew/snipe and got its name. Mount
Krouncha is believed to be in Bellary district of Karnataka.]. The mountain had shala and sarala[Pine.] trees and the apes and elephants that lived on it were terrified. The birds rose up in
terror and the serpents fell down. Large numbers of monkeys[Golangula, the cow-tailed black monkey.] and bears shrieked in fear and fled. The place
echoed with the sounds of antelopes running away. When the mountain was shattered and fell down, sharabhas[Mythical animal similar to a lion, which feeds on lions.]
and lions were overtaken by a calamity and suddenly ran away. But it was very beautiful. Vidyadharas who dwelt
on the peak rose up into the air. The kinnaras were anxious, because they were struck by the descent of the javelin.
Hundreds and thousands of daityas were crushed. They emerged from that blazing mountain, attired in excellent
and colourful ornaments and garlands. Kumara's followers proved to be superior and killed them in the battle.
Pavaka's son[Pavaka is one of Agni's names.], the destroyer of enemy heroes, shattered Krouncha with the javelin. The great-souled one divided himself into one, and also many forms. In the encounter, he repeatedly hurled the javelin from his hands. Thus,
did Pavaka's son repeatedly show his powers. He shattered Krouncha and killed hundreds of daityas.

'Thus did the illustrious god slaughter the enemies of the gods. The gods were supremely delighted. O king! O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! They sounded drums and blew on conch shells. The wives of the gods showered down excellent flowers. An auspicious breeze, mixed with celestial fragrances, began to blow. Some describe
the lord as the eldest of all of Brahma's sons, Sanatkumara[Usually, it is said that four sons were born to Brahma through his mental powers-Sanatkumara, Sanaka,
Sanatana and Sanandana, though seven sons are sometimes also mentioned. Sanatkumara is believed to have
reappeared as Kartikeya.]. Some describe him as the son of Maheshvara, others as the son of Vibhavasu. Others speak of him as the son of Uma, the Krittikas or Ganga. The immensely strong
one is in one form, or two forms, or four forms. The god, who is the lord of yoga, is in hundreds and thousands of
forms.

'O king! I have thus told you about Kartikeya's consecration. Now listen to the most sacred of tirthas along the
Sarasvati. O great king! After the enemies of the gods had been killed by Kumara, it became foremost among the
tirthas and was like heaven itself. Pavaka's son gave the foremost of nairrtas separate dominions and riches in different parts of the three worlds. O great king! The illustrious destroyer of the lineage of the daityas was consecrated by the gods as the general of the celestials in that tirtha. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Earlier, large number of gods had consecrated Varuna as the lord of the waters in that tirtha and it had been known by the name of
Oujasa. Having bathed in that tirtha and having worshipped Skanda, the wielder of the plough donated gold, garments and ornaments to the brahmanas. Madhava, the destroyer of enemy heroes, spent a night there. The wielder
of the plough worshipped that supreme of tirthas and touched the waters there. The best of the Madhava lineage
was cheerful and delighted. I have told you everything that you had asked me, about how the illustrious Skanda
was consecrated by the assembled gods.'
