'"Vashishtha said, 'O daughter! Do not be frightened. There is nothing to be frightened of from a rakshasa. There
is no danger from the one you see advancing. He is not a rakshasa. He is King Kalmashapada, powerful and famous on earth. That terrible one lives in this part of the forest.'"

'The gandharva said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As he[Kalmashapada.] advanced towards them, the illustrious
and energetic rishi Vashishtha stopped him with a roar. He sprinkled water sanctified with mantras over him and
freed the good king from the terrible rakshasa. For twelve years, the king had been swallowed through the energy
of Vashishtha's son, like the sun is swallowed by the one who swallows[Rahu.] at the time of an eclipse. Thus freed
from the rakshasa, the king reddened the great forest with his energy, like the sun illuminates the evening[The word used is sandhya, which can mean dawn, as well as dusk.]
clouds. Regaining his senses, the king worshipped Vashishtha, the best of rishis, with joined palms and said, 'O illustrious one! O best of Brahmanas! I am the son of Sudasa. You are my preceptor. Tell me what your wish is now
and what I should do.' Vashishtha said, 'O lord of men! My desire was fulfilled when the right time arrived. Return
to your kingdom and rule and never again disregard Brahmanas.' The king said, 'O illustrious one! I shall never
again disregard the bulls among Brahmanas. In accordance with your instructions, I shall always worship the
twice-born. O best among the twice-born! O best among those who are learned in the Vedas! I wish to obtain a
boon from you, so that I can be freed from the debt I owe to the Ikshvaku lineage. I wish to have a son. Please go
to my beloved queen[This story is taken up later, and we learn why Kalmashapada requested Vashishtha to impregnate the queen.], who is virtuous, beautiful and has all the qualities, so that the Ikshvaku lineage can be
extended.'

'"Vashishtha, the best of Brahmanas and always devoted to the truth, agreed to the desires of the great archer,
the king. O king of men! After some time, Vashishtha, accompanied by the one without blame[The king.], went to his capital, famous in this world as Ayodhya. In great joy, all the people came out to welcome the great-souled and sinless
one[Meaning the king, who had now been freed from the curse of the rakshasa.], like gods welcome their chief. Accompanied by the great-souled Vashishtha, the king of men soon entered
his auspicious city. O king! The citizens of Ayodhya saw him, like the sun rising in Pushya[One of the twenty-seven nakshatras.]. The king, the most
fortunate among those who are blessed with fortune, filled Ayodhya, like the cool moon which fills the skies when
it rises in the autumn. His mind was gladdened when he saw that supreme of cities, with its streets clean and
washed, adorned with flags and pennants. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! That city was full of people who were
happy and well fed. It looked as radiant as Amaravati[Indra's capital.] in Indra's presence.

'"After the rajarshi had entered the best of cities, the queen came to Vashishtha at the king's command. When
the season was right, maharshi Vashishtha, the rishi who always obtained the best share, united with her, in accordance with the divine rites laid down by the gods. Thereafter, when the queen conceived through him, the best of
sages received salutations from the king and returned to his hermitage. When she had carried the embryo for a long
time, the famous lady split her womb open with a stone. O bull among men! After twelve years, rajarshi Ashmaka
was born, the one who founded the city of Potana."'
