Vaishampayana said, 'At the right time, the Pandavas and the Yadavas arose and performed their morning ablutions. They set out on chariots that looked like cities. They went to Kurukshetra and approached the unblemished
Bhishma. They asked if Gangeya, supreme among rathas, had spent the night in happiness. They paid their respects to Vyasa and all the other rishis. Then, in every direction, they seated themselves around Bhishma. The
king, the immensely energetic Dharmaraja Yudhishthira, joined his hands in salutation. He paid his respects to
Bhishma and asked, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The word raja, raja keeps circulating around. O grandfather! What is its origin? Tell me. A man possesses hands, head and neck that are similar to those of others. His
understanding, senses and soul are similar. His sense of unhappiness and happiness are similar. His back, arms and
stomach are similar. His semen, bones and marrow are similar. His flesh and blood are similar. His inhalation and
exhalation are similar. His breath of life and body are similar. His birth and death are similar. All his human qualities are similar. Among all those with bravery and intelligence, why does a single one stand out as superior? The
entire earth is full of brave, valiant and noble people. Why does one alone protect it and why do all the people wish
to please him? If a single one is pleased, all the people are pleased. When he is troubled, it is certainly the case that
everyone is troubled. O bull among the Bharata lineage! I wish to hear the entire truth about this. O supreme
among eloquent ones! Tell me the exact truth about this. O lord of the earth! It cannot be a trifling reason that the
entire world worships a single person like a god."

'Bhishma replied, "O best among men! Listen attentively to everything, about how, in the beginning, royalty
was created in krita yuga. At that time, there was no sovereignty and no king. There was no punishment and no
one to chastise. In accordance with dharma, all the subjects protected each other. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In accordance with dharma, all the men sustained each other. However, they became extremely exhausted
and confusion pervaded them. O bull among men! When people were overcome by confusion, this confusion affected their perception and dharma was destroyed. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! All of them were overcome by avarice. The men then hankered after what was not theirs. O lord! Then the vice named desire took over.
When they came under the subjugation of desire, passion touched them. O Yudhishthira! O Indra among kings!
Because of that passion, they were no longer aware of what should be done and what should not be done, whom
one should have intercourse with and whom not with, what should be said and what should not be said, what
should be eaten and what should not be eaten, and what was good and what was bad. They accepted what should
be discarded. When this world was in disorder, the brahman was destroyed[This is interpreted as meaning that the knowledge of the Vedas was destroyed.]. O king! When the brahman was destroyed, dharma was also destroyed. When the brahman and dharma were destroyed, the gods were frightened. O
tiger among men! In their terror, they sought refuge with Brahma. The gods approached the illustrious grandfather
of the worlds. They were afflicted by sorrow, grief and fright. All of them joined their hands in salutation and said,
'O illustrious one! The eternal brahman that was present in the world of men has been destroyed. There are sentiments like avarice and confusion there. We are overcome by terror. O original lord! With the brahman having been
destroyed, dharma has also been destroyed. O lord of the three worlds! We have become the same as mortals. They
poured oblations upwards. We showered downwards on earth[The gods showered down rain. Sustained by this, men offered oblations to sustain the gods.]. Now that those supreme rites have stopped, we
are faced with an uncertainty. O grandfather! Determine what will be beneficial for us. Your power results from
our power and that is being destroyed.' Having been thus addressed by all the gods, the illustrious Svayambhu[The self-creating one, Brahma's name.]
replied, 'O bulls among the gods! I will think about your welfare. Do not be frightened.' Using his own intelligence, he composed one hundred thousand chapters that described dharma, artha and kama. Svayambhu designated these categories trivarga[The three objectives or categories.]. The fourth one of moksha was a separate objective and a separate category. Within
moksha, three categories of sattva, rajas and tamas were spoken of[Respectively, the qualities of purity, passion and darkness.].

'"Preservation, increase and destruction were three categories that were the consequence of chastisement. The
self, place, time, means, tasks, aides and causes were said to be the six ingredients of policy[Place and time are counted as one, so that there are six and not seven.]. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! In this extensive corpus of learning, the three[The three Vedas.], analysis, livelihood and the policy of punishment are laid down. The means of protecting oneself against aides, protecting oneself against princes, the use of
spies and other methods and the use of secret agents are separately indicated[A king might face treachery from aides and princes.]. O Pandava! All the techniques of
sama, dana, danda, bheda and the fifth one of upeksha are completely laid down[Sama, dana, danda, bheda are the four respective familiar principles of conciliation, gifts (to wean away), punishment and sowing dissension. Upeksha can be translated as both endurance and neglect.]. All the secret methods of creating dissension have been described, and also when these secret methods fail. The consequences of success and
failure are given. The various kinds of alliances-inferior, middling and superior-based respectively on creating
fear, showering honour and offering riches, have been completely described. There is an account of the four kinds
of time for departure[Probably very good, good, bad and very bad muhurtas.] and a complete description of the three kinds of victory-victory for reasons of dharma,
victory for reasons of artha and objectives, and victory that is asura in nature[Dharma and artha are not gained from an asura victory.]. The three kinds of characteristics
associated with the five categories have also been described[The five categories are the advisers, the countryside, the fortified city, the treasury and the army. These can
have three characteristics-superior, middling and inferior.]. Direct and indirect kinds of punishment have been
recounted. Indirect punishment is of many different kinds. O Pandava! There are eight that are direct-chariots,
elephants, horses, foot soldiers, compulsory service, boats, spies and guides for the road[The text actually suggests that one should take these guides from the country one is at war with.] as the eighth. O
Kouravya! These are the eight direct manifestations of an army. The use and administration of many types of poison and mixtures in mobile and immobile objects has also been described, such as through objects one touches and
objects one uses. Enemies, friends and neutral ones have been recounted. There are qualities of roads, qualities of
the ground, the technique of protecting, the technique of providing assurance and keeping a lookout for spies.
There are different methods for arranging men, elephants, chariots and horses in diverse vyuhas and many wonderful techniques of fighting. O bull among the Bharata lineage! There is also information about portents, accidents,
fighting well, retreating well and knowledge about making the weapons drink[The word used is payana, which means drink. This is not about the blades of weapons being made to drink the
enemy's blood. It is about the way those iron blades were crafted, heated and then cooled with water.]. O Pandava! How is an army
freed from a calamity? How is the army's delight increased? What are the times for attacking and destroying?
When should one take fright? Techniques of laying trenches and other methods have been described. How does
one afflict the kingdom of an enemy through the use of thieves, mountain-dwelling bandits and fierce soldiers?
How does one use arsonists, poisoners and spies in disguise? How are foremost members of guilds weaned away?
570 How are the plants uprooted? How are his elephants corrupted? How are his subjects terrified? How are those
loyal to him dissuaded? How does one control the roads? The waxing and waning of the seven parts of the kingdom[The king, the army, advisers, allies, the treasury, forts and the geographical expanse of the kingdom.] are described and the extension of the prosperity of the kingdom through the use of emissaries. The development of enemies, neutrals and allies is completely enumerated. How does one grind down and counter stronger
enemies? What are the extremely subtle methods used for uprooting thorns? How does one pacify oneself? What
are the methods of exercise? How does one use yoga and accumulate objects? Those who are not servants must be
sustained and servants must be taken care of. Riches must be given at the right time and one must be free from
vices. There are the qualities of a king and the qualities of a commander. There are reasons and tasks and their
good and bad aspects. There are signs to discern if someone is wicked and is ensuring livelihoods for those who
are dependents. One must be suspicious of everything and avoid being negligent. One must seek to obtain what
one does not possess and extend it. In the proper way, this increase must be given away to deserving people.
Wealth must be expended for reasons of dharma, artha and kama. The fourth aspect of avoiding vices has also been
described there. O foremost among the Kuru lineage! The ten kinds of vices have been described, the most important arising from anger or from desire. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The preceptors say, following Svayambhu, that hunting, gambling with dice, drinking and women are the ones that are born from desire. Harshness in
speech, violence, harshness in punishment, inflicting pain on one's own self, suicide and the destruction of one's
own riches are mentioned[These are the six that arise from anger.]. There is a description of many kinds of machines and their action. How does one
counter those of the enemy? How does one shatter his houses? How does one destroy his sanctuaries, trees and
boundaries and destroy the tasks he is engaged in? The techniques of spreading out, advancing and stationing have
been described. O supreme among warriors! There are the six aspects of cymbals, drums, conch shells, battle
drums, the obtaining of supplies and the weak spots of the enemy.

'"What has been obtained[Newly acquired kingdoms. The succeeding shlokas are difficult to understand. We have interpreted them as
learning about these practices in newly acquired kingdoms.] must be pacified and the virtuous ones honoured. One must become friendly with
these learned ones and learn the methods used to offer oblations in the mornings. What are the auspicious signs
followed for the body? What are the food habits and what the rites always followed by believers? One must singlemindedly determine this, using truth and pleasant words. What are the festivals observed by society and what kind
of rituals do those residents follow? O tiger among the Bharata lineage! One must always keep an eye on all the
rights and livelihoods-direct, as well as indirect. The non-punishment of brahmanas, the use of punishment
against the wicked, the protection of the good qualities of followers and relatives, the protection of citizens and the
extension of the kingdom has been described. O king! There are thoughts about a circle of twelve kings. Depending on country, race and family, Svayambhu spoke about the seventy-two aspects of dharma[These numbers are about complicated relationships between kings. At the central core is a king, his main ally
and the ally's ally. The core king has an adversary, an enemy, a neutral and a king whose kingdom is geographically contiguous to the core king and the enemy, but is not necessarily a neutral. 3 multiplied by 4 gives the
number of 12. Each kingdom has six elements-the king, the advisers, the countryside, the fortified city, the
treasury and the army. 12 multiplied by 6 gives 72.]. Dharma, artha,
kama and moksha were described there. There were many methods to satisfy the desire for riches and the giving
away of large quantities of donations. The fundamental tasks and rites and maya and yoga were described. The
techniques for poisoning flowing and stagnant waters were described. There were all the methods so that people
did not deviate from the noble path. O tiger among kings! All these aspects of policy were laid down in that sacred
text.

'"Having composed this auspicious text, the illustrious lord cheerfully addressed all the gods, with Shakra at the
forefront. 'This is for the welfare of the worlds and is established in the three objectives[Dharma, artha and kama.]. This is full of intelligence and is like newly churned butter that has emerged from the Sarasvati[As a river, or as the goddess of speech.]. With the use of the rod, this will
protect the worlds. It will reward and punish and roam around the world. It will be known as dandaniti[The policy of chastisement.] and the
three worlds will follow it. Great-souled ones will place it at the forefront, representing the essence of the six qualities[The king, the advisers, the countryside, the fortified city, the treasury and the army.]. The greatness of punishment will be evident in all aspects of policy.' O Yudhishthira! Everything has been
described here-the extensive corpus of good policy, the learned texts and the Puranas, the origin of the maharshis,
the list of tirthas, the list of nakshatras, everything about the four ashramas and the four kinds of oblations[Associated with the four Vedas.], descriptions of the four varnas and the four Vedas, all the descriptions about itihasa, the minor Vedas[Probably the Vedangas.] and good
policy, austerities, knowledge, non-violence, the best policy about the true and the false, the serving of seniors, donations, purity, enterprise and compassion towards all beings. All of this has been described here. O Pandava!
There is no doubt that everything that exists on earth in the form of speech has been assembled in this sacred text
by the grandfather. Everything has been pronounced about dharma, artha, kama and moksha.

'"The illustrious Shankara Shiva Sthanu, the many-formed and large-eyed consort of Uma, received this policy
first. The illustrious Shiva knew that the lifespan decreases from one yuga to another[The human span of life decreases progressively from satya yuga to kali yuga. Hence, people wouldn't have the
time to read long texts.]. He therefore abridged the
text, full of great import, prepared by Brahma. The immensely asectic one then gave this text, known as Vaishalaksha[Prepared by the one with large eyes, Vishalaksha or Shiva.] to Indra, who was extremely devoted to Brahma. It had ten thousand chapters. O son[The word used is tata.]! The illustrious Indra abridged it to a text with five thousand and this was known as Bahudantaka. The intelligent lord Brihaspati
abridged it to three thousand and this is known as Barhaspatya[Named after Brihaspati.]. The immensely wise and great ascetic Kavya[Shukracharya.],
the preceptor of yoga, reduced it to one thousand and recounted it. O Pandava! Thus, knowing that the lifespan of
mortals was becoming reduced, at the request of the worlds, the maharshis abridged the text.

'"Once, the gods went to Prajapati Vishnu and said, 'Tell us about one person who deserves to be superior to
other mortals.' The illustrious lord, god Narayana, thought about this. Through his mental powers, he created an
energetic son named Virajas. O immensely fortunate one! O Pandava! However, Virajas did not wish to rule over
earth. His mind was on renunciation. He had a son named Kirtiman, but he too was interested in what was beyond
the five[The five elements. He too was interested in renunciation.]. He had a son named Kardama, who tormented himself through great austerities. Kardama Prajapati had
a son named Ananga. This virtuous one was accomplished in dandaniti[The policy of chastisement.] and protected the subjects. Ananga's
son, Atibala, obtained knowledge of policy. However, having become the king of the earth, he was overcome by
addiction to the senses. O king! Through his mental powers, Mrityu[Death.] had a daughter named Sunitha. She was famous in the three worlds and gave birth to Vena. But he became a prey to passion and hatred and used adharma
against the subjects. The rishis, knowledgeable about the brahman, purified and invoked blades of kusha grass with
mantras and killed him with this. The rishis then used mantras to churn his right thigh[Because a king was needed.]. At this, a malformed
man was created on the ground and he was a dwarf. His eyes were red. His hair was black and he looked like a
post that had been burnt. The rishis, knowledgeable about the brahman, asked him to sit down. That is how the
cruel Nishadas were created[Nishida is an instruction to be seated.] and they dwelt in mountains and forests. Hundreds and thousands of other mlecchas were also created and they made their abode in the Vindhya mountains. The maharshis then churned his right
hand. A man was created and his form was like that of Indra himself. He was armoured and his sword was girded.
He held a bow and arrows. He was accomplished in the Vedas, the Vedangas and dhanurveda. O supreme among
kings! That king possessed the splendour of all of dandaniti. Vainya[That is, the son of Vena. Also known as Prithu.] joined his hands in salutation and spoke to
the maharshis. 'An excellent and subtle intelligence that tells me about dharma and artha has arisen in me. What is
my task? Tell me the truth about this and instruct me. Tell me about tasks that are full of objectives. Without thinking about it, I will do whatever you ask me to.' The gods and the supreme rishis told him, 'Restrain yourself. Without any doubt, follow dharma. Treat all living beings alike, irrespective of whom you like and whom you don't
like. Abandon desire, anger, avarice and price and cast these off far away. Always have your eye on dharma and
use your arms to punish all the men in the world who deviate from dharma. In thoughts, deeds and speech, take
this pledge. "I will honour and protect the brahman on earth. I will never resort to my own inclinations. Instead,
without any doubt, I will follow the policy of dharma and use dandaniti." O scorcher of enemies! Also take a
pledge to never punish brahmanas and protect the entire earth against the creation of hybrid varnas.' Vainya replied
to the gods, with the rishis at the forefront. 'O bulls among the gods! If the brahmanas and the gods aid me, I will
do this.' Those who knew about the brahman agreed with Vainya's words. Shukra, who was a store of the brahman, became his priest. The Valakhilyas became his advisers and the Sarasvatyas followed him. The illustrious
maharshi Garga became the reckoner of time[Literally, the reckoner of the year, samvatsara. The word can also be translated as astrologer.].

'"There is a supreme saying among men. 'He is himself the eighth[Vainya was the eighth because he followed Vishnu, Virajas, Kirtiman, Kardama, Ananga, Atibala and Vena.].' Those who chanted praises were created,
bards and minstrels[Respectively, suta and magadha.] being the foremost. He[Vainya.] levelled the earth and made it plain. We have heard that earlier,
the earth was uneven. Vishnu, the god Shakra, the other gods, the rishis and Brahma consecrated him to rule over
the subjects. O Pandava! The earth herself presented him with jewels. So did the ocean, the lord of the rivers, and
the supreme mountains, the Himalayas. O Yudhishthira! Shakra gave him inexhaustible riches. The golden mount,
the great Meru, himself gave him gold. The illustrious Naravahana[Literally, the one whose mount is a man, a name for Kubera.], the lord of yakshas and rakshasas, gave him
riches so that he would be capable of following dharma, artha and kama. O Pandava! As soon as Vainya thought of
them, horses, chariots, elephants and crores of men manifested themselves. There was no old age, famine, hardship
or disease. Because of the protection offered by the king, there was no fear from reptiles and thieves. He milked
the earth for the seventeen kinds of grain[The word for grain is shasya and it is difficult to pin down the number seventeen. Five types are more common
-paddy (dhanya), beans (mudga), sesamum (tila), barley (yava) and black gram (masha).]. Yakshas, rakshasas and serpents, each obtained whatever they wished
for. Thus did the great-souled one ensure supreme dharma in the world. He pleased all the subjects and everyone
came to call him raja[The word for king is raja. Ranjita means pleased or delighted. Since he delighted the subjects, he came to be
known as raja, from the root ranj. The word for king is actually rajan and raja is the nominative, in the singular.]. The word kshatriya is used because he saved the brahmanas from injury[With a play on the words kshata (wound/injury) and save (trana).]. Virtuous ones
have said that the earth is famous for being strewn with riches[Prathita means extended or famous. The name prithivi for earth is being linked with that word.]. O king! The eternal Vishnu himself established
the rule that no one would ever be able to transgress the king. Through his austerities, the illustrious Vishnu penetrated the king. O king! That is the reason the world bowed down to and honoured this god among human gods[Kings are like human gods and Vainya was a king among them.].

'"O lord of men! You must always protect through the use of dandaniti. You must see to it so that it is never afflicted by anyone and use spies for this. The king is equal to everyone else. With the exception that divine qualities
exist inside him, there is no reason for everyone in the world to honour him. A golden lotus was generated from
Vishnu's forehead. This was the goddess Shri[Prosperity personified.] and she became the wife of the intelligent Dharma. O Pandava!
Through Shri, Artha was born to Dharma. Therefore, prosperity, dharma and artha are always established in the
kingdom. O son[The word used is tata.]! When good deeds are exhausted, a person is dislodged from the world of heaven and is born
on earth as a king, to follow dandaniti. Such a man on earth is united with the greatness of Vishnu. He is united
with intelligence and attains greatness. No one transgresses what has been established by the gods. That is the reason everyone remains under the subjugation of one man. O Indra among kings! Though he is equal to the others in
the world, because his good deeds lead to good consequences, everyone follows his words. Whoever glances at his
peaceful face comes under his control. He sees someone who is extremely fortunate, prosperous and handsome. O
Indra among kings! O lord of the earth! That is the reason the learned pronounce that on earth, gods and human
gods are similar. This is the entire account about the greatness of kings. O best among the Bharata lineage! I have
said everything. What should we do now?"'
