Vaishampayana said, 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The magnanimous king then went and saw many beautiful and sacred tirthas, some of which were along the shores of the ocean, and all of which were adorned by the
presence of brahmanas. O son of Parikshit[Janamejaya was Parikshit's son.]! Pandu's son bathed there and performed donations, together with
his younger brothers, who were the sons and grandsons of kings. He then went to a sacred and broad river. The
magnanimous one bathed there and offered oblations to the ancestors and the gods. Donating riches to the foremost among brahmanas, he went to Godavari, which heads towards the ocean. O king! Having been cleansed of
his sins, he approached the ocean, sacred to the worlds, in Dravida. The brave one saw the extremely sacred
Agastya tirtha and also Nari tirtha. There he heard the story of Arjuna's feat, incapable of being performed by others[It is not clear which feat this refers to. Arjuna's conquests did not take him to the south. This must therefore
be a reference to Lomasha's account of Arjuna's exploits in heaven.]. He was the foremost of archers. When he[Yudhishthira.] was worshipped by the supreme rishis, Pandu's son derived
supreme delight. Accompanied by Krishna[Droupadi.] and with his younger brothers, he bathed his limbs in those tirthas.
Honouring Arjuna's valour, the lord of kings found delight in the earth there. He donated one thousand cows in
those supreme tirthas that are always full of water. Together with his brothers, he happily recounted the story of
Arjuna's donations of cattle. O king! One after another, he went to many sacred tirthas, those that were on the
shores of the ocean and others too. When all his desires were satisfied, he saw the most sacred Shurparaka.

'Then, after crossing a region on the shores of the ocean, he came to a forest that is famous on earth. In ancient
times, the gods performed austerities there and kings regard it as the most sacred of places. There, he saw the altar
of Richika's son[Parashurama. The word son is being used in a loose sense. Parashurama is Jamadagni's son and Richika's
grandson.], the one who was the foremost of archers and long and thick in the arms. It was surrounded by
many ascetics and was worthy of being worshipped by the virtuous. O king! The lord of the earth saw the holy
sites of the Vasus, the masses of Maruts, the two Ashvins, Vaivasvata[Meaning Yama.], the Adityas, the lord of riches[Meaning Kubera.], Indra,
Vishnu, the lord Savita[The sun-god.], Bhaga[Bhaga also means the sun and the moon. In this context, it means Shiva.], the moon, Divakara[The sun. Literally, the one who creates the day.], the lord of the waters[Varuna.], the masses of Sadhyas,
Dhata[Brahma.], the ancestors, the great-souled Rudra with his masses of ganas, Sarasvati, the masses of Siddhas,
Pushan[Pushan has several meanings-the sun, Indra and Shiva. However, all three have already been separately
mentioned.] and all the other immortals. The king saw these beautiful sites and observed fasts there. The king gave
away many expensive gems. Having bathed his limbs in all these tirthas, he returned again to Shurparaka. With his
brothers, he again went to the tirthas along the shores of the ocean. He then went to the great tirtha of Prabhasa,
acclaimed by brahmanas throughout the earth. With his younger brothers and with Krishna, the one with the large
and red eyes bathed there, and offered oblations to the masses of gods and the ancestors. So did the brahmanas, together with Lomasha. He lived on water and air for twelve days. He performed ablutions at dawn and dusk. He
surrounded himself with flames on all sides. Thus did the supreme upholder of dharma scorch himself with austerities. Rama[Balarama.] and Janardana got to know about his practice of severe austerities. The foremost of all the Vrishnis
went to Ajamidha Yudhishthira, together with their armies. The Vrishnis saw the sons of Pandu lying down on the
ground, their bodies smeared with dirt. On seeing Droupadi, who did not deserve this, they were extremely distressed and lamented loudly. But, strong in spirit, and in accordance with the prescriptions of dharma, he[Yudhishthira.] went
and offered homage to Rama, Janardana, Krishna's son Samba, Shini's grandson[Shini's grandson is Satyaki.] and all the other Vrishnis. All
of them also returned the homage to the Parthas and were welcomed by Pandu's sons. O king! They seated themselves around Yudhishthira, like the masses of gods around Indra. Extremely happy, he told them about the deeds
of his enemies and about their dwelling in the forest. He told Krishna that Partha[Arjuna.], son of the king of the gods,
had gone to Indra for weapons. They heard his words and were relieved. On seeing them lean and pitiful, the magnaminous ones from Dasharha[The Yadavas.] were saddened and tears streamed down from their eyes.'
