Vaishampayana said, 'Kounteya Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, did not say anything. Pandava Gudakesha[Arjuna.] addressed Hrishikesha. "Dharmaraja, the scorcher of enemies, is tormented by grief on account of his kin. O Madhava! He is immersed in an ocean of sorrow. Comfort him. O Janardana! All of us are now again faced with an uncertainty. O mighty-armed one! You should dispel this grief." Having been thus addressed by the great-souled Vijaya, the lotus-eyed Govinda Achyuta circumambulated the king. Since he was a child, Dharmaraja could never
cross Keshava. He loved Govinda more than Arjuna. The mighty-armed one's[Yudhishthira's.] arms were smeared with sandalwood paste and were like stone pillars. Shouri seized them and delighted him with these words. His[Krishna's.] face was
beautiful and possessed excellent teeth, with lovely eyes. It was like a full-blown lotus when the sun had arisen. "O
tiger among men! Do not indulge in this sorrow that dries up the body. Those who have been slain in the field of
battle will not come back. They are like objects one sees in a dream. Once one awakes, they disappear. These kshatriyas have died in the great battle between kings. They did not turn their faces away from the battle. These ornaments of the battle were brave and have died. They did not turn their backs. Nor were they slain while running
away. All of those brave ones fought and gave up their lives in the great battle. They were purified through
weapons and have attained heaven. You should not sorrow about them.

'"An ancient history is recounted about this[This is Krishna speaking to Yudhishthira.]. Srinjaya was overcome by sorrow on account of his son and
Narada spoke to him. 'O Srinjaya! I, you, and all the subjects, have to face happiness and unhappiness. We have to
roam around and can't be free from this. What is there to sorrow about? I will tell you about the deeds of supreme
and immensely fortunate kings. Listen. O king! Your sorrow will be dispelled. Hear about these immensely fortunate kings who died. Listen, as I tell you about them in detail. On hearing, your sorrow will be dispelled.

'"'O Srinjaya[This is Narada speaking now.]! Hear about Marutta, the son of Avikshit. He died. The gods, with Indra and Varuna, with Brihaspati at the forefront, came to the sacrifice where the great-souled king offered everything. He wished to rival
Shakra Shatakratu, the king of the gods. Wishing to ensure pleasure to Shakra, the learned Brihaspati refused to be
the officiating priest at his[Marutta's.] sacrifice. However, for the sake of spiting Brihaspati, Samvarta[Brihaspati's younger brother.] agreed. O supreme
among kings! When that virtuous king ruled, the earth yielded grain, even when it had not been ploughed and was
radiant with garlands of holy sanctuaries[Chaityas or holy shrines. These were not necessarily temples.]. At the sacrifice of Avikshit's son, the Vishvadevas were the courtiers,
the Maruts were the attendants and the great-souled Sadhyas were also present. Large numbers of Maruts drank
Marutta's soma. The gifts made surpassed those of gods, men and gandharvas[The gifts made by Marutta surpassed the collective gifts made by gods, men and gandharvas.]. O Srinjaya! He was four times as
fortunate as you and more meritorious than your son. When he died, why are you grieving about your son?

'"'O Srinjaya! We have heard about Suhotra, the son of Vitithi. Maghavan[Indra.] showered gold on him for an entire year. Having obtained him as a lord of men, Vasumati's name became appropriate[Vasumati is the earth's name and means someone (something) that possesses riches. When Suhotra ruled, the
earth was prosperous.]. When he was the lord of
the countries, the rivers flowed with gold. When he was honoured by the worlds, Maghavan showered down tortoises, crabs, crocodiles, makaras and dolphins into the rivers. When he saw hundreds and thousands of fish,
makaras and tortoises raining down, Vitithi's son was astounded. He collected the gold that was strewn around
and, performing a sacrifice in Kurujangala, gave it all away to brahmanas at the sacrifice. O Srinjaya! He was four
times as fortunate as you and more meritorious than your son. When he died, why are you grieving about your son,
who did not give anything away, nor perform sacrifices? Be pacified and do not grieve.

'"'O Srinjaya! We have heard about Vrihadratha of Anga. He died, after giving away a million white horses. In
the sacrifice that he performed, as donations, he gave away a million maidens with golden ornaments. As donations, he also gave away a million bulls with golden harnesses, followed by thousands of cows. When the king of
Anga performed his sacrifice on Mount Vishnupada, Indra was intoxicated with soma and the brahmanas with the
gifts. The Indra among kings performed hundreds of other sacrifices too. The gifts given surpassed that of gods,
men and gandharvas. No other man has been born, or will be born, who has given away as much of wealth in the
seven soma sacrifices[The seven sacrifices at which soma was offered were agnishtoma, atyagnishtoma, ukthya, shodashi, vajapeya,
atiratra and aptoryama.]. O Srinjaya! He was four times as fortunate as you and more meritorious than your son.
When he died, why are you grieving about your son?

'"'O Srinjaya! We have heard about Shibi, the son of Ushinara. Like a skin, he covered the entire earth. The
earth resounded with the mighty roar of his chariot. On a single chariot, he brought the entire earth under a single
umbrella[That is, he conquered the entire earth and became its emperor.]. At his sacrifice, Shibi, the son of Ushinara, gave away all the cattle, horses and wild animals that he
possessed. O descendant of the Bharata lineage[Within Narada's statement, this doesn't belong, since we haven't been told that King Srinjaya belonged to the
Bharata lineage.]! Prajapati thought that amongst all the kings, from the past and
from the future, there would be no one else who would be able to bear such a burden, other than rajarshi Shibi, the
son of Ushinara. He surpassed Indra is his valour. O Srinjaya! He was four times as fortunate as you and more
meritorious than your son. When he died, why are you grieving about your son, who did not give anything away,
nor perform sacrifices? Be pacified and do not grieve.

'"'O Srinjaya! We have heard about Bharata, the son of Duhshanta and Shakuntala. He died. He was a great
archer and possessed abundant riches and energy. Along the banks of the Yamuna, he tied thirty horses for the
gods, twenty along the Sarasvati and fourteen along the banks of the Ganga. He performed one thousand horse sacrifices and one hundred royal sacrifices. Duhshanta's immensely energetic son, Bharata, performed these in earlier
times. Among all the kings on earth, no one else could replicate Bharata's great deed, just as mortals cannot fly
with the use of their arms. He tied down more than one thousand horses at sacrificial altars. Bharata gave away
many treasures to Kanva[When Duhshanta had deserted Shakuntala, the sage Kanva had given shelter to Shakuntala and Bharata.]. O Srinjaya! He was four times as fortunate as you and more meritorious than your
son. When he died, why are you grieving about your son?

'"'O Srinjaya! We have heard about Rama, Dasharatha's son. He too died. He was always compassionate towards the subjects, as if they were his own sons. In his kingdom, there were no widows, nor those without protectors. When he ruled over the kingdom, he was like a father to everyone. Rain showered down at the right time and
the crops were succulent. When Rama ruled over the kingdom, there was always plenty of food. Beings did not
drown in the water. Nor did fires burn unnecessarily. When Rama ruled over the kingdom, there was no fear from
predatory beasts. When Rama ruled over the kingdom, the subjects lived for thousands of years and had thousands
of sons. They were without disease and were successful in all their objectives. The women did not quarrel with
each other, not to speak of men. When Rama ruled over the kingdom, the subjects always followed dharma. Without any calamity, the trees always bore flowers and fruit. When Rama ruled over the kingdom, each cow yielded a
bucket of milk. The immensely ascetic one roamed around in the forest for fourteen years. He then performed ten
horse sacrifices, at which a lot of gifts were given, with no bars on entry. He was dark and handsome, with red
eyes. He was like a mad elephant in his valour. Rama ruled over the kingdom for ten thousand years. O Srinjaya!
He was four times as fortunate as you and more meritorious than your son. When he died, why are you grieving
about your son?

'"'O Srinjaya! We have heard about King Bhagiratha. He died. At his sacrifice, Indra drank soma and became
extremely intoxicated. The illustrious chastiser of Paka, supreme among the gods, was invincible in the strength of
his arms and defeated many thousands of asuras. In his sacrifice, he[Bhagiratha.] gave away a million maidens, with ornaments of gold. Each maiden was on a chariot and each chariot was drawn by four horses. With each chariot, there
were one hundred excellent elephants with golden harnesses. A thousand horses followed each elephant from the
rear. A thousand cows followed each horse and there were one thousand goats and sheep behind each cow. When
he dwelt in the mountainous regions earlier, Ganga Bhagirathi was seated on his lap and came to be known as Urvashi[Urvashi means someone who is seated on the thigh (lap). In an attempt to rescue his ancestors, who had been
reduced to ashes by the sage Kapila, Bhagiratha performed austerities in the Himalayas and persuaded Ganga to
descend from heaven.]. Bhagiratha, descended from the Ikshvaku lineage, performed sacrifices at which a lot of donations were
given. Ganga, with three flows[Ganga flows in heaven, the earth and the nether regions.], agreed to become his daughter. O Srinjaya! He was four times as fortunate as
you and more meritorious than your son. When he died, why are you grieving about your son?

'"'O Srinjaya! We have heard of Dilipa, the son of Ilavila. He died. The brahmanas recount his numerous deeds.
In a great sacrifice, the lord of the earth willingly gave away the earth, with all its riches, to brahmanas. In each
sacrifice that he performed, the officiating priest received one thousand golden elephants as a gift. For his sacrifices, there was a great and radiant sacrificial stake made out of gold. With Shakra as the foremost, the gods performed their tasks and sought refuge with him. The ring on top of the sacrificial stake was also made out of gold
and six thousand divine gandharvas danced around it. In their midst, Vishvavasu[Chief of the gandharvas.] himself played the seven notes
of the veena and every being there thought, "He is playing for me." No other king could replicate King Dilipa in
this. Ornamented in gold, intoxicated women lay down on the road[The kingdom was safe.]. King Dilipa was truthful and fierce in
wielding the bow. Any man who saw the great-souled one went to heaven. There were three sounds that never
flagged in Dilipa's residence- the chant of studying, the twang of the bowstring and the words, "I give". O Srinjaya! He was four times as fortunate as you and more meritorious than your son. When he died, why are you grieving about your son?

'"'O Srinjaya! We have heard about Mandhata, Yuvanashva's son. He also died. The gods, the Maruts, extracted
the foetus from his father's flank[Yuvanashva had no son and some sages gave him some consecrated clarified water, meant for his wife. Thirsty,
Yuvanashva drank this by mistake and conceived.]. The great-souled one developed in Yuvanashva's stomach, having earlier been
generated from the water. The handsome king would later conquer the three worlds. On seeing him lying down on
his father's lap, with the form of a god, the gods asked each other, "Who will suckle him?" Indra approached and
said, "He will be suckled by me." Thus, Shatakratu gave him the name of Mandhata[Etymologically, mandhata can be broken up as-he will suck me.]. For the sake of sustaining
the great-souled one, a stream of milk issued forth from Indra's hand, into the mouth of Yuvanashva's son. O king!
He drunk from Indra's hand and grew and in twelve days, was like one who was twelve years old. In a single day,
the entire earth came under the subjugation of that great-souled one. He had dharma in his soul and, in battle, was
as brave as Indra. In battle, Mandhata defeated King Angara, Marutta, Asita, Gaya and Brihadratha from Anga.
When Yuvanashva's son fought against Angara in the battle, the gods thought that the stretching of his bow was
shattering the firmament. From where the sun rises to where it sets, all of that was said to be the field of Mandhata,
Yuvanashva's son. He performed one hundred horse sacrifices and one hundred royal sacrifices. The lord of the
earth gave brahmanas rohita fish made out of gold and each of these was ten yojanas long and one yojana wide[The rohita fish is a kind of carp, Cyprinus rohita (rohu). A yojana is a measure of distance, usually between 8
and 9 miles.].
What was left over was shared out among people who were not brahmanas. O Srinjaya! He was four times as fortunate as you and more meritorious than your son. When he died, why are you grieving about your son?

'"'O Srinjaya! We have heard about Yayati, the son of Nahusha. He also died. He conquered the entire earth,
with its oceans. O king! He travelled through the earth, throwing a shami stick[Stick from the wood of a shami tree, a tree similar to the acacia.] and performing a sacred sacrifice
wherever the stick landed, thus dotting it with sacrificial altars. He performed one thousand sacrifices and one hundred horse sacrifices. He satisfied Indra of the gods with three mountains of gold. In the battle between the gods
and the asuras, Yayati, son of Nahusha, slew daityas and danavas and divided up the entire earth. He abandoned
his other sons, with Yadu and Druhyu as the foremost, and instated Puru in the kingdom[Yayati had five sons-Yadu, Turvasu, Druhyu, Anu and Puru. Puru was the youngest. When Yayati became
old, and was still addicted to worldly pleasures, he asked his sons to temporarily accept his old age and give him
their young age. Since all except Puru refused, they were disinherited and Puru succeeded Yayati.]. With his wives, he
then left for the forest. O Srinjaya! He was four times as fortunate as you and more meritorious than your son.
When he died, why are you grieving about your son?

'"'O Srinjaya! We have heard about Ambarisha, the son of Nabagha. He died. O supreme among kings! The
subjects chose him as their sacred protector. He attentively performed sacrifices and gave brahmanas a million
kings who had themselves performed sacrifices. No one had ever performed a task like this earlier, nor will anyone
do so in future. Thus did Ambarisha, the son of Nabagha, delight them with dakshina. A hundred thousand kings
and another ten thousand kings followed him in his horse sacrifices and went along the southern path[After dying, they went the way of their ancestors.]. O Srinjaya! He was four times as fortunate as you and more meritorious than your son. When he died, why are you grieving about your son?

'"'O Srinjaya! We have heard about Shashabindu, the son of Chitrasena. He died. The great-souled one had one
hundred thousand wives. Shashabindu had a million sons who were excellent archers. All of them were clad in
golden armour. Each of those princes married one hundred maidens, who followed him. One hundred elephants
followed each maiden and one hundred chariots followed each elephant. One hundred horses, born in the country
and adorned with golden harnesses, followed each chariot. One hundred cows followed each horse and one hundred sheep and goats followed each cow. O great king! In a great horse sacrifice, Shashabindu instructed that all
these riches should be given away to brahmanas. O Srinjaya! He was four times as fortunate as you and more meritorious than your son. When he died, why are you grieving about your son?

'"'O Srinjaya! We have heard about Gaya, the son of Amurtarayas. He died. For one hundred years, that king
subsisted on what was left over from oblations. Agni wished to give him a boon. Gaya said, "O bearer of obla-
tions! Through your favours, grant me the boons that even when I give, my riches are inexhaustible, my faith in
dharma grows and my mind delights in the truth." We have heard that he obtained all these wishes from the fire
god. Whenever it was the new moon, whenever it was the full moon and at each interval of four months, the immensely energetic one repeatedly performed sacrifices and this continued for one thousand years. For a thousand
years, when he awoke in the morning, he gave away a hundred thousand cows and ten thousand horses. The bull
among men satisfied the gods with soma, the brahmanas with riches, the ancestors with svadha[Exclamation made when the ancestors are offered oblations.]and his wives
with sensual pleasures. He covered a part of the earth with gold. This was ten cubits wide and twenty cubits long,
and in a great horse sacrifice the king gave this away as dakshina. O king! O bull among men! Gaya, the son of
Amurtarayas, gave away as many cows as there are grains of sand in the Ganga. O Srinjaya! He was four times as
fortunate as you and more meritorious than your son. When he died, why are you grieving about your son?

'"'O Srinjaya! We have heard about Rantideva, the son of Sankriti. He died. The immensely illustrious one satisfied Shakra properly and obtained a boon from him. "Let us have an abundance of food and guests. Let my faith
never diminish and let me never have to ask anything from anyone[This is the boon Rantideva asked for.]." The illustrious Rantideva was extremely
rigid in his vows and of their own accord, domestic and wild animals presented themselves before the great-souled
one, so as to be sacrificed. Because of the discharge from this mass of hides, a great river was created and this
great river became famous as Charmanvati[The Chambal. Charma means hide or skin and Charmanvati is something that has hides or skins.]. When the king singled out brahmanas and proceeded to give them
one golden coin each, they protested. So he gave each brahmana one thousand. There were vessels and implements
used in the intelligent Rantideva's sacrifices-pots, plates, frying pans, bowls and cups. There was not a single one
that was not made out of gold. Whenever someone spent a night in the house of Rantideva, the son of Sankriti,
twenty thousand and one hundred cows were sacrificed. But even then, adorned in bejewelled and excellent earrings, the cooks exclaimed, "There is plenty of broth. Take as much as you want. But now, there is no longer as
much meat as there used to be earlier[This is a reflection of the number of guests who were entertained.]." O Srinjaya! He was four times as fortunate as you and more meritorious
than your son. When he died, why are you grieving about your son?

'"'O Srinjaya! We have heard about the great-souled Sagara. He died. The tiger among men was descended
from the Ikshvaku lineage and was superhuman in his valour. Sixty thousand sons followed him at the rear. They
were like a large number of stellar bodies in a sky without clouds and at the end of the rain, surrounding the lord of
the stars[The moon.]. In earlier times, the earth bowed down before him and was under a single umbrella[That is, Sagara was a universal emperor.]. He satisfied the
gods with one thousand horse sacrifices. He gave deserving brahmanas palaces that were completely made out of
gold, with golden pillars. They were full of beds and women with eyes like lotuses. The brahmanas got whatever
they desired, superior and inferior, and on his instructions, divided this up among themselves. Because of his
anger, the earth was dug out and came to be marked with the ocean[Searching for the horse used at the horse sacrifice, which was stolen by Indra, Sagara's sons dug up the earth.
The ocean is known as saagara, named after Sagara.]. It is after his name that the ocean came to
be known as Saagara. O Srinjaya! He was four times as fortunate as you and more meritorious than your son.
When he died, why are you grieving about your son?

'"'O Srinjaya! We have heard about King Prithu, the son of Vena[Vena was a wicked king and the earth suffered. The sages killed Vena and created Prithu from Vena's dead
body. The word Prithu is derived from a root that means extending or spreading. Prithu was so named because
he would extend the earth and the earth (prithivi) is named after Prithu.]. He died. The maharshis consecrated him in
the great forest. He was known as Prithu because he would extend the world. Someone who saves from injuries is
said to be a kshatriya[Literally, a kshatriya is someone who saves from injury (kshata). Prithu was thus a kshatriya.]. On seeing Prithu, the son of Vena, the subjects said, "We are attached to him." Because of
that affection, he came to known as a raja[Raja means king. Here, raja is etymologically being derived from the word raga (affection) or the allied raja
(affection).]. The earth yielded crops without being ploughed. There was honey in
every hole[Of a tree.]. When Vena's son ruled, all the cows yielded a bucket of milk. All the men were without disease,
were successful in all their objectives and were free from fear. As they wished, they dwelt in their fields or their
homes. On his instructions, the waters of the ocean were solidified[This might mean that Prithu fixed the boundaries between the ocean and the land.]. The rivers did not swell up and obstruct the
advance of his standard. In a great horse sacrifice, the king gave brahmanas twenty-one mountains of gold and
each of these was three nalas high[A nala is a measure of distance, equal to six feet.]. O Srinjaya! He was four times as fortunate as you and more meritorious
than your son. When he died, why are you grieving about your son? O Srinjaya! Why are you reflecting in silence?
O king! You have not listened to my words. If you have not listened, my discourse, though spoken well, has been
in vain, like medicine to someone who is about to die.'

'"Srinjaya replied, 'O Narada! I have listened to your words. They are wonderful in their purport, like a fragrant
garland. Those rajarshis were great-souled and meritorious in their deeds. Their deeds are enough to dispel my
grief. O maharshi! Your discourse has not been in vain. O Narada! Your sight alone has been sufficient to drive
away my sorrow. O one who speaks about the brahman! I have listened to your words. However, like one drinking
amrita, I am not satisfied. O one whose sight never fails! O lord! I am tormented on account of my son. Through
your favours, let the dead one come back to life. Through your favours, let me be united with my son.'

'"Narada replied, 'Your beloved son, Svarnashthivi, was given to you by Parvata[The sage Parvata.] and has departed. But I will
give your son back to you. Hiranyanabha[Another name for Svarnashthivi. We have interpreted Hiranyanabha as a proper noun rather than as an adjective, meaning one with a golden navel.] will live for one thousand years.'"'
