'Gandhari said, "This Vaikartana was a maharatha and great archer. He is lying
down in the battle, as if a blazing fire has been pacified through Partha's energy.
Behold Vaikartana Karna. He was one who slew many atirathas. However, he has
been brought down and is lying down on the ground, his limbs covered with blood.
The great archer and maharatha harboured an enmity for a long time and was intolerant. The brave one has been slain in the battle by the wielder of Gandiva and is
lying down. When my maharatha sons fought with the Pandavas and terrified them,
they placed him at their head, like elephants with a leader of the herd. He was like a
tiger in the battle, against the lion Savyasachi. He has been brought down, like an
elephant by a crazy elephant. O tiger among men! When that brave one has been
killed in the battle, his wives have assembled and have surrounded him, with their
hair dishevelled. They are weeping. Dharmaraja Yudhishthira was always anxious
about him. Because of his worry, he could not sleep for thirteen years. The enemy
could not assail him in a battle, like foes against Maghavan. His heat was like that
of the fire at the time of the destruction of a yuga. He was as steady as the Himalayas. O Madhava! The brave one was the refuge for Dhritarashtra's son. He has
been slain and is lying down on the ground, like a tree shattered by a storm. Behold
Karna's wife, Vrishasena's mother. She has fallen down on the ground and is
lamenting and weeping in piteous tones. 'It is certain that the preceptor's curse followed you[Karna's preceptor, Parashurama, cursed him.]. That is the reason the earth swallowed up the wheel of your chariot.
Then, in the midst of the enemy in the battle, Dhananjaya's arrow severed your
head.' Alas! Shame! When Sushena's mother[Sushena was Karna's son.] has seen the mighty-armed Karna,
with gold-decorated armour plates and who was never dispirited, she has fallen
down, senseless. She is extremely miserable and is weeping. There is little left of
the great-souled one. The predatory beasts have devoured his body. It is not a pleasant sight and is inauspicious, like the moon on the fourteenth day of krishnapaksha.
She is writhing on the ground, where she has fallen. She is distressed and has arisen
again. She is inhaling the fragrance of Karna's face. Tormented because her sons
have been killed, she is weeping."'
