Vyasa said, 'O virtuous son! I was asked by you and have recounted the exact truth. I have recounted to you
the philosophy of sankhya. I will now tell you everything about the tasks of yoga. Listen. The intelligence,
the mind and all the senses must be united. O son! If one meditates on the atman, one will obtain supreme knowledge. One will obtain this through tranquility. One must be self-controlled and devote oneself to adhyatma. One
must turn one's intelligence to finding pleasure in the atman. One must be pure in one's deeds. One will then know
what should be known. The learned and the wise say that five taints associated with yoga must be severed. These
are desire, anger, avarice, fear and sleep as the fifth. Anger is conquered through tranquility, desire by giving up all
resolution. A patient person resorts to the truth and should give up all sleep. Through fortitude, the penis and the
stomach must be controlled. The hands and the feet must be protected through the eyes. The eyes and the ears must
be controlled through the mind, the mind through words and deeds. Fear can be conquered through attentiveness
and greed by serving the wise. In this way, one must attentively conquer the taints associated with yoga. One must
honour the fire and brahmanas and bow down before the gods. One must abandon hateful words, those that are full
of violence and not pleasant to the mind. The brahman is the energetic seed and is the essence of everything. It is
the single one in both kinds of beings, mobile and immobile. Meditation, studying, donations, truth, modesty, uprightness, forgiveness, purity in food, cleanliness and control of the senses-energy can be increased through these
and sins cleansed. One is then successful in all one's pursuits, and knowledge arrives. One must behave equally
towards all beings and towards what has been obtained and what has not been obtained. One will be cleansed of all
sins, energetic, restrained in diet and in control over the senses. Having subjugated desire and anger, one must desire to attain the objective of the brahman. One must be single-minded and controlled in restraining the mind and
the senses. Just before night, or just after night, one must fix one's mind on the atman[Meditation should be in the evening, or at dawn.]. If a person cannot control
a single one of the five senses, that is a weakness in the senses, and wisdom drains out, as if through a hole at the
bottom. The mind must first be subdued, like a fisherman drawing in the fish. A person engaged in yoga must then
control the ears, the eyes, the tongue and the nose. Having restrained them, they must be fixed in the mind. With all
resolution having ebbed away from the mind, it must then be fixed on the atman. The five[The five senses.] must be controlled
and placed in the mind. After this, the mind, as the sixth, must be placed in the atman. When this has been done,
the brahman is pleased and manifests itself. It blazes, like flames without smoke, or like the resplendent sun. Like
fire in lightning in the sky, one then beholds the atman inside one's own self. Everything is then seen in it and it is
seen in everything. Learned brahmanas see the great atman. They are immensely wise and persevering and are engaged in the welfare of all beings. If a person is rigid in his vows and observes them for a limited period of time[This is interpreted as a period of six months.],
seated alone, he obtains identity with Akshara. Infatuation, hallucination, the whirling around of scent, hearing and
sight, wonders of taste and touch, pleasant, cool and warm breezes, powers and other phenomena-all these are
obtained through yoga[Through yoga, several such powers are obtained. But these are distractions and must be ignored.]. Knowing the truth about these, he must ignore them and return them to his atman. A restrained sage must ignore them. At three times[Dawn, noon and evening.], he must engage himself in yoga-on the summit of a mountain,
at a place of worship, or at the foot of a tree. He must control all his senses, like cattle in a cow pen in a village. He
must always be single-minded in his thoughts and turn his mind to nothing other than yoga. In every way possible,
one must restrain the fickle mind. He must be engaged in this and must never deviate. Single-minded in attaining
the objective, he must reside in deserted mountain caverns, temples to the gods or deserted houses. He should have
no association with others, in words, deeds and thoughts. He must ignore everything and be restrained in his diet.
He should look at what has been obtained and what has not been obtained as equal. He should not be delighted.
Nor should he be distressed. Whether he is praised or whether he is reprimanded, he must look on both equally,
and not desire good things for the former and bad things for the latter. He should not be delighted at obtaining
something. He should not think about something that has not been obtained. He must behave equally towards all
beings and must follow the dharma of the wind[The wind does not get attached to anything.]. Such a virtuous person seeks everything in the atman and looks
upon everything equally. If he is engaged in this way for six months, he obtains the Shabda-Brahma[This is interpreted as meaning that he no longer has to undertake any rites, but passes beyond them.]. On seeing
that subjects are afflicted by grief[Because of their attachments.], he must look upon a lump of earth and gold in the same way. He must withdraw from this path[Of acquisition.]. He must desist from it and be free of confusion. Even if one belongs to one of the inferior
varnas and even if one happens to be a woman, as long as one desires dharma, one can resort to this path and obtain the supreme objective[By implication, the Vedas and sankhya are prohibited to inferior varnas and women. But the path of yoga is
available to everyone.]. A man who controls his senses and is not fickle obtains the ancient and eternal one
who is without birth and without decay. It is subtler than the most subtle. It is greater than the greatest. United with
his own atman, he sees it inside himself. These are the words of the great-souled maharshis. They spoke about this
and beheld it with their minds. In one's mind, one should follow the words that have been spoken and instructed. A
learned person will then see the great being inside his own self, until the time comes for a living being to be destroyed.'"'
