'Markandeya said, "Angry at the death of his beloved son, Dashagriva ascended his chariot and marched out,
adorned in gold and gems. He was surrounded by terrible rakshasas, with many weapons in their hands. He scattered the foremost among monkeys and advanced towards Rama. While he was angrily advancing, Mainda, Nila,
Nala, Angada, Hanuman and Jambavan, together with their soldiers, surrounded him. In Dashagriva's sight, those
bulls among bears and monkeys destroyed his soldiers with trees. When he saw that his soldiers were being annihilated by the enemy, Ravana, the lord of the rakshasas and skilled in maya, resorted to maya. Hundreds and thousands of rakshasas were seen to emerge from his body. They held arrows, lances and swords in their hands. But
Rama destroyed all those rakshasas with his divine weapons. The lord of the rakshasas then resorted to maya
again. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Dashanana created forms that looked like Rama and Lakshmana and
they rushed towards Rama and Lakshmana. O king! On reaching Rama and Lakshmana, those stalkers of the night
descended on them, with long bows in their hands. On witnessing the maya of the Indra among rakshasas, the
dauntless Soumitri, the descendant of the Ikshvaku lineage, spoke these words to Rama. 'Kill those evil-souled
rakshasas, who have forms like yours.' Rama then slew the ones who looked like him.

'"Then, in that field of battle, Shakra's charioteer, Matali, arrived before Rama in a chariot that was as radiant as
the sun and was yoked to tawny horses. Matali said, 'This is the supreme chariot that belongs to Maghavan himself. It is named Jaitra and is yoked to tawny horses. O Kakutstha! O tiger among men! Shakra used this splendid
chariot in the war against daityas and danavas and killed hundreds. O tiger among men! Swiftly ascend this chariot, driven by me in battle. Defeat Ravana in battle. Do not delay.' When he heard Matali's words, Raghava was
suspicious, thinking that this might be more maya on the part of the rakshasa. But Vibhishana told him, 'O tiger
among men! This is not the maya of the evil-souled Ravana. O immensely radiant one! Therefore, swiftly mount
Indra's chariot. Delighted, Kakutstha told Vibhishana that he would act accordingly. He mounted the chariot and
angrily advanced towards Dashagriva. When Ravana advanced towards him, all the beings began to lament. The
gods roared like lions in heaven and sounded drums. The stalker of the night hurled an extremely terrible javelin at
Rama, like Indra's vajra and like Brahma's raised staff. Rama cut that javelin down with sharp arrows. On witnessing that difficult deed, Ravana was overcome by fear. Dashagriva was angered and released thousands and tens of
thousands of sharp arrows and other kinds of weapons at Rama-bhushundis[It isn't clear from the Mahabharata what kind of a weapon a bhushundi was. It was a weapon that was
hurled and could have been a simple rock. However, in descriptions of the Kurukshetra War, it seems to have been
more sophisticated than a simple rock.], javelins, clubs, axes, different
kinds of spears, shataghnis and arrows sharp as razors. On seeing the distorted maya created by the rakshasa
Dashagriva, all the monkeys were scared and fled in all the directions. At that, Kakutstha took a supreme arrow out
of his quiver. It was excellent in the head and in the shaft and had a golden shaft. He invoked it with brahmastra
and fixed it to his bow. When Rama invoked that excellent arrow with the mantra of brahmastra, on witnessing
that, all the gods and the gandharvas, with Indra at the forefront, rejoiced. With the invocation of brahmastra, all
the gods, gandharvas and kinnaras thought that the rakshasa only had a short span of life left now. Rama then released the arrow, unmatched in its energy. It was terrible and resembled Brahma's raised staff, destined to kill Ravana. It enveloped the foremost among rakshasas, with his chariot, horses and charioteer, in a great mass of blazing
flames. The thirty gods, together with the gandharvas and the charanas, were delighted to see that Ravana had been
killed by Rama, whose deeds were unsullied. The five elements departed from the immensely fortunate Ravana.
Through the energy of brahmastra, he was deprived of all the worlds. The ingredients of his body, together with his
flesh and blood, were burnt so much by the brahmastra that even the ashes could not be seen."'
