Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing Arjuna's words, Nakula glanced towards the king, who was supreme among
those who upheld all forms of dharma. The immensely wise one was broad in the chest and mighty-armed[This is a description of Nakula.]. His
eyes were coppery red and he was temperate in speech. The scorcher of enemies spoke these words to his brother.

"The gods established their fires in Vishakhayupa[Yupa is a sacrificial altar and Vishakhayupa is a place towards the north where the gods set up their sacrificial
altar.]. O great king! Know that the gods decided to base themselves
on action. O king! The ancestors gave life to both believers and non-believers. However, consider that they performed deeds in accordance with the prescribed rites. Know that those who censure the Vedas[The rites prescribed in the Vedas.] have been dislodged and are extreme non-believers. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A brahmana who abandons what is
stated in the Vedas, despite all his action, does not attain the path of the gods and the vault of heaven. O lord of
men! There are brahmanas who are learned and have carefully determined everything stated in the Vedas. Listen.
They say that this[The status of a householder.] is the best stage of life. Wealth must be acquired in accordance with dharma and must be given
away in the best of sacrifices. O great king! A man who thus perfects his soul is said to be one who truly renounces. However, a person who ignores this source of happiness is established on a higher plane, in the sense that
he abandons his own self[This higher plane is being spoken of disparagingly, rather than approvingly. That higher plane is a reference to
life beyond death. In the process, the person abandons his own self because he abandons his own body and deprives it of sustenance.]. O great king! O lord! That is a tamasa kind of renouncing[Of the three qualities (guna), tamas is the worst and represents darkness and ignorance.]. There may be a sage who
does not have an abode. He roams around and finds refuge at the root of a tree. He does not cook and is always engaged in yoga. O Partha! He is one who renounces, but is a mendicant[Although not very clearly stated, the sense is that this is also not approved of. In any event, this is not meant for
a kshatriya.]. O lord of the earth! There may be a brahmana who disregards anger and delight and does not indulge in passions. He studies the Vedas. But such a person
who renounces only serves his preceptor[Again, not meant for kshatriyas.]. O king! The learned ones have considered all the ashramas[The four stage of life-brahmacharya (celibate stage of being a student), garhasthya (the stage of being a householder), vanaprastha (retiring to the forest) and sannyasa (renunciation).] on a scale
and have said that three of them on one side are equal to the stage of being a householder on the other. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having considered, the maharshis, who know about the objectives of the worlds, determined that this was the path towards artha, kama and heaven. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Someone who
acts in accordance with these sentiments is one who truly renounces. Like a foolish person, he does not abandon
his house and head for the forest. There are also those false ones, who are like bird-catchers trying to catch dharma. But because they cannot get rid of desire, the king of death[Yama.] binds them around the neck with the noose of
death. It is said that action done through pride does not lead to fruits. Tranquility, self-control, austerities, generosity, truthfulness, cleanliness, honesty, sacrifices, fortitude and dharma are always spoken of as the rites followed by
rishis. Acts undertaken for the sake of gods, ancestors and guests are praised. O great king! In this mode of life, the
three fruits are obtained[This mode of life is that of a householder. The three fruits are dharma, artha and kama.]. One who follows this, observed by the brahmanas, and does not deviate, is one who renounces and never confronts catastrophe in anything. O king! The unblemished Prajapati[Brahma.] created beings. The one
who is tranquil in his soul thought that they would worship him with sacrifices and perform sacrifices, with many
kinds of gifts. Creepers, trees, herbs, animals fit to be sacrificed and oblations and other objects required for sacrifices were also created for the sake of sacrifices. The task of performing a sacrifice constrains those who are in the
householder stage[Because wealth is required to perform sacrifices.]. That is the reason the status of being a householder is a difficult task to perform and is not
easy to obtain. O great king! There are householders who possess animals and grain, but do not sacrifice. Eternal
sin awaits them. Some rishis say that studying is a sacrifice, others that knowledge is a sacrifice. There are others
who perform great sacrifices in their minds. O king! There are brahmanas who become one with the brahman by
adhering to the path that involves the act of giving. The residents of heaven envy them. O lord of men! There are
many kinds of jewels that have been collected. By not giving them away in a sacrifice, you are thinking like a nonbeliever. For someone who has a family, I do not see any renouncement except through ashvamedha, rajasuya or
sarvamedha[Ashvamedha is a horse sacrifice, rajasuya is a royal sacrifice and sarvamedha is a universal sacrifice.]. O father[The word used is tata.]! There are also other sacrifices revered by brahmanas. O great king! Perform those, like
Shakra, the lord of the gods. When a king commits the sin of being distracted, bandits plunder. When the subjects
have no refuge, the king is said to be overcome by kali[In the sense of kali yuga, or strife and discord.]. O lord of the earth! If we do not give away horses, cattle,
servant maids, adorned she-elephants, villages, countries, fields and houses to brahmanas, our consciousness will
be destroyed by selfishness and we will be like kings overcome by kali. Kings who do not give and do not offer
refuge obtain their share of sin. They enjoy unhappiness, never happiness. If you do not perform a great sacrifice,
if you do not sacrifice to the ancestors, if you do not bathe in the waters of tirthas and instead depart, to roam
around, you will face destruction, like a cloud that is dispersed and blown away by the wind. You will be dislodged
from both the worlds[This world and the next.] and be stationed between them. One who casts aside all attachment in his mind, internal
and external, is one who truly renounces, not one who simply goes away. O great king! A brahmana who follows
these rites prescribed for brahmanas is never dislodged[This does not quite fit, since there is not much point invoking recommended conduct for brahmanas.]. The prosperous enemies have been swiftly slain in the
battle, like the army of the daityas against Shakra. O Partha! Devoted to your own dharma, why should you
grieve? O king! This is what has earlier been recommended in the sacred texts and practised by the righteous. You
have conquered the earth through the valour and dharma of kshatriyas. O Indra among men! You know about
mantras! Give it away and you will ascend the vault of heaven. O Partha! You should not sorrow now."'
