Vaishampayana said, 'When they were some distance away, the Pandavas descended and proceeded on foot.
They bowed down in humility and advanced towards the king's hermitage. All the citizens, the residents of the
kingdom, the women and the foremost among the Kurus followed them on foot. The Pandavas reached Dhritarashtra's lonely hermitage, only frequented by a large number of deer and beautiful with groves of plantain trees. There
were ascetics there, engaged in different kinds of vows. When the Pandavas arrived, they were curious and came
forward to see them. His voice choking with tears, the king asked them, "Where is the upholder of the Kourava lineage? Where has our elder father gone?" They replied, "The lord has gone to bathe in the Yamuna and to collect
flowers and water." On foot, all of them swiftly proceeded along the path that was indicated to them and saw him
from  a  distance.  Wishing  to  see  their  father,  they  advanced  swiftly.  Sahadeva  quickly  dashed  towards  Pritha.
Weeping aloud, the intelligent one touched his mother's feet. On seeing her beloved son, tears also flowed down
her cheeks. She raised her son and embraced him with her arms, informing Gandhari that Sahadeva had come.
Then Pritha saw the king, Bhimasena, Arjuna and Nakula and swiftly came towards them. She was ahead of the
couple whose sons had been killed and was dragging them along. Seeing her, they[The Pandavas.] fell down at her feet. The
great-minded and intelligent lord, the king[Dhritarashtra.], recognized them through their voices and touch. Showering  down
tears and following the prescribed rites, the great-souled ones greeted the king, Gandhari and their mother. They
took away the water pots and carried those themselves. The Pandavas were again comforted by their mother and
regained their senses. The women, whose husbands were lions among men, the warriors and the inhabitants of the
city and the countryside saw the king. King Yudhishthira presented each of them, announcing their names and their
families and they were honoured back in return. Surrounded by them, the king's[Dhritarashtra's.] eyes were filled with tears of joy
and he thought himself to be back in his house in the city of Gajasahvya. With Gandhari and the intelligent Kunti,
the king greeted his daughters-in-law, Krishna and the others and was delighted. He went to the hermitage, populated by siddhas and charanas. He wished to see it, since it was populated by the visitors, like the firmament by
large numbers of stars.'
