'"Manu said, 'Wind originated in Akshara. Energy originated in wind. Water originated in energy. The universe
originated in water. Everything in the universe originated from the universe. All these bodies eventually enter into
the water first[After destruction.]. From the water, they then progressively go to energy, wind and space. The enlightened ones who
obtain the supreme do not have to return from space. There is no heat, cold, mildness, sharpness, sourness, astringency, sweetness, bitterness, sound, scent or form in that supreme state. One does not feel touch. The tongue does
not feel taste. The nose does not feel scent. The ears do not hear sound. In that supreme state, the eyes do not see
form. Men who are learned about adhyatma accept that state. The tongue withdraws from taste, the nose from
scent, the ears from hearing, the skin from touch and the eyes from the qualities of form. In that supreme state,
such a person beholds his own natural state. It has been said that the doer, the act, the facilitators for an act, the inclination, the reasons behind the act and the methods are the soul[The soul is left implicit in the text. We have added this. Otherwise, the
sentence is incomplete.]. But the true doer is the one who pervades
everything in the world, just as the mantras have stated. He is the reason behind everything. He is behind the
supreme objective. He is the cause. Everything else is an effect. Because of the good and bad deeds performed, a
man obtains the good and the bad, sometimes in contradiction to each other. Because of his own deeds, the good
and the bad reside in the body, and knowledge is also bound down there[Because of lack of comprehension, knowledge is bound down.]. When a lamp is lit, the lamp illuminates everything that is in front. The senses are like lamps on trees. When ignited with knowledge, they illuminate
everything. The many advisers of a king cite different reasons, but also come together. Those five in the body[The senses.]
are also subservient to supreme knowledge. The flames of the fire, the force of the wind, the rays of the sun and the
water in the rivers repeatedly come and go. Like that, embodied beings repeatedly come and go in different bodies.
When a person grasps an axe and cuts wood, he sees neither smoke nor fire inside it. Like that, by severing the
body, the stomach, the hands and the feet, one cannot see the other one. When wood is rubbed against another
piece of wood, one can see both smoke and fire. Like that, a person with excellent intelligence and wisdom, can
control his senses to see the supreme in his own natural state. When one is dreaming, one can see one's own body
lying down on the ground, as if it is separate from one's own self. Like that, a person with hearing and the others
senses, excellent in his mind and in his intelligence, sees himself going from one body into another body. The
supreme in the body[The atman.] is not subject to birth, growth, decay and destruction. Unseen, it goes through a process of
transition and passes from one body into another body. The eye cannot behold the form of the atman. It cannot be
felt by anyone through touch. It does not perform any acts. No one can see it. But it sees them. When a lamp is lit,
it assumes a form because of the fire and the heat. That which is inside is also seen to assume form and qualities
from the body. Unseen, a man gives up his body and enters another body. He casts aside the body formed of the
great elements, but still resorts to a form constituted by them. He enters the body of wind, fire, water, space and
earth in every way. Depending on their action, hearing and the other senses resort to the five different qualities.
The ear is for space, smell is for the earth and sight is for energy and fire. Sweat and taste are said to resort to water. The quality of touch has the property of wind. The objects of the senses, and the five senses themselves, dwell
in the five great elements. All of them follow the mind. The mind follows intelligence and the mind follows one's
nature. Whatever good and bad deeds may have been performed are received in one's own body. They follow the
lead of the mind, just as aquatic creatures follow a favourable current. When a moving object comes into the range
of vision, even if it is extremely small, it seems to assume a large form. In the path of intelligence, one can see
one's supreme form in one's own form.'"'
