Janemejaya asked, 'O sage! How can Bhima, whose prowess is terrible and who has the strength of ten thousand
elephants, have been overcome by dreadful fear on account of an ajagara? The insolent one challenged the lord of
riches, of the Pulastya lineage, in battle[Kubera was Vishrava's son and Pulastya's grandson.]. He encountered and killed the foremost among yakshas and rakshasas
at the lotus pond. You said that the destroyer of enemies was overcome by distress and fear. I am curious and wish
to hear this in detail.'

Vaishampayana said, 'O king! Having left the hermitage of King Vrishaparva, those foremost among archers
lived in the forest that possessed many wonders. On seeing that beautiful forest, frequented by gods and gandharvas, Vrikodara began to roam around as he wished, bow and sword in his hands. He saw the pure regions on the
Himalaya mountains, visited by masses of apsaras and frequented by gods, rishis and siddhas. It resounded everywhere with the sounds of chakoras, chakravaka birds, jivas[Herons.], jivakas[Pheasants.], cuckoos and bhringarajas[A shrike or a thrush.]. It was covered with trees that were always full of flowers and fruit, tender because of the touch of snow. There was plenty of
shade and it was pleasant to the mind and the eye. He saw mountainous streams tinged with the colour of lapis
lazuli. The water was touched by snow and there were tens of thousands of geese and karandavas[Ducks.]. There were
forests of devadaru trees[Species of pine. Devadaru literally means tree of the gods.] that seemed to act like a net for the clouds. These were mixed with yellow sandalwood
and tall kaliyakas[Kaliyaka is the barberry or turmeric tree.]. He went hunting on the flat terrain of the desert. The immensely strong one shot the deer with
arrows that were pure[Meaning that the tips of the arrows did not have poison in them.].

'Then he saw a gigantic serpent that makes one's body hair stand up. It had entered a mountainous cavern and
had covered the entire cave with its body. Its coils were piled as high as a mountain. Its colour was yellow like
turmeric and its colourful skin was speckled with circular marks like the sun and the moon. Its mouth was as wide
as a cave and was adorned with four teeth. It constantly licked the corners of its mouth. Its eyes blazed and were
copper-red in hue. Like destiny and like Yama, it struck terror in all beings. Through the moist hissing of its breath,
it seemed to be reprimanding. The hungry boa suddenly grasped Bhimasena and forcefully seized him with both
his arms. Because of the boon it had received, Bhimasena instantly lost his senses as soon as it touched him. The
strength of Bhimasena's arms might have been more than that of others and his strength might have been able to
withstand ten thousand elephants. But the energetic one was completely overcome by the serpent. Bhima trembled
slowly, but he was completely unable to move. He was equal to ten thousand elephants. He had the shoulders of a
lion. His arms were strong. But grasped, he lost his mettle. He was deluded because of the grant of the boon. For
some time, the brave one tried terribly hard to extricate himself. But he did not succeed at all.'
