'Sahadeva said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! One does not obtain success by casting aside external objects. Even if one casts aside physical parts of the
body, success may or may not occur[An interpretation that is not obvious should be mentioned. External objects are those outside the body and those are being juxtaposed not just
with physical parts of the body, but those that are internal to the body,
that is, the mind.]. There are those who cast aside external objects, but still desire them from inside the body[That is, the mind.]. Let the happiness that results
from that kind of dharma devolve on those who hate us, not on us. There are those
who cast aside both objects and the physical body. Let the happiness that results
from that kind of dharma devolve on our well-wishers, but not on us. There are
two aksharas in death and three aksharas in the eternal brahman. 'Mama' is death
and 'na mama' is eternal[Akshara is syllable, though there are some differences between the English syllable and the Sanskrit syllable, because of the way Sanskrit syllables are constructed. Mama has two syllables and means 'it is mine'. Na
mama has three syllables and means 'it is not mine'. The sense of ego
and ownership leads to death and its reverse leads to the eternal truth.]. O king! The brahman and death both dwell inside
one's own self. They are invisible inside beings and there is no doubt that they
cause them to struggle. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If it is certain that
the soul cannot be destroyed, then, by destroying the bodies of beings, one does
not cause any violence. On the other hand, if the soul is generated with the body
and is also destroyed with the body, then the path of all these rites is completely
futile. Therefore, a virtuous man should renounce internally and intelligently follow the path that has been followed by his ancestors earlier[A meaning can be inferred. Since one does not know whether the soul is
eternal or not, one ignores that debate and follows the path traversed by
ancestors.]. If a king obtains the
entire earth, with all its mobile and immobile objects, and yet does not enjoy it,
his life is certainly fruitless. O king! There may be a man who lives in the forest
and survives on wild fare. However, if he still has attachment towards objects, he
lives within the jaws of death. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Consider the
brahman that is naturally within all beings. A person who can see that characteristic is freed from great fear. You are my father. You are my mother. You are my
brother. You are my preceptor. Therefore, you should pardon me for this distressed lamentation that is the consequence of sorrow. O protector of the earth! O
supreme among the Bharata lineage! What I have spoken may be true or false. But
know that it results from devotion towards you."'
