'Markandeya said, "Here more about the greatness of brahmanas. There was a rajarshi by the name of Vainya, who
was instated in a horse sacrifice. We have heard that Atri desired to go to him for riches. But determining the nature of his dharma, he gave up this desire. After reflecting about this, the immensely energetic one decided to retire
to the forest. He summoned the one who was his wife according to dharma, and his sons, and spoke to them. 'If we
wish to reap great fruits, free from any hindrances, you should agree that it is best to swiftly retire to the forest.'

Driven by dharma, his wife replied, 'Go to the great-souled Vainya and ask for a lot of riches from him. The rajarshi is donating gifts and will give you the riches you desire. O brahmana rishi! Having received a lot of riches
and having distributed it among your servants and sons, then go wherever you wish. This is the supreme dharma,
as indicated by those who are learned in dharma.' Atri replied, 'O great-souled one! The immensely fortunate
Goutama has told me that Vainya is conversant with dharma and artha and is devoted to the vow of truthfulness.
But he is surrounded by brahmanas who hate him. So Goutama has told me. Therefore, I have decided not to go
there. When I speak words of well-being that are full of dharma, artha and kama, they will contradict them and
render them useless. O immensely wise one! But I like the purport of your words and will go. Vainya will give cattle and a lot of riches.'

'"Having said this, the immensely ascetic one swiftly went to Vainya's sacrifice. On reaching the sacrificial
grounds, Atri praised the king. 'O king! O Vainya! You are the foremost among all kings on earth. Masses of sages
praise you and no one other than you knows dharma.' But the immensely ascetic rishi[Goutama.] spoke these angry words.

'O Atri! Do not speak such words again. You have not yet attained wisdom. In this world, Mahendra Prajapati[Indra.]
occupies the foremost place.' Atri then replied to Goutama, 'He[Vainya.] is as much of a sustainer as Prajapati Indra. You
are the one who is confused. Your wisdom has been clouded by ignorance.' Goutama said, 'I know that I am not
confused. You are the one who is suffering from delusion. On having seen him, you are speaking thus so as to satisfy him. You do not know what supreme dharma is, nor do you see any need for it. You are as stupid as a child.
Why have you then grown old?' They thus argued, in full sight of the sages who had assembled for the sacrifice
and they asked, 'What are these two arguing about? Who permitted them entry into Vainya's assembly? Why are
they standing here and shouting in this fashion?' O one knowledgeable in all dharma! Then Kashyapa, with
supreme dharma in his soul, stepped between the disputants and asked them why they were quarreling. Goutama
spoke to the supreme sages who were the assisting priests[Sadasyas.]. 'O bulls among brahmanas! Listen to the question
that has arisen between the two of us. Atri says that Vainya is the sustainer, and I have a great doubt on this score.'

On hearing this, the great-souled sages swiftly went to Sanatkumara to resolve the doubt, because he was learned
in dharma.

'"Having heard their words, reflecting the issue exactly, the great ascetic Sanatkumara replied in words that
were in conformity with dharma and artha. Sanatkumara said, 'Brahmanas are united with kshatriyas and kshatriyas with brahmanas. The king is foremost in dharma and he is the lord of his subjects. He is like Shakra, Shukra,
the creator and Brihaspati[Shakra is Indra, Shukra is the preceptor of the demons and Brihaspati is the preceptor of the gods.]. He is Prajapati, Virata[Ruler.], emperor, kshatriya, the lord of the earth and the lord of
men. If one is praised with such words, how can he not be worthy of worship? The king has appellations like "the
prime cause", "the conqueror in battles", "the one who attacks", "the contented one", "the fortunate one", "the one
who wins heaven", "the one who is easily victorious", "the expansive one", "the one for whom anger comes from
truth", "the one who triumphs over enemies" and "the one who propagates dharma and truth". Out of fear for that
which is not dharma, the rishis conferred powers on kshatriyas. Through its energy, the sun removes darkness in
heaven, among the gods. Like that, the king eradicates that which is not dharma from earth. Therefore, the proof of
the sacred texts is that the king is foremost. I am in favour of the side that has spoken for the king.' The great-
souled king was extremely delighted that his side had won. He happily spoke to Atri, who had praised him earlier.

'O brahmana rishi! You have earlier described me as the foremost and greatest among men and an equal to all the
gods. Therefore, I will give you a lot of riches, one thousand shyama servant girls[The word shyama usually means dark, which makes no sense here. Shyama has a secondary meaning of a
woman who has not borne children. That meaning seems more appropriate.] adorned in excellent garments
and ornaments, ten crores of gold coins and ten bharas of gold[Bhara is a measure of weight.]. O brahmana! I must give you this, because I
think you know everything.' The energetic and great-minded Atri accepted all this in the proper fashion. The great
ascetic then returned to his home. Happily, the self-controlled one distributed these riches among his sons. For the
sake of performing austerities, he then left for the forest."'
