Bhishma said, "You have been told what learned ones have ordained about the conduct of householders. O
Yudhishthira! Listen to what has been spoken about next. In due order, a person must proceed to the third
stage, one that is characterized by supreme conduct. This is the ashrama of vanaprastha, followed by those who are
not  distressed  from  observing  vows.  O  Partha! Listen  to  the  conduct  of  those  fortunate  ones,  who  follow  this
everywhere in the world. They reside in auspicious regions and follow this conduct after having examined it first.

'"Vyasa said, 'When a householder sees wrinkles on his body and white hair, and when he sees the children of
his  children,  he  should  then  resort  to  the  forest.  The  third  quarter  of  the  life  should  be  spent  dwelling  in
vanaprastha. He must tend to the fires he used to tend to[As a householder.]. He must worship the residents of heaven. He must be
controlled and restrained in his diet. Without any distraction, he must only eat at the sixth time indicated for taking
meals[This means the evening.]. He must maintain cows and other things required for agnihotra sacrifices. He must survive on rice or barley that grows wild and has not been tilled. He must offer oblations at the five kinds of sacrifices[Offerings at ritual sacrifices, offerings to gods, offerings to ancestors, offerings to guests and offerings to other
animals.]. Four kinds of
conduct are recommended for those who are in the vanaprastha ashrama. Some only wash[A reference to washing food.] what is needed immediately. Others store enough for a month. Some others store for a year and some others store for twelve years. To
accomplish their objectives, they must perform the sacrifice of honouring guests. When it rains, they must only
have the sky for a shelter. When it is autumn, they must find refuge in the water. When it is summer, they must torment themselves through the five austerities[Four fires are lit in the north, the south, the east and the west, with the practitioner seated in the middle. The sun
above the head is the fifth fire.]. They must always be restrained in diet. Some roam around the
earth. Others are seated or lie down on the bare ground. In the forest, some sprinkle their beds and seats with water.
Some use their teeth as mortars for grinding grain. Others use stones for crushing grain. Some only drink a little bit
of grain mixed with water during shuklapaksha. Some only drink[That grain mixed with water.] during krishnapaksha. Others  eat what becomes available in the normal course of things. Some are rigid in their vows and subsist on roots, fruits and flowers. As  is  appropriate,  they  follow  the  mode  revered  by  the  Vaikhanasas[Class of hermit.].  That  apart,  there  are  many  other
learned ones who have been consecrated. The fourth stage[Of sannyasa.] is generally referred to as the dharma of the Upanishads. This follows after garhasthya and vanaprastha. O son! Even in this yuga, brahmanas who know the truth
about everything have followed this-Agastya, the saptarshis[The seven great rishis. While this list varies marginally, the standard one is Marichi, Atri, Angira, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu and Vasishtha.], Madhucchanda, Aghamarshana, Samkriti, Sudiva,
Tandi, who lived on barley and conquered his exhaustion, Ahovirya, Kavya, Tandya, the wise Medhatithi, Shala,
Vaka, Nirvaka and Shunyapala, who conquered his exhaustion. They were learned in this kind of dharma and went
to heaven. O son! There were large numbers of Yayavara[If this is not interpreted as a proper name, it means those who are mendicants, with no fixed abode.] rishis, fierce in their austerities and accomplished and
far-sighted about dharma. They immediately obtained the fruits of this dharma. There were so many brahmanas
who resorted to the forest that it is impossible to speak about them. There were the Vaikhanasas, the Valakhilyas
and Sikatas. They performed difficult deeds. They were always devoted to dharma. They conquered their senses.
All of them went to the forest and immediately obtained the fruits of their dharma. Those fearless ones may not
have become nakshatras[There are twenty-seven nakshatras, which are stars/constellations.], but can be seen in the large number of stellar bodies. When one is overcome by old
age and afflicted by disease, in the fourth quarter of one's life, one should abandon the vanaprastha stage. One
should perform the sacrifice that can be performed in a single day and offer up everything as dakshina. One must
perform one's own funeral rites[Symbolically.]. One must take pleasure in one's own self and must not depend on anyone else.
One must regard one's own self as the sacrificial fire and give up all possessions. One must perform the sacrifice
that can be performed in a single day, which is the sacrifice of all sacrificies. When one sacrifices one's own self,
all other sacrifices and rites can cease. This sacrifice for the sake of emancipation is like making sacrifices to the
three fires[The three sacred fires at any sacrifice-ahavaniya (to the east), dakshinagni (to the south) and garhapatya (the
fire for the householder).]. One should not find fault with the food and only eat five or six mouthfuls for the sake of the five
breaths of life[Prana, apana, samana, udana and vyana.]. At the end of vanaprastha, a sage will cut his hair, beard and nails. Having cleansed himself, he
will then proceed from this ashrama to the next sacred ashrama. Such a brahmana departs, offering freedom from
fear to all beings. After death, he obtains the eternal and energetic worlds. He is excellent in conduct and all his
sins have been cleansed. He doesn't act so as to desire anything in this world or in the next. He is without anger
and without confusion. He is beyond friendship and enmity. Such a man is indifferent towards anything other than
his own atman. He observes yama and that which follows[That which follows yama is niyama. Though there are several principles, yama is good conduct vis-à-vis the external world and niyama is more like internal good conduct.]. He is not distressed at having to give up the principles, oblations and mantras of the sacred texts[He has passed beyond these.]. He is pursuing the objective of performing a sacrifice with his
atman. He has conquered his senses and has no doubt about this supreme dharma. After the other three, this fourth
ashrama is said to be supreme. It is the best and has all the good qualities. I will recount that supreme state to you.
Listen.'"'
