'Dhritarashtra said, "O Duryodhana! O son! Think about what I am telling you. Like one who does not know the
route, you think that the wrong path is the right one. You wish to envelope the energy of the five great-souled sons
of Pandu. But it is as great as the five elements. Kounteya Yudhishthira is established in supreme dharma. Without
attaining the supreme objective[That is, without being killed.], you cannot know him. Kounteya Bhimasena has no one equal to him in
strength. He is a killer in battle. But you are challenging him, like a tree against a great storm. Which intelligent
one wishes to fight against the warrior who is the wielder of Gandiva? He is supreme among those who know all
the weapons, like Meru is among mountains. Whom can Panchala Dhrishtadyumna not vanquish? He releases arrows in the midst of the enemy, like the king of the gods with the vajra. Satyaki is also invincible and is revered by
the Andhakas and Vrishnis. He is always engaged in the welfare of the Pandavas and will destroy your soldiers.
Then again, which intelligent person will fight with Krishna Pundarikaksha[Krishna's name, the one with eyes like a lotus.], who is superior to the three worlds?
His wives, relatives, kin, his own self and the earth are on one side and Dhananjaya alone on the other. The invincible Vasudeva, in control of his soul, is where the Pandava is. His[Arjuna's.] forces, impossible for the earth to withstand,
are where Keshava is. O son! Abide by the words your virtuous well-wishers have spoken for your welfare. Listen
to the aged grandfather Bhishma, Shantanu's son. Listen to what I have said for the welfare of the Kurus. Drona,
Kripa, Vikarna and the great king Bahlika think the same way that I do. You should listen to them. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! All of them are learned in dharma and are equally affectionate towards you. Your forces, together with those of your brothers, were scattered in Virata's city. Before your eyes, they had to relinquish the cattle in a great fight. We have heard the extraordinary account told about that city, where one was enough for many.
That is sufficient proof. This is what Arjuna alone accomplished. What will all of them do together? Know them to
be your brothers and give them a means of sustenance."'
