'Sanjaya said, "The kings were angry and saw Phalguna in that battle. They surrounded him on all sides with many
thousands of chariots. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having surrounded him with a large number of chariots, they enveloped him in all directions with many thousands of arrows. Enraged in battle, they hurled polished
and sharp lances, clubs, maces, javelins, battleaxes, bludgeons and pestles towards Phalguna's chariot. That shower of weapons descended on him like a flight of locusts. But Partha countered all of them with gold-decorated arrows. O Indra among kings! On witnessing Bibhatsu's superhuman lightness of hand, the gods, the danavas, the
gandharvas, the pishachas, the serpents and the rakshasas honoured Phalguna with words of praise. With a large
army and together with Soubala, the brave ones from the land of Gandhara surrounded Satyaki and Abhimanyu in
that battle. With many different kinds of weapons, the angry ones who were on Soubala's side wrathfully cut down
Varshneya's supreme chariot into tiny fragments[Varshneya means someone of the Vrishni lineage. In this context, it is being used for Satyaki.]. In that extremely fearful battle, Satyaki abandoned his chariot
and the scorcher of enemies swiftly ascended onto Abhimanyu's chariot. Stationed on the same chariot, they swiftly countered Soubala's army and pierced it with many sharp and straight-tufted arrows. In that battle, Drona and
Bhishma made endeavours to fight with Dharmaraja's army. They destroyed it with sharp arrows tufted with the
feathers of herons. In the sight of all the soldiers, the king who was Dharma's son and the Pandavas who were
Madri's sons began to oppress Drona's army. The great battle that was fought was tumultuous and made the body
hair stand up. It was like the extremely terrible battle that was earlier fought between the gods and the asuras. Bhimasena and Ghatotkacha performed extremely great deeds. Then Duryodhana arrived and repulsed both of them.
We witnessed the valour displayed by Hidimba's son[Ghatotkacha.] and it was extraordinary. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When he fought, he surpassed his father in battle. Pandava Bhimasena was enraged. He smiled and pierced
the intolerant Duryodhana in the chest with an arrow. At this, King Duryodhana lost his senses from this blow. He
sank down on his chariot and fainted. O king! On seeing that he had lost his senses, the charioteer swiftly carried
him away from the field of battle and his soldiers ran away. While the Kourava soldiers were running away in all
directions, Bhima pursued them and killed them with sharp arrows.

'"In Drona's sight and in the sight of Gangeya, Parshata, foremost among charioteers, and the Pandava who was
Dharma's son began to slaughter their soldiers with sharp and straight-tufted arrows that were capable of killing
the enemy. In that battle, the soldiers of your sons started to run away. O lord of the earth! Maharatha Bhishma and
Drona were incapable of restraining them, though Bhishma and Drona did try to restrain them. While both Drona
and Bhishma looked on, the soldiers fled. Thousands of chariots fled in all directions. Subhadra's son and the bull
among Shinis were stationed on a single chariot. In that battle, in every direction, they began to slaughter the soldiers of Soubala. Shini's descendant and the bull among the Kurus[Satyaki and Abhimanyu respectively.] were resplendent, like two suns in the firmament after the night of the new moon had passed. O lord of the earth! Arjuna angrily showered down arrows on the
soldiers, like clouds pouring down rain. Thus slaughtered in that battle with Partha's arrows, the Kourava soldiers
were overcome by sorrow and fright and trembled and ran away. On seeing that the soldiers were running away,
maharatha Bhishma and Drona, became angry and having Duryodhana's welfare in mind, tried to restrain them. O
lord of the earth! At this, King Duryodhana himself reassured the troops and restrained them from running away in
every direction. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Wherever your son could be seen, there the maharatha kshatriyas were restrained. O king! Wherever they were restrained, the ordinary soldiers saw them and were also restrained, ashamed and desiring to rival each other. O lord of the earth! That army was thus forcefully rallied and
looked like a full ocean when the moon rises.

'"Having seen that the army had been rallied, King Suyodhana swiftly went to Bhishma, Shantanu's son, and
spoke these words to him. 'O grandfather! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Listen to the words I am speaking
to you. O Kourava! When you are alive, and so is Drona, supreme among those who are skilled in weapons, together with his son and well-wishers, and so is the great archer Kripa, I do not think it is praiseworthy that my soldiers should flee in this way. I do not think that the Pandavas are a force capable of withstanding you in battle, or
Drona, or Drona's son, or Kripa. O grandfather! The Pandavas are certainly being favoured by you. O brave one!
That is the reason you are pardoning them this act of killing my soldiers. O king! You should have told me earlier,
before this encounter commenced, that you would not fight in a battle with the Pandavas, or with Parshata, or with
Satyaki. On hearing your words and those of the preceptor and of Kripa, together with Karna, I would then have
reflected on what should be done. O bulls among men[Duryodhana is addressing both Bhishma and Drona now.]! If I do not deserve to be abandoned by both of you in
this battle, then fight in accordance with your valour.' Having heard these words, Bhishma laughed repeatedly. His
eyes were full of anger and he spoke these words to your son. 'O king! On many occasions, I have spoken words
for your welfare and you should have accepted them. The Pandavas are incapable of being vanquished in battle
even by the gods, together with Vasava. O supreme among kings! Though I am aged now, I will do what I am capable of doing and I will do it to the best of my capacity. Behold it with your relatives. While all the worlds look
on, I will alone repulse the sons of Pandu now, together with their soldiers and relatives.' O lord of men! Having
been thus addressed by Bhishma, your son was extremely delighted and instructed that conch shells and drums
should be sounded. O king! Having heard this loud roar, the Pandavas blew on their conch shells and instructed
that drums and tambourines should be sounded."'
