'Yudhishthira said, "When the supreme forms of dharma decay and are transgressed by all the people, adharma
transforms into dharma and dharma goes into adharma. Boundaries are broken down and the determination to follow dharma is agitated. O lord of the earth! The world is oppressed by kings and thieves. All the ashramas are confused and the duties are destroyed. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Fear is seen from desire, confusion and
avarice. O king! Everyone is always distrustful and frightened. They use fraud to kill and deceive each other. The
country is ablaze and brahmanas are afflicted. The rains do not shower down. Dissension and strife arise. All the
means of sustenance on earth are taken over by bandits. When that terrible time arrives, how does a brahmana survive? O lord of men! Because of extreme compassion, he may be unwilling to give up his sons and grandsons[He may be unwilling to give up his life.]. O
grandfather! How will he conduct himself? Tell me that. How will the king conduct himself when the world has
been rendered impure? O scorcher of enemies! How can artha and dharma be prevented from decaying?"

'Bhishma replied, "O great king! The king is the foundation for the people to obtain yoga, kshema, good rains
and lack of fear from disease and death. O bull among the Bharata lineage! I have no doubt that the king is the
foundation of everything in krita, treta, dvapara and kali. When a time that causes confusion among subjects arrives, one must live on the basis of the strength of discernment. On this, an ancient history is recounted. It concerns
a conversation between Vishvamitra and a chandala in the hut of the chandala. O king! In ancient times, in the intervening period[Sandhya, the period between two yugas.] between treta and dvapara, it was ordained by destiny that there should be a terrible drought for
twelve years. At the end of the yuga, subjects became extremely aged. As treta gave away and dvapara took hold,
the thousand-eyed one[Indra.] did not rain. Jupiter[The text uses the word Guru.] moved in a retrograde direction. The moon abandoned its characteristics and moved along a southern path. There was no dew at the end of the night. There were no collections of
clouds. The flow of water in the rivers became less and in some places, it disappeared. Because of destiny, the natural condition and beauty of lakes, rivers, wells and springs were destroyed. The water in waterbodies dried up and
water was no longer distributed[In places along the roads, where there is free distribution of drinking water.]. There were no sacrifices and recitations of svadha. All the auspicious sounds of
vashatkara also ceased. Agriculture and animal husbandry were destroyed. Shops and markets disappeared. There
were no assemblies of people and all the great festivals vanished. Bones and skeletons were strewn around. The
place was frequented by large numbers of demons. Most of the cities were emptied. Villages and habitations were
burnt up. Sometimes, this was because of thieves. Sometimes, this was because of weapons. Sometimes, this was
because of oppressive kings. They were afraid of each other and the desolate spots were also generally empty. No
resolutions were made to the gods. The old and the young were abandoned. Cows, goats and buffaloes fought
against each other[For food.] and perished. Brahmanas were killed. There was an end to protection. The stores of herbs
were destroyed. The men and the earth turned almost brown then. O Yudhishthira! At that fearful time, dharma
was in decay. All the mortals were hungry and ate each other. The rishis abandoned their rituals. They abandoned
the sacrificial fire and the gods. They abandoned their hermitages and ran around, here and there.

'"The illustrious maharshi Vishvamitra was without a house[The lack of a house need not necessarily mean a sign of deprivation, since hermits often didn't possess a fixed
residence.]. The intelligent one was afflicted by hunger and
wandered around in every direction. On one occasion, in the forest, he came upon the houses of violent shvapachas, who killed animals and ate their flesh. The place was strewn with broken pots and the hides of dogs. There
were heaps of shattered bones from boars and asses. There were pots made of skulls. It was strewn with garments
of the dead and ornamented with used garlands[Implicitly, these garments and garlands have been collected from the dead and from cremation grounds.]. The huts were decorated with garlands made from the cast-off
skins of snakes. The temples bore flags made out of the feathers of owls. There were iron bells and the place was
surrounded by packs of dogs. Afflicted by hunger, the great rishi, Gadhi's son, entered there. He made great efforts
to search for some food there. Though he was begging for alms, Koushika could find nothing there[Vishvamitra was the son of Gadhi and Gadhi was the son of Kushika. Thus, Vishvamitra is Koushika.]. There was no
meat, rice, roots or fruit, or anything else. Koushika thought, 'Alas! A great hardship has come upon me.' Because
of his weakness, in that hamlet of the chandalas, he fell down on the ground. O supreme among kings! The sage
thought, 'Do I have any good merits left? How can I avoid a pointless death?' O king! The sage then saw some
dog meat hung out from a rope in the chandala's house, from an animal that had just been killed by a weapon. He
thought, 'I must steal this now. Other than this, there is no other means for me to remain alive. In a time of catastrophe, it has been determined that even an especially distinguished person can steal. It has been determined that
this must be in succession, from an earlier category to the next. One must first take from someone who is inferior
and then from someone who is equal. If these are impossible, one can take from an eminent person, even if he follows dharma. I will therefore take it from those who live on the outside fringes. I do not see any sin in this theft. I
will steal the meat.' O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having used his intelligence to determine this, Vishvamitra, the great sage, began to sleep at the spot where he had fallen down. When he saw that it was night and
everyone in the chandala hamlet was asleep, the illustrious one arose and gently entered the hut.

'"The chandala was asleep. His eyes were covered with mucus. His voice was broken and harsh and he was unpleasant to look at. He asked, 'When the hamlet of the chandalas is asleep, who is stirring the rope? I am awake. I
am not asleep. I am terrible and I will kill you.' At these sudden and forceful words and anxious at the prospect of
his actually doing this, he replied, 'I am Vishvamitra.' The chandala heard these words from the maharshi who had
perfected his soul and was terrified. He leapt up from his supine position. Tears flowed from his eyes.

'"He joined his hands in salutation, showed a great deal of honour and told Koushika, 'O, brahmana! What do
you wish to do here in the night?' Vishvamitra assured Matanga[The chandala's name.] and replied, 'I am hungry and have almost lost
my life. I will steal the dog's haunch. The breath of my life is ebbing away. The hunger is destroying my memory.
Though I know my own dharma, I will steal the dog's haunch. Despite begging everywhere, I could find no food
until I saw some in your house. Then I turned my mind to sin. I will steal the dog's haunch. A thirsty person will
drink dirty water. There is no shame for someone who is looking for food. Hunger destroys dharma. I will steal the
dog's haunch. Agni is the priest and the mouth of the gods and the illustrious one's footsteps are clean. Just as the
one who devours everything still remains a brahmana, know that so will I, according to dharma.' The chandala
said, 'O maharshi! Listen to my words. Having heard me, act accordingly, so that dharma is not made to decay.
The learned say that dogs are the worst among animals. The worst part of the body is said to be the thighs and the
haunches. O maharshi! You did not act properly when you decided to commit this perverse deed. You should not
steal from a chandala, in particular, food that you should not eat. Look towards some other means so that you may
be successful in remaining alive. O great sage! Do not destroy your austerities because of this greed for meat. You
know that this is a forbidden path. You should not act so as to mix up dharma[Mix up a brahmana's dharma with a chandala's dharma.]. O supreme among those who
know about dharma! You should not abandon dharma.' O king! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Having been
thus addressed, the great sage, Vishvamitra, afflicted by hunger, again replied in these words. 'I have been running
around for a very long time, without any food. There is no other means for me to remain alive. If one faces a hardship, one should do whatever is possible to remain alive, and if possible, act in accordance with dharma. Indra's
dharma is from kshatriyas and Agni's for brahmanas. The brahmana Agni is my strength and I will eat at the time
when I am hungry. One should unhesitatingly act so as to remain alive. It is better to be alive than dead. One can
follow dharma only if one remains alive. In my desire to remain alive, I will also eat what should not be eaten. I
have used my intelligence to determine this earlier. Grant me permission. I am following the dharma of remaining
alive and will cleanse all the impurities through my knowledge and austerities, like stellar bodies dispelling great
darkness.' The shvapacha said, 'If you eat this, I do not think that you will obtain your breath of life, a long lifespan, or the satisfaction of amrita. Beg for something else. Do not set your mind on begging for, and eating, dogs.
Dogs should not be eaten by brahmanas.' Vishvamitra replied, 'O shvapacha! At a time of famine, no other meat is
easily available, or rice. Nor do I possess riches. I am afflicted by hunger and have lost all hope of even being able
to move. I think that dog meat will provide the six different kinds of flavours[Sweet, salty, sour, bitter, pungent and astringent.].' The shvapacha said, 'O brahmana! Brahmanas and kshatriyas should only eat five animals that have five claws[Hedgehog, porcupine, lizard, rabbit and turtle.]. If you accept the proofs of
the sacred texts, do not pointlessly have a desire to eat what should not be eaten.' Vishvamitra replied, 'When he
was hungry, Agastya ate the asura Vatapi[This incident has been described in Section 33 (Volume 3).]. I am afflicted and agitated by hunger. I will eat the dog's haunch.' The
shvapacha said, 'Beg for something else. You should not act like this. You should certainly not act in this way.
However, since you so wish, take the dog's haunch.' Vishvamitra replied, 'The virtuous act in accordance with
dharma and I will follow their conduct[A reference to Agastya.]. I think that eating this dog's haunch is better than eating food obtained
from sacrifices.' The shvapacha said, 'If someone has followed an unrighteous path, this does not become eternal
dharma. You should not vainly engage in wicked conduct on the basis of deceitful and false reasons.' Vishvamitra
replied, 'Since I am a rishi, I will not do anything wicked, or anything that should not be done. I think that a dog
and a deer are the same. Therefore, I will eat the dog's haunch.' The shvapacha said, 'The rishi's[A reference to Agastya again.] right to eat and
the act that he did was for the sake of brahmanas. Dharma is that which is not wicked and it must be protected, by
whatever means that are possible.' Vishvamitra replied, 'I am a brahmana and this body is my friend. In this world,
it is worshipped as the most loved. Since I desire to maintain it, I will take this. I am not frightened of any violence
that may result from this.' The shvapacha said, 'Do as you wish. There are men who act so as to give up their lives,
instead of eating what should not be eaten. They obtain all their desires. O learned one! Since you are afflicted by
hunger, do what appeals to you.' Vishvamitra replied, 'There is an uncertainty about what will happen to me after
death. Perhaps all my deeds will be destroyed. If I protect the foundation by eating what should not be eaten, I may
still return with a cleansed soul[This shloka is difficult to translate and some liberties have been taken.]. In my knowledge, I am satisfied that the two[The body and the soul.] are distinct, like the skin and
sight, and thinking that they are the same is confusion. I am certain that if I act in this way, I will not become
someone like you[In the next life.].' The shvapacha said, 'My view is that this downfall is misery. It is because of this that I am
committing the evil act of censuring a virtuous brahmana.' Vishvamitra replied, 'Even when frogs croak, cows
drink. You have no right to dharma. Do not praise yourself greatly.' The shvapacha said, 'O brahmana! I entreated
you as a well-wisher. I felt compassion for you. Therefore, accept what is best. Because of greed, do not eat the
dog.' Vishvamitra replied, 'If you are my well-wisher and desire my happiness, then save me from this distress. I
know what dharma is. Give me the dog's haunch.' The shvapacha said, 'I am not interested in giving you this. Nor
can I ignore my own food being taken away. O brahmana! Both of us will be stained by sins-I, because I am the
giver, and you, because you are receiving it.' Vishvamitra replied, 'After perpetrating this wicked act today, if I am
still alive and roam around, I will act so as to greatly cleanse myself. Having purified myself, I will obtain dharma.
Of these two[Remaining alive or dying.], tell me which is better.' The shvapacha said, 'The atman is the witness to everything that is done in
this world. You yourself know what is wicked here. I think that anyone who is prepared to eat dog meat will not be
ready to abstain from anything.' Vishvamitra replied, 'There is no sin in taking it, or eating it. It is always good
policy to allow for exceptions. There has been no violence. No false words have been spoken. This can therefore
be eaten and there will be no grave sin.' The shvapacha said, 'If this is the reason behind your eating it, it has no
rationale from the Vedas, or from dharma. O Indra among brahmanas! Therefore, as you have said, I do not see
any sin attached to food that should not be eaten, or from your eating it.' Vishvamitra replied, 'It is not seen that
there is a great sin from eating this. If one drinks liquor, one is bound to fall down-these are only words used in
this world. This is also true of many other similar deeds. Such deeds do not bring about the slightest bit of downfall.' The shvapacha said, 'If a person is learned, his good conduct restrains him from going to where he should
not, from becoming inferior and from being censured. But because of desire, if he nevertheless goes to such a
place, he will have to bear the punishment.' Having told Koushika this, Matanga desisted.

'"Having made up his mind, Vishvamitra took the dog's haunch. In a desire to remain alive, the great sage
seized those five limbs[Probably the two hind legs, the two rear thighs and the hind quarters.]. The great sage went to the forest, to gratify his wife with this. At that time, Vasava began
to rain down. All the subjects were revived and the herbs were generated. The illustrious Vishvamitra performed
austerities and burnt his sins. In the course of time, he obtained great and extraordinary success. If a learned person
confronts a calamity and desires to remain alive, as long as he is not miserable in his heart and knows of different
means, he must cheerfully use every method to save himself. One must thus always resort to one's intelligence and
remain alive. If a man remains alive, he obtains what is sacred and sees fortune. O Kounteya! Therefore, resort to
the intelligence used by learned people in determining dharma and adharma. Make efforts and conduct yourself in
this world accordingly."'
