The brahmana said, 'In this connection, there is an ancient history about the ordinances for chaturhotra[Sacrifice with four officiating priests.],
explaining why the rites are like that. All those ordinances and rites are now being recounted to you. O fortunate one! I will tell you. Listen to this supreme mystery. O beautiful one! The agent, the action, the instrument
and emancipation-these are the four officiating priests that envelope the universe. Listen to the means that are
used by all these officiating priests. The nose, the tongue, the eyes, the skin, the ears as the fifth, mind and intelligence-these seven are known to be qualities associated with the agent. Smell, taste, form, sound, touch as the
fifth, what is thought and what is understood-these seven are qualities associated with the action. The one who
smells, the one who eats, the one who sees, the one who touches, the one who hears as the fifth, the one who thinks
and the one who understands-these seven are known as qualities associated with the instrument. They possess
qualities, good or bad, and are consumed by their own qualities. A person who knows himself to be beyond the
seven and devoid of qualities has reason for emancipation. Learned ones know that these qualities occupy their respective places. They are the forms of the gods and always enjoy the oblations. Ignorant ones eat and develop a
sense of ownership[The senses consume, not the atman. Learned ones know the difference between the senses and the atman.]. Such a person only cooks for himself and is always destroyed by this sense of ownership.
He eats what he should not eat and he is also destroyed by the drinking of liquor. He destroys the food he has eaten. Having destroyed the food, he also destroys his sense of knowledge. However, a learned lord eats the food for
the sake of being born again. Because of the food he has eaten, there is not the slightest bit of transgression in him.
What is thought by the mind, what is spoken in words, what is heard by the ears, what is seen by the eyes, what is
touched by the skin, what is smelt by the ears-all these six are like oblations and must be controlled by the mind.
These qualities must be offered to the blazing fire that rages inside the body[The atman is being compared to a fire.]. This is the sacrifice of yoga that I
am engaged in. This knowledge about the brahman emanates from the mind. Prana is the hymn for that sacrifice
and apana is the weapon that is used. Renouncing everything is the excellent dakshina. The action and the doer are
both the officiating priest with which I praise the beloved brahman. I praise him with the rules of the sacred texts
and offer dakshina. Those who know about Naryayana praise him with a hymn from the Rig Veda. "In ancient
times, animals were slaughtered in the name of the god Narayana." Hymns chanted from the Sama Veda are also
cited as an illustration. O timid one! Listen to me. The god Narayana is the soul of everything.'"'
