Vaishampayana said, 'Daruka, Keshava and Babhru left and followed Rama's footsteps. They saw the infinitely
valorous Rama seated in a desolate spot, at the foot of a tree. Krishna approached the great one and gave Daru-
ka the following instruction. "Swiftly go to the Kurus and tell Partha about this great destruction of the Yadus. On
hearing about how the Yadavas have died because of the curse of brahmanas, let Arjuna come here quickly." Thus
addressed, Daruka, who was senseless in grief, left on a chariot for the Kurus. After Daruka left, Keshava saw that
Babhru was still near him and spoke these words. "Go quickly and protect the women. Greedy for riches, let the
bandits not cause any violence to them." He was still intoxicated with liquor and distressed because of the slaughter of his relatives. However, instructed by Keshava, he departed. Babhru had gone only a short distance away
from Keshava. He has also been covered in the curse of the brahmanas. Suddenly and swiftly, a club released from
a hunter's hand arrived and slew him. On seeing that Babhru was now dead, Krishna spoke these words to his elder brother. "O Rama! Wait here for me, until I have handed over the care of the women to our kin." Janardana entered the city of Dvaravati and spoke these words to his father. "Wait for Dhananjaya's arrival and protect all these
women. Rama is waiting for me on the outskirts of the forest. I have to go to him now. I foresaw this slaughter of
the Yadus even before I foresaw that of the kings and the bulls among the Kuru lineage. Without the Yadus, I am
incapable of looking at this city of the Yadavas. Listen to me. I will go to the forest and practise austerities, together with Rama." Having said this, Krishna touched his feet with his head and quickly departed.

'Loud sounds of lamentation arose from the women and the children who were in the city. Hearing the sounds of
the weeping women, Keshava returned and said, "Savyasachi will arrive in the city. That foremost among men will
free you from your grief." Keshava went and saw Rama in that desolate spot in the forest. He saw him immersed in
yoga and a giant serpent was emerging from his mouth. Its complexion was white and that great being headed towards  the great ocean. It possessed  one thousand heads, was  as  large as  a mountain and was  an inhabitant of
Bhogavati[The city of the nagas.]. Its face was red and it freed itself from the former body. It moved towards the ocean. Divine serpents
and  sacred  rivers  were  there  to  receive  it.  O  king!  Karkotaka,  Vasuki,  Prithushrava,  Varuna,  Kunjara,  Mishri,
Shankha, Kumuda, Pundarika, the great-souled naga Dhritarashtra, Hrada, Kratha, Shitikantha, Agrateja, the nagas
Chakramanda and Atishanda, Durmukha and Ambarisha, the best among nagas and King Varuna himself came forward to welcome and honour it[These are names of nagas and the first Varuna is a naga, not the lord of the ocean. Dhritarashtra is also a naga, not
Duryodhana's father.]. They worshipped it with padya, arghya and other rites.

'Vasudeva possessed divine sight. When his brother had departed, he knew that everyone was gone. For some
time, he wandered around in that desolate forest, thinking. The greatly energetic one then sat down on the ground.
He thought about all the words that the excellent Gandhari had spoken to him earlier. Krishna also remembered
what Durvasa had said when his body had been smeared with payasam[Payasam (payasa) is rice boiled in milk. Durvasa visited Krishna and Rukmini and was offered some payasam.
Satisfied, Durvasa granted Krishna the boon that he would be able to choose the time of his death. He also offered the leftover payasam to Krishna, who smeared it all over his body, except the legs. He did not wish to taint
what the sage had given by smearing it on his legs. Thus, except for the legs, every other part of Krishna's body
became invulnerable.]. The great one thought about the destruction of the Andhakas and the Vrishnis and the destruction of the Kurus. Having decided that the time had come, he
restrained his senses. He restrained his senses and his speech. Krishna lay down, immersed in great yoga. A fierce
hunter named Jara arrived at that spot, searching for deer[Jara also means old age and decrepitude.]. The hunter saw Keshava lying down in yoga and took
him to be a deer. With an arrow, Jara swiftly struck him on the sole of the foot. He then quickly advanced, desiring
to seize what he had struck. The hunter saw a man immersed in yoga, with many arms and attired in yellow garments. He thought he had committed a grave sin and severely distressed, touched his feet with his head. The great-
souled one comforted him. Enveloping heaven and earth in his prosperity, he rose upwards. He reached heaven and
was welcomed by Vasava, the Ashvins, Rudra, the Adityas, the Vasus, the Vishvadevas, the sages, the siddhas, the
foremost among gandharvas and the apsaras. O king! Then, the fiercely energetic, powerful, undecaying, great-
souled and illustrious Narayana went to his own region, which is impossible to fathom. O king! Krishna met the
gods, the rishis and the charanas. The best among gandharvas and apsaras and the siddhas and the sadhyas bowed
down and worshipped him. O king! The gods, the best among sages and their eloquent followers worshipped the
lord of everything. The gandharvas served and praised him. Delighted, Puruhuta[Indra.] also honoured him.'
