Vaishampayana said, 'O king! On getting to know through messengers, Shalya, together with his maharatha sons,
marched towards the Pandavas, surrounded by a large army. His army's camp extended for one and a half
yojanas[A yojana is a measure of distance, between eight and nine miles.]. That bull among men was the lord of such a large army. Those brave warriors were dressed in colourful
armour. They had colourful flags and bows. All of them wore colourful ornaments. They had colourful chariots
and vehicles. Those hundreds and thousands of warriors wore their native attire and ornaments. Those bulls among
the kshatriyas were the generals of the army. The beings were frightened and the earth trembled. Resting often, the
army slowly marched towards the Pandavas. Duryodhana heard about the maharatha's great army. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! He hastened towards him himself and showed him homage. In his honour, Duryodhana had
pavilions constructed in beautiful regions, ornamented and adorned with gems. When he arrived at those pavilions,
he was shown homage by Duryodhana and his advisers in every region, like an immortal. Then he reached another
pavilion that was as resplendent as the abode of a god. It was full of all objects and possessed superhuman loveliness. He began to think very highly of himself and lowly about Purandara[Indra.]. That bull among the kshatriyas was
delighted and asked the servants, "Which one of Yudhishthira's men has constructed these pavilions? Bring the
builders of the pavilions here. It is my view that they should be rewarded." Duryodhana had concealed himself
there and now showed himself to his maternal uncle[Shalya was Duryodhana's maternal uncle by extrapolation. Shalya's sister Madri was Pandu's wife. In a narrow
sense, Shalya was the maternal uncle of Nakula and Sahadeva. In a broader sense, he was the maternal uncle of the
Pandavas. He was Duryodhana's maternal uncle in an even broader sense.]. On seeing him and learning of the efforts he had undertaken, the king of Madra embraced him. He told him in great delight, "Accept whatever you desire." Duryodhana
replied, "May your words be true. Please grant me a boon that will ensure my welfare. It is appropriate that you
should be the general of my entire army." Shalya said, "Agreed. What else do you wish me to do?" Gandhari's son
kept on repeating, "Agreed! Agreed!" Having taken his leave of Shalya, he then returned to his own city. Shalya
went to the Kounteyas to tell them what he had done.

'Having gone to Upaplavya, Shalya went to the camp and saw all the Pandavas there. When he went there, as
was prescribed, the sons of Pandu offered him water to wash the feet[Padya.], the gift for a guest[Arghya.] and a cow. Then the
king of Madra, the slayer of enemies, asked them about their welfare. He embraced Yudhishthira with great delight, Bhima, Arjuna and the twins who were his sister's sons. Having seated himself, Shalya then told Partha[Yudhishthira.],
"O tiger among kings! O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Are you well? O supreme among victorious ones! It is
good fortune that you have been freed from dwelling in the forest. O king! O Indra among kings! You performed
an extremely difficult act in dwelling in the secluded forest, together with your brothers and Krishna. You performed an extremely difficult act in spending that terrible period of concealment. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It is only unhappiness for one who has been dislodged from his kingdom. How can there be happiness? All
this great misery has been brought on by Dhritarashtra's son. O king! O scorcher of enemies! You will obtain happiness after you have killed your enemies. O great king! O lord of men! You know about the nature of this world.
O son[The word used is tata.]! That is the reason you never act out of greed." O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Then the king told
him about his encounter with Duryodhana and everything about how he had been served and the boon that he had
granted. Yudhishthira replied, "O king! You performed a good deed, when you were happy in your own soul. O
brave one! You must observe the pledge that you have given to Duryodhana. O fortunate one! O lord of the earth!
But there is an act that I wish you to perform. O great king! You are the equal of Vasudeva in battle. O supreme
among kings! When Karna and Arjuna confront each other in a duel, there is no doubt that you will perform the
task of being Karna's charioteer. O king! If you wish to satisfy my desires, you must protect Arjuna. Your task will
be to sap the energy of the son of the suta and ensure our victory. O maternal uncle! Though this is not a task that
should be done, you must do it." Shalya said, "O Pandava! O fortunate one! You are asking me to sap the energy of
that evil-minded son of a suta in battle. It is certain that I will be his charioteer in battle. He has always thought of
me as Vasudeva's equal. O tiger among the Kurus! When he wishes to fight in the field of battle, it is certain that I
will speak words that do him harm. O Pandava! They will make him lose his pride and lose his energy. He will
then be easy to kill. I tell you this truthfully. O son! I will do whatever you have asked me to do. I will do whatever
else brings you pleasure. Together with Krishna, you have suffered miseries because of the gambling match. The
son of the suta has spoken harsh words. O immensely radiant one! You have suffered hardships because of
Jatasura[The Jatasura story has been recounted in Section 34 (Volume 3).] and Kichaka. Droupadi underwent several unholy sufferings, like Damayanti[Damayanti's story has been recounted in Section 32 (Volume 2).]. O brave one! All this
unhappiness will result in the rise of happiness. Do not think that all this is because of your deeds. Destiny is more
powerful. O Yudhishthira! Even great-souled ones confront difficulties. O lord of the earth! Even the gods have
faced unhappiness. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! We have heard that the great-souled Indra, the
king of the gods, had to experience great unhappiness, together with his wife."'
