Vaishampayana said, 'Gandhari was angry. She was afflicted at the slaughter of her sons and grandsons. Having
said this, she asked, "Where is King Yudhishthira?" Trembling and with his hands joined in salutation, Yudhishthira, Indra among kings, approached and spoke these gentle words to her. "O queen! I am Yudhishthira, the violent
slayer of your sons. I deserve to be cursed. I am the reason behind this destruction on earth. Curse me. After
slaughtering my well-wishers in this way, there is no purpose to my life, or in this kingdom and these riches. I am
foolish and a slayer of my well-wishers." Having spoken these words, he was frightened and approached close.
Gandhari said nothing, but sighed, long and deep. Yudhishthira lowered his body down and fell at her feet. She
was knowledgeable about dharma and could see dharma. Through the band of cloth, the queen could see the tips of
the king's fingers[Because Dhritarashtra was blind, Gandhari always wore a blindfold.]. The king's nails had been handsome, but now became malformed. On seeing this, Arjuna hid
behind Vasudeva. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They[All the Pandavas.] were restless and moved around. However, Gand-
hari's rage was gone and she comforted them, like a mother.

'Those broad-chested ones took her leave and together, went to see their mother Pritha[Kunti.], the mother of brave
ones. Having not seen her sons for a long time, she had been anxious about her sons. The queen covered her face
with a piece of cloth and wept. Thus, with her sons, Pritha shed tears. She saw that they had been wounded from
the blows of many weapons. In many ways, she repeatedly touched her sons. She sorrowed for the grief-stricken
Droupadi, who had lost her sons. She saw that Droupadi had fallen down on the ground and was weeping. Droupadi said, "O noble lady! Where have all your grandsons, together with Subhadara's son[Abhimanyu.], gone? You are an ascetic
and they have not seen you for a long time. They have not come to you now. Without my sons, what good will the
kingdom be to me now?" The large-eyed Pritha comforted her. She raised Yajnaseni[Droupadi.], who was weeping and was
afflicted by grief. With her, and with her sons following her, Pritha, who was suffering herself, went to Gandhari,
who was suffering even more. With her sister-in-law, Gandhari spoke to the illustrious one[Droupadi.]. "O daughter! Do not
grieve. Behold. I am also miserable. I think that this destruction of the worlds has been goaded by destiny. It came
about inevitably and naturally, and made the body hair stand up. When Krishna was unsuccessful in his
entreaties[A reference to Krishna's mission of peace, described in Section 54 (Volume 4).], the immensely intelligent Vidura had spoken some great words and those have come to pass. One
should not sorrow over something that is inevitable, especially something that has already occurred. One should
not sorrow over those who have been killed in a battle. I am in the same state as you are. Who will comfort me? It
is because of my crimes that the best of our lineage have been destroyed."'
