Vaishampayana said, 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the maharatha Kouravas now got together and
counter-attacked Arjuna with determination. But the one whose soul cannot be measured covered the maharathas
everywhere with showers of arrows, like mountains shrouded with fog. The giant elephants trumpeted. The horses
neighed. The kettledrums and conch shells resounded. A terrible tumult arose. Piercing the bodies of men and
horses, slicing through iron armour, Partha's shower of arrows struck in thousands. Partha swiftly strode and shot
arrows in that battle, ablaze like the resplendent autumn sun at midday. Struck by terror, the charioteers leapt down
from their chariots and the cavalry from their horses. The infantry began to flee on the ground. When the great-
souled one's arrows pierced the armour, made of copper, silver and iron, there was a mighty roar. The entire battlefield was strewn with bodies of those who had lost their senses, and with elephants, horses and other animals
which had been robbed of their lives by the sharp arrows. The earth was covered with the corpses of those who had
fallen down from their stations on the chariots. Dhananjaya seemed to be dancing in that battle, with a bow in his
hand. On hearing Gandiva's twang, like the roar of the thunder, all the beings were frightened and fled from the
great field of battle. The fallen heads could be seen in the forefront of that battle, with earrings and headdresses
embellished with gold. The earth was strewn with bodies that had been destroyed by the arrows, with the arms
holding bows and the hands decorated with ornaments. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Because the heads were
struck down with sharp arrows, it seemed as if a shower of rocks had fallen down from the sky. Having displayed
his terrible self, Partha, whose valour was terrible, roamed around, after having been restrained for thirteen years.
The brave Pandava unleashed the anger of his wrath on the sons of Dhritarashtra. On witnessing his valour as he
burnt down the soldiers, all the warriors sought peace, while Dhritarashtra's son[Duryodhana.] looked on. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Having terrified the soldiers and routed the maharathas, Arjuna, foremost among victorious ones,
roamed around. He made a terrible river flow. Its current was made out of blood. The moss was made out of bones.
It was as if destiny had fashioned it at the end of an era[The reference is to the destruction at the end of an era.]. There was a terrible flow of bows and arrows. The mud
was made out of flesh and blood. The great chariots were like giant islands. There was the roar of conch shells and
drums. Thus Partha created a giant river of blood that was difficult to cross. No one could make out when he affixed his arrows and released them, or when he drew the Gandiva, because no gap could be discerned.'
