'"Duryodhana said, 'In all the worlds, Vasudeva is spoken of as the great being. O grandfather! I wish to know
about his origin and his glory.'

'"Bhishma replied, 'Vasudeva is the great being. He was created with the gods. O bull among the Bharata lineage! No one superior to Pundarikaksha can be seen. Markandeya spoke about Govinda's extraordinary greatness.
He is the great-souled Purushottama. He is in all beings and is the soul of all beings. He created the three elements
of water, air and energy. He is the god who created the earth. He is the lord of all the lords of the worlds. The
great-souled Purushottama was lying down on water. The god who is everywhere was asleep in his yoga. He created fire from his mouth. He created wind from his breath of life. Through his mind, the undecaying one created
Sarasvati and the Vedas. He initially created the worlds, with the gods and the masses of rishis. He decreed the decay and death of all beings and also their birth and growth. He is dharma. He is learned in dharma. He is the
granter of boons. He is the one who satisfies all desire. He is the actor. He is action. He is the ancient god and is
himself the lord. He created the past, the present and the future, and everything. Janardana created the two sandhyas[Dawn and dusk.], the directions, the sky and the rituals. Govinda created the austere rishis. The great-souled and undecaying lord created the universe. He created Samkarshana, the first among all beings. He created the god Shesha,
whom the learned know of as Ananta. He holds up all beings and the earth, with all its mountains[The earth rests on the serpent Shesha.]. Through
their yoga of meditation, brahmanas speak of him as the immensely energetic one. The great asura named Madhu
was born from the secretion of his ears. He was extremely terrible in his deeds and terrible in his intelligence. He
was about to kill Brahma, but Purushottama slew him. O son! Having killed him, the god Janardana came to be
worshipped by gods, danavas, men and rishis as Madhusudana[Madhusudana means the destroyer of Madhu.]. He is the boar. He is the lion. He is the lord
with the three steps[These are respective references to Vishnu's varaha (boar), narasimha (man-lion) and vamana (dwarf)
incarnations.]. He is the mother. He is the father. He is Hari for all beings. There is no one superior to
Pundarikaksha, nor will there ever be. O king! He created the brahmanas from his mouth, the kshatriyas from his
arms, the vaishyas from his thighs and the shudras from his feet. He is the refuge of all beings. He is the essence of
the brahman. He is the essence of yoga. One can attain the great god Keshava by devoutly performing austerities
on the nights of the new moon and the full moon. Keshava is supreme energy. He is the grandfather of all the
worlds. O lord of men! The sages know him as Hrishikesha[Hrishikesha means the lord of the senses.]. Know him to be the teacher, the father and the
preceptor. When Krishna favours someone, he wins the undecaying worlds. If a man confronts fear and always
seeks refuge with Keshava, or reads about this, such a man obtains sanctuary and happiness. Men who attain
Krishna are never deluded. Janardana always saves those who are immersed in great fear. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Yudhishthira knows about the truth of this. O king! With all his soul, he has sought refuge with
the great-souled Keshava, the lord of the universe. He is the lord of yoga and he is the lord of the earth.'"'
