'Markandeya said, "Having introduced his parents to the brahmana as his greatest gurus, the hunter with dharma in
his soul again spoke to the brahmana. 'Behold. I have obtained insight through the power of my austerities. It is for
this reason that the devoted, self-controlled and truthful wife told you to go to Mithila, where a hunter who lives
there would tell you about dharma.' The brahmana replied, 'O one who is learned about dharma! O one who is
good in his vows! I remember the words of that devoted, truthful and virtuous wife. I know that you have good
qualities.' The hunter said, 'O foremost among brahmanas! O illustrious one! There is no doubt that what you have
said about me was completely foreseen by that faithful wife. O brahmana! It is to exhibit favours towards you that
I showed you these things. O son[The word used is tata.]! O brahmana! Now listen to the words that I am going to speak to you. O
supreme among brahmanas! You have slighted your mother and father. O unblemished one! You left the house
without their permission, for the sake of studying the meaning and the chanting of the Vedas. Your deeds caused
great grief to your aged, ascetic and blind parents. Go and seek their favours, else great dharma will forsake you.
You are an ascetic. You are great-souled. You are always devoted to dharma. But all of this has been futile. O brahmana! Therefore, listen to my words and do not act contrary to them. Return swiftly and show them your devotion.
O brahmana rishi! I am telling you this for your own welfare.'

'"The brahmana answered, 'O fortunate one! O one who has the qualities and conduct of dharma. There is no
doubt that everything that you have said is true. I am pleased with you.' The hunter said, 'You are the equal of the
gods and you are always devoted to dharma that is ancient, eternal and divine, difficult of access to those who have
not perfected their souls. Go swiftly to your mother and your father and worship them unceasingly. Beyond that,
there is no other supreme dharma that I can see for you.' The brahmana replied, 'It is through good fortune that I
came here. It is through good fortune that I met you. Men like you, exponents of dharma, are difficult to find in this
world. Among one thousand men, one may find someone who is learned in dharma, or one may not. O fortunate
one! O supreme among men! I am pleased with your truthfulness. I was descending into hell and you have saved
me. O unblemished one! It had been destined and that is the reason I met you. O tiger among men! King Yayati fell
and was rescued by his daughter's virtuous sons[Yayati's story appears in several sections, Section 33 is an instance. The daughter in question is Madhavi,
whose sons saved Yayati from the sage Galava.]. Like that, I have now been saved by you. As you have said, I
will serve my mother and my father. One who has not perfected his soul does not know how to differentiate between dharma and adharma. The eternal dharma is incomprehensible to one who has been born in the womb of a
shudra. I do not regard you as a shudra. There must be some reason. Perhaps you obtained the status of a shudra
because of your specific deeds. O immensely intelligent one! I wish to know the details about this. O one who has
controlled his soul! If you so desire, please tell me everything accurately.'

'"The hunter replied, 'O supreme among brahmanas! No brahmana should be crossed. O unblemished one!
Therefore, hear everything that had happened to me in an earlier body. O son of foremost among brahmanas! I was
a brahmana earlier. I studied the Vedas well and was skilled in the Vedangas. But it is because of my own sins that
I have been reduced to my present state. There was a king who was my friend and he was skilled in the use of
arms. O brahmana! Because of my association with him, I also became supreme in wielding the bow. Once upon a
time, the king went out hunting. He was surrounded by his advisers and was with his foremost warriors. Near a
hermitage, he killed many deer. O supreme among brahmanas! I also shot a swift and terrible arrow, with a plume
that was bent downwards. It hurt a rishi. The brahmana fell down on the ground and shouted, "I am innocent. Who
has performed this evil deed?" Still thinking him to be a deer, I rushed towards him and suddenly saw the sage. I
saw that the rishi had been pierced by my arrow, with a plume that was bent downwards. My mind was troubled to
see that I had performed an act that should not be performed. I then told the extremely ascetic brahmana, who was
dying on the ground. "I performed this act out of ignorance. Please pardon me. O brahmana! I should be forgiven."

Thus did I speak to the sage. But the rishi was overcome with anger and replied in these words. "O cruel one! O
brahmana! You will be born as a hunter and will be born from a shudra womb."'"'
