'Sanjaya said, "Shantanu's son, Bhishma, then fought a tumultous battle, wishing to save your sons from their fear
of Bhimasena. In the forenoon, there was an extremely terrible battle between the kins on the Kuru and Pandava
sides, with the destruction of the foremost among warriors. While that extremely fearful battle was raging on, there
was a great and tumultuous sound that seemed to touch the sky. Giant elephants roared. Horses neighed. There was
the sound of drums and conch shells and there was a mighty roar. Those valiant and extremely strong ones fought
with each other, desiring victory. They roared at each other, like great bulls among herds of cows. O bull among
the Bharata lineage! In that battle, heads were sliced down with sharp arrows and descended like a shower of
stones from the sky. They still wore earrings and helmets, blazing in gold. O bull among the Bharata lineage!
These heads were seen to fall down. The bodies were wounded by arrows. The severed arms still held on to bows.
Adorned with ornaments, they were seen to be strewn all over the ground. The bodies bore armour. The upper
arms were decorated with bracelets. The faces were like moons. The eyes were red. O lord of the earth! There were
all the bodies of elephants, horses and men. In an instant, the earth was covered with a thick dust. In that thick
cloud of dust, the weapons were like lightning. The sound made by the weapons was like the clap of thunder. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! The ensuing tumultuous and fierce encounter between the Kurus and the Pandavas made a river of blood flow there. It was an extremely fearful, terrible and tumultuous fight and it made the
body hair stand up. Unassailable in that battle, the kshatriyas showered down arrows. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! Afflicted by the shower of arrows in that encounter, your elephants, and those belonging to the enemy,
screamed in agony. With their riders slain, the horses ran around in the ten directions. O bull among the Bharata
lineage! Your warriors, and those of the enemy, were oppressed and wounded by arrows. They leapt up and fell
down. O lord of the earth! Horses, elephants and chariots were seen to whirl around in the battle there. Driven by
destiny, the kshatriyas killed each other there with clubs, lances and arrows with drooping tufts. Other brave ones,
skilled in battle, struck each other with bare arms that were like clubs made completely out of iron. O lord of the
earth! The brave ones, on your side and that of the Pandavas, killed each other with clenched fists, thighs and
palms. Charioteers were bereft of their chariots. Desiring to kill each other, they rushed at each other, with excellent swords in their hands. Surrounded by a large number of Kalingas and with Bhishma at the forefront, King
Duryodhana charged against the Pandavas. At this, all the Pandavas surrounded Vrikodara. Inflamed with rage,
they rushed against Bhishma on swift mounts."'
