'Yudhishthira asked, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There may be a king whose friends have abandoned
him and who has many enemies. His treasury may have become depleted and his army may have been weakened.
What happens to him? His advisers and aides may be wicked. All his secret counsel may have been divulged. His
kingdom may gradually be weaned away and he cannot see any course of action. He is weak and may be attacked
by a circle of stronger enemies. His kingdom may be in disarray. He may be ignorant about the time and the place.
He is unable to use conciliation. And because he is afflicted, he cannot use dissension either. His life may seem to
be without purpose. What is a good course of action then?"

'Bhishma replied, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! You have asked me about secret kinds of dharma[Meaning that this should not be talked about in public. Dharma in times
of distress figures in the next section.]. I
did not wish to speak about this kind of dharma until I had been asked. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Dharma
is more subtle than words and intelligence. If one has served those who have good conduct, and learnt from them,
one can perhaps become virtuous. Using one's intelligence to reflect on a task before undertaking it, one may, or
may not, become prosperous. In that way, with respect to what you have asked, use your own intelligence to decide
what must be done. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Using the instruments of dharma, there are many ways to
advance towards the objective. Listen. If one considers dharma, I do not consider these kinds of action to be dharma[The suggestion seems to be that these acts are undertaken in a time of
emergency. Therefore, even though they seem to follow dharma, they are
not true dharma.]. Prosperous people may bring hardships on themselves and subsequently, it may be held that this was inappropriate[Because those acts were short-sighted and not in conformity with true
dharma.]. One can be certain about the outcome of a course of action only after everything has been completed.
Whenever a man always looks towards the sacred texts and obtains learning from them, that learning pleases him.
If a man is not learned, a course of action may seem wrong. But it seems wrong because of lack of knowledge and
that course of action can lead to prosperity. Without any doubt in your mind, listen to the words that I will speak. If
the king's treasury is exhausted, his army will decline. The king must try to build the treasury, like a person conserves water in a place where there is no water. This is dharma then, and when it is time, he can show
compassion[In a time of adversity, it is dharma to build the treasury by imposing
taxes. When it is a time of prosperity, one can be compassionate and reduce taxes.]. These are the instruments of dharma that were followed by people in earlier times. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! There is one kind of dharma for those who are capable and another for those in distress. It
is said that a treasury ensures dharma and intelligence is superior to dharma[Using intelligence to build up the treasury.]. One who is weak cannot find a
means of sustenance by following dharma alone. However, since the acquisition of wealth does not occur in isolation[It can have other adverse affects.], it has been heard that, in times of hardship, adharma may acquire the characteristics of dharma. But those
who are learned and wise say that adharma results and subsequently[When the period of hardship is over.], a kshatriya must act to heal this. Dharma
must not be made to decline, but nor should one come under the subjugation of the enemy. Nor, because of the action undertaken, should one allow one's own self to be destroyed. If one is destroyed, one can perform no act of
dharma, either for one's own sake, or for the sake of someone else. It is certain that one must use every means possible to preserve oneself. O son! This has been determined by those who are knowledgeable about dharma and
skilled about the means of dharma. The sacred texts say that because of the valour in their arms, enterprise is the
life of a kshatriya. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When a kshatriya's means of sustenance have gone, why
should he not take from everyone, with the exception of ascetics and brahmanas? It is like a brahmana in hardship
officiating at the sacrifice of someone who should not be performing a sacrifice. There is no doubt that in such situations, food that should not be eaten can also be eaten. If someone is distressed, why should gates and paths be
barred? If someone is distressed, he can escape through something that is not a door. However, even for a person
whose treasury and army have been destroyed and who has been defeated by the entire world, a life of begging is
not recommended, nor the livelihood of a vaishya or a shudra. One should first try for one's own dharma, before
adopting the livelihood of someone else. At first, one should think of that kind of livelihood to sustain life. However, if there is a disaster, one can then resort to the dharma and livelihood of others. When their means of livelihood
have been destroyed, even brahmanas are seen to do this. Why should there be any doubt about a kshatriya? This
has already been decided. He should take from whoever possesses more and never allow himself to be destroyed.
The kshatriya is known to be the slayer and protector of subjects. Therefore, to protect him, it is the duty of the relatives of the kshatriya to appropriate. O king! There is no livelihood that exists without violence. Even a solitary
sage, active and roaming in the forest, cannot manage to do that. Nor can one remain alive by following the conduct of Shankha and Likhita. O best among the Kurus! If one desires to protect the subjects, this is especially the
case. In times of distress, the king and the kingdom must protect each other. This must always be done and this is
eternal dharma. In times of distress, the king protects the kingdom by flooding it with material objects. In a time of
distress, the kingdom must also protect the king. When the kingdom suffers from hunger, the king must not hide
his treasury, his army, his rod, his friends and anything else that he may have stored. Those who are learned about
dharma say that seeds must be saved from one's own food.

'"Shambara, who was great in his knowledge of maya, spoke about this. 'When a kingdom goes into a decline,
the life of that king is one of shame. If he knows about the words of Shibi[Generous king, whose story has been recounted in Section 33 (Volume
Three).], why should people be without a
means of sustenance?' A king's foundations are his treasury and his army. The treasury is again the foundation of
the army. It is the foundation of all dharma and dharma is again the foundation of the subjects. There cannot be a
treasury without oppression and without it, how is it possible to have an army? Therefore, one does not deserve to
be tainted because of oppression. If a task is undertaken for the sake of a sacrifice, or if rites are followed in the
course of a sacrifice, then, because of these reasons, the king does not deserve to be tainted. There are acts pursued
for the sake of artha and there are contrary acts pursued for the sake of what is not artha. Those which are for the
sake of artha and those which are not for the sake of artha may all seem to have the signs of artha. An intelligent
person will use his intelligence to consider all this and then determine the course of action. Some objects are of use
in a sacrifice, others are of no direct use in the sacrifice and still others may be of use in obtaining the purpose of
the sacrifice. But all these are ingredients in conducting the sacrifice. I will tell you about examples, to illuminate
the true nature of dharma. A sacrificial post must be severed for the sake of the sacrifice and there are some other
trees that stand in the way and obstruct it. It is certain that these must also be cut down. When these fall down, they
bring down other trees too. O scorcher of enemies! In that way, there are men who stand in the way of building up
a large treasury and without killing them, I see no means of success. Both the worlds can be conquered with riches,
this one and the next. What is said about dharma is true-it does not exist where there are no riches. To meet the
requirements of sacrifices, every method of obtaining riches must be used. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
The sins from doing the right thing and not doing the right thing are not equal[It is not clear how this is to be interpreted. It probably means that doing
the right thing is more important in normal times and not doing the right
thing becomes more serious in times of adversity.]. O king! O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! How can one follow neither of these two? I do not see people who extend their riches in the forest[This is an argument against renunciating life.]. A man desires whatever riches he can see in this world and hopes that it might belong to him. O scorcher
of enemies! There is no dharma that is equal to the ruling of a kingdom. There is another kind of dharma that is
recommended for kings who confront a hardship. Some acquire stores of riches through gifts and deeds, others are
ascetics and do this through austerities, and still others choose intelligence and skills. It is said that one without
riches is weak and one with riches is strong. One with riches can obtain everything. One with a treasury can overcome everything. The treasury provides dharma and kama, and this world and the next."'
