'Kanva said, "When Matali was travelling along the road, he met maharshi Narada. Because he so desired, he was
going to see Varuna. Narada asked, 'Where are you going? O charioteer! Is it on your own task, or on the instructions of Shatakratu?' Being questioned by Narada, who was travelling along the same road towards Varuna, Matali
told him everything about his own objective. The sage told him, 'Let us travel together. I have myself descended
from heaven to see the lord the waters[Varuna.]. I will tell you everything when we see the nether regions of the earth. O
Matali! After having searched there, we will approve of a suitable groom.' Matali and Narada immersed themselves in the nether regions of the earth. The great-souled ones saw the guardian of the world who was the lord of
the waters. There, Narada received the homage due to a devarshi and Matali also received honours due to the great
Indra. In a happy frame of mind, they told Varuna about their task and having taken his leave, went to the world of
the serpents. Narada knew everything about all the beings who dwelt in the nether regions of the earth and described everything in detail to his companion.

'"Narada said, 'O son[The word used is tata.]! You have now seen Varuna, surrounded by his sons and grandsons. Now behold the regions of the lord of the waters. They are fortunate and prosperous in every way. This immensely wise one is the
son of Varuna, the lord of the cows. He is specially distinguished because of his good conduct and purity. This is
his beloved son Pushkara, whose eyes are like lotuses. He is beautiful and handsome and has been chosen by
Soma's daughter as her husband. She is famous by the name of Jyotsnakali and she is second only to Shri[Lakshmi, the goddess of wealth.] in her
beauty. It has been said that this son of a cow has been made the eldest son of Aditya himself[Gopati (the lord of the cows) is a term used for the sun, Indra, Krishna, Shiva and Varuna. As a son of Aditi,
Varuna is also Aditya. All that is being said is that Pushkara is Varuna's eldest son and there is a suggestion that he
was adopted.]. Behold Varuni's
abode[The text says Varuni's abode and not Varuna's abode. There is a pun. The gods are known as suras and sura is
also a term for liquor. Varuni is a specific kind of liquor.]. It is constructed out of gold everywhere. O friend of the lord of the gods! By obtaining this, the gods obtained their divinity. O Matali! You can see all those radiant weapons. They belong to the daityas, who were ousted
from the kingdom[By the gods.]. Since they are indestructible, they still remain. O Matali! They were conquered by the gods
and require great power to be used. O Matali! There are many species of rakshasas and many species of bhutas[Demons.]
here. They possessed divine weapons that had been constructed by the gods earlier[The demons won them by defeating the gods.]. There is a great fire here, a
fire that was created in Varuna's lake[Fire was created from the water.]. Theres is also Vishnu's chakra, surrounded by a fire without smoke. This is
the bow Gandiva[Varuna gave Arjuna Gandiva.], created for the destruction of the world. Because it is always protected by the gods, the bow is
known by the name of Gandiva[The etymology is difficult to understand. Gandiva means something that is made out of the horn of a rhinoceros,
which was tough and strong.]. When the time for action has arrived, it is always certain that it has the strength
of one hundred thousand breaths of life. It chastises and brings under its control kings who are allied with the rakshasas. This is the staff first created by Brahma, imbibed with knowledge of the brahman. This is a great weapon
for Indras among men and has been pronounced to be that by the great Shakra. The sons of the lord of the waters
bear this great weapon. This is the umbrella of the king of the waters[Varuna has an umbrella.] and is kept in the room reserved for umbrellas. Like a cloud, it showers cold waters everywhere. The water that showers from this umbrella is as pure as
the moon. But it is enveloped in darkness and nothing can be seen. O Matali! There are many extraordinary sights
here. But because of the task you have to accomplish, let us quickly leave this spot.'"'
