'Vasudeva said, "When Pradyumna, supreme among strong ones, had been struck down by Shalva's arrows, the
Vrishnis who had come to fight lost their calm and their resolution. Lamentations then arose in the army of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas. O king! The enemies were delighted at Pradyumna's fall. Having seen him lose his senses, his trained charioteer Daruki[Daruka is Krishna's charioteer. Daruki is Daruka's son and is Pradyumna's charioteer.] used his swift horses to take him away from the field of battle. The chariot
hadn't gone very far, when that supreme of warriors regained his senses.

'"He grasped his bow and spoke thus, 'O Souti[Souti is a suta's son. A suta is a charioteer and also a bard or raconteur.]! What have you done? Why are you turning back? This is not
the dharma of Vrishni warriors in battle. O Souti! Have you lost your senses at the sight of Shalva in that great battle? Are you unhappy on witnessing that battle? Tell me exactly.' Souti replied, 'O Janardana's son! I am not bewildered. Nor am I overcome with fear. O son of Keshava[The word used is nandana.]! But I think that you will find Shalva too difficult. O
brave one! I am therefore retreating slowly. This evil one is powerful. When a warrior is knocked unconscious on
the chariot, it is the charioteer's duty to protect him. Your life must always be protected by me, just as you always
protect me. Thinking that a warrior must always be protected, I am taking you away. O mighty-armed one! You are
alone. The danavas are many. O Rukmini's son! Thinking that this is not an equal battle, I am taking you away.' O
Kouravya! The charioteer thus spoke to the one with the makara on his flag.

'"And he[Pradyumna.] said, 'O Suta! Turn the chariot back again. O Daruka's son! Never act in this way again. O Souti!
Never retreat from a field of battle while I am still alive. One who has born in the Vrishni lineage never goes back
on a word he has given and never kills an enemy who has fallen or has surrendered. Nor does he kill a woman, an
aged one or a child, or one who has lost his chariot or his weapons, or is bewildered. You have been born in the
suta lineage and you are well trained in the tasks of sutas. O Daruka's son! You know the dharma of Vrishnis in
battle. O Souti! Since you know the conduct of Vrishnis in battle, you will never again, no matter what the situation is, leave the field of battle. What will Gada's elder brother, the invincible Madhava, tell me when he sees that I
have been frightened and have fled the field of battle, struck by weapons on my back? The mighty-armed Balade-
va, who is dressed in blue and is Keshava's elder brother, is addicted to wine. What will he say when he returns? O
Suta! Sini's grandson[Satyaki.] is a great archer and a lion among men? What will he say when he hears I have fled from
battle? What will the victorious Samba say, or the invincible Charudeshna, or Gada, or Sarana? O charioteer! What
will the mighty-armed Akrura tell me? The wives of the Vrishni warriors have always considered me brave, honourable, virtuous and manly. When they get together, what will they say? They will say, "Pradyumna is frightened
and retreats from the great battle. Shame on him!" They will never say, "Well done!" O Souti! To a person like me,
shame with ridicule is worse than death. Therefore, never withdraw again. Before he left for the sacrifice of the infinitely energetic Partha, lion among the Bharata lineage, Hari, the killer of Madhu, left this burden on me. O son
of a suta! When the brave Kritavarma was about to come out to face Shalva, I restrained him, saying that he should
refrain and that I would stop him. Because of his respect for me, Hridika's son[Kritavarma.] desisted. What will I tell the
maharatha after abandoning the field of battle? What will I tell Pundarikaksha[Krishna.], the mighty-armed and invincible man who wields the conch shell, the chakra and the club, when he returns? What will I tell Satyaki, Baladeva
and the other Andhakas and Vrishnis, who have always taken pride in me? O Souti! Having abandoned the field of
battle, with arrows piercing my back and having been carried away unconscious by you, I do not wish to live any
longer. O Daruka's son[The word used is nandana.]! Turn the chariot back at once. Never act in this way again, not even if disaster looms.
O Souti! After having fled the field of battle in fright and with arrows piercing my back, I do not think life is worth
living. O son of a suta! Have you ever seen me suffer from fear, or flee from the field of battle like a coward? O
Daruka's son! As long as I desired to fight, you should not have left the field of battle. Therefore, return to the field
of battle.'"'
