Sanjaya said, "O king! Listen to the great destruction of the Kurus and the Pandavas that ensued when they
clashed against each other. The son of a suta was slain by the great-souled Pandava. Your soldiers were repeatedly
rallied and routed. The senses of your son were overcome by great sorrow and he retreated. On witnessing Partha's
valour, the soldiers were extremely anxious. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Confronted by that misery, the
soldiers reflected about what should be done next. The troops were being crushed. Loud wails could be heard. In
the battle, the kings were in disarray. The great-souled ones had fallen down from their seats on the chariots and
from the chariots. O venerable one! In the battle, the elephants and the foot soldiers were being destroyed. An extremely terrible battle was going on, as if Rudra was sporting. Hundreds and thousands of kings confronted an inglorious death.

' "O king! On discerning all this, Kripa, aged and virtuous in conduct, was overcome with compassion. The energetic one approached King Duryodhana. Overcome with anger, the eloquent one spoke these words. 'O Duryodhana! O Kourava! Listen to the words that I am speaking to you. O great king! O unblemished one! Having heard
me, act in accordance with those words, if you find them acceptable. O Indra among kings! There is no path that is
superior to the dharma of fighting. O bull among kshatriyas! That is the reason kshatriyas resort to fighting. One
who lives the life of a kshatriya fights with sons, brothers, fathers, sister's sons, maternal uncles, matrimonial allies
and relatives. There is supreme dharma in being killed and adharma in retreat. That is the reason, if one wishes to
remain alive, this kind of livelihood is terrible. However, I wish to tell you some beneficial words. O unblemished
one! After the deaths of Bhishma, Drona, maharatha Karna and Jayadratha, and the death of your brothers and
your son, Lakshmana, what is there left for us to do? They were the ones on whom we resolved to impose the burden of the kingdom. Those brave ones have given up their bodies and gone to the destination reserved for those
who know about the brahman. Those maharathas possessed many qualities and we are deprived of them now. We
have brought down many kings and are reduced to a miserable state. Even when all of them were alive, Bibhatsu
remained unvanquished. Krishna is his eyes and the mighty-armed is extremely difficult to defeat, even by the
gods. The ape sits astride his standard, which is like Indra's standard and Indra's bow, with the resplendence of the
vajra. The large army trembles at this. Bhima's leonine roars, Panchajanya's blare and Gandiva's twang bring distress to our hearts. Gandiva's brilliance dazzles our eyes. As it is brandished, it is like a circle of fire and is seen to
move around, like a giant flash of lightning. Colourful and decorated with gold, that giant bow is brandished
around. It is seen in all the directions, like a mass of clouds tinged with lightning. O king! Arjuna is supreme
among those who are skilled in weapons. Wielded by Krishna[Arjuna.], your troops are driven away, like clouds dispelled
by the wind. He is like the great Indra in his radiance and is scorching your soldiers, like a fire that has arisen to
burn down the dead wood in a forest during the winter. We have beheld Dhananjaya agitate your soldiers and terrify the kings, like an elephant with four tusks. We have beheld Dhananjaya, like an elephant amidst lotuses. The
warriors have been terrified by the twang of Pandava's bow. We have repeatedly seen him, like a lion amidst herds
of deer. Those two Krishnas are great archers in all the worlds. They are bulls among all archers. Clad in their armour, they are resplendent amidst all the people. O descendant of the Bharata lienage! This is the seventeenth day
of the battle and warriors have been slaughtered in this extremely terrible battle. Your soldiers have been routed
and scattered in all the directions, like the wind dispelling masses of clouds during the autumn. O great king! Your
troops are trembling because of Savyasachi. They are like an overturned boat, being whirled around on the giant
ocean. When we saw that Jayadratha was within the range of his arrows[The slaying of Jayadratha has been described in Section 69 (Volume 6).], where were the ones on your side-the
son of a suta, Drona and his followers, I, you, Hardikya, your brother Duhshasana, and his brothers? O king! While
all the worlds looked on, he used his valour to cross all your relatives, brothers, aides and maternal uncles and
placing his feet on their heads[Metaphorically.], slew Jayadratha. What is left for us to do? Where is the man who can defeat Pan-
dava? The great-souled one possesses many divine weapons. He robs our valour with the twang of Gandiva. With
their leaders slain, the soldiers are like the night without the moon, or like a dried up river, with the trees along the
banks destroyed by elephants. The mighty-armed one on the white horses is roaming around amidst the soldiers at
will, consuming them like fire amidst dead wood. Both Satyaki and Bhimasena have a force that can shatter mountains and dry up all the oceans. O lord of the earth! Bhima uttered words in the midst of the assembly hall. He has
accomplished them and will accomplish them again[This is a reference to Bhima's pledge of killing Duryodhana and his
brothers.]. When Karna was fighting in the forefront, the army of the
Pandavas, protected by the wielder of Gandiva, was so strongly protected that it was difficult to assail. You have
performed many evil acts against those virtuous ones. Those deeds were unwarranted and the fruits have arrived.
For your own sake, you carefully assembled all these people. O son[The word used is tata.]! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Both
they and you face a danger. O Duryodhana! Protect your own self, because your own self is the reservoir of everything. O son! If that reservoir is destroyed, everything in it is scattered in different directions. A weakened person
should try to obtain peace through conciliation. War is meant for someone who is prospering. That is
Brihaspati's[Brihasapati is the preceptor of the gods.] policy. In terms of the strength of our forces, we are now inferior to the sons of Pandu. O lord! Pardon me, but I think that peace with the Pandavas is indicated now. He who does not know what is beneficial for
him, or disregards the beneficial, is quickly dislodged from his kingdom and does not obtain anything superior. O
king! If you are able to obtain the kingdom by bowing down before the king[Yudhishthira.], that would be superior to heading
towards the folly of defeat. Yudhishthira is compassionate. On the instructions of Vichitravirya's son[Dhritarashtra.] and on
Govinda's words, he will allow you to retain the kingdom. There is no doubt that the unvanquished king, Arjuna,
Bhimasena and all of them will do what Hrishikesha asks them to. I think that Krishna will not be able to ignore
the words of Kourava Dhritarashtra and the Pandavas will not cross Krishna. I think that a cessation of hostilities
with the Parthas is for your own good. I am not saying this out of weakness, or because I wish to save my own life.
O king! I am offering you medication and you will remember this later[On the assumption that Duryodhana will not listen to the advice.].' The aged Kripa Sharadvata lamented in
these words. His sighs were deep and warm and, in sorrow, he lost his senses." '
