Samvarta continued, 'There is a summit named Munjavat on the slopes of the Himalaya mountains. The illustrious one, Uma's consort[Shiva.], is always engaged in tormenting himself through austerities there. As he desires
and as he pleases, he does this under trees, slopes, summits and caves of that king of mountains. With Uma as his
companion, the illustrious Maheshvara is always there. The immensely energetic one has a trident and is surrounded by large numbers of different kinds of demons[Bhutas.]. The Rudras, the Sadhyas, the Vishvadevas, the Vasus, Yama,
Varuna, Kubera and his followers, bhutas, pishachas, the Nasatya Ashvins[Nasatya is a collective term for the two Ashvins. But Nasatya is also a singular name for one of the two Ashvins,
the other one being Dasra.], the gandharvas, the apsaras, the yak-
shas, the devarshis, the Adityas, the Maruts and all the yatudhanas are also there, worshipping Uma's great-souled
consort in his many different forms. O lord of the earth! The illustrious one finds pleasure there, sporting with Ku-
bera's malformed and deformed companions. His blazing prosperity is seen to be as radiant as the morning sun.
However, that region is never seen to have any particular form. No ordinary creature, made out of flesh, can see it
with his eyes. It is neither hot, nor cold, there. There is no wind. Nor is the sun there. O king! There is no old age,
hunger, thirst, death or fear. O supreme among victorious ones! Shining like the rays of the sun, there are minerals
and gold along all the slopes of that mountain. O king! With their weapons raised, Kubera's companions protect
the spot. They wish to do what brings pleasure to the great-souled Kubera. O king! Go there and bow down before
the illustrious one-Sharva, Vedha, Rudra, Shitikantha, Surupa, Suvarcha, Kapardi, Karala, Haryakshana, Varada,
Tryakshana, Pushna, Dantabhida, Vamana, Shiva, Yama, Avyakta-kesha, Sadvritta, Shankara, Kshemya, Harinetra,
Sthanu, Purusha, Harikesha, Munda, Kusha, Uttarana, Bhaskara, Sutirtha, Devadeva, Ramha, Ushnishi, Suvaktra,
Sahasraksha, Midusha, Girisha, Prashanta, Yati, Chiravasa, Bilvadanda, Siddha, Sarva-dandadhara, Mriga-vyadha,
Mahat,  Dhanvina,  Bhava,  Vara,  Soumya-vaktra,  Pashuhasta,  Varshina,  Hiranyabahu,  Ugra,  Dikpati,  Pashupati,
Bhutapati, Vrisha, Matri-bhakta, Sena, Madhyama, Sruva-hasta, Dhanvipati, Bhargava, Aja, Krishna-netra, Viru-
paksha, Tikshna-damshtra, Tikshna, Vaishvanara-mukha, Mahadyuti, Ananga, Sarvanga, Prajavat, Shukradhipati,
Prithivi, Krittivasa, Kapalamali, Nitya, Suvarna-mukuta, Mahadeva, Krishna, Tryambaka, Anagha, Krodhana, Nrishamsa,  Mridu,  Bahushali,  Dandi,  Tapta-tapasa,  Krura-karma,  Sahasra-shira,  Sahasracharana,  Svadha-svarupa,
Bahurupa, Damshtri, Pinaki, Mahayogi, Avyaya, Trishula-pani, Bhuvaneshvara, Tripuraghna, Trinayana, Trilokesha,  Mahoujasa,  Prabhava-sarvabhutanam,  Dharna,  Dharanidhara,  Ishana,  Sarva,  Shiva,  Vishveshara,  Umapati,
Vishvarupa, Dashabhuja, Tishya, Go-vrisha-dhvaja, Ghora, Gouri-shamishvara, Shukra, Prithu, Prithuhara, Hara,
Bahurupa,  Pranamya-shirasa-deva,  Ananga-anga-hara,  Sharanya,  Sharana,  Chaturmukha[All of these are Shiva's names. The meanings have been given in Section 87 (Volume 9).].  Go  and  seek  refuge
with Mahadeva. Having done this, bow down before the powerful Mahadeva. O lord of the earth! You will obtain
gold from that great-souled one. Men who go there obtain gold.'"

'Vyasa  continued,  "Thus  addressed,  Karandhama's  son  acted  in  accordance  with  these  words.  After  this,  he
made superhuman arrangements for the sacrifice. Artisans manufactured golden vessels. On hearing about King
Marutta's prosperity, which surpassed that of the gods, Brihaspati was severely tormented. He was tormented and
became pale. His body became emaciated. 'Samvarta, my enemy, will also become prosperous.' The king of the
gods heard that Brihaspati was severely tormented. Surrounded by the immortals, he went there and spoke these
words."'
