'Dhritarashtra asked, "O Sanjaya! After the brave Saindhava was killed by Savyasachi, what did those on my side
do? Tell me that."

'Sanjaya replied, "O venerable one! On seeing that Saindhava had been killed in the battle by Partha, Kripa,
Sharadvata's son, was overcome by great intolerance. He covered Pandava with a great shower of arrows. Drona's
son also stationed himself on his chariot and attacked Partha Phalguna. Those two best of rathas were stationed on
two chariots that were supreme among chariots. They showered down sharp arrows from both sides. The mighty-
armed one, supreme among rathas, was afflicted by that great shower of arrows and felt extreme pain. But in that
battle, he did not wish to slay his preceptor or his preceptor's son[Kripa was the preceptor before Drona became the preceptor.]. Kunti's son, Dhananjaya, then began to act like
a preceptor there[Like a preceptor who does not strike a student.]. He countered the weapons of Drona's son and Sharadvata's son with his weapons. However,
since he did not wish to kill them, he released arrows at them that were only mild in speed. But though he did not
shoot them powerfully, the many arrows shot by Jaya caused supreme difficulties and they were overcome by
those arrows. O king! Oppressed by Kounteya's arrows, Sharadvata's son sat down on the floor of his chariot and
lost his consciousness. On seeing that his master was unconscious and was afflicted by arrows, his charioteer
thought that he was dead and bore him away. O great king! After Kripa, Sharadvata's son, had been taken away
from the field of battle, Ashvatthama also took to his chariot and fled from Pandaveya.

'"Seeing that Sharadvata's son was unconscious and afflicted by arrows, the great archer, Partha, lamented miserably on his chariot. 'The immensely wise Kshatta[Vidura.] had foreseen this and had spoken to the king, as soon as the
wicked Suyodhana, the exterminator of his lineage, was born. "Let this destroyer of the lineage be conveyed to the
world of the hereafter. Because of him, the foremost ones of the Kuru lineage will confront a great calamity."

Those words, spoken by the one who tells the truth, have come true. It is because of his deeds that I see Kripa lying on a bed of arrows. Shame on the dharma of kshatriyas! Shame on strength and manliness! Is there anyone like
me, raising his weapons against a brahmana, especially one who is a preceptor? He is the son of a rishi. He is the
beloved friend of my preceptor, Drona. He is lying down on the floor of his chariot, afflicted by my arrows.
Though I did not desire it, my arrows have severely wounded him. He has sunk down on the floor of his chariot
and this causes pain to my heart. Even though he afflicted me with arrows, I should only have looked at that immensely radiant one[Without striking back.]. Struck by my numerous arrows, he has attained the state that everyone must duly obtain[That is, he has died.]. I
am overcome by greater sorrow than from the death of my son. O Krishna! Behold the miserable state he has been
reduced to on his chariot. Those bulls among men, who obtain knowledge from their preceptors, and then give
them what they desire, attain divinity. But the worst of men, who obtain knowledge from their preceptors, and then
strike them, are of evil conduct and go to hell. There is no doubt that my deed today will take me to hell, since my
preceptor, Kripa, was on his chariot and I have covered him with arrows. When he had instructed me about
weapons earlier, Kripa had said, "O Kouravya! Do not ever strike your preceptor." I have not obeyed the words of
my great-souled preceptor. I have struck him with a shower of arrows. I bow down and worship Goutama, who
does not retreat. O Varshneya! Shame on me for having struck him.' While Savyasachi was thus lamenting, Rad-
heya saw that Saindhava had been killed and attacked him.

'"On seeing that Radheya was advancing, maharatha Partha laughed and spoke these words to Devaki's son[Krishna.].
'Adhiratha's son is advancing towards Satyaki's chariot. There is no doubt that he cannot tolerate Bhurishrava's
death in the battle. O Janardana! Urge the horses towards the spot where he is going. Let not Vrisha make Satyaki
follow in the footsteps of Somadatta's son.' Having been thus addressed by Savyasachi, the mighty-armed and immensely energetic Keshava spoke words that were appropriate to the occasion. 'O Pandava! The mighty-armed one
is alone enough for Karna. In addition, the bull among the Satvata lineage is with Droupadi's sons. O Partha! It is
not proper for you to fight with Karna now. O destroyer of enemy heroes! He possesses the blazing weapon that
was given to him by Vasava[In exchange for the natural armour and earrings, Indra gave Karna an invincible spear. This has been described in
Section 43 (Volume 3).]. It is like a giant meteor. He worships it and has preserved it for you. Therefore, let
Karna proceed to the spot where Satvata is. O Kouravya! I know when the time will come for the evil-souled
one.'"

'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! Tell me about the clash between the brave Karna and Varshneya, which took
place after Bhurishrava and Saindhava had been brought down. Satyaki was without a chariot. Which chariot did
he mount? Also tell me about the two Panchalas[Yudhmanyu and Uttamouja.] who protected the chariot wheels."

'Sanjaya said, "I will tell you everything that happened in that great battle. Listen patiently. All this is because
of your own evil conduct. O lord! Mentally, Krishna had already known earlier that the brave Satyaki would be defeated by the one with the sacrificial altar on his standard[Bhurishrava.]. O king! Janardana knows the past and the future. O
king! Therefore, the immensely strong one had summoned his charioteer, Daruka, and had given him instructions.

'Let my chariot be yoked for tomorrow[This instruction had been given the previous night.].' The gods, the gandharvas, the yakshas, the serpents, the rakshasas and
men can never defeat the two Krishnas. The gods and the siddhas, with the grandfather[Brahma.] at the forefront, know
about the infinite prowess of those two. Listen to the battle, as it happened. On seeing that Satyaki was without a
chariot and Karna was attacking him with raised weapons, Madhava blew a rishabha note on his conch shell with
great force[In the seven pure notes, sa, re, ga, ma, etc., rishabha (re) is the second.]. From the sound of that conch shell, Daruka got the message. He took that chariot, with Suparna[Garuda. Garuda is always on the top of Krishna's (Vishnu's) standard.]
decorating the standard. With Keshava's permission, Daruka yoked the chariot, which was like the fire or the sun,
and made Shini's grandson ascend it. It could go wherever one wished and it was drawn by Sainya, Sugriva,
Meghapushpa and Balahaka[The names of Krishna's horses.]. It possessed a great speed and was decorated with gold. He ascended that chariot,
which was like a celestial vehicle[Vimana.] and which had been yoked.

'"He attacked Radheya and showered down many arrows on him. The two protectors of the chariot wheels, Yudhamanyu and Uttamouja, also abandoned Dhananjaya's chariot and attacked Radheya. O great king! Radheya also
showered down arrows. In that battle, he angrily attacked Shini's undecaying grandson. The gods, the gandharvas,
the asuras, the serpents and the rakshasas have not heard of such a battle having taken place in heaven or on earth
earlier. O great king! On witnessing their deeds, the soldiers, the rathas, the horses, the men and the elephants were
senseless with wonder and became spectators, witnessing those superhuman exploits. O king! They withdrew and
also watched Daruka's skill as a charioteer. He moved forward and back, executed circular motions and retreated.
The charioteer of that chariot, descended from Kashyapa's lineage, caused great wonder[While every living being is descended from Kashyapa, this description of Daruka as being descended from
Kashyapa is a little odd.]. The gods, the gandharvas and the danavas assembled in the sky, to watch that encounter between Karna and Shini's descendant with
great attention. For the sake of their friends, those two powerful ones vigorously challenged each other in that battle. O great king! Karna, who was like an immortal, and Yuyudhana Satyaki showered down arrows on each other.
Unable to tolerate the death of Kouravya Jalasandha[In Section 69, Satyaki killed Jalasandha.], Karna ground Shini's descendant down with a shower of
arrows. Overcome by anger, Karna sighed like a giant serpent. In that encounter, his angry glances seemed to burn
up Shini's descendant. The scorcher of enemies repeatedly attacked him, with great force. On seeing that he was in
great rage, Satyaki pierced him back with a great shower of arrows, like an elephant countering another elephant.
Those two tigers among men clashed, as spirited as tigers. In that battle, unparalleled in valour, they wounded each
other. Shini's grandson, the scorcher of enemies, repeatedly pierced Karna, all over his limbs, with arrows that
were completely made out of iron. With a broad-headed arrow, he brought down his charioteer from his seat on the
chariot. He killed the four white horses with sharp arrows. The bull among men shattered his standard into a hundred fragments with a hundred arrows. O king! On seeing that Karna was without a chariot, your sons and the bulls
among men on your side were distressed.

'"Karna's son, Vrishasena, Shalya, the lord of Madra, and Drona's son surrounded Shini's descendant from all
sides. There was a melee everywhere and nothing could be discerned. O king! Seeing that the brave son of the suta
had been deprived of his chariot by Satyaki, a great lamentation arose from all the soldiers. O king! Having been
oppressed by Satvata's arrows, Karna was also benumbed. O king! He ascended Duryodhana's chariot and sighed
deeply. He remembered the respect he bore towards your son, the affection since childhood and the promise that he
had made about returning the kingdom to him. O king! When Karna was deprived of his chariot, your brave sons,
with Duhshasana at the forefront, succumbed to Satyaki. But he did not kill them, to protect the pledge that Bhimasena had taken earlier. He deprived them of their chariots and made them senseless, but did not take their lives
away from them. Bhimasena had taken a pledge to kill your sons and at the time of the second gambling match, so
had Partha[Arjuna.] about killing Karna. With Karna at the forefront, though they made efforts to kill Satyaki, supreme
among rathas, they did not succeed in killing him. With a single bow, he defeated Drona's son, Kritavarma, other
maharathas and hundreds of bulls among the kshatriyas. Satyaki, the destroyer of enemies, possessed a valour that
was like that of the two Krishnas and for the sake of attaining to the afterworld and to do that which would bring
pleasure to Dharmaraja. O tiger among men! In this world, there are only three archers-Krishna, Partha and Shini's descendant. No fourth one can be seen."

'Dhritarashtra said, "Saytaki ascended Vasudeva's invincible chariot. The young one, who is Vasudeva's equal,
deprived Karna of his chariot. He was proud because of the strength of his own arms and that chariot was yoked by
Daruka. Did Satyaki then climb onto another chariot? I wish to hear this and you are skilled in recounting. O Sanjaya! Tell me that. I think that he is impossible to withstand."

'Sanjaya replied, "O king! Listen to what happened. Daruka's immensely intelligent younger brother quickly
brought another chariot that had been prepared in the proper fashion. The pole was of iron and gold and was tied
with cloth. There was a lion on the standard, decorated with a thousand stars. The horses were as fast as the wind
and possessed golden harnesses. They were as white as the moon. The chariot was firm and its speed was beyond
that of sound. O lord of the earth! Those were the best of horses and they were colourful with gold. There was the
sound of nets of bells and the lances and spears were like lightning. It was stocked with implements of war and
many weapons and garments. That chariot rumbled like the roar of the clouds and it was prepared. Ascending this,
Shini's descendant attacked your soldiers. Following his desire, Daruka went to where Keshava was. O great king!
The best of chariots was also brought for Karna. There were well-trained horses that had a great speed and they
were as white as conch shells or milk. The harnesses were colourful and golden. The sides and standard were made
out of gold and there were machines and flags. There were many weapons and garments and there was a good
charioteer. Ascending this chariot, Karna rushed against the enemy again. This is the entire account, as you have
asked me to recount it. Know about the great destruction that was brought about because of your bad policy. Thirty-one of your sons were brought down by Bhimasena. With Durmukha at the forefront, they were colourful in
fighting[Durmukha was killed by Bhima in Section 69.]. O venerable one! Hundreds of brave ones were killed by Satvata and Arjuna, with Bhishma and Bhagadatta as the foremost. O king! This was the destruction that was brought about by your evil counsel."'
