Bhishma said, "At that time, Narada came to the spot where Shuka was alone[Vedavyasa had left.], engaged in studying. He wished to
ask him about the purport of the Vedas. On seeing that devarshi Narada had presented himself, Shuka first offered him arghya and then honoured him, following the rites laid down in the Vedas. Narada was delighted
and spoke these words. 'O supreme among those who know about the brahman! O son! How can I ensure what is
best  for  you?  Cheerfully,  instruct  me.'  O  descendant  of  the  Bharata  lineage!  Hearing  Narada's  words,  Shuka
replied, 'What is beneficial in this world? You should instruct me about the truth of this.'

'"Narada  answered,  'Earlier,  rishis  with  cleansed  souls  desired  to  find  out  about  the  truth.  The  illustrious
Sanatkumara spoke these words to them. "There is no sight that is like that of knowledge. There are no austerities
that are equal to learning. There is no misery that is equal to attachment. There is no bliss that is equal to renunciation. Abstention from wicked deeds, constant engagement in auspicious conduct, virtuous conduct and virtuous behaviour constitute supreme benefit. Having obtained the miserable status of being born as a man, if a person becomes attached, he is confused. Such a person will not be freed from misery. Attachment is the sign of misery. The
intelligence of someone who is attached is fickle. The net of delusion is only widened. If one is enmeshed in the
net of delusion, one obtains misery in this world and in the next. Every means must be used to restrain desire and
anger. These two arise to destroy what is beneficial and prevent observance of beneficial tasks. Austerities must
always be protected against anger, and prosperity must be protected against jealousy. Knowledge must be protected
against honour and dishonour and the atman against distraction. Non-violence is supreme dharma. Forgiveness is
supreme strength. Knowledge of the atman is supreme knowledge. There is nothing that is superior to the truth.
Truthful words are the best. However, beneficial words are preferable to the truth. It is my view that whatever
brings great benefit to creatures is the truth. A person who has renounced the fruits of all enterprise, is without desires, delinked from possessions and has renounced everything, is knowledgable and learned. If a person enjoys the
senses and the objects of the senses without his self being subjugated by them and if he is not attached, he is tranquil in his soul. He is indifferent and controlled. If a person is immersed in his atman and if he is not attached to
anything he is associated with, he has been freed. He will soon obtain the supreme benefit. O sage! If a person does
not really see, touch or converse with other creatures, he will obtain the supreme benefit. One should not act violently towards any being. One should always be affectionate. Having obtained birth, one should never exhibit enmity. A person who is content with a trifle, a person who is without hopes and not fickle-such a person is said to
have conquered himself. He knows his atman and will obtain the supreme benefit. O son[Since the rishis are being addressed, this should really be in the plural.]! Discard all possessions and conquer your senses. Be established in the place that has no sorrow and be without fear, in this world and
in the next. Those who have no desires do not grieve. Cast aside all desire from your self. Cast aside all desire and
be tranquil. You will thus free yourself from misery and calamity. A sage must control his self, be restrained and
always engage in austerities. He must conquer desire, which is difficult to vanquish. In the midst of attachments,
he must not be attached. If a brahmana is not attached to an association with any of the qualities and if he always
dwells alone, he will soon obtain supreme bliss. Creatures are addicted to the pleasure that comes from sexual congress. In the midst of this, a sage takes pleasure in himself alone. Know him to be a person for whom wisdom has
brought contentment. A person who is content with his knowledge does not sorrow. Through auspicious deeds, one
obtains  divinity  in  the  firmament.  Through  mixed  deeds,  one  obtains  birth  as  a  human.  Through inauspicious
deeds, one obtains an inferior birth. One is powerless against what has been obtained through deeds. Creatures are
cooked in the cycle of life. One is always assailed by death, old age and misery. Why do you not understand this?
Something that is not beneficial is regarded by you as beneficial. Something that is transitory is regarded by you as
permanent. Something that is undesirable is regarded by you as desirable. Why do you not understand this? Like a
silkworm, you are enmeshing yourself in these multiple strands. You are entangling yourself in this cocoon. But
you do not comprehend. There has been enough of possessions. Possessions are associated with sins. The worm
encased in a cocoon is destroyed by what it has itself done. Beings who are attached to sons, wives and families
have to suffer. They are like an aged and wild elephant that has got stuck to the mud in a pond. They have been
captured in a large net, like fish that have been dragged to the land. Behold. Creatures are entangled in the net of
affection and undergo great misery. Families, sons, wives, bodies and accumulations of objects are all transitory
and serve no purpose in the hereafter. There is nothing except one's good and bad deeds. One must certainly abandon everything and go there. Why should one then be attached to the undesirable and not be engaged in what
brings one benefit? There is no place for resting along that path, no refuge and no provisions. That region is desolate, unknown and enveloped in darkness. How will you go there alone? When you advance there, there is nothing
that will follow you from the rear. Your good and bad deeds are the only things that will follow you. One searches
for one's objectives through learning, deeds, valour and extremely great wisdom. Once one is successful in accomplishing that objective, one is freed. The attachment towards dwelling in a village[Interpreted as any habitation.] is like a noose made out of
ropes. When one has severed it, the ones with good deeds move forward. Without severing it, the ones with bad
deeds find it difficult to make progress. Beauty constitutes the banks[There js an image of a river of life.]. The mind is the current. Touch constitutes
the islands and taste is the flow. Scent is the mud. Sound is the water. The flow along the road to heaven is extremely difficult. Forgiveness constitutes the oars. Truth, patience and dharma are the ropes. Renunciation is the
wind that swiftly drives it. Using one's intelligence as a boat, one must cross that river. Abandon both dharma and
adharma[Interpreted in the narrow sense.]. Cast aside truth and falsehood. Having cast aside both truth and falsehood, cast aside everything that
must be abandoned. Abandon all resolution about dharma. Abandon adharma and violence. Having cast aside both
truth and falsehood, use your intelligence to form a resolution about what is supreme. The bones[In the body.] are the pillars.
The sinews are like strings. Flesh and blood are the external plaster. The skin is a sheath. It emits a foul smell and
is full of urine and excrement. It is pervaded by the sorrow of old age. It is an abode for disease and affliction.
Abandon this residence of creatures, full of passion and impermanent. Everything in the universe is in this universe. This universe has  originated in the five  great elements. Everything results from the atoms[The word used is paramanu.]  of  Mahat.
There are the five senses and tamas, sattva and rajas. The collection of the seventeen[The five senses, the five organs of action, the five breaths of life, mind and intelligence.] is said to be indicative of
the manifest. With the objects of the senses, the manifest and the unmanifest, there are said to be twenty-five[The five objects of the senses, ego, ignorance and prakriti added to the earlier list of seventeen.],
with the qualities of the manifest and the unmanifest. When all of these are united together, one is always described as a being[That is, the jivatman.]. If a person knows the nature of the three objectives[Dharma, artha and kama.], life and death, he knows the truth. He
knows about creation and destruction. A person who has the slightest bit of knowledge knows that prosperity exists in the hereafter. Anything that can be grasped by the senses is established in the realm of the manifest. One
must know the unmanifest and attentively comprehend it through the signs. The senses always satisfy a creature,
like a shower. However, a person who sees the atman sees that the atman is extended everywhere in the world.
Through the strength of knowledge, a person can see the supreme and he does not perceive the lack of a shore. In
every way and in every circumstance, he sees it in all beings. Even if he is associated with other creatures, he does
not suffer anything undesirable on this account. Through knowledge, one can overcome many kinds of hardship
that are due to delusion. When a person's knowledge has become manifest, he does not suffer any injury on account of the ways of the world. An illustrious person who knows about the sacred says that in its atman, a creature
is without beginning and without end. It is without decay. It is not the doer and it is without form. Because of its
own deeds, a creature is always engaged in tasks and confronts misery. In an attempt to counter this misery, it kills
many other creatures. Having performed such an act, it goes through many other births. It is tormented, and suffers
like a diseased person without any medication. There are many who are afflicted by such delusion, thinking that
unhappiness is actually happiness. Slain and crushed, it is always churned in these deeds. That is the reason one
must refrain from the bonds that are caused by deeds. One is wheeled around in this cycle of life and suffers many
kinds of pain. However, you have withdrawn from those bonds. You have restrained yourself from deeds. You
know everything. You have conquered everything. Be successful and free from all sentiments. Through restraint,
abstaining from new bonds and resorting to the strength of austerities, many people have become successful. They
have obtained unrestrained bliss."'"'
