'Vyasa said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Through austerities, deeds and donations, a man is purified, as
long as he does not commit wicked deeds again. A person who has killed a brahmana can free himself of the crime
of killing a brahmana by eating once a day, roaming around for alms, performing all his tasks himself, holding a
skull in one hand and a bedpost in the other[A skull and khattanga (bedpost) being held as rod or staff are the signs of mendicancy. The broken bed
is symbolic of the giving up of the bed and the comforts of a household.], following brahmacharya, by always being enterprising, showing no
malice, sleeping on the bare ground and disclosing his deed to the worlds. He has to do this for a full twelve years.
If he lives on a diet of hardship, a man who kills a brahmana can be purified in six years[The translation doesn't capture the nature of the hardship (krichchha) diet. In this kind of practice, one
only eats in the morning for three days, only in the evening for the next three days, nothing that is not
obtained through begging in the next three days and fasts for three more days. This cycle of twelve days
continues and one is purified in six years. If this cycle is modified by replacing a seven-day span in
odd-numbered months and an eight-day span in even-numbered months, one is purified in three years.]. If he eats from one
month to another, he is freed in three years. If he eats only once a month, there is no doubt that he is freed in one
year. O king! If one does not eat at all, one is freed very soon. There is no doubt that one is purified through a
horse sacrifice. In this way, there are men who have bathed after a horse sacrifice. There are supreme learned texts
which say that all their souls have been cleansed. If one is killed in a battle for the sake of a brahmana, one is freed
from the sin of killing a brahmana. If the slayer of a brahmana gives one hundred thousand cows to deserving recipients, he is freed from all sin. If one gives away twenty-five thousand milk-yielding brown cows, one is freed
from all sin. At the time of death, if one gives one thousand milk-yielding cows with calves to virtuous and poor
people, one is freed from sin. O protector of the earth! If one gives away one hundred horses from Kamboja to
self-restrained brahmanas, one is freed from sin. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If someone gives something
that another person wishes for and does not brag about his generosity, he is freed from sin.

'"When a brahmana has drunk liquor, if he drinks that liquor when it is as hot as fire, he purifies himself in this
world and the next. Or he can fling himself down from Mount Meru, or enter a fire, or embark on the great
journey[The great journey (mahaprasthana) is death. The suggestion is of killing oneself.]. He will then be freed from all sin. However, a brahmana who has drunk liquor can again be admitted
into an assembly of brahmanas, provided he follows the injunctions of Brihaspati laid down in texts concerning
brahmanas. O king! If a man who has drunk liquor casts off envy and gives away land, without indulging in that
act again, he is cleansed and purified.

'"If one has had intercourse with a preceptor's wife, one should lie down on a heated slab of stone. Alternatively, one should cast one's eyes upwards and roam around, holding one's penis in one's hand.

'"By giving up the body, one is freed from all wicked deeds. If women endeavour to be restrained for a year,
they are freed from such deeds. If one observes a great vow, gives away everything that he owns, or is slain in a
battle for the sake of a preceptor, one is freed from all wicked deeds. If one acts falsely towards a preceptor or opposes him, one is freed from that crime by giving him something agreeable[By giving the preceptor an agreeable gift.]. If one has deviated from a vow of
chastity, one should follow the atonement vows prescribed for a killer of a brahmana. Alternatively, one can wear
the hide of a donkey for six months. One will then be freed from that crime. A person who has abducted another
person's wife or stolen another person's possessions must observe a vow for one year to be freed from that sin. If a
person has stolen the property of another, he must use every means possible to return riches that are of an equal
measure. He will then be freed from that sin. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A younger brother who has
married before the elder brother, or an elder brother whose younger brother has married before him, are both naturally freed by eating the hardship diet for twelve nights, or at least for ten. But, to save the ancestors, he[The elder brother.] must
get married. The wife[Of the younger brother.] is not tainted by this and no blemish attaches to her. Those who know about dharma say
that, after giving birth and after a period, women are cleansed and purified through a chaturmasya vow. When
there is suspicion about a woman's wicked conduct, it is known that there should be no sexual intercourse with her.
However, she is purified through her menstrual flow, like a vessel with ashes.

'"The four parts of dharma are decreed for brahmanas. For kings, it has been ordained that dharma will be reduced by one quarter. The vaishya's will be a quarter less than that and the shudra's a quarter less than that too. In
this way, one determines the seriousness or lightness of the crime and the atonement.

'"If a person kills a bird or an animal, or cuts down a large number of trees, that man should only subsist on air
for three nights and proclaim his crime. O king! If a person has intercourse with someone he should not have intercourse with, the atonement has been laid down. For six months, he should sleep in wet clothes and lie down on
ashes. These are the decrees laid down in the brahmana texts[The brahmana texts associated with the Vedas.], explaining all the deeds, the forms of atonement
and the detailed reasons. If one recites the savitri mantra[Another name for the gayatri mantra.] in a secluded place, while eating little, abjuring violence and hate and speaking little, one is freed from all sin. During the day, one must be under the open sky and
during the night, one must also sleep there. Thrice during the day and thrice during the night, one must immerse
oneself in the water, wearing one's garments. A brahmana who is observing this vow must not speak to women,
shudras and those who have become outcasts because of deviation in their conduct. He will then be freed from any
sins that he may have committed in ignorance.

'"The witness to a being[The atman.] obtains good and bad fruits after death. Depending on which of the two[Good and bad deeds.] is more,
the doer reaps the consequences. Donations, austerities and deeds lead to auspicious fruits. In that way, they increase and become greater than wicked deeds. If wicked deeds have been performed, that is a reason to perform
auspicious ones. By constantly giving away riches, one is freed from sin. The rites of atonement are in proportion
to the wicked deed. However, no atonement is recommended for a mahapataka[A great sin is pataka or mahapataka, while a minor sin is upapataka. While it is agreed that there are
five great or major sins, the listing of those sins varies. But something like killing a brahmana or having
intercourse with a preceptor's wife would figure in all such lists.]. O king! Eating what should not
be eaten and speaking what should not be spoken-for these, atonement depends on whether these are done knowingly or unknowingly. Crimes that are knowingly committed are said to be grievous. Those that are unknowingly
committed are light and there is atonement for both. The methods and rites described are capable of cleansing the
sin. But those recommendations are for the believers and the faithful. Those rites are never seen to be for men who
are non-believers, and unfaithful and those who are prone to insolence and wickedness. O supreme among those
who uphold dharma! Good conduct is the dharma of the virtuous. O tiger among men! For the sake of happiness
after death, they must serve this. O king! Because of the motives behind your earlier crimes, you will be freed. You
wished to save by killing them. Alternatively, you were following the duty of kings. However, if you abhor what
you did, follow the path of atonement. Like those who are not aryas, you will then not confront destruction because of your deeds."'
