'Jaritari said, "The intelligent man stays awake before difficult times. When the difficult time arrives, there is no
suffering at all. But he who is not intelligent and is not sensible knows nothing and suffers because of difficulties
when a difficult time arrives."

'Sarisrikva said, "You are implacable and intelligent. The time has come when our lives are endangered. There
is no doubt that only one among many is wise and brave."

'Stambamitra said, "The eldest is the protector, because the eldest saves in times of difficulty. If the eldest one
does not know, what can the younger ones do?"

'Drona said, "The one with the golden seed[Hiranyareta, the one with the golden (hiranya) seed (reta) is a name used for the fire and for the sun.] is swiftly advancing towards our abode in flames. The seven
tongues of the fire are lean and are eagerly licking."'

Vaishampayana said, 'At these words of his brother, Jaritari folded his hands on his forehead in salutation. O
king! Listen to the way he praised the fire.

'Jaritari said, "You are the soul of the wind, the purifier[Pavana is the name of the wind and means the purifier.]. You are the body of the creepers. O virile one[The word used in the text is Shukra. Shukra is the preceptor of the gods and is also the planet Venus. But it
means the virile one and is also a term used for Agni.]! You
are the source of the water. The water is also your source. O most powerful one! Your flames are like the rays of
the sun and they go above and below, and on every side."

'Sarisrikva said, "O you with the clouds in your banner! Our mother has ignored us and we do not know our father. Our wings have still not grown. O Agni! We have no protector but for you. You are the only hero and, therefore, protect us. O Agni! We are seeking refuge with you. In your benevolent form and in your seven flames, therefore, protect us. O Jataveda! You alone are the one that heats. O god! You alone are the one who heats the heavens.
O bearer of sacrificial offerings! Protect us young rishis today and bypass this place."

'Stambamitra said, "O Agni! You alone are everything. The entire universe is established in you. You sustain all
beings and you hold up everything that exists. O Agni! You are the bearer of all sacrificial offerings. You alone are
the supreme sacrificial offering. The learned ones offer sacrifices to you, knowing you to be one and many. O bearer of sacrificial offerings! You are the creator of the three worlds. When the time arrives[The time for destruction.], you kindle them and
cook afresh. You are the mother of the entire universe. O Agni! You are the one in whom everything is established
again. O lord of the universe! You remain inside and digest the food that beings eat[Jatharagni is the digestive fire, that is the gastric fluids, inside the stomach (jathara).]. Everything is established in
you and you are always cooking and always expanding."

'Drona said, "O Jataveda! You are the sun with its rays. You suck up the water from the earth and the juices that
are born in the ground. O Shukra! You take them all and return them again in the form of rain when it is time and
cause everything to grow. O Shukra! It is from you that the verdant creepers grow again. The ponds, the seas and
the giant oceans are born. O you whose rays are piercing! We are always dependent on Varuna[The god of the ocean or of water.]. Be benevolent
and be our protector. Do not destroy us today. O fire! Your eyes have the colour of copper. Your neck is red and
your trail is black. Save us, like the houses on the shores of the ocean[The tide goes away, bypassing houses on the shore. In that sense, the fire should bypass the Sharngakas.]."'
Vaishampayana said, 'When he had been thus addressed by Drona of the unsullied deeds, Jataveda spoke to
Drona, remembering the promise he had made to Mandapala. Agni said, "O Drona! You are a rishi. What you have
uttered is the Brahman[The truth.]. I will do what you desire and you have nothing to fear. Mandapala had mentioned all
this to me earlier and had asked me to spare his sons when I consumed the forest. The word that I gave him and the
words that you have just spoken are both of great importance. Therefore, tell me what I should do. O fortunate
one! O brahmana! O illustrious one! I am extremely pleased with your praise." Drona replied, "O Shukra! These
cats cause us trouble all the time. O bearer of sacrificial offerings! Place them and all their relatives between your
teeth." O Janamejaya! After granting leave to the Sharngakas, Agni acted accordingly. Blazing up, he consumed
the Khandava forest.'
