'Dhritarashtra said, "I think Bhimasena's valour is extraordinary, since he fought with Karna, who is brave and
dexterous, in that battle. In an encounter, Karna is capable of repulsing the gods, the yakshas, the asuras and men,
even if they are united and armed with every kind of weapon. O son! O Sanjaya! Pandava is blazing in his prosperity. But how could he not be vanquished? Tell me that. How did the battle between them continue, in which, each
of them wagered their lives? I think that either of them was capable of being victorious, or being defeated. O suta!
Having obtained Karna in the battle, my son, Suyodhana, was confident of defeating the Parthas, with Govinda and
the Satvatas. But having heard that Karna was repeatedly defeated in the battle by Bhimasena, terrible in his deeds,
I have lost my senses. Because of the wicked policies of my son, I think that the Kouravas have already been destroyed. O Sanjaya! Karna will not be able to defeat those great archers, the Parthas. Whenever Karna has fought
with the sons of Pandu, the Pandavas have always defeated him in the field of battle. O son! The Pandavas are incapable of being vanquished, even by the gods, with Vasava. My wicked son, Duryodhana, does not comprehend
this. Partha[Meaning Yudhishthira. The lord of riches is Kubera.] is like the lord of riches. Having robbed him of his riches, my son, whose intelligence is limited, is
like a searcher of honey and does not know about the downfall[The image is that a searcher of honey has climbed a tree and doesn't know that he will fall down.]. He is wise about deceit and used deceit to rob
the great-souled ones of their kingdom. He thinks that it[The kingdom.] belongs to him and disregards the Pandavas. My soul
is also unclean. I have been overcome by affection for my son and have maltreated the sons of Pandu, who are
great-souled and have been established in dharma. Partha Yudhishthira is far-sighted and has always desired peace.
But my sons thought that he was incapable and maltreated him. The mighty-armed Bhima bears all the assorted
hardships and diverse ill-treatment in his heart and has fought with the son of the suta. O Sanjaya! Karna and Bhi-
ma are foremost among warriors and wished to kill each other. In that battle, tell me how they fought."

'Sanjaya replied, "O king! Listen to the account of the battle between Karna and Bhima. They wished to kill
each other and were like elephants in a forest. O king! Vaikartana was enraged and used his valour to pierce the
brave and angry Bhima, the scorcher of enemies, with thirty arrows. These were extremely powerful, sharp at the
tip and embellished with gold. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! Bhima was struck by Vaikartana's arrows.
However, while he was attacking, Bhima used three sharp arrows to sever his bow and used a broad-headed arrow
to bring his charioteer down from the seat of the chariot onto the ground. Vaikartana Vrisha[Vrisha is one of Karna's names.] wished to kill Bhimasena. He grasped a giant javelin, which was like a javelin used by Death. The shaft and handle of that javelin
was colourfully decorated with gold and lapis lazuli. The immensely strong Radheya hurled it at Bhimasena and it
was capable of robbing him of his life. Having released the javelin, like Purandara with his vajra, the powerful son
of the suta emitted an extremely loud roar. On hearing that roar, your sons were delighted. That javelin was released from Karna's hands and was as radiant as the sun or the fire. However, while it was still traversing, Bhima
severed it with seven arrows. O venerable one! Thus severed by Bhima as it was travelling through the air, the
javelin looked like a snake that has cast off its skin. Wishing to rob the son of the suta of his life, he then angrily
released many arrows shafted with the feathers of peacocks. They were gold-tufted and sharpened on stone and in
that battle, each of them was like Yama's staff. Karna took up another bow that possessed a golden back and was
unassailable. The immensely energetic one drew it and shot many arrows. However, Pandu's son severed these
with nine arrows with drooping tufts. O king! Having severed those great arrows shot by Vasushena[Karna's name.], Bhima
roared like a lion. O great king! Those two powerful ones roared like bulls desiring to find an opportunity, or like
roaring tigers that attacked each other. They sought to strike each other and looked for each other's weakness.
They glanced towards each other, like giant bulls in a pen. They were like giant elephants, striking each other with
their tusks. They drew their bows back to the full extent and struck each other with arrows. O great king! They
scorched each other with showers of arrows. They glanced towards each other, with eyes dilated with rage. They
laughed at each other and repeatedly censured each other. As they fought with each other, they blew on their conch
shells. O venerable one! Bhima again severed the bow in his hand and with his arrows, dispatched his horses,
which had the complexion of conch shells, to Yama's abode.

'"On seeing that Karna was confronting difficulties, King Duryodhana trembled with anger and instructed Dur-
jaya[Duryodhana's brother.], 'O Durjaya! Go to that spot in front, where Radheya is about to be devoured by Pandava. Quickly slay
that eunuch and give Karna strength.' Having been thus addressed there by your son, your son[Duryodhana and Durjaya respectively.] agreed and attacking Bhimasena, covered him with arrows. He struck Bhima with nine arrows, his charioteer with six, his standard with three and struck him again with seven arrows. Bhimasena became extremely angry. With his arrows, he
pierced Durjaya, his horses and his charioteer in the inner organs and dispatched them to Yama's abode. His ornamented body lay down on the ground, mangled like a writhing snake. Karna wept and circumambulated your son.
Having deprived him[Karna.] of his chariot, he[Bhima.] laughed at the enemy and covered him with a mass of arrows, making him look like a shataghni[A shataghni is a weapon that is difficult to identify. All one knows is that it could kill one hundred (shata) at
one go.] with spikes sticking out. Atiratha Karna, scorcher of enemies, was pierced by
those arrows. However, he did not avoid Bhima in that battle."'
