Vaishampayana said, 'Having killed thousands of animals, the king and his many mounts entered another forest to
hunt deer. Though supremely strong, he was hungry and thirsty. Travelling alone, he penetrated the deep forest until he came to a vast wilderness. Passing beyond this, he came to a wood that was full of holy pilgrimages, beautiful to the eyes and a joy to the heart. Beyond this, he came to another great wood where a cool breeze blew. The
trees were full of flowers and soft grass extended on all sides. The great wood echoed with the sweet songs of
birds. There were trees all around, with branches that offered pleasant shade. Bees[The word used in the text is shatapada, one with six legs. This is a word for a bee.] swarmed over the creepers
and there was a supreme beauty there. There was no tree without flowers and fruit and none with thorns. Nor did
that wood have one[That is, a tree.] not made dark with swarming bees. Resounding with the sweet songs of birds, adorned with
beautiful flowers that blossomed in all seasons, with the pleasant shade of blossoming trees everywhere, and with
pleasant expanses of grass, that supreme wood was beautiful. And the great archer[Duhshanta.] entered it. Bedecked with
flowers, the trees were shaken by the breeze and repeatedly showered wonderful flowers. They rose up into the
sky, full of the sweet songs of birds. The trees there were attired in many-coloured garments of wonderful flowers.
They were heavy with the weight of new shoots and flowers and full of the sweet songs of birds and bees.

'On seeing that expanse, adorned with many flowers and surrounded by pleasant creepers that seemed to form
canopies, the greatly energetic one was delighted. With branches laden with flowers intertwined with one another,
the wood then seemed to shine like Indra's pennant. A pleasant, cool and fragrant breeze, carrying the pollen of
flowers, wafted around the wood and sported with the trees. Such were the qualities of the wood the king gazed
upon. It was located in the delta of a river and had the beauty of flagpoles. In that forest, the abode of extremely
happy birds, the king saw a charming hermitage. It was full of many trees and blazing fires[Sacrificial fires.]. Many yatis[A yati is specifically an ascetic.],
valakhilyas and other groups of sages were there. Many places for sacrificial fires were around and the flowers
formed carpets on the ground. O king! The sacred river Malini, which gladdens the heart, flowed by and created
beautiful and large pools[The word used in the text is kaccha. This is usually the word used for a marsh. But a marsh does not seem
right, given the context.] of water. It was full of many waterfowl and made the hermitage even more beautiful.
The king was delighted to see predatory beasts and deer peacefully together.

'The king, whose chariot no one could obstruct, entered that enchanting hermitage, which was like the world of
the gods and beautiful everywhere. He saw the river with sacred waters embracing the hermitage, as if the mother
of all beings was established there. Chakravaka[The ruddy goose.] birds swarmed along its banks. The water carried flowers and
foam. Groups of kinnaras and monkeys and bears lived there. The sound of holy chants and studying resounded
along the sand banks. Rutting elephants, tigers and gigantic snakes frequented the place. Having seen the sacred
hermitage ornamented by the river Malini with beautiful banks and islands, the king then desired to enter it. It was
like the abode of Nara and Narayana, beloved by the waters of the Ganga and echoing with the sound of madly
dancing peacocks.

'The bull among men entered the great wood, which resembled Chitraratha's[The king of the gandharvas.] garden. He wished to see the radiant maharshi Kanva, descendant of Kashyapa, blessed with all the qualities and the power of austerities. He
stopped his retinue of chariots, cavalry and infantry at the entry to the wood and told his soldiers, "I will go to see
the descendant of Kashyapa, blessed with the power of austerities and free of passion. Remain here until I return."

As soon as he entered the wood, which was like Nandana, the lord of men derived great pleasure and forgot his
hunger and thirst. The ruler of men put aside his signs of kingship. He entered the supreme hermitage with only his
priest and his adviser. He wished to see the sage whose store of ascetic powers was everlasting. He saw that the
hermitage was like Brahma's world, with buzzing bees and singing birds.

'In one place, that tiger among men heard chanting of the Rig Veda, recited in proper word and metre by the best
of Brahmanas, as they went about their work. Another place was adorned by those who were learned in various
branches of sacrificial rituals[This is probably a reference to the Yajur Veda. The critical edition jumps from the Rig Veda to the Atharva
Veda, at least by name. The Yajur Veda is not explicitly mentioned. Some regional variations mention the Yajur
Veda explicitly and there are shlokas, missing in the critical edition, that mention the Sama Veda.]. That hermitage was adorned by ascetics who were controlled and rigid in their
vows. In another place, those who were learned in the Atharva Veda, respected by the assembled, recited the
samhitas in the proper tone and metre. In other places, Brahmanas learned in the science of tones recited other
mantras, so that all these holy sounds made the hermitage seem like the illustrious world of Brahma. There were
those who were skilled in the art of sacrifices and rules of recital. Others were learned in the Vedas and knew the
principles of logic, self-realization and salvation. There were those who knew the meaning of words and were accomplished in combining them. Others were skilled in special rituals and the rites for salvation. Some were skilled
in arguments, refuting redundant arguments and knew the secrets of words, philosophy and time. The sound of
chanting and hymns was everywhere. The destroyer of enemy armies saw around him many learned Brahmanas of
rigid vows, all engaged in meditation and offerings.

'The lord of the earth was astonished to see the beautiful and coloured seats that had been carefully laid out. On
observing the rituals with which the Brahmanas worshipped the gods, that supreme among kings thought that he
was in the world of Brahma. The more the king saw of the beautiful, holy and solitary hermitage of Kashyapa's
descendant[Kanva.], protected by his austerities and qualities, the more he wished to see. Kashyapa's descendant's hermitage was full of great rishis, powerful in their austerities and rigid in their vows. Thus, the slayer of enemies entered there, with his adviser and his priest.'
