Vaishampayana said, 'Restraining their souls and immersing themselves in yoga, they headed in a northern direction. They saw the giant mountains, the Himalayas. Having passed beyond it, they saw an ocean of sand.
There, they saw the giant mountain of Meru, with an excellent summit. All of them proceeded swiftly, devoting
themselves to the dharma of yoga. However, Yajnaseni deviated from yoga and fell down on the ground. On seeing
that she had fallen down, the immensely strong Bhimasena glanced towards Yajnaseni and spoke to Dharmaraja.

"O scorcher of enemies! This princess never committed an act of adharma. O king! Why has Krishna[That is Droupadi, Krishnaa.] fallen down
on the ground?" Yudhishthira replied, "O supreme among men! She had a great partiality for Dhananjaya. She has
reaped the fruits of that." Having said this, the king who was Dharma's son didn't look back. The intelligent bull
among men, with dharma in his soul, controlled his mind. The intelligent Sahadeva also fell down on the ground.
On seeing that he had fallen down, Bhima spoke to the king. "Without any pride, he served all of us. Why has
Madravati's[Madri's.] son fallen down on the ground?" Yudhishthira replied, "He thought that there was no one who was
his equal in wisdom. O son of a king! It is because of that sin that he has fallen down." Having said this, he left Sahadeva  there  and  proceeded.  Kounteya  Yudhishthira  went  on,  with  his  brothers  and  the  dog.  On  seeing  that
Krishna and Pandava Sahadeva had fallen down, the brave Nakula, who loved his relatives, was afflicted and also
fell down. Seeing that the handsome and brave Nakula had fallen down, Bhima spoke to the king again. "He had
dharma in his soul and his adherence to it never suffered. He followed the words of his brothers. In the world,
Nakula was unmatched in his beauty. Yet, he has fallen down on the ground." Thus addressed by Bhimasena, Yudhishthira replied, "Nakula possessed dharma in his soul and was supreme among all the intelligent ones. However,
he held a view, like Diti's offspring[Diti's offspring are the daityas.], that there was no one who was his equal in beauty. In his mind, he thought
that there was no one who was superior to him. O Vrikodara! Understand. This is the reason why Nakula has fallen
down. O brave one! Anything ordained for a person is bound to happen." On seeing that they had fallen down,
Pandava, the one with the white horses and the scorcher of enemies[Arjuna.], was tormented by grief and also fell down.
That tiger among men possessed Shakra's energy. On seeing that the invincible one had fallen down and was about
to die, Bhima spoke to the king. "I cannot remember any falsehood that this great-souled one has wilfully uttered.
What is the transgression, as a result of which, he has fallen down on the ground?" Yudhishthira replied, "Arjuna
always said that he would burn down the enemy in a single day. Though he was proud of his valour, he wasn't able
to accomplish that. That is the reason he has fallen down. Phalguna disrespected all the other wielders of the bow.
Those who desire their own prosperity must always act as they have spoken." Having said this, the king proceeded.
Bhima fell down. Having fallen down, Bhima addressed Dharmaraja Yudhishthira. "O king! Look towards me. I
am loved by you and I have fallen down. What is the reason I have fallen down? If you know, tell me." Yudhishthira replied, "You ate too much and you boasted about your vigour. O Partha! You disrespected others. That is the
reason you have fallen down on the ground." Having said this, without looking back, the mighty-armed one proceeded. The single dog followed him and I have spoken about it to you many times[Vaishampayana hasn't quite spoken about it many times.].'