Bhishma said, "Maitreya was born in an extremely prosperous family. He was wise and extremely learned. He
was also one who valued rites. Thus addressed, he replied, 'O immensely wise one! There is no doubt that it
is exactly as you have described it. O lord! However, with your permission, I wish to say something.'

'"Vyasa replied, 'O Maitreya! O immensely wise one! Say whatever you wish to. Speak. I wish to hear your
words.'

'"Maitreya said, 'Your words on gifts are blameless and pure. There is no doubt that your soul has been cleansed
through learning and austerities. Since your soul has been cleansed, I can obtain a great advantage from this. Using
my intelligence, I can see that you are extremely prosperous in austerities. O god! I think this great opportunity of
my being able to see you is because of your favours and because of the rites I have naturally performed. Austerities, learning and birth-these are the three ways of becoming a brahmana. It is through these three qualities that
one obtains the status of being a brahmana. Therefore, when he[A brahmana.] is satisfied, the ancestors and the gods are also
satisfied. There  is  no  one  superior  to  a  brahmana  in  knowledge.  Men  obtain  fruits  from  a  field  that  has  been
ploughed well. In that way, a donor obtains fruits when the recipient is learned. Had there not been a brahmana
with learning and good conduct as a recipient, the donations of riches by a wealthy person would have been useless. When an ignorant brahmana eats, he destroys the food that he eats and also destroys the donor. Such an ignorant person destroys the food and also destroys the person who is doing the eating. A learned lord digests the food
and the lord again regenerates it. In the absence of learning, the food is not regenerated and this is a difference that
is more than subtle. Merits are obtained both by the donor and by the recipient and do not devolve only on a single
one. This is what the learned rishis have said. If donations are made to learned brahmanas who are controlled and
have good conduct, then the auspicious fruits are obtained in this world and in the next. There are those who are
pure in lineage and are always devoted to severe austerities. They are engaged in donations and studying. They
should always be worshipped. These are the paths followed by the virtuous and one is not confused if one treads
that way. They have nurtured the eternal sacrifices and have conveyed people to heaven.'"'
