'"The lord said, 'O Partha! Listen to how you will know, without any doubt, the complete truth about me-mind
attached to me, seeking refuge in me and immersed in yoga. I will completely tell you about the knowledge with
self-realization. 285 Knowing that, there is nothing more remaining to know. Among thousands of men, rarely one
tries for liberation. Among those who try for liberation, perhaps one 286 gets to know my true nature. Earth, water,
fire, 287 air, sky, mind, intellect and ego-these are the eight parts of my nature. These are inferior nature. 288 O
mighty-armed one! Besides this, know my superior and other nature 289 that is the essence of living beings. The
universe is held up by this. Know all matter 290 to be born from these. 291 I am the reason for the creation of the
entire universe and its destruction. O Dhananjaya! There is nothing superior to me. Like jewels on a string, all this
is threaded in me. O Kounteya! In the water, I am the sap. In the sun and the moon, I am the radiance. In all the
Vedas, I am the Om syllable. 292 In the sky, I am the sound. In humans, I am manifest as prowess, 293 and as pure
fragrance in the earth. I become energy in the fire, life in all living beings. I become austerity in ascetics. O Partha!
Know me to be the eternal seed of all beings. I am intellect in the intelligent. I become energy in those who are energetic. O bull among the Bharata lineage! I am strength, without desire and without attachment, 294 in those who
are strong. In all living beings, I become desire that is sanctioned by dharma. 295 And know all the three conditions, with sattva, rajas and tamas predominating, 296 to be derived from me. I am not in them. They are in me.
This entire universe is deluded by these three gunas and the resultant conditions. And is not able to know me, who
is above these and without change. It is indeed difficult to overcome this divine aspect 297 of mine, immersed in
gunas. Those who seek refuge in me alone, they are able to overcome this maya. The evildoers, ignorant and worst
among men, lose their knowledge because of maya and resort to demonic states. They do not worship me. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! O Arjuna! There are four types of people, pure of heart, who worship me-those who
are suffering, those who want satisfaction, 298 those who want self-knowledge and those who know. Of these,
those who know, always united and worshipping only one, 299 are the best. I am extremely beloved by one who
knows. And he is also my beloved. All these 300 are righteous. But the man who knows is like my atman. That is
my view. Therefore, the united man who knows seeks refuge in me, the supreme of objectives. After many births
are over, he attains the knowledge that Vasudeva is everything and attains me. Such great souls are extremely rare.
Those whose knowledge has been robbed by those desires, according to their own nature, follow prescribed rites to
worship other gods. Whatever form a devotee wishes to worship faithfully, in whatever way, in that 301 and that,
302 I make the faith firm and unwavering. With that faith, whatever form is worshipped and whatever fruits are
obtained as a result, are actually bestowed by me alone. The fruits of those 303 who have little intellect come to an
end. 304 Worshippers of gods attain the gods. My devotees attain me. Those who are ignorant don't realize my
supreme and unchanging nature and think of me, the one who is unmanifest, as manifest. Shrouded in my powers
of yoga and maya, I am not evident to everyone. I am not born and am without change. But the ignorant world
does not know me. O Arjuna! I know all beings in the past, the present and the future. But no one knows me. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O scorcher of foes! All beings are deluded at birth from opposite sensations, 305
resulting from desire and aversion. But those whose sins have been overcome and those who are virtuous in action,
they are freed from the delusion of opposite sensations and worship me, firm in their vows. Those who want to free
themselves from decay and death and seek refuge in me, they know about the brahman, about the individual atman
306 and about action in its entirety. Those who know me as the one who underlies all beings, all gods and all yaj-
nas, right till the time of death, their mind is fixed on me and they know me.'"'
