Vaishampayana said,  'Following  Vidura's  advice,  the  king  dwelt  on  the  banks  of  the  Bhagirathi,  amidst  the
dwelling places of many sacred people. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Large numbers of brahmanas, kshatriyas, vaishyas and shudras, residents of the kingdom, came to visit the king there. They surrounded the king and
he delighted them by conversing with them. Following the prescribed rites, he honoured them[Specifically, the brahmanas.] and their disciples
and took their leave. When it was evening, the king and Gandhari immersed themselves in the Ganga and purified
themselves in the appropriate manner. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Separately, all the others also bathed in
that tirtha. Vidura and the others performed all the rites there. O  king! When he had performed his ablutions,
Pritha, Kuntibhoja's daughter, brought her aged father-in-law and Gandhari to the banks of the Ganga. For  the
king, the officiating priests erected a sacrificial altar there. The king, devoted to the truth, offered oblations to the
fire there. From the banks of the Bhagirathi, the king then proceeded to Kurukshetra, with his followers. He was
learned, self-restrained and in control of his senses. The king, the rajarshi, arrived at the hermitage of the learned
and intelligent Shatayupa and met him. That scorcher of enemies used to be the great king of Kekaya. The lord of
men had handed over his wealth to his son and had entered the forest. O king! Following the prescribed rites, he
welcomed the extender of the Kuru lineage. With the king, he then went to Vyasa's hermitage. The king who was
the descendant of  the Kourava lineage[Dhritarashtra.]  was  initiated there. After  this,  he  began  to  reside  in  Shatayupa's  hermitage. O king! On Vyasa's instructions, the immensely intelligent one instructed the king in all the rites pertaining
to dwelling in the forest[Shatayupa instructed Dhritarashtra.]. O great king! The high-minded King Dhritarashtra engaged himself in austerities and so
did his followers. Queen Gandhari attired herself in bark and hides. O great king! In an identical way, with Kunti,
she observed similar vows. O king! In deeds, mind, words and sight, they controlled their senses and resorted to
supreme austerities. The king's flesh was dried up and he was reduced to bones. His hair was matted and he was
attired in hides and bark. Devoid of taints, he performed fierce austerities, like a maharshi. Kshatta was supreme in
his intelligence about dharma and artha. With Sanjaya, he served the king and his wife and both of them also
cleansed  their  souls  and  engaged  in  supreme  austerities.  They  were  attired  in  bark  and  rags  and  became
emaciated.'
