'Sanjaya said, "O great king! Wishing to fight, Yuyudhana advanced against your soldiers. Dharmaraja, surrounded
by his own soldiers, advanced towards Drona's chariot, wishing to follow Yuyudhana from the rear. The son of the
king of Panchala[Dhrishtadyumna.] was indomitable in battle. In the midst of the army of the Pandavas, he and King Vasudana
loudly shouted, 'Come! Strike! Advance swiftly against the enemy, so that Satyaki, indomitable in battle, can pass
through easily. Many maharathas will endeavour to vanquish him.' Having said this, they descended forcefully on
your army. 'We will defeat those who advance against him[Satyaki.].' A great sound then arose from the direction of
Yuyudhana's chariot and this made your son's forces tremble mightily. O great king! They were shattered into a
hundred fragments by Satvata. Shini's maharatha grandson shattered them and crushed seven brave and great
archers who were stationed at the forefront of the army. They were terrified, crushed and routed by the long-armed
one. On seeing that superhuman one, the brave ones fled from the field of battle. O venerable one! Chariots were
shattered and seats on chariots broken. Wheels were shattered and umbrellas and standards brought down. O lord
of the earth! There were flags, bumpers and golden helmets. There were arms smeared with sandalwood paste,
with armlets. O supreme among men! The thighs of men were strewn around on the ground. They were like the
trunks of elephants, or the tapering bodies of serpents. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were handsome
faces with earrings and eyes like bulls, with complexions like that of the moon. They fell down and made the earth
look beautiful. There were many mangled elephants, lying down like mountains. They were wounded severely and
were strewn around on the ground, like elephants. Their harnesses were made of gold and they were garlanded
with strings of pearls. The colourful breast plates of the horses were beautiful. They were destroyed by the long-
armed one and having lost their lives, fell down on the ground. Satvata slew diverse kinds of your soldiers. Having
penetrated your soldiers, he violently drove that army away.

"He then wished to proceed along the path that Dhananjaya had followed. But as Satyaki proceeded, he was obstructed by Drona. O venerable one! Yuyudhana confronted Bharadvaja's son. But the angry one did not retreat,
like the store of water on encountering the shoreline. In that battle, Drona repulsed maharatha Satyaki. He pierced
him with five sharp arrows that penetrated the inner organs. O king! In that encounter, Satyaki pierced Drona with
seven arrows that were gold-tufted, sharpened on stone and with the feathers of herons, peacocks and hawks.
Drona struck his horses and the charioteer with six arrows. Maharatha Satyaki could not tolerate this on Drona's
part. Satyaki roared like a lion and pierced Drona with ten other arrows and yet again with another fourteen.
Yuyudhana again pierced Drona with ten arrows, his charioteer with one and his four horses with four arrows. O
venerable one! In that battle, he pierced his standard with an arrow. Drona swiftly enveloped his horses, his charioteer, his chariot and his standard with swift arrows, like flying locusts. Yuyudhana also fearlessly covered Drona
with many swift arrows. Drona said, 'Your preceptor[Arjuna. Arjuna did not wish to waste time, fighting with Drona.] has abandoned the battle and departed like a coward. He
was fighting me. But keeping me to the right, he has left. O Madhava! If you do not swiftly avoid me in this battle,
like your preceptor did, and continue to fight with me, you will not escape with your life today.' Satyaki replied, 'I
am following Dhananjaya's footsteps on Dharmaraja's instruction. O brahmana! Be fortunate. I am leaving. I do
not wish to waste time.' O king! Having said this, Shini's descendant abandoned the preceptor and proceeded
quickly. He told the charioteer, 'Drona will make every effort to restrain me. O charioteer! Take care in this battle.
Listen to these supreme words of mine. Behold. There is the extremely resplendent army of the Avantis. Next to
that, there is the extremely powerful army from the south. Next to that, there is the large army of the Bahlikas.
Joined to the Bahlikas, there is the large force of Karna. O charioteer! These armies are different from one another,
but are dependent on each other. They support each other and will not give up the field of battle. Cheerfully goad
the horses into the space that is between them. O charioteer! Adopt a medium speed and take me there, where the
Bahlikas can be seen, with many weapons raised in their arms and there are many from the south, with the son of
the suta at the forefront. His army of elephants, horses and chariots can be seen in an array. They have been raised
from many countries and are stationed in the midst of the infantry.' He avoided the brahmana and spoke thus to his
charioteer. 'Pass through the gap, towards Karna's extremely large and fierce army.' Drona became angry at this
and followed him, releasing many arrows. But the mighty-armed Yuyudhana left and did not return.

'"Satyaki struck Karna's extremely large army with sharp arrows and penetrated into the limitless army of the
Bharatas. When Yuyudhana penetrated and the soldiers began to run away, the intolerant Kritavarma repulsed
Satyaki. As he was advancing, the valiant Satyaki quickly struck him with six arrows and killed his four horses
with four arrows. Satyaki again used sixteen swift arrows with drooping tufts to pierce Kritavarma between the
breasts. O great king! Having been thus afflicted by many arrows of great energy released by Satvata, Kritavarma
could not tolerate this. O king! He affixed a vatsadanta arrow that was like a tongue of fire. He stretched his bow
up to his ear and struck Satyaki in the chest. The gold-tufted arrow penetrated the armour on his body and passing
through the body, penetrated the earth, drenched in blood. O king! Kritavarma knew about supreme weapons. He
used many arrows to slice down his bow, with the arrows affixed to them. O king! In that battle, he pierced Satya-
ki, for whom truth was his valour. He angrily struck him between the breasts with ten sharp arrows. With his bow
shattered, Satyaki, supreme among strong ones, picked up a javelin and used this to strike Kritavarma's right arm.
The brave Satyaki then grasped another firm bow and quickly released hundreds and thousands of arrows. He enveloped Kritavarma and his chariot. With a broad-headed arrow, he sliced down the charioteer's head. Having been
slain, Hardikya's charioteer fell down from the great chariot. When the charioteer was slain, the horses fled at great
speed. Disturbed, Bhoja himself controlled the horses, with the bow in one hand. At this, the soldiers honoured
him. In an instant, he urged those well-trained horses on. He did not suffer from any fear, but caused great terror
among his enemies. However, Satyaki had gone on ahead and he[Kritavarma.] attacked Bhima.

'"O Indra among kings! Yuyudhana emerged from Drona's army and swiftly advanced towards the great army
of the Kambojas. He was countered there by many brave maharathas. O king! Though truth was Satyaki's valour,
he could not move at all. Having arranged his army, Drona entrusted the burden to Bhoja and followed Yuyudhana
in the battle, wishing to fight with him. He followed Yuyudhana from the rear and the largest of the Pandu armies
angrily began to resist him. Having encountered the chariot of Hardikya, who was supreme among rathas, the Panchalas, with Bhimasena at the forefront, lost their enterprise. O king! The brave Kritavarma repulsed them with his
valour. Though they endeavoured, all of them lost their spirits. Fearlessly, Bhoja used his torrent of arrows to obstruct and afflict their mounts. In that battle, those brave ones were oppressed by Bhoja's army. But desiring great
fame, they remained stationed, like noble ones."'
