Yudhishthira asked,  "O  bull  among  the  Bharata  lineage!  How  should  an  elder  brother  behave  towards  a
younger brother and how should a younger brother behave towards an older brother? Tell me this."

'Bhishma replied, "O son! You have always been the eldest and you must behave as an elder brother. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! This is the superior conduct that a preceptor exhibits towards a disciple. Even if the
preceptor is unaccomplished in wisdom, the disciple is unable to abandon him. At times, the elder brother must be
blind to the transgressions of the younger brothers. Even if he understands, he must pretend to be stupid. He must
refrain from speaking to them about these transgressions. If it is evident that they[The brothers.] have different inclinations,
men will try to create dissension. O Kounteya! Enemies are always tormented by prosperity and desire to bring
about dissension. It is through the eldest that the lineage prospers and is also destroyed. If the eldest is inferior, the
lineage is destroyed in every possible way. An eldest brother who injures a younger brother is no longer entitled to
the share of the eldest brother and must be restrained by the king. There is no doubt that a deceitful man must go to
the worlds meant for the wicked. It is said that the birth of such a person is fruitless, like the flower of a bamboo.
When a wicked man is born, he creates all kinds of hardships for the family. He generates ill fame and all the fame
vanishes. If a person performs perverse deeds, his other brothers should not give him his share. The eldest brother
no longer needs to give such a younger brother a share in the ancestral property. If riches are obtained by an elder
brother through his own efforts, as a result of travels and without using the ancestral property in any way, then unless he so desires, a share in these need not be given to younger brothers. When the father has not ascended upwards[Has not died.],  if  the  brothers  want  the  property  to  be  divided  up,  the  father  should  never  have  an  unequal  division
among the sons. The eldest brother must not be ignored, regardless of whether he performs good or bad deeds.
Even if the wife is wicked, her interests must be considered[This means the mother, the wife of the father who is dividing up the property.]. Those who are learned about dharma say that this is
the best dharma. The upadhyaya is superior to ten acharyas[An acharya is an ordinary teacher. An upadhyaya is a superior teacher, one who teaches the Vedas.]. The father is superior to ten upadhyayas. The mother is superior to ten fathers and even to the entire earth. There is no preceptor who is equal to the mother and all the
respect is due to her. That is the reason why people think that the mother is the most superior. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! When the father is dead, the elder brother is regarded as equal to the father. He is the one who
provides a means of sustenance for everyone and protects them. All the younger brothers must bow down before
him and follow his instructions. Like their father, he is the one who will provide them a means of subsistence. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! The body is created by the father and the mother. But the birth that the instructor gives[The birth of learning.] is true birth and is without old age and without death. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The elder sister is like a mother. The wife of the elder brother is also like that, since in infancy, the younger brother is suckled at
her breast."'
