'Sanjaya said, "Drona's son caused a great carnage among the enemy. He was like the Destroyer, created by destiny to destroy all beings at the end of a yuga. He killed the enemy with his broad-headed arrows. The standards
were like trees. The weapons were like mountain peaks. The slain elephants were like giant mountains. The horses
were strewn around like kimpurushas[A kinnara or kimpurusha belongs to semi-divine species, identified with Kubera. Slain horses are being compared to kimpurushas, both because kimpurushas were grotesque and because they were half-human and half-
horse.]. The bows were like clumps of reeds. There were spears and the roars of
carnivorous creatures. The place was full of large numbers of demons and yakshas. He created a mountain of
corpses. The bull among men then roared powerfully and loudly and again made your son hear his oath. 'Dharma's
son, Yudhishthira, disguised himself in the cloak of dharma. While the preceptor was fighting, he made him cast
aside his weapons. Therefore, while he looks on, I will drive away his soldiers. I tell you truthfully that I will rout
them and kill the wicked Panchala. I will kill all of them, if they fight against me in the battle. Know this to be the
truth. Therefore, make your soldiers return.' On hearing these words, your son made his soldiers return, dispelling
their great fear with a loud roar, like that of a lion. O king! The Kuru and Pandava soldiers clashed again. There
was a fierce encounter, like that between two swelling oceans. Drona's son incited and rallied the Kouravas. At
Drona's death, the Pandus and the Panchalas also became fierce. Both sides were extremely cheerful and saw
themselves as victorious. They were enraged, and with great force, advanced on that field of battle. O Indra among
kings! It was like a mountain clashing against a mountain, or an ocean against another ocean. That was the way the
Kurus and the Pandavas rushed against each other. The Kuru and Pandava soldiers were delighted and blew on
thousands of conch shells and sounded tens of thousands of drums. The great roar that arose from the soldiers was
like the roar of the ocean when it is churned. It was extraordinary.

'"Then, Drona's son invoked the narayana weapon. He aimed it at the Pandu and Panchala armies. Thousands of
arrows, flaming at the tips, appeared in the sky and devoured the Pandavas, like serpents with flaming mouths. O
king! In that great battle, the directions, the sky and the soldiers were enveloped in an instant, like the world being
engulfed by the blazing rays of the sun. O lord of the earth! After this, iron balls appeared, like blazing stellar bodies in the clear sky. The four directions were covered by wonderful shataghnis that were like the fire. They possessed wheels and were sharp as razors. They formed circles and blazed. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The
sky was densely covered with these weapons. On seeing this, the Pandus, the Panchalas and the Srinjayas became
anxious. O lord of men! Wherever the maharatha Pandavas fought, in those spots, that weapon increased in power.
They were slain by that narayana weapon. All of them were consumed, as if by a fire, and became frightened in
that battle. O lord! At the end of the winter, a conflagration burns down dry wood. Like that, that weapon consumed the Pandu soldiers. On every side, the soldiers were destroyed by that weapon. On seeing this, the lord Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, was overcome by supreme terror. He saw that his soldiers were running away and in the
midst, the Parthas were bereft of their senses.

'"Dharma's son spoke these words. 'O Dhrishtadyumna! Run away with the Panchala soldiers. O Satyaki! Run
away home, surrounded by the Vrishnis and the Andhakas. Vasudeva, with dharma in his soul, will himself think
of means of saving himself. He is capable of instructing the entire world. How can I say anything to him? We
should no longer fight. I am saying this to all the soldiers. With my brothers, I will enter the fire. In this battle, we
have crossed the fierce oceans that are Bhishma and Drona, extremely difficult for cowards to cross. With all our
soldiers, we are now being submerged in this trifle that is Drona's son[The text uses the word goshpada. This literally means the mark of a cow's foot in the soil and the small puddle
of water that fills up such a mark, that is, a trifle.]. Since the preceptor, who was beneficial
towards us, was brought down by me in the battle, let Bibhatsu's wishes towards me swiftly come true[Since Arjuna resented the act of deception.]. The
child who was Subhadra's son was unskilled in fighting. He was slain by many skilled and cruel ones and was not
protected by him[That is, Drona did not protect Abhimanyu.]. When she was brought into the assembly hall and sought to be made a slave girl, Krishna[Krishnaa, Droupadi.]
asked him a question. But he[Drona.], together with his son, ignored her. When everyone was exhausted, he[Drona.] gave
Dhritarashtra's son armour so that he might kill Phalguna and protect Saindhava. He possessed knowledge about
brahmastra and used it against the Panchalas, headed by Satyajit[In Section 66, Drona killed Drupada's son, Satyajit. The idea is that a brahmastra should not be used against
those who do not possess knowledge of divine weapons.]. They were making endeavours for your sake
and were completely destroyed. We were exiled and robbed of our kingdom through adharma. Though those devoted to us sought to restrain him, he[Drona.] asked us to leave. Our supreme well-wisher, who has performed many
beneficial deeds for us, has been killed[To make it explicit, Yudhishthira is being sarcastic.]. Since he has been slain, with all my relatives, I will advance towards my
death.' When Kounteya had spoken in this way, Dasharha waved his arms and quickly restrained the soldiers from
running away.

'"He spoke these words. 'Swiftly lay down your weapons and descend from your mounts and your horses. This
is the method of countering, decreed by the great-souled one[Narayana.]. All of you descend from the elephants, the horses
and the chariots onto the ground. If you are on the ground and without weapons, this weapon will not kill you.
Wherever warriors fight against the strength of this weapon, in those spots, the Kouravas will become stronger. But
those men who fling away their weapons and descend from their mounts, will not be slain by this weapon in the
battle. But all those who seek to counter it, even in their minds, will be killed, even if they descend to the nether
regions.' O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing Vasudeva's words, all of them flung away their weapons
and cast aside any thought of fighting, even in their minds.

'"O king! On seeing that they wished to cast aside their weapons, Pandava Bhimasena cheerfully spoke these
words. 'No one should, under any circumstances, cast aside weapons. I will use my arrows to quickly counter the
weapon of Drona's son. My heavy club is decorated with gold. In this battle, I will roam around like Death and use
it to destroy the weapon of Drona's son. There is no man who is my equal in valour, just as there is no stellar body
that is equal to the sun. Behold my firm arms. They are like the trunk of a king of elephants. These are capable of
bringing down a mountain, with its summit. I am the only man who has the might of ten thousand elephants. I am
without a peer, just as the renowned Shakra is amidst the gods in heaven. Let them behold the strength of my arms
and my broad chest in the battle, as I repulse the flaming and blazing weapon of Drona's son. While the Kurus and
the Pandus look on, if there is no one else who is capable of countering the narayana weapon, I will repulse it today.' Having thus spoken, Bhima, the scorcher of enemies, advanced against Drona's son on a chariot that was as
radiant as the sun and roared like the clouds. Kunti's son was dexterous, swift and valiant and in a short instant,
enveloped him[Ashvatthama.] with a net of arrows. Drona's son laughed at this and addressed him[Bhima. The words are not mentioned.]. He invoked mantras and
shrouded him with arrows that flamed at the tips. In that battle, Partha was enveloped with these. They were like
blazing serpents, with flames emerging from their mouths. They were like golden sparks. O king! In that encounter, Bhimasena's form was like that of a mountain when the day is done, covered with fireflies. O great king!
That weapon of Drona's son was aimed and increased in its influence, like a fire fanned by the wind. On seeing
that the weapon, terrible in its power, was increasing in its influence, all the Pandu soldiers were overcome by
great fear, with the exception of Bhima. All of them laid down their weapons on the ground. All of them alighted
from their chariots, elephants and horses. When they had thrown down their weapons and descended from their
mounts, the great power of that weapon descended on Bhima's head. All beings, especially the Pandavas, uttered
sounds of lamentation, when they saw that Bhimasena was covered by the energy of that weapon."'
