'Yayati said, "I am Yayati, Nahusha's son and Puru's father. Disrespect for all beings has dislodged me from the
world of the gods, the siddhas and the rishis. My merit diminished, I am falling. Since I am older than you in age, I
was not the first to greet you. He who is senior in learning, austerities or birth is older and is worshipped by the
Brahmanas."

'Ashtaka replied, "O king! You say that he who is older in age deserves the respect of others and that is the reason you did not greet first. But it is also said that the worship of Brahmanas is for him who is senior in learning and
austerities."

'Yayati said, "It is said that evil deeds destroy the merit of good deeds and vanity leads to the evil worlds. The
righteous never follow evil and act so as to increase their virtue. I myself had great riches[Clearly, not material prosperity, but riches obtained through righteousness.]. But all that is gone
now and I will not get it back, despite my best efforts. One who learns from this fate will be wise and righteous. In
the world of the living, men have different dispositions, but depending on destiny, their power and efforts may
amount to nothing. Knowing that destiny is supreme, the learned say that the wise are content with what they obtain. Happiness and misery are determined by destiny and are beyond one's control and powers. Knowing that destiny is supreme, one should not be miserable or happy. The wise are always equable, without misery in grief and
exultation in happiness. Knowing that destiny is supreme, grief and exultation are pointless. O Ashtaka! I never
tremble in fear. Nor is my mind ever affected by anxiety. For I know that it will certainly be the way the creator
has determined for me. Insects[The text should literally be translated as those born from sweat.], those born from eggs, vegetables, reptiles, worms, fish, stones, wood and
everything, when freed from action, are reunited with nature. I know that happiness and unhappiness are not eternal. O Ashtaka! Knowing this, why should I grieve? We never know what should be done to avoid misery. Therefore, I am not concerned and give up grief."

'Ashtaka replied, "O lord of kings! Tell me in detail the accurate accounts of the worlds that you enjoyed and
where you spent time. You speak of dharma like one who knows the subject."

'Yayati said, "I was a king, ruling over the entire earth as my kingdom. I acquired many great worlds and those
beyond them. I lived there for 1000 years and then ascended to a superior world. That beautiful world was the capital of Puruhuta[Another name for Indra.]. It had 1000 gates and extended for 1000 yojanas. I lived there for 1000 years and then ascended to a superior world. I attained that world, which was divine and without decay. It was the world of Prajapati,
one that is difficult to attain. I lived there for 1000 years and then ascended to a superior world. That was the abode
of the god of the gods[Meaning Vishnu.]. I lived in that world, as I wished. The thirty gods have paid me homage. I have rivalled
the gods in power and glory. In Nandana, I could assume any form at will. For a million years I sported with apsaras, in mountains with flowering trees and fragrant scents. I lived there in divine happiness for a large number of
years, beyond counting. Then a messenger of the gods, terrible in visage, shouted to me thrice in a deep voice,
'Ruined, ruined, ruined'. O king[From an earlier reference, one knows that Ashtaka was a king. Yayati was his maternal grandfather.]! I remember that I fell from Nandana with my merits diminished. O lord of
men! I heard the voices of the gods in the sky, lamenting and mourning. 'Yayati of sacred fame and sacred deeds
has had his merit diminished and is falling. What misfortune!' When I was falling, I asked them, 'Where are the
righteous ones among whom I shall fall?' They pointed me to this sacrificial ground that belongs to you. On seeing
it, I came here quickly. I smelt the fragrance of ghee wafting up from the sacrificial ground. I saw the smoke rising
up and was reassured."'
