Dhritarashtra asked, "Thus, my son, the lord of the earth, was censured. The scorcher of enemies is naturally intolerant. What did he do? He has never heard reprimands like these earlier. He has been revered by all the worlds
with the respect that is due to a king. O Sanjaya! You have seen how the entire earth, with mlecchas and those who
live in mountainous regions, depended on him for favours. Such a person was censured, especially by the sons of
Pandu. He was alone and without servants, in a secluded spot. On hearing the words repeatedly spoken by the victorious ones, what did he tell the Pandaveyas? O Sanjaya! Tell me everything about that."

'Sanjaya replied, "O king! O Indra among kings! Your son was thus censured by Yudhishthira and his brothers.
The lord of men heard those words, which were like poison. Inside the water, he repeatedly let out long and hot
sighs. Inside the water, the king repeatedly wrung his hands. Then, having made up his mind to fight, he replied to
the king[Yudhishthira.]. 'O Parthas! All of you are served by well-wishers. You possess chariots and mounts. I am alone and
miserable. I have been deprived of a chariot. My mounts have been slain. I am without weapons and am surrounded by many rathas. Without weapons, even if I wish to fight, how can I single-handedly fight on foot? O Yudhishthira! Fight with me one at a time. It is not appropriate that one should single-handedly fight with many warriors simultaneously, especially when one is without armour, exhausted and miserable. I am severely wounded in
my limbs. My soldiers and mounts are exhausted. O king! I am not frightened of you, or Partha Vrikodara, or Phal-
guna, or Vasudeva, or the Panchalas, or the twins, or Yuyudhana, or of any of the other soldiers. Single-handedly
and wrathfully, I am interested in fighting against all of you. O lord! The deeds of all virtuous men have a source in
dharma. Fame follows dharma and I will observe this. I am telling you that I will arise and fight against all of you
in the battle. Like a year encounters all the seasons, I will encounter all of you in due course. This is despite you
possessing chariots and weapons and me not possessing weapons and a chariot. When night is over, the sun destroys the radiance of all the nakshatras. O Pandavas! Wait. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Today, I will free
myself of the debt I owe to the illustrious kshatriyas[The ones who have been killed.] -Bahlika, Drona, Bhishma, the great-souled Karna, the
brave Jayadratha and Bhagadatta, Shalya, the king of Madra, Bhurishrava, my sons, Shakuni Soubala, my friends,
well-wishers and kin. I will kill you and your brothers and free myself of that debt today.' Having said this, the
lord of men stopped.

' "Yudhisthira said, 'O Suyodhana! It is through good fortune that you have learnt about the dharma of kshatriyas. O great-armed one! It is through good fortune that your mind has turned towards fighting. O Kouravya! It is
good fortune that you are brave and it is good fortune that you know about fighting, since you have single-handedly decided to engage all of us in an encounter. Fight with us one at a time, with whatever weapon you wish. While
you fight thus, all the others will remain as spectators. O brave one! I am also granting your desire. If you kill any
one of us, the kingdom will be yours. Otherwise, be slain and obtain heaven.'

' "Duryodhana replied, 'If you are granting me the boon of fighting one at a time, as a weapon, I am choosing
the club that I am wielding. Let any one of the brothers come forward, whoever thinks he is capable of fighting me
with a club on foot. Let him fight with me. There are many wonderful battles that are fought through circular motions of chariots. This wonderful and great duel on foot, with clubs, will be the only one of its kind. As a fight progresses, men often wish to change weapons. But with your permission, let that not be the case[That is, the entire fight will be with clubs.]. O mighty-armed
one! With a club, I will defeat you and your younger brothers, the Panchalas, the Srinjayas and your other
soldiers.'

' "Yudhisthira said, 'O Gandhari's son! O Suyodhana! Arise! Arise and fight with me. O powerful one! With the
club, fight with us one at a time. O Gandhari's son! Be a man and fight well. Even if you are as fast as thought, you
will not remain alive today.'"

'Sanjaya said, "Your son, tiger among men, could not tolerate this. From inside the waters, he sighed like an immense serpent. He was repeatedly urged by the goad of the words. He could not tolerate those words, like an intelligent horse cannot bear a whip. The valiant one agitated the waters and forcefully grasped the club, which was
heavy, with the essence of stone and decorated with gold. He arose from inside the waters, like an Indra of serpents
that was sighing. He penetrated the waters that had been converted to stone, with the iron club on his shoulder.
Your son arose, like the sun scorching with its rays. The club was heavy and made out of iron. It was decorated
with molten gold. Dhritarashtra's immensely strong son grasped it. With the club in his hand, he looked like a
mountain with a peak. He was like the enraged wielder of the trident[Shiva.], stationed among subjects. With the club in
his hand, the descendant of the Bharata lineage was as resplendent as the scorching sun. The mighty-armed
scorcher of enemies arose, with the club in his hand. All the beings thought that he was Yama, with a staff in his
hand. He was like Shakra with the vajra in his hand, or like Hara with the trident in his hand. O lord of men! All
the Panchalas saw your son. When they saw him arise, all the Panchalas and Pandaveyas were delighted and
grasped each other's palms. Your son, Duryodhana, thought that this was a mark of disrespect. He dilated his eyes
in rage and glanced towards the Pandavas. There were three lines on his forehead and he bit his lower lip. He addressed the Pandavas and Keshava. 'O Pandavas! I will reply to your taunts today. With the Panchalas, I will soon
slay you and convey you to Yama's eternal abode.' Having arisen from the water, your son, Duryodhana, stood
there, with the club in his hand and with blood flowing from his body. He was drenched in blood and water and his
body was as beautiful as an exuding mountain[A mountain exuding minerals.]. When the brave one arose with the club, the Pandavas thought
that he was an enraged Vaivasvata, with Kimkara in his hand[Vaivasvata is Yama and Kimkara is the name of Yama's club.]. His voice thundered like the clouds, or like the
bellows of a delighted bull. With the club, the valiant one challenged the Parthas to battle.

' "Duryodhana said, 'O Yudhishthira! You will fight with me one at a time. O brave one! It is not appropriate
that one should single-handedly fight with many warriors, especially when one is devoid of armour, exhausted,
covered with water, severely wounded in the limbs and without mounts and soldiers.'

' "Yudhishthira replied, 'O Suyodhana! Where did this wisdom of yours disappear, when many maharathas united and slew Abhimanyu in the battle? O brave one! Don armour and tie your hair. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Take everything else that you need. O brave one! I will grant you another of your wishes. If you can kill any
of the five Pandavas with whom you wish to fight, you will be king. Otherwise, be slain and obtain heaven. O
brave one! With the exception of your life in battle, what else do you desire?'"

'Sanjaya said, "O king! Your son then picked up golden armour and a colourful helmet that was decorated with
gold. He fastened the helmet and the sparkling and golden armour. O king! Your son dazzled like a golden mountain. O king! In the field of battle, he was armoured and wielded the club. Your son, Duryodhana, spoke to all the
Pandavas. 'Among all the brothers, let anyone fight with me with a club. O bull among the Bharata lineage[Yudhishthira.]! I am
willing to fight with Sahadeva, Bhima, Nakula, Phalguna, or with you. Having obtained an opportunity to fight, I
will be victorious in the field of battle. Today, I will accomplish the extremely difficult task of bringing an end to
the hostilities. O tiger among men! I will use my club, tied in golden cloth. I think that there is no one who is equal
to me in fighting with a club. With the club, I will kill all those who advance against me. Let the one who wishes to
fight against me, pick up a club.'" '
