Vasishtha said, 'O Rama! In ancient times, I heard this from Brahma. This is about the conduct of the grandfather,  identical  with  the  brahman  and  the  paramatman.  O  son!  The  gods  performed  a  great  sacrifice  of
varuni[Performed on the thirteenth tithi of krishnapaksha in the month of Chaitra (March-April).]. O Rama! The lord Rudra assumed a resplendent form and went to that great varuni. All the sages and
gods came there, with Agni at the forefront. All the limbs of sacrifices and vashatkara were there in personified
form. Thousands of hymns from the Sama and Yajur Vedas were there in personified form. There were parts of the
Vedas, arranged in the proper order of verses. There were the divisions of signs, vowels, chants and distinct and
indistinct syllables. Omkara was there, with techniques of nigraha and pragraha[Nigraha and pragraha are about rules of grammar. Nigraha is for vowels to which rules of sandhi apply. Pragraha is for vowels to which rules of sandhi do not apply.]. There were the Vedas, the Upanishads, all kinds of learning and Savitri. The illustrious Shiva upheld these and the past, the present and the future. The lord offered the oblations himself. O extender of the Bhrigu lineage! Delighted that the varuni sacrifice
was being conducted by the great-souled Pashupati, the wives and daughters of the gods and the mothers of the
gods came there. On seeing them, Brahma's semen fell down on the ground. When that semen fell down on the
ground, Pushan seized it with his hands and flung it into the fire. The sacrifice continued, with the fire blazing
away. Brahma was offering oblations into the fire. O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! He picked up some of the
dislodged semen in a sacrificial ladle, and uttering the mantras, offered it as a libation into the fire. Through this,
the valiant one generated categories of beings. From that energy was generated all the energy in the world. The ignorance of tamas and sattva[Representing knowledge.] pervaded everything. The energy of sattva is eternal and tamas characterizes space.
The energy of sattva and tamas exist in all creatures. O lord! From the semen that was offered as a libation into the
fire, three beings manifested themselves. These were men, endowed with the qualities from which they had been
generated. The one from bhrig[The crackling sound of the fire.]was known as Bhrigu. The one from angara was called Angiras. Yet another,
based on angara, was called Kavi[Angara means coal or charcoal. The sense is that Angiras was born from coal that was still burning, while Kavi
was born from coal that had got extinguished.]. The one born with flames and bhrig was called Bhrigu. Marichi was born
from marichi[The rays of the fire.] and Kashyapa was born from Marichi. O son! Angiras was born from angara. The Valakhilyas
were born from the sacrificial stones. It has been said that Atri was also born from that. The large number of
revered brahmana rishis was generated from the ashes. The Vaikhanasas were born, with the qualities of austerities
and learning. The handsome Ashvins were born from his[Agni's.] ears. Finally, the Prajapatis were born from his ears.
The rishis were born from his pores and the metres from his unclean sweat. That is the reason Agni is said to represent all the gods and the learned rishis, who possess insight about the proofs of the Vedas. The months are the
wood[For the fire.]. The essence of the kindling constitutes the pakshas. Day and night are from the bile. The light from the
varuni constitute the muhurtas. The Rudras are said to come from his blood, as do the red and golden Maitras.
Know that the Vasus are said to come from the smoke. The immensely radiant Rudras and Adityas arose from the
flames. The benevolent gods located in the firmament[The stars and the planets.] arose from the angara. He[Agni.] is the original lord of the
worlds. Brahma is spoken about later. The bearer of oblations is said to be the one who satisifies all the objects of
desire.  With  the  varuni  as  part  of  his  supreme  soul,  Mahadeva  said,  "This  is  my  divine  sacrifice.  I  am  the
grihapati[The master of the household, in the sense that he is the one who undertakes a sacrifice.]. There is no doubt that the three earlier offspring[Bhrigu, Angiras and Kavi.] are mine. O those roaming in the sky! Know that
these are the fruits of the sacrifice." Agni responded, "They have been generated from my limbs and they have depended on me. They are my offspring and the one who is in the form of varuni[Shiva.] is wrong." Brahma, the preceptor
of the worlds and the grandfather of the worlds said, "They are my offspring. It was my semen that was offered as
a libation. I am the one who uttered the mantras. I am the one who offered the semen as a libation. The fruit belongs to the one whose seed it is. It is my view that the semen was the source." At this, the large number of gods
approached the grandfather.

'"'All of them bowed their heads down and worshipped him. They said, "O illustrious one! We, and all the mobile and immobile objects in the universe, were generated from you. However, let Agni Vibhavasu and the lord
god who is in the form of varuni get what they wish[The right to the offspring.]." Though Brahma was the original lord of all creation, the
one who was in the form of varuni accepted the firstborn, Bhrigu, with a radiance like that of the sun, as his son.
The lord[Brahma.] determined that for purposes of deciding a son, Angiras should be Agni's. Kavi, who knew about the
truth, was accepted as the grandfather's son. Bhrigu, of terrible fame, engaged himself in the act of procreation.
The handsome Angiras was regarded as Agni's and the immensely illustrious Kavi as Brahma's. In this world,
Bhrigu and Angiras are regarded as the ones who have had descendants. All the best among brahmanas are the offspring of these three. All the descendants were reared and nurtured by them. Bhrigu had seven sons who were like
Bhrigu  in  qualities.  They  were  Chyavana,  Vajrashirsha,  Shuchi,  Urva,  the  revered  Shukra,  Vibhu  and  Savana.
These were the seven. All of them are known as Bhargavas and Varunas and this is your lineage too. Angiras had
eight sons and they are also known as Varunas[Perhaps because everything followed the varuni sacrifice.]. They are Brihaspati, Utathya, Vayasya, Shanti, Ghora, Virupa,
Samvarta and Sudhanva. These are said to be the eight. All of them were generated through Agni. They were free
from disease and were devoted to learning. The sons of the brahmana, Kavi, are also known as Varunas. There
were eight of them and they possessed the qualities. They were sacred and knowledgable about the brahman. Their
names were Kavi, Kavya, Vishnu, the intelligent Ushanas, Bhrigu, Viraja, Kashi and Ugra, who was devoted to
dharma. These are the eight sons of Kavi. Everyone in the universe has descended from them. They are Prajapatis
and  all  these  offspring  have  resulted  from  them.  In  this  way,  Angiras  and  Kavi  also  had  descendants.  O  tiger
among the Bhrigu lineage! All the offspring on earth come from their lineage and that of Bhrigu. O brahmana! O
son! In the form of varuni, the lord and god[Shiva.] originally accepted Bhrigu and Kavi. That is the reason they are
known as Varunas. The crested bearer of oblations accepted Angiras. That is the reason all the others are known as
the descendants of Angiras.

'"'In ancient times, the grandfather, Brahma, was pleased by the gods. They said, "Let these lords and offspring
save us. Let these offspring have more offspring. Let all of them be extreme ascetics. Through your favours, let
them eternally save the world. Let them be the creators of your lineage and let them extend your energy. Let them
possess knowledge of the Vedas and let them be the lords of speech. Let them be amiable and on the side of the
gods. Let them be Prajapatis and maharshis. Let them obtain austerities and supreme brahmacharya. O lord! All of
us and they are your offspring. O grandfather! You are the creator of the gods and the brahmanas. Marichi is your
original son. But so are all the Bhargavas. O grandfather! Considering all your offspring, forgive us[For any transgressions.]. In their own
ways, they will generate offspring. At the end of the destruction and the beginning of a new yuga, they will establish themselves again." At the time of the origin of the worlds, this is what happened at the sacrifice of the great-
souled one, the best of the gods who assumed the dazzling form of varuni. Agni is Brahma, Pashupati, Sharva,
Rudra and Prajapati.

'"'It is held that gold is the offspring of Agni. When fire is not available, gold can be used instead of fire. O Jamadagni's son! O one who knows about proof! The learned texts and the Vedas are proof of this. Gold can be
placed on a mat of kusha grass and oblations to the fire offered there. It is thought that the illustrious one will be
pleased at these oblations and will ensure prosperity. We have thus heard that Agni is supreme among the gods.
Agni was created from Brahma and gold from Agni. Therefore, those who possess insight about dharma donate
gold. We have heard that this is like making gifts of all the gods. O Bhargava! Such a donor leaves the world of
darkness and obtains the supreme objective. He is consecrated as a king of kings in the world of heaven. When the
sun rises, if a person observes the rituals and recites the appropriate mantras first, thereafter donating gold, he destroys all his bad dreams. If he donates as soon as the sun has risen, he cleanses all his sins. If he donates gold at
midday, he destroys all the future sins. If a person is firm in his vows and donates gold at the time of the western
sandhya[That is, the evening.], he obtains the worlds of Brahma, Vayu, Agni and Soma. With Indra, he obtains an auspicious status in
those worlds. He is tranquil in his soul and obtains happiness and fame in this world too. He always obtains many
other unmatched worlds. There are no obstructions in his path and he can roam around as he wills. He obtains an
eternal greatness that is never dislodged. By donating gold, a person obtains all the indestructible worlds. At the
time of sunrise, if a person ignites a fire and donates[Gold.], after having followed all the indicated vows, he obtains all
the objects of desire. It has been said that it[Gold.] is like Agni and its donation brings happiness. For those who follow
rites, it is said to possess all the qualities.'"

'Bhishma continued, "This is what Vasishtha told Jamadagni's powerful son. He gave gold to brahmanas and
was freed from all sins. O lord of the earth! I have told you everything about gold, about the fruits from its donation and its supreme birth and origins. Therefore, give a lot of gold to brahmanas. O king! If you donate gold, you
will be freed from sins."'
