Duryodhana said, 'O Karna! This king of Madra will act as your charioteer. He is superior to Krishna and is like
Matali, the charioteer of the king of the gods. Just as Matali controls the horses yoked to Hari's[Hari is one of Indra's names.] chariot, Shalya
will control the ones that are yoked to yours. With you as the warrior on that chariot and with the king of Madra as
the charioteer, it is certain that this foremost of chariots will vanquish Partha in the battle.'"

'Sanjaya said, "Duryodhana then spoke again to the spirited king of Madra. 'O king! Control these supreme
horses in the battle. Protected by you, Radheya will defeat Dhananjaya.' O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Having been thus addressed, he[Shalya.] agreed and ascended the chariot. When Shalya approached, Karna was delighted in his mind and spoke to the charioteer. 'O charioteer! Swiftly prepare my chariot and equip it.' That supreme
and victorious chariot was like a city of the gandharvas. Having prepared it, the lord[Shalya.] brought it and said, 'May
you be victorious.' Karna, foremost among rathas, worshipped the chariot in accordance with the prescribed rites.
It had earlier been sanctified by a priest who was knowledgeable about the brahman. He circumambulated it carefully and prayed to the sun. The king of Madra was nearby and he asked him to climb onto it first. That great and
supreme chariot of Karna's was unassailable. The immensely energetic Shalya ascended, like a lion atop a mountain. O king! On seeing that Shalya was stationed, Karna ascended his supreme chariot, like the sun atop clouds
tinged with lightning. Ascended on the same chariot, they were like Aditya and Agni together[The sun god and the fire god respectively.]. They were as
resplendent as clouds in the firmament, tinged with Surya and Agni together. Those two brave ones, supreme
among resplendent ones, were praised. They were like Indra and Agni, praised by priests and assisting priests at a
sacrifice. Shalya controlled the horses. Karna stood on the chariot and extended his terrible bow, like the sun in its
halo. On the best of chariots, Karna, tiger among men, with his arrows like rays, looked like the sun on Mandara.

' "The infinitely energetic and immensely brave Radheya was on the chariot and ready to leave. Duryodhana
spoke these words. 'O brave one! O Adhiratha's son! Drona and Bhishma were incapable of accomplishing this
extremely difficult task in the battle, while all the archers looked on. Accomplish it. I have always been convinced
in my mind that maharatha Bhishma and Drona would kill Arjuna and Bhimasena. O brave one! They were unable
to accomplish that valiant deed in this great battle. O Radheya! Like the one with the vajra in his hand, accomplish
that task. O Radheya! Seize Dharmaraja, or kill Dhananjaya, Bhimasena and the twins who are the sons of Madri.
O fortunate one! May you be victorious. O bull among men! Depart. Reduce all the soldiers of the sons of Pandu
to ashes.' Thousands of trumpets and tens of thousands of drums were sounded. The sound of those musical instruments was like the sound of clouds in the sky.

' "Accepting those words and stationed on the chariot, the supreme of rathas, Radheya, addressed Shalya, who
was skilled in fighting. 'O mighty-armed one! Urge the horses, so that I can kill Dhananjaya, Bhimasena, the twins
and King Yudhishthira[However, Karna had sworn to Kunti that he would not kill any of the Pandavas, other than Arjuna.]. O Shalya! Let Dhananjaya behold the strength of my arms today, when I shoot hundreds and thousands of arrows shafted with the feathers of herons. O Shalya! I will unleash supremely energetic
arrows today, for the destruction of the Pandavas and for Duryodhana's victory.' Shalya replied, 'O son of a suta!
Why do you disrespect the Pandavas? All of them are great archers and know about all the weapons. All of them
are maharathas. They do not retreat, are immensely fortunate. They cannot be vanquished and truth is their valour.
They are capable of generating fear in Shatakratu himself. O Radheya! When you hear the twang of Gandiva in
battle, like the tumultuous sound of thunder, you will no longer speak in this way.' O lord of men! Disregarding
the words spoken by the king of Madra, Karna glanced towards Shalya and asked him to proceed.

' "O scorcher of enemies! On seeing that the great archer, Karna, was stationed and ready to fight, all the
Kouravas were filled with delight and let out a roar. There was the sound of drums and kettledrums. There was the
sound of arrows and the roars uttered by those spirited ones. Those on your side emerged to do battle, resolved to
die, rather than retreat. As Karna advanced, the warriors were delighted. O king! The earth trembled and let out a
mighty roar. The seven great planets and the sun seemed to be moving. Showers of meteors could be seen and the
directions seemed to be blazing. Thunder descended and fierce winds began to blow. Large numbers of animals
and birds kept your army to the right, signifying great fear[Therefore, the animals and birds were to the left and the left is inauspicious.]. When Karna advanced, his horses fell down on the
ground. Bones showered down from the sky, portending fear. The weapons seemed to be blazing and the standards
trembled. O lord of the earth! The mounts released tears. O venerable one! These, and many other ominous signs,
were seen there. They signified the extremely terrible destruction of the Kouravas. However, because they were
confounded by destiny, none of them paid any attention to these. On seeing the son of the suta advance, all the men
on earth cried out for his victory. The Kouravas thought that the Pandavas had already been vanquished.

' "Vaikartana Vrisha, elephant among rathas and the slayer of enemy heroes, was stationed on his chariot. He
thought of the deaths of the brave Bhishma and Drona and blazed like a fire. On seeing Partha's unequalled deeds,
he was consumed by pride and insolence. He blazed in anger and sighing deeply, spoke these words to Shalya.

'When I am stationed on my chariot with my bow and enraged, I will not be frightened of the great Indra, with the
vajra in his hand. On seeing that Bhishma and the best of others are lying down, do not be anxious. They[Meaning Bhishma and Drona.] were
like the great Indra and Vishnu. They were unmatched and unblemished. They were the ones who crushed the best
of chariots, horses and elephants. It was as if they could not be slain, but they were killed by the enemy. Nevertheless, I am not alarmed in this battle. The preceptor was a bull among brahmanas and was knowledgeable about
great weapons. On seeing the extremely powerful kings, with their men, horses, elephants and chariots, slain by
arrows, why did he not kill all of them in the battle? O Kurus! Remembering Drona in the great battle, I am telling
you this truthfully. Listen to me. Other than me, there is no one who is capable of withstanding Arjuna, when he
advances in the battle, in the form of a fierce Death. Drona possessed learning, serenity, strength, fortitude, great
weapons and good policy. When that great-souled one had to succumb to death, I think that all the others are distressed now. When I think about it, there is nothing in this world that is certain. Everything is always the outcome
of action. When the preceptor has been brought down, who can proudly say with certainty that he will be alive till
today's sunrise[These events are happening just before sunrise on the seventeenth day.]? There is no doubt that weapons, strength, valour, deeds, good policy and supreme weapons
cannot ensure human happiness, since the preceptor has been slain by the enemy in battle. His energy was like that
of the sun or the fire. He was equal to Vishnu and Purandara in valour. He was always like Brihaspati and
Ushanas[Shukracharya.] in policy. He was extremely difficult to withstand, but weapons could not save him. Our women and
children are weeping. The manliness of the sons of Dhritarashtra has been defeated. O Shalya! Know that I have to
accomplish the task. Therefore, advance towards the soldiers of the enemy, where the Pandava king who is unwavering in his aim and Bhimasena and Arjuna are stationed. There are Vasudeva, the Srinjayas, Satyaki and the
twins. Who, other than me, can withstand them? O lord of Madra! Therefore, advance swiftly in the battle, towards
the Panchalas, Pandavas and Srinjayas. I think that I will kill those assembled ones in the battle, or follow Drona's
lead[That is, die.]. O Shalya! Do not think that I will not advance into the midst of those brave ones. I cannot tolerate this
dissension among friends[Referring to the quarrel between Karna and Shalya.]. I will give up my life and follow Drona. Whether wise or foolish, when one's lifespan is over, one cannot escape with one's life and advances into Yama's mouth. O learned one! Therefore, I will
advance against Partha. I cannot negate my destiny. O king! The son of Vichitravirya's son[Duryodhana. Duryodhana is Dhritarashtra's son and Dhritarashtra is Vichitravirya's son.] has always been
kind towards me. To accomplish his objective and attain his end, I will give up my beloved pleasures and my life,
which is so difficult to abandon. This expensive chariot is covered with the skins of tigers. Its axles don't make a
sound. The three frames are golden and the trivenu is made out of silver. It is yoked to excellent horses. Rama[Parashurama. That is, Parashurama gave Karna the chariot.]
gave it to me. O Shalya! Behold the colourful bows, standard, clubs, arrows with fierce forms, flaming sword,
supreme weapons and the white conch shell that has a fierce sound. It[The chariot.] has flags and clatters like the sound of
the thunder. It is yoked to white horses and is adorned with superb quivers. Stationed on this chariot, I will use my
force to slay Arjuna, bull among rathas, in the battle. Even if Death, the destroyer of everything, diligently protects
the son of Pandu in the encounter, I will engage with him and kill him in the encounter, or follow the path to Yama,
along which, Bhishma has led. Even if Yama, Varuna, Kubera, Vasava, together with all their followers, unite to
protect Pandava in this battle, I will defeat him. What is the need to speak more?'

' "On hearing the words of the one who was delighted at the prospect of battle and was bragging, the valiant
king of Madra showed him disrespect and laughed at him. To restrain him, he gave him the following reply. 'O
Karna! Desist. Refrain from such bragging. You are delighted and are saying that which should not be said. Where
is Dhananjaya, supreme among men? And where are you, an extremely stupid person? The abode of the Yadus was
protected by Upendra[Upendra is Indra's younger brother, that is, Vishnu. Here, it means Krishna.]. It was like heaven, protected by the king of the immortals. Who other than Arjuna,
supreme among men, could have violently abducted that beautiful lady, while he looked on[This is a reference to the abduction of Subhadra, Krishna's sister, described in Section 17 (Volume 2).]? He has a power
and valour like that of the king of the gods. Where is the man, other than Arjuna, who at the time of the slaughter
of the animal, could have challenged Bhava, the lord of all lords and the creator of the three worlds, to a battle[This is a reference to Arjuna's duel with Shiva, described in Section 31 (Volume 2).]?
To honour Agni, Jaya[Arjuna's name.] vanquished asuras, gods, giant serpents, men, birds, pishachas, yakshas and rakshasas
with his arrows and gave him the oblations he desired[This is a reference to the burning of Khandava, described in Section 19 (Volume 2).]. Do you remember how Dhritarashtra's son was seized
by the enemy and was freed by that supreme among men, using arrows that were as bright as the rays of the sun?
In that wilderness, he killed large numbers of the enemy. You were the first to run away then. Do you remember
how Dhritarashtra's quarrelsome son was freed and the Pandava defeated large numbers of those who travel
through the skies[The gandharvas travel through the sky. This is a reference to the gandharvas capturing the Kouravas, described in Section 39 (Volume 3).]? At the time of the seizure of the cattle, all of them, though they possessed large numbers of
forces and mounts, were vanquished by that supreme of men. The preceptor, the preceptor's son and Bhishma were
also there. Why did you not defeat Arjuna then[This is a reference to the Kourava attempt to seize Virata's cattle, described in Section 47 (Volume 4).]? This supreme and excellent encounter has presented itself
now, for the sake of your destruction. O son of a suta! If you do not run away, because of fear of the enemy, you
will be slain today, when you advance to fight.' The lord of Madra spoke many such harsh words cheerfully, praising your enemy. Vrisha, the leader of the Kuru forces, became supremely enraged and spoke these words to the
lord of Madra. 'Let it be that way. Even if it is that way, why are you praising him, when a battle is about to commence between him and me? If he defeats me in this great battle, will it be said that the words uttered by you have
been spoken well?' The lord of Madra agreed with this and did not say anything in reply. Wishing to fight, Karna
asked the lord of Madra to depart. The ratha left in the direction of the enemy with the white horses, with Shalya as
his charioteer. He killed enemies in the battle, like the sun destroying darkness. Karna was on a chariot yoked to
white horses, covered with the skins of tigers. He left cheerfully. He saw the standards of the Pandavas and quickly
asked about where Dhananjaya was." '
