'Lomasha said, "Then Brahma, the grandfather of the world, spoke to the assembled gods. 'O gods! All of you depart, as you desire and as you wish. A great deal of time must pass before the ocean returns to its natural state. The
great king Bhagiratha will do this because of his relatives.'"

'Yudhishthira said, "O brahmana! O sage! How did the relatives become the cause? How was the ocean filled
through Bhagiratha's efforts? O one rich in austerities! O brahmana! I wish to hear this in detail. Tell me the
supreme account of that king."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having been thus addressed by the great-souled Dharmaraja, the Indra among brahmanas
recounted the greatness of the great-souled Sagara.'

'Lomasha said, "A king named Sagara was born in Ikshvaku's lineage. He possessed beauty, character and
strength and was powerful. But he did not have a son. O descendant of the Bharata linage! Having exterminated
the Haihayas and the Talajanghas and having conquered other kings, he ruled over his own kingdom. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! He had two wives who were proud of their beauty and their youth. O best of the
Bharata lineage! One was from Vidarbha and the other from Shibi. O Indra among kings! Desirious of obtaining a
son, the king performed great austerities, together with his wives, seeking refuge on Mount Kailasa. While he was
engaged in great austerities and immersed in yoga, he saw the great-souled Tryaksha, the destroyer of Tripura,
Shankara, Bhava, Ishana, Shulapani, Pinaki, Tryambaka, Shiva, Ugresha and Uma's consort, the one with many
forms[All of these are Shiva's names. Pinaki is the wielder of the pinaka, Shulapani is the one with a shula (trident) in his hand and Tryaksha (or Tryambaka) is the one with three eyes. Shiva destroyed the demon fortress
named Tripura. Hara and Rudra are also Shiva's names.]. As soon as he saw that granter of boons, the mighty-armed king, together with his wives, prostrated
themselves and asked for a son. Hara was pleased and told the supreme among kings and his two wives, 'O king!
Considering the moment when you have asked me for a boon, sixty thousand brave sons who will be proud in war
will be born to one of your wives. O supreme among men! One son will be born to the other wife. O king! But
they will all be destroyed together. But you will have one brave descendant from the one who bears the single
one.' Having spoken these words, Rudra instantly vanished. King Sagara also returned to his residence with his
wives, happy in his heart.

'"O best of men! Then his lotus-eyed wives, Vaidarbhi and Shaibya, conceived. In due time, Vaidarbhi gave
birth to a gourd. Shaibya gave birth to a son who was as beautiful as the gods. The king then thought about throwing away the gourd. But he heard a voice from the sky, deep in sound. 'O king! Do not act in haste. Do not abandon your sons. Take the seeds out from the gourd. Let them be carefully preserved in a warm vessel partly filled
with ghee. O king! You will then obtain sixty thousand sons. O lord of men! Mahadeva has decided that your sons
will be born in this fashion. Do not make your mind act contrary to this.'"'
