'"Vashishtha said, 'O Vibhavasu[A name for the sun.]! On Samvarana's behalf, I have come to ask you for your daughter Tapati, Savitri's younger sister. He is a mighty king with great deeds. He is great-souled and is well versed in dharma and
artha. O traveller in the sky! Samvarana is a fit husband for your daughter.'"

'The gandharva said, "Hearing these words, Savita[A name for the sun.] decided on giving her. Divakara[A name for the sun.] saluted the Brahmana
and said, 'O sage! Samvarana is the best among kings and you are the best among rishis. Tapati is the best of
women. Why give her somewhere else?' Thereupon, Tapana[A name for the sun.] himself gave the unblemished and perfect Tapati to
the great-souled Vashishtha, for Samvarana's sake. The maharshi accepted the lady Tapati and taking his leave,
Vashishtha returned to where the bull among the Kurus and the one with famous deeds was seated. The king was
possessed by love and his heart was fixed on her. He became extremely glad when he saw that Vashishtha was
leading the divine maiden Tapati, the one with a beautiful smile, towards him. The illustrious rishi Vashishtha, pure
of spirit, came to the king when he had completed the twelfth night of his vows. Thus Samvarana obtained his wife
through austerities and worship of the Lord Gopati[Gopati means lord of cows and is another name for the sun.] and Vashishtha's energy. That bull among men accepted Tap-
ati's hand on that best of mountains, frequented by gods and gandharvas, in accordance with the prescribed rituals.

'"With Vashishtha's permission, the rajarshi[Samvarana.] desired to sport with his wife on that mountain. He then instructed his minister to rule over his city, kingdom, mounts and armies. Bidding farewell to the king, Vashishtha left.
The king sported on that mountain like a god. The king pleasured with his wife in the groves and streams of that
mountain for twelve years. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! For those twelve years, the one with a thousand
eyes[Indra.] did not pour any rain in the king's city and kingdom. Because of hunger and starvation, the men became
like dead bodies. The city looked like a city of the king of the dead, populated by dead people. Then, seeing that
condition, the illustrious rishi Vashishtha, learned in dharma, went to the supreme among kings[Samvarana.]. O king! He
brought back the tiger-like king, who had been away from his city for twelve years, together with Tapati. When
that tiger among kings entered the city again, the slayer of demons[Indra.] poured down rain, as before. Thus, enervated
by that foremost among kings, who had himself enervated his soul, the city and the kingdom became extremely
happy. With his wife Tapati, the king performed sacrifices for twelve years, like Shakra[Indra.], lord of the maruts.

'"O Partha! This is the story of the greatly fortunate Tapati of ancient times. She was the daughter of Vivasvat
and it is after her that you are named Tapatya. O Arjuna! O greatest among those who scorch! On Tapati, King
Samvarana had a son named Kuru. Born in that lineage of Tapati, you are known as Tapatya."'
