'Sanjaya said, "O great king! On hearing Kripa's auspicious words, which were full of dharma and artha, Ashvatthama was overcome with sorrow and grief. He burnt with misery, like a blazing fire. He formed a cruel resolution in his mind and replied to both of them. 'The quality of intelligence varies from man to man. But depending
on his own wisdom, each one is satisfied with what he has. In this world, everyone thinks his own intelligence to
be supreme. Each person reveres his own understanding and praises it a lot. Each person bases himself on praising
his own wisdom. Everyone criticizes the intelligence of others and always honours and praises his own. To accomplish an objective, if they hold similar views, they are then satisfied with each other and show each other great honour. But when, because of destiny, those same men face a hardship, they oppose each other's understanding. This
is especially the case because human intelligence is affected by lack of thought. Since the wisdom is clouded, their
understanding differs. A skilled physician diagnoses the disease properly and then applies a medicine to correctly
cure it. In the same way, men use their intelligence to accomplish their objective. Even if they use their own wisdom, they may be censured by other men. On this earth, when one is young, one's intelligence is often clouded. It
is different in middle age. And in old age, a different kind of intelligence is agreeable. O Bhoja[Kritavarma.]! When one confronts great calamity or when prosperity is equally great, it is seen that a man's intelligence is confounded. In the
same person, depending on the state of intelligence then, what is once regarded as wisdom at one time is regarded
as the reverse at another. Having used one's wisdom and intelligence to determine what is virtuous, one should
then try to accomplish the objective. O Bhoja! All men determine what is virtuous and then cheerfully act accordingly, even if that action leads to death. Having determined their own reasoning and wisdom, all men act in different kinds of ways, thinking these to be beneficial. As a result of the calamity, I have arrived at a resolution today
and I will tell both of you about this. It will dispel my sorrow. Having created beings, Prajapati[Brahma.] ordained tasks for
them. He assigned different qualities for each of the varnas-supreme self-control to brahmanas, great energy to
kshatriyas, skill to vaishyas and servitude of all varnas to shudras. A brahmana without self-control is not virtuous.
A kshatriya without energy is the worst. An unskilled vaishya is censured, as is a shudra who is not devoted. I have
been born in a brahmana lineage that is greatly revered. However, because of misfortune, I am engaged in the
dharma of kshatriyas. Knowing the dharma of kshatriyas, if I now resort to the conduct of brahmanas and perform
an extremely great deed, that will not be virtuous for me. I have wielded a divine bow and celestial weapons in the
battle. Having seen my father slain, how will I speak in any assembly? Today, I will follow my desires. I will resort
to the dharma of kshatriyas and follow in the footsteps of the king[Duryodhana.] and my immensely radiant father. The Pancha-
las desired victory and will sleep comfortably tonight. They will cast aside their armour and will be full of delight.
They will think that they have defeated us and will be tired and exhausted. While they are comfortably sleeping in
their respective positions in their camps, I will perform the extremely difficult task of attacking their camp. I will
attack their camp when they are senseless, as if dead. I will slaughter them with my valour, like Maghavan[Indra.]
against the danavas. Today, I will use my valour and slaughter all of them together, with Dhrishtadyumna at the
forefront, like a blazing fire amidst kindling. O supreme ones! Having slain the Panchalas, I will obtain peace.
While roaming around amidst the Panchalas and slaughtering the Panchalas, I will be like the enraged Rudra, the
wielder of the Pinaka[Pinaka is the name of Shiva's bow or trident.], acting against beings. Having severed and slain all the Panchalas today, I will then wrath-
fully take the battle to the sons of Pandu and afflict them. Today, I will strew the earth with the bodies of all the
Panchalas. I will strike them down, one by one, and free myself of my debt to my father. The footsteps of Duryodhana, Karna, Bhishma and Saindhava are difficult to follow, but the Panchalas will tread along those. Tonight, before the night is over, I will use my strength to grind down the head of Dhrishtadyumna, king of the Panchalas,
treating him like an animal. O Goutama[Kripa.]! While the sons of the Panchalas and the Pandus are sleeping tonight, I
will use my sharp sword to crush them. O immensely intelligent one[This is in the singular and is specifically addressed to Kripa.]! When the Panchala soldiers are sleeping
tonight, I will slaughter them. Having succeeded in my task, I will be happy.'"'
