'"Manu said, 'When the five attributes and the five[The five senses and their qualities.] are separated from the mind, one can see the brahman, like a
gem that is strung on a thread. That thread may be made out of gold, pearls, coral, clay or silver. This is because, as
a consequence of its own acts, the atman is attracted and may dwell in cows, humans, elephants, other animals, insects and worms. The body depends on the acts one has performed. In that kind of body, one must enjoy the fruits.
Though the earth is sprinkled with the same juices, it follows its nature and yields different kinds of herbs. In that
way, intelligence follows the atman and the consequences of earlier deeds. Desire originally comes from knowledge. Resolution first comes from desire. Action flows from resolution. Action is foundation for the fruits. Fruits
thus result from action. Knowledge results in action and the atman leads to knowledge. There is knowledge that
enables one to know what should be known. This knowledge is virtuous and involves the destruction of ignorance.
The destruction of knowledge[The inferior kind of knowledge, tantamount to ignorance.
], fruits, understanding and action leads to divine fruits and knowledge of what
should be known. Yogis behold that great and supreme being. Those who are ignorant and only perceive the qualities in themselves do not see it. The form of water is greater than the form of the earth. Energy is greater than water. The wind is greater than energy. Space is greater than the wind. In that way, the supreme is greater than the
mind. Intelligence is greater than the mind. It is said that time is greater than intelligence. The illustrious Vishnu, to
whom this entire universe belongs, is greater than time. That god has no beginning, no middle and no end. He is
without beginning, without middle and without an end. He is without decay. He is beyond all misery, because it is
said that misery has an end. He is said to be the supreme Brahma. He is said to be the supreme refuge. Going to
him, there are those who are freed from time and material objects and obtain emancipation. Everything is seen to
possess qualities. However, the supreme is without qualities. The signs of withdrawal are thought of as eternal
dharma. The hymns of the Rig, Yajur and Sama Vedas have a base in the body and flow from the tip of the tongue.
But these require effort for success and are also subject to destruction. The brahman cannot be obtained in this
way, by relying on things that are dependent on the body. The brahman is without beginning, without middle and
without end and cannot be obtained through exertion. The hymns of the Rig, Sama and Yajur Vedas are said to
have a beginning. Everything with a beginning has an end. But the brahman is said to be without a beginning. Because there is no beginning and no end, it is infinite and without decay. It is without decay and is without opposite
sentiments. It is beyond opposite pairs of sentiments. Mortals do not succeed in seeing or going to the supreme because of their ill fortune, the lack of methods, lack of resolution and because of their deeds. They do not attain the
supreme because they are addicted to material objects, because they wish to see something else, or because their
minds desire something else. There are other people who see qualities in this world. They desire those qualities
and do not desire the supreme, which is without qualities. They are devoted to inferior qualities. How will they
know something that has superior qualities? It is beyond qualities and form and one can attain it on the basis of inference. One can know it through the subtleties of the mind and one is incapable of describing it in words. The
mind is attracted by the mind. Sight is attracted by sight. It is intelligence that cleans knowledge and knowledge
cleans the mind. Through the mind, and by fixing the senses, one obtains the infinite. Accepting intelligence, the
mind is enriched. A person may not be interested in the qualities. Like the wind that keeps fire apart from kindling,
if he is not driven by greed, he obtains the supreme in this world. When one is disinterested in obtaining all the
qualities, the mind always attains what is superior to intelligence. If one is engaged in this mode and disassociates
from all the qualities, one merges into the body of the brahman. The atman of a man is not manifest. It becomes
manifest through his deeds. While he is destroyed, it becomes unmanifest again. The soul does not act. It is extended by the senses and there is joy and misery. Action is performed. It obtains a body and is united with the senses
and finds a refuge in the five elements. However, unless it is goaded by the supreme and undecaying one, it is incapable of performing any action. No man on earth will see its end, but knows that there will be an end. He is agitated and is conveyed to the supreme, like a boat whirled by winds on the ocean. The sun obtains its qualities by
spreading its circle of rays. But when it withdraws them, it is without qualities. In that way, in this world, a sage
can give up all attachments and enter into the undecaying brahman, devoid of all qualities. It is without beginning.
It is the supreme refuge for virtuous people. This is the undecaying Svayambhu. Everything originates in him and
everything ends in him. He is eternal and the immortal and undecaying objective. A person who reflects on this obtains tranquility and immortality.'"'

Section 86 will conclude in Volume 9.