'"The rakshasa said, 'O lord of kings! O fortunate one! I am a rakshasa woman named Jara, who can assume any
form at will. Worshipped by everyone, I live happily in your habitation. O righteous one! O king! Therefore, I have
always thought about offering you a favour in return. It so happened that I saw the two half-bodies of your son. On
my accidentally uniting them, the son surfaced. O great king! This was because of your own good fortune. I was
only the instrument.'"

'Krishna said, "O king! Having said this, she disappeared, then and there. The king picked up the boy and entered his own house. The king then performed all the necessary rites for the child. He commanded that a great festival should be held in Magadha in honour of the rakshasa. The father was the equal of Prajapati[Brahma.] and bestowed a
name on him. Since he had been united by Jara, he came to be known as Jarasandha[The root sandha (as in sandhi) means union or junction.]. The son of the king of Magadha grew up and became endowed with great energy, large and strong like a fire into which oblations have been
offered.

'"After some time had passed, Chandakoushika, the illustrious and great ascetic, once again came to Magadha.
Delighted at his arrival, Brihadratha went out with his advisers, subjects, wives and son. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! The king showed him homage with water for washing the feet, gifts due to a guest and water to
wash his mouth. Then he offered him his son and his kingdom. O king! The illustrious rishi accepted the king's
worship and with a happy heart, told the one from Magadha[Brihadratha. A few lines later, Magadha will also be used for Jarasandha.], 'O king! Everything is known to me through my
divine sight. O Indra among kings! Listen to what will happen to your son. No king will be able to equal this valorous one in valour. O lord of the earth! Like the currents of rivers make no impression on mountains, weapons
hurled by the gods will cause him no pain. He will blaze forth over the heads of all those who have been consecrated[Meaning, kings.] and rob their light the way the sun shines over the lights of stars. Like moths to a flame, kings who possess
large armies and mounts will meet their destruction before him. Like the lord of rivers and rivulets[That is, the ocean.] receives
swollen river water during the monsoon, he will seize the combined prosperity of all the kings. Like the earth, the
abode of all crops, extensively supports good and evil, with immense strength, he will justly uphold the four varnas. All the rulers of men will be under his subjugation, just as all beings are subservient to the breath of life in
their bodies. This Magadha[Jarasandha.], immensely stronger than everything in all the worlds, will witness with his own
eyes Rudra Mahadeva Hara, the destroyer of Tripura[Rudra, Mahadeva and Hara are different names for Shiva. Tripura was a collection of three (tri) cities (pura),
constructed by Maya for the demons. Tripura was in the sky and the three cities were made out of gold, silver and
iron. Shiva burnt them down. Tripura is also the name of the demon-king who ruled over these cities.].' O destroyer of your enemies! Having said this, the sage
thought about all the acts he had to perform and dismissed King Brihadratha.

'"With his relatives and kin, the ruler of Magadha returned to his city and instated Jarasandha. King Brihadratha
became detached from worldly pleasures. After instating Jarasandha, King Brihadratha, followed by his two wives,
then left for the forest to lead a life of austerities. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! After his father and two
mothers had retired to the forest for austerities, Jarasandha subjugated the kings with his own valour. After a long
time of austerities in the forest, King Brihadratha and his wives attained heaven by virtue of their austerities. He
had Hamsa and Dibhaka, incapable of being killed with any weapons. They were best among the intelligent in
their counsel and skilled in the art of war. I have already told you about these mighty ones earlier. My view is that
these three were more than a match for the three worlds. O valorous one! O great king! Such is the one whom the
powerful Kukuras, Andhakas and Vrishnis[All names of Yadava tribes.] ignored, because that was the right policy."'
