'Bhishma said, "O Pandava! The dharma of the four ashramas, the dharma of tribes[Jatis.] and that of the rulers of the
worlds are based on the dharma of kshatriyas. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! All the other dharmas are
also in that of kshatriyas. In this world of the living, those who have no desires also base themselves on the dharma
of kshatriyas. The eternal sacred texts say that the dharma of those who dwell in the different ashramas have many
forms and parts. It is as if there are many gates and it is also not obvious. There are people who profess to speak
auspicious words, as if they are certain. However, there are others who do not believe in the certainty of dharma
and give instances to the contrary. They say that everything that is for the welfare of the worlds is established in
the dharma of kshatriyas. It directly leads to repeated happiness and can be directly experienced by a person. O
Yudhishthira! The dharma of brahmanas who have withdrawn from the ashramas[That is, moved to the sannyasa stage.], and that of the other three
varnas, has been recounted in the ancient and sacred texts. In this world, there is no other good conduct that is
equal to rajadharma. O Indra among kings! I told you earlier how, in ancient times, many brave kings went to the
immensely energetic Vishnu, the god who is the lord of all beings, the lord Narayana. They wanted to know about
dandaniti. Before this, in their own respective ashramas, they had performed tasks and thought these to be equal.
The kings had followed the words that set out instances as benchmarks and stood around[They wanted Vishnu to determine what kind of dharma was superior and whether
rajadharma was superior to the other kinds.]. The gods were the
Sadhyas, the Vasus, the Ashvins, the Rudras, the Vishvas[The Vishvadevas.], large numbers of Maruts and the Siddhas. They were
the first gods, created in ancient times, and they were established in the dharma of kshatriyas. I will now state what
determines dharma and artha. In earlier times, the danavas created dishonour and reduced everything to one[They mixed everything up and caused confusion.]. O
Indra among kings! At that time, there was a valiant king named Mandhata. In ancient times, that lord of the earth
performed a sacrifice. He wished to see the god Narayana, without an origin, without a middle and without an end.
O tiger among kings! In that sacrifice, King Mandhata placed the two feet of the great-souled Parameshthi[The supreme lord.] Vishnu on his own head. Vishnu adoped the form of Vasava and showed himself and surrounded by kings, he[Mandhata.] worshipped that lord. O immensely radiant one! A great conversation then took place between that large mass of kings
and the great-souled one[Vishnu, in the form of Indra.], about the nature of Vishnu.

'"Indra asked, 'O foremost among those who uphold dharma! Why do you wish to see the one who cannot be
measured? Narayana is the ancient and first god. His maya is infinite. His spirit and valour are unlimited. The universe is his form. I am incapable of seeing that god in person. Not even Brahma can. O king! I will grant you whatever other desire exists in your heart. After all, you are a king among mortals. You are based in truth and follow
supreme dharma. You have conquered your senses. You are firm in your valour and are engaged in bringing pleasure to the gods. You possess intelligence, devotion and supreme faith. That is the reason I will grant you whatever
boon you desire.'

'"Mandhata replied, 'I bow my head down before you. But there is no doubt that I wish to see the illustrious
one, the first among the gods. Desiring dharma, I will give up all objects of pleasure and go to the forest. I will follow that virtuous path, practised by the worlds. The dharma of kshatriyas is extensive. Established in that, I have
obtained immeasurable worlds and my own fame. However, there is a dharma that the first among gods is engaged
in. That is foremost in the worlds and I do not know how to follow it.'

'"Indra said, 'If you did not possess soldiers, you would have followed supreme adharma. However, if you are
not distracted, you will attain the supreme objective. The first god was engaged in the dharma of kshatriyas. It was
only later that he resorted to other forms of dharma. The others were created later and have limits. However, the
dharma of kshatriyas is special. It is extremely well established and is without limits. All the other dharmas are immersed in this dharma. That is the reason this dharma is said to be the best. In ancient times, Vishnu used the dharma of kshatriyas to crush the enemy[The demons.] and protect all the gods and the infinitely energetic rishis. The illustrious,
immeasurable and prosperous one slew those enemies first. Had he not done that, there would have been no brahmanas, no original creator of the worlds[Brahma.], no virtuous dharma and no original dharma. If, in the past, that foremost among gods had not conquered this entire earth, the four varnas and the dharma of the four ashramas would
all have ceased to exist, because the brahman would have been destroyed. The hundreds of flows of eternal dharma
were seen to be created from the dharma of kshatriyas. The original dharma flows from one yuga to another yuga.
However, the dharma of kshatriyas is said to be the foremost in the worlds. Giving up one's one self[In battle.], compassion towards all beings, knowledge of the worlds, saving, protecting, rescuing the wretched and the distressed-
these are to be found in the dharma of kshatriyas, as practised by kings. Those who do not honour, driven by desire
and anger, are frightened of the king and do not perform wicked deeds. There are others who are virtuous and follow all forms of dharma. They are righteous in conduct and follow virtuous dharma[Because they are protected by the king.]. There is no doubt that as
all the beings roam around in this world, the king must follow dharma, observe the signs and protect them like
sons. The eternal dharma of kshatriyas is supreme among all forms of dharma and is foremost in the worlds. It is
the eternal akshara, it extends up to the akshara[We have deliberately not translated akshara here. At one level, the word means immutable and imperishable, so that the dharma of kshatriyas is without decay. However, akshara is also a word for the brahman, so that it is possible that the dharma of
kshatriyas is being equated with the brahman.]. It faces every direction.'"'
