Janamejaya said, 'O illustrious one! Vyasa and his disciples praised Madhusudana with many kinds of names that
they uttered. You should tell me about those. I wish to hear about Hari, the lord of all Prajapatis. On  hearing
them, I will become purified and will be like the bright moon in the autumn.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'O king! Listen to what the lord Hari told Phalguna[Arjuna.]. Cheerfully, the great-souled Keshava recounted these names. O king! Phalguna, the destroyer of enemy heroes, had asked Keshava about these
names and the qualities and deeds that led to their being used.

'Arjuna said, "O illustrious one! O lord of the past and the future! O creator of all beings! O immutable one! O
refuge of the worlds! O protector of the universe! O one who grants the worlds freedom from fear! O god! There
are names that the maharshis have used to praise you in the Vedas and the Puranas, because of your mysterious
deeds. O Keshava! I wish to hear the true explanations about these. O lord! With the exception of you, there is no
one else who is capable of explaining these names."

'The illustrious one replied, "O Arjuna! In the Rig Veda, the Yajur Veda, the Atharva Veda, the Sama Veda, the
Puranas, the Upanishads, the sacred texts of sankhya, yoga and ayurveda, the maharshis have recounted many of
my names. Some of those names are based on qualities, others are based on deeds. O unblemished one! Listen attentively. I will explain the ones that are based on deeds. O son! I will tell you. It has been said that in earlier
times, you were half of me. I bow down to the extremely famous one, the paramatman who exists in all bodies. He
is Narayana. He is the universe. He is without qualities. He possesses all the qualities in his atman. It is through his
favours that Rudra was generated from Brahma's rage. He is the womb of everything, mobile and immobile. O
supreme  among  those  who  possess  sattva!  He  possesses  the  eighteen  qualities  of  sattva[Amiability, lustre, superiority, dexterity, happiness, generosity, lack of fear, contentment, devotion, forgiveness,
fortitude, non-violence, lack of sorrow, uprightness, equanimity, truthfulness, lack of anger and lack of malice.].  After  me,  there  is
Prakriti, who holds up heaven and earth through her yoga. She is truth. She is immortal. She is invincible. She is
the consciousness in the worlds. Everything, the transformations of creation and destruction, flow from her. The
ancient and great Purusha is the sacrifice and the person who performs the sacrifice. He is known as Aniruddha and
he is the reason behind the creation and the destruction of the worlds. O one whose eyes are like lotus petals!
When Brahma's night is over, it is through the favours of the infinitely energetic one that a lotus manifests itself. It
is through his favours that Brahma is generated from this. When the day is over, it is because of that god that a son
is born from the forehead, as the outcome of rage. This is Rudra, the destroyer[Rudra is born from Aniruddha's forehead, not Brahma's. That seems to be the suggestion.]. These two, the best among the
gods, are said to be the result of favour and rage. They follow his indicated paths in becoming agents of creation
and destruction. Though they are capable of granting boons to all creatures, they are actually nothing but instruments. Rudra is Kapardi, Jatila and Munda[Respectively, holding a skull, with matted hair and with a shaved head. Obviously, not simultaneously.]. His house is the cremation ground. He is a yogi who engages in
fierce vows. He was terrible for Tripura[Shiva destroyed Tripura.]. He destroyed Daksha's sacrifice and uprooted Bhaga's eyes. O Pandaveya! From one yuga to another yuga, know that Narayana is always present in his atman. O Partha! Therefore, if
Maheshvara, the god of the gods, is worshipped, that is the same thing as the lord god, Narayana, being worshipped. O descendant of the Pandu lineage! I am the atman of all the worlds. Therefore, I single-mindedly worship Rudra as my own self. If Ishana Shiva, the granter of boons, is not worshipped, then I think of that as my own
self not being worshipped. The worlds follow my ordinances. Those ordinances must be honoured and I also honour them. A person who knows him[Rudra.], knows me. A person who knows me, knows him. O Kounteya! Rudra and
Narayana possess a single essence, although they divide themselves into two, pervade people and make them engage in all the acts. O descendant of the Pandava lineage! There is no one else who is capable of granting me a
boon. In ancient times, I mentally thought this and worshipped the great-souled lord of the universe[Meaning Rudra.], for the
sake of obtaining a son. There is no other god that Vishnu bows down before, with the exception of Rudra, who is
my own self. Therefore, I worship him. Brahma, the Rudras, Indra and the rishis worship the god who is foremost
among the gods, Narayana Hari. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Among creatures of the past, the present and
the future, Vishnu is the foremost and he must always be served and worshipped. Bow down before Vishnu, the
one to whom havya is offered. Bow down before the one who is the refuge. O Kounteya! Bow down before the
one who is the granter of boons. Bow down before the one who eats havya and kavya. You have heard that four
kinds of people are my devotees[This probably means the pursuit of the fruits of dharma, artha and kama and the fruitless pursuit of moksha.]. Among these, the best are the ones who single-mindedly seek me, and not any
other god, as the objective. They are without desire and do not pursue rites. Though virtuous, it is the view that the
three other categories of devotees desire the fruits. They follow a dharma that leads to rebirth. The enlightened obtain the best outcome. It is said that enlightened ones may serve Brahma, Shitikantha[Shiva.] or any of the other gods,
but  they  obtain  me,  who  is  beyond  them.  O  Partha!  I  have  recounted  the  differences  among  my  devotees.  O
Kounteya! You and I are known as Nara and Narayana. O Partha! We have entered these human forms to reduce
the burden[Of the earth.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I know adhyatma yoga, who I am and where I have come
from. I know the attributes of nivritti and the means whereby dharma is awakened. I alone am known as the eternal
refuge of men. The water is known as Nara[Actually, naara.] and Nara obtained birth from the waters[Nara means human or man and an etymological derivation is being given for this name.]. Since, in earlier times,
the water was my road, I am known as Narayana[Ayana means road or progress. Earlier, before creation, Narayana slept on the water.]. Assuming the form of Surya, I envelop the world and the universe with my rays. Since I am the dwelling of all creatures, I am Vasudeva[Adhivasa is dwelling or habitation and the Vasu part of Vasudeva is being linked to this.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I am the destination of all creatures and subjects. O Partha! My extreme splendour pervades heaven and
earth. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! At the end, all perishable creatures desire to merge into me. O Partha!
Since I make everything progressively flow, I am known by the name of Vishnu[From the verb visho, which means to flow or cause to flow.]. People who desire success in
self-control wish for me and I am in between heaven and earth. That is the reason I am Damodara[This is a slightly contrived explanation based on self-control (dama) and stomach (udara), a stomach being in
between.]. Food, the
Vedas, water and amrita are known as prishni[Prishni means water and these are all derived from water.]. Since I always bear these in my womb, I am known as Prishnigarbha. The rishis have said that when Trita was flung into a well and hurled there by Ekata and Dvita, he called
out, 'O Prishnigarbha! Save Trita.' The rishi Trita, who was Brahma's original son, was thus raised from the well,
after calling out the name of Prishnigarbha. The sun fiercely heats the worlds and there are the rays of the moon
too. Know these to be my hair. The best among brahmanas, who know everything, therefore call me Keshava[Kesha means hair.].
When  the  great-souled  Utathya's  wife  had  conceived,  through  a  maya  worked  by  the  gods,  Utathya
disappeared[This story has been recounted in Section 7 (Volume 1). Brihaspati was Utathya's younger brother.]. Brihaspati, best among rishis, approached Utathya's wife for the sake of intercourse. O Kounteya!
The fetus had already been formed, constituted of the five elements. It said, 'O one who is the granter of boons! I
am already here. You should not oppress my mother.' Hearing this, Brihaspati was angered and cursed him. 'Since
you have prevented me when I was about to engage in intercourse, there is no doubt that, because of my curse, you
will be born blind.' In ancient times, thanks to the curse imposed by that foremost rishi, the rishi named Dirghatama was born and remained blind for a long time[Dirghatama means darkness/blindness for a long time.]. He studied the eternal Vedas, the Vedangas and the subsidiary
branches. Using this secret name, he invoked me. Following the prescribed ordinances, he repeatedly called out to
Keshava. Because of this, he obtained his eyesight and later came to be known as Goutama. O Arjuna! This is the
boon that the name Keshava grants to all the gods and great-souled rishis who invoke it. Agni and Soma come together and unite in the mouth[Agni is the digestive fire and Soma is food.]. Everything in the universe, mobile and immobile, is based on the essence of
Agni and Soma. This is what is said in the Puranas. Agni and Soma are spoken of as having united together. Agni
is spoken of as the mouth of the gods. These two great ones come together and hold up the worlds[This seems to have nothing to do with the rest of the chapter. That's because the suggestion is left implicit. Agni
(the sun) and Soma (the moon) have earlier been described as Narayana's hair (kesha). Hrishika is an organ of
the senses. Since kasha exists in hrishika, we have the name Hrishikesha. This is a convoluted explanation for
the name Hrishikesha, usually taken to mean the lord of the senses.]."'