Vaishampayana said, 'Those maharathas, the best of the Bharata lineage, sported like immortals in the forest of
Kamyaka, full of large numbers of deer. They gazed upon many forest regions in all directions and woods full of
blossoms, beautiful according to the season. The Pandavas, the destroyers of enemies, equals of Indra and fond of
hunting deer, roamed for some time in that great forest. One day, at the same time, all of them went out in the four
directions, since those tigers among men, the scorchers of enemies, wished to obtain deer for serving the brahmanas. With the permission of maharshi Trinabindu, blazing in austerities, and Dhoumya, they left Droupadi in the
hermitage. At that time, the famous king of the Sindhus, the son of Vriddhakshatra, was headed for the country of
Shalva, desiring to get married[Jayadratha was already married to Duhshala, Duryodhana's sister.]. He was surrounded by a large retinue, as was appropriate for a king. With the
many kings who were with him, he stopped in Kamyaka. In that deserted forest, he saw the famous Droupadi, the
beloved wife of the Pandavas, standing at the gate of the hermitage. Her form was radiant in its supreme beauty. It
illuminated the forest region, like lightning on a dark cloud. "Is she an apsara, a daughter of the gods, or an illusion
created by the gods?" Thinking this, all of them joined their hands in salutation and gazed at the unblemished one.

'The king of the Sindhus, Jayadratha, the son of Vriddhakshatra, was amazed and happy in his mind to see her
unblemished limbs. He was deluded by desire and told King Kotikashya, "Who is this one with the unblemished
limbs? Is she human? I do not desire to marry, since I have seen this extremely beautiful lady. I will take her with
me and return to my own abode. O gentle one! Go and find out who she is. Whom does she belong to and where
has she come from? Why has the one with the beautiful eyebrows come to a forest that is full of thorns? She has
beautiful hips. She is the beauty of this world. She is slender of waist and her teeth are beautiful. Her eyes are
large. Will she love me now? I will consider my desires to be satisfied if I can obtain this supreme of women. O
Kotika! Go and find out who her protector is." On hearing these words, Kotikashya, who was adorned with earrings, descended from his chariot and approached her, the way a jackal approaches the wife of a tiger, and asked
her.'
