'Markandeya said, "She was sorrowful and miserable on account of her husband. She was attired in soiled garments and what remained of her gems and ornaments. She was devoted to her husband and was weeping. She was
seated on a slab of stone and was served by the rakshasis. Oppressed by the arrows of love, Ravana came to see
her. The gods, danavas, gandharvas, yakshas and kimpurushas had not managed to vanquish him in battle. Oppressed by Kandarpa[The god of love.], he went to the grove of ashoka trees. He was radiant and was attired in celestial garments. He had resplendent and jewelled earrings. He wore colourful garlands and a crown and was like spring personified. Having adorned himself carefully, he looked like kalpavriksha[Tree (vriksha) that grants everything one desires (kalpa).]. But with all these adornments, he was
as terrible as a chaitya tree[Religious fig tree.] in a cremation ground. The traveller of the night approached the slender-waisted
one, and looked like the planet Saturn approaching Rohini. Having greeted the one with the beautiful hips and
struck by the arrows of the one who has the flower as a banner[The god of love has the flower as a banner.], he spoke these words to the one who was as
terrified as a doe. 'O Sita! You have shown favours towards your husband for a long time. O one who is slender in
form! Show me your favours. You should be adorned. O one with the beautiful hips! Love me, adorned in expensive garments and ornaments. O beautiful one! Be the foremost among all my women. I have daughters of the gods
and the women of rajarshis. I have daughters of the danavas and the women of daityas. Fourteen crore[One crore is ten million.]
pishachas await my word and double that number of rakshasas, the eaters of men and the performers of terrible
deeds. Three times that number of yakshas carry out my instructions. Only a few have sought refuge with my
brother, the lord of riches. O fortunate one! O one with the beautiful thighs. When I am in my drinking hall, gandharvas and apsaras always attend on me, as they attend on my brother. I am the son of the brahmana rishi, the sage
Vishrava himself. My fame is renowned as the fifth guardian of the world[The lords (pala) or guardians of the worlds (loka) are usually four in number-Indra, Agni, Varuna and
Yama.]. I eat celestial food and I have many
different kinds of drink. O beautiful one! Whatever the thirty gods have, I possess that. Let all the evils of your sojourn in the forest be gone. O one with the beautiful hips! Be my wife, like Mandodari[Ravana's wife.].' Thus addressed,
Vaidehi, the one with the beautiful face, turned her face away.

'"She thought of the traveller of the night as no more than a blade of grass and spoke to him, with inauspicious
tears from her eyes drenching her firm breasts and beautiful thighs. Accepting her husband to be a god, Vaidehi
spoke these words to the mean one. 'O lord of the rakshasas! I am unfortunate that I have had to listen to such
words from you. I am miserable and unlucky that I have heard such words. O fortunate one! Be fortunate in your
happiness, but turn these thoughts away. I am another man's wife and am always devoted to my husband. This
helpless woman cannot be an appropriate wife for you. What pleasure will you find from violating a helpless
woman? Your father is a brahmana. He was born from Brahma and is the equal of Prajapati. If you are the equal of
a guardian of the world, how do you not follow dharma? Do you not have any shame at naming your brother, the
lord of riches and the king of the yakshas[Rajaraja.], the friend of the lord Maheshvara?' Having said this, the heavy-
breasted Sita trembled and wept. The one who was slender in form covered her head and her face with her garment. Her hair was long and was braided well. Hanging from her head, it looked like a delicate and dark serpent.
The indignant one was weeping. On hearing those extremely cruel words spoken by Sita and being rejected, Ravana, whose intelligence was wicked, spoke again. 'O Sita! Let the one with the makara on his banner burn my
limbs through desire[Makara is a mythical aquatic creature and the god of love has the makara as his banner.]. O one with the beautiful smile! O one with the beautiful hips! But I will not enjoy you
against your wishes. What can I possibly do? Even now, you are devoted to Rama, a human who is nothing but our
food.' Thus addressing the one with the unblemished limbs, the lord of masses of rakshasas instantly disappeared
and went in whatever direction he desired. Surrounded by the rakshasis, Vaidehi was overcome by grief. Served by
Trijata, she resided there."'
