Yudhishthira said, "O grandfather! You have said that emancipation can be obtained through some means and
not by others. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I wish to hear what those appropriate means are."

'Bhishma replied, "O immensely wise one! What you have asked requires accomplished sight. O unblemished
one! You must always seek to hunt out the appropriate means in everything. O unblemished one! When one turns
one's intelligence towards fashioning a pot, once the pot has been done, it vanishes[The objective having been accomplished, there is no need for the resolution any more.]. In that way, the reasons for
pursuing dharma are no longer there once one has obtained dharma[Dharma is pursued through acts, for the fruits, known as pravritti. However, once one pursues dharma in the
sense of nivritti or renunciation, those reasons cease to exist.]. The road that goes to the eastern ocean
doesn't go to the western one. There is only one path for emancipation. Listen to that in detail. One should practise
forgiveness, eliminate anger and abandon all desire and resolution. One must patiently follow sattva and conquer
sleep. By being attentive, one must protect oneself against fear. The atman must be used to control the breath. Patience must be used to restrain wishes, hatred and desire. Practice must be used to control errors and the whirl of
confusion. Through practice of knowledge, one must ascertain the truth about important and unimportant things.
Through restrained diet, one must ward off digestive disorders and disease. Contentment and knowledge of the
truth must be used to control greed, confusion and hatred. Through the dharma of compassion, one should conquer
the adharma of indifference. Through tranquility and abandoning of attachment, one must control the desire to obtain things. Through yoga, a learned person realizes that affection and hunger are temporary. Compassion and contentment are used to control pride and thirst. Enterprise is used to conquer lassitude. Certainty is used to conquer
doubt. Loquaciousness is conquered through silence and fear through valour. Words and thoughts are controlled
through intelligence and intelligence through the sight of knowledge. Knowledge about the great paramatman is
used to control the jivatman[The text uses the word atman for both. But we have translated it in this way to make comprehension easier.]. Finally, that[The paramatman.] can be known by those who are tranquil and pure in deeds. The wise
know how to control the five taints associated with yoga. These are desire, anger, greed, fear and laziness as the
fifth. These must be discarded and yoga must be practised. Meditation, studying, donations, truthfulness, modesty,
uprightness, forgiveness, purity in intake of food and control over the senses-these are the means used to increase
energy and dispel sins. Thus, resolution becomes successful and knowledge is obtained. Such a person is energetic
and has cleansed his sins. He is restrained in diet and has conquered his senses. Having subjugated desire and
anger, he attains the state of the brahman. He is without folly and without attachment. He has cast aside desire and
anger. He bases himself on lack of distress, lack of insolence and lack of anxiety. He is cheerful, unblemished and
pure. This is the path of emancipation. He controls his words and thoughts and all desire[The desire for obtaining powers through yoga is controlled. Otherwise, one will deviate from the objective.]."'