'Sanjaya said, "O king! The samshaptakas were delighted. They stationed themselves and their chariots on level
ground, arrayed in a vyuha in the shape of a half-moon. O venerable one! On seeing that Kiriti was advancing towards them, those tigers among men were delighted. They roared loudly. That noise resounded in the directions
and the sub-directions and covered the sky. Because the ground was covered with only a few men, there were no
echoes. On seeing that they were extremely delighted, Dhananjaya smiled a little and addressed these words to
Krishna. 'O one who has Devaki as a mother! Behold. At a time when they should be weeping, the Trigarta brothers are delighted. They are about to be killed in the battle. Or perhaps, this is certainly a time for the Trigartas to
rejoice. They will obtain excellent worlds that cannot be obtained by those who are cowards.' Having spoken these
words to the mighty-armed Hrishikesha in the battle, Arjuna encountered the army of the Trigartas, arranged in a
battle formation. Phalguna grasped the conch shell Devadatta, embellished with gold and blew it with great force,
filling all the directions. The samshaptaka chariots were terrified at the sound. In that battle, they were motionless,
as if they were made out of stone. Their mounts dilated their eyes, with the ears, heads and lips paralysed. Their
feet did not move. They excreted urine and vomited blood.

'"When they regained consciousness, the army was arrayed again and simultaneously released arrows tufted
with heron feathers towards Pandu's son. However, Arjuna used fifteen swift arrows to counter thousands of those.
The valiant one was swift and severed the arrows before they could reach him. Each of them then pierced Arjuna
with ten sharp arrows. But Partha pierced them back with three arrows each. O king! Each of them then pierced
Partha with five arrows. But the valorous one pierced each of them back with two arrows. They became extremely
angry and enveloped Arjuna and Keshava with sharp arrows, like rain showering down on a lake. Hundreds and
thousands of arrows were released towards Arjuna, like hordes of bees descending on flowering trees in a forest.
Subahu pierced and penetrated Savyasachi's diadem with thirty arrows that were as hard as rock. Those gold-tufted
arrows stuck to Kiriti's diadem and he looked like a sacrificial post decorated with gold. In the encounter, Pandava
used a broad-headed arrow to sever Subahu's arm-guard and enveloped him with a shower of arrows. Susharma,
Suratha, Sudharma, Sudhanu and Subahu pierced Kiriti with ten arrows each. But the one with the monkey on his
banner countered each of them separately with arrows. He pierced them back and severed their golden standards
with broad-headed arrows. Having sliced down Sudhanu's bow, he killed his horses with arrows. Then he severed
his helmeted head from his body. When that brave one was brought down, his followers were terrified. In fear, they
fled towards Duryodhana's army. Vasava's son was extremely angry and slaughtered that large army with his net of
arrows, like the sun's rays dispelling darkness. The army was shattered and fled in different directions. Savyasachi
was overcome with great rage and the Trigartas were overcome with fear. They were slaughtered by Partha's
straight-tufted arrows. They remained there, bereft of their senses, like a frightened herd of deer. The angry king of
the Trigartas[Susharma.] spoke to the maharathas. 'O brave ones! Do not run away. You should not be overcome by fear.
You pledged and took a terrible oath before all the soldiers. Having gone there, what will you tell the foremost
ones among Duryodhana's soldiers? For this deed of ours in this battle, will we not be ridiculed in this world? All
of us should unite and return to our respective divisions.' O king! Having been thus addressed, those brave ones
repeatedly blew on their conch shells and gladdened each other. The masses of samshaptakas returned again, like
the Narayana cowherds[This is a reference to the incidents recounted in Section 49 (Volume 4), when both Duryodhana and Arjuna had
solicited Krishna's help. Arjuna had opted for the unarmed Krishna and Duryodhana for the cowherds known as
Narayana soldiers. The Narayana soldiers are partly being equated with the samshaptakas.] that have returned to their death."'
