Vaishampayana said, 'O great king! On hearing this, Dhritarashtra, Ambika's son,
was seen to be overcome by great grief. He thought that Suyodhana had already
been killed. He lost his senses and fell down on the ground, like an elephant that had
lost its consciousness. That supreme among kings was senseless and fell down on the
ground. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! A great lamentation arose among the
women. That sound filled the earth, everywhere. The Bharata women were immersed
in a great and terrible ocean of grief. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Gandhari approached the king. All those from the inner quarters[The women.] lost their senses and fell down
on the ground. O king! At this, Sanjaya comforted those distressed ones. Miserable,
copious quantities of tears flowed from their eyes. He repeatedly assured the trembling women. In every direction, they were like plantain trees that had been whirled
by a storm. Vidura sprinkled the Kourava king, the lord who had wisdom for his
sight[Dhritarashtra was blind.], with water and comforted him. O king! He slowly regained his senses and
saw the ladies. O lord of the earth! The king seemed to be mad and stood there,
silently. He reflected for a long time and sighed repeatedly. He censured his sons in
many ways and applauded the Pandavas. He censured his own intelligence and that
of Shakuni Soubala. He thought for a long time and trembled repeatedly. The king
then used his mind to restrain himself. Resorting to patience, he asked Sanjaya, the
suta who was the son of Gavalgana. "O Sanjaya! I have heard the words that you
have spoken to me. O suta! Has my son, Duryodhana, already gone to Yama's
abode? O Sanjaya! Tell me everything accurately, even if you have told it to me earlier." O Janamejaya! Having been thus addressed by the king, the suta replied, "O
king! The great archer, Vaikartana, was killed, with his maharatha sons and brothers
and so were the sons of other sutas[Karna was brought up by a charioteer named Adhiratha and is known as
the son of a suta.]. In the battle, Duhshasana was killed by the illustrious and angry Pandava Bhimasena, who drank his blood." '
