Vaishampayana said, 'The powerful Krishna recounted the story of the Mahabharata battle before his father. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! The brave one glossed over Abhimanyu's death. The great-minded one did
not wish Vasudeva to hear something that was unpleasant. On hearing about the death of his daughter's son, Vasudeva would have been tormented by great sorrow and grief. That is what the immensely intelligent one thought.
Subhadra noticed that the matter of her son's death in the battle had been passed over. She said, "O Krishna! Recount the account of the death of Subhadra's son," and fell down on the ground. Vasudeva saw that she had fallen
down on the ground. On seeing that she had fallen down, he was overcome by grief and also lost his senses. O
great king! Vasudeva was overwhelmed by sorrow and grief at his daughter's son having been killed. He spoke
these words to Krishna. "O Pundarikaksha! It is true that you are famous as one who is truthful in speech. O slayer
of enemies! Why did you now not tell me about my daughter's son having been killed? O lord! Tell me the truth
about how your sister's son was slaughtered. His eyes were like yours. How could he have been killed by the enemy in battle? O Varshneya! It is always impossible for men to die before their time has come. Despite the grief,
that is the reason why my heart has not shattered into a hundred fragments. At the time of the battle, what did he
tell his mother, Subhadra? O Pundarikaksha! He was my beloved. What did the one with the restless eyes say to
me? Was he slain by the enemy in the battle when he had turned his back towards them? O Govinda! I hope his
face wasn't distorted when he fought against them. O Krishna! He was immensely energetic and because of his
childish sentiments, boasted in my presence. The lord spoke about his being victorious. When he was slain and
was lying down on the ground, was that child mangled by Drona, Karna, Kripa and the others? O Keshava! Tell
me. In an encounter, he always used to challenge Drona, Bhishma, Karna and the supreme of charioteers. He was
my daughter's son." Extremely miserable, he thus lamented in many different ways.

'Govinda spoke these words to his grieving father. "In the forefront of the battle, he never distorted his face.
Though the battle was extremely difficult, he did not show his back. He killed hundreds and thousands of assembled kings. He was then afflicted by Drona and Karna and subjugated by Duhshasana's son. O lord! If they had always fought against him one by one, no one would have been able to kill him in the battle, not even the wielder of
the vajra. At that time, in the encounter, Partha had been challenged by the samshaptakas and Drona and the others
angrily surrounded him in the battle. O father! In the encounter, he created an extremely great carnage among the
enemy. O Varshneya! After this, your daughter's son was brought down by Duhshasana's son. O immensely wise
one! Conquer your  sorrow. There is no  doubt that he has  gone to heaven. Confronted with a hardship, a man
should never yield to lassitude. In the battle, he countered Drona, Karna and the others. He was like the great Indra. Why will he not have gone to heaven? O invincible one! Vanquish this grief. Do not yield to intolerance. The
conqueror of enemy cities has gone to the destination meant for those who have been purified by weapons. That is
the way my sister Subhadra's brave son was killed. She was afflicted by grief. When she met Pritha, she shrieked
like a female osprey. When she met Droupadi, she sorrowfully asked, 'O noble one! Where are all our sons? I wish
to see them.' On hearing her words, all the Kuru women embraced her in their arms. Extremely miserable, all of
them lamented. On seeing Uttara, she asked, 'O fortunate one! Where has your husband gone? When he returns,
without any delay, let me know. O Virata's daughter! In earlier times, as soon as he heard my voice, he used to
swiftly appear before me. Where is your husband now? O Abhimanyu! Your maharatha maternal uncles are well.
All of them used to ask you about your welfare when you returned from a battle. O scorcher of enemies! As was
the case earlier, tell me what happened in the encounter today. I am lamenting? Why are you not answering me today?' At that time, the daughter of the Varshneya lineage lamented in this way. Pritha was also extremely miserable.  On  hearing  this,  Pritha  spoke  these  gentle  words.  'O  Subhadra!  In  the  battle,  he  was  protected  by
Vasudeva[Krishna.], Satyaki and his father. Despite this, the child has followed the dharma of time and has been killed.
This is the dharma of those who are mortal. O daughter of the Yadu lineage! Do not grieve. Your son was unassailable and has gone to the supreme destination. You have been born in a great lineage of great-souled kshatriyas. O
one with the restless eyes! O one with eyes like lotus petals! Do not sorrow. Look towards Uttara. She is expecting.
O fortunate one! Do not grieve. This beautiful one will soon give birth to a son.' O extender of the Yadu lineage!
Kunti comforted her in this way. O invincible one! Casting aside her sorrow and with the permission of the king[Yudhishthira.],
Bhima and the twins, who are like Yama, the one who knows about dharma[Kunti.] then began to think about his funeral
rites and gave away large quantities of gifts. O extender of the Yadu lineage! She gave many cattle away to brahmanas. The daughter of the Vrishni lineage[Kunti.] summoned Virata's daughter and told her, 'O Virata's daughter! O
illustrious one! One should not lament. O one with the wide hips! For your husband's sake, protect the child that is
in your womb.' O immensely radiant one! After saying these words, Kunti stopped. With her permission, I have
brought Subhadra here. O Madhava! This is the way your daughter's son was killed. O invincible one! Conquer
your misery. Do not have any grief in your mind."'
