Yudhishthira asked,  "There  may  be  a  situation  where  a  bride  price  has  been  given  for  a  maiden,  but  the
prospective husband no longer exists[The prospective husband may have died, or simply gone away.]. O grandfather! What should be done then? Tell me that."

'Bhishma replied, "She must be maintained like a son, in case the husband returns. Alternatively, the bride price
can be returned. If it is not returned, the maiden belongs to the one who has paid the price. Therefore, she is also
capable of having offspring through means that have been sanctioned[In certain situations, a wife was allowed to have progeny through others, not just her husband.]. However, no person can use mantras for
this purpose[As long as she is married to another, she cannot be married again.]. Instructed by her father, Savitri had herself done this[Instructed by her father, Ashvapati, Savitri chose her own husband, Satyavan.]. Some people who know about dharma
have praised this, but not others. There are some who have not acted in this way. There are some who do not hold
this to be virtuous. There are those who hold that the best sign of dharma is the conduct of the virtuous. About this
kind of conduct, Sukratu spoke the following words. He was the grandson of the king of Videha, the great-souled
Janaka. 'How can one praise conduct that is along a path followed by the wicked? There should be no questioning
or doubt about the conduct of the virtuous. The dharma of the wicked is the confused dharma of asuras. We have
not heard of anything like this in the lives of those who have come before us.' The relationship between a wife and
a husband is not comparable to mere intercourse between a woman and a man. The latter is the ordinary dharma of
desire. This is what that king[Sukratu.] said."

'Yudhishthira asked, "What are the rules whereby a man's riches are inherited? For a father's property, a daughter should be no different from a son."

'Bhishma replied, "The son is like one's own self and the daughter is like the son. As long as these offspring are
alive, no one else should inherit the riches. Unmarried daughters have a share in their mother's youtaka[Youtaka is exclusively the property of a woman. If consists of the dowry, gifts and property she has obtained at
the time of marriage.]. If a father dies without leaving any sons, then the daughter's son inherits the ancestral property. He is the one who offers
the funeral cakes to both his father and his maternal grandfather. The sacred texts of dharma have said that there is
no  special  difference  between  a  son  and  a  daughter's  son.  Even  if  offspring  has  been  generated  by  someone
else[Other than the mother's husband.], he is said to be a son. There is no special difference between a son and a daughter's son who has been generated by someone else. However, in cases where a daughter has been sold by the father, I see no reason in dharma
that allows a daughter's son to inherit. Such sons are malicious and addicted to adharma. They are deceitful and
appropriate other people's possessions. They are the result of an asura form of marriage, a conduct that is contrary
to the dictates of dharma. There are those who are knowledgable about the ancient accounts, devoted to dharma
and the sacred texts of dharma, binding themselves down to the ordinances of dharma. They recount a chant that
was sung by Yama. 'In a desire for riches, if a man sells his own son, or bestows his daughter through a bride price
for the sake of earning a living, he has to progressively pass through seven terrible hells known as Kalasahvya.
After death, he feeds on sweat, urine and excrement.' There is a form of marriage called arsha. In this, a cow and a
bull are given and some rishis have spoken of this as a bride price. O king! But whether it is small or large, this[Something that is a gift.]
should not be regarded as a sale. However, though some people act in this way, it should never be regarded as
dharma. Other kinds of marriage are seen, indulged in by those who are greedy. There are some who bring maidens under their subjugation and enjoy them. These are evildoers and have to lie down in hell. A man must never be
sold, not to speak of one's own offspring. If riches are obtained with adharma as a foundation, no artha can ever be
gained from it."'
