Vaishampayana said, 'Having heard these words of Shounaka, Kunti's son Yudhishthira went to his priest and in
the midst of his brothers, said, "These brahmanas are learned in the Vedas. When I left, they followed me. I am immersed in many miseries and do not have the powers to sustain them. I cannot abandon them. But nor do I have the
powers to give to them. O illustrious one! Please tell me. What is the right course of action for me?" Dhoumya,
supreme among those who uphold dharma, thought for a moment about what was the right course of action in accordance with dharma. He then spoke these words to Yudhishthira, "In ancient times, when beings were created,
they suffered from great hunger. Like their own father, Savita[The sun-god.] felt compassion for them. While proceeding on his
northern course[Uttarayana, the movement of the sun to the north of the equator, the period from the winter to the summer
solstice.], he used his energy to suck up the juices. Then, returning on his southern course[Dakshinayana, the movement of the sun to the south of the equator, the period from the summer to the winter
solstice.], the sun
placed them in the earth. When he became lord of the fields, the lord of the herbs[The moon.] collected the sun's energy and
created the clouds. Sprinkled with the moon's energy, it is the sun himself who is created as the herbs with six
flavours[Pungent, sour, sweet, salty, bitter and astringent.]. It is this that provides food to all beings on earth. Thus, it is the sun that provides food for sustaining
the lives of all beings. He is the father of all beings. Therefore, seek refuge with him. All great-souled kings, pure
in birth and in deeds, save all their subjects by resorting to great austerities. Bhima[This Bhima is not the same as Bhimasena.], Kartavirya, Vainya and
Nahusha-all of them saved their subjects through austerities, yoga and meditation. O one with dharma in your
heart! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You have been purified through your deeds. Like that, basing yourself
in dharma, you must sustain the brahmanas by resorting to austerities." Having been thus addressed by Dhoumya
in words that were appropriate for the time, the pure-souled Dharmaraja undertook supreme austerities. After
touching the waters of the Ganga and the wind, the one with dharma in his soul resorted to yoga and pranayama,
controlled his senses and lived on air, worshipping Divakara[The sun-god.] with offerings of flowers and fireless oblations.'

Janamejaya asked, 'For the sake of the brahmanas, how did King Yudhishthira, bull among the Kurus, worship
Surya, whose valour is extraordinary?'

Vaishampayana said, 'O king! After purifying yourself, listen attentively to my words. O Indra among kings!
Find the time and I will tell you everything in detail. O immensely intelligent one! Listen to the one hundred and
eight pure names[Of the sun.] that were recited by Dhoumya to Partha, best among great-souled ones-Surya, Aryama, Bha-
ga, Tvashta, Pusha, Arka, Savita, Ravi, Gabhastiman, Aja, Kala, Mrityu, Dhata, Prabhakara, Prithivi, Apa, Teja,
Kha, Vayu, Parayana, Soma, Brihaspati, Shukra, Budha, Angaraka, Indra, Vivasvat, Diptamshu, Shuchi, Shouri,
Shanaischara, Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra, Skanda, Vaishravana, Yama, Vaidyuta, Jathara, Aindhana, Tejaspati, Dharmadhvaja, Vedakarta, Vedanga, Vedavahana, Krita, Treta, Dvapara, Kali, Sarvamarashraya, Kala, Kashtha, Muhurta, Paksha, Masa, Ritu, Samvatsarakara, Ashvattha, Kalachakra, Vibhavasu, Purusha, Shashvata, Yogi, Vyaktavyakta, Sanatana, Lokadhyaksha, Prajadhyaksha, Vishvakarma, Tamonuda, Varuna, Sagara, Amshu, Jimuta, Ji-
vana, Ariha, Bhutashraya, Bhutapati, Sarvabhutanishevita, Mani, Suvarna, Bhutadi, Kamada, Sarvatomukha, Jaya,
Vishala, Varada, Shighraga, Pranadharana, Dhanvantari, Dhumaketu, Adideva, Aditya[The text actually says son of Aditi.], Dvadashatma, Aravindaksha, Pita, Mata, Pitamaha, Svargadvara, Prajadvara, Mokshadvara, Trivishtapa, Dehakarta, Prashantatma, Vishvatma, Vishvatomukha, Characharatma, Sukshmatma, Maitra and Vapushanvita. These are the sacred one hundred
and eight names of the great-souled Surya, all deserving of praise[Actually, 109 names are mentioned, which means that one of these is an adjective rather than a proper name.
But it is not possible to determine which one is the adjective.]. They were recounted by the great-souled
Shakra. Narada obtained them from Shakra and Dhoumya obtained them later. Yudhishthira got them from
Dhoumya and obtained all that he desired.

'You who are served by the masses of the gods, the ancestors and the yakshas. You who are worshipped by the
asuras, nishacharas and siddhas. You who are like the fire and the best of gold. O Bhaskara[One of the sun's names, meaning one who gives light.]! With you in my
mind, I bow down before you[A prayer to the sun-god has been given and ends here.]. He who recites this at the time of sunrise with a calm frame of mind obtains sons
and a treasury of riches and gems. Such a man can always remember his past lives. He obtains memory and
supreme wisdom. Let a man recite this chant to the supreme of gods, after concentrating and purifying his mind.
He will be freed from the fire and ocean of grief and will obtain everything that his mind desires.'
