Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing Yajnaseni's words, Arjuna again spoke, showing honour to the mighty-armed
lord who was his eldest brother. "The rod punishes all subjects. The rod protects them. When everything is asleep,
the rod is awake. The learned say that the rod is dharma. O lord of men! The rod protects both dharma and artha.
The rod protects kama. Is it said that the rod protects the three objectives[Dharma, artha and kama.]. Grain is protected through the rod.
Wealth is protected through the rod. You know this and you should accept it. Consider the natural way of the
world. Some evil ones do not perform wicked deeds because of their fear for the king's rod, others because of their
fear for Yama's rod and others because of their fear of the life hereafter. There are other evil ones who do not perform wicked deeds because of their fear for each other. In this world that has come about, everything is based on
the rod. It is because of their fear of the rod that some do not eat each other. Had the rod not protected, they would
have been submerged in blind darkness. It controls those who are not disciplined. It punishes those who are
wicked. It is because it controls and punishes that the learned know of it as danda[Danda means both rod and punishment. Damana is to control or subdue. There is a common etymology.]. Words are the danda for
brahmanas, arms that for kshatriyas. Donations are said to be the rod for vaishyas. But it is said that there is no rod
for shudras[Brahmanas are punished by chastising them with words, kshatriyas through use of
weapons and vaishyas by forcing them to donate out of their riches. However, shudras
possess no wealth that can be taken away and they are naturally expected to serve. Therefore, no punishment can be imposed on them.]. O lord of the earth! To ensure that there was no confusion among mortals, to protect riches and to
establish boundaries in this world, danda was thought of. When danda strides around, dark and red-eyed[The personification of punishment.], there
is exultation and subjects are not confused.
The wicked are not to be seen there. Men who are brahmacharis, householders, in the vanaprastha stage and
mendicants remain stationed on their paths because of their fear of danda. O king! If one is not frightened, one
does not sacrifice. If one is not frightened, one does not donate. A man who is not frightened does not wish to adhere to agreements. Without severing the inner organs, without performing terrible deeds and without killing like a
fisherman, one does not obtain great prosperity. Without killing, there is no fame on earth, nor riches or subjects.
Indra became the great Indra after slaying Vritra. The gods who have killed are worshipped much more by the
worlds. Rudra, Skanda, Shakra, Agni, Varuna and Yama are killers. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Time is a
killer and so are Vayu, Death, Vaishravana[Kubera.], Ravi[Surya.], the Vasus, the Maruts, the Sadhyas and the Vishvadevas. It
is because of their powers that people bow down before them, but never before Brahma, Dhata or Pushan. These[Brahma, Dhata and Pushan.]
are neutral vis-à-vis all beings, self-controlled and prone to peace. But only a few men, who are peaceful in all
their deeds, worship them. I do not see anyone alive in this world who does not act violently. Living beings sustain
themselves through other living beings, the stronger live off the weaker. O king! The mongoose eats the rat. The
cat eats the mongoose. The dog eats the cat. The carnivorous beast eats the dog. A man eats them all. Behold. That
is the way of dharma. Everything, mobile and immobile, is food for living beings. Those are the principles laid
down by the gods and a learned person is not confused by this. O Indra among kings! You should become the person you were born to be. Those who are stupid[Among kshatriyas.] control anger and delight and resort to the forest. Without
killing, the ascetics cannot sustain their lives. There are many beings in water, in the earth and in fruits. It is not
true that they are not killed. What can be more important than sustaining life? There are many beings so subtle that
their existence can be determined only through inference.
Their bodies can be destroyed through a mere blinking of the eyelids. Men leave the village. They give up anger
and pride. But in the forest, they are seen to be confused and live the life of householders with families[That is, they could have remained as householders, instead of retiring to the forest.]. They
till the ground and destroy herbs and trees. They kill birds and animals. Such men perform sacrifices and obtain
heaven. O Kounteya! In my mind, there is no doubt that when the rod is properly applied, the endeavours of all beings become successful. If danda did not exist on this earth, all these beings would be destroyed. Like fish on a
stake, the strong will cook the weak. Brahma himself spoke these truthful words earlier. 'When applied rightly,
danda protects beings. Look at the fire, once it has been pacified and is not frightened. Scared of the danda, it
blazes up again.' If danda did not exist in this world, there would be no difference between the virtuous and the
wicked. Everything would be blind darkness and it would be impossible to distinguish anything. There are nonbelievers and criticizers of the Vedas, those who do not observe the boundaries. But stricken by the rod, even they
can be made to follow rules. In this world, everyone is ruled by the rod. The pure man is extremely rare. It is because of fear of the rod that people can be made to follow rules. The rod was thought of by the creator, for the sake
of protecting dharma and artha, so that the four varnas could be controlled and did not become confused. If they
were not scared of danda, birds and carnivorous animals would have eaten up all the animals and men and all the
oblations kept for sacrifices. Had the rod not protected, no brahmachari would have studied, no wonderful cow
would have yielded milk and no maiden would have married[The suggestion is that studies occur because of the fear of punishment, cows suffer the
act of milking because of the fear of punishment and maidens suffer the institution of marriage (as opposed to free love) because of the fear of punishment.]. There would be an end to the universe and all the
boundaries would be broken down. Had the rod not protected, beings would not have recognized property. Had the
rod not protected, people would not have been scared and would not have performed sacrifices throughout the
year, giving away many kinds of donations, in accordance with the proper rites. Had the rod not protected, people
would not have followed the dharma and dictates of the stages of life, nor would anyone have obtained learning.
Had the rod not protected, camels, bullocks, horses, mules and asses would not have drawn vehicles, even after
they had been yoked. Had the rod not protected, servants would not have listened to their instructions, nor would
children have abided by what their fathers described as dharma. All beings are established on the basis of fear of
the rod. That is what the learned say. Heaven and the world of men are established on the rod. Where the rod that
destroys enemies is applied well, crookedness, sin and deceit are not seen there. When the rod is not raised, dogs
are seen to lick oblations. If the rod does not protect, the crow steals the sacrificial cake. Be it through dharma, or
be it through adharma, the kingdom has now been obtained. Our duty is not to sorrow, but to enjoy it and perform
sacrifices. There are fortunate ones who dwell with their beloved wives. They roam around, attired in pure garments, and happily follow dharma. They eat the best of food. There is no doubt that all efforts depend on artha and
that itself is based on danda. Behold the glory of danda. Dharma was declared so that the world could be sustained.
There is non-violence and there is violence for righteous reasons. Of these, that which leads to dharma is
superior[Righteous violence is superior to non-violence for the sake of non-violence.]. There is nothing that possesses all the qualities, nor is there anything without any qualities. In all acts,
something that is good and something that is evil are seen. Animals are castrated. Their horns are broken off. They
are afflicted and made to carry many loads. They are tied down and chastised. This is the way the world goes on. It
is on a crooked and decayed path. O great king! Therefore, you should observe the dharma that has been followed
from ancient times. Perform sacrifices. Donate. Protect the subjects. Follow dharma. O Kounteya! Slay enemies
and protect your friends. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You should not sorrow because you have slain the
enemy. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! No sin has attached to you because of that. Someone who kills an assassin advancing to kill him does not suffer the sin attached to killing a foetus[This is being used as an extreme case of the sin of killing.], because that anger provokes the
anger[The anger of the assassin provokes the anger in the slayer.]. There is no doubt that the inner souls of all beings are incapable of being killed. If the soul cannot be
killed, then how can it be killed by someone else? Just as a man enters a new house, in that way, beings successively enter new bodies. The old bodies are discarded and the new ones are acquired. People who know about the truth
say that the face of death is nothing but this."'
