'Arjuna said, "You are the supreme well-wisher of all the Kurus. As a relative, you have always been loved by
both the sides. O Keshava! You are capable of restoring health to the Pandavas and the sons of Dhritarashtra and
bringing about peace and you must act accordingly. O Pundarikaksha! You should go to the intolerant Suyodhana
for the sake of peace. O destroyer of enemies! Tell the Bharatas what must be said. If you speak to him words that
are in conformity with dharma and artha, auspicious and directed towards health, and the foolish one does not accept them, he will fall prey to destiny."

'Bhagavan said, "I will go to King Dhritarashtra with a desire to accomplish what is in accordance with dharma,
and what is good for the health of the Kurus."'

Vaishampayana said, 'When darkness had passed and the clear sun had risen, at the muhurta of maitra, when the
sun's rays were mild, in the month of Koumuda and the nakshatra of Revati, when autumn was over and winter
had arrived, in a season when there is an abundance of crops and happiness, the foremost among spirited ones got
ready[A muhurta is forty-eight minutes. Maitra also means friendship. Maitra muhurta usually begins ninty-six minutes after sunrise. Koumuda is the month of Kartika, in October-November. Revati is the twenty-seventh
nakshatra.]. He listened to the auspicious and sacred benedictions pronounced by happy and well-trained brahmanas,
like Vasava listening to the benedictions of rishis. He performed the morning ablutions and bathed. He purified and
ornamented himself. Janardana worshipped the sun and the fire. He touched a bull on its tail and showed his respects to the brahmanas. He circumambulated the fire and looked at all the auspicious objects that were before
him. He acknowledged Pandava's words. Satyaki, Shini's grandson, was seated and he addressed him. "Ready the
chariot, with the conch shell, the chakra and the club. Also include the quivers, the spears and all kinds of
weapons. Duryodhana, Karna and Soubala are evil in their souls. A stronger person should not ignore an enemy,
however weak he might be." Knowing Keshava's instructions, his servants rushed to prepare and yoke the chariot
of the one who wields the chakra and the club. It was as radiant as the fire of destruction. It could travel in the sky.
It was adorned with two wheels that were like the sun and the moon. It was decorated with figures of half-moons,
full moons, fish, animals, birds and many different kinds of flowers and was embellished with gems and jewels. It
was large and beautiful and was as radiant as the rising sun. It had excellent flags and excellent pennants, decorated with jewels and gold. It was invincible and was full of objects, and was covered with tiger skins. It diminished
the fame of enemies and increased the delight of the Yadu lineage. They yoked it to the horses Sainya, Sugriva,
Meghapushpa and Balahaka, all of whom had been bathed and dressed in excellent harnesses. There was a standard with the Indra among birds[Garuda.] on it and the chariot uttered an excellent roar, thereby increasing Krishna's glory. Shouri ascended the chariot, like the performers of pure deeds ascend vimanas. It was like a summit of Mount
Meru and roared like clouds or battle drums.

'Purushottama made Satyaki ascend the chariot and departed. The earth and the sky resounded with the sound of
the chariot. In an instant, everything was clear and the sky was bereft of clouds. Auspicious winds began to blow.
The dust settled down. Auspicious birds and animals circled and followed Vasudeva's departure. Cranes, woodpeckers and swans circled and followed Madhusudana, voicing auspicious sounds in every direction. To the chanting of mantras, great oblations were offered into the fire. There was no smoke and flames circled around. Vasishtha,
Vamadeva, Bhuridyumna, Gaya, Kratha, Shukra, Narada, Valmika, Maruta, Kushika and Bhrigu, devarshis and
brahmarshis, circled Indra's younger brother Krishna, who had brought happiness to the Yadu lineage. Thus honoured by masses of immensely fortunate maharshis, Krishna left for the abode of the Kurus. As he left, Kunti's
son, Yudhishthira, followed him, and so did Bhimasena, Arjuna, the twins who were the sons of Madri and Pandu,
the valiant Chekitana, King Dhrishtaketu from Chedi, Drupada, the king of Kashi, the maharatha Shikhandi,
Dhrishtadyumna, Virata and his sons and the Kekayas. To ensure success, all these kshatriyas followed the bull
among the kshatriyas.

'In the presence of the kings, having followed Govinda for some distance, the resplendent Dharmaraja Yudhishthira spoke these words to Keshava, who is the lord of all beings and is the eternal god of the gods. He is
learned about dharma, steadfast and is wise about all beings. He is constant in his intelligence and does not follow
wrong conduct because of desire, fear, greed or selfishness. He has all the qualities and is marked with the srivatsa
sign[Vishnu bears the srivatsa mark (or curl) on his chest. This is the place where Lakshmi resides.]. Kounteya embraced him and gave him a message. "The lady[Kunti.] has reared us from childhood. Fasts and austerities are her nature and she is always devoted to auspicious rites. She is devoted in worship to gods and guests
and servitude towards her elders. O Janardana! She is affectionate towards her sons and is loved by us. O destroyer
of enemies! She has saved us from fear of Suyodhana and great death, like a boat saves one in the terrible ocean. O
Madhava! She has always suffered hardships, though she does not deserve it. You should ask about her welfare.
Comfort her, because she is overcome with grief over her sons. When you have greeted her, embrace her and tell
her about the Pandavas. O destroyer of enemies! She did not deserve unhappiness. But ever since she got married,
she has suffered from hardships and deceit in her father-in-law's house. O Krishna! O destroyer of enemies! My
mother has suffered a lot. Will there be a time when this tide of suffering will turn, so that I can give her happiness? When we were exiled, out of affection for her sons, she was miserable and ran after us. But we left the weeping one behind and left for the forest. O Keshava! One cannot die of grief, as long as she is alive. Our mother was
honoured by the Anartas, but she was deeply grief-stricken because of her sons. O Krishna! O lord! Salute her on
my behalf and also Kouravya Dhritarashtra and the kings who are our seniors. O Madhusudana! Embrace Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, the great king Bahlika, Drona's son, Somadatta and all the Bharatas separately, and the immensely wise Vidura, who is unfathomable in his intelligence, knowledgeable about dharma and the adviser of the
Kurus." In the midst of the kings, when Yudhishthira had spoken to Keshava thus, he circumambulated Krishna
and took his leave.

'Bibhatsu followed his friend, who was a bull among men. He told the unvanquished Dasharha, the slayer of enemy warriors. "O lord! O Govinda! All the kings know about our earlier consultations, concerning half of the kingdom. O mighty-armed one! I will be delighted if they give it to us courteously, without any disrespect. They will
be saved from a great fear. But Dhritarashtra's son doesn't know about the right code of conduct. O Janardana! If
he acts in a contrary way, I will certainly annihilate the kshatriyas." When Pandava spoke in this way, Vrikodara
was delighted. Pandava's[The first Pandava is Arjuna, while the second one is Bhima.] form repeatedly shook because of his rage. While trembling, Kounteya emitted loud
roars. Having heard Dhananjaya's words, his mind was filled with great delight. On hearing his roars, the archers
trembled and all the mounts released dung and urine. Having thus spoken to Keshava and voiced his intentions,
he[Arjuna.] embraced Janardana and, having taken his leave, departed. All the kings also returned.

'Janardana progressed on his journey, drawn by the mounts Sainya and Sugriva. Under Daruka's[Krishna's charioteer.] whip, Vasudeva's horses seemed to kiss the road and devour the sky. Along the road, the mighty-armed Keshava saw that
many radiant rishis were stationed, shining with the resplendence of brahmanas. Janardana swiftly descended from
his chariot and honoured them. He worshipped all the rishis in the proper way and asked, "Are all the worlds in
good health? Is dharma followed? Do the other three varnas follow the instructions of brahmanas?" Having worshipped them with honours, Madhusudana said, "O illustrious ones! Have all of you been successful in your objectives? O illustrious ones! What is your purpose? What do you wish to be done? O illustrious ones! For what purpose have you descended on earth?" Jamadagni's son approached Madhusudana, his friend in earlier good deeds[Jamadagni's son is Parashurama. Both Parashurama and Krishna are incarnations of Vishnu.].
Embracing Govinda, he said, "O Dasharha! O immensely radiant one! The devarshis who are the performers of
good deeds, the extremely learned brahmanas, the rajarshis and the venerable ascetics once witnessed the ancient
battle between the gods and the asuras. O Janardana! They wish to see all the kshatriyas on earth and the kings
gathered in the assembly hall, with you voicing what is true. O Keshava! O Madhava! We are going to witness that
great spectacle, wishing to hear the words that you will speak, in conformity with dharma and artha. O scorcher of
enemies! You will speak to the Kurus in the midst of those kings. Bhishma, Drona and the others, the immensely
intelligent Vidura and you, tiger among the Yadava lineage, will gather in that assembly hall. O Madhava! O
Govinda! We wish to hear your celestial words, full of truth and welfare, and theirs too. O mighty-armed one! Let
us take your leave now. We will see you again. O brave one! May your journey be without obstacles. We will see
you in that assembly hall."'
