Bhishma said, "Hearing these words, the one with the cleansed soul became firm in his resolution. He based his
atman on the atman and saw the atman in his atman. He was happy and tranquil at having accomplished his
objective. Silently, with the speed of the wind, he headed towards the northern direction, towards the cold mountains. At this time, devarshi Narada wished to see the Himalayas, inhabited by siddhas and charanas. It was populated by a large number of apsaras and reverberated with the sound of singing. There were large numbers of kinnaras and bees. There were diver-birds, wagtails and wonderful pheasants. There were colourful peacocks, calling
in hundreds of tones. There were collections of swans and cheerful cuckoos. Garuda, the king of birds, always
went there. To ensure the welfare of the worlds, the four guardians of the worlds, the gods and large numbers of
rishis always gathered there. For the sake of a son, the great-souled Vishnu tormented himself with austerities
there.

'"In his childhood, it was there that Kumara hurled his spear down on the ground, disrespecting the three worlds
and the residents of heaven. Having flung it down, Skanda spoke these words to the universe. 'Is there anyone superior to me? Is there anyone who loves brahmanas more? Is there a second valiant Brahmanya[Subrahmanya (Brahmanya) is Kartikeya's name and means someone who is kind to brahmanas.] in the three
worlds? If there is any such person, let him raise this spear, or make it tremble.' On hearing this, the worlds were
distressed and wondered who would be the saviour. The large number of gods were frightened that he wished to
become Indra. The illustrious Vishnu saw that the asuras and the rakshasas were also agitated. He began to think,
'What is the best thing to be done under the circumstances?' He could not afford to tolerate and ignore the act of
flinging down by Pavaki[Pavaki is Kartikeya's name, Kartikeya being described as the son of the fire god (Pavaka).]. The one with the pure soul laughed at the blazing spear. Purushottama grasped it in
his left hand and it began to tremble. The powerful Vishnu made the spear tremble in this way. The earth, will all
its mountains, forests and groves, began to shake. Although he could have uprooted the spear, he only made it
tremble a little. In this way, the lord Vishnu preserved Skandaraja's pride. Having made it tremble, the illustrious
one spoke to Prahlada. 'Behold Kumara's valour. No one else is capable of acting in this way.' Unable to tolerate
these words, he[Prahlada.] determined to uproot the spear. He grasped it, but could not make it tremble. Uttering a loud
roar, he fell down on the summit of the mountain, unconscious. Hiranyakashipu's son was numbed and fell down
on the ground.

'"O son! The one with the bull on his banner[Shiva.] always goes to the northern slopes of that king among mountains and torments himself with austerities there. The hermitage there is surrounded by a blazing fire and is extremely difficult to approach. It is known as Adityabandhana and a person with an unclean soul cannot approach it.
It is surrounded by a blazing fire that extends for ten yojanas[Measure of distance, between two and three miles. Originally, a yojana was a distance that could be travelled by
one yoking of horses to a chariot.]. The valiant and illustrious Pavaka is himself established there. He removes all impediments for the intelligent Mahadeva. Mahadeva was firm in his vows. There,
he stood on a single foot for one thousand divine years, thereby tormenting the gods.

'"On the slopes of those mountains, Vyasa, Parashara's immensely ascetic son, taught the Vedas. The great ascetic instructed his disciples-the immensely fortunate Sumantu, Vaishampayana, the immensely wise Jaimini and
the  ascetic  Paila.  The  great  ascetic,  Vyasa,  was  surrounded  by  these  disciples.  At  that  sacred  hermitage,  the
supreme father saw that the one who had been born from the sticks[Shuka.] was approaching, pure in his soul and like
the sun in the sky. Vyasa saw that his son was approaching, like a fire scattering flames on every side. He was like
the sun in his resplendence. The great-souled one was united with yoga and did not seem to touch the trees, the
mountains, or the uneven terrain. He was like an arrow that had been released from a bow. The son of the two
sticks approached his father and grasped his feet. Following the rites, the great sage welcomed him. Cheerful in his
mind, Shuka informed his father about his conversation with King Janaka. He told him everything. With his son,
the great sage, Parashara's son, Vyasa, continued to dwell on the slopes of the Himalayas, instructing his disciples.
They were accomplished in studying the Vedas and tranquil in their souls, having conquered their senses. Those
ascetics had obtained the benefits from the Vedas and the Vedangas.

'"On one occasion, Vyasa was surrounded by them. The disciples joined their hands in salutation and spoke to
their preceptor. 'We have obtained great benefits and our fame has increased. However, through the favours of our
preceptor, there is one thing that we still desire.' On hearing their words, the brahmana rishi replied, 'Tell me what
you wish for. I will act so as to bring you pleasure.' On hearing their preceptor's words, the disciples were cheerful
in their minds. They joined their hands in salutation and again bowed their heads down before their preceptor. O
king! Together, they spoke these supreme words. 'O supreme among sages! If our preceptor is pleased, we have
been blessed. O maharshi! All of us desire that you should grant us a boon. Through your favours, other than us,
let no sixth person become famous[Sumantu, Vaishampayana, Jaimini, Paila and Shuka being the five.]. The four of us are your disciples and the preceptor's son is the fifth. We desire the boon that the Vedas may only be established in us.' Vyasa knew about the true purport of the Vedas. On
hearing the words of his disciples, Parashara's intelligent son thought about welfare in the world hereafter. The one
with dharma in his soul spoke these words, which were full of beneficial dharma, to his disciples. 'They must always be given to a brahmana who is devoted to the brahman, one who certainly wishes to dwell in Brahma's
world. May you multiply and spread the undecaying words of the Vedas. They should not be given to someone
who has not become a disciple, nor to a person who is without vows and has not cleansed his soul. These should be
known  as  the true qualities of  someone who  becomes a disciple. Without testing for  character,  the knowledge
should never be given. Pure gold is tested by heating, cutting and rubbing. In that way, a disciple's birth and qualities must be tested. Do not employ a disciple in a task that should not be undertaken, or where there is great danger. The fruits of knowledge are proportional to intelligence and studying. Let all the difficulties be overcome. Let
everyone see what is fortunate. You are accomplished to teach the four varnas, with brahmanas at the forefront. In
studying the Vedas, these are said to be the great tasks that must be observed. To praise the gods, Svayambhu created the Vedas. If a person is ignorant and deluded and is jealous of brahmanas, disrespecting a brahmana who is
accomplished in the Vedas, there is no doubt that he will be overcome. If a person speaks about this without following  dharma,  or  if  a  person  asks  about  this  without  following  dharma,  there  will  be  no  affection  between
them[Implicitly, this refers to a preceptor and a disciple.]. Instead, there will be hatred. I have thus told you everything about the rites to be followed in the course
of studying. Bear these in your hearts and bring welfare to your disciples.'"'
