Sanjaya said, "O great king! In the encounter, Shrutakarma angrily struck Chitrasena, lord of the earth, with fifty
arrows that had been sharpened on stone. The king of Abhisara[So we now know that this was a different Chitrasena and Chitra was his
brother.] struck Shrutakarma with nine straight-tufted
arrows and pierced his charioteer with five. In the forefront of the army, Shrutakarma became enraged. He struck
Chitrasena in his inner organs with extremely sharp iron arrows. Using the opportunity[In non-Critical versions, there are shlokas that say that Chitrasena became unconscious.], the immensely illustrious Shrutakirti shrouded the lord of the earth with ninety arrows. Having recovered his senses, maharatha Chitrasena severed his[Shrutakarma's.] bow with a broad-headed arrow and pierced him with seven arrows. He grasped another
bow that was decorated with gold and could strike hard. Piercing Chitrasena with arrows, he made him look
colourful. The youthful king was adorned with colourful garlands and was made colorful by the arrows. He looked
like an ornamented youth in an assembly. In that encounter, angrily asking Shrutakarma to wait, he pierced him between the breasts with iron arrows. In the battle, Shrutakarma was pierced by those iron arrows and began to shed
copious quantities of blood, like a mountain exuding red minerals. His limbs were covered in blood and he was
like a picture drawn in blood. O king! In that battle, he was as resplendent as a blossoming kimshuka. O king!
Having been thus struck by the enemy, Shrutakarma angrily countered the foe and severed his bow into two. O
best of the Bharata lineage! Having severed his bow, the immensely illustrious Shrutakarma pierced him with three
hundred iron arrows. Swiftly, he severely struck him with another sharp and broad-headed arrow and severed the
great-souled one's helmeted head. Chitravarma's[The text says Chitravarma. Either Chitravarma was another name for
Chitrasena, or there is a typo.] extremely large head fell down on the ground, as if the moon
was wilfully dislodged from heaven and fell down on the surface of the ground. O venerable one! On seeing that
the king of Abhisara had been killed, Chitrasena's soldiers attacked with force. However, Shrutakarma, the great
archer, angrily used his arrows to drive away those soldiers, like the wrathful lord of the dead[Yama.] at the time of the
destruction of all beings. Having driven them away, he roamed around there.

' "Prativindhya pierced Chitra with five swift arrows and having pierced his charioteer with three, brought down
his standard with a single arrow. Chitra struck him in the chest and the arms with nine broad-headed arrows that
were gold-tufted, sharpened on stone and shafted with the feathers of herons and peacocks. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Prativindhya used his arrows to sever his bow and then struck that ratha with five sharp arrows. O
great king! He hurled a spear towards your son[The text uses the word putra (son) and not poutra (grandson). In an extended sense, Prativindhya was Dhritrarashtra's grandson and assuming
that putra is not a typo, the word son can also be interpreted in a broad
sense. This shloka is stated such that it is not clear who is doing the hurling of the spear at whom. Given the context, Chitra must have hurled the
spear towards Prativindhya. But it is also possible that Chitra from Abhisara was confused with the Chitra who was Dhritarashtra's son, in
which case, 'son' makes sense and Prativindhya did the hurling of the
spear.]. It possessed a golden handle and was difficult to resist. It was
terrible and was like the flame of a fire. As it descended, Prativindhya severed it with his sharp arrows. It was like
the vajra frightening all beings at the end of a yuga and on seeing that this spear had been destroyed, Chitra
grasped a large club. It was decorated with nets of gold and he hurled it towards Prativindhya. In that great battle,
it slew his horses and his charioteer. It struck his chariot with great force and crushed it down on the ground. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! At this time, he ascended another chariot and hurled a spear that was decorated
with golden bells towards Chitra. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As it descended, the great-souled
Chitra seized it and flung it back towards Prativindhya. In the battle, the immensely radiant spear struck the brave
Prativindhya. It pierced his right arm and fell down on the surface of the earth. Having fallen down, because of its
radiance, like lightning, it lit up the spot where it had fallen down. O king! Prativindhya grasped a javelin that was
decorated with gold. Wishing to kill Chitra, he angrily hurled it towards him. It pierced the armour on his body and
his heart. It then swiftly penetrated the ground, like a snake entering its hole. The king was struck by that javelin
and was brought down, extending his large and thick arms that were like clubs. On seeing that Chitra, the ornament of a battle, was killed, all those on your side powerfully attacked Prativindhya from all directions. They released many kinds of arrows and shataghnis with bells. They quickly enveloped him, like the sun by a mass of
clouds. But in that encounter, the mighty-armed one struck them with a net of arrows and drove away those soldiers, like the wielder of the vajra against the asuras. O king! In the battle, those on your side were slaughtered by
the Pandavas. They were violently dispersed, like the clouds by the wind. The army was slaughtered and scattered
in all the directions. Drona's son alone quickly attacked the immensely strong Bhimasena. A terrible and violent
clash ensued between them. It was like that between Vritra and Vasava in the battle between the gods and the asuras." '
