Vaishampayana said, 'Satyavati was miserable and unfortunate and grieved over her son. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! With her daughters-in-law, she performed the funeral rites for her son. Then the illustrious one
turned her mind to dharma and the preservation of the paternal and maternal lineages. The immensely fortunate
one told Ganga's son, "The perpetuation of Shantanu's dharma, the lineage and fame of the Kuru dynasty, the
deeds of progeny and the offering of oblations to ancestors is now vested in you. Just as the attainment of heaven
is certain when one performs good deeds, just as a long life is certain when it is based on truth, it is certain that
dharma cannot be separated from you. You know dharma and its parts. Dharma is established in you. You are
learned in all the sacred texts, the Vedas and the Vedangas. In preserving the customs and virtue of the family and
in deciding what should be done in times of distress, you are like Shukra or Angirasa's son[Brihaspati.]. O supreme among
those who hold up dharma! Therefore, I am depending on you. I will ask you to perform an act. When you have
heard it, please do it. O bull among men! My valorous son was your brother and you loved him a lot. He has ascended to heaven, though but a child. Your brother's queens are the fortunate daughters of the king of Kashi and
they possess youth and beauty. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They yearn for sons. O immensely fortunate
one! Therefore, so that the lineage continues, beget offspring on them. At my request, perform this act of dharma.
Instate yourself on the throne and rule over the kingdom of the Bharatas. In accordance with dharma, take a wife
and do not immerse your ancestors in hell." The conqueror of enemies was thus addressed by his mother and his
friends.

'But the one who followed dharma replied in accordance with dharma. "O mother! What you have said is certainly sanctioned by supreme dharma. But for the sake of the kingdom, you know about the vow I have taken
about not having offspring. O Satyavati! You also know about the price that had to be paid for you and about the
occurrence thereafter. I will again repeat the truthful pledge that I then took. I can give up the three worlds. I can
also renounce the kingdom of the gods, or anything that is greater than both of these. But I can never go back on
the truth. The earth can give up its fragrances, the water can give up its juices, light can give up its diverse forms,
wind can give up its sense of touch, the sun can give up its radiance, the smoke-crested flame can give up its heat,
the sky can give up its sounds, the moon can give up its cool rays, the slayer of Vritra[Indra.] can give up his valour,
the god of dharma can give up dharma, but I can never give up the truth." Having been thus addressed by her son,
who was endowed with great energy, the mother Satyavati then told Bhishma, "I know that you are always established in the truth and that truth is your strength. If you wish, you can create another three worlds with your own
energy. I know that the vow of truth you took was for my sake. But you know the calamity that has now arisen and
you know about dharma at such times. Also remember the duty to your ancestors. O one who is never defeated!
Act in a way that dharma is not destroyed and our lineage is not broken. Do what doesn't make our friends grieve."

Having been thus repeatedly addressed by his miserable mother, who was grieving for her son, in words that represented a deviation from dharma, Bhishma again said, "O queen! Look at dharma. Otherwise, you will bring all of
us to ruin. The norms of dharma never praise a deviation from the truth by Kshatriyas. O queen! In order to prevent Shantanu's lineage from becoming extinct, I will tell you the eternal dharma of Kshatriyas. Hearing this, after
consulting priests and those wise ones who know about the dharma that should be followed in time of calamities,
determine what is best for the welfare of the world."'
