Dhritarashtra said, "All of you know how the destruction of the Kurus came about. O Kouravas! It is known
that all this happened because of my crimes. He was evil-minded, foolish and increased the fear of his relatives. However,  it was  I  who  instated Duryodhana as  a lord over the Kouravas. I  did not listen to Vasudeva's
words, which were full of importance. 'It will be a virtuous act to kill this wicked and evil-minded one, with his
advisers.' I was overcome by affection towards my son and did not heed the learned and beneficial words of Vidu-
ra, Bhishma, Drona and Kripa. At every step, the illustrious and great-souled Vyasa said the same thing and so did
Sanjaya and Gandhari. I am now tormented because of that. The great-souled sons of Pandu are full of qualities.
But  I  did  not  bestow  the  blazing  and  prosperous  earth,  inherited  from  my  ancestors,  on  them.  Gada's  elder
brother[Krishna. Krishna wanted the destruction, so that the evil on earth might be eliminated.] foresaw the destruction of all the kings, but Janardana thought that this would be supremely beneficial. I
did not control myself from engaging in what was futile. I always bear that in my heart, like thousands of snakes.
In particular, it has tormented me for fifteen years. I am extremely evil-minded. I wish to control myself and purify
my sins. Gandhari knows that I only eat and drink a little, at the fourth hour, and sometimes at the eighth hour. All
my relatives think that I eat regularly. This has been hidden. Otherwise, Pandava Yudhishthira would have been
sorely tormented. I clad myself in deerskin, lie down on darbha grass on the ground and meditate. The illustrious
Gandhari also follows similar vows. One hundred brave sons, who did not retreat from the field of battle, have
been killed. Knowing that this is the dharma of kshatriyas, I have not been tormented."'

Vaishampayana continued, 'Kourava spoke in this way to Dharmaraja. "O fortunate one! O Yadavi[In addition to Yudhishthira, Dhritarashtra is addressing Kunti.]! Listen to
my words. O son! I have been sustained by you in great happiness. I have given great gifts away and have repeatedly performed funeral ceremonies. O son! My age and strength are just right to earn auspicious merits. Though
her sons have been slain, it is Gandhari who has taught me patience. They oppressed Droupadi and stole away her
riches. However, following dharma, those violent ones have been slain in the battle. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! I do not see anything more that needs to be done for them. They have been killed while facing the battle and
have conquered the worlds with their weapons. O Indra among kings! My best course of action is what brings benefit to me and Gandhari. Therefore, you should grant us permission. You are foremost among those who uphold
dharma. You have always been devoted to dharma. You are the king who sustains the life of all beings. That is the
reason I am speaking to you. O brave one! Grant us permission. We wish to resort to the forest. With Gandhari, I
will wear tattered rags and skins. Pronouncing benedictions over you, we should resort to dwelling in the forest. O
bull among the Bharata lineage! O son! In our lineage, that has always been regarded as the best. O king! When
the age is right, one must hand over the possessions to the son and go to the forest. I will reside there, subsisting on
air and fasting. O brave one! With my wife as a companion, I will observe supreme austerities. O son! As a king,
you will also obtain the fruits of those austerities. The king has a share in the fruits, good or bad, of anything done
in the kingdom."'
