Yudhishthira asked, "O grandfather! Who is the best recipient for a gift-a stranger, a person with whom one
has lived for a long time, or a guest who has come from a long distance away?"

'Bhishma replied, "People follow diverse rites and excellent vows. Everything should be given to whoever asks.
However, we have heard that donations that make the various categories of servants suffer must not be undertaken.
If the various categories of servants suffer, one's own self suffers. The learned know that all these are proper recipients-a stranger, a person with whom one has lived for a long time, or a guest who has come from a long distance
away."

'Yudhishthira said, "One must not give by making the servants suffer or by causing violence to dharma. We
must also ascertain the nature of the recipient, so that we do not suffer from the act of giving."

'Bhishma said, "If the officiating priest, the priest, the preceptor, the disciple, matrimonial allies and relatives
possess learning and lack tendencies of causing injury, they must all be honoured and worshipped. All those who
do not possess these traits do not deserve to be treated virtuously. Therefore, one must always attentively examine
men. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Lack of anger, truthfulness in speech, lack of injury, self-control, uprightness, lack of hatred, lack of excessive pride, modesty, patience, austerities, tranquility and lack of improper
deeds-if these signs are seen in a person, he is a deserving recipient and must be honoured. Whether it is someone with whom one has dwelt for a long time, or whether it is someone one has just met, whether it is a stranger or
someone one knows, if these signs are present, he is a deserving recipient and must be honoured. A person who
questions the proof of the Vedas and transgresses the sacred texts, or a person who questions the ordinances in
every way, destroys his own self. O son! There may be a brahmana who thinks himself to be learned but censures
the Vedas, who is addicted to the futile knowledge of argumentation and scrutinizes everything in detail, who questions the reasons behind everything and seeks to be triumphant over those who cite reasons, who always speaks
against brahmanas and talks too much, who is suspicious of everyone, childish and harsh in speech-the learned
know such a man to be the equal of a dog. He barks like a dog, always seeking to bite. The purpose of such speech
is to destroy all the sacred texts. Such people are limited in learning and are inferior in arguments. When they are
asked, they are seen to be lacking in learning. They may exhibit the signs of knowledge, but they are engaged in
detecting weaknesses in those who are learned about shruti, smriti, itihasa, Puranas and the Aranyakas. However,
there are also acts that lead to the progress of the worlds and do not cause damage to dharma or one's own self-
men who engage in these, obtain prosperity for eternity. The rishis have said that debts to gods, rishis, ancestors,
brahmanas and guests, as the fifth, must be repaid[Debts to gods are paid through sacrifices, to rishis through studying, to ancestors through offspring, to brahmanas through gifts and to guests through hospitality.]. In due order, if a householder purifies himself and undertakes these tasks that have been laid down, then, his dharma does not suffer."'
