Yudhishthira said, "O supreme among the Bharata lineage! I wish to hear about the character of women. O
grandfather! Women are the root of all sins and their intelligence is fickle."

'Bhishma replied, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about a conversation between Narada and
the courtesan Panchachuda. In ancient times, the intelligent devarshi Narada was roaming through the worlds. In
Brahma's region, he saw the unblemished apsara, Panchachuda. On seeing all her beautiful limbs, the sage asked
the apsara, 'O one with the excellent waist! There is a doubt in my heart. Tell me.' Having been thus addressed,
she told the brahmana Narada, 'If you think that I am capable, tell me what the subject is.'

'"Narada said, 'O fortunate one! I will never ask you to do something that you are incapable of. O one with the
beautiful face! I wish to hear the truth about the character of women.'"

'Bhishma continued, "On hearing the words of the devarshi, the supreme among apsaras replied, 'Since I am a
woman, I am incapable of criticizing women. You know about women and their nature. O devarshi! You should
not ask me to answer such a question.' The devarshi said, 'O one with the excellent waist! You have spoken the
truth. However, lying is a sin. There is no sin in speaking the truth.' Having been thus addressed, the one with the
beautiful smiles made up her mind. She truthfully spoke about the eternal vices of women.

'"Panchachuda said, 'O Narada! Even if a woman belongs to a noble lineage, is beautiful and has a protector,
she doesn't follow the restraints. That is a fault among women. There is nothing more evil than women. Women
are the root of all sins. You yourself know this. There may be a husband who is famous, prosperous, handsome and
obedient. Even then, a woman waits to disregard him. O lord! We women are prone to wickedness and adharma.
We abandon our shame and are attracted to evil men. Women like those who approach, desire and serve them.
They  aren't  concerned  about  not  following  the  restraints.  Out  of  fear  of  relatives,  or  injury  caused  to  people,
women aren't constrained to follow restraints and stick by their husbands. Women do not find anyone unapproachable, nor do they care about age. They enjoy men, regardless of whether they are handsome or ugly. Because of
fear, compassion, riches, kin, family and alliances, women never remain with their husbands. Women of good families also envy independent women who are young and wear beautiful ornaments and garments. There may be
beloved wives who are protected and always greatly respected. Even they are attracted to those who are hunchbacked, blind, dumb and dwarves. O devarshi! They are attracted to the disabled and other ugly men. O great sage!
There is no one in this world whom women regard as unapproachable. O brahmana! If a man can be obtained in
any way, a woman never remains with her husband. If a woman is restrained and protects herself, that is because a
man cannot be obtained, out of fear of relatives, or out of fear of being killed or imprisoned. Their nature is fickle.
They are difficult to please and difficult to understand. Women are like words spoken by the wise[In the sense of being difficult to understand.]. Wood never
satisfies a fire. The great ocean is never satisfied by rivers. Yama is not satisfied with all creatures. The fair-eyed
ones are never satisfied with men. O devarshi! I think that this is a mystery about all women. As soon as she sees a
man, a woman's vagina is moistened. Even the best of women are not satisfied with husbands who give them
everything that they wish, do whatever they desire and protect them. A woman does not attach as much importance
to objects of pleasure, many ornaments and large stores of possessions as she does to the prospect of sexual intercourse. The destroyer, destruction, death, the nether regions, the subterranean fire, the sharpness of a razor, the poison of a snake and the fire-all these collectively exist in a woman. The creator ordained the worlds and the five
great elements originated with him. O Narada! When men and women were created, these are the sins that were
implanted in women.'"'
