'Yudhishthira said, "O supreme among brahmanas! I wish to hear about that wise maharshi. Tell me in detail about
Agastya's deeds."

'Lomasha replied, "O king! O great king! Then listen to his divine, extraordinary and superhuman account,
Agastya's powers and his infinite soul. In Krita yuga[Another name for Satya yuga.], there were some terrible danavas, invincible in battle.
There were masses of them, famous as the Kaleyas, and they were extremely terrible. Arming themselves with
many upraised weapons, they placed themselves under Vritra. They pursued the gods, led by the great Indra,
everywhere. In ancient times, the thirty gods decided to act so that Vritra might be killed. Placing Purandara[Indra's name. Literally, the destroyer of cities.] at
the forefront, they approached Brahma. On seeing all of them, their hands joined in salutation, Parameshthi[Brahma.]
said, 'O gods! I know the task that all of you wish to undertake. I will tell you the means whereby you can ensure
Vritra's killing. There is a famous, great and wise rishi by the name of Dadhicha. Together, go to him and ask him
for a boon. The one with dharma in his soul and virtue in his mind will happily grant it to you. If you wish for victory, all of you must tell him these words. "For the welfare of the three worlds, give us your bones." He will give
up his body and give his bones to you. With those bones, fashion the firm and greatly terrible vajra. It will be large,
capable of killing enemies. It will be sharp and will have six sides. It will make a terrible sound. With that vajra,
Shatakratu will kill Vritra. I have told you everything. Do this without delay.' Having been thus addressed, the
gods took their leave of the grandfather.

'"With Narayana at the forefront, they went to Dadhicha's hermitage. It was on the other bank of the Sarasvati
and covered with many trees and creepers. It resounded with the sound of bees, as if they were chanting sama
hymns. This mixed with the sound of male cuckoos and was alive with the noise of chakora[Partridge.] birds. Buffaloes,
boars, swamp deer and yaks roamed everywhere, without the fear of tigers. Male elephants, with juices flowing
down their burst temples, sported with female ones in the ponds and thundered in every direction. The place
echoed with the giant roars of lions and tigers. There were others that were hidden in caves and caverns. The place
was extremely beautifully adorned with these and was like heaven. It was to this hermitage of Dadhicha's that the
thirty gods went.

'"They saw Dadhicha there, as radiant as the sun. His beauty was resplendent, like the grandfather with Lakshmi. O king! The gods bowed in obeisance at his feet and saluted him. Then all of them asked for the boon, as Parameshthi had asked them to. At this, Dadhicha was extremely delighted. He addressed the supreme gods and said,
'O gods! I will act today for your welfare. For your sake, I will myself give up my body.' Having spoken thus, that
best of men, in control of his breath of life, gave up his life. As they had been instructed, the gods collected the
bones of the dead one. Delighted at the prospect of victory, the gods went to Tvashtar[Vishvakarma, the architect of the gods.] and spoke to him. On
hearing their words, Tvashtar was happy and began to work, carefully and diligently. He created the vajra, extremely terrible in appearance. Having constructed it, he happily told Shakra, 'O god! This vajra, the best of
weapons, will today reduce to ashes the terrible enemies of the gods. Therefore, kill the enemy and having done
that, happily live in heaven with your companions.' Having been thus addressed by Tvashtar, Purandara cheerfully
and respectfully accepted the vajra."'
