Vaishampayana said, 'When it was morning, King Dhritarashtra, Ambika's son, determined that the time had
come for departure to the forest. He summoned the brave Pandavas. With Gandhari, the intelligent one greeted
them in the proper way. Using brahmanas accomplished in the Vedas, he performed the rites associated with the
full moon in Kartika, agnihotra being the foremost. He attired himself in bark and deerskin. Surrounded by his
daughters-in-law, the king emerged from his house. The king who was Vichitravirya's son departed in this way.
The Kourava and Pandava women and all the others who belonged to the royal lineage of the Kouravas were distressed and lamented loudly. Using parched grain, the king cheerfully worshipped the wonderful house where he
had lived. The Indra among men met all the large numbers of servants, said farewell to them and left. King Yudhishthira trembled and joined his hands in salutation. In a voice that was choking with tears, he exclaimed, "O virtuous and great king! This is a time for lamentation. Where are you going?" He said this and fell down on the
ground. Arjuna was tormented by great grief. The foremost among the Bharata lineage sighed repeatedly. He restrained Yudhishthira and told him that he should not act in this way. However, he was himself distressed. Vrikodara, Phalguna, Madri's brave sons, Vidura, Sanjaya, the son of the vaishya[Yuyutsu.], Goutama[Kripa.],  Dhoumya and other
brahmanas followed the king, their voices choking with tears. Gandhari's eyes were covered with a strip of cloth[Since Dhritarashtra was blind, from the time of marriage, Gandhari had covered her eyes with a strip of cloth.].
For support, her hand was placed on Kunti's shoulder, who walked ahead. King Dhritarashtra advanced cheerfully,
grasping Gandhari's shoulder with his hand. Krishna Droupadi, Yadavi[Subhadra.], Kouravi Uttara, who had had a son as
offspring[Abhimanyu's son, Parikshit.], Chitrangada, other women and daughters-in-law advanced with the king. O king! Their lamentations
were piteous, like the shrieks of she-ospreys. In every direction, brahmana, kshatriya, vaishya and shudra women
also emerged. O king! The large numbers of citizens of Gajasahvya were distressed at the departure. O king! This
was just like in earlier times, when after the gambling match, they had witnessed the departure of the Pandavas
from the assembly hall of the Kouravas. There were women who had never seen the sun or had been seen by it.
But when that Indra among men, the Indra among the Kouravas, left for the forest, they were afflicted by grief and
emerged onto the royal roads.'
