'Sanjaya said, "Shatanika[The son of Nakula and Droupadi.] quickly consumed your soldiers with arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Your son, Chitrasena, countered him. Nakula's son severely struck Chitrasena with an iron arrow and he pierced
him back with ten sharp arrows. O great king! In that battle, Chitrasena again struck Shatanika between the breasts
with nine sharp arrows. Nakula's son used straight-tufted arrows to sever his[Chitrasena's.] armour from his body and it was
wonderful. O king! O Indra among kings! Divested of his armour, your son looked extremely beautiful, like a
snake that has cast off its skin at the right season. O great king! Nakula's son then made efforts and severed his
standard and his bow with sharp arrows. In that encounter, the maharatha's bow was severed and he was deprived
of his armour. O great king! He picked up another bow that was capable of shattering the enemy. Chitrasena swiftly struck Nakula's son with nine arrows. In that encounter, the maharatha among the Bharata lineage angrily struck
him. O venerable one! Shatanika, supreme among men, was extremely angry and killed Chitrasena's four horses
and his charioteer. Maharatha Chitrasena jumped down from his supreme chariot. The powerful one struck Naku-
la's son with twenty-five arrows. In that battle, Nakula's son performed a deed. With an arrow in the shape of a
half-moon, he severed his bow, which was adorned with gems. His[Chitrasena's.] bow was severed. He was without a chariot.
His horses were slain. His charioteer was killed. He swiftly climbed onto the chariot of the great-souled Hardikya.

'"Maharatha Drupada, with his army, was advancing towards Drona. Vrishasena swiftly showered hundreds of
arrows on him. O unblemished one! In that encounter, Yajnasena[Drupada.] pierced Karna's maharatha son, in the arms
and in the chest, with sixty arrows. Yajnasena was stationed on his chariot. Vrishasena angrily struck him, between
the breasts, with many sharp arrows. O great king! In that battle, their limbs were wounded with arrows. The arrows were like thorns. They were as beautiful as porcupines with erect quills. Those arrows were gold-tufted and
sharp at the tip. Their armour was shattered by those arrows. In that great battle, they were covered with blood and
looked extremely beautiful. They were as radiant and colourful as beautiful kalpavrikshas[Mythical celestial tree that yields everything that one desires.]. In the forefront of
the battle, they were as dazzling as flowering kimshukas. O king! Vrishasena struck Drupada with nine arrows and
again pierced him with seventy arrows. He again pierced him with three other arrows. O great king! Karna's son
shot thousands of arrows and was as resplendent as a cloud that was showering down. The armour of Drupada's
soldiers was shattered with arrows. O king! In the battle which took place in the night, they[The Kourava soldiers.] assumed a fierce
form and drove them away. The lamps that had been lit were abandoned everywhere. O king! The earth was as
beautiful as a cloudless sky, adorned with planets. The earth was beautiful because of the armlets that had fallen
down. O great king! It was like clouds during the monsoon, tinged with lightning. The Somakas were frightened
and were driven away by Karna's son. It was like the danavas, terrified of Indra at the time of the tarakamaya battle. The Somakas were afflicted and driven away in that battle. O great king! They were illuminated in that battle
and looked beautiful. Having defeated them in the encounter, Karna's son was resplendent. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! He was like the sun when it has attained midday. Among the thousands of kings on your side and
those of the enemy, there was a single one who blazed there and it was the powerful Vrishasena. He defeated the
brave maharatha Somakas in that encounter. He then swiftly proceeded to the spot where King Yudhishthira was.

'"Prativindhya angrily consumed enemies in that battle. Your maharatha son, Duhshasana, advanced against
him. O king! The clash between them was wonderful in form. It was like a conjunction between Budha and Bhargava in a cloudless sky[Budha is Mercury. Bhargava is another name for Shukra (Venus).]. Prativindhya was the performer of extremely difficult deeds and in that encounter,
Duhshasana pierced him in the forehead with three arrows. Thus pierced by your powerful archer son, the mighty-
armed one looked beautiful, like a mountain with peaks. In that encounter, maharatha Prativindhya pierced
Duhshasana with nine arrows and pierced him again with seven. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Your son
then performed an extremely difficult deed. With fierce arrows, he brought down Prativindhya's horses. He used a
broad-headed arrow to bring down his charioteer and also his standard. O king! The archer shattered the chariot
into one hundred fragments. The lord angrily used straight-tufted arrows to shatter into tiny fragments the flag, the
quiver, the harness and the yoke. Deprived of his chariot, the great-souled one[Prativindhya.] stood with the bow in his hand
and fought with your son, showering many hundreds of arrows. He[Duhshasana.] showed the dexterity of his hands and severed the bow with a kshurapra arrow. Once the bow had been severed, he struck him[Prativindhya.] with ten broad-headed arrows. On seeing that he was without a chariot there, his maharatha brothers[Droupadi's other sons.] impetuously arrived with a large
army. O great king! He ascended Sutasoma's[Sutasoma was Droupadi's son through Bhima.] radiant chariot and taking up a bow, pierced your son. Then, all
those on your side surrounded your son. In that battle, they advanced forcefully, with a large army. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! A battle commenced between those on your side and the others at that terrible time of the
night and it extended Yama's kingdom."'
