'Shishupala said, "O descendant of the Kuru lineage[Shishupala is addressing Yudhishthira.]! When so many great-souled lords of the earth are present
here, Varshneya does not deserve to be worshipped, as if he were a king. O Pandava! This honour shown to Pundarikaksha is not deserving of the great-souled Pandavas. O Pandavas! You are children and do not know the subtleties of dharma. This son of the river[Bhishma, who was Ganga's son.] can see little and has transgressed what is proper. Though he knows what
is dharma, Bhishma acts like you out of favouritism and is worthy of censure in the world of honest ones. This
man from Dasharha is not even a king. You have shown him homage. How does he deserve to be honoured foremost among all these kings? O bull among the Bharata lineage! You cannot consider Krishna to be the eldest when
the aged Vasudeva[Krishna is Vaasudeva, that is, Vasudeva's son. Krishna has been written as Vasudeva, not Vaasudeva, to make
the reading easier. In most instances, there is no danger of confusion, this being an exception. Krishna's father, Vasudeva, is also present.] is here? How can the son he shown homage first? Or you may consider Vasudeva to be one
who always does that which ensures your welfare. But then, when Drupada is here, how can Madhava be thus worshipped? O chief among those of the Kuru lineage! If you consider Krishna to be your preceptor, how can Varshneya be shown homage when Drona is here? O descendant of the Kuru lineage! If you consider Krishna to be the
sacrificial priest, how can you show him homage when the brahmana Dvaipayana is present? O supreme among
those of the Kuru lineage! Madhusudana is not a sacrificial priest, or a preceptor, or a king. Why have you shown
him homage except out of favouritism? O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If you must worship Madhusudana,
why did you bring these kings here, so as to insult them?

'"We did not offer tribute to the great-souled Kounteya out of fear, or out of avarice, or as a result of conciliation. We offered him tribute because he wished to become an emperor, in accordance with the dictates of dharma.
Yet he now pays no attention to us. Krishna has not attained any signs of royalty, yet he is offered homage in the
midst of this assembly of kings. This is nothing but an insult. The fame of Dharma's son, as someone who has
dharma in his heart, has vanished. Who can offer deserving homage in this way to one who has deviated from
dharma? Born in the lineage of the Vrishnis, he earlier slew a king[This is a reference to either Kamsa or Jarasandha. But Krishna did not directly kill Jarasandha.]. Today, the devotion to dharma has deserted
Yudhishthira. His meanness is evident from his offering the arghya to Krishna. O Madhava! If the Kounteyas are
scared and if they have become mean as a consequence of their asceticism, surely you could have enlightened
them about what kind of honour you deserve. O Janardana! If in their meanness they offered you a homage that
you are not worthy of, why did you accept it? Though undeserving, you set great store on this homage, like a dog
that has found an offering of sacrificial ghee and consumes it in private. O Janardana! This is not only an insult to
the Indras among kings. The Kurus have also brought out your true nature. O Madhusudana! You are not a king
and this royal homage to you is like a wife to the impotent or a beautiful sight to the blind. We have seen what
King Yudhishthira is and we have seen what Bhishma is. We have seen what Vasudeva is. We have seen everything
exactly as it is."

'With these words, Shishupala arose from his supreme seat and went out from the assembly, together with all the
other kings[Though not explicitly mentioned, these words are clearly being uttered by Vaishampayana.].'