Vaishampayana said, 'Having heard the words of the subjects, appropriate to
the time and the place, King Yudhishthira replied to them. "The sons of Pandu are fortunate in this world. The assembled bulls among brahmanas have
praised their qualities, whether they possess them or not. It is my view that
you have certainly shown us a favour. Without any selfishness, you have spoken about the qualities that we possess. However, the great king, Dhritarashtra, is our father and our supreme god. If you wish to ensure what brings me
pleasure, ensure his pleasure and remain under his rule. Having caused a
great destruction of the kin, I live for him alone. Constantly and attentively,
my duty is to serve him. O well-wishers! If you wish to show your favours
towards me, then you should behave towards Dhritarashtra as you used to do
earlier. He is the lord of the universe and mine too. The entire earth belongs
to him and so do all the Pandavas. In your minds, you should always remember these words I have spoken. Taking the permission of the king, go wherever you wish to." The residents of the city and the countryside took their leave
of the descendant of the Kuru lineage[This might mean either Yudhishthira or Dhritarashtra, probably the
former.].

'Kouravya instated Bhimasena as the heir apparent. He cheerfully instructed that the intelligent Vidura should be the adviser for the six kinds of
policy[Usually, but not universally, understood as discipline, duties of government servants, ensuring law and order, the conduct of courtiers, the removal of obstructions and dealing with other kingdoms. Alternatively,
peace, war, marching, halting, creating dissension and defence of the
kingdom.]. Sanjaya, who possessed many qualities and could think about what
had been done and what should be done, was put in charge of finances and
wealth. The king instructed Nakula to supervise the size of the army, make
sure salaries were being paid and also take care of the workers. Yudhishthira,
the great king, instructed that Phalguna should act against the circles of enemies and punish those who were unruly. The scorcher of enemies instructed
that Dhoumya, best among priests, should take care of all the rites laid down
in the Vedas and duties connected with the brahmanas. O lord of the earth!
Sahadeva was instructed to always remain nearby, so as to protect the king.
The lord of the earth joyfully appointed each one to a separate task, depending on what was suitable. The destroyer of enemy heroes, always devoted to
dharma and with dharma in his soul, told Vidura, Sanjaya and the immensely
intelligent Yuyutsu, "Arise! Get up and accomplish every task for the king
who is my father[Dhritarashtra.]. Perform all the appropriate tasks so that everyone is
well. Always act for the residents of the city and the countryside. Having taken the king's[Dhritarashtra's.] permission, follow dharma and perform all those tasks."'
