'The gandharva said, "O king! Living in the hermitage, Adrishyanti gave birth to a son who was the extender of
Shakti's lineage and was like a second Shakti. O best of the Bharata lineage! The best of the sages, the illustrious
one, himself performed the prescribed birth ceremonies of his grandson. Because the sage Vashishtha had resolved
to kill himself, but refrained from doing so when he heard of the son in the womb, he was known in the world by
the name of Parashara[Parasu means lifeless or dead.]. From the date of his birth, that virtuous one knew Vashishtha to be his father and behaved towards him like a father. O Kaunteya! O scorcher of enemies! When the child addressed the Brahmana
rishi Vashishtha as 'father' in front of his mother Adrishyanti, she heard the sweet word, so full of meaning, uttered by him. Adrishyanti spoke to him with tears in her eyes. 'O son! Do not use the word father. The great sage is
not your father. O son! Your father was devoured by a rakshasa in the deep forest. O innocent son! The one you
think of as your father is not your father. The illustrious one is the father of your famous father.' Having been thus
addressed, the best of rishis[Shakti's son Parashara.] was grief-stricken, because he always spoke the truth. The great-souled one resolved to destroy all the worlds. On seeing him thus resolved, the great-souled Vashishtha, great in austerities, gave
reasons for refraining. Hear them.

'"Vashishtha said, 'There was a great king known by the name of Kritavirya. In this world, that bull among
kings had as his priest the Bhrigus, learned in the Vedas. At the end of his soma sacrifice, the king gratified those
who are the first receivers of offerings[The Brahmanas.] with many presents of grain and riches. When that tiger among men had
ascended to heaven, there came a time when his descendants were in need of riches. O son! Knowing that the Bhrigus were affluent, those kings went to the best of the Bhrigus, in the disguise of beggars, to ask for riches. To save
their indestructible riches, some of the Bhrigus buried them in the ground. Fearing danger from the Kshatriyas,
others gave away their riches to Brahmanas. O son! Some of the Bhrigus gave them as much of riches as they
wanted, thinking that some other use might be found for the Kshatriyas.

'"'O son! Then one day, some of the Kshatriyas, according to their wishes, dug up the ground in the dwelling
place of the Bhrigus and discovered a treasure. All the bulls among the Kshatriyas, who were assembled there, saw
the treasure. Thereafter, angry and contemptuous, those supreme archers shot down the Bhrigus with their sharp
arrows, though they craved for mercy. They travelled all over the earth, killing even children in wombs. O son!
When they were killed in this way, many Bhrigu wives fled in fear and sought refuge in the mountains of the
Himalayas.

'"'Among them was a lady with beautiful thighs. She resolved to perpetuate her husband's race and kept her immensely energetic embryo hidden in her thigh, so that it might not be discovered. But the Kshatriyas discovered
the Brahmana lady, who blazed in her radiance. Then the child appeared, tearing her thigh open and blinding the
eyes of the Kshatriyas like the midday sun. Thereupon, deprived of their eyesight, the Kshatriyas began to wander
around in the difficult passes of the mountain. Frustrated in their desire and frightened, those bulls among the
Kshatriyas sought refuge with that unblemished Brahmana lady, so that their eyesight might be restored. They
were out of their minds with pain. They had lost their eyesight and were like a fire that has been put out. Those
Kshatriyas spoke to the lady. "O illustrious lady! Through your grace, may the Kshatriyas regain their eyesight. All
of us will depart from here with our evil deeds. You and your son should show us mercy. You should save these
kings by restoring their eyesight to them."'"'
