'Sanjaya said, "They are performers of terrible deeds in battle. Their deeds show they have conquered exhaustion.
Together with Krishna, the five Pandavas are difficult to resist, even by the gods. There has never been, nor will
there be, a man who possesses Krishna's qualities in righteousness, deeds, vigour, intelligence, nature, fame and
prosperity. King Yudhishthira has always obtained heaven because of his truthfulness, devotion to dharma, generosity, worship of brahmanas and other qualities. O king! It has been said that three are equal in the field of battle
-the Destroyer himself at the end of a yuga[An era. At the end of an era, the universe is destroyed and created again.], Jamadagni's valiant son[Jamadagni's son is Parashurama.] and Bhimasena. Partha, the wielder of
the Gandiva, is always skilled in performing all his pledges in battle and I do not see his parallel on earth. Devotion towards superiors, maintaining secrecy of counsel, humility, self-control, beauty and bravery-these six are
always present in Nakula. In knowledge of the sacred texts, gravity, sweetness, spirit, prowess and valour, the
brave Sahadeva is the equal of the gods who are the Ashvins. All the great qualities in Krishna and all the qualities
in the Pandavas, all those assembled qualities were to be seen in Abhimanyu. He was Yudhishthira's equal in patience, Krishna's in conduct, Bhimasena's in deeds and his equal in terrible feats, Dhananjaya's in beauty, valour
and learning, and Nakula and Sahadeva's in humility."

'Dhritarashtra said, "O suta[A suta is a charioteer, and those who looked after horses, tended to chariots and drove them were of the suta
class. Sanjaya was a suta.]! I wish to hear everything about how the invincible Abhimanyu, Subhadra's son,
was killed on the field of battle."

'Sanjaya replied, "O great king! The preceptor created the chakra vyuha. All the kings, who were Shakra's
equal, were assembled in it. There was an assembly of princes there. All of them had taken their pledges and their
standards were embellished with gold. All of them were attired in red garments and all of them had red ornaments.
All of them had red pennants and all of them wore golden garlands. There were ten thousand such, firm in wielding the bow. Your handsome grandson Lakshmana[Lakshmana was Duryodhana's son.] was at the forefront. They shared each other's misery and
were like each other in bravery. They sought to rival each other and were devoted to each other's welfare. The
king[Duryodhana.] was surrounded by maharatha Karna, Duhshasana and Kripa. With a white umbrella held aloft his head, he
was like the king of the gods in his beauty. He was fanned with whisks and was as radiant as the rising sun. The
leader, Drona, was stationed at the forefront of those soldiers. The king of Sindhu[Jayadratha.] was stationed there, handsome, and like Mount Meru. O great king! On the flank of the king of Sindhu were stationed thirty of your sons,
resembling the gods, and with Ashvatthama at the forefront. The maharathas-the gambler who was the king of
Gandhara[Shakuni.], Shalya and Bhurishrava-were stationed on the flank of the king of Sindhu[Presumably the other flank.]."'