'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! How is it that you know Madhava as the great lord of all the worlds? Why do I
not know that? Tell me this."

'Sanjaya replied, "O king! You do not possess the knowledge. But my knowledge is not lacking. Devoid of
knowledge and overcome by darkness, you do not know Keshava. O father[The word used is tata.]! Through this knowledge, I know
Madhusudana of the three yugas[Satya yuga, treta yuga and dvapara yuga.] as the god who is the creator and the end of all beings, though he has himself
not been created."

'Dhritarashtra asked, "O son of Gavalgana! What is the extent of the faith that you always have in Janardana, as
a result of which you know the Madusudana of the three yugas?"

'Sanjaya replied, "O fortunate one! I do not fall prey to maya. I do not pretend to act in accordance with dharma.
I become pure in sentiments through my faith. I know Janardana from the sacred texts."

'Dhritarashtra said, "O Duryodhana! Resort to Hrishikesha Janardana. O son! We have trust in Sanjaya. Seek
refuge with Keshava."

'Duryodhana replied, "If Keshava, Devaki's illustrious son, wishes to destroy the worlds, because of his avowed
friendship with Arjuna, I will not seek refuge with him, not even now."

'Dhritarashtra said, "O Gandhari! This son of yours is extremely evil in his mind. He is envious, wicked in soul
and insolently ignores the words of his superiors. He is proceeding towards his downfall."

'Gandhari said, "O one who is evil in soul[Addressing Duryodhana.]! You desire for prosperity. You do not listen to the instructions of
the seniors. You will lose your prosperity and your life. You do not pay heed to your father and me. You increase
the delight of your enemies and you also increase my sorrow. When you are killed by Bhimasena, you will remember these words of your father."

'Vyasa said, "O king! O Dhritarashtra! Listen to me. You are loved by Krishna. Sanjaya is your messenger and
he will yoke you to what will ensure your welfare. He knows the ancient and the new Hrishikesha[New in the form of Krishna.]. Listen to him
with great attention. He will free you from this great danger. O Vichitravirya's son! Men are confounded by the
darkness of anger and delight. Bound down by many different kinds of nooses, they are not content with their own
riches. Because of desire and ignorance, they repeatedly come under Yama's control. They are like ones without
eyes being led by ones without eyes and are borne by their own deeds. There is only one path followed by learned
ones. When one sees it, one overcomes death. Such a great person does not become attached."

'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! Tell me about the path along which there is no danger, traversing along which,
one attains Hrishikesha and obtains supreme peace."

'Sanjaya replied, "A man who has not controlled his soul cannot know Janardana, whose soul is controlled.
Without controlling the soul and without restraining the senses, the performance of rites is inappropriate. There is
no doubt that the unwavering renunciation of the senses, the steady abandonment of desire and the constant avoidance of violence constitute the womb of knowledge. O king! Constantly and steadily restrain your senses. Do not
permit your intelligence to deviate. Control and direct it. Learned brahmanas say that the mastering of the senses is
the certain path to knowledge. This is knowledge and the path that the learned ones traverse. O king! Keshava cannot be attained by those who have not controlled their senses. One who has controlled himself through yoga, and
knows the sacred texts, is one who is favoured."'
