'Gandhari said, "Look at Somadatta's son, brought down by Yuyudhana[Yuyudhana is Satyaki and Somadatta's son is Bhurishrava.]. O Madhava! From a close distance,
many birds are tugging away at him. O Janardana! On account of his son, Somadatta is tormented by sorrow and is
seen to be censuring Yuyudhana, the great archer. Bhurishrava's mother is overcome by grief. The unblemished
one is comforting her husband, Somadatta[There is a problem of consistency. Somadatta, Bhurishrava's father,
seems to be alive. But in the shlokas that immediately follow, he seems to
be dead. Satyaki's killing of Bhurishrava has been described in Section
Sixty Nine . In some non-Critical versions, following this, Satyaki  also
killed Somadatta.]. 'O great king! It is through good fortune that you have not seen this
terrible destruction of the Bharatas. This fearful carnage of the Kurus was like that at the end of a yuga. Your brave
son had a sacrificial altar on his standard and donated a lot. He performed many rites and sacrifices. It is through
good fortune that you have not seen him slain now. Your daughters-in-law are fearfully lamenting a lot, like female
cranes near an ocean. O great king! It is through good fortune that you do not hear them. They are clad in single
garments and the dark hair on their heads is dishevelled. With their sons slain, with their lord slain, the daughters-
in-law are running around. That tiger among men is being devoured by carnivorous beasts. His arm was severed
and brought down by Arjuna. It is good fortune that you are not seeing this. Together with Bhurishrava, Shala was
brought down in the battle[Shala, Bhurishrava's younger brother, was killed by Shatanika in Section
Sixty Nine.]. It is through good fortune that you do not see all your widowed daughters-in-law
now. Somadatta's great-souled son possessed a golden umbrella and a sacrificial altar on his standard. They were
shattered on the terrace of his chariot. It is good fortune that you have not seen this.' With Bhurishrava slain by
Satyaki, his dark-eyed wives have surrounded their husband. They are grieving. They are lamenting a lot, afflicted
by grief on account of their husband. O Keshava! They are falling downwards towards the ground. Alas! This is
terrible. How could Bibhatsu have performed such a fearful deed? The brave one performed sacrifices and while
he was distracted, he severed his arm[Arjuna severed Bhurishrava's arm while he was distracted in the sense
of fighting with another, that is, Satyaki. This has been described in Section 69 (Volume 6).]. Satyaki perpetrated a deed that was more wicked. He[Bhurishrava.] was attacked
when he had controlled his soul and was ready to give up his life. O Madhava! 'You followed dharma. You are
alone. But you were finally slain by two who followed adharma.' This is what the wives of the one with the sacrificial altar on his standard are screaming. The wife of the one who had a sacrificial altar on his standard has a waist
that can be circled by two hands[Earlier, the wives were in the plural. Here, it is in the singular.]. She has placed her husband's arm on her lap and is lamenting piteously. This
arm used to untie her girdle. It used to crush her thick breasts. That arm used to caress her navel, her thighs and her
loins and remove her lower garment. Partha is the performer of unblemished deeds. In Vasudeva's presence, while
he[Bhurishrava.] was fighting with another one in the battle and was distracted, he was brought down. That beautiful one may
be silent, but is censuring you. 'O Janardana! When you are in an assembly, what will you say and tell them? Will
you yourself say that Arjuna performed a great deed, or will the one with the diadem say so?' The co-wives are
sorrowing over their husband and her in the same way, as if they are her daughters-in-law[The co-wives are sorrowing both about Bhurishrava and about the principal wife.].

'"Shakuni, the king of Gandhara, was powerful. Truth was his valour. He was slain by Sahadeva, a maternal uncle by a sister's son[Shakuni was Gandhari's brother and this is maternal uncle by extension.]. He was earlier fanned with two whisks that had golden handles. He is now lying down and
is being fanned by the wings of birds. He used to perform many hundreds and thousands of different kinds of
maya. However, his maya has been consumed by the energy of the Pandavas. He was wise about deceit and vanquished Yudhishthira through the use of maya in the assembly hall[A reference to the gambling match.]. He won the extensive kingdom and has won
the right to be reborn. O Krishna! Birds have surrounded Shakuni on every side. The deceitful one became accomplished for the sake of bringing about the destruction of my sons. He is the one who was addicted to this great enmity with the Pandavas. He has brought about the death of my sons, his own self and that of his followers. O lord!
My sons have conquered worlds through their weapons. In that way, this evil-minded one has also won worlds
through weapons. O Madhusudana! Even there, because of his evil intelligence, he will create dissension between
my sons and the brothers."'
