'Sanjaya said, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! When the troops were withdrawn on the first day, Duryodhana
was delighted at having seen the enraged Bhishma in battle. With all his brothers and all the lords of the earth who
were on his side, Dharmaraja swiftly went to Janardana. O king! Having witnessed Bhishma's valour and overcome with great sorrow as he reflected on his defeat, he spoke to Varshneya. 'O Krishna! Behold the great archer
Bhishma, whose valour is terrible. He consumes my soldiers with his arrows, like a fire consumes dry grass. How
can we possibly glance at that great-souled one? He is licking up my soldiers, like a fire fed with oblations. On seeing that immensely strong tiger among men, armed with a bow, my soldiers are afflicted with arrows and flee. The
angry Yama, the wielder of the vajra, Varuna with the noose and Kubera with the club can be vanquished in battle.
But the immensely energetic and greatly strong Bhishma is incapable of being conquered. Without a boat, I am immersed in the fathomless waters of Bhishma. O Keshava! Because of the weakness of my own intelligence, I have
encountered Bhishma. O Govinda! It is better for me to retire to the forest and dwell there. I should not offer all
these lords of the earth to death, in Bhishma's form. O Krishna! Bhishma is knowledgeable about great weapons
and he will destroy my soldiers. Like insects dash into a blazing fire and are destroyed, my soldiers will advance
towards their destruction. O Varshneya! I have resorted to valour for the sake of a kingdom and am heading towards destruction. My brave brothers are afflicted, oppressed by arrows. Because of me and because of affection
towards their brother, they have been dislodged from their kingdom and from happiness. We place a great value on
life and now, life seems to be extremely difficult to attain. For the remaining part of my life, I will perform severe
austerities. O Keshava! I will not bring about the destruction of my friends in battle. With his divine weapons, the
immensely strong Bhishma incessantly kills many of my armed rathas, who are themselves foremost among the
wielders of arms. O Madhava! Swiftly tell me what should be done for my own welfare. I see Savyasachi stationed
in battle, as if he was a neutral spectator. Bhima alone remembers the dharma of kshatriyas. Using the valour of his
arms, the mighty-armed one fights to the best of his capability. To the best of his capacity, this great-minded one
kills warriors with his club. He performs difficult deeds on elephants, chariots, horses and infantry. O venerable
one! But even if he were to fight for a hundred years, in a fair fight, this brave one is incapable of destroying the
soldiers of the enemy. This friend of yours[Arjuna.] is alone knowledgeable about all weapons. On seeing us consumed
by Bhishma and the great-souled Drona, he looks on with indifference. Bhishma's divine weapons, and those of
the great-souled Drona, are repeatedly consuming all the kshatriyas. O Krishna! Such is Bhishma's valour that, if
he is enraged, together with all the kings on his side, he will certainly annihilate us. O lord of yoga! Look for a maharatha and great archer who can pacify Bhishma in battle, like clouds of rain against a conflagaration. O Govinda!
It is through your favours that the Pandavas will kill their enemies, regain their own kingdom and find delight with
their relatives.' Having said this, the great-souled Partha remained silent for a long time, deep in reflection and
with his senses robbed by misery.

'"On learning that Pandava was oppressed by sorrow, with his senses robbed by unhappiness, Govinda spoke,
delighting all the Pandavas. 'O foremost among the Bharata lineage! Do not sorrow. You should not sorrow when
all your brothers are brave and archers who are famous in all the worlds. O king! I am engaged in ensuring your
welfare and so are maharatha Satyaki, the aged Virata and Drupada and Parshata Dhrishtadyumna. O supreme
among kings! So are all these kings and their soldiers. O lord of the earth! They are waiting for your favours and
are devoted to you. The immensely strong Parshata Dhrishtadyumna has always been engaged in your welfare and
doing that which pleases you. He has been appointed as overall commander. The mighty-armed Shikhandi is certain to bring about Bhishma's death.' Having heard this, the king spoke to maharatha Dhrishtadyumna, in that assembly and in Vasudeva's hearing. 'O Dhrishtadyumna! O venerable one! Listen to what I am telling you. You
should not transgress the words that I will speak. With Vasudeva's approval, you are our supreme commander. O
bull among men! You are the commander of the soldiers of Pandu, just as in earlier times, Kartikeya always was
that of the gods. O tiger among men! Display your valour and kill the Kouravas. O venerable one! O bull among
men! I will follow you, Bhima and Krishna, together with the sons of Madri and the armoured sons of Droupadi,
and the foremost among all the other lords of the earth.' Delighting everyone, Dhrishtadyumna replied, 'O Partha!
In earlier times, I have been ordained by Shambhu as the one who will kill Drona. O lord of the earth! I will now
fight in battle with Bhishma, Drona, Shalya, Jayadratha and all the others intoxicated at the prospect of battle.'

When that great archer, the Parshata who was unassailable in battle, the destroyer of brave ones and an Indra
among kings, spoke in this way, everyone loudly applauded.

'"Partha told Parshata, the commander of the army, 'The vyuha[A vyuha is the arrangement of troops in battle formation.] known by the name of Krouncharuna is the
destroyer of all enemies[Krouncha is a curlew or osprey. So this vyuha was in the form of a bird.]. When the gods and the asuras fought in earlier times, Brihaspati told this to Indra.
Therefore, deploy this battle formation, which is destructive of enemy soldiers. This has not been seen before. Let
the kings, together with the Kurus, now see it.' Having been thus addressed by that god among men, like Vishnu
speaking to the wielder of the vajra, when it was morning, he placed Dhananjaya in the forefront of the entire
army. His[Arjuna's.] standard had been constructed by Vishvakarma on Indra's[The text uses the name Puruhuta. Puruhuta is one of Indra's names and means one who is worshipped by many.] instruction and it was extremely beautiful as it fluttered in the path of the sun. It was decorated with flags and possessed the complexion of Indra's
weapon[In this context, by Indra's weapon, one means Indra's bow. The rainbow is described as Indra's bow. Hence, the
standard had the complexion of a rainbow.]. It coursed through the sky like a traveller of the skies and was like a city of the gandharvas. O venerable one! It seemed to be dancing along, along the path that the chariot took. Partha, the wielder of Gandiva, was
adorned with this jewel. He was adorned with it, like the self-creating one[Brahma.] is with the sun. King Drupada was at
the head, surrounded by a large army. O lord of men! Kuntibhoja and Chedi were the two eyes[Of the bird.]. O bull among
the Bharata lineage! Dasharnas, Prayagas, together with masses of Dasherakas, Anupakas and Kiratas were the
neck. O king! Together with Patachcharas, Hundas, Pouravakas and Nishadas, Yudhishthira was the back. Bhimasena, Parshata Dhrishtadyumna, Droupadi's sons, Abhimanyu and maharatha Satyaki were the wings. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were Pishachas, Daradas, Pundras, together with Kundivishas, Madakas,
Ladakas, Tanganas, the further Tanganas, Bahlikas, Tittiras, Cholas and Pandyas. O king! These countries formed
the right wing. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Agniveshyas, Jagatundas, Paladashas, Shabaras, Tumbupas,
Vatsas, together with the Nakulas[This is Naakulas, not to be confused with the Pandava Nakula.], Nakula and Sahadeva resorted to the left wing. There were ten thousand chariots on the joints of the wings, a hundred thousand on the head, a hundred million and twenty thousand on the back
and one hundred and seventy thousand on the neck. O king! There were many elephants, like mobile mountains,
on the joints of the wings, the wings and the tips of the wings. The rear was protected by Virata, together with
Kekaya, the king of Kashi and Shaibya[The king of Chedi.] and thirty thousand chariots. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thus
did the Pandavas constitute a great vyuha and having clad themselves in armour and stationed themselves in battle,
waited for the sun to rise. Their white umbrellas were radiant and had the hue of the sun. They were giant and unblemished and adorned their elephants and chariots."'
