Yudhishthira asked, "O lord of men! O great king! If the other three varnas find it extremely difficult to become a brahmana, how did the great-souled kshatriya, Vishvamitra, with dharma in his soul, become a brahmana? O grandfather! I wish to hear the truth about this. Please tell me. O great grandfather! Through his austerities and infinite valour, the great-souled one instantly killed one hundred of Vasishtha's sons. When anger entered
his body, he created many yatudhanas[Evil spirits or demons.] and rakshasas who were fierce in their energy. They were like the Destroyer himself. There were hundreds of brahmana rishis in the great lineage of Kushika[Vishvamitra was born as a kshatriya and was the great-grandson of a king named Kusha. Thus, Vishvamitra is
also known as Kushika or Koushika. His father was Gadhi.]. Having established this lineage in the world of men, he was praised by the learned brahmanas. The great ascetic, Shunahshepa, was Richika's
son. He was treated like an animal at a great sacrifice and was freed by him[Freed by Vishvamitra.]. The energetic Harishchandra performed a sacrifice and pleased the gods, thus becoming the intelligent Vishvamitra's son. O lord of men! Because
they did not honour their eldest, Devarata, fifty of his sons were cursed and became shvapakas[The offspring of mritapas, and chandalas, are shvapakas, and they are extremely vile. Mritapas are also outcastes.]. Trishanku, the
son of Ikshvaku, was abandoned by his relatives. However, he[Vishvamitra.] affectionately conveyed him to heaven, with his
head hanging downwards. Vishvamitra created a large, pure and sacred river named Koushiki and this was frequented by the rajarshis and also frequented by the brahmana rishis. There was the apsara named Rambha, who
had five tufts of hair and was extremely beautiful. However, because she disturbed his austerities, she was cursed
and turned into stone. In ancient times, because he was scared of him, Vasishtha submerged himself in the water
and rose after he had been freed from his bonds. That is the reason the sacred and large river came to be known as
Vipasha[Vipasha means something that releases from bonds (pasha). This is the river Beas.].  This  was  a  famous  deed  the  great-souled  one  performed  for  Vasishtha's  sake.  The lord praised and
pleased the eloquent and illustrious one who was at the forefront of the army of the gods and thus freed himself
from the curse[This is left unclear. It probably refers to Vishvamitra eventually becoming a brahmana. When this happens, Brahma (presumably the eloquent and illustrious one) arrives, with all the gods following him. Brahma declares that
Vishvamitra will henceforth be a brahmana rishi and gives him the name of Vishvamitra.]. He always blazes in the northern direction in the midst of the brahmana rishis and Uttanpada's
son, Dhruva[Dhruva was Uttanpada's son and became the Pole Star. The saptarshis constitute the constellation Ursa Major
(Great Bear).]. O Kourava! These and many others are his deeds. This is despite his being born as a kshatriya and I
am curious about this. O bull among the Bharata lineage! How did this happen? Tell me the truth about this. Without taking birth in another body, how did he become a brahmana? O king! You should tell me the entire truth about
this. Tell me the truth about Matanga too. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Having been born in the womb of a
chandala, Matanga did not obtain the status of a brahmana. How did he[Vishvamitra.] then become a brahmana?"'
