'Bhagavan said, "I have listened to Sanjaya's words and I have also heard your words. I know everything about
their intentions and I also know what you have in mind. Your intelligence is based on dharma. Their minds are
turned towards enmity. You will cherish everything that can be gained without resorting to a war. O lord of the
earth! But following rituals is not the task of a kshatriya. In all the stages of life, it has been said that a kshatriya
should not resort to begging for a livelihood. Victory or death on the field of battle has been eternally ordained by
the creator. This is the natural dharma of kshatriyas and weakness in that is not praised. O Yudhishthira! It is not
possible to have a livelihood by resorting to weakness. O mighty-armed one! Display your valour. O scorcher of
enemies! Conquer the foes. O scorcher of enemies! The sons of Dhritarashtra are extremely avaricious. They have
obtained affection, they have obtained friends and they have obtained strength by living with them[The likes of Bhishma, Drona and Kripa.] for a long
time. O lord of the earth! Therefore, peace with the Kurus is not desirable. Because of Bhisma, Drona, Kripa and
the others, they think themselves to be stronger. O king! As long as you act mildly towards them, they will take
your kingdom away. O destroyer of enemies! Dhritarashtra's son will not do what you wish, because of kindness,
because of compassion, or because of dharma and artha. O destroyer of enemies! O Pandava! This alone is proof,
that they left you in a loincloth, and did not repent their evil deed. In the sight of the grandfather, Drona, the intelligent Vidura and the foremost among the Kurus, who knew exactly what had happened, that wicked one did not repent his cruel deeds. You are generous, mild, self-controlled and follow dharma. O king! But he used deceit to defeat you in a game of dice. O king! When one's conduct is of this nature, do not resort to affection. They deserve to
be killed by all the worlds. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Why not by you? Insolent and delighted, he eloquently maligned you and your brothers and told his brothers, 'The Pandavas have nothing that they can call their
own now. Their names and their lineages will not survive either. After a long period of time has passed, they will
confront defeat. Their subjects will no longer honour them. Their natural subjects have also been destroyed.' He
uttered such harsh words and many others. He boasted among his relatives, when you were banished to the forest.
Those who were assembled there, saw that you were without blame. They were seated in the assembly hall, their
throats choked with tears and they wept. The kings and the brahmanas did not praise him then. All the courtiers
censured Duryodhana. O destroyer of enemies! For someone born in a noble lineage, there can be censure and
there can be death. O king! But death is several times superior to a reviled and wicked life. O king! He has been
dead since the instant he was censured for his shamelessness before all the kings of the earth. O great king! One
whose conduct is of this nature can be killed effortlessly, like a tree whose roots have been severed, so that it is
precariously balanced on its trunk. The evil-minded one is ignoble to all the worlds and should be killed, like a
snake. O destroyer of enemies! O king! Therefore, kill him and do not hesitate.

'"O unblemished one! But it pleases me, and is also worthy of you, that you should bow in obeisance and show
your respects to your father[Dhritarashtra.] and Bhishma. O king! I will myself go and resolve the doubts of all those who are in
two minds about Duryodhana. In the midst of the kings, I will expound your manly qualities and his transgressions
of these. On hearing my words, in conformity with dharma and artha, the lords of the earth and the kings from the
various countries will recognize you to possess dharma in your soul, and one who speaks the truth. They will know
that he acts out of avarice. When the four varnas are assembled, among the old and the young, among inhabitants
of the town and the country, I will censure him. When you are striving for peace, no adharma will be attached to
you. The kings will blame the Kurus and Dhritarashtra. When he is forsaken by all the worlds, what will be left to
be done? O king! With Duryodhana slain, there remains nothing else to be done. With this intention, I will go the
Kurus. I will not relinquish your objective. I will strive for peace and notice their intentions. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Having observed the conduct and preparations of the Kouravas for war, I will leave and return to
ensure your victory. In every way, I expect a war with the enemies. It seems to me that all the portents indicate
that. The beasts and the birds are making terrible sounds. When it is night, the foremost of elephants and horses are
assuming terrible forms. Signifying evil, the fire is assuming many colourful and terrible forms. Had death not arrived to destroy the world of men, this would not have been the case. Ready the weapons, arrows, armour, chariots,
elephants and standards. Let all the warriors be trained. Let them ready the horses, elephants and chariots. O Indra
among men! Let everything be ready for battle. Let everything be kept ready. O king! O foremost among the Pandavas! As long as he lives, Duryodhana is incapable of returning the prosperous kingdom that was once yours, and
which he robbed in the gambling with the dice."'
