'Yudhishthira asked, "O grandfather! What should be the conduct of those who are officiating priests and how
should they endeavour? O Indra among kings! O supreme among eloquent ones! What kind of people should they
be?"

'Bhishma replied, "From ancient times, the tasks and conduct of officiating priests have been laid down. They
must first be knowledgeable about sacred hymns[Or metres, chhanda.] and the learning of brahmanas. They must always be patient
and firm in this one task[Of acting as officiating priest.]. They must not be unpleasant in speech. They must be affectionate towards each
other[Other priests.]. They must be revered and must look on everyone equally. They must possess attributes of non-injury,
truthfulness, non-violence, austerities, uprightness, lack of hatred, lack of ego, modesty, forbearance, self-control
and tranquility. A person who is modest, truthful, patient, self-controlled, non-injurious towards beings, without
desire and harted, possessing the three sparkling qualities[Knowledge of the three Vedas. Alternatively, knowledge of the Vedas,
good conduct and lineage.], non-violent and content with knowledge alone-is
said to be worthy of Brahma's seat. O son! These are great officiating priests and all of these must be honoured in
the proper way."

'Yudhishthira said, "The words of the Vedas stipulate the giving of dakshina. They say that it must be given. But
nothing is said about when that giving is enough. Nor do the sacred texts say enough about riches, for example,
what is in accordance with the sacred texts in times of distress[Apad dharma is about dharma in times of distress or hardship. The sacred texts are about standard dharma and have less to say about times of
distress.]. The commands of the sacred texts are terrible,
because they do not look towards the capacity of the giver[Who may have limited capacity in times of distress.]. The ordinances of the Vedas only say that one must
faithfully perform sacrifices. However, what will devotion achieve when the sacrifice is performed falsely[This falsehood is in a very specific sense of limited dakshina because of
distress. Instead of a cow, food is given. Instead of garments, a piece of
barley is given. Instead of gold, a copper coin is given.]?"
'Bhishma replied, "One cannot obtain greatness by disrespecting the Vedas, deceit or fraud. You should not
think in this way. O son! Dakshina is a part of sacrifice and extend the Vedas. Devoid of dakshina, mantras can
never render salvation. However, the capacity to give one full vessel should also be honoured. O son! Therefore,
all the three varnas must perform sacrifices in the proper way. The ordinances of the Vedas say that for brahmanas,
the king is like soma. One should not try to sell it, since such a means of earning a living is fruitless[For the sake of earning a living, one should not sell soma.]. If the sacrifice is performed in this way, it will be as if dharma has been sold. The rishis who are learned about dharma have
spoken about dharma in this way. The person, the sacrifice and soma must be in accordance with what is proper. A
man who has improper conduct is of no use to himself or to others. We have heard it in the sacred texts that the
body constitutes the vessels of the sacrifice. For that reason, conducted properly, only great-souled brahmanas
must be engaged. The supreme among the learned texts decrees that austerities are superior to sacrifices. O learned
one! Therefore, I will tell you about austerities. Listen to me. Non-violence, truthfulness, lack of injury, self-control and compassion-the learned and the patient know that these are austerities, not the drying up of the body. Not
accepting the proof of the Vedas, transgressing the sacred texts and chaos everywhere-these destroy the soul. O
Partha! Listen to what has been said about oblations in sacrifices that last for ten days. Consciousness is the ladle.
Thoughts are clarified butter. Supreme knowledge is the pavitra[Pavitra is two blades of sacred grass, used to sprinkle clarified butter on
the fire.]. All kinds of deceit represent death. All kinds
of uprightness represent the objective of the brahman. All this is actually in the realm of the unknown. What purpose will words accomplish?"'
