'Gandhari said, "O Madhava! O Dasharha! He was as proud and haughty as a lion[This is a reference to Abhimanyu.]. He was said to possess one-
and-a-half times the qualities, strength and valour of his father and you. He single-handedly penetrated the extremely impenetrable battle formation of my son. He was the one who caused death to others, but has himself
come under the subjugation of death. O Krishna! He was Krishna's[Meaning Arjuna's.] son and was infinitely energetic. I see that
though Abhimanyu has been slain, his radiance has not diminished. This daughter of Virata's[Uttara.] is the daughter-inlaw of the wielder of Gandiva. This distressed child is sorrowing over her brave husband. The unblemished one is
grieving. O Krishna! With her husband dead, the wife, Virata's daughter, has approached him and is wiping his
face with her hands. The neck of Subhadra's son has three lines[The text uses the word kambu, which can be translated as a neck with three
lines, or as a neck that is like a conch shell.] and the face above it is like a blooming lotus.
The illustrious one[Uttara.] is inhaling its fragrance. The beautiful one is desirable in her beauty and is embracing him.
She used to be bashful earlier. But she has now lost her senses, as if she has drunk madhvika liquor. O Krishna!
She has removed the golden armour and is glancing at his body, covered with wounds. O Krishna! The child is
glancing at him and speaking to you. 'O Pundarikaksha! This one had eyes like yours and has been brought down.
O unblemished one! He was your equal in strength, valour and energy. He was your equal in beauty. But he has
been brought down and is lying down on the ground. He was extremely delicate and was used to lying down on the
skins of ranku deer. His body is on the ground now. Does it not cause torment? With armlets, his hands are like the
trunks of elephants, hardened from bowstrings. As he is lying down, with golden bracelets, those large arms are
outstretched. He is certainly sleeping happily, tired out through many kinds of exertion. As I am lamenting in grief,
he is not speaking to me at all. Where has the noble one gone, abandoning the noble Subhadra, his fathers, who are
like the gods, and the grief-stricken me?' She has placed his head on her lap, as if he is still alive, and is removing
the blood-smeared hair with her hands. She is asking, 'You are Vasudeva's sister's son. You are the son of the
wielder of Gandiva. In the midst of the battle, how could those maharathas slay you? Shame on the perpetrators of
that cruel deed-Kripa, Karna, Jayadratha, Drona and Dronayani[Ashvatthama.]. They have caused this hardship. Did all those
bulls among rathas not possess hearts? They surrounded a child and killed him and brought me this sorrow. The
Pandavas and the Panchalas were looking. Though he possessed protectors, how was that brave one killed, as if he
had no protectors? On seeing that he was killed by many, as if he had no protector, how is the brave Pandava[Referring to Arjuna.],
tiger among men, still alive? Without the lotus-eyed one, how will the Parthas obtain any delight from getting this
large kingdom or from the defeat of their enemies? You have earned worlds through your weapons, your dharma
and your self-control. Let me swiftly follow you there and protect me there. It is always extremely difficult to die
before one's time has come. I am extremely unfortunate. Despite seeing you slain in the battle, I am still alive. O
tiger among men! You have gone to the world of the ancestors. In a gentle and smiling voice, which beautiful one
will you greet there, as if she were I? In heaven, there is no doubt that you will crush the hearts of the apsaras, with
your great beauty and your smiling words. O Subhadra's son! When you attain those auspicious worlds and meet
the apsaras and spend time in pleasure with them, remember the good deeds that I did. O brave one! You were destined to spend only six months of your life with me[Abhimanyu and Uttara were married six months before the war.]. In the seventh month, you have confronted your death.' As
she is speaking these miserable and pointless words, the women of the Matsya king's[Meaning Virata.] lineage are pulling Uttara
away. Having pulled the grief-stricken Uttara away, they are themselves overcome with sorrow, on seeing that Vi-
rata has been killed. They are weeping and lamenting. He is lying down, covered with blood, mangled by Drona's
arrows. Virata is being torn apart by vultures, jackals and crows. Those dark-eyed ones are helpless and distressed
and are incapable of restraining those birds from tearing Virata apart. Those women have been scorched by the sun
and are exhausted from their endeavours. They are pale and their bodies have lost their beauty. Look at the children who have been killed-Uttara[Virata's son, Uttara, not the daughter, Uttaraa.], Abhimanyu, Sudakshina from Kamboja[This does not fit. Sudakshina from Kamboja was killed by Arjuna in Section
Sixty Nine (Volume 6). However, he was not a child.] and the handsome Lakshmana. O
Madhava! Behold. They are lying down in the forefront of the warriors."'
