Janamejaya asked, 'O illustrious one! While Vasudeva looked on, how were the Andhakas, the Vrishnis and the
maharatha Bhojas destroyed?'

Vaishampayana replied, 'After thirty-six years passed, there was a great destruction of the Vrishnis. Goaded by
destiny, they killed each other with clubs.'

Janamejaya asked, 'Who cursed the brave Vrishnis, Andhakas and Bhojas and caused their destruction? O best
of brahmanas! Tell me in detail.'

Vaishampayana said, 'One day, those brave ones, Sarana and the others[Sarana was the son of Vasudeva (Krishna's father) and Bhadra. Samba was the son of Krishna and Jambavati. The
Bhojas were descended from Babhru, so any of the Bhojas could be addressed as Babhru.], saw Vishvamitra, Kanva and Narada,
store  of  austerities,  when  they  came  to  Dvaraka.  They  placed  Samba  ahead  of  them  and  dressed  him  up  as  a
woman. Goaded by the rod of destiny, they approached them and said, "This is the wife of the infinitely energetic
Babhru and desires a son. O rishis! O virtuous ones! Do you know how she can give birth?" O king! Speaking in
this way, they sought to deceive those brahmanas. O lord of men! Listen to what those sages said in reply. "Vasudeva's son, Samba, will give birth to a terrible and iron club for the destruction of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas. You are evil in conduct, cruel and insolent. With the exception of Rama and Janardana, you will exterminate
your entire lineage. The one with the plough as his weapon[Balarama.] will go to the ocean and cast aside his handsome body
there. When the great-souled Krishna is lying down on the ground, Jara will pierce him." They spoke in this way to
the evil-souled ones who had tried to deceive them. The eyes of the sages were red with rage and they glanced towards each other. Having said this, the sages went off to see Keshava.

'Madhusudana told the Vrishnis what he had heard. The intelligent one knew about the end and told them that it
would indeed happen in this way. Having told them this, Hrishikesha again entered his own house. The lord of the
universe did not desire that the end should come about in any other way. Next day, Samba gave birth to a club.
This was for the destruction of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas and looked like Yama's giant messenger[The text does not mention Yama. We have introduced it for clarity.]. Because
of the terrible curse, he gave birth to this and this was reported to the king[Ugrasena. Ugrasena was Ahuka's son. In the proclamation, Ahuka means Ahuka's son, not Ahuka himself.]. The king was distressed and instructed
that this should be crushed into tiny fragments. On the instructions of the king, men flung these into the ocean.
Ahuka's instructions were proclaimed throughout the city. "From today, for all the residents of the city, in the
houses of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas, there will be no drinking of liquor. If there is any man who does not listen to this and prepares liquor, he will himself be impaled alive on a stake and so will his relatives." Out of fear for
the king, everyone followed this rule. The men obeyed the commands of the great-souled king.'
