Souti said, 'When the illustrious king uttered these words, the ministers approved and the king took an oath that he
would undertake a snake-sacrifice. The lord of the earth, Parikshit's son and the king who was a tiger of the Bharata lineage, then summoned his priest and officiating priests who knew about the sacrifice. He who was eloquent in
the uttered words that would make the deed successful said, "I must act against the evil Takshaka who brought violence to my father. Please tell me what I must do. Do you know of an act whereby the snake Takshaka and his relatives can be hurled into the blazing fire? Just as my father was earlier burnt with the poison, I wish to burn that evil
snake." The officiating priests replied, "O king! There is a sacrifice that the gods have recommended for those like
you. It is known as the snake-sacrifice and it is described in the ancient tales. O lord of men! No one but you can
offer this sacrifice. Those who know the ancient tales have told us there is such a sacrifice and we know it." O
supreme one! Thus addressed, the rajarshi thought that Takshaka had already been hurled into the mouth of a blazing fire and burnt.

'The king then told the Brahmanas who were learned in the mantras, "I will perform the sacrifice. Collect the
required ingredients." O supreme among the Brahmanas! Thereupon the officiating priests, who were hard in their
resolve and learned in the shastras, measured out a piece of land as the sacrificial platform, in accordance with the
prescribed rites. It was graced by the presence of many learned Brahmanas and adorned with every valuable object, abundant quantities of riches and foodgrains. Before the snake-sacrifice could begin, they then instated the
king on this sacrificial platform.

'Earlier, when the sacrificial platform was being built and the sacrifice had not started, a great incident occurred
that suggested the sacrifice might be disrupted. There was a man who was a suta. He was an extremely wise
builder and one who was skilled in the knowledge of architecture. He was also a raconteur of ancient tales. This
bard said, "The land on which the platform was constructed and the time at which it was measured indicate that
this sacrifice will not be completed. A Brahmana will be the cause." On hearing this, before being instated, the
king instructed the door-keeper that no one should be allowed entry without his knowledge.

'The snake-sacrifice then started according to the prescribed norms. The officiating priests, who were learned in
their respective duties, went about prescribed tasks. They dressed themselves in black garments and their eyes became red from the smoke. Chanting mantras, they offered oblations into the sacrificial fire. As they poured obla-
tions into the mouth of the fire and uttered the names of the snakes, the hearts of the snakes trembled in fear.
Thereafter, the snakes dropped into the blazing flames, wretched and screaming piteously at each other. They
swelled, breathed hard and intertwined their heads and tails. In large numbers, they fell into the blazing fire-
white, black, blue, old and young. Crying out terrible screams, they fell into the lofty and blazing flames, in hundreds, thousands, millions and tens of millions. O supreme among Brahmanas! Many snakes perished powerless.
Among those which perished, some were small as rats, others large as trunks of elephants, or gigantic and immensely strong like mad elephants. Snakes of many colours, poisonous, terrible, like clubs and with immense
strength, fell into the fire in large numbers, as a consequence of their mother's curse.'
