Vaishampayana said, 'He saw his dead brothers, as glorious as Shakra, like dislodged guardians of the world[Lokapalas.]
when the end of the yuga had arrived. He saw Arjuna dead, with his bow and arrows scattered and Bhimasena and
the twins, motionless and bereft of life. He shed tears of sorrow and breathed hot and deep sighs. Using his intelligence, he began to think. "Who has killed these brave ones? There are no marks of weapons on them. Nor are
there any signs of footprints. I think it must be a great being that has killed my brothers in this way. I must reflect
on this with concentration. Perhaps I will find out after drinking the water. Perhaps this is a deed that has been undertaken by Duryodhana, who cannot differentiate between what should be done and what should not be done, in
secret, always aided by the wicked-minded king of Gandhara[Shakuni.]. No brave person can trust that evil one, whose
soul has not been perfected. Or perhaps that evil-souled one has employed secret servants." Thus the mighty-
armed one thought in many ways. But he did not think that the water was tainted through poison. He thought, "The
faces of my brothers are healthy in complexion. These men are excellent and each one of them is capable of withstanding the shock of a flood of water. Who but Yama, the arbiter of destiny, can subjugate them?" Reflecting in
this way, he entered the water. As he entered, he heard these words from the sky.

'The yaksha said, "I am a crane that lives on aquatic plants and fish. I have taken your younger brothers to the
land of the dead. O prince! If you do not answer my questions, you will be the fifth. O son[The word used is tata, which means son. But it is affectionately used for anyone who is younger.]! Do not be foolish
enough to do this. I have obtained possession of this earlier. O Kounteya! Answer my questions. Then drink and
take the water."

'Yudhishthira said, "Are you the foremost among the Rudras, the Vasus or the Maruts? I am asking you. Which
god are you? This is not the task of a bird[The yaksha has said that he is a crane.]. Who is the greatly energetic one who has felled these four
mountains[The four Pandavas.]-Himalaya, Pariyatra, Vindhya and Malaya? O supreme among those who are strong! You have performed an extremely great deed. The gods, the gandharvas, the asuras and the rakshasas are incapable of withstanding them in a great battle. You have accomplished something that is extraordinary. I do not know what you
are doing. Nor do I know your intentions. I am greatly curious, but I am also overwhelmed by fright. You are consuming my heart and have brought fever to my head. O illustrious one! I am asking you. Who are you, established
here?"

'The yaksha replied, "I am a yaksha. I am not an aquatic bird. It is I who killed all your greatly energetic brothers."'

Vaishampayana said, 'O king! On hearing these inauspicious words spoken by the yaksha in a harsh voice, he
approached nearby and stood there. The bull among the Bharata lineage saw the yaksha, with malformed eyes and
gigantic in form, as tall as a tala tree. He was as fiery as the fire and the sun and was invincible like a mountain.
The immensely strong one stood on a mound and censured him in a voice that was as deep as the roar of thunder.
The yaksha said, "O king! These brothers of yours were repeatedly restrained by me. But they tried to drink the
water by force and I killed them. O king! This water should not be drunk by someone who desires his life. O
Partha! Do not be foolish. I have obtained possession of this earlier. O Kounteya! Answer my questions. Then
drink and take." Yudhishthira replied, "O yaksha! I do not desire what you have possessed earlier. Learned men
never praise such desires, nor should men praise themselves on their own. O lord! Ask me. I will answer according
to my wisdom."

'The yaksha asked, "What makes the sun rise and who are those near him? What makes him set and on what is
he established?"

'Yudhishthira replied, "Brahma makes the sun rise and the gods remain near him. Dharma makes him set and he
is established in truth."

'The yaksha asked, "How does one become learned? How does one attain greatness? O king! How does one obtain a second? How does one become intelligent?"

'Yudhishthira replied, "One becomes learned through the sacred texts[Specifically, the shrutis or revealed texts.]. One attains greatness through austerities. One obtains a second through perseverance[The word used is dvitiyavana, meaning one who has a second. But the meaning remains obscure. However,
dvitiya also means the second in a family, that is, a son. Perhaps the sense is that one obtains a son through
perseverance.]. One becomes intelligent by serving the elders."

'The yaksha asked, "What is the divine trait of brahmanas? What dharma of theirs is like that of the virtuous?
What are their human traits? Which of their traits are like that of those without virtue?"

'Yudhishthira replied, "The study of the Vedas is their divine trait. Austerities are like that of the virtuous. Mortality is their human trait. Slander is like the conduct of those without virtue."

'The yaksha asked, "What is the divine trait of kshatriyas? What dharma of theirs is like that of the virtuous?
What are their human traits? Which of their traits are like that of those without virtue?"

'Yudhishthira replied, "Arrows and weapons are their divine traits. Sacrifices are like that of the virtuous. Fear is
their human trait. Desertion is like the conduct of those without virtue."

'The yaksha asked, "Which is the single sacrificial chant? What is the sacrificial formula? What do sacrifices
need? And what can sacrifices not transgress?"

'Yudhishthira replied, "The breath of life[Prana.] is the single sacrificial chant. The mind is the sacrificial formula.
Sacrifices need speech. Sacrifices cannot transgress speech."

'The yaksha asked, "What is the best among those that descend? What is supreme among those that are sown?
What is the best among those that stand? What is supreme among those that speak?"

'Yudhishthira replied, "Rain is best among those that descend. Seeds are supreme among those that are sown.
Cows are best among those that stand. Sons are supreme among those that speak[The critical edition uses the word pravadatam, meaning those who speak. Some other versions use the word
prasavatam, meaning those who are born. Since the answer is a son, the latter fits better than the former.]."
'The yaksha asked, "Who experiences the objects of the senses, is intelligent, is worshipped by all the beings in
the world and breathes, but is not alive?"

'Yudhishthira replied, "A person who does not render offerings to the five-gods, guests, servants, ancestors and
himself-breathes, but is not alive."

'The yaksha asked, "What is heavier than the earth? What is higher than the sky? What is swifter than the wind?
What is more numerous than men?"

'Yudhishthira replied, "The mother is heavier than the earth. The father is higher than the sky. The mind is
swifter than the wind. Worries are more numerous than men[The critical edition uses the word nrinam, meaning men. Some other versions use the word trinam, meaning
grass. Grass does fit better than men.]."
'The yaksha asked, "What does not close its eyes while asleep? What does not move when it is born? What has
no heart? What grows through speeding?"

'Yudhishthira replied, "A fish does not close its eyes while asleep. An egg does not move when it is born. A
stone has no heart. A river grows through speeding."

'The yaksha asked, "Who is a friend to one who is travelling? Who is a friend at home? Who is a friend to one
who is sick? Who is a friend to one who is about to die?"

'Yudhishthira replied, "A caravan is a friend to a traveller. A wife is a friend at home. A physician is a friend to
one who is sick. Charity is a friend to one who is about to die."

'The yaksha asked, "What travels alone? What is born again after birth? What is a cure for cold? What is the
greatest field?"

'Yudhishthira replied, "The sun travels alone. The moon is born again after birth. Fire is the cure for cold. The
earth is the greatest field."

'The yaksha asked, "In a single word, what is dharma? In a single word, what is fame? In a single word, what is
heaven? In a single word, what is happiness?"

'Yudhishthira replied, "In a single word, dexterity is dharma. In a single word, generosity is fame. In a single
word, truth is heaven. In a single word, conduct is happiness."

'The yaksha asked, 'What is a man's self? What is the friend given by destiny? What is the support of his life?
What is the best refuge?"

'Yudhishthira replied, "A son is a man's self. The wife is the friend given by destiny. Rains are the support of his
life. Generosity is the best refuge."

'The yaksha asked, "What is supreme among objects that are lauded? What is supreme among riches? What is
the supreme gain? What is supreme happiness?"

'Yudhishthira replied, "Dexterity is supreme among objects that are lauded. Knowledge of the sacred texts is
supreme among riches. Health is the supreme gain. Satisfaction is supreme happiness."

'The yaksha asked, "What is supreme dharma in this world? What dharma always leads to fruits? What does not
grieve when it is controlled? What alliance never breaks?"

'Yudhishthira replied, "Non-violence is supreme dharma. The dharma of the three[The three Vedas-Rig Veda, Sama Veda and Atharva Veda.] always leads to fruits. The
mind does not grieve when it is controlled. An alliance with the righteous never breaks."

'The yaksha asked, "If abandoned, what makes one pleasant? If abandoned, what does not lead to sorrow? If
abandoned, what ensures prosperity? If abandoned, what makes one happy?"

'Yudhishthira replied, "The abandoning of pride makes one pleasant. The abandoning of anger does not lead to
sorrow. The abandoning of desire ensures prosperity. The abandoning of desire makes one happy."

'The yaksha asked, "When is a man dead? When is a kingdom dead? When is a funeral ceremony dead? When
is a sacrifice dead?"

'Yudhishthira replied, "A poor man is dead. A kingdom without a king is dead. A funeral ceremony performed
without a learned brahmana is dead. A sacrifice without dakshina is dead."

'The yaksha asked, "What is the right direction? What is spoken of as water? O Partha! What is food and what
is poison? What is the right time for a funeral ceremony? Then you can drink and take[The water.]."
'Yudhishthira replied, "The virtuous are the right direction. The sky is water. The cow is food. A request is poison. A brahmana is the best time for a funeral sacrifice[Meaning brahma muhurta, those specific times of the day that are regarded as being presided over by the
brahmana. They occur towards the early part of the day.]. O yaksha! What do you think?"

'The yaksha said, "O scorcher of enemies! You have answered all my questions correctly. Tell me. Who is a
man? Which man possesses all riches?"

'Yudhishthira replied, "The reputation of good deeds touches heaven and earth. As long as that reputation remains, one is said to be a man. One to whom the pleasant and the unpleasant, happiness and unhappiness and the
past and the future are equal, is a man who possesses all riches."

'The yaksha said, "O king! You have explained who is a man and which man possesses all riches. Therefore one
of your brothers, whichever one you wish, will live."

Yudhishthira replied, "O yaksha! Nakula is dark, with red eyes, mighty arms and a broad chest. He is as tall as a
shala tree. He will live."

'The yaksha said, "You love Bhimasena and you depend on Arjuna. O king! Why do you then wish Nakula, who
is your stepbrother, to be alive? Bhima has strength equal to ten thousand elephants. Why do you discard him and
wish Nakula to live? People say that Bhimasena is your beloved. Out of what sentiments do you wish your stepbrother to live? All the Pandavas depend on the strength of Arjuna's arms. But you discard him and wish Nakula to
live."

'Yudhishthira replied, "Non-violence is supreme dharma. It is my view that this is the supreme objective. I am
attracted to non-violence. O yaksha! Nakula shall live. Men know of me as a king who always follows dharma. I
will not deviate from my own dharma. O yaksha! Let Nakula live. Madri is like Kunti and I see no difference between the two. I wish the same for both my mothers. O yaksha! Let Nakula live."

'The yaksha replied, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! Since you think that non-violence is superior to artha
and kama, all of your brothers will be restored to life."'
