'Sanjaya said, "Wishing to kill the king of Sindhu, Kounteya penetrated. He shattered Drona's array and the irresistible array of Bhoja. O king! Sudakshina, the heir of Kamboja, was slain. The valiant Shrutayudha was also
killed by Savyasachi. On seeing that the soldiers were scattered and routed in every direction and that his own
army was destroyed, your son went to Drona. He swiftly approached Drona on a single chariot and said, 'That
tiger among men has shattered this giant army and has departed[In his search for Jayadratha.]. Use your intelligence to reflect on what should
be done after this. Given this terrible slaughter of people, how do we kill Arjuna and ensure that the tiger among
men does not kill Jayadratha? O fortunate one! You are our ultimate refuge. Act accordingly. This Dhananjaya is a
fire and his anger is the wind that goads him. He is consuming the soldiers like kindling, like a raging fire against
dry grass. O scorcher of enemies! O supreme among those who have knowledge of the brahman! Kounteya has
shattered the soldiers and has proceeded. The lords of men who are stationed to protect Jayadratha are overcome
by great anxiety. They thought that Dhananjaya would never be able to pass beyond Drona, not with his life. O immensely radiant one! But while you looked on, Partha has passed through your soldiers. All of them are extremely
distressed. I think that I no longer have an army left. O immensely fortunate one! I know that you have always
been engaged in the welfare of the Pandavas. O brahmana! I am confounded, thinking about what should be done.
O brahmana! I have sought to please you to the best of my strength. To the best of my capacity, I have given you
the best of livelihoods. But you do not recognize this. O infinitely valorous one! We have always been devoted to
you. But you have always been affectionate towards the Pandavas and have been engaged in bringing injury to us.
Though you have obtained your livelihood from us, you have been engaged in bringing injury to us. I did not know
you earlier. You are like a razor dipped in honey. If you had not granted me the boon that you would afflict the
Pandavas, I would not have restrained the lord of Sindhu from returning to his own home. I displayed weak intelligence in depending on your assurance and your weapons. Having stupidly assured the lord of Sindhu, I have given
him death. Even if a man enters Yama's mouth, he may escape. But once Jayadratha has come within Arjuna's
reach, there is no escape for him. O one with the red horses! Act so that Jayadratha can be protected. Do not be angry at my distressed lamentations. Protect Saindhava.'

'"Drona replied, 'I have found no fault with your words. You are like Ashvatthama to me. O lord of the earth! I
am telling you this truthfully and act accordingly. Krishna is a supreme charioteer. His horses are swift. They are
supreme steeds. Even if a small space is created, Dhananjaya passes quickly through it. Have you not seen the innumerable arrows shot by Kiriti? As he swiftly advances, they descend one krosha[Measure of distance equal to two miles.] behind his chariot. I am old
now and am incapable to travelling at such great speed. The force of the Parthas has presented itself at the mouth
of our array. O mighty-armed one! I should now capture Yudhishthira. Before all the archers and in the midst of all
the kshatriyas, this is the pledge that I made. Having been abandoned by Dhananjaya, he is stationed in front of
me. I will not move from the front of this vyuha and go to Phalguna. He is your equal in birth and deeds. With
your aides, you should go and fight with that solitary enemy. Do not be frightened. You are a lord of the earth. You
are a king. You are brave, accomplished and skilled. You can uproot enemies like Pandava. O brave one! You
should yourself swiftly go to the spot where Dhananjaya is.'

'"Duryodhana said, 'O preceptor! O supreme among those who wield all weapons! How can I cross Dhananjaya? He has countered you too. I am capable of vanquishing Purandara, the wielder of the vajra, in battle. But I
cannot withstand Arjuna, the vanquisher of enemy cities, in battle. Through the power of his weapons, he has vanquished Bhoja Hardikya[Kritavarma.] and you, who are an equal of the gods. His arrows have killed Shrutayu, Sudakshina,
King Shrutayudha, Shrutayu[There were two Shrutayus who were killed.] and Achyutayu. Hundreds of mlecchas have been killed. He has consumed many
enemies. How can I fight with Pandava? How can I fight with that invincible one? He is learned in the use of
weapons. How do you think that I am fit to fight with him today? Instruct me. I am dependent on you and your servant. Preserve my fame.'

'"Drona replied, 'O Kouravya! You have spoken the truth. Dhananjaya is invincible. But I will act so that you
are able to withstand him. Let all the archers in the world witness something extraordinary today. While Vasudeva
looks on, you will repulse Kounteya. O king! I will fasten this golden armour on you and arrows and weapons will
not be able to penetrate you in the battle, even if the gods, the asuras, the yakshas, the serpents, the rakshasas and
the three worlds fight against you, together with all men. You have no reason to fear. Krishna, Kounteya, or anyone
else who uses weapons in battle, will not be able to pierce this armour with arrows. Resorting to this armour today,
go and fight with the angry Arjuna in the battle. Go yourself and go swiftly. He won't be able to withstand you.'"

'Sanjaya said, "Having spoken these words, Drona, supreme among those who knew about the brahman, quickly
touched water and fastened that radiant armour on him, in accordance with the proper rites. This was for the sake
of your son's victory in battle. All the worlds were astounded at the knowledge of the one who knew about the
brahman.

'"Drona said, 'Let Brahma give you benedictions. Let all the brahmanas give you benedictions. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Let the best of reptiles give you benedictions. Let Yayati, Nahusha, Dhundumara, Bhagiratha
and all the best of rajarshis[A royal sage, that is a king who has attained the characteristics of a rishi.] always give you benedictions. May you have benedictions from those who have one
foot[Ekapada.] and those who have many feet. In this great battle, may you always have benedictions from those who possess no feet. May Svaha, Svadha and Shachi always act so that it is beneficial for you[Svaha is pronounced in offerings to the gods, Svadha in offerings to the ancestors. Shachi is Indra's consort.]. O unblemished one! May
Lakshmi and Arundhati always act so that it is beneficial for you. O king! May Asita-Devala, Vishvamitra, Angi-
ras, Vasishtha and Kashyapa act so that it is beneficial for you. Let Dhata, Vidhata, the lord of the worlds, the directions, the lords of the directions and the six-faced Kartikeya grant you benedictions today. Let the illustrious Vivasvat act in every way so that it is beneficial to you. O king! Let the four elephants of the four directions[There are actually eight elephants for the eight directions. But the four principal cardinal points have been singled out.], the
earth, the firmament, the sky, the planets, the earth which always holds us up from below and Sesha, the chief of
the serpents, give you their benedictions. O son of Gandhari! In earlier times, the daitya Vritra used his valour to
defeat the best of the gods in battle. Thousands of them were mangled in their bodies. All of them were robbed of
their energy and their strength. With Indra, those residents of heaven went to Brahma and sought refuge with him.
They were frightened of the great asura, Vritra.'

'"The gods said, 'O supreme among gods! The gods are afflicted by Vritra. O chief among the gods! Be our
refuge now. Protect us from this great fear.'

'"Drona said, 'He[Brahma.] addressed Vishnu, who was stationed by his side and also the best of the gods, Shakra and
the others. He spoke these appropriate words to the best of the gods, who were distressed. "The gods, together with
Indra and the brahmanas, should always be protected by me. Vritra has been created from Tvashtra's extremely invincible energy[There are different versions of the Vritra story. In one version, Indra killed Trishira or Vishvarupa, the son of
Tvashtri (or Tvashtra). Tvashtri created Vritra through his own energy, so as to exact vengeance on Indra.]. In ancient times, Tvashtra performed austerities for a million years. O gods! Having obtained
Maheshvara's permission, he then created Vritra. It is through the favours of that god that this enemy of yours has
become powerful and can strike you. Without going to Shankara's abode, one cannot see the illustrious Hara. Having swiftly gone to Mandara and seen him, you will be able to destroy your enemy. The source of all austerities,
the destroyer of Daksha's sacrifice, resides there[Shiva destroyed Daksha's sacrifice.]. He is the wielder of Pinaka[The name of Shiva's trident or bow.]. He is the lord of all beings. He
is the one who uprooted Bhaga's eyes[At Daksha's sacrifice, Shiva gouged out the god Bhaga's eyes.]." With Brahma, the gods went to Mandara. They saw that mass of energy,
with the splendour of ten million suns. Having seen the gods, he welcomed them and asked, "Tell me. What can I
do for you? The sight of me is never fruitless. Because of this, may your desires be satisfied." Having been thus
addressed, all those residents of heaven replied, "Vritra has robbed us of your energy. Be the refuge of the residents
of heaven. O god! Behold our bodies. We are afflicted and oppressed because of his blows. We have sought refuge
with you. O Maheshvara! Be our refuge." Maheshvara replied, "O gods! You know that this immensely strong and
fierce one has been created from Tvashtra's energy. He cannot be resisted by those who haven't controlled their
souls. It is certainly my task to protect all the residents of heaven. O Shakra! Accept this radiant armour from my
body. O lord of the gods! Fasten it on your body, after uttering these mantras in your mind." Having spoken these
words, the granter of boons gave him the armour, together with the mantras. Protected by the armour, he[Indra.] advanced against Vritra's army. In that great battle, many different kinds of weapons were hurled at him. But they
were incapable of penetrating the armour that he had fastened. In the battle, the lord of the gods himself killed Vri-
tra. He then gave the armour, whose joints were made out of mantras, to Angiras. Angiras gave it to his son Brihaspati, who knew about mantras. Brihaspati gave it to the intelligent Agniveshya. O supreme among kings! Agniveshya gave it to me and I have fastened the armour on you, so as to protect your body, together with the
mantras.'"

'Sanjaya said, "Having thus addressed your immensely radiant son, Drona, bull among preceptors, again gently
spoke these words. 'O king! I have fastened this armour on you, using the strands of Brahma[A reference to the mantras.]. In ancient times,
at the time of battle, Hiranyagarbha[Brahma's name.] himself fastened it on Vishnu. In the tarakamaya battle, Brahma himself
fastened this divine armour on Shakra and I have fastened it on you.' Having fastened the armour with the use of
mantras and in the decreed fashion, the great brahmana sent the king to the battle. The mighty-armed one was thus
armoured by the great-souled preceptor. He had one thousand rathas from Trigarta, accomplished in striking. There
were one thousand crazy tuskers that were valiant. There were ten thousand horses and other maharathas. Surrounded by these, the mighty-armed one advanced towards Arjuna's chariot. There were the sounds of many musical instruments and he advanced like Virochana's son[Bali was the demon Virochana's son.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A great sound arose
among your soldiers, when they saw Kourava advance like a fathomless ocean."'
