'The brahmani said, "You must not grieve like a common person. For someone who is as learned as you, this is not
the time to grieve. All men must certainly come to an end. If something is certain, one should not grieve over it. A
man desires a wife, a son and a daughter for his own sake. Therefore, since you have great learning, abandon this
grief. I shall go there myself. It is the supreme and eternal duty of women in this world that they should give up
their lives for the welfare of their husbands. Done by me, such an act will bring you happiness. It will also bring
me eternal fame in this world and the hereafter. What I have told you is the highest dharma. Through this, it will
perceptibly bring you artha and dharma. You have already obtained from me the purpose for which a man acquires
a wife-a daughter and a son. Through this, I have been freed from the debt I owe you.

'"You are capable of supporting and protecting your children. I cannot protect and support the children as you
can. You have given me all that I desire and protected me from all danger. If I am abandoned by you, how can
these young children and I survive? How can an unprotected widow with two young children support them both,
while treading a path of virtue? How can I protect our daughter when she is wooed by arrogant and selfish suitors
who are unworthy of an alliance with you? Like birds grabbing a lump of meat thrown on the ground, all men
crave women without their husbands. O best of the twice-born! Solicited by evil-hearted ones, I might waver and
might not be able to stick to the path of virtue. How can I ensure that this only daughter of the lineage, young and
innocent, walks along the path trodden by her forefathers? How can I teach this young boy, fatherless and without
a protector, every desirable quality so as to make him as learned in virtue as you? When I am in this state, those
who are unworthy will overcome me and demand this unprotected girl, like Shudras craving to hear the Vedas. If I
refuse to give her, endowed with all qualities and with your blood, they may forcibly carry her away, like crows
after sacrificial offerings. When they see a son who is unlike you and your daughter under the control of those who
are unworthy, I will be despised in the worlds. O Brahmana! I do not know what will happen to me, under the control of the arrogant. But there is no doubt that I shall die. There is no doubt that these young children, deprived of
you and of me, will perish like fish when the water dries up. There is no doubt that without you, all three of us will
perish in this way. Therefore, you should sacrifice me.

'"O Brahmana! Those who are learned in dharma have said that the supreme salvation of women is to go on the
last journey before their husbands and not remain under the protection of their sons. For you, I am ready to give up
this son and this daughter, my relatives and my life. To be always engaged in what pleases her husband is a greater
duty for a woman than sacrifices, austerities, vows and donation of alms. Thus, the act I wish to perform is in conformity with the supreme dharma. It is for the welfare of you and of the lineage. The virtuous say that objects of
desire, children, possessions and friends, even the wife, are cherished to rescue oneself in a time of distress. O you
who have extended your lineage! The wise ones have said that if all one's relations are placed on one side of the
scale, they do not equal oneself on the other side. My lord! Thus, do through me what has to be done. Save yourself by sacrificing me. Give me permission and protect my children. In deciding the path of virtue for men, those
who are learned in dharma have said that women should never be killed and that rakshasas also know dharma.
Therefore, he may not kill me. It is certain that he will kill a man. But it is doubtful that he will kill a woman. O
you who are learned in dharma! Therefore, you should let me go. I have enjoyed my life. I have enjoyed great happiness. I have trodden the path of dharma. Through you, I have borne beloved children. I will not grieve if I have
to die. I have borne a son and I have grown old. I have always desired to do that which pleases you. Counting all
my blessings, I have arrived at my decision. O revered one! You can take another wife after you have sacrificed
me. You will then again be able to tread the path of dharma. O virtuous man! To have more than one wife is not a
sin among men. But it is a grave sin for a woman to have another husband after the first. Having considered all this
and realizing that your self-sacrifice must be condemned, today, without any delay, save yourself, your lineage and
these two children through me."'

Vaishampayana said, 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing her words, her husband embraced her.
Stricken with grief, he shed copious tears, along with his wife.'
