'Sanjaya said, "Having slaughtered Duhshasana's force, Savyasachi Dhananjaya wished to get at the king of Sindhu and attacked Drona's army. He approached Drona, who was stationed at the mouth of the vyuha. Instructed by
Krishna, he joined his hands in salutation and spoke these words. 'O brahmana! Wish me well and pronounce
benedictions over me. Through your favours, I wish to penetrate this impenetrable army. You are like my father.
For me, you are the equal of Dharmaraja. You are the equal of Krishna. I tell you this truthfully. O father[The word used is tata. This means father, but is affectionately used towards anyone who is senior or superior.]! O unblemished one! O supreme among brahmanas! Like Ashvatthama should be protected by you, like that, I should
always be protected by you. O best of men! Through your favours, I wish to kill the king of Sindhu in this battle. O
lord! Protect my pledge.' Having been thus addressed, the preceptor smiled and replied, 'O Bibhatsu! Without vanquishing me, you are incapable of defeating Jayadratha.' Having said this, Drona smiled and enveloped him, his
charioteer, his chariot, his horses and his standard with a storm of sharp arrows.

'"At this, Arjuna used his own arrows to repulse Drona's storm of arrows. He attacked Drona and released more
terrible and greater arrows. O lord of the earth! Having shown reverence to Drona, he pierced him in that battle. He
resorted to the dharma of kshatriyas and pierced him again with nine arrows. Drona severed these arrows and
pierced both Krishna and Pandava with his own arrows, which were like poison or the flaming fire. Pandava then
thought of using his arrows to sever Drona's bow. But while the great-souled Phalguna was thus thinking, Drona
acted vigorously. The valiant one used arrows to swiftly sever his[Arjuna's.] bowstring and pierced his horses, standard and
charioteer. The brave one smiled and shrouded Arjuna with arrows. At this, Partha strung a great bow. He was
supreme among those who were skilled in the use of all weapons and was better than the preceptor. He quickly released six hundred arrows, as if he had grasped one alone. He again shot seven hundred arrows, and another one
thousand. These were impossible to repluse. He again shot another ten thousand arrows and killed many in Drona's
army. He was truly powerful and wonderful in fighting. Men, elephants and horses were pierced by those and fell
down, bereft of their lives. They fled from the field of battle, or fell down dead, their weapons severed. There were
rathas on the best of chariots and horses and they were afflicted by the arrows. They were crushed, dispersed and
burnt, as if by the vajra, the wind or the fire. Elephants that were like mountain peaks, clouds and large houses fell
down. Wounded by Arjuna's arrows, thousands of horses fell down. They were like swans on the breast of the Himalayas, struck by a torrent of water. Wounded by Pandava's arrows, chariots, horses, elephants and infantry were
like large masses of water, dried up by the sun at the end of a yuga. Pandava's net of arrows was like the rays of
the sun. But Drona was like a cloud that forcefully showered down arrows, and that brave and foremost warrior
among the Kurus enveloped him. This was like a cloud covering the rays of the sun. Drona then struck Dhananjaya
in the chest with an iron arrow. It was released with great force and could drink up the enemy's blood. He[Arjuna.] trembled in all his limbs, like a mountain during an earthquake. However, Bibhatsu resorted to fortitude and struck
Drona with arrows. Drona used five arrows to strike Vasudeva, pierced Arjuna with seventy-three and pierced his
standard with three. O king! The powerful Drona got the better of his disciple. In an instant, he made Arjuna disappear with his shower of arrows. As his bow was drawn in the form of a circle, we saw the arrows of Bharadvaja's
son descend continuously and it was extraordinary. O king! In the battle, the large number of arrows released by
Drona was shafted with the feathers of herons. They descended on Vasudeva and Dhananjaya. The likes of the battle between Drona and Pandava had never been seen.

'"The immensely intelligent Vasudeva started to think about what should be done. Vasudeva addressed Dhananjaya in these words. 'O Partha! O Partha! O mighty-armed one! We should not be wasting time. Abandon Drona
and let us perform the greater task.' Partha told Krishna, 'O Keshava! It shall be as you wish.' The mighty-armed
Bibhatsu circumambulated Drona and departed, glancing backwards and shooting arrows. Drona spoke to him. 'O
Pandava! Where are you going? Is it not true that you do not retreat until you have vanquished the enemy in
battle?' Arjuna replied, 'You are my preceptor. You are not my enemy. I am your disciple and am like your son.
Nor is there any man in this world who can vanquish you in battle.' Having spoken these words, the mighty-armed
Bibhatsu advanced against the soldiers, wishing to slay Jayadratha. His wheels were guarded by the Panchalas,
Yudhamanyu and Uttamouja. They followed the great-souled one, as he penetrated your army. O great king! Jaya,
Satvata Kritavarma, the king of Kamboja[Sudakshina.] and Shrutayu countered Dhananjaya. They had ten thousand rathas as
their followers-the Abhishahas, the Shurasenas, the Shibis, the Vasatis, the Machellakas, the Lalitthyas, the
Kekayas, the Madrakas, the Narayanas, the Gopalas and masses of Kambojas. They were revered as brave ones
and had earlier been vanquished by Karna. With Bharadvaja's son at the forefront, they rushed at Arjuna, ready to
give up their lives. He was angry and consumed by grief on account of his son. He was like Death and the Destroyer. He was armoured and wonderful in fighting. He was ready to give up his life in that tumult. Like the leader of a
herd of elephants, he was ready to devour those soldiers. He was a great archer and brave. He was a tiger among
men and they sought to counter him. A tumultuous battle commenced and it made the body hair stand up. It was
between the others who sought to fight and Arjuna. The bull among men advanced, wishing to kill Jayadratha.
They united and countered him, like medicines against a disease that has surfaced."'
