Vaishampayana said, 'O best of the Bharata lineage! Then King Yudhishthira asked the immensely radiant
Markandeya an extremely difficult question about dharma.

'"O illustrious one[This question is being asked by Yudhishthira.]! O brahmana! I wish to hear about the supreme greatness of women. Tell me the details
about the subtleties of dharma. O brahmana rishi! O foremost one! The sun, the moon, the wind, the earth and the
fire seem to be gods to me. O illustrious one! O great one! O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! So are the father,
the mother, the cow and whatever else has been ordained. All of these have to be revered as preceptors and I look
upon devoted wives in the same way. It seems to me that devotion to husbands and serving them must be very difficult. O lord! If you so wish, please tell me about the greatness of devotion to husbands. O unblemished one! Restraining the senses and controlling the mind, it must be very difficult to continuously think of husbands as gods. O
illustrious one! O lord! This seems to me to be extremely difficult. O brahmana! The serving of the father, the
mother and the husband by women and the dharma of womanhood seem to be extremely terrible and difficult to
me. O brahmana! Faithful women are always devoted in their conduct. But this must be difficult, as are acts towards the father and the mother. There are women who are devoted to one single person and speak the truth. They
bear an embryo in the womb for a full ten months. What can be more wonderful than that? They bear great difficulties and immense pain. O lord! They give birth to sons after great pain. O supreme among brahmanas! Then
they rear them with great affection. I also think that those who perform cruel deeds and are abhorred for that, but
always continue to perform them, must find it very difficult. O brahmana! Tell me in detail about the dharma of
kshatriyas. O brahmana! Dharma must be difficult for a cruel and evil-minded one. O illustrious one! You are
supreme among those who know the answers to questions. O best among those of the Bhrigu lineage! O one who
maintains good vows! I wish to hear the answer to my question."

'Markandeya replied, "O best among the Bharata lineage! Yes, I will tell you everything about this extremely
difficult question of yours. Pay attention to my words. O son[The word used is tata.]! Some hold the mother to be superior, others the
father[There is a problem with the Critical edition's text here. As it stands, the text should be translated as 'some
hold the mother to be equal ...' This doesn't quite fit. The translation given is in accordance with what non-Critical
versions state.]. However, the mother performs the most difficult task, she propagates the species. Through austerities,
worshipping the gods, endurance and resorting to magical spells, fathers desire sons. O brave one! After undergoing such great difficulties, one obtains a son, difficult to obtain, and one wonders about what this son will end up
doing. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A father and a mother wish for fame, deeds, wealth, prosperity, offspring and dharma for the son, a son who will make their desires successful and be devoted to dharma, one who
will bring satisfaction to the father and the mother and will attain eternal fame and dharma in this world and the
next. O Indra among kings! But a woman does not need sacrifices, funeral ceremonies or fasting. When she serves
her husband, she obtains heaven. O king! O Yudhishthira! On this, listen attentively to the dharma of those who are
devoted to their husbands."'
