'Yudhishthira asked, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! Having obtained a
kingdom, how can a weak king, without any resources, station himself
against a stronger one?"

'Bhishma replied, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about a conversation between the ocean
and the rivers. The eternal ocean, the lord of the rivers and the residence of
the enemies of the gods[The demons reside in the ocean.], himself had a doubt about this and asked all the
rivers. 'I see trees lying down, with their roots and their branches. When
you overflow, you bring these down. Though I see others[Smaller plants.] there, I never
see any reeds. The reeds that grow along your banks are thin in body and
slight of essence. Do you ignore them? Are you incapable? Or have they
done you a good turn? I desire to hear all your views on this. When you
overflow the banks, why are they not shattered? Why do they not come under your control?' At this, the river Ganga replied in supreme words that
were full of meaning. She told the reason to the ocean, the lord of the rivers.

'A tree remains in a single spot. It does not move from that place. Because
it foolishly tries to resist us, it is forced to give up that spot. However, when
it sees the flood approaching, a reed bends down. The flood passes over it
and it remains rooted to its spot. It knows the time and the place and bows
down. A tree does not. Because a reed is pliable and does not try to resist, it
is not carried away. Herbs, trees and creepers that do not bow down before
the force of the wind and the water are overcome.' If a person does not tolerate the powerful onslaught of an enemy who is stronger, he is swiftly destroyed. One who knows the superiority and inferiority in the strength of
one's own self and that of the enemy is wise and knows how to conduct
himself. He is not overcome. In this way, when a learned one thinks that the
enemy is extremely strong, he resorts to the conduct of reeds. That is a sign
of wisdom."'
