'Bhishma said, "I laughed and spoke to the one who stood ready for battle. 'You are standing on the ground and I
do not wish to fight with you while I am established on my chariot. O brave one! O mighty-armed one! O Rama!
Mount a chariot and armour yourself, if you wish to fight with me in battle.' In that field of battle, Rama smiled
and told me, 'The earth is my chariot. O Bhishma! The Vedas bear me, like well-trained horses. The wind is my
charioteer. The mother of the Vedas is my armour[The mother of the Vedas is a reference to the metres Gayatri, Savitri and Sarasvati.]. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! I am protected well by
these and will fight in the battle.' O son of Gandhari! Rama's truth is his valour and while speaking in this way, he
covered me on all sides with a great shower of arrows. I then saw Jamadagni's son stationed on a celestial chariot.
It was stocked with all kinds of radiant weapons that were extraordinary to look at. It was created from his mind
and was sacred. It was as expansive as a city. It was yoked to celestial horses that were ready. It was decorated
with gold. O mighty-armed one! It was adorned with a banner that had the sign of the moon embellished on it. He
held a bow and his quivers were fastened. He had guards on his arms and fingers. His friend Akritavrana, learned
in the Vedas and beloved of Bhargava, acted as his charioteer. Wishing to fight, Bhargava delighted my heart by
repeatedly saying, 'Attack' and challenging me to do battle. He was unassailable and extremely strong and was
like the rising sun. Alone, I approached Rama, the destroyer of kshatriyas. When I was at a distance of three shots
of an arrow[That is, thrice the distance an arrow can travel.], I restrained my mounts. I descended. Putting aside my bow, I advanced towards that supreme of
rishis. I showed homage to Rama, supreme among brahmanas, in the prescribed fashion and offered him worship,
speaking these supreme words. 'O Rama! I will fight with you in battle, though you are better than me and superior. You are my preceptor. You follow dharma. O lord! Bless me so that I may be victorious.'

'"Rama replied, 'O foremost among the Kurus! This is what should be done by those who desire prosperity. O
mighty-armed one! This is dharma for those who fight with their superiors. O lord of the earth! Had you not approached me like this, I would have cursed you. O Kourava! Make every effort to fight in this battle and resort to
fortitude. I cannot bless you for your victory, because I am standing here, wishing to defeat you. Go and fight in
accordance with dharma. I am pleased with your conduct.'"

'Bhishma said, "I bowed before him and swiftly ascended my chariot. Desiring battle, I once again blew on my
conch shell, which was decorated with gold. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A battle then ensued between
him and me. As we sought to defeat each other, it lasted for many days. He was the first one to strike me, with nine
hundred and sixty-nine arrows that were shafted with the feathers of cranes. They were like the fire in their energy.
O lord of the earth! My four mounts and my charioteer were restrained in that battle. But since I was armoured, I
remained firm. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I bowed to the gods and brahmanas. While he stood established on that field of battle, I smiled and replied to him. 'Though you have behaved harshly towards me, I have
honoured you as a preceptor. O brahmana! Listen again to what must be done if one wishes to accumulate a store
of dharma. I will not strike the Vedas that are there in your body, your great brahmana characteristics, or the extremely great austerities that you have collected. O Rama! I will strike the dharma of kshatriyas that you have resorted to. When a brahmana raises his weapons, he becomes like a kshatriya. Behold the valour of my bow. Behold
the strength of my arms. O brave one! I will slice your bow and arrows into two.' O bull among the Bharata lineage! I shot a sharp arrow[A specific type of arrow named bhalla, with a broad head.] at him. The ends of his bow were shattered and it fell down on the ground. I shot nine
hundred arrows towards Jamadagni's son. They had lowered tufts and were shafted with the feathers of cranes.
They were directed towards his body and were spurred on by the wind. Those arrows sped on, seeming to spout
blood, like serpents. All the limbs in his body were wounded and blood flowed out from those wounds. O king! At
that time, Rama looked like Meru spouting out its minerals, or an ashoka tree at the end of the winter, covered with
red blossoms, or like a kimshuka tree[Tree with red blossoms.].

'"At this, Rama was overcome by anger and took up another bow. He showered down sharp arrows, with golden
shafts, on me. There were many terrible arrows, capable of piercing the heart. They were extremely fast and made
me tremble. They were like flames, or the poison of snakes. I again summoned my patience in that battle. Enraged
in that battle, I unleashed one hundred arrows at Rama. They were sharp and were like the fire or the sun, or like
the venom of snakes. Struck by these, Rama seemed to lose his consciousness. O bull among the Bharata lineage! I
was overcome by compassion and censured myself. 'Shame on battles and on kshatriyas!' O king! I was overcome
by sorrow and repeatedly said, 'I am evil. I have committed a sin by acting like a kshatriya. My preceptor is a
brahmana. He has dharma in his soul. He has been oppressed by my arrows.' O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
I did not strike Jamadagni's son any more. Having heated the earth, once the day was over, the one with the thousand rays[The sun.] departed and the fight was over."'
