'Yudhishthira said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You have said many things about the conduct of kings,
about what has been indicated in the past by those who knew about rajadharma. You have recounted in detail the
views of those virtuous ones who thought about these earlier. O bull among the Bharata lineage! I am requesting
you to again tell me about rajadharma."

'Bhishma replied, "The protection of all beings is the supreme objective for kshatriyas. O lord of the earth! Listen to how this protection can be brought about. A peacock, the devourer of snakes, exhibits colourful plumage.
Like that, a king who follows dharma and desires happiness should adopt many kinds of forms-fierceness, deceit,
incapability of being controlled, truthfulness and uprightness. He should spiritedly stand amidst all of these. Whatever ensures welfare for a certain objective, that is the colour and form he should adopt. When a king can assume
many different forms, even the subtlest of his objectives does not suffer. He must always hide his counsel and be
dumb, like a peacock during the autumn. He must speak gently and his body must be smooth and handsome. He
should be skilled in the sacred texts. He must make endeavours to guard the gates through which dangers penetrate, like waterfalls, and also be a refuge for brahmanas and virtuous people, when there is a shower of hail and
rain[There is an implicit image of a peacock passing through waterfalls and avoiding rain and hail.]. Desiring prosperity, like the crest of a peacock, the king must hold aloft the flag of dharma. He must always wield the rod of chastisement and act attentively, paying attention to the income and expenditure of people,
flying from one tree to another[The implicit image of a peacock again.]. He must fling away insects from the flock with the feet[The peacock image again.]. When his own wings
have grown, he should flutter them and cleanse himself. He must identify his enemy's faults and cause agitation to
his[The enemy's.] wings. He must behave the way a peacock acts towards flowers in the forest[The peacock's plumage complements the flowers in the forest. The imagery is a bit stretched, but the king must
act in this way.]. He must seek refuge with
lofty and prosperous kings who are like mountains, seeking shade and refuge in secret, while one is undetected[The image is of a peacock seeking out shade in the mountains.].
Like a peacock submerging itself during the monsoon, undetected and alone in the night, he must go to his wives,
following the qualities of the peacock. He must not take off his body armour and must always protect himself. He
must not advance into snares and must avoid the nooses. Having destroyed the ground[Like a peacock digging up the ground where there are snares.], he must penetrate the
dense forest again. Just as the peacock angrily kills the others who are poisonous[The peacock kills poisonous snakes.] and does not allow them to reside with him, he[The king.] must kill the powerful[The Critical edition uses the word baala, instead of bala, and there is a typo.] and deceitful ones who seek to injure him.
However, unlike the peacock, he must not always be addicted to desire. He must always collect wise people
around him, like insects in the deep forest[The insects again bring up the imagery of the peacock.]. In this way, like a peacock, the king must protect his own kingdom.
If he is skilled, he will adopt a policy that will enhance his own prosperity. He will use his intelligence to control
himself and counter the enemy's intelligence. The sacred texts give illustrations to indicate that one's qualities are
developed through intelligence. Considering one's own strength, the enemy must be assured through conciliation.
The intelligence must be used to reflect, since the intelligence provides counsel to one's own self. One must be
calm, devoted to yoga, intelligent and wise, thinking about what must be done and what must not be done. A
learned one will keep his counsel hidden and speak only what should be spoken. If he is wise and as intelligent as
Brihaspati, he will avoid inferior speech. His nature will be like molten steel, when it has been immersed in
water[The sense probably is that even if the king is angered, he will quickly cool down.]. The lord of the earth will follow the injunctions of the sacred texts to ensure that he himself, and everyone else, is engaged in the appropriate tasks. The inferior, the cruel, the wise, the brave, those who are skilled with
money and others who are good with words must all be engaged in their respective tasks. Others who cannot be
seen[That is, they are not directly employed in the court.] must also be similarly appointed in tasks. They must all be made to follow their appropriate tasks, like
notes on the taut strings of a musical instrument. One who acts in an affectionate way towards all beings, without
acting against dharma, is as immobile as a mountain and everyone thinks of him as, 'He is my king.' He must look
towards dharma and treat everything, pleasant or unpleasant, as equal, like the sun casting its rays and thus dispense judgement. He must appoint those who know about dharma, are middle-aged, without taints, in control of
their senses and mild in speech, bearing in mind their lineage, nature and country of origin. They must not be
avaricious and must be learned. They must be controlled and devoted to dharma.
A king who wishes to protect dharma and artha must appoint these for all the tasks. In this way, he acts so as to
become the refuge of those who have no refuge. In this way, he is impartially established and having used spies, is
content. He must himself consider and act so that his anger and delight are not in vain. If he is firm in his own convictions, his treasury and the earth become full of riches. When the reasons behind his favours and his punishment
are transparent, when he is protected and when his kingdom is protected, then that king is a king who knows about
dharma. Like the sun rises over cows[Protecting the cows.], he must always look towards the kingdom. He must use his intelligence
to know about mobile and immobile objects and will not suffer from any anxiety. The king's accumulation of riches must be appropriate to the time. When he milks the earth every day, he will be like an intelligent person who
milks a cow without killing it. A six-legged one[A bee.] gradually collects honey from flowers. In that fashion, the king
must collect objects to build up his treasury. Anything that is in excess of the required store should be spent on
dharma and kama. A king who knows about dharma must accumulate and also spend. He must never think that any
wealth is a trifle. He must never disregard an enemy. He must use his intelligence to know himself and he must not
trust those who are limited in intelligence. Perseverance, skill, self-control, great intelligence, patience, valour,
knowledge about time and place and attentiveness, whether these are a little or a lot, are the eight kindling logs that
lead to an increase in prosperity. When a fire is small but is sprinkled with clarified butter, it becomes larger. A single seed can become many thousand. Even if he hears that his income and expenditure are great, a learned one will
not think that anything is too little. Whether the enemy is a child or an adult, or even if he is extremely old, he is
capable of slaying a careless man. In the course of time, he can sever the root. Therefore, someone who knows
about time is the best among kings. Whether the enemy is weak or strong, if he is driven by malice, he can take
away deeds, become an obstruction in the path of dharma and, for a long period of time, take away one's valour.
Therefore, a self-controlled person does not ignore the enemy. The enemy must be weakened and one's own
stores must be protected. Together with these objectives, dharma, artha and kama exist. An intelligent person does
things that are beyond these. Thus, a king resorts to a person who is intelligent. Blazing intelligence destroys the
powerful and protected by intelligence, strength increases[One's own strength increases, while that of the enemy declines.]. Through intelligence, a prosperous enemy can be
made to decline. When one uses one's intelligence and then undertakes a task, this is praised. One who pursues all
one's objects of desire is wise. If one possesses only a little bit of enterprise, one is weak in the body. Since he desires prosperity for his own self, he must fill the vessel, even if only a little is available. Therefore, a king who has
been seized by the enemy must seek to obtain the foundation of prosperity from everywhere. Even if he has been
afflicted for a long period of time, like a momentary flash of lightning, he will obtain honour. Learning, austerities,
a great deal of riches-all of these are capable of being obtained with enterprise. The brahman dwells in the bodies
of those who are enterprising. Thus, one should know that enterprise is the most important. The intelligent and
spirited Shakra, Vishnu and Sarasvati always reside in all beings and, therefore, one must never disregard the body.
An avaricious person must be slain with generosity. An avaricious person is always dissatisfied with the prosperity
of others. All those who are avaricious may enjoy the qualities of deeds[Good deeds performed in earlier lives. Therefore, they may be prosperous.], but because they abandon dharma and
kama, they eventually lose artha too. All those who are avaricious desire the riches, objects of pleasure, sons,
wives and prosperity of others. All the sins exist in avaricious people. Therefore, the king must not accept avaricious people[By implication, as advisers or ministers.]. A person born in an inferior lineage, if he is virtuous and wise, can be used to ascertain the undertakings and all the objectives of those who wish to cause injury. O Pandava! A minister must be known to follow dharma and must be capable of keeping a secret. O king! He must be learned, born in a noble lineage and capable of extending the kingdom. O god among men! I have recounted the ordinances of dharma. Use your intelligence to know and follow them. The king who uses his intelligence to follow these is a king who is capable of protecting the earth. Wrong policy that is against the ordinances, or many kinds of deceitful policy, can be seen to produce happiness. But that kind of king has no ultimate end. Nor is there supreme happiness in the kingdom. A king
who allies with the virtuous is seen to soon slay enemies who are superior in wealth, intelligence, conduct, honour,
endowments of good qualities, evident valour in battle and visible qualities[Since qualities are mentioned twice, the first may be qualities in battle, while the second is qualities in general.]. One must think of different ways
of treading along the path of action and not turn one's mind to obstructions. A man who only looks at the sins[In the sense of impediments.]
does not obtain prosperity, superiority, great fame and riches. There may be two well-wishers who have been
drawn together by bonds of affection, but have later drifted apart. A wise person must know that the two have
drifted apart and treat with great gentleness the friend who bears the greater load[This is probably a reference to adjucating a dispute between two people who have formerly been friends. The
meaning isn't very clear.]. I have recounted rajadharma
to you. Using this and your intelligence, protect men. You will obtain auspicious fruits and happiness. Everything
in the world is based on the supreme foundation of dharma."'
