Vaishampayana said, 'O, Janamejaya! Thereupon, 100 sons were born to Dhritarashtra through Gandhari. Then beyond these 100, he had one more through a Vaishya. Pandu had five maharatha sons through Kunti and Madri.
They were born from the gods so that the lineage could continue.'

Janamejaya asked, 'O best of the Brahmanas! How did Gandhari give birth to 100 sons and how long did it
take? How long did they live? How did Dhritarashtra have a son through a Vaishya, despite possessing a wife who
was equal to him and who was devoted to dharma and loved him? How were the five maharatha sons born from
the gods, after the great-souled Pandu was cursed? O one blessed with the power of austerities! Tell me all this as
it happened and in detail, because I can never be satisfied on hearing the accounts of my relatives.'

Vaishampayana said, 'One day, Dvaipayana arrived, hungry and tired. Gandhari satisfied him and Vyasa gave
her a boon that she would have 100 sons who would be the equals of her husband. After some time, she conceived
through Dhritarashtra. Gandhari bore the embryo for two years without giving birth and was overcome with grief.
Then she heard that a son had been born to Kunti, as radiant as the morning sun. She felt the hardness of her stomach and began to worry, losing her patience. Unknown to Dhritarashtra, Gandhari violently struck her belly and
aborted herself, fainting with the pain. A hard mass of flesh, like an iron ball, came out. This was what she had
borne in her womb for two years and prepared to throw it away. But learning of this, Dvaipayana quickly came to
her. That supreme among those who meditate saw that mass of flesh and asked Subala's daughter, "What have you
done?" She truthfully expressed her thoughts to the supreme rishi. "When I heard that Kunti had given birth to her
first son, as radiant as the sun, I struck my belly in grief. Earlier, you granted me the boon that I would have a hundred sons. But instead of those 100 sons, this mass of flesh has been born to me." Vyasa replied, "O Subala's
daughter! It will be as I have said and not otherwise. I have never uttered a falsehood in jest. Why should I do it
when I am in earnest? Quickly bring a hundred pots and fill them up with ghee. Let cool water be sprinkled on this
mass of flesh." Being sprinkled with water, that mass of flesh divided itself into a hundred parts. Each part of the
embryo was only the size of a thumb. O ruler of the earth! O king! As time passed, that mass of flesh gradually became 101 separate parts[There is a problem with the numbers, since there were only 100 pots.]. These parts of the embryo were then placed into the pots and these were concealed in
a secret spot and carefully guarded. The illustrious one then again told Subala's daughter about how much time
should pass before the pots were broken open. After saying this and making the necessary arrangements, the illustrious and wise lord Vyasa went away to the mountainous Himalayas to perform his austerities.

'In due course, King Duryodhana was born first. But King Yudhishthira was the eldest, because he had been
born first. As soon as his son was born, Dhritarashtra summoned Brahmanas, Bhishma and Vidura and said,
"Prince Yudhishthira is the eldest prince for the extension of our lineage. He will obtain the kingdom through his
own qualities and I have nothing to say on this. But will this one become the king after him? Tell me truthfully
what must certainly happen." O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When he stopped speaking, carrion eaters, terrible carnivores and howling jackals began to scream from all the directions. O king! On witnessing these terrible
and ominous signs, all the Brahmanas and the immensely intelligent Vidura said, "It is clear that this son of yours
will bring about the destruction of this lineage. There is peace in abandoning him and great disaster in nurturing
him. O lord of the earth! Let ninety-nine sons remain with you and with the one you can bring about the welfare of
the world and the lineage. It is said that abandon one for the sake of the lineage. Abandon a lineage for the sake of
a village. Abandon a village for the sake of a country. Abandon the earth for the sake of the soul." Thus spoke
Vidura and all the supreme Brahmanas. But because of affection towards his son, the king did not do this.

'O king! Within a month, 100 sons were born to Dhritarashtra and a daughter, over and above the 100. When
Gandhari was afflicted with her expanding belly, the mighty-armed Dhritarashtra used to have a Vaishya maid in
attendance. O king! Within a year, a son was born to Dhritarashtra. O king! He was immensely famous and wise
and he was named Yuyutsu, of mixed lineage. Thus, 100 wise, brave and maharatha sons were born to Dhritarashtra and one daughter named Duhshala.'
