Vaishampayana said, 'Nakula was accomplished in fighting with the sword. During a break in the conversation, he
spoke to the grandfather, who was lying down on a bed of arrows. "O grandfather! It is said that the bow is the best
weapon. O one who knows about dharma! But it is my view that a well-fashioned sword is the best. O king! When
the bow has been severed and when the horses have been killed in a battle, a person is capable of successfully protecting himself with a sword. A brave person wielding a sword is single-handedly capable of warding off those
who wield bows and those who wield clubs and spears. I have a doubt and curiosity about this. O king! What is the
best weapon for battles? How did a sword arise? Who fashioned it and why? O grandfather[The text actually says great-grandfather.]! Tell me about the
first person who instructed about the use of the sword." He heard the words of Madri's intelligent son. He knew
about all the techniques. He spoke auspicious words that were subtle, colourful and full of purport. He replied to
him in words that had vowels and accents. The great-souled Nakula, Drona's son, was skilled in learning and policy. Bhishma was accomplished in dhanurveda and was knowledgeable about all forms of dharma.

'Lying down on the bed of arrows, he said, "O Madri's son! Concerning what you have asked me, listen to the
truth. I look like a mountain with minerals flowing from it[Because of the blood.] and you have stirred me. O son[The word used is tata.]! In ancient times,
everything was in an ocean of water. There was no sky and the surface of the earth could not be discerned. It was
enveloped in darkness. It was enveloped in darkness and it was extremely deep to look at. There was no sound. It
was immeasurable. The grandfather[Brahma.] was born there. He created wind and fire and the energetic sun. He created
the sky above and below it, the earth and the nether regions. He created the sky, with the moon, the stars, the
nakshatras and the planets, the year, day and night, the seasons, lava and kshana. The grandfather established his
body in the worlds. The illustrious one generated supreme and energetic sons-the rishis Marichi, Atri, Pulastya,
Pulaha, Kratu, Vasishtha, Angiras and the lord god Rudra. There was Daksha Prachetasa, who gave birth to sixty
daughters. All the brahmarshis accepted them for the sake of offspring. All the beings in the universe resulted from
them-the gods, the large numbers of ancestors, the gandharvas, the apsaras, the many kinds of rakshasas, the
birds, the animals, the fish, the apes, the giant serpents and many others that had different forms and strengths,
travelling in the water or on the land. O son! There were plants, those born from sweat, those born from eggs and
those born from wombs. Everything in the universe was born, mobile and immobile. The grandfather of all the
worlds created all these categories of beings. He then again united them to the eternal dharma that is laid down in
the Vedas. The gods, with their preceptors and their priests, remained within the fold of dharma-the Adityas, the
Vasus, the Rudras, the Sadhyas, the Maruts and the Ashvins. So did Bhrigu, Atri, Angiras, the Siddhas, Kashyapa,
rich in austerities, Vasishtha, Goutama, Agastya, Narada, Parvata, the Valakhilya rishis, the Prabhasas, the Sikatas,
the Ghritachas, the Somavayavyas, the Vaikhanasas, the Marichipas, the Akrishtas, the Hamsas, the rishis who
were born from the fire, the Vanaprasthas and the Prishnis. All of them based themselves on Brahma's instructions.

'"However, the lords of the danavas transgressed the grandfather's instructions[This is Bhishma speaking, not Vaishampayana.]. They were full of anger and
avarice and diminished dharma. Hiranyakashipu, Hiranyaksha, Virochana, Shambara, Viprachitti, Prahrada, Na-
muchi, Bali-these and many other large numbers of daityas and danavas crossed the boundaries set by dharma
and enjoyed themselves, having determined to follow adharma. 'All of us are their equals. We are just like the gods
are.' Having reasoned in this way, they challenged the gods and the rishis. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
They showed no favour or compassion to any of the beings. They disregarded the three methods and punished the
subjects with danda[Since danda has been mentioned, the three ignored methods must be sama, dana and bheda.]. Because of their insolence, those supreme among the asuras entered into an agreement with
them[The other subjects.]. At this, the brahmarshis presented themselves before the illustrious Brahma. At that time, he was on the
beautiful slopes of the Himalayas, in Padmataraka[The name of a peak.]. It was one hundred yojanas in area and was decorated with
jewels and pearls. O son! In that supreme mountain, there were groves with blossoming trees. Brahma, the best of
the gods, was there, engaged in the success and welfare of the worlds. At the end of one thousand years, the lord
made arrangements for a grand sacrifice there, following the rites instructed in the kalpas[The kalpasutras, which are a part of Vedanga and indicate the norms to be followed in rites and rituals.]. Rishis who were accomplished in performing sacrifices were there. As required, they were capable of undertaking all the acts. The
Maruts covered the place and there were blazing fires. The place was radiant and seemed to be decorated with the
golden sacrificial vessels. The circle of the sacrifice was resplendent, because it was surrounded by gods.

'"I have heard that the rishis suffered something terrible there. The sparkling moon arises in the sky and surpasses the stars. Like that, it has been heard that a being broke through the fire and arose there. Its complexion was like
that of a blue lotus. It possessed sharp teeth and a lean stomach. It was tall and difficult to behold because of its
great energy. When it arose, the earth began to tremble. Large waves and whirlpools agitated the great ocean. Meteors showered down and there were grave portents. Branches fell down from the trees. All the directions were disturbed. Inauspicious winds began to blow. All the beings were continuously frightened and afflicted. On witnessing the tumult and the being that had arisen, the grandfather told the maharshis, the gods and the gandharvas, 'This
valiant being is known as a sword and I have thought of it. This is for the protection of the worlds and for slaying
those who hate the gods.' The sword then abandoned that form and became sharp-edged. It sparkled and was sharp
at the edges. It was as if the Destroyer had arisen. Brahma gave the blazing sword to Shitikantha[The one with the blue throat, Shiva's name.] Rudra, the one
with the bull on his banner. This was for the purpose of countering adharma. At this, the illustrious Rudra was worshipped by the large number of brahmarshis. The one who was immeasurable in his soul accepted the sword and
assumed another form. He was four-armed. Though he stood on the ground, he touched the firmament with his
head. Mahalinga[Shiva's name.] glanced upwards and released flames from his mouth. He assumed many different complexions-blue, pale and red. His garment was made out of black antelope skin and was decorated with stars made out
of the best gold. There was a giant eye on his forehead and it was like the sun. He was beautiful with two other
sparkling eyes and they were dark brown. The god Mahadeva wielded the trident in his hand and he was the one
who plucked out Bhaga's eyes[At the time of Daksha's sacrifice.]. He grasped the sword, which was like the Destroyer, the sun, or the fire. He
grasped a shield that was embossed in three places and it looked like a cloud tinged with lightning. The immensely
strong and valorous one roamed around in many different kinds of paths. He waved the sword around in the sky,
wishing to bring an end to the danavas.

'"He released a roar and laughed loudly. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Rudra's fearful form was resplendent then. On seeing Rudra's form, all the danavas, wishing to perform terrible deeds, attacked him. They showered down rocks and blazing torches. There were many other terrible weapons, razor-sharp and tipped with iron.
That army of the danavas had never wavered earlier. However, because of the force that was generated from
Rudra's sword, it trembled and was confused. With the sword in his hand, he moved around, in even faster and
colourful ways. All the asuras thought that the solitary person was actually one thousand. He severed, pierced,
struck, sliced, shattered and mangled. Rudra roamed around amidst that mass of daityas, like a fire amidst deadwood. The rakshasas were devastated by the force of the sword and their arms, thighs and breasts were severed.
Their heads were completely cut down and the great asuras fell down on the ground. There were other danavas
who were shattered and afflicted by Rudra's force. They screamed at each other and fled in different directions.
Some entered the ground. Others entered mountains. There were others who rose up into the sky. Still others submerged themselves in the water. A great and extremely terrible encounter took place. The earth was then covered
with the mud of blood and looked horrible. O mighty-armed one! It was strewn with the large bodies of danavas,
wounded and bloodied. They were like mountains, covered with kimshuka trees. The earth was covered with blood
and looked beautiful then. She was like a dark woman, intoxicated with liquor and attired in a red and wet
garment.

'"When he had killed the danavas and established supreme dharma in the universe, Rudra swiftly abandoned his
terrible form and took up his auspicious form of Shiva. All the maharshis and all the large numbers of gods worshipped the god of the gods because of the wonderful nature of his victory. The sword, the protector of dharma,
was still wet with the blood of danavas. Respectfully, the illustrious Rudra gave it to Vishnu. Vishnu gave it to
Marichi and the illustrious Marichi gave it to the maharshis. The rishis gave the sword to Vasava. O son! The great
Indra gave it to the guardians of the world and the guardians of the world gave the extremely large sword to Manu,
Surya's son[This means Vaivasvata Manu.]. They told the first man, 'You are the lord. This sword has dharma in its womb. Use it to protect the
subjects. Those who transgress the boundaries of dharma, because of subtle or gross reasons, must be punished and
protected by the rod, not as one wills, but following dharma. Harsh words are also punishment and chastisement
can also take the form of fining a large quantity of gold. For trifling reasons, a limb of the body must not be severed. Nor should there be execution. Harsh words of censure are indicated as a form of the sword. The sword has
different measures[Different norms of punishment.] and there are also exceptions to these measures.' Having created his own son, Kshupa,
Manu, the lord of subjects, gave him the sword, for the protection of the subjects. On earth, Ikshvaku accepted the
sword from Kshupa and Pururava from Ikshvaku[The sword thus passed from the solar to the lunar dynasty. But it came back to the solar dynasty.]. Ayu obtained it from him and Nahusha from him. Yayati got
it from Nahusha and Puru obtained it from him. Amurtarayasa got it from him and King Bhumishaya from him. O
king! Bharata, the son of Duhshanta, obtained the sword from Bhumishaya and Aidabida, knowledgeable about
dharma, obtained it from him. From Aidabida, Dhundhumara, lord of men, obtained it. Kamboja got it from
Dhundhumara and Muchukunda from him. Marutta got it from Muchukunda and Raivata from Marutta. Yuvanashva got it from Raivata and Raghu from Yuvanashva. The powerful Harinashva, descended from the lineage of Ikshvaku, got it from him. Shunaka got the sword from Harinashva and Ushinara, with dharma in his soul, from Shu-
naka. The Bhojas and the Yadavas got it from him. Shibi obtained it from the Yadus and Pratardana from Shibi.
Ashtaka got it from Pratardana and Rushadashva from Ashtaka. Bharadvaja got it from Rushadashva, Drona from
him, and Kripa from him. You and all your brothers obtained the supreme sword from him.

'"The Krittikas are the nakshatra for the sword[Pleiades. The sword was thus created when Krittika was in the ascendant.]. The fire is its god. Rohini is its gotra. Rudra is its supreme
preceptor. O Pandaveya! Listen to the eight secret names of the sword. Recounting these, one can always obtain
victory in the world-Asi, Vishasana, Khadga, Tikshnavartma, Durasada, Shrigarbha, Vijaya and Dharmapala[Respectively, sword, the one that severs, another term for sword, the one that is sharp at the edges, the one that
is difficult to assail, the one that has prosperity in its womb, victory and the protector of dharma.].
O son of Madravati[Madri.]! The sword is the foremost among weapons. The ancient tales have certainly stated that it
was first wielded by Maheshvara. O destroyer of enemies! Prithu created the first bow and with this, Vena's son[Prithu.]
protected the world earlier. O son of Madri! You must also follow the standard set by the rishis. The sword must
always be worshipped by those who are accomplished in war. This is the first principle and this has been explained
to you in great detail. O bull among the Bharata lineage! I have told you about the sword's origin and association.
If a person listens to the supreme and complete account about how the sword was fashioned, that man obtains fame
in this world and eternity in the world hereafter."'
