Vaishampayana said, 'The ascetic lady lamented piteously, as if she was mad. Desiring her son, the miserable
Uttara then fell down on the ground. On seeing that she had fallen down, with her son dead and her clothing
dishevelled, Kunti and all the other Bharata women were afflicted by grief and shrieked out. O king! In a short
while, the residence of the Pandavas was no longer a sight to be seen. It echoed with sounds of lamentation. O Indra among kings! O brave one! Virata's daughter was afflicted by sorrow on account of her son. She suffered from
unconsciousness. O bull among the Bharata lineage! But in a short while, Uttara regained her senses. She placed
her son on her lap and spoke these words. "You are the son of one who knew about dharma. But you do not understand the adharma you have committed. You are not greeting the brave one from the Vrishni lineage. O son! Go
and tell your father my words. 'O brave one! It is impossible for beings to die before their time has come. I am
separated from you. I do not have a husband, or a son. Yet I am alive on this earth, though I should be dead. O
mighty-armed one! Perhaps I will take Dharmaraja's permission and consume terrible poison. Perhaps I will enter
the fire.' O son[Uttara is conveying her message to Abhimanyu and also speaking to her son.]! Perhaps death is extremely difficult to obtain. Despite being deprived of my husband and my
son, my heart has not shattered into one thousand fragments. O son! Arise. Behold your miserable great grandmother. She is afflicted and miserable. She is immersed in an ocean of grief. Behold the noble Panchali and the ascetic Satvati[Subhadra.]. Look at me. I am extremely miserable, like a deer that has been pierced by a hunter. Arise. Behold
the face of the intelligent protector of the worlds[Krishna.]. His eyes are restless and like lotus petals. He is in front of
you." Uttara lamented in this way and fell down again. On seeing this, all the women raised her up again. The
daughter of the king of Matsya was raised and resorted to her fortitude. While still on the ground, she joined her
hands in salutation and greeted Pundarikaksha. The bull among men heard her great lamentations. Krishna touched
water and withdrew brahmastra's powers. Dasharha had promised that he would bring him back to life. The one
with the pure soul spoke these words, so that the entire universe could hear. "O Uttara! I do not utter a falsehood.
This will come true. While all the creatures look on, I will revive him. I have never spoken a lie earlier, not even in
jest. Never have I retreated in battle. Therefore, he will come back to life. I love dharma and I specially love brahmanas. Abhimanyu's son was born dead. But let him revive. There has never been a conflict between me and Vijaya. Through the virtue of that truth, let this dead child come back to life. Since truth and dharma have always
been established in me, let this dead child come back to life. I killed Kamsha and Keshi by resorting to dharma.
Because of that truth, let his child again come back to life." O bull among the Bharata lineage! O great king! When
Vasudeva spoke in this way, the child regained its senses and gradually began to move.'
