'Bhishma said, "If a king acts so as to engage and employ servants who are unlike the dog, then he obtains the fruits of the kingdom. When the dog transgressed its own state and measure, it was no longer treated well. The dog should
have remained in its own place. It transgressed it and became something else. It
is a duty for a learned person to appoint servants appropriate to their families
and lineages, so that they are engaged in their appropriate tasks. Inappropriate
positions are condemned. If servants are engaged in the appropriate tasks, then
because of the qualities of those servants, the king obtains fruits. A sharabha
should be in a sharabha's place, a lion in a lion's. A tiger should be in a tiger's
place, a leopard in a leopard's. As is proper, appoint servants in the appropriate
tasks. If one desires the fruits of one's actions, servants should not be appointed
in perverse positions. A king who transgresses the norms and appoints servants
in perverse positions is foolish and does not delight the subjects. If the king desires his welfare, he should not have stupid, inferior and men born from bad lineages by his side, those who are unable to control their senses. Those who are at
the side must be men who are virtuous, accomplished, brave, learned, without
malice, without meanness, pure and skilled. Those who are appointed outside[Outside the court.]
by the king must be engaged in the welfare of beings, forgiving, accomplished,
naturally pure and satisfied with their own states. A person who is like a lion
should always be by the side of a lion. If a person who is not a lion is with a
lion, the lion does not obtain any fruits. If a lion is engaged in obtaining the
fruits of its deeds, but that lion is surrounded by dogs, because that lion is attended by dogs, it is incapable of enjoying any of the fruits. O Indra among men!
In this way, with brave, wise and extremely learned people, who are born in noble lineages, one is capable of conquering the entire earth. O supreme among
those who employ servants! A lord of the earth must not collect servants who
are without learning, without uprightness, without knowledge and without great
riches by his side. The king must be attentive towards the servants he has appointed and assure them. These people will then be engaged in the tasks of their
master and advance like arrows that have been released. Kings must always endeavour to protect their treasuries. The treasury is the foundation for kings. Ensure the foundation of the treasury. The stores must always be full and stocked
with grain. Good people must be employed to take care of them. Have stores of
riches and grain. Always engage servants who are skilled in fighting. Skill in the
use of horses is also desired. Look towards kin and relatives. Be surrounded by
friends and allies. O descendant of the Kourava lineage! Be engaged in tasks that
ensure the welfare of the city. I have spoken to you about the desired intelligence
and wisdom. O son! The dog is an example before you. What else do you wish
to hear?"'
