'Vasudeva said, "Get up! O Gandhari! Arise! Do not sorrow unnecessarily. The Kurus have confronted destruction
because of your crimes. Your evil-souled son was jealous and extremely insolent. You honoured Duryodhana and
thought that his evil deeds were virtuous. But they were cruel, full of enmity and harsh. They transgressed the
commands of seniors. You committed the sin yourself. Why are you trying to blame it on me? If one sorrows over
someone who is dead, something that has been destroyed, or something that has already happened, one imposes
sorrow on a sorrow and thereby, causes a double calamity. A brahmana lady gives birth for austerities, a cow for a
draught animal, a mare for running, a shudra for a servant and a vaishya for animal husbandry. However, a princess
like you gives birth for slaughter."'

Vaishampayana said, 'On again hearing Vasudeva's unpleasant words, Gandhari became silent. Her eyes were
anxious and full of tears. Rajarshi Dhritarashtra had dharma in his soul and dispelled the darkness caused by limited intelligence. He asked Dharmaraja Yudhishthira, "O Pandava! You know the number of soldiers who are alive.
If you know the number of those who have been slain, tell me." Yudhishthira replied, "One billion[Ayuta is ten thousand. The text says ten ayuta ayuta, that is one billion.], twenty thousand and sixty-six crore-that is the number slain in this battle of kings[The total is thus 1,660,020,000. This cannot readily be converted into eighteen akshouhinis. One akshouhini had 21,870 chariots, 21,870 elephants, 65,610 horses and 109,350 foot soldiers. But the
number of soldiers per chariot, per elephant or per horse is not known.]. O Indra among kings! In addition, twenty-four thousand, one hundred and sixty-five brave ones are missing." Dhritarashtra asked, "O Yudhishthira!
Where have those best of men gone? Tell me. O mighty-armed one! It is my view that you know everything." Yudhishthira replied, "They cheerfully offered their bodies as oblations in the supreme battle. Truth was their valour
and they have gone to worlds that are like that of the king of the gods. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Those
who were cheerful in their minds, thinking that everyone is mortal, were slain in the battle and have encountered
the gandharvas. Those who were unwillingly stationed in the battle and wished to be spared have been slain with
weapons and have gone towards the guhyakas[Guhyakas are semi-divine species, companions of Kubera. This is a less desirable end.]. However, there were great-souled ones who were weakened and
deprived of weapons. They were abandoned by others and severely afflicted. Even then, they attacked the enemy.
Though they were severed by sharp weapons, they were devoted to the dharma of kshatriyas. Those extremely radiant and brave ones were slain and went to Brahma's abode. O king! There were some who were slain in the field
of battle without doing anything remarkable. They have obtained the region of Uttarakuru[Uttarakuru, as a real dvipa (continent) is to the north of Jambudvipa and to the north of Mount Meru.
However, Uttarakuru is also described as a region that is not on earth, but as a region attained after
death.]." Dhritarashtra asked,
"O son! What is this strength of knowledge, through which you can perceive like a siddha[A siddha is someone who has obtained success, in the sense of having obtained higher knowledge.]? O mighty-armed one!
If it can be heard by me, tell me about it." Yudhishthira replied, "Because of your instructions, I roamed around in
the forest earlier. In that connection, I visited the tirthas and obtained this blessing[The visit to the tirthas has been described in Section 33 (Volume 3).]. At that time, I saw devarshi
Lomasha and acquired this knowledge. Earlier, through the yoga of knowledge, I had obtained divine sight."

'Dhritarashtra said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There are people who have relatives and those who
do not have relatives. Let the bodies of all those be burnt in accordance with the proper rites. Some have no one to
perform the rites and fires have not been lit for some. O son! For whom can we perform the rites? There are many
rites to be performed. O Yudhishthira! There are those who have obtained the worlds through their deeds, but are
being dragged here and there by birds and vultures."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having been thus addressed, the immensely wise Yudhishthira, Kunti's son, instructed
Sudharma[The family priest of the Kouravas.], Dhoumya[The family priest of the Pandavas.], the suta Sanjaya, the immensely intelligent Vidura, Kouravya Yuyutsu and all the servants
and charioteers, with Indrasena[Yudhishthira's charioteer.] at their head. "Perform the funeral rites for everyone. Let the bodies of those who
have no one to look after them not be destroyed." Having heard Dharmaraja's command, Kshatta[Vidura.], suta Sanjaya,
Sudharma, Dhoumya, Indrasena and the others brought sandalwood, aloe, yellow fragrant wood, clarified butter,
oil, fragrances and cotton garments. They made piles of woods and these expensive objects. They added the shattered chariots and other implements. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having carefully prepared the pyres and
observed the prescribed rites, they burnt the foremost among the kings, following the due order-King Duryodhana and his one hundred brothers, Shalya, King Shala, Bhurishrava, King Jayadratha, Abhimanyu, Duhshasana's
son, Lakshmana[Duryodhana's son.], King Dhrishtaketu, Brihanta, Somadatta, more than one hundred Srinjayas, King Kshemadhanva[This is a strange mention, because Kshemadhanva has only been mentioned in passing in Section 63
(Volume 5) and has no role to play in the actual war.], Virata, Drupada, Panchala Shikhandi, Parshata Dhrishtadyumna, valiant Yudhamanyu, Uttamouja, the king of
Kosala, Droupadi's sons, Shakuni Soubala, Achala, Vrishaka[Achala and Vrishaka were Shakuni's brothers.], King Bhagadatta, the intolerant Karna Vaikartana
and his sons, the great archers from Kekaya, the maharathas from Trigarta, Ghatotkacha, Indra among rakshasas,
Baka's brother[The rakshasa Alayudha.], King Alambusa, King Jalasandha and hundreds and thousands of other kings. O king! Flows of
clarified butter were poured and the blazing fires burnt them. For some of those great-souled ones, sacrifices meant
for the ancestors were performed. Some chanted sama hymns. Others sorrowed over the ones who were dead. The
sounds of women weeping mixed with the sama chants. During that night, a lassitude overcame all beings. The
blazing fires flamed, without any smoke. They were seen to be like planets surrounded by clouds in the firmament.
There were those who had come from many countries and had no one to tend to them. On Dharmaraja's instructions, Vidura brought all of them together and piled them in thousands of heaps. Pyres were lit with wood, sprinkled with oil and they were attentively burnt. Yudhishthira, king of the Kurus, performed the rites for them. After
this, with Dhritarashtra at the forefront, he went towards the Ganga.'
