Vaishampayana said, 'O extender of the Kuru lineage! Through the favours of the rishi, the king obtained sight
and saw his sons in their own forms, having never been able to see them earlier[While they were alive. Because Dhritarashtra was blind.]. The king knew about the
dharma of kings, the brahman and the Upanishads[Instead of the brahman and the Upanishads separately, this could also be the Brahmopanishad of the Yajur Veda.]. The best among men possessed the determination of intelligence. Through the strength of his austerities, the immensely wise Vidura advanced towards success. Having met
the ascetic Vyasa, so did Dhritarashtra.'

Janamejaya said, 'If Vyasa, the granter of boons, shows me my father in his former form, his former garments
and his former age, I will then have faith in all this. Such a sight will be agreeable. I will then have accomplished
success.  I  will  be  firm  in  my  determination.  Through  the  favours  of  that  son  of  a  rishi,  let  my  desire  be
accomplished.

'Suta  said,  "When  the  king  spoke  these  words,  the  powerful  and  intelligent  Vyasa  wished  to  show  him  his
favours and brought Parikshit there. King Janamejaya saw his handsome father. The king arrived from heaven in
his former form and his former age. The great-souled Shamika and his son Shringi and the advisers also arrived
and the king saw them[Parikshit placed a dead snake around the sage Shamika's neck and was cursed by Shamika's son, Shringi, that
Parikshit would die from the bite of the snake Takshaka. Janamejaya performed a snake sacrifice for the destruction of the snakes. Takshaka was saved by the intervention of the sage Astika, Jaratkaru's son.]. Having performed the final rites of the sacrifice, King Janamejaya was delighted. The
king bathed and also bathed his father himself. Having bathed, the best among the Bharata lineage addressed Asti-
ka, who was Jaratkaru's son and was born in a lineage of nomadic mendicants. 'O Astika! This sacrifice of mine
has witnessed various wonders. That is my view. I have even obtained my father, the dispeller of my sorrows,
now.'

'"Astika replied, 'Rishi Dvaipayana is an ancient store of austerities. O best among those of the Kuru lineage! If
he is present at any person's sacrifice, that person conquers both the worlds. O descendant of the Pandava lineage!
You have heard many colourful accounts. The snakes have been reduced to ashes and have followed the footsteps
of your father. O king! Because of your devotion to the truth, Takshaka has also been freed. All the rishis have
been worshipped and you have seen the great-souled one's end[Meaning Parikshit.]. On hearing about this destruction of sin, you
have accumulated a great deal of dharma. On seeing this generous person[This probably means Vedavyasa.], the strands of your heart have been
loosened. There are those who are on the side of dharma, with good deeds and inclinations. On seeing them, sins
are diminished. One should bow down before such people.'"

'Suta continued, "King Janamejaya heard this from the best among brahmanas. He worshipped the rishi and honoured  him  repeatedly.  O  one  who  knows  about  dharma!  He  then  asked  the  undecaying  and  excellent  rishi
Vaishampayana about the remaining part of the account about residence in the forest."'
