Vaishampayana said, 'Those brave tigers among men, the Pandavas, the delight of their mother, remembered
their mother and were afflicted by terrible grief. Unlike what they had always done earlier, they no longer devoted themselves to the royal duties. Before this, all of them had performed those tasks of the kingdom. But they
no longer did this. They were permeated by sorrow and could find nothing to delight them. Even if they were addressed by someone, they did not honour that person back in reply. Those brave ones were impossible to assail and
were like the ocean in gravity. However, because of being afflicted by grief, they seemed to be ignorant. It was as
if they had lost their senses. The descendants of the Kuru lineage remembered their mother. "How will the emaciated Pritha be able to bear the burden of the aged couple? How is the king? He has lost his sons and is without a
refuge too. With his wife, how will he dwell in a forest that is infested with carnivorous beasts? The relatives of
the queen, the immensely fortunate Gandhari, have been slain. How will she follow her aged and blind husband in
that desolate forest?" Extremely anxious, this is the way they conversed.

'They then made up their minds to go and see Dhritarashtra. Sahadeva bowed down before the king and said, "I
can see that you have made up your mind to go there. Out of respect for you, I was unable to say that I also desired
that. O Indra among kings! It is time for us to go. Through good fortune, I will be able to see how the ascetic Kunti
is faring. The aged ascetic will have matted hair. Her limbs will have been wounded from kusha and kasha[From sleeping on them. Both kusha and kasha are kinds of grass.]. She
has been reared in palaces and mansions and has enjoyed great happiness. She is now exhausted and extremely
miserable. When will I see my mother? O bull among the Bharata lineage! The progress of mortals is indeed temporary. The princess Kunti, who enjoyed happiness, is now in a forest." Hearing Sahadeva's words, the queen
Droupadi, supreme among women, honoured the king and said, "If the queen Pritha is alive, when will I see her?
O lord of men! If she is still alive, all of us will be delighted. In this way, may your mind and intelligence always
find pleasure in dharma. O Indra among kings! You should now do what is best for us. O king! Know that all the
daughters-in-law are ready, with their feet poised. They desire to see Kunti, Gandhari and their father-in-law." O
bull among the Bharata lineage! The queen Panchali addressed the king in this way. He accordingly summoned the
commander of the soldiers and instructed him about everything. "Make the soldiers advance, with a large number
of chariots and elephants. I wish to see how King Dhritarashtra is in the forest. Let the superintendents of the
women be asked to ready many vehicles. Let all the thousands of palanquins be prepared. We need carts, stores,
tents, treasuries and artisans. Let the supervisors of the treasuries also advance towards the hermitage in Kurukshetra. Let there not be any restrictions for any of the citizens who wish to see the king and let them be protected
well. Let there be cooks and all the overseers of the kitchen. Let many kinds of food and edible items be loaded
onto the carts. Let it immediately be announced that we will depart tomorrow. Let diverse kinds of dwelling houses
be constructed along the way." With his brothers, the Pandava king issued these kinds of instructions. Next day,
with the women and children in front, the king left. Once outside, the king waited for five days, protecting and
waiting for the large number of people who wanted to go. After this, he left for the forest.'
