The preceptor said, 'Beings come to a bad end because they are lazy and addicted to the objects of the senses.
However, not being attached to these, great-souled ones attain the supreme objective. Birth, death, old
age, misery, disease and mental anguish-seeing that the world is always overwhelmed by these, an intelligent person seeks to bring about his emancipation. He must be pure and without ego in his words, mind and body. He must
be tranquil, learned and a mendicant who is indifferent. He will then roam around happily. However, if there is attachment in his mind because of compassion towards beings, he must ignore this, knowing that everything in this
universe is because of the fruits of earlier deeds. Whether good or bad deeds have been committed earlier, those
results must be borne. In words, intelligence and action-one must peform auspicious deeds. Non-violence, truthfulness in speech, uprightness towards all beings, forgiveness and lack of distraction-a person who follows this is
happy. This is supreme dharma and brings joy to all beings. Know that this eliminates all misery. A person who
knows the truth about this is happy. One must use one's intelligence to control one's mind and sustain all beings.
One must not desire to injure them and one must not allow one's thoughts to bind one down. One should direct
one's words and mind towards such action. He should always speak virtuous words, looking towards the subtleties
of dharma, and speak words that do not censure, but are truthful and do not cause injury. Evil results from harsh
and violent words which are cruel and condemning, as it does from excessive speech. One's consciousness is then
distracted. Words lead to attachment. If one is detached, that should be reflected in words too. One should avoid
tamas in intelligence, mind and deeds. If a person resorts to action because of rajas, he will reap the consequences.
He will obtain misery in this world and hell thereafter. Therefore, one must exhibit patience in one's mind, words
and body and act accordingly. Bandits who are carrying loads of sheep always opt for directions that are adverse[These are stolen sheep and the king's soldiers will catch them along the way.].
Know that ignorant people in the world are like that. If the bandits wish to follow desirable directions, they have to
fling aside their burdens. Like that, to obtain happiness, one has to cast aside acts based on rajas and tamas. Such a
person is not suspicious. He doesn't desire anything. He has freed himself from possessions. He lives alone. He
has attained all his desires. He is an ascetic. He is in control of his senses. He has burnt his hardships through
knowledge. He has controlled his atman. Having withdrawn his mind, he obtains the supreme. There is no doubt
that a patient man who has cleansed his soul must control his intelligence. The mind must be controlled with intelligence and desire for objects controlled with the mind. When the senses have been restrained and the mind is under subjugation, the god manifests himself and one cheerfully advances towards that lord. When the mind has been
controlled, Brahma manifests himself. One must not engage in yoga and tantra, in any form at all. Instead, one
must act so that one's conduct is permeated by the warp of that tantra[This presumably means that yoga and tantra must not be practised so as to obtain any special powers. They are
not an end. They are the means to the end of good conduct.]. One should seek to sustain oneself on broken bits of grain, seeds from which oil has been extracted, inferior kinds of grain[Kulmasha. Alternatively, a kind of bean.], vegetables, barley, coarsely
ground meal, roots and fruit that have been obtained through begging. Depending on the time and the place, a virtuous person will be restrained in his diet. Having examined it, he will follow the appropriate conduct. This is like
gradually kindling a fire. One must gently use the kindling of knowledge and the sun of knowledge will manifest
itself. Ignorance is actually based on knowledge and the three worlds are based on that[There is ignorance because the knowledge is clouded.].Jnana follows vijnana[External and internal knowledge, respectively. The former is learnt from teachers, the latter from one's own self.]
and destroys the ignorance. One does not know the eternal because they seem to be separate[Presumably the atman and the brahman.].  A  person  who
knows about renunciation is devoid of attachment and is freed. Having overcome age, old age and death, he wins
the eternal brahman. He obtains immortality, the Akshara who is without change.""