'Dhritarashtra asked, "When Drona's maharatha son headed towards the camp, were Kripa and Bhoja frightened?
Did they retreat? Were they restrained by the inferior guards and did they run away? Did those maharathas think
that they[The opponents.] were irresistible and refrain? Or did they crush the camp and kill the Somakas and the Pandavas? Did
they follow Duryodhana's supreme footsteps in the encounter? Were they slain by the Panchalas and did they lie
down on the ground? What tasks did those two accomplish? O Sanjaya! Tell me that."

'Sanjaya replied, "Drona's great-souled son headed towards the camp and Kripa and Kritavarma stationed themselves at the gate of the camp. O king! On seeing that those two maharathas were ready to make efforts, Ashvatthama was delighted and softly spoke these words. 'If the two of you try, you are sufficient to destroy all the
kshatriyas, not to speak of the remaining warriors, especially when they are asleep. I will penetrate the camp and
roam around like Death, so that not a single man escapes from me with his life.' Having said this, Drona's son penetrated the large camp of the Parthas. Casting aside all fear, he entered through a spot where there was no gate. The
mighty-armed one knew the spot and entered. He quietly approached Dhrishtadyumna's abode. Having performed
great deeds in the battle, they[The Panchalas.] were extremely exhausted and slept at ease, surrounded by their own soldiers. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! He entered Dhrishtadyumna's abode. Drona's son saw that Panchala[Dhrishtadyumna.] was lying down, as if he was dead. He was on a large and excellent bed, covered by an expensive and silken sheet. This
was covered with excellent garlands and was fragrant with the aroma of incense. The great-souled one was calmly
sleeping, devoid of any fear. O lord of the earth! He awoke the sleeping one with a kick of his foot. With the touch
of the foot, the one who was indomitable in battle awoke. The one with an immeasurable soul recognized Drona's
maharatha son. As he was rising from his bed, the immensely strong Ashvatthama seized him by his hair and
pressed him down on the ground with his hands. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He was crushed down with
great force. Because of consternation and sleep, Panchala was unable to resist then. O king! He pressed him down
on his throat and his chest with both his feet. Though he roared and writhed, he[Ashvatthama.] was about to kill him like an animal. He tore at Drona's son with his nails and gently said, 'O son of the preceptor! Slay me with your weapon. Do
not delay. O best among men! By doing this, let me go the worlds of the virtuous.' Having heard the words that he
had spoken, Drona's son replied, 'O worst of your lineage! There is no world for those who slay their preceptor. O
evil-minded one! You do not deserve to be killed by any weapon.' Having spoken thus, like a lion against an elephant, he angrily struck the brave one in his inner organs with extremely fierce kicks of his feet. O great king! As
he was being killed in that abode, the brave one's cries woke up the women and the guards. They saw that his body
was being crushed by someone with superhuman valour and took that being to be a demon. Therefore, out of fear,
they did not raise an alarm. Having dispatched him to Yama's eternal abode, the energetic one approached his extremely handsome chariot and ascended it. O king! He emerged from that abode and made the directions resound.
The powerful one left for other parts of the camp on the chariot, wishing to kill the enemy.

'"When Drona's maharatha son had left, all the women and the guards let out cries of lamentation. On seeing
that the king, Dhrishtadyumna, had been killed, they were overcome with great sorrow. On hearing their shrieks,
all the kshatriyas awoke. The bulls among kshatriyas swiftly approached and asked, 'What has happened? Tell us.'

O king! The women had been terrified at the sight of Bharadvaja's descendant[Ashvatthama.]. In distressed voices that choked
with tears, they said, 'Swiftly follow him. We do not know whether it was a rakshasa or a human. He has killed
the king of Panchala and is now stationed on his chariot.' At this, the foremost among warriors violently surrounded him. On seeing that they were descending on him, he uprooted all of them with rudrastra[Divine weapon named after Rudra, Shiva.]. Having slain
Dhrishtadyumna and all his followers, he saw that Uttamouja was sleeping nearby, on his bed. He attacked him
and forcefully pressed down on his throat and his chest with his feet. He thus killed that scorcher of enemies, while
he was shrieking. Thinking that he had been killed by a rakshasa, Yudhamanyu approached. He raised a club and
powerfully struck Drona's son in the chest. However, he[Ashvatthama.] rushed towards him, and seizing him, flung him down
on the ground. As he writhed, he slew him like an animal. Having slain that brave one, he attacked the others. O
Indra among kings! Wherever those maharathas slept, quivered, trembled and strove, he killed them like animals at
a sacrifice. He grasped his sword and separately killed many others. Skilled in fighting with the sword, he roamed
along different paths in various parts of the camp. He saw army divisions and killed those who were sleeping in the
midst of those divisions. They were exhausted and had cast aside their weapons. He uprooted all of them in a short
instant. With that supreme sword, he brought down warriors, horses and elephants. All his limbs were covered
with blood and he was like Death, created by Destiny. Drona's son raised his sword and made them tremble. He
struck them with three different motions of the sword[In Dhanurveda, there were many techniques (motions) of fighting with the sword and it is not immediately obvious which three are meant.] and was covered in blood. He was covered in red and
fought with that blazing sword. His form was superhuman and he was resplendent and extremely terrible. O
Kouravya! Those who were awakened were confused by the noise. On seeing Drona's son, they were distressed
and glanced towards each other. On beholding his form, the kshatriyas, the destroyers of enemies, thought that he
was a rakshasa and closed their eyes. Assuming a terrible form like Yama, he roamed around in that camp.

'"He saw Droupadi's sons and the remaining Somakas. O lord of the earth! Frightened by the noise and hearing
that Dhrishtadyumna had been killed, Droupadi's maharatha sons grasped bows in their hands. Without any fear,
they countered Bharadvaja's son with storms of arrows. The Prabhadrakas awoke. With loud roars, they and
Shikhandi struck Drona's son with arrows that possessed stone heads. On seeing that they were raining down
showers of arrows, Bharadvaja's descendant roared powerfully and wished to kill the ones who were extremely
difficult to defeat. Remembering the death of his father, he became extremely angry. He swiftly descended from
his chariot and rushed against them. In that encounter, he picked up a giant shield that had the marks of one thousand moons and also a large and shining sword that was decorated with gold. With that sword, the powerful one
roamed around and attacked Droupadi's sons. O king! In that encounter, the tiger among men struck
Prativindhya[Droupadi's son through Yudhishthira.] in the abdomen and killed him. Slain, he fell down on the ground. The powerful Sutasoma[Droupadi's son through Bhima.] struck
Drona's son with a javelin and again attacked Drona's son with a sword. However, the bull among men severed
Sutasoma's arm, with the sword in it. He struck him again in the side and with his heart shattered, he fell down.
Nakula's valiant son, Shatanika, picked up a chariot wheel. Using both his hands, he flung it with great force and
struck him[Ashvatthama.] in the chest. However, after the wheel had been flung, the brahmana attacked Shatanika. He lost his
senses and fell down on the ground and he severed his head[Ashvatthama severed Shatanika's head.]. Shrutakarma[Droupadi's son through Sahadeva.] picked up a club and attacked him.
He attacked Drona's son and severely struck him on the left side of his head. However, with that supreme sword,
he struck Shrutakarma on his face. Slain and bereft of his senses, he fell down on the ground, with his face disfigured. At this sound, the brave Shrutakirti[Droupadi's son through Arjuna.] seized a giant bow. He attacked Ashvatthama and countered him with
a shower of arrows. However, he countered that shower of arrows with his shield. O king! He then severed his
head, with the earrings, from his body. The slayer of Bhishma[Shikhandi.], together with all the Prabhadrakas, armed themselves with many weapons and attacked the brave and powerful one from all sides. He[Shikhandi.] used his bow to strike
him between the eyebrows with an arrow with a stone head. At this, Drona's extremely powerful son was filled
with great rage. He attacked Shikhandi and cut him down into two pieces with his sword. Having killed Shikhandi,
the scorcher of enemies was enraged and powerfully attacked all the large numbers of Prabhadrakas. He also attacked the remaining troops in Virata's army. Wherever the immensely strong one saw the sons, grandsons and
well-wishers of Drupada, he created a terrible carnage. He attacked many other men and killed them, one after the
other. Drona's son was skilled in executing motions with the sword and struck them down with his sword.

'"They saw Kali[The text uses the word Kaali, a natural translation being the goddess. However, since the goddess Kali is unusual in the Mahabharata, a dark personification of the night is also possible.], with red eyes and a red mouth, adorned in red garlands and smeared with crimson paste.
She was attired in a single red garment and had a noose in her hand. She had a tuft on her head. They saw that dark
night stationed before them, as if she was smiling. She seemed to have tied up men, horses and elephants in a terrible bond. She seemed to tie up many dead bodies with nooses in their hair and bear them away. O venerable one!
The foremost among warriors were sleeping and in their dreams saw them borne away by the night, as they were
constantly struck by Drona's son. Since the battle between the Kuru and the Pandava soldiers had commenced,
they had always seen that female deity and Drona's son in their dreams. They had already been slain by destiny
and later, they were brought down by Drona's son. He roared frightfully and terrified all the beings. Those brave
ones remembered the Kali that they had seen earlier. As they were oppressed by destiny, that is what they thought.
Because of those roars, hundreds and thousands of archers in the camp of the Pandaveyas woke up. Like Death
created by Destiny, he severed the feet of some and the thighs of others. He shattered the flanks of others. As they
were crushed severely, they emitted piteous sounds of lamentation. O lord! The earth was covered by them and
there were others who were crushed by elephants and horses. Some exclaimed, 'What is this? Who is this? What is
this noise? Who has done this?' As they wailed thus, Drona's son became their destroyer. He angrily destroyed the
Pandus and the Srinjayas, who were without weapons and armour. Drona's son, supreme among strikers, dispatched them to the world of the dead. They were without weapons and awoke, overcome by fear. Some were
blind with sleep and bereft of their senses. They seemed to vanish there[Killed by Ashvatthama.]. Some were paralysed in their thighs.
Others were full of lassitude and lost their energy. They lamented in great fright and began to kill each other.
Drona's son once again ascended his chariot, the one that made a thunderous noise. With the bow in his hand, he
used arrows to dispatch many others to Yama's eternal abode. Other best among men sought to approach him
again. But while they were still at a distance, those brave ones were offered up to that terrible night. He crushed
many with that fierce chariot. He showered the enemy with many diverse kinds of arrows. Yet again, he grasped
that extremely wonderful shield marked with the signs of one hundred moons[The earlier reference was to one thousand moons.] and the sword that possessed the
complexion of the sky, and roamed around. In that encounter in the camp, Drona's son was indomitable. O Indra
among kings! He agitated them, like an elephant in a large lake. O king! Many warriors were awoken by the noise,
still somewhat unconscious. They were afflicted by sleep. They were afflicted by fear. They ran around, here and
there. There were those who couldn't find a voice and others who shrieked. There were those who screamed a lot
and those who screamed little. Some could not find their weapons and their garments. Others had dishevelled hair
and could not recognize each other. There were others who awoke and were terrified. Some wandered around aimlessly. Some released excrement. Others released urine. O Indra among kings! The horses and the elephants tore
off their bonds. Others clung to each other and crated a great melee. Some men were frightened and lay down on
the ground. As they fell down there, the elephants and the horses crushed them.

'"O bull among men! While this was going on, the rakshasas were satisfied and screamed in delight. O best
among the Bharata lineage! O king! The large number of delighted demons emitted roars and filled all the directions and the sky with that loud noise. On hearing the woes of lamentation, the elephants and horses were frightened. O king! They freed themselves and as they fled, they crushed the men in the camp. As they ran here and
there, a dust arose from their feet and this doubled the darkness of the night in the camp. Because of the darkness
that was created, all the people were confounded. They could no longer recognize their fathers and their sons. Nor
did brothers recognize their brothers. Elephants attacked elephants that were without riders and horses attacked
horses. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They attacked, broke and crushed each other there. As they were
mangled and fell down, they killed each other. As they fell down, they brought down others and crushed them. The
men were unconscious, sleepy and covered in darkness. Driven by destiny there, they killed those on their own
side. Those in charge of gates abandoned the gates. Those in charge of divisions abandoned the divisions. To the
best of their capacity, they fled. They were unconscious and no longer knew the directions. O lord! Without knowing, they destroyed each other. Their senses robbed by destiny, they cried out for their fathers and their sons. As
they fled in various directions, they abandoned those on their own side and their relatives. Other men screamed and
called out to each other by the names of their lineages. There were others who lamented as they fell down on the
ground. Drona's son was crazy in that encounter. Recognizing them, he brought them down.

'"There were others who were repeatedly struck and lost their senses. Those kshatriyas were afflicted by fear
and tried to run away from the camp. Terrified and seeking to preserve their lives, they emerged from the camp. In
the vicinity of the gate, they were killed by Kritavarma and Kripa. They were devoid of weapons, implements and
armour. Their hair was dishevelled and they joined their hands in salutation. They trembled on the ground and
were terrified. They begged to be set free. O great king! But those who emerged outside the camp were not set free
by the evil-minded Kripa and Hardikya. They also wanted to do that which would please Drona's son. Therefore,
in three places, they set fire to the camp. O great king! When the camp was thus lit, Ashvatthama, the one who delighted his father, roamed around with the sword, exhibiting the dexterity of his hands. Some brave ones attacked,
others ran away. The best of brahmanas used his sword to rob all those men of their lives. The valiant one severed
some warriors in the middle with his sword. Drona's son angrily brought them down, as if they were stalks of sesamum. Men, horses and the best of elephants shrieked in grievous tones. O bull among the Bharata lineage! They
fell down and were strewn all over the ground. Thousands of men were slain and fell down. There were many
headless torsos which were seen to rise and then fall down again. Arms with weapons and armlets, and heads, were
severed. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were thighs that were like the trunks of elephants, and arms
and feet. The backs of some were mangled, and the heads of others. The flanks of others were mangled. Drona's
son attacked them all, while some retreated. He severed the bodies of some men at the middle and sliced off the
ears of others. He struck others on the shoulders and pressed down the heads of some into their bodies. While he
roamed around, slaughtering many men, the terrible night was covered in darkness and seemed to become even
more fearful. Some still had some life left. Other men were slain in thousands. There were innumerable elephants
and horses on the ground and it looked terrible. It was full of yakshas[Yakshas are semi-divine species and companions of Kubera, the god of treasure.] and rakshasas. It was terrible because of
the chariots, the horses and the elephants. As Drona's son angrily severed them, they fell down on the ground.
Some screamed for their mothers, others for their fathers, and still others for their brothers.

'"Some exclaimed, 'The angry sons of Dhritarashtra could not accomplish this in the battle. While we were
sleeping, the evil-acting rakshasas have done this[They had not realized that it was Ashvatthama.]. As long as he is protected by Janardana, Kounteya is incapable of being vanquished by gods, asuras, gandharvas[Gandharvas are celestial musicians and semi-divine.], yakshas and rakshasas. He is devoted to brahmanas. He
is truthful in speech. He is controlled. He is compassionate towards all beings. Partha Dhananjaya does not kill one
who is sleeping, one who is distracted, one who has cast aside his weapons, one who has joined his hands in salutation, one who is running away, or one whose hair is dishevelled. These rakshasas, evil in their deeds, are perpetrating these terrible acts on us.' Lamenting in this way, many men lay down. The lamentations of men and the
shrieks of others died down in a short while. That great and tumultuous sound was pacified. O lord of the earth!
The earth was sprinkled with blood and because of that, the large and fierce dust swiftly disappeared. Thousands of
men were bereft of enterprise and writhed around in agony. As they fell down, those men were angrily killed, like
Pashupati[Shiva.] amidst animals. There were some who clung to each other as they lay down. There were others who
ran away. Some tried to hide, while others tried to fight. However, Drona's son brought all of them down. They
were burnt by the flames and slaughtered by him. O Indra among kings! Before half of the night was over, that
large army of the Pandavas was conveyed by Drona's son to Yama's abode. That night increased the delight of
creatures that roam around in the night, though it caused a terrible carnage among men, elephants and horses.
Many different kinds of rakshasas and pishachas were seen there. They fed on the flesh of men and drank the
blood. They were fierce, tawny and terrible. They had teeth like stone and were covered with blood. Their hair was
matted and their thighs were long. They had five feet and large stomachs. There were those with five fingers, harsh
and malformed, with terrible roars. Some had knees that were like jars. Others were short in stature, blue in the
throat and fierce. They were extremely cruel and hideous. They were abominable and came with their sons and
wives. Rakshasas of many different kinds of forms were seen there. They cheerfully drank the blood. Others
danced around in large numbers. They exclaimed, 'This is great. This is pure. This is tasty.' There were also carnivorous creatures that subsisted on flesh. They fed on the fat, marrow, bones, blood, oily substances and other
parts of the body that they regarded as excellent meat. Other demons[Kukshila, a specific kind of evil spirit.] drank the fat that flowed and danced
around. There were terrible and fierce carnivorous creatures that fed on flesh, with many kinds of mouths. They
came there, in tens of thousands, millions and tens of millions. There were gigantic rakshasas terrible in form, the
performers of cruel deeds. They were delighted and satisfied at this destruction. O lord of men! Many such demons
assembled.

'"When it was morning, Drona's son desired to leave the camp. His body was covered in human blood and the
sword was still in his grasp. O lord! It was as if the sword had become one with his hand. Having destroyed the
men, he was resplendent in that carnage of men. He was like a fire that consumes all beings, when the destruction
of a yuga is near. O lord! Drona's son accomplished the task that he swore to undertake, but walked along an undesirable path. He followed an extremely difficult path and forgot the fever on account of his father. The camp was
asleep, when he had entered in the night and killed. In a similar silence, the bull among men emerged. With the
other two[Kripa and Kritavarma.], the valiant one emerged from the camp. O lord! He joyfully told them what he had accomplished and
delighted them. They also told him about the pleasant deeds that they had undertaken and about how they had destroyed thousands of Panchalas and Srinjayas. They roared in delight and slapped their palms. In this way, that
night caused a great destruction of men among the Somakas. While they were asleep and unconscious, this terrible
and fearful destruction took place. There is no doubt that the course of destiny cannot be crossed. Those who
caused a great carnage of men amongst us were thus slain."

'Dhritarashtra asked, "Why did Drona's maharatha son not accomplish such a great deed earlier? He did not
achieve such a feat, though he was firm in ensuring the victory of my son. Why did he perform this task after my
son had been killed? After all, Drona's son is a great archer. You should tell me this."

'Sanjaya replied, "O descendant of the Kuru lineage! This was certainly because of terror and fright. Drona's
son could accomplish this deed because the Parthas, the intelligent Keshava and Satyaki were not present[In Section 77 (Volume 7), we have been told that the Pandavas, Krishna and Satyaki had gone to the Kourava
camp.]. In
their presence, even the lord of the Maruts[Indra is the lord of the Maruts.] would have been unable to kill them. O king! O lord! And this kind
of conduct was possible because the men were asleep. Having caused that extremely great carnage of men among
the Pandavas, those maharathas[Ashvatthama, Kripa and Kritavarma.] met each other and exclaimed, 'This was fortunate. It was good fortune.' Those
two congratulated Drona's son and embraced him. In great delight, he[Ashvatthama.] spoke these supreme words. 'All the Panchalas have been slain and all of Droupadi's sons. The Somakas and all the remaining Matsyas have been slain by
me. Having accomplished this deed, let us immediately go to the spot where the king[Duryodhana.] is. If he is still alive, we
will give him this pleasant news.'"'
