Vaishampayana said, 'Ten mighty-armed maharathas, destroyers of enemy warriors, followed Devaki's son, with
weapons in their hands. O destroyer of enemies! There were one thousand foot soldiers and riders. O king! There
were hundreds of others, with plenty of provisions.'

Janamejaya asked, 'How did the great-souled Dasharha Madhusudana travel? What portents were seen when
that immensely energetic one progressed?'

Vaishampayana said, 'When the great-souled one travelled, listen to the extraordinary portents. Some were divine, driven by destiny. Others were adverse portents. In the clear sky, there was thunder, with lightning. Behind
him, Parjanya showered down fiercely, though there were no clouds. The seven great rivers, supreme among rivers,
flow in an eastern direction[The seven great rivers (sapta sindhu) is not a fixed list. Since flowing eastwards is mentioned, one probably
means Sindhu, Sarasvati, Vipasha (Beas), Shatadru (Sutlej), Chandrabhaga or Asikni (Chenab), Vitasta (Jhelum)
and Parushni (Ravi).]. All of them reversed direction. All the directions were reversed and nothing could be
discerned. O king! Fires were ignited and the earth trembled. Hundreds of wells and water pots overflowed and
water flowed out. The entire earth was covered in darkness. O king! Because of the dust, the directions and the
sub-directions could not be seen. There was a loud roar in the sky, though nothing could be seen. O king! There
were extraordinary things in every region. A storm from the south-western direction devastated Hastinapura. With
a harsh and terrible roar, it uprooted a large number of trees. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Along whatever
route Varshneya progressed, there was a pleasant breeze and everything was favourable. There was a shower of
flowers, with a large number of lotuses. The roads became smooth and pleasant, without prickly grass and thorns.
O king! Wherever the mighty-armed one went, he was honoured by brahmanas. The granter of riches was worshipped with madhuparka and flowers. Women gathered along the road and showered fragrant and wild flowers on
the great-souled one. He passed the beautiful Shalibhavana, which had an abundance of crops. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! It was a happy spot, where supreme dharma was followed. He saw many animals and beautiful
villages, pleasant to the heart. There were diverse cities and many kingdoms. The people there were protected by
the Bharatas and were always happy, happy in their hearts. They were without anxiety and were ignorant about any
evil designs on the part of enemies. The residents of the city of Upaplavya came out in large numbers to see Vishvaksena. They stood along the road. All of them honoured the famous lord, who had arrived in that country as a
guest, blazing like a fire, with the homage that he deserved.

'Keshava, the slayer of enemy heroes, arrived in Vrikasthala. The clear sun's scattered rays were red. He swiftly
descended from the chariot and performed the appropriate ablutions. He gave instructions that the chariot should
be unyoked and seated himself for the evening rites. Having unharnessed the horses and tended to them, in accordance with the sacred texts[Texts pertaining to the care of horses.], Daruka removed their armour and released them. After he had done all that, Madhusudana said, "To accomplish Yudhishthira's objective, we will spend the night here." Getting to know about his
intention, the men instantly set up camp there and obtained excellent food and drink. O king! The foremost brahmanas from the village, noble in birth and conduct, modest and devoted to the tasks of brahmanas, approached the
great-souled Hrishikesha, the destroyer of enemies. They worshipped him with benedictions and auspicious words.
Having worshipped the great-souled Dasharha, honoured by all the worlds, they offered him their houses, with all
their riches. The lord told them that they had done enough and returned their homage in the appropriate way. Having entered their houses, he returned again[To his camp.], in their company. Keshava offered succulent food to the brahmanas
and himself ate in their company. All of them spent the night in comfort.'
