Vyasa said, 'I have recounted everything that you asked about, about how different categories of beings are
appointed. I will now tell you about the tasks to be undertaken by brahmanas. There are jatakarma and other rituals, ending with samavartana[These are samskaras or sacraments and there are thirteen of these. The list varies a bit. But one list is vivaha
(marriage), garbhalambhana (conception), pumshavana (engendering a male child), simantonnayana (parting
the hair, performed in the fourth month of pregnancy), jatakarma (birth rites), namakarana (naming), chudakarma (tonsure), annaprashana (first solid food), keshanta (first shaving of the head), upanayana (sacred thread),
vidyarambha (commencement of studies), samavartana (graduation) and antyeshti (funeral rites).].  These involve the payment of  dakshina and require a preceptor who  is
knowledgable about the Vedas. One must be engaged in serving the preceptor and study all the Vedas. Having repaid the preceptor's debt[By paying the fee due to the preceptor.], one obtains knowledge about all the sacrifices, and graduates. Having taken the preceptor's permission, one must then adopt one of the four ashramas and follow its prescribed ordinances, until one
is freed from one's body. One can accept a wife for generating offspring. Or one can adhere to brahmacharya. Or,
with the preceptor, one can dwell in the forest. Or one can follow the dharma of a mendicant. The state of the
householder is said to be the foundation for all four. Such a person, who is self-controlled and matures while he
scrapes away[Scrapes away all the attachments.], is successful everywhere. Through offspring, studying and performing sacrifices, he is freed from
the  three  divine  debts[Offspring repays the debt to ancestors, studying repays the debt to the sages and sacrifices repay the debt to
gods.].  Having  purified  himself  through  these  deeds,  he  can  then  proceed  to  the  other
ashramas[Vanaprastha and sannyasa.]. He must dwell in a place of learning that is the most sacred spot on earth. That will be the yardstick
for his obtaining supreme fame. The fame of brahmanas increases through extremely great austerities, accomplishment in learning, performing sacrifices and donating. As long as his deeds and fame remain in this world, a man
obtains eternal and sacred worlds in the hereafter. He must study and teach. He must officiate at a sacrifice and perform his own sacrifices. He must not receive or give without reason. Great riches can be obtained by officiating at
sacrifices, through pupils and through maidens[Maidens clearly refers to marriage. Anything beyond that is a matter of deduction, since the text doesn't elaborate. However, both dowry and brideprice were not approved of.]. Whatever has been obtained must not be enjoyed alone. For a
person who is in the state of a householder, there is no option but to receive for the sake of gods, rishis, ancestors,
preceptors, the aged, the diseased and the hungry[The brahmana must receive for the sake of subsistence and for performing pious acts towards these.]. For those who are afflicted and in disguise, one must give, including cooked food, to the best of one's capacity. One must indeed give in excess of one's capacity. To those who
deserve to be given, there is nothing that cannot be given.

'"'The virtuous and learned must even be given Uchchaishrava[The name of Indra's horse. That is, everything can be given to them.]. Entreated by Kavya[Presumably Shukracharya.], Satyasandha, great in
his vows, gave up his own life for the sake of protecting a brahmana and went to heaven[Nothing more is known about this incident. King Satyasandha occurs in the Skanda Purana, but that story is
different.]. Samkriti's son, Rantideva, offered only lukewarm water to the great-souled Vasishtha and obtained greatness in the vault of heaven.
Atri's son, Indradamana, was an intelligent lord of the earth. He gave many kinds of riches to deserving people and
obtained worlds in the hereafter. Ushinara's son, Shibi, gave up his limbs and his beloved son for the sake of benefiting a brahmana and went to heaven[Shibi was a generous king. A hawk pursued a pigeon and Shibi gave up his own flesh to protect the pigeon from
the hawk. But that story has nothing about a brahmana, or about Shibi's son.]. Pratardana was the lord of Kashi and gave up his own eyes for the sake of
a brahmana, obtaining umatched fame here and in the hereafter. The extremely intelligent Devavridha gave away a
celestial umbrella, with eight golden ribs, and went to heaven with his entire kingdom. The immensely energetic
Samkriti,  from  Atri's  lineage,  instructed  his  pupils  about  Brahma,  who  is  without  qualities,  and  went  to  the
supreme worlds. The powerful Ambarisha gave brahmanas eleven billion cows and went to heaven, with his entire
kingdom. For the sake of brahmanas, Savitri gave away her earrings and Janamejaya gave away his body. Both of
them went to the supreme worlds. Yuvanashva, the son of Vrishadarbha, gave away all his jewels, his beloved
women and a beautiful residence, and obtained the supreme worlds. Nimi, the king of Videha, gave away his kingdom. Jamadagni's son[Parashurama.] gave away the earth. Gaya gave away the earth, with its cities, to brahmanas. There was a
time when it did not rain and Vasishtha sustained and kept all the beings alive, like Prajapati among the subjects.
Karandhama's son was King Marutta. He gave away his daughter to Angiras and swiftly proceeded to heaven.
King Brahmadatta of Panchala was supreme among intelligent ones. He gave away his treasure and a conch shell
to the foremost among brahmanas and obtained the worlds[This may be an inaccurate translation. The text uses the word shankha. A natural translation for this is conch
shell. However, giving away a conch shell does not fit the context. Shankha also means a large number. So he
may have given away a large amount of treasure.]. King Mitrasaha gave away his beloved wife, Madayanti, to the great-souled Vasishtha and went to heaven with her. The immensely illustrious royal rishi, Sahasrajit,  gave  away  his  beloved  life  for  the  sake  of  a  brahmana  and  went  to  the  supreme  worlds.  The  great  king,
Shatadyumna, gave Mudgala a golden residence that was full of all the objects of pleasure and went to heaven. The
powerful king of Shalva was known by the name of Dyutiman. He gave his kingdom to Richika and went to the
supreme worlds. The royal rishi, Madirashva, gave away his slender-waisted daughter to Hiranyahasta and went to
worlds  that the gods  are content with. The  lord  and  royal  rishi,  Lomapada,  gave  away  his  daughter  Shanta  to
Rishyashringa and obtained all the great objects of desire. The immensely energetic King Prasenjit gave away one
hundred thousand cows,  with their calves, and went to the supreme worlds. There are many other such  great-
souled ones. They were virtuous in their souls and conquered their senses. Through their donations and austerities,
they went to heaven. As long as the earth exists, their fame will remain established. They obtained heaven through
donations, sacrifices and the generation of offspring.'"'
