Vyasa said, 'Therefore, if one does not wish to be confused in one's mind, when one is immersed and submerged, one must resort to the raft of knowledge. Learned and patient ones use this raft, which is constructed out of wisdom, to cross over. Those who are not learned cannot save themselves, or others. Sages who are united with yoga sever themselves from the taints. They yoke themselves to the ten tasks that bring bliss and also to
anupaya and upaya[There are thus twelve requirements and there is interpretation involved. These twelve are: (1) a clean place
where yoga must be performed; (2) pure acts; (3) attachment towards others who are devoted to yoga; (4) sacred
objects; (5) the methods used; (6) destruction of desire and attachment; (7) certainty of belief about yoga; (8)
restraint of the senses; (9) purity in food; (10) suppression of attachment towards material objects; (11) regulation of the mind, or not resorting to bad practices (anupaya); and (12) contemplation, or strategy (upaya).]. Those who are wise use their mental sight to control their eyes[As a surrogate for the senses.] and conduct. Those who
desire supreme knowledge use their intelligence to control their speech and thoughts. Those who desire tranquility
in the soul use their knowledge to control their souls. A man who follows this may be extremely terrible, knowledgable about the Vedas or ignorant about hymns and meditation, an observer of dharma and performer of sacrifices or one who commits wicked deeds, a tiger among men or a follower of the practices of eunuchs. But as long
as he follows this, he will be able to cross the ocean of old age and death, which is so difficult to traverse. That is
the reason one must single-mindedly devote oneself to yoga. One who enquires in this way obtains Shabda-Brahma. Dharma is the upastha[There is the imagery of a chariot and upastha is the seat on which the charioteer sits.]. Upaya is the varutha and apaya is the kubara[Upaya means good practices, the opposite of anupaya. Varutha is the wooden bumper around a chariot. Kubara
is the pole for attaching the yoke.]. Apana is the aksha, prana is the
yuga[In pranayama, the breath of life is prana and this has five actions-prana (exhalation), apana (downward inhalation), vyana (diffusion through the body), udana (upward inhalation) and samana (digestive breath). Aksha is the
wheel and yuga is the yoke.]. Wisdom represents the harnesses that are attached to the yoke. Consciousness is the bandhura[The part of the yoke attached to the pole.]. Good
conduct and the avoidance of bad conduct are the nemi[The circumference of the wheel.]. Sight, touch, scent and hearing are the four mounts that
bear it along. Wisdom is the nabhi[Central part of the chariot, where the warrior, as opposed to the charioteer, is seated.]. All the sacred texts are the pratoda[The goad.]. Knowledge is the charioteer. The patient kshetrajna is seated there and faith and self-control are at the front[The two horses at the front.]. Renunciation follows at the rear, with
tranquility. The path is of purification, and meditation is the objective. With the soul, the chariot then obtains radiance in the divine world of Brahma. There are means of yoking this chariot so that one speedily reaches Akshara[The one without decay, the brahman.]
by observing mental ordinances. The chariot then travels fast. I will tell you about this. Altogether, there are seven
kinds of dharana that a learned person practises[Concerning the five elements, intelligence and consciousness.]. There are dharanas to the rear, to the side and everywhere.
Gradually, through these, he controls the earth, the wind, space, water, fire, ego and intelligence and obtains special
powers[These shlokas are difficult to understand and some liberty has been taken.]. He then gradually obtains power over the one who is not manifest. Those who are united with yoga obtain the power of conception. Those who are united with yoga obtain success and behold their own atmans. Instructed properly, he sees the subtlety of the atman. The firmament seems to be covered in a subtle substance, as if
smoke has been mixed with dew. Initially, the soul seems to be freed from the body. When the smoke has disappeared, a second form can be seen. In the sky, he then sees his atman in the form of water. When the water has
passed, the form of fire manifests itself. When that has disappeared, there is the manifestation of a form that has
the complexion of gossamer and is dressed in yellow garments. The yellow then becomes white and there is a form
that is as subtle as the wind. The consciousness becomes white and subtle and this is nothing but the unmanifest
brahman. There are diverse kinds of fruits that result from all these. Listen. If he is able to conquer the earth, he
becomes like Prajapati, undisturbed, and with powers over creation and destruction. He can create beings from his
own body. If he is able to control the quality of the wind, it is said that he can make the earth tremble with only his
toe or finger, or with his hands and feet. If he immerses himself in the quality of space, he assumes the quality of
space and differences between him and space vanish and he can make himself vanish. If he obtains the quality of
water, as he wills, he can drink up all waterbodies. When his form is like that of the fire, he is seen to have a form
that cannot be pacified. When the sense of ego has been conquered, these five[The five elements.] come under subjugation. When
these and the sixth aspect of the atman, intelligence, have been conquered, he obtains all the powers and has a form
that is not blemished. The manifest merges with the unmanifest and the unmanifest can be grasped. Everything in
the world emerges from that[The unmanifest.] and obtains the trait of manifestation. I will explain to you in detail about how
things become manifest. Listen. What is manifest has been spoken about in sankhya[The sankhya school of philosophy.]. Listen. In both yoga[As a school of philosophy.]and
sankhya, twenty-five kinds of truth have been spoken about and treated equally[The number twenty-five cannot quite be pinned down.]. There is no difference between
them. Listen. It has been said that anything that is manifest has birth, growth, decay and death. These are its four
attributes. That which is the reverse of this is said to be the unmanifest. It is the determination of the Vedas that
there are two kinds of atman. One has those four traits[Birth, growth, decay and death.] and the four objectives[Dharma, artha, kama and moksha.] are prescribed for the other. The
manifest comes out of the unmanifest and may have intelligence or may not have intelligence. I have told you
about sattva and kshetrajna, which we have been instructed about[Sattva is the physical body (kshetra) and kshetrajna is the soul or jivatman.]. The Vedas have said that both these atmans
get attached to material objects. Sankhya says that withdrawal from material objects is the characteristic of success. One must be free from a sense of ownership and free from ego. One must be free from opposite sentiments
and dispel all doubt. One must never be angered, nor hate. One must never utter a falsehood. Even if one is censured or struck, one must be friendly and not act in an adverse way. One must restrain all three kinds of chastisement in the form of speech, deeds and thoughts. One must look upon all beings in the same way. Such a person obtains the brahman. A person should not have desire, or lack of desire. He must only establish himself in the journey. He must not be greedy. He must not be distressed. He must be controlled. He must perform tasks and be indifferent to appearance. His senses must be brought together in his mind. He must not deviate from his wishes. He
must show lack of injury towards all beings. According to sankhya, this is the kind of person who is emancipated.
This is also the path of emancipation through yoga. Listen to the reasons for this. If one can progress beyond the
powers obtained through yoga, one is freed. There is no doubt that I have spoken to you about different kinds of
attributes of intelligence. If a person is free from opposite sentiments in this way, he attains the brahman.""
