Vaishampayana said, 'After Kunti's sons were born and Dhritarashtra's sons, the daughter of the king of Madra
privately spoke to Pandu. "O scorcher of enemies! I am not distressed, even though you find no qualities in me. O
unblemished one! Though I am superior[Meaning that she was superior in birth to Kunti.], I have always been regarded as inferior. O king! O descendant of the
Kuru lineage! I have not grieved on learning that Gandhari has given birth to 100 sons. But I do have a great unhappiness. We are not equal in that neither of us has sons. However, it is my destiny that my husband has obtained
sons through Kunti alone. If the princess Kunti can arrange it so that I too have sons, she will do me a favour and
this will be for your welfare too. Since she is my co-wife, I find it awkward to speak to Kuntibhoja's daughter. But
if you are pleased with me, please ask her yourself." Pandu replied, "O Madri! I have always thought about this
matter in my own mind. But I hesitated to speak to you, because I didn't know whether you would like it or not.
Now that I know what you desire, I will act on it. I am certain that she will not refuse when I speak to her." Thereupon, Pandu spoke to Kunti in private.

'Pandu said, "O fortunate one! Please give me offspring for the lineage and the worlds. Do that which pleases
me. Ensure that I, my ancestors and my successors always have funeral cakes. For the sake of giving me pleasure,
you will have to perform a supreme act that brings welfare. Do this extremely difficult act for the sake of your
fame. Even though Indra has obtained sovereignty, he still performs sacrifices, so that he can obtain fame. O beautiful one! There are Brahmanas who know the mantras and have obtained ascetic powers that are difficult to obtain.
For the sake of fame, they too go to preceptors. All rajarshis and all Brahmanas who are blessed with the power of
austerities perform the most difficult of deeds for the sake of fame. O unblemished one! Obtain supreme fame and
save Madri with a boat. Bestow children on her." Having been thus addressed, she spoke to Madri. "Think of some
god once and through him you will certainly obtain a son who will be like him." After thinking about this for some
time, Madri thought about the two Ashvins in her mind. They came and she obtained twin sons-Nakula and Sahadeva. Their beauty was unmatched on earth.

'When the twins were born, the invisible voice spoke again. "These beautiful, brave and righteous sons will
have qualities that will surpass all men. They will be radiant in energy, handsome and prosperous." O lord of the
earth! The inhabitants of the Shatashringa mountains performed the rites of birth and affectionately named them.
The eldest of Kunti's sons was named Yudhishthira. The one in the middle was named Bhimasena. And the third
one was named Arjuna. Affectionately, the Brahmanas named the first of Madri's sons Nakula. And the one born
later was named Sahadeva. These supreme ones of the Kuru lineage were born one year apart.

'For Madri's sake, Pandu once again spoke to Kunti in private. But Pritha replied, "O king! I gave her the secret
to be used once. But she obtained two and I was deceived. I am worried that she will get the better of me[By obtaining more sons than Kunti.]. This
is the evil way of women. Fool that I was, I did not know that by summoning two gods at one time, the fruits could
also be doubled. Therefore, do not command me again. This is a boon that I ask from you." Thus, five sons were
born to Pandu through the gods. They were immensely powerful, performed great deeds and extended the Kuru
lineage. They bore all the auspicious marks and were as handsome as the moon. They were as proud as lions, their
gait was as powerful as lions and they were great archers. Their necks were like those of lions, they were the lords
of men and they grew up with the valour of the gods. They grew up in the sacred Himalaya Mountains. On seeing
them grow, the maharshis who were assembled there were astounded. These five, and the other hundred, extended
the Kuru lineage. They grew up in a short while, like lotuses in a pond.'
