Vaishampayana said, 'O bull among the Bharata lineage! After listening to Keshava's words, Shantanu's son
Bhishma addressed the intolerant Duryodhana. "The words spoken by Krishna are those of a well-wisher who desires peace. O son[The word used is tata.]! Listen to them and do not act out of anger. O son[The word used is tata.]! By not listening to the words of the
great-souled Keshava, you will not obtain well-being, happiness, or good fortune. O son[The word used is tata.]! The mighty-armed
Keshava has told you how to act in accordance with dharma and artha. O king! Follow that path and do not bring
destruction for your subjects. The prosperity of the Bharatas blazes among all the kings. While Dhritarashtra is
alive, do not destroy it because of your evil-mindedness. By acting against Keshava's truthful and beneficial
words, you yourself, your advisers, your sons, your animals, your relatives, your father and the intelligent Vidura
will confront death because of your own perversity. O best of the Bharatas! Do not travel along a deviant path followed by the evil-minded. Do not be the destroyer of your lineage! Do not be a wicked man. Do not cause grief to
your aged father and mother." Then Drona spoke these words to Duryodhana, who was under the influence of intolerance and was sighing repeatedly. "O son[The word used is tata.]! Keshava spoke words to you that are in conformity with dharma
and artha. So did Shantanu's son, Bhishma. O lord of men! Pay heed to them. These two are wise, intelligent, self-
controlled, extremely learned and wish to ensure your welfare. O scorcher of enemies! Accept the words that they
have spoken for your benefit. O immensely wise one! Act in accordance with what Krishna and Bhishma have spoken. Do not listen to the words of those who are inferior in intelligence. Those who are encouraging you have never acted in your interest. When there is a war, they will thrust the enmity of others around your neck. Do not destroy the Kurus and all your sons and brothers. Know that when Vasudeva and Arjuna are together, that power is
invincible. This opinion of your well-wishers, Krishna and Bhishma, is correct. O son[The word used is tata.]! O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! If you do not accept it, you will rue it later. Arjuna is greater than what Jamadagni's son[Parashurama.] has
said. Krishna, Devaki's son, is one whom even the gods find difficult to withstand. O bull among the Bharata lineage! But what is the point of telling you about your happiness and welfare? You have been told all this. Do as you
please. O supreme among the Bharatas! I am not interested in telling you anything more." After these words had
been spoken, Kshatta Vidura looked at Duryodhana, Dhritarashtra's intolerant son, and said, "O Duryodhana! O
bull among the Bharata lineage! I do not sorrow for you. I grieve for these two old ones, Gandhari and your father.
As long as an evil-hearted one like you is their protector, they will wander around, unprotected. They have lost
their friends. They have lost their advisers. They are like birds that have lost their wings. Grieving, they will roam
the entire earth as beggars, having given birth to such a wicked and evil man, the destroyer of his lineage." King
Dhritarashtra then addressed Duryodhana, who was seated with his brothers, surrounded by all the kings. "O Duryodhana! Listen to what the great-souled Shouri has said. Accept his auspicious and eternal words. They will get us
what we aspire for and protect what we already possess[Yoga and kshema respectively.]. Through the help of Krishna, whose deeds are unsullied, together with all the kings, we will obtain everything that we desire. O son! With Keshava's support, go to
Yudhishthira. Act so that complete safety and good health of the Bharatas can be ensured. O son! With Vasudeva
as the tirtha, go to the meeting. O Duryodhana! I think that the time has arrived now. Do not neglect the chance. If
you abandon the peace that is being asked from you, you will rebuff Keshava and your defeat will be ensured. He
has spoken thus for your own welfare."'
