'Duryodhana said, "O Kshatta! Bring Droupadi here, the beloved and honoured wife of the Pandavas. Let her
sweep and perform our tasks. It will be good to see her with the serving girls."

'Vidura replied, "Through people like you, the impossible happens. O evil one! You do not know that you are
tying yourself in a noose. You do not realize that you are extended over a precipice. You are only a deer, but you
are angering tigers. O one who is greatly evil at heart! Angry serpents, full of great venom, have raised themselves
above your head. Do not anger them and go to Yama's abode. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Krishna[Droupadi.]
has not yet become a slave. The king[Yudhishthira.] offered her as stake when he was no longer his master. A bamboo bears
fruit only to kill itself[A bamboo has fruit only when it is old.]. This king, Dhritarashtra's son, also bears fruit. He does not see that gambling leads to
fearful enmity and that he is ripe, like one about to meet his destiny. No one should cause hurt, or act cruelly. Nor
should one extract from one who is miserable. Words that cause pain and hurt others should not be uttered, because
they lead to hell. From his lips, a man utters words that hurt. The one stung by them burns night and day. Therefore, learned ones do not utter words that unleashed on another, pierce the depths of the heart. When a weapon
could not be found, by pawing the ground, it is said that a goat dug up a weapon that was used to cut its own
throat[This is an allusion to an old story that is not recounted completely in the text, perhaps because it was a familiar one. Thieves stole a goat. But when they were ready to kill the goat, they couldn't find the knife, because it
had got buried in the ground. So they set the goat free. Prancing around, the goat unearthed the knife and got
slaughtered in the process.]. Therefore, do not dig up an enmity with the sons of Pandu. No one speaks ill of the forest-dweller or
householder. But like dogs, the same men bark at the ascetic who is full of learning[The sense is that one who should know better, like the ascetic, is censured if he performs an evil act, but not
one who cannot differentiate between good and evil.]. Dhritarashtra's son does
not know the crooked and terrible door that leads to hell. Duhshasana and many others among the Kurus will follow him there, through the route of gambling. Gourds may sink[Gourds are light and float. Gourds sinking conveys a sense of impossibility.] and stones may float. Boats may eternally be
lost on the seas. But King Dhritarashtra's deluded son will not listen to my words, which are appropriate[The word used is pathya, which not only means advice, but also medicine and right diet.] for
him. It is certain that this will be the end of the Kurus, a terrible end that will lead to everyone's destruction. The
words of Kavya and his well-wishers were apt[The word pathya is used again.]. But because greed has expanded, they are no longer listened
to."'
