'Sanjaya said, "Karna was without a chariot and was again defeated by Bhima. He ascended another chariot and
again began to pierce Pandava. They were like giant elephants, goring each other with their tusks. They drew their
bows back to the full extent and struck each other with arrows. Karna powerfully struck Bhima with a storm of arrows. He roared loudly and again struck him on the chest. Bhima pierced him back with ten arrows and again
struck him with twenty arrows with drooping tufts. O king! Karna pierced Bhima between the breasts with nine
arrows and pierced his standard with a sharp arrow. Partha pierced him back with sixty-three arrows, like a giant
elephant struck by a goad or a horse with a whip. O great king! Having been thus pierced by the illustrious Panda-
va, he licked the corners of his mouth and his eyes became red with rage. O great king! He shot an arrow that was
capable of penetrating all bodies towards Bhimasena, like Indra hurling his vajra towards Bala. That arrow had a
colourful tuft and was sharpened on stone. Released from the bow of the suta's son, it pierced Partha in that battle
and penetrated the earth. The mighty-armed Bhima grasped a heavy club that was completely made out of iron.
This had six sides and was decorated with gold. It was four kishkus long[Kishku is a measure of length. It is variously described as forty-two angulas (the length of a finger) or four
hastas (the length of an arm).]. Without reflecting, he hurled this at
the son of the suta. The wrathful descendant of the Bharata lineage hurled this club, like Indra with the vajra
against the asuras. The horses of Adhiratha's son were well trained and well controlled and it slew them. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! He then used a couple of razor-sharp arrows to bring down the standard of Adhiratha's
son and kill his charioteer. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! With his horses and charioteer slain and his standard brought down, Karna was extremely distressed. But he drew his bow and we witnessed Radheya's extraordinary valour. Though he was without a chariot, the foremost among rathas countered his enemy.

'"O king! On seeing that Adhiratha's son, the best of rathas, was without a chariot in that battle, Duryodhana addressed Durmukha[Duryodhana's brother.]. 'O Durmukha! Radheya has been deprived of his chariot by Bhimasena. Provide a chariot
to that maharatha, who is the best among men.' O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing Duryodhana's
words, Durmukha swiftly advanced towards Karna and enveloped Bhima with arrows. On beholding Durmukha in
that battle, following in the footsteps of the son of the suta, Vayu's son was delighted and licked the corners of his
mouth. O great king! Pandava repulsed Karna with arrows that had stone heads and quickly drove his chariot towards Durmukha. O great king! At that moment, Bhima used nine other arrows with drooping and excellent tufts
to dispatch Durmukha to Yama's abode. O king! On seeing that Durmukha had been killed, Adhiratha's son
mounted his[Durmukha's.] chariot and stationed there, was as radiant as the blazing sun. Durmukha's inner organs were shattered and he lay down, blood flowing from his wounds. On seeing this, Karna's eyes were full of tears and he
paused for a while. The brave Karna circumambulated the one who had lost his life and left him there. His sighs
were deep and warm and he did not know what to do. O king! Using that gap, Bhimasena shot fourteen iron arrows
that were shafted with the feathers of vultures at the son of the suta. These were colourful, gold-tufted and extremely energetic and were the drinkers of blood. O great king! These illuminated the ten directions and penetrated
his armour, drinking the blood of the son of the suta. O Indra among kings! Those arrows were like angry serpents,
urged by destiny, as they penetrated the earth, after having passed through his body. They were like large and angry serpents, half-inserted into their holes[Only part of the arrows penetrated into the ground.]. Without any reflection, Radheya pierced him back with fourteen extremely sharp and iron arrows that were decorated with gold. Those arrows penetrated Bhimasena's left arm and
penetrated the earth, like fierce curlews entering a tree. On having penetrated the ground, those iron arrows were
resplendent. They were like the blazing rays of the sun, as it heads towards setting. In that battle, Bhima was mangled by those iron arrows that penetrated the inner organs. He shed a great deal of blood, like water flowing out of
a mountain. In turn, Bhima pierced the son of the suta with three arrows and used another seven arrows, with the
force of Suparna[Garuda.], to pierce his charioteer. O great king! Afflicted by Bhima's strength, Karna was agitated. The
immensely illustrious one gave up the battle and fled on his swift horses. Bhimasena stretched his bow, embellished in gold. In that battle, the atiratha was stationed like a blazing fire."'
