Brahma said, 'O Shatakratu! You have asked me questions about the superiority of donating cows and there
is no one else in the world who could have asked them. O Shakra! There are many kinds of worlds that you
cannot see. I can see those worlds and so can women who have only one husband. Rishis who are excellent in their
vows and extremely auspicious in their deeds go there, in their own bodies, and so do brahmanas who are virtuous
in  their  conduct.  Those  who  are  excellent  in  their  vows  obtain  emancipation  and  free  themselves  from  their
bodies[Through yoga.]. With clear minds, they see those worlds in this world itself, as if in dreams. O one with the thousand
eyes! Listen to the qualities that those worlds possess. There is no passage of time there. There is no old age. Nor
is there sin. There is nothing that is inauspicious there. There is no disease or exhaustion. O Vasava! The cattle that
dwell there obtain everything through their mental powers. I have directly seen this. They can go wherever they
want. They  roam  around,  wherever  they  wish.  They  enjoy  one  object  of  desire  after  another  object  of  desire.
Lakes, ponds, rivers, many kinds of groves, houses, mountains and all the objects that are agreeable to all beings-
all these are seen there. Know that there is no world that is superior to this world. O Shakra! The best of men who
tolerate everything, are forgiving and affectionate, follow their preceptors and are devoid of ego, go there. A man
who does not eat any kind of flesh, is always self-controlled, worships his mother and his father, is truthful, cheerfully serves brahmanas, does not exhibit anger towards cows or brahmanas, is devoted to dharma, serves his preceptors, is devoted to the truth for as long as he lives, is engaged in donations, is forgiving towards crimes, is mild
and self-controlled, is devoted to gods and is compassionate towards all guests is a man who possesses the qualities to go to that eternal and undecaying world. A person who has intercourse with someone else's wife cannot see
this world. Nor can a person who kills his preceptor, engages in futile boasting, or always engages in censuring
peaceful brahmanas who are devoted to the Vedas. Evil-souled ones who possess other wickedness cannot go there
either. Goloka is the residence of those who are the performers of auspicious deeds. Those who injure their friends,
are ungrateful, deceitful, crooked, haters of dharma and slayers of brahmanas cannot see it, not even in their minds.
O lord of the gods! I have thus skilfully told you everything.

'"'O Shatakratu! Now listen to the fruits obtained by those who gift cows. A person who donates a cow bought
with the riches obtained through inheritance or bought with wealth that has been earned through dharma obtains
worlds without decay. O Shakra! If a person buys a cow with riches won through gambling and then donates it, he
enjoys the fruits for ten thousand divine years. If a person obtains a cow through inheritance, that is regarded as
having obtained a cow lawfully. Such a gift can be received and the donor certainly obtains the undecaying worlds.
O Shachi's lord! If a person receives a cow as a gift and then gives it away with an extremely pure heart, know that
it is certain that he will obtain the eternal worlds. If a person speaks the truth from the moment of his birth, controls his senses, is forgiving and tolerates his preceptors and brahmanas, he goes to the destination meant for cows.
O Shachi's lord! Words that should not be spoken should not be uttered towards a brahmana. One must not harm a
cow, even mentally. One must follow the conduct of a cow[Not store anything.]. One must be compassionate towards cows. O Shakra!
Listen to the fruits obtained by those who are devoted to the truth. If he gives away a single cow, that is like giving
away one thousand cows. Listen to the fruits obtained by kshatriyas who possess such qualities. If he gives away a
single cow, it has been determined that this is like giving away one hundred cows. If a vaishya possesses such
qualities, it will be like giving away fifty cows. For a humble shudra, the fruits are said to be one-fourth. There
may be a person who is devoted to rites, devoted to the truth, engaged in service to the preceptor, self-controlled,
forgiving, tranquil, pure in intelligence and devoted to dharma. He may worship gods and be free of egoism. If he
follows the ordinances and gives a milk-yielding cow to a brahmana, he obtains great fruits. Always single-minded
in devotion, one must always give, established in the truth and engaged in serving the preceptor. O Shakra! Listen
to the fruits obtained by a person who studies the Vedas, is respectful towards cows, is always delighted at seeing
cows and who, since birth, has bowed down before cows. He is said to obtain great fruits equal to those obtained
by the perfomer of a royal sacrifice, or a sacrifice where a lot of gold is given. All the virtuous and successful rishis
have said this. If a person practises great reverence, is truthful in speech, is tranquil and wise and always follows a
vow towards cows, in the sense of giving cows something for an entire year, then he is auspicious in conduct and
obtains fruits equal to those from donating one thousand cows. If a person eats only once a day and follows a vow
towards cows, giving the remainder of the food to cows and showing compassion towards cows, he obtains the infinite for ten years. O Shatakratu! If a person devoutly gives away a single cow that has been bought, it is said that
he obtains the fruits for many days, as if he had given away one hundred cows. These are the fruits obtained by a
brahmana. Listen to what is said about the fruits obtained by a kshatriya. The fruits obtained by a kshatriya are said
to last for five years[That for a brahmana is not at all clear. Perhaps the preceding sentence means that it lasts one hundred years for a
brahmana.]. It is said to be half that for a vaishya and a shudra's is half that for a vaishya. If one sells
one's own person, buys a cow with this and then gives it away, it is said that the duration of the fruits enjoyed can
be ascertained by touching the cow. O immensely fortunate one! It is said that there are as many eternal and indestructible worlds as there are hair on the cow's body. O Koushika[A slightly unusual name for Indra, since it is more common in Buddhist literature.]! Know that if a cow is conquered in battle and
then given away, the fruits are as eternal as those from selling one's own self. In the absence of a cow, if one is
careful in vows and gives away a cow made out of sesamum, one can tide over all hardships. That cow's milk is
like a river of bliss. The mere gift of a cow is not praised. The ordinances must be observed and the time and the
place are important. One must donate a cow only at the right time and after ascertaining the nature of the brahmana. The cow must not suffer from fire and the sun in the recipient's residence. A person who is firm in studying,
is pure of lineage, calm, is devoted to sacrifices, scared of sin, grateful, forgiving, is not too fierce, one whose subsistence has suffered and a person who will provide a refuge to cows is said to be a worthy recipient. The time and
the place are particularly superior for donating a cow when the recipient is excessively suffering because of the
lack of a means of subsistence, when the cow is meant for agriculture, a sacrifice, a pregnant mother, for the sake
of a preceptor or for rearing a child. If one knows about a cow's nature, if it has been obtained in exchange for
knowledge, if it has been conquered through weapons, if it has been born in one's own house, if it has been saved
from a distressful situation and if it has to be given because it can no longer be maintained-such cows are praised
as gifts. Cattle that are strong, good in disposition and fragrant are always praised as gifts. Ganga is the best among
rivers. Like that, a kapila is the best among cattle. For three nights, one must only subsist on water. One must sleep
on the bare ground. After satisfying with other gifts, one must then give a cow. Healthy calves that have not been
weaned must be given away with the cow. After giving the cow away, for three days, one must only subsist on
milk. One must donate cows of a good disposition, ones that yield excellent calves. They must behave well and
must not run away. If one gives away such a cow, in the world hereafter, one enjoys happiness for as many years as
the cow possesses hair. For a brahmana, one must give a strong, young and truculent bull that is capable of bearing
a burden. It must be great in courage and must be capable of carrying the plough. One then obtains worlds obtained by those who donate ten cows. O Koushika! If a person saves a brahmana or a cow from a desolate state,
because of that act of conferring safety, he is freed. Listen to the good merits. Such a man obtains eternal fruits
equal to a horse sacrifice. O one with the one thousand eyes! At the time of death, he obtains whatever status he
desires[In the next life.]. He obtains many kinds of divine worlds and everything else that is there in his heart. Through that deed,
the man obtains all these. With the permission of cattle, he obtains greatness everywhere. There may be a person
who follows the ordinances and follows cows into the forest, surviving on grass, cow dung and leaves, free from
desire, self-controlled and pure. O Shatakratu! Free from desire, he resides happily in my world with the gods, or
in whatever other world he wishes for.'"'
