'Lomasha said, "At this time, the powerful and immensely fortunate King Brihaddyumna, for whom Raibhya was
the sacrificial priest, performed a sacrifice. The intelligent Brihaddyumna appointed Raibhya's two sons, Arvavasu
and Paravasu, as assistants at the sacrifice. O Kounteya! Having obtained their father's permission, they went
there. Raibhya remained in the hermitage with Paravasu's wife. One day, Paravasu returned home to see her. He
saw his father in the forest, attired in black antelope skin. It was late in the night and he was blind from sleep. He
saw his father roaming in the dense forest and took him to be an animal. Thinking that his father was an animal, he
killed him. He did not do this out of a desire for violence, but because he wanted to protect his own body. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He performed all the funeral rites.

'"Then he returned to the place where the sacrifice was being held and told his brother, 'You will never be able
to accomplish this deed alone. I have killed our father, mistaking him to be an animal. Therefore, you observe the
righteous rite that must be observed for killing a brahmana. O sage! I am capable of accomplishing the deed
alone.' Arvavasu replied, 'Then you complete the intelligent Brihaddyumna's sacrifice. For your sake, I will control my senses and act so as to expunge the sin of killing a brahmana.' O Yudhishthira! Having completed the vow
required for killing a brahmana, the sage Arvavasu again returned to the sacrifice.

'"On seeing that his brother had returned, Paravasu spoke these words to Brihaddyumna, who was with his advisers. 'See that this killer of a brahmana is not permitted to enter the sacrifice. There is no doubt that the mere
glance of a killer of a brahmana will cause you injury.' O king! Arvavasu was then thrown out by the servants,
though he cried out repeatedly, 'I am not the killer of a brahmana.' O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The servants kept calling him the killer of a brahmana. He did not admit that he had observed the vow of killing a brahmana for his own sake. 'My brother performed the deed and I have freed him.' O king! The gods were delighted at
Arvavasu's deeds. They instated him as the priest and Paravasu was dismissed. With Agni at the forefront, the
gods granted him boons. He asked for the boon that his father might stand up alive, that his brother might be freed
from the sin of killing their father and that both Bharadvaja and Yavakrita might rise up again. O Yudhishthira! All
of them manifested themselves again.

'"Yavakrita then told the gods, with Agni at the forefront, 'I have observed and accomplished the vow of knowing the brahman. O supreme among the immortals! Using that particular rite, how was it that Raibhya was capable
of slaying a learned ascetic like me?' The gods replied, 'O Yavakrita! O sage! Do not think it is the way you have
spoken. Earlier, you have learned the Vedas in an easy way, without resorting to a preceptor. But he studied it with
a great deal of difficulty, after satisfying his preceptors with his own deeds. He learnt about the supreme brahman
over a long period of time and after tolerating suffering.' Thus did the gods speak to Yavakrita, with Agni at the
forefront. Having revived all of them, the gods returned to heaven. O tiger among kings! This is the supreme hermitage, with trees that are always full of flowers and fruit. Spend the night here and you will be cleansed of all
sins."'
