Vaishampayana said, 'Waking up, those tigers among men[The Pandavas.], together with Pritha, were astonished on seeing the
divine beauty of Hidimba. Then, astonished at the richness of her beauty, Kunti looked at her and addressed her in
soft, gentle and assuring words. "O beautiful one, equal to the offspring of the gods! Who are you? Where have
you come from? What business has brought you here? Are you the goddess of this forest or are you an apsara? Tell
me everything and also tell me why you are standing here."

'Hidimba replied, "The great forest that you see, blue like monsoon clouds, is the habitation of the rakshasa
Hidimba and me. O noble lady! Know me to be the sister of the lord of the rakshasas. O honoured lady! My brother sent me here to kill you and your sons. I came here on the instructions of that cruel one and saw your immensely
powerful son, with a complexion like that of pure gold. O fortunate lady! Then, under the influence of
Manmatha[The god of love.], who pervades the essence of everything, I fell under your son's spell. Therefore, I chose your immensely powerful son to be my husband. Though I tried to control my passion, I could not. Since I was delayed,
the maneater himself came here to kill all these sons of yours. But he has been flung on the ground and dragged
away by your great-souled and wise son, my husband. Look at the man and the rakshasa, both with great strength
and valour, grasping each other with great force and fighting and roaring." On hearing these words, Yudhishthira,
Arjuna, Nakula and the valorous Sahadeva quickly got up. They saw those two fighting, grasping and dragging
each other, desirous of victory like two immensely powerful lions. They grasped and dragged each other again and
again. Dust rose from the earth like billowing smoke from a forest fire. Covered with the dust of earth, they were
enveloped like two mountains in whirling mists.

'On seeing Bhima oppressed at the hands of the rakshasa, Partha[Arjuna.] slowly said, as if in jest, "O Bhima! O one
with mighty arms! Do not be afraid. We did not know that you were tired from fighting this terrible rakshasa. O
Partha[Bhima. As a son of Pritha, Bhima is also Partha.]! I am here to help you. I shall kill the rakshasa, while Nakula and Sahadeva will guard our mother." Bhi-
ma replied, "Watch this fight as a neutral. You don't have to take part. When I have got him in my clutches, he will
not live for long." Arjuna said, "O Bhima! What is the need to keep this evil rakshasa alive for so long? O conqueror of enemies! We have to leave this place as quickly as we can. We cannot stay here longer. Before long, the
east will redden. The morning dawn is about to set in. At the roudra[The time of daybreak.] moment, the rakshasas become stronger. O
Bhima! Be quick. Kill the terrible rakshasa before he begins to use his powers of delusion[Maya.]. Therefore, show the
strength of your arms." Having been thus addressed by Arjuna, Bhima threw up the body of the terrible rakshasa
and whirled it around a hundred times.

'Bhima said, "Your body has thrived in vain on impure flesh. Your intelligence is in vain and you have aged in
vain. Therefore, you deserve a useless death. Today, I will end your useless existence." Arjuna said, "If you think
that killing this rakshasa in battle is too onerous a task, let me help you. O Vrikodara[Bhima.]! Kill him quickly. Otherwise, let me kill him. You are tired and have almost finished the work. You deserve to rest now." On hearing these
words, Bhimasena was enraged. Crushing him on the ground with all his strength, he killed him the way one kills
an animal. As he was thus being killed by Bhima, he let out a mighty roar that filled the entire forest, like the
sound of a kettledrum drenched in water. Then the strong son[Bhima.] of Pandu held the body in his hands and tore it
into two, pleasing the Pandavas with the strength of his arms. On seeing Hidimba killed, they were delighted and
swiftly congratulated Bhimasena, a tiger among men and conqueror of enemies. Worshipping the great-souled Bhi-
ma of terrible strength, Arjuna again told Vrikodara, "O lord! I think there is a city not far from this forest. O fortunate one! Let us go there quickly, before Suyodhana[Duryodhana.] discovers us." The scorchers of enemies and tigers among
men[The Pandavas.] agreed, as did their mother, and left, with the rakshasi Hidimba following.'
