Vaishampayana said, 'King Yudhishthira was still silent and immersed in grief. The ascetic Krishna Dvaipayana,
who knew about the true nature of dharma, spoke to him. "O one with eyes like a blue lotus! The dharma of kings
is to protect subjects. Dharma is the standard used to measure people. One must always follow dharma. O king!
Follow in the footsteps of your father and grandfather. The eternal dharma of brahmanas has been determined in
the Vedas. O bull among the Bharata lineage! That has been the eternal measuring rod, and the dharma of kshatriyas is to protect all this and any man who acts against this must be punished with the use of arms, since this is
against the path indicated for the worlds[Kshatriyas must protect everyone in the pursuit of dharma and punish
those who are against dharma.]. In one's confusion, one should not take the measuring rod to be something that is not the measuring rod. Whether it is a servant, a son or an ascetic-all those who act in a wicked way
must be punished, even killed. If a king does not act in this way, he will commit a sin, since one who does not prevent dharma from being destroyed is guilty of slaying dharma. They[The Kouravas.] were the slayers of dharma and you have
killed them and their followers. O Pandava! You were stationed in your own dharma. Why are you sorrowing? According to dharma, the king must kill such people, donate and protect the subjects."

'Yudhishthira said, "O one rich in austerities! I do not doubt your words. O one who is supreme among all those
who uphold dharma! Dharma is always in front of you. For the sake of the kingdom, I have slain many who should
not have been killed. O brahmana! Those deeds are burning and tormenting me."

'Vyasa replied, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The doer may be the Lord, or it may be man. Or, as the
learned texts say, the fruits in this world may be the consequence of past deeds. O king! If man performs good and
evil deeds because he has been so appointed by the Lord, then the fruits also accrue to the Lord. If a man uses an
axe to cut down a tree in the forest, the cause can never be the axe, nor does sin accrue to it. The implement cannot
take over the fruits of that action. There is no sin if a man uses a weapon to inflict punishment. O Kounteya! One
cannot reap the fruits of something that has been done by others[The ones who committed the sin warranting punishment.]. Therefore, vest it on the Lord. Or perhaps it is
the case that a man is the doer of both good and bad deeds. In that case, there is nothing like the hereafter. In that
case, perform a good deed[There is no hereafter and no birth after death. Therefore, one might as
well perform the good deed of ruling the kingdom. The three possibilities
of deeds being done by the Lord, man or past deeds are being disposed
of.]. O king! There is no one who can act against destiny. There is no sin if a man uses a
weapon to inflict punishment. O king! If you think that the world is established on past deeds, then there cannot
have been an inauspicious deed, nor will there be. In this world, if it is necessary to assign good and bad deeds,
then the king's upraised rod of punishment is the determining factor in this world[This is a different line of argument. If everything is based on past deeds,
there are no good and bad deeds. Hence, if a classification of good and
bad deeds is required, the only one who can do that is the king.]. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! It is my view that in this world, people are whirled around, performing good and bad deeds and reaping
the fruits. This is the truth and I am instructing you to perform good deeds because the fruits from deeds are certain. O tiger among kings! Therefore, abandon this fruitless sorrow in your heart. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Resort to your own dharma, even if that brings censure. O king! This abandoning of your soul is not proper.
O Kounteya! There are rites of atonement that have been laid down[Prayaschitta.]. One must perform them while one has this
body. Without the body, one will not succeed[If there have been evil deeds, it is better to atone for them in this life,
instead of carrying forward the fruits to the next life.]. O king! Therefore, while you are still alive, perform those rites of
atonement. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If you do not perform rites of atonement, you will be tormented
after death."'
