Yudhishthira asked, "Why was that woman not scared of being cursed by that extremely radiant one? How did
the illustrious one return? You should tell me that."

'Bhishma replied, "Ashtavakra asked her, 'How could you change your form? Tell me. You should not wish to
utter a falsehood before a brahmana.'

'"The woman said, 'O supreme among brahmanas! O one with truth as his valour! Listen to everything attentively. Whether one is in heaven or on earth, there is desire everywhere. You have witnessed the fickleness of a
woman. But know me to be the northern direction. O one with truth as his valour! You have conquered the worlds
through your composure. O unblemished one! I was employed to test you. Even when women are aged, they suffer
from the fever of sexual desire. Now, the grandfather and the gods, together with Vasava, are satisfied with you. O
illustrious one! That is the reason why you were sent here. O bull among brahmanas! You were sent here by the
brahmana who was the father of the maiden. I have done everything so that you might be instructed. Go in peace
and you will not suffer from any exhaustion when you head home. O brahmana! You will obtain the maiden and
she will bear a son. I tested you through my desire, but you rebuffed me through an appropriate reply. In all the
three worlds, this is something that is impossible to overcome. Having accomplished a good deed, depart. What
else do you desire to hear? O brahmana rishi! O Ashtavakra! I have told you exactly what occurred. O bull among
brahmanas! It was for your sake that I pleased that rishi[Vadanya.]. It is to show him honour that I spoke those words to
you.'"

'Bhishma said, "On hearing her words, the brahmana stood there, his hands joined in salutation. Having obtained her permission, he returned to his own house again. On reaching his house, he rested and honoured his relatives. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Following what was proper, he then went to that brahmana. He was asked
by that brahmana about the signs that he had seen. With great delight in his heart, the brahmana told the brahmana,
'Having taken your permission, I proceeded towards Gandhamadana. I encountered a great divinity towards the
north of that region. It is with her permission that I am recounting this to you. O lord! I have returned home after
hearing her words.' The brahmana told him, 'Accept my daughter. Let us follow the conjunction of the nakshatras
and the tithis[For the marriage.]. You are the best groom possible.' O lord! Thus instructed, Ashtavakra agreed and accepted her.
The one who was supremely devoted to dharma was delighted with the maiden. He accepted the extremely beautiful maiden as his wife. He was free from all anxiety and dwelt happily in his hermitage."'
