'Yudhishthira asked, "O Indra among kings! How does a king succeed in ruling over the subjects, with a specific
eye towards dharma, so that he obtains eternal fame?"

'Bhishma replied, "He must be pure in his conduct. He must devote himself to protecting the subjects. He must
be cleansed. He will then attain dharma and fame in both the worlds[This world and the next.]."
'Yudhishthira asked, "What kind of conduct should a king follow and whom should he use? O immensely wise
one! I am asking you this and you should tell me. You have earlier spoken about the qualities in a man. But it is my
view that all of those cannot be found in a single man."

'Bhishma replied, "O immensely wise one! O intelligent one! It is exactly as you have stated. The man who possesses all these different qualities is extremely rare. But in brief, if one makes the effort, it is not difficult to find
good conduct. I will now tell you about appropriate advisers and act according to this. There must be four brahmanas who are learned in the Vedas and are bold, virtuous and pure. There must be three humble shudras who
have been pure in their earlier work[The Critical edition excises some shlokas where eighteen kshatriyas and
twenty-one vaishyas are also mentioned.]. There must be a fifty-year-old suta[In the sense of bard or raconteur. The eight qualities of the bard are readiness
to listen, readiness to learn, ability to receive, ability to retain, ability to reason, ability to be critical, internal knowledge (vijnana) and external knowledge (jnana).]who is bold and without malice. He
will recount the ancient stories and must possess the eight qualities. He must have understanding about the smriti
texts and must be humble and impartial. When there is a dispute because of greed for riches, he must be capable of
knowing what must be done[As stated, it is not obvious whether this applies only to the suta, or to all advisers. All advisers seems more likely.]. When decisions have to be taken about a crime, the king must consult in the midst
of those eight[Four brahmanas, three shudras and the suta.] ministers and they must be devoid of the seven extremely terrible vices[Hunting, gambling with the dice, addiction to women, addiction to liquor,
harshness in punishment, harshness in speech and the squandering of riches.]. For the sake of the
kingdom, the outcome must be publicized in the kingdom. Through such conduct, one must always look towards
the subjects. One must not keep the proceedings a secret, because secrecy runs counter to the task. If the proceeding suffers, that adharma will also afflict you. The kingdom will then be scattered, like birds before a hawk. It will
always remain adrift, like a shattered boat on an ocean. When the lord of the earth does not protect his subjects
well and uses adharma, fear is generated in his heart and heaven is closed to him. O bull among men! This is also
true of a king's adviser or a king's son who follows adharma, because a person who has been appointed to a seat of
dharma[Someone who sits in judgement.] is the foundation of dharma. When appointed to tasks, if the followers of the king do not act properly,
they themselves head downwards first[In the next birth.], taking the kings with them. The king must always be the protector of the
men who have no protectors. If distressed ones are forcefully oppressed by the powerful, there will be a lot of resentment. When there is a dispute between two parties, it is best to decide on the basis of the strength of witnesses.
There must be special scrutiny for those who have no witnesses and are without protectors. The punishment that
descends on the wicked must be proportionate to the crime. There must be monetary fines for the wealthy and
death and imprisonment for the poor. The king must use decency and blows to control those who are wicked in
conduct. The virtuous must be protected through pleasant words and gifts. If a person desires to kill the king, he
must be executed through colourful means[The word used is citravadha and probably means execution preceded by
torture.]. This is also recommended for those who make a living out of thievery and those who cause a mingling of the varnas[Probably meant for those who have intercourse with a person from another
varna.]. O lord of the earth! When a lord of the earth applies the rod
of punishment well, there is no adharma in this. Instead, this represents eternal dharma. However, if a king uses
punishment in an inexperienced way and uses it according to his whims, he does not obtain fame in this world. After death, he goes to hell. He should not impose punishment on another, merely on the basis of hearsay from others. Following the injunctions of the sacred texts, a person should be imprisoned or set free. Even if there is an
emergency, the king must never slay a messenger. If he kills a messenger, together with his advisers, he goes to
hell. A messenger merely states what he has been asked to. If a king who follows the dharma of kshatriyas kills
such a person, this is tantamount to his ancestors being tainted with sin of killing a foetus. It is said that a messenger must possess seven qualities-he must be born in a good family, he must be good in his conduct, he must be
eloquent, he must be skilled, he must be pleasant in speech, he must say what he has been asked to and he must
have a good memory. The person who protects the gate must have similar qualities and the one who protects his
head[The king's head. This applies to personal bodyguards.] must also have such qualities. The adviser who is knowledgeable about dharma, artha and the sacred texts,
who knows about peace and war, who is intelligent, patient, wise and capable of keeping a secret, who is born in a
noble family and is truthful and capable-such a person is praised. The commander must also have such qualities.
He must know about battle formations, implements of war and warriors and possess valour. He must be capable of
tolerating rain, cold, heat and wind and know about the weaknesses of the enemy. He should be able to engineer
trust in the enemy, but must never trust anyone. O Indra among kings! It is not recommended that he should even
trust his own son. O unblemished one! I have now recounted to you the truth and the purport of the secret texts. I
have also told you about the supreme secret-the lords of men should never trust anyone."'
