'Yudhishthira said, "O Sanjaya! The creator places the righteous, the unrighteous, the young, the old, the weak and
the strong under his control. The lord grants learning to children and childishness to the learned. He grants all this
when he provides the seed in a being. There is no need to tell you more. You will report it the way it actually is,
now that we have cheerfully consulted each other. O son of Gavalgana! Go to the Kurus and show homage to the
immensely strong Dhritarashtra. Touch his feet and ask about his welfare. When he is seated, surrounded by the
Kurus, tell him, 'O king! It is through your valour that the Pandavas are living happily. O destroyer of enemies! It
is through your favours that they obtained a kingdom while they were still young. After having established them in
a kingdom first, do not destroy them by ignoring them now.' O Sanjaya! No one should enjoy everything alone. 'O
father! We will live together. Do not fall prey to enmity.' In the same way, lower your head in homage and recount
my name to Shantanu's son, Bhishma, the grandfather of the Bharatas. After having greeted him, you should tell
the grandfather, 'When Shantanu's lineage was drowning, you rescued it once[This could be a reference to several incidents, but probably refers to Bhishma taking the vow of celibacy.]. O father[The word used is tata.]! O grandfather! Act
again in that fashion so that your grandsons live with affection among themselves.' You should speak in the same
way to Vidura, the adviser to the Kurus. 'O peaceful one! O one who wishes for the welfare of Yudhishthira!
Speak words of peace.'

'"Then you should repeatedly speak to the intolerant Prince Suyodhana, entreating him when he is seated in the
midst of the Kurus. When Krishna was brought alone into the assembly hall, evil was done towards her. But we
ignored it patiently, so that the Kurus might not be slaughtered. The Pandavas have borne hardships earlier and
will do so again, though they are stronger now. All the Kurus know this. 'O peaceful one! You sent us into exile,
with deerskin as our garments. We bore those miseries, so that the Kurus might not be slaughtered. When
Duhshasana, with your approval, oppressed Krishna by the hair in the assembly hall, we overlooked that also. O
scorcher of enemies! But we will fight for our rightful share now. O bull among men! Turn your mind away from
avarice and from grasping the possessions of others. O king! Let there be peace and harmony amongst us. We wish
for peace. Give us one province from your kingdom-Kushasthala, Vrikosthala, Asanti, Varanavata and whichever
else you pick as the fifth and the last. O Suyodhana! Give five villages to the brothers[One village for each of the five Pandavas.].' O Sanjaya! O immensely wise one! Let there be peace between us and our relatives. Let brother be united with brother, and let father be
united with son. With smiles, let the Panchalas mingle with the Kurus. I desire to see the Kurus and the Panchalas
uninjured. O son[The word used is tata.]! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Let all of us live happily in peace. O Sanjaya! I am as
ready for peace, as I am for war. For the sake of dharma and artha, I can be mild. But I can also be terrible."'
