Vaishampayana said, 'Thereupon, the mighty-armed one left his advisers behind and went on inside the hermitage
alone. But he did not find the rishi of rigid vows[Kanva.]. On seeing that the rishi was not there and the hermitage was
deserted, he called out in a loud voice that echoed in the wood, "Who is here?" On hearing his words, a maiden
emerged from the hermitage. She was dressed in the attire of an ascetic and was as beautiful as Shri[Goddess Lakshmi.]. As soon as
the black-eyed maiden saw King Duhshanta, she welcomed him and paid him homage. She offered him a seat,
gave him water to wash his feet and the gift due to a guest. O king! She then asked that lord of men about his welfare. Having honoured him in the appropriate way and asked about his welfare, the maiden then smilingly asked
the king what she could do. Having been thus honoured in the appropriate way, the king spoke to the maiden who
was unblemished in form and sweet in speech. "I have come to pay my respects to the illustrious rishi Kanva. O
beautiful and fortunate one! Where has the revered one gone?" Shakuntala replied, "My revered father has gone
out of the hermitage to collect fruit. Please wait for a while. You will see him when he returns."'

Vaishampayana said, 'The king did not see the rishi there. But having been thus addressed by the maiden, he
saw that she was dazzling, with a charming smile and beautiful hips. She was dazzling in her beauty, austerities
and humility and endowed with beauty and youth. The ruler of the earth told her, "O one with the beautiful hips!
Who are you? Who do you belong to? Why have you come to this forest? O beautiful one! You are blessed with
beauty and qualities. From where have you come? O beautiful one! You have robbed me of my heart from the first
glance. O beautiful one! I wish to learn all about you. Please tell me." Having been thus addressed by the king in
the hermitage, the maiden smiled and told him in sweet words, "O Duhshanta! I am regarded as the daughter of the
illustrious, righteous, great-souled ascetic Kanva, wise in the path of dharma." Duhshanta said, "That illustrious
and extremely fortunate one is worshipped by all the worlds and is known to have never spilled his seed. The god
of dharma may stray from the right path, but not this ascetic of rigid vows. O beautiful and charming one! How
can you be his daughter? Dispel this great doubt from my mind."

'Shakuntala said, "O king! Then listen to how I have learnt what occurred in earlier times and how I came to be
the sage's daughter. Once upon a time, a rishi came here and asked questions about my birth. O king! Hear what
the illustrious one[Kanva.] told him about me. Kanva said, 'In ancient times, Vishvamitra alarmed and oppressed
Shakra[Indra.], the king of the gods, with his great austerities. He feared that with the blazing energy of his austerities,
he would dislodge him from his seat. Purandara[Indra.] therefore told Menaka, "O, Menaka!
You are the best of the celestial apsaras in your qualities. O amiable one! Please listen to what I have to say and
do that which will bring about my welfare. The great ascetic Vishvamitra possesses the sun's radiance. He has
been engaged in such austerities that my mind is trembling. O Menaka! O you with the slender waist! Vishamitra
is your burden now. His soul is fixed on meditation and he is engaged in the performance of awesome austerities.
He is unassailable and may dislodge me from my seat. Go to him and seduce him. Bring obstructions to his austerities. Do that which is good for me. O one with the beautiful hips! Turn him away from his austerities with your
beauty, youth, sweetness, efforts, smiles and words."

'"Menaka said, "O, illustrious one! That illustrious one has great energy and the power of great austerities. You
yourself know that he is prone to anger. The energy, asceticism and wrath of that great-souled one have made even
you afraid of him. Why should I not be scared? He made even the illustrious Vashishtha suffer grief through the
premature death of his sons. He was born a Kshatriya, but became a Brahmana through his powers. For the sake of
performing ablutions, he created a river with such a lot of water that it is difficult to cross. That sacred river is still
known in the worlds by the name of Koushiki[Vishvamitra's name is Koushika.]. In ancient times, the great-souled one's wife was maintained
there by the righteous rajarshi Matanga, who had become a hunter. O lord! After the famine was over, the powerful
sage returned to his hermitage and gave the river the name of Para. O king of the gods! Extremely pleased with
Matanga, he himself was the officiating priest at his sacrifice and out of fear, you yourself went there to drink the
soma. In his anger, he who was descended from the stars[Vishvamitra.] created a wealth of other stars, beginning with Shravana[A nakshatra, that is, a star or constellation.] and beyond the existing stars. I am afraid to go to a person whose deeds are like this. O lord! Tell me how
I can escape being burnt from his anger. He can burn down the worlds with his energy. He can make the earth
quake with a kick. He can uproot the great Meru and whirl it around. How can a woman like me touch someone
with such austerities, such energy that is like a blazing fire and who is in complete control of his senses? His
mouth is radiant as the blazing fire. The pupils of his eyes are like the sun and the moon. His tongue is like Yama.
O best of the gods! How can someone like me touch him? Yama, Soma, the maharshis, the saddhyas, the vishvadevas and the valakhilyas are all alarmed of him. Why should someone like me not be afraid? O lord of the
gods! Nevertheless, commanded by you, I must go to that sage. O king of the gods! Find a means so that I can accomplish your wishes under your protection. O god! When I sport before him, let Marut[The wind-god. Vayu is another one of his names.] strip me of my garments. On your instructions, let Manmatha[The god of love. Kama is another one of his names.] be there to help me in my work. Let the breeze carry soft fragrances
from the wood when I tempt the rishi."' Having said this and once her wishes had been catered to, she went to
Koushika's hermitage."'
