Vaishampayana said, 'O king! Bharadvaja's powerful son went to Prishata's son and said, "Recognize me." Drupada replied, "O Brahmana! Your wisdom is lacking and inferior, if you suddenly begin to address me as your friend.
O one with a dull mind! No great king can ever be a friend with men like you. You have no prosperity, nor do you
have riches. Time decays everything, including friendship. It is true that we were friends once, but that was based
on a relationship of equality. No friendship can be found in the world that does not age; desire and anger both destroy it. Do not therefore talk about a friendship that has died out. O best of Brahmanas! Find a fresh friendship. I
was friends with you because it served my purpose. The poor cannot be a friend to the rich. The fool cannot be a
friend to the learned. The weak cannot a friend of the strong. Who wants an old friendship? Those of similar
wealth and similar lineage can have marriages and friendship together, not one who is rich with one who is poor.
One who is learned in the Vedas[The word used is shrotriya, which can also be translated as a learned Brahmana.] cannot be a friend to one who is not learned. One with chariots cannot be a
friend to one who has no chariots. A king cannot be a friend to one who is not a king. Who wants this old friendship?" Thus addressed by Drupada, Bharadvaja's powerful son was full of wrath and reflected for a while. The
wise one thought about a course of action for Panchala[Drupada, the king of Panchala.] and made his way to Gajasahrya[Hastinapura.], the chief city of
the Kurus.

'One day, all the Kuru princes came out of Gajasahrya together. The brave ones wandered around, playing with
a wooden ball[The word used is vita. I have translated this as ball. But there is no evidence to suggest that this was spherical. In all probability, this was a short piece of wood struck with another long piece of wood, something like a bat.
Guli-danda may be the closest approximation.]. While they were playing, the ball fell into a well. With all their efforts, they couldn't find a way
to recover the ball. The valorous Drona saw that the princes were unsuccessful in their attempts. He laughed at
them a little and then softly told them, "Shame on your Kshatriya prowess! Shame on your knowledge of weapons!
You have been born in the Bharata lineage and yet you cannot recover a ball. Here is a handful of reeds[The word used is ishika and means reed. In recounting this particular anecdote, renderings invariably interpret this as reed or grass. However, ishika also means arrow and Drona could have used arrows instead of reeds.
There is nothing in the text to counter the arrow interpretation.] that I
have invested with the mantra of my weapons. Look at their power, unmatched by that of anything else. I will
pierce the ball with one of these reeds and that reed with another one and that one with another. With the chain of
reeds, I will bring the ball up into my hands." On seeing this, the eyes of the princes widened with wonder. They
saw him pull up the ball and spoke to the one who had pulled the ball up. "O Brahmana! We pay homage to you.
No one else has the knowledge to do that. Who are you? We wish to know your lineage. What can we do for you?"

Drona replied, "Go to Bhishma and tell him of my appearance and qualities. He has great intelligence and will
know what should be done." The princes agreed. They went to Bhishma, the grandfather, and told him exactly
what the Brahmana had said and done. On hearing this from the princes, Bhishma immediately recognized Drona.
He thought that this would be the right preceptor. He went to him in person and paid him the highest of respects.
Bhishma, the greatest of those who wielded arms, then skilfully asked Drona about the reason why he had come
there and he told him the entire reason.

'Drona said, "Desiring to learn the science of Dhanur Veda, I earlier went to maharshi Agniveshya. I lived there
for a long time, as a humble brahmachari with matted hair, desiring to learn Dhanur Veda. The powerful Yajnasena, son of the king of Panchala, hardworking and dedicated, also studied with me under that teacher. There he became my friend and was always willing to do what brought me happiness. I also loved his company. O descendant
of the Kuru lineage! We studied together from the time we were boys. He would come to me and do things that
were pleasurable for me. O Bhishma! He used to say things that brought me pleasure: 'I am the favourite son of
my great-souled father. O friend! When I am instated by the king of Panchala in the kingdom, it will be yours to
enjoy. I swear truthfully on this. My pleasures, riches and happiness will all be yours.' This is the way he spoke to
me then. Having become skilled in use of weapons, I set out in search of riches. When I heard that he had been instated, I remembered those words. Happily, I went to see my old friend in his kingdom. O lord! Remembering
those words, I went to my old friend Drupada and told him, 'O tiger among men! Recognize me as your friend.'

But he laughed at me, as if I was a person who was unimportant. He said, 'O Brahmana! Your wisdom is lacking
and inferior. O Brahmana! Why have you suddenly come to me, claiming to be my friend? O one with a dull mind!
No great king can ever be a friend with men like you. You have no prosperity, nor do you have riches. The poor
cannot be a friend to the rich. The fool cannot be a friend to the learned. The weak cannot a friend of the strong.
The king cannot be a friend to one who is not a king. Who wants an old friendship?' O Bhishma! I was flooded
with anger at Drupada's words and I made my way to the land of the Kurus, in search of disciples who might have
the right qualities."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Bhishma and Pandu's sons accepted him as a preceptor. O king! With all kinds of riches,
he handed over his grandsons as disciples to Drona, in accordance with the prescribed manner. Delighted, that
great archer accepted the Kouravas as his disciples. Having accepted them, Drona called all of them together and
told them privately, when they were seated at his feet, "O unblemished ones! There is a special task in my heart.
You must promise me that you will give it to me when you have become skilled in the use of arms." O lord! When
they heard him, the Kouravas remained silent. But Arjuna, the scorcher of enemies, gave him a complete promise
and he then inhaled the scent of Arjuna's forehead repeatedly, embracing him delightedly and shedding tears of
joy.

'Then the valorous Drona taught Pandu's sons the use of many weapons, human and divine. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! Other princes also came to Drona, supreme among Brahmanas, to learn the use of arms-the Vrishnis, the Andhakas, kings from many countries and Radheya[Radha's son, Karna.], the son of the suta. They made Drona their preceptor. The suta's son was envious of Partha and always competed with him. With Duryodhana's support, he
showed his contempt for the Pandavas.'
