Sanjaya said, "O great king! In the battle, there were only two of your sons who had not been killed, Duryodhana
and Sudarsha. They were stationed in the midst of the horses. On seeing that Duryodhana was stationed in the
midst of the horses, Devaki's son spoke to Dhananjaya, Kunti's son. 'Many enemies, and relatives protected by
them, have been killed. The bull among the Shini lineage is returning, having captured Sanjaya. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Having fought in the battle against the wicked sons of Dhritarashtra and their followers,
Nakula and Sahadeva are exhausted. Those three, Kripa, Kritavarma and Drona's maharatha son, have abandoned
Suyodhana and stationed themselves elsewhere. Having slain Duryodhana's soldiers, the Panchalas, together with
all the Prabhadrakas, are stationed here, supreme in their prosperity. O Partha! Duryodhana is stationed there, in
the midst of the horses. The umbrella is held aloft his head and he is repeatedly glancing here and there. He has arrayed his entire army in the form of a counter-vyuha and is stationed in the midst of the battle. If you kill him with
your sharp arrows, you will be successful in your objective. O scorcher of enemies! Having seen that the army of
elephants has been killed, they are not approaching you. While they are still running away, kill Suyodhana. Let
someone else go to Panchala and ask him to quickly come here. O son[The word used is tata. This means son, but is affectionately used towards
anyone who is younger or junior.]! The army is exhausted and the wicked
one will not be able to escape. Having destroyed a large army in the battle, Dhritarashtra's son thinks that the sons
of Pandu have been defeated and has assumed an insolent form. Having seen that his own army has been destroyed
by the Pandavas, he is distressed. It is certain that the king will advance in the battle and ensure his own destruction.' Having been thus addressed, Phalguna spoke these words to Krishna. 'O one who grants honours! O
Krishna! All the sons of Dhritarashtra have been killed by Bhima and the two who are alive will also be killed today. Bhishma has been killed. Drona has been killed. Karna Vaikartana has been killed. Shalya, the king of Madra,
has been killed. O Krishna! Jayadratha has been killed. O Janardana! Only five hundred horses remain from
Shakuni Soubala's army and two hundred chariots. There are one hundred fierce tuskers and three thousand foot
soldiers. O Madhava! Ashvatthama, Kripa, the lord of Trigarta, Uluka, Shakuni and Satvata Kritavarma-these are
the ones who are left in Dhritarashtra's army. It is certain that no one on earth can ever escape from death. Behold.
Though the soldiers have been killed, Duryodhana is still stationed there. However, all the enemies of the king[Yudhishthira.]
will be slain today. I think that no one amongst the enemy will be able to escape. O Krishna! Even if they are crazy
in the battle and are superhuman, as long as they do not run away, I will slay all of them in the battle today. I will
angrily bring down Gandhara with sharp arrows in the battle today. The king has not slept for a long time. I will
win back the riches the evil-acting Soubala deceitfully won from us, when he again challenged us to a gambling
match in the assembly hall. On hearing that their husbands and sons have been killed in the battle by the Pandavas,
all the women of Nagapura[Hastinapura.] will weep today. O Krishna! All our tasks will be completed today. Today, Duryodhana will abandon his blazing prosperity and his life. O Krishna! O Varshneya! You can regard Dhritarashtra's stupid son as having been killed by me in the battle today, as long as he does not flee because of fear. O scorcher of
enemies! Those horses cannot endure the twang of my bow and the slapping of my palms. Take me there.' O king!
Thus addressed by the illustrious Pandava, Dasharha drove the horses towards Duryodhana's army.

' "O venerable one! On seeing that army, three maharathas-Bhimasena, Arjuna and Sahadeva-prepared themselves. They roared like lions and advanced, wishing to kill Duryodhana. All three united and raised their bows. In
the battle, on seeing this, Soubala advanced against the Pandava assassins. Your son, Sudarshana, advanced against
Bhimasena[Since we have been told that all the other brothers have been killed, Sudarshana is the same as Sudarsha. That apart, the two words have the
same meaning.]. Susharma and Shakuni fought against Kiriti. Your son[Duryodhana.] was on the back of a horse and attacked
Sahadeva. O lord of men! With care and speed, your son severely struck Sahadeva's head with a javelin. Struck by
your son, he sank down on the floor of his chariot. His limbs were covered with blood and he sighed like a venomous serpent. O lord of the earth! Having regained his senses, Sahadeva angrily countered Duryodhana with
sharp arrows. Partha Dhananjaya, Kunti's son, fought valiantly and severed the heads of many warriors who were
seated on horses. Partha slaughtered that army with many arrows. Having brought down all the horses, he advanced against the chariots of the Trigartas. The maharathas from Trigarata united and covered Arjuna and Vasudeva with showers of arrows. Pandu's immensely illustrious son struck Satyakarma with a kshurapra arrow and
shattered the yoke of his chariot. O lord! With a kshurapra arrow that had been sharpened on stone, the immensely
illustrious one then laughingly severed his adversary's head, adorned with earrings made out of molten gold. O
king! While all the warriors looked on, he then attacked Satyeshu, like a hungry lion in the forest going after deer.
Having killed him, Partha pierced Susharma with three arrows and destroyed all the chariots that were decorated
with gold. Partha then forcefully advanced against the lord of Prasthala[Prasthala was the capital of Trigarta and Susharma was the king of
Trigarta.], harbouring an enmity nurtured over
many years and angrily shooting arrows that were like poison. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Arjuna first enveloped him with one hundred arrows and then slew all the horses that belonged to that archer. Partha then afflixed
a sharp arrow that was like Yama's staff and smilingly, shot it towards Susharma. That arrow was shot by an archer
who flamed with rage. In the battle, it struck and pierced Susharma's heart. O great king! Having lost his life, he
fell down on the ground. All the Pandavas roared and those on your side were distressed. When Susharma had
been killed in the battle, he used sharp arrows to dispatch forty-three of his[Susharma's.] maharatha sons to Yama's eternal
abode. He then used sharp arrows to kill all his followers. The maharatha then attacked the remaining soldiers in
the Bharata army.

' "O lord of men! In the battle, Bhima was wrathful. He laughed and made your son, Sudarshana, invisible with
arrows. Angry, but smiling, he severed his head from his body with an extremely sharp kshurapra arrow. Slain, he
fell down on the ground. When that brave one was killed, his followers surrounded Bhima in the battle and covered him with sharp arrows. However, Vrikodara used sharp arrows that were like Indra's vajra to the touch to envelop that army in every direction. O bull among the Bharata lineage! In a short while, they were slaughtered by
Bhima. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When they were thus being slaughtered by that immensely strong
one, many of those soldiers advanced against Bhimasena and fought with him. However, Pandava countered all of
them with fierce arrows. O king! In that fashion, those on your side brought down a great shower of arrows on the
Pandaveya maharathas from every side. All the Pandavas, and the enemy, became anxious. Those on your side,
and that of the Pandaveyas, fought in that battle. The warriors struck each other and fell down. O king! Both
armies sorrowed over their relatives." '
