Dhritarashtra said, "O supreme among kings! Consider war and peace. O Yudhishthira! For both of these, three
kinds of situations and many kinds of techniques have been thought of[War or peace with someone who is stronger, weaker or equal. Those are the three situations.]. O Indra among kings! For your own
self, you must progressively and calmly, examine both of these[Strength and weakness.]. You must remember not to advance against an
enemy who is content, nourished and strong. At such a time, the opposite is recommended and one must excuse
oneself. O Indra among kings! It is better to retreat and wait for a time to attack. One must act so as to cause hardship to the enemy and create dissension in his ranks. After creating this great affliction, one must create great destruction through a battle. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Before advancing, a king who knows about the sacred texts thinks of the three kinds of strength that characterize him and the enemy-enterprise, power over the
soldiers and the strength of good advisers. A man who possesses these, advances. If one doesn't possess these, one
acts in the opposite way. The king must accumulate the strength of riches, the strength of friends, the strength of
forests, the strength of servants and the strength of traders. O king! Of these, the strength of riches and the strength
of friends are superior. It is my view that the strength of servants and the strength of traders are equal. O king! The
strength of spies is equal to either of these. When all this strength has accumulated, the king knows it is time. O
lord of men! Know that calamities kings face are of many different types. O Kouravya! Listen to what these separate types are. O king! O descendant of the Pandu lineage! There are many ways of countering these calamities. A
king must use conciliation, pacification and the others. O scorcher of enemies! When united with the six kinds of
strength, a king must advance, combining these with the strength of his own qualities and considering the time and
the place. A king who desires growth must not advance unless the soldiers are content, nourished and strong. A
king can also falsely claim that these exist and advance. To destroy the enemy, the king must advance along a river
that has quivers as stones, horses and chariots as currents, standards as trees that cover the banks and large numbers of foot soldiers and elephants as mire. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O lord! The sacred texts known to
Ushanas have recommended battle formations in the form of a cart, a lotus and a vajra. Having deprecated the enemy's soldiers, act to increase cheer in your own soldiers. This is irrespective of whether you are fighting in your
own territory or the enemy's territory. After having rested, the king must hurl the best men against the enemy.
Knowing the state of one's own kingdom, one should resort to conciliation and the other techniques. O great king!
The body must be protected in every possible way. One must ensure supreme benefit for one's own self, in this
world and in the world after death. A king who listens to these auspicious words protects the subjects according to
dharma and obtains this world. After death, he obtains heaven. O foremost among the Kuru lineage! For the welfare of the subjects, this is the way you must act. O son! You must always act so as to obtain both the worlds.
Bhishma has spoken to you about this earlier, and so have Krishna and Vidura. O supreme among kings! However,
since I bear affection towards you, I must also tell you. O one who grants a lot of dakshina! Following the law, you
must do all of this. You will then be loved by the subjects and will obtain happiness in heaven. A king who performs one thousand horse sacrifices and one who protects the subjects according to dharma obtains fruits that are
equal."'
