Vaishampayana said, 'At the time of the sprinkling of water[That is, the formal anointment or coronation at the end of the sacrifice.], all the brahmanas and kings entered the inside of the
sacrificial enclosure. The maharshis, with the great-souled Narada at the forefront, seated themselves at the altar.
With the rajarshis, they were as radiant as the gods and the devarshis in Brahma's abode. Those immensely energetic ones performed one rite after another and discussed it among themselves, "This is the right way," "that is not
the right way," "there is no other way except this," thus did they speak a lot and argue with each other. Some made
weak arguments appear strong. Others cited the sacred texts to make strong arguments appear weak. Some intelligent debaters tore apart the arguments of others, the way hawks fall upon raw pieces of meat thrown in the air.
Some among them were great in their vows and knew the stories about dharma and artha. Others were supreme
among those who had knowledge of the Vedas. Others found delight in recounting tales. The sacrificial altar was
surrounded by gods, brahmanas and maharshis, all with knowledge of the Vedas, and looked as beautiful as the
clear sky with its stars. O king! No shudra, or one without any vows, was near the inner altar of Yudhishthira's
abode.

'On seeing the prosperity of the prosperous and intelligent Dharmaraja, all the consequences of that sacrifice,
Narada became satisfied. O lord of men! On seeing the assembly of all the kshatriyas, the sage Narada began to
think. O bull among the Bharata lineage! He remembered the ancient account about the partial incarnations that he
had heard in Brahma's abode. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Knowing that this was an assembly of gods,
Narada remembered Pundarikaksha Hari[Hari is Vishnu's name and so is Pundarikaksha. Pundarika is a lotus, typically the white lotus, and aksha
means eye. So Pundarikaksha means lotus-eyed.]. The lord Narayana, slayer of enemies of the wise ones[The gods.] and destroyer
of cities of the enemies, had himself been born as a kshatriya to keep his pledge. In ancient times, the creator of
beings had himself commanded the gods, "You will regain your own worlds after you have killed one another."

Having thus instructed all the gods, Shambhu[Shambhu is one who brings prosperity. It is usually used for Shiva, and sometimes Kartikeya and Ganesha too.
But here, it is being used for Vishnu.] Narayana, the illustrious lord of the universe, was himself born in
Yadu's dynasty. Having been born in the lineage of the Andhakas and the Vrishnis, the supreme one among those
who extend lineages, shone with supreme prosperity, like the moon among the stars. Hari's strength of arms was
worshipped by Indra, with all the gods. He is the destroyer of enemies and had been born in human form. "Oh!
What can be a greater wonder than this? The self-creator will himself take away all these great and strong kshatriyas." These were the thoughts of the righteous Narada. He knew that Hari Narayana is the god who is worshipped through sacrifices. The intelligent one, supreme among those who know dharma, remained at the great
sacrifice of the supremely intelligent Dharmaraja, so as to greatly honour him.

'O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Bhishma then spoke to King Dharmaraja Yudhishthira. "Let offerings be made to the kings, according to what they deserve. O Yudhishthira! It is said that one's preceptor, one's
priest, one's relative, a snataka, a friend and a king-these are the six who are deserving of such offerings. It is
also said that when someone comes and stays for more than one year, he too becomes deserving. These kings have
stayed with us for a very long time. O king! Therefore, let an arghya be brought for each of them. Let the first
arghya be brought for he who is the most deserving among them." Yudhishthira asked, "O grandfather! O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Whom do you consider to be the one to whom the first arghya should be presented?
Please tell me what is right." O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Through his intelligence, Shantanu's son Bhishma then determined that Varshneya Krishna was the most deserving person on earth. "Among all these assembled
here, he is the one who blazes with his energy, strength and valour, like the sun shines among the stars. This sacrificial place is lit up and gladdened by Krishna, like a sunless place with the sun and a windless place with the
wind." Having been thus instructed by Bhishma, the powerful Sahadeva offered the supreme arghya to Varshneya,
in accordance with the rites prescribed. Krishna accepted it, in accordance with the rites laid down in the sacred
texts. However, Shishupala could not tolerate this homage shown to Vasudeva. In that assembly, the immensely
powerful king of Chedi censured Bhishma and Dharmaraja and then insulted Vasudeva.'
