Parashara said, 'Whatever little riches a brahmana obtains through receiving gifts, a kshatriya through conquest by weapons, a vaishya through lawful means and a shudra through servitude, are praised. When spent
for dharma, these yield great fruits. It is said that the shudra must always serve the three varnas. But if a brahmana
doesn't have means of sustenance and follows the dharma of kshatriyas or the dharma of vaishyas, he suffers no
downfall. But if a brahmana follows the dharma of shudras, then he does face a downfall. When a shudra does not
possess a means of sustenance, then trade, animal husbandry and subsistence on the basis of artisanship are recommended for him. If a person has not engaged in such occupations earlier, then descending in an arena[Probably actors.], earning a
living through one's beauty and earning a living through the sales of liquor, flesh, iron and leather are not recommended. These are censured in the world. It has been heard that if one has been engaged in such tasks and has then
given them up, this leads to great dharma. In this world, it is said that if a successful man is overcome by arrogance
in his mind and acts wickedly, that cannot be accepted. It has been heard in the ancient accounts that subjects used
to  be  self-controlled  and  placed  dharma  at  the  forefront,  following  the  fair  policy  of  dharma.  Shaming them
through words was sufficient chastisement. O king! At that time, dharma alone was praised among men. Men on
earth served and extended the qualities of dharma. O son! O lord of men! But the asuras could not tolerate this.
They increased themselves and gradually penetrated the subjects. Because of this, insolence was generated among
subjects and this destroyed dharma. Resulting from insolence, anger was again generated within them. Having
been overcome with anger, their conduct became shameful. O king! When they were overcome with lack of modesty, confusion was generated in them. Having become overcome with confusion, they no longer looked at things
the  way  they  had  done  earlier.  They  cheerfuly  conducted  themselves  and  crushed  each  other.  Shaming  them
through words was no longer sufficient chastisement then. They served their senses and no longer showed respect
towards gods and brahmanas. At this time, the gods sought refuge with Shiva, supreme among the gods, the brave
one with many forms and the lord of the ganas. With the combined energy of the gods, with a single arrow, he
brought down the three cities from the sky onto the ground[This is the story of Tripura, the three cities of the asuras in the sky, destroyed by Shiva. However, this is sometimes interpreted in metaphorical fashion, the three cities standing for desire, anger and greed.]. Their lord was terrible and fearsome in valour,
frightful to the gods. But he was slain by the wielder of the trident. When he was slain, men regained their own nature. As was the case earlier, the Vedas and the sacred texts were revived. The saptarshis instated Vasava in the
kingdom of the gods in heaven and he was given the task of wielding the staff of chastisement over men. After the
saptarshis, there were the king named Viprithu and several other kshatriyas who became kings over separate categories. However, even when they were born in great lineages, there were some who continued to follow the earlier
conduct. Their hearts were full of sentiments like that of the asuras. Because of those sentiments, those kings, terrible in valour, continued to be attached to deeds that were like those of the asuras. Men who are exceedingly foolish
continue to be devoted to such acts, rever them and establish them. O king! That is the reason I am telling you that
you must reflect about the sacred texts. You must discard all notions of violence within you and act so as to obtain
success. An accomplished person does not think of obtaining riches by mixing up the means. For the sake of dharma or artha, he does not abandon what is proper. That is not said to be the way towards welfare. It is recommended
that a kshatriya should be self-controlled, affectionate towards relatives and protect subjects, servants and sons in
accordance with his own dharma. Because of prosperity and adversity, there can be enmity and affection. One is
born and circles around in thousands of lives in many ways. Find delight in the qualities and never in sins. Even if
a person is evilminded and devoid of qualities, he realizes this internally. O great king! Dharma and adharma are
prevalent among men. Other than men, these notions are not seen to exist in other creatures. Whether a man is concerned with this life or is not concerned with this life, he must be learned and must follow dharma in conduct. He
must cause injury and must always regard everyone like his own self. When there is no longer any desire in the
mind, there is no longer any falsehood and one desires what is beneficial.'"'
