'"Manu said, 'That which should be known exists in the midst of that knowledge. Know
that the mind is only a quality of knowledge. When it is united with the faculties of wisdom, then intelligence is the result. When intelligence is freed from the qualities of action and is immersed in the mind, then wisdom is the result. One is engaged in the yoga
of meditation and knows the brahman. If intelligence still possesses those qualities[Of action.], it
circles around because of those qualities and flows down like a stream from the summit
of a mountain, heading in different directions. But if one disengages from the qualities
and the mind is first immersed in meditation, then one knows the brahman, like gold
through a touchstone. The mind pursues the objects of the senses and clouds intelligence. Because it is obsessed with those qualities, it is incapable of seeing what is without qualities. One must close all the doors[Of the senses.] and base oneself in the mind. Having fixed
one's mind, one can then obtain the supreme. When the qualities are extinguished, the
great elements are withdrawn. In that way, when the senses are withdrawn, the intelligence circles around in the mind. When intelligence is based in the mind and circles
around inside, there are no longer any qualities that the mind is engaged with. When the
mind is engaged in the qualities of meditation, it can cast aside its qualities. Devoid of
all the qualities, it can know what is without qualities[The brahman.]. There is no vijnana that is capable of proving the existence of what is not manifest. There are no arrangements of
words that can express it. How can it be understood through material objects? A person
who has cleansed his atman inside can seek to approach the supreme brahman through
austerities, inferences and the qualities prescribed in the sacred texts. Freeing oneself
from the qualities, one can also follow him in the external path[Other than inside one's own self.]. Because there are no
natural attributes, the one who should be known cannot be known through debate. When
one withdraws from the qualities, one obtains the brahman, who is devoid of qualities.
The intelligence is such that it reaches towards the qualities, like a fire towards kindling.
When the five senses are freed from their respective actions, the supreme brahman is
also freed and transcends nature. All embodied beings are naturally influenced[Towards performing action.]. When
they withdraw, they are freed, and some go to heaven. Man, nature, intelligence, senses
in particular, ego and pride are created in beings. Their first creation emanated from that
foremost one. The second creation resulted from sexual intercourse and is restrained by
rules[Such as sexual intercourse between members of the same species.]. Benefit is obtained by observing dharma. The practice of adharma leads to injury. Attachment leads to the normal course[Of rebirth.]. Detachment leads to knowledge.'"'
