'Yudhishthira said, "You have stated the tasks and the duties that you will perform. To the best of my intelligence, I
have decided that I approve of this. Let our priest leave, together with the superintendents of the kitchen and the
cooks, and preserve the agnihotra[In this context, the sacred fire preserved in any household. Agnihotra is also a kind of sacrifice.] in Drupada's abode. It is my view that Indrasena[Yudhishthira's charioteer.] and the other charioteers
should take the empty chariots and swiftly proceed to Dvaravati. Let all the women who tend to Droupadi go to
Panchala[Panchala is Drupada's kingdom.] with the superintendents of the kitchen and the cooks. All of them must say, 'We do not know where
the Pandavas are. All of them have deserted us and have left Dvaitavana.'"

'Dhoumya[The priest of the Pandavas.] said, "Devoted well-wishers can speak about things that are known. Therefore, I will speak and listen to my reasons. O princes! I will tell you about life in a king's abode and about how, having reached the king's
household, you can free yourselves from harm. O Kouravyas! Life in a king's abode is difficult, even for those
who are acquainted with it. For an entire year you will be unknown and will not be shown any honour, even
though you deserve honour. When you are shown the door, take to the door. Do not repose any trust in kings. Seek
out seats that no one else desires. Live in the king's abode without assuming that, as a favourite, one can ascend his
vehicle, palanquin, seat, elephant or chariot. If evil-minded ones are suspicious of the seat that you occupy, do not
ascend there again. That is the way one can live in a king's residence. One should never offer advice to the king,
unless he has asked for it. Be seated in silence and honour him at the right time. Kings dislike those who disagree
and people who speak lies. Wise ones never become friendly with the wives[Of kings.], or with those who live in the inner
quarters, or ill-wishers whom the king despises. With the king's knowledge, one should perform the most insignificant of tasks. If one conducts oneself in this fashion, one will be protected from any harm from the king. One
should serve with the care one exhibits towards Agni or the other gods. There is no doubt that if one resorts to
falsehood, one will confront violence. One should follow the instructions of the lord and avoid negligence, pride
and anger. One should always offer advice that is good and pleasant, but one should attend more to the good than
the pleasant. In every kind of conversation, one should be kindly disposed[Towards the king.]. One should never say that which is
unpleasant and brings no gain. A learned one serves, not thinking that he is favoured. Without any confusion, do
that which is good and pleasant. One can live in the king's abode as long as one does not serve those who wish him
ill, as long as one does not consort with those who seek to harm him and as long as one does not stray from one's
station. The learned seat themselves to the right side or the left. It has been decreed that the place behind him is for
armed guards. The grand seat in front of him has always been forbidden. One should not talk about prosperity in
his presence[Presumably, someone else's prosperity.]. This is regarded as extreme impertinence, even among the poor. Do not reveal to men the lies the
king utters. Do not converse with men the king does not like. Do not be proud because of your bravery, or vain because of your intelligence. One becomes dear and comfortable by doing that which brings pleasure to the king.
Having obtained rare riches and affection from a king, without any confusion, one must engage in that which is
good and pleasant for the king. His anger can be a great obstacle. His favours can bring great fruits. Can anyone,
who is honoured by the wise, think of causing harm to such a person? One should not forcefully move one's lips or
thighs, or utter words with great force. Sneezing, breaking wind and clearing the throat should always be done gently. When there is an occasion for laughter, one should laugh gently, and not like one who is mad. But one should
not be too solemn. Otherwise, one will be taken to be too severe. Instead, one should smile gently, showing oneself
to be benevolent. One can always live in a king's abode if one does not show delight at a gain or sorrow at a dishonour, and is always attentive. If one is a learned counsellor who always pleases the king and the prince, one can
always live there in prosperity. If a beloved adviser has fallen out of favour for some reason and does not blame
the king, he will regain the favours once more. One who earns his livelihood from the king, or dwells in his kingdom, must be sagacious enough to recount his good qualities, both in his presence and in his absence. An adviser
who strongly desires to obtain some objective from the king, will not remain in that position for long and faces a
danger to his life. For the sake of what is seen to be one's one gains, one should not say anything that goes against
the king. In particular, one should always advice the king at the right place. One who is always cheerful, strong,
brave, faithful like a shadow, truthful, gentle and self-controlled, is capable of dwelling in a king's abode. If another one is instructed with a task, a person who jumps forward and asks what he should do is capable of dwelling in a
king's abode. If one does not waver when given instructions, whether it is hot or cold, or night or day, one is capable of dwelling in a king's abode. One who lives away from home and does not remember one's loved ones and
one who finds happiness in unhappiness is capable of dwelling in a king's abode. One should not dress like him[The king.].
One should not laugh loudly in his presence. One should not offer a great deal of advice. In this way, one will become dear to the king. Appointed to a task, one should not touch riches[That is, one should not be bribed.]. Having obtained unearned riches, one
faces imprisonment or death. One should use vehicles, garments, ornaments and other objects that have been given, and thus become a greater favourite. O sons[The word used is tata.]! Spend a year in this way, adorning yourselves with good conduct. You will then regain your possessions and act according to your pleasures."

'Yudhishthira replied, "O fortunate one! We have been instructed by you. No one but you can speak in this fashion, but for our mother Kunti and the immensely intelligent Vidura. It is now necessary to do what must be done,
so that we can overcome our suffering and depart so as to achieve victory."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having been thus addressed by the king, Dhoumya, supreme among brahmanas, performed all the decreed rites that were necessary for their departure. He offered kindling to the fire and rendered
oblations to the utterance of mantras, so that their prosperity might increase and they might conquer the earth. The
six of them, with Yajnaseni[Droupadi.] at the forefront, circumambulated the fire and the brahmanas, rich in austerities. Then
they departed.'
