'Yudhishthira said, "O grandfather! You have recounted this eternal rajadharma. This is the lord's[The word used is ishvara and subsequent sections suggest that Brahma is meant.] great rod of
chastisement and everything is established on this rod of chastisement-in particular, the gods, the rishis, the
great-souled ancestors, the yakshas, the rakshasas, the pishachas and the mortals. In a fierce way, it resides in all
the beings in this world. O lord! It pervades everything, is extremely energetic and is the best. You have said that
everything that is seen in the worlds-gods, asuras and men, mobile and immobile objects-is touched by the rod
of chastisement. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Therefore, I wish to know the entire truth about this. What is
this rod? What is the rod like? What is its form? What is its nature? What is its soul like? How was it created?
What is its image? How did it become a rod? When does the rod of chastisement, which causes injury to beings,
awake? To protect, how does it remain awake, before and after[Before and after an act of chastisement.]? How was it known earlier? What are the signs
of the rod later? Where is the rod based? What is its trajectory?"

'Bhishma replied, "O Kouravya! Hear about the rod of chastisement and about why it amounts to judgement. In
this earth, the rod is the only object through which everything is controlled. O great king! That is the reason judgement is also known by the name of dharma. If it is destroyed, how will beings, who wish to cause injury, be destroyed? That is the reason judgement is known as vyavahara[While vyavahara means conduct or behaviour, it also means a lawsuit and judicial procedure.]. O king! In ancient times, right at the beginning,
this was stated by Manu. 'If the rod is applied well, treating the loved and the disliked equally, then he who protects the subjects in this way is alone like dharma himself.' These words were spoken by Manu in ancient times.

'"But even before that, at the time of creation, there were Brahma's great words, mentioned by Vasishtha. These
words were spoken before those other words were uttered, so the learned say that these were the earliest words[Brahma's words were the earliest, because they came before Manu's.].

'In this world, judgement is spoken of as vyavahara. If the rod is applied well, the three objectives[Dharma, artha and kama.] always flow
from it.' The supreme rod is divine in form, with trails like fire. He is as dark as the petals of a blue lotus. He has
four teeth, four arms, eight feet and many eyes. The ears are conical and the hair stands upright. He is matted and
possesses two tongues. His eyes are coppery and he is clad in the skin of the king of animals[A lion.]. The rod always
sports this fierce and frightful appearance and is impossible to withstand. The sword, the club, the bow, the spear,
the trident, the bludgeon, the arrow, the mallet, the battleaxe, the chakra, the spike, the staff, the cutlass, the javelin
and whatever weapons exist in this world-the rod roams around and assumes their forms. The rod roams around,
slaying and striking, piercing, severing, smashing, slicing, mangling and uprooting. O Yudhishthira! These names
of the rod are recounted-Asi[Sword.], Vishasana[A sabre or crooked sword.], Dharma, Tikshnavartma[Fierce in progress.], Durasada[Irresistible.], Shrigarbha[The womb of prosperity.], Vijaya[Victory.], Shasta[The ruler.], Vyavahara, Prajagara[The guardian who remains awake.], Shastra[Sacred text or command.], Brahmana, Mantra, Shasta[This is repeated.], Pragyavachana-gata[The one who returns to the earliest words.],
Dharmapala[The protector of dharma.], Akshaya[The one without decay.], Deva[God, alternatively, the shining one.], Satyaga[The one who follows truth.], Nityaga[The one who is always present.], Graha[The one who seizes.], Asanga[The one without attachment.], Rudratanaya[The son of Rudra.], Manujyeshtha[The eldest Manu.] and Shivamkara[The performer of what is auspicious.]. The lord is the illustrious Vishnu and his sacrifice, the lord Narayana, whose
great form is eternal and who is known as the great being. It is said to be Brahma's daughters-Lakshmi, Niti[Good policy personified.]
and Sarasvati. Dandaniti is Jagaddhatri[The mother of the universe.]. O descendant of the Bharata lienage! The rod has many different kinds
of forms-good and bad, happy and unhappy, dharma and adharma, strong and weak, good fortune and ill fortune,
auspicious and inauspicious, with qualities and without qualities, with desire and without desire, season, month,
night, day, moment, without favours and with favours, delight, anger, pacification, self-control, destiny, human endeavour, with salvation and without salvation, with fear and without fear, with violence and without violence, austerities, sacrifices, self-restraint, with poison and without poison, the end, the beginning, the middle, evil sorcery,
deceit, intoxication, carelessness, pride, insolence, patience, good policy and bad policy, lack of strength and
strength, respect and disrespect, change and status quo, humility, renunciation, the right time and the wrong time.
O Kouravya! The rod has many different forms in the world-falsehood, knowing and not knowing, truth, faith
and lack of faith, impotence, conduct, gain and loss, victory and defeat, sharpness and mildness, death, getting and
not getting, disagreement and agreement, tasks that should be done and tasks that should not be done, strength and
weakness, malice and lack of malice, dharma and adharma, shame and lack of shame, success and failure, energy,
deeds, learning, strength of speech and intelligence.

'"Had the rod not existed, people would have crushed each other. O Yudhishthira! It is out of fear of the rod that
they do not kill each other. O king! It is through the rod that the subjects are constantly protected. Therefore, a king
who resorts to the rod obtains prosperity. O lord of men! It swiftly establishes good conduct in the world. Dharma,
which is based on the truth, finds a foundation in brahmanas. Brahmanas are full of dharma and the best among
them base themselves on the Vedas. Sacrifices result from the Vedas and sacrifices please the gods. If the gods are
pleased, they always give it to Indra[The oblations offered at sacrifices are given to Indra.]. If Shakra is pleased with the subjects, he gives them food. The lives of all
beings always find a basis in food. Thus, subjects obtain a foundation and the rod watches over them. Because of
these reasons, the rod manifests itself in kshatriyas. It remains awake and, always and eternally, protects subjects
well. It is spoken of in eight names-Ishvara, Purusha, Prana, Sattva[Essence, strength.], Vitta[Prosperity, power.], Prajapati, Bhutatma[The soul in all beings.] and
Jiva[Living being.]. This rod certainly gives him[The king.] prosperity. When strength is united with policy, five ingredients result-
lineage, strength, wealth, advisers and wisdom. These are said to be the strengths. O Yudhishthira! There is another
kind of strength that can be obtained from eight objects-elephants, horses, chariots, infantry, boats, workers,
guides and spies. These are said to be the eight kinds of strength. When that eight-limbed army advances, it is united with elephants, elephant riders, horse riders, foot soldiers, ministers, physicians, mendicants, principal investigators, astrologers, readers of omens, treasuries, allies, foodgrains and all kinds of implements. The learned say
that it is a body with seven ingredients and eight limbs[The kingdom is being compared to the physical body. The seven ingredients are the king, his allies, advisers,
the country, the fortified cities, the treasury and the army. To these seven ingredients, the rod of chastisement is
being added to account for eight limbs.]. The rod is a limb of the kingdom and the rod provides
the power. The lord made efforts so that kshatriyas could bear it. The rod is applied equally to everyone and the
rod is the eternal soul. It shows the way towards dharma and there is nothing that kings should revere more. For
the protection of the worlds and to establish people in their own dharma, the creator[Brahma.] engendered this.

'"Judgement comes after this and is seen to be united with it. It is also a characteristic that has been engendered
by the creator. Judgement is said to be the soul of the Vedas and obtains its sanction from the Vedas. O tiger among
men! While this is the foundation, there is another kind that originates with the ordinances of the sacred texts[A hierarchy of judgement and judicial process is indicated. The primary one is what is laid down in the Vedas,
the secondary flows from other sacred texts and the tertiary is from the exercise of the king's powers.].
The rod is said to exhibit the characteristics of the lord's[The king's.] custom. It is known to be based on the customs
through which the lord of men exercises the rod. What is seen to be the custom behind the exercise of the rod is
said to be the soul of judgement. What is said to be judgement is also the soul of the subject matter of the Vedas.
Whatever flows from the soul of the Vedas is said to exhibit the qualities of dharma. When something results from
the dharma of customary practice, those with cleansed souls also regard that as dharma. O Yudhishthira! On Brahma's instructions, judgement protects the subjects. It has truth as its soul, it upholds the three worlds and it extends
prosperity. Where the rod cannot be seen, eternal judgement doesn't exist either. We have heard that whatever is
seen in the judicial process is dharma. Where the Vedas are, dharma exists there. Where dharma exists, the path of
virtue is there. Brahma Prajapati was the first. He was the grandfather of all the worlds, with the gods, the asuras
and the rakshasas, and with men and the serpents. He is the creator of everything that came into existence. Thus,
this judgement flows from the characteristics of custom followed by the lord. That is how we have spoken about
this example of the judicial process. If they are not established in their own dharma, the mother, the father, the
brother, the wife and the preceptor are not beyond the exercise of the king's rod."'
