Vaishampayana said, 'The horse wandered around as it willed. After saying this, Partha followed it. The horse
then returned towards the city of Nagasahvya. Through messengers, Yudhishthira got to know that the horse
was returning. He heard that Arjuna was well and was delighted. The king was extremely happy to hear about Vijaya's deeds in the kingdom of Gandhara, as well as in the other countries. At this time, it was the twelfth lunar day
in shuklapaksha of  Magha[January-February. There is inconsistency in the month, since it changes from Chaitra to Magha.]. Dharmaraja Yudhishthira discerned that the nakshatras were auspicious. The immensely energetic Kourava summoned all his great-minded brothers, Bhima, Nakula and Sahadeva. At that time,
the supreme among the upholders of dharma spoke these words. The best among eloquent ones specifically addressed Bhima, terrible in his valour. "O Bhimasena! Your younger brother, Arjuna, is arriving with the horse. The
men who followed Dhananjaya have reported this to me. The horse is returning and the time for the sacrifice has
presented itself. O Vrikodara! The month of Magha is about to end and it will soon be the day of the full moon. Let
learned brahmanas who are accomplished in the Vedas leave. For the success of the horse sacrifice, let them seek
out a spot for the sacrifice." Thus addressed, Bhima followed the king's instructions. O king! He was delighted to
hear that Savyasachi was returning. Bhimasena left with wise architects. He placed brahmanas, who were skilled in
the performance of sacrificial rites, ahead of him. Following the ordinances, Kouravya measured out a sacrificial
ground. He had it levelled and had houses, palaces and roads constructed. Residences were erected for the officiating priests and the wives and for the sacrificial fire towards the north. In the proper way, everything was laid out
with gems and decorated with gold. There were colourful golden pillars and large gates. The sacrificial area was
encrusted with pure gold. In the proper way, the one with dharma in his soul had inner quarters constructed and
residences for the kings who would come from many countries. There were residences for the brahmanas who
would arrive from many countries. Bhima had many such constructed. O great king! On the king's instructions,
Bhimasena, unblemished in his deeds, sent messengers to the kings. To do what was agreeable to the lord of the
Kurus, those supreme kings arrived. They brought many gems, women, horses and weapons. They were made to
reside in those thousands of pavilions. The sound that arose was like the roaring of the ocean and seemed to touch
the sky. The king with the redeyes instructed that they should be welcomed with food and drink and beds superhuman in beauty. The mounts were fed different kinds of grain, sugar cane and milk. O tiger among men! Dharmaraja
gave such instructions for those who had come. Many sages who knew about the brahman came in large numbers
to the intelligent Dharmaraja's great sacrifice. O lord of the earth! All the foremost brahmanas assembled there,
with their disciples, and Kourava received them. Abandoning all pride, Yudhishthira himself followed all of them,
until they had found the residences earmarked for them. O king! Following the ordinances, after completing everything that was required for the sacrifice, the architects and artisans went and reported this to Dharmaraja. On hearing that everything had been arranged, Dharmaraja praised them all. With his brothers, the undecaying king was
delighted.'
