'Bhagavan said, "You have spoken as an immensely wise and discerning one should. You have spoken as a wellwisher like you should speak to a well-wisher like me. This is truly in accordance with dharma and artha and befits
you. The words spoken by you are truly like those spoken by a father and a mother. What you have told me is true,
appropriate and worthy of being followed. O Vidura! But listen attentively to the reason why I have come. O
Kshatta! I have come to the Kouravas with complete knowledge about the evil soul of Dhritarashtra's son and the
enmity of the kshatriyas. However, one who will relieve the earth, with all its horses, chariots and elephants, of her
burden and free her from the noose of death, will achieve supreme dharma. If a man strives for an act of dharma to
the best of his capability, even if he is not successful, I have no doubt that he obtains merits. Those who are knowledgeable about dharma know that if one thinks of an evil deed in one's mind, but does not consent to do it, one
does not suffer from the fruits. O Kshatta! Therefore, I will sincerely try to bring about peace between the Kurus
and the Srinjayas. Otherwise, they will be destroyed in this war. This extremely terrible calamity has now arisen
before the Kurus. This is because of Karna and Duryodhana, but all the others are also responsible. The wise say
that one who does not rush, to the best of his capacity, to help a friend who faces distress is cruel. A friend should
be prevented from performing an improper act, even by grasping him by the hair. If one strives for this, to the best
of one's strength, one cannot be blamed. My words are appropriate, pure, beneficial and in conformity with dharma
and artha. O Vidura! Together with his advisers, Dhritarashtra's son should accept them. I will sincerely try for the
welfare of the sons of Dhritarashtra, the Pandavas and all the kshatriyas on earth. Though I strive for welfare, if
Duryodhana suspects me, my heart will at least be satisfied that I have been freed from a debt[Owed to a friend.]. If a friend does
not intervene, to the best of his endeavours, and maintains a distance, when there is dissension among relatives, the
wise know that he is not a friend. Those who do not know about dharma and are foolish and hostile should not say
that Krishna, though capable, did not restrain the angry Kurus and Pandavas. I have come here to help both sides.
After having made the effort, I will no longer be blamed by men. After having listened to my beneficial words, in
conformity with dharma and artha, if that child ignores them, he will come under the power of destiny. If I can
bring about peace with the Kurus, without harming the cause of the Pandavas, I will accomplish a great objective
and earn merit, saving the Kurus from the noose of death. If Dhritarashtra's sons pay attention to my virtuous and
wise words, full of dharma and artha and designed to ensure welfare, I will earn the respect of the Kurus for having
come here. All the kings of the earth together are not sufficient to withstand me when I am enraged, like deer before a lion."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having spoken these words, the bull of the Vrishni lineage and the source of joy to the
Yadu lineage lay down to sleep on a bed that was pleasant to the touch.'
