'Sanjaya said, "Those lords of men spent the night happily, engrossed in sleep. Then the Kurus and the Pandavas
again emerged to fight. A great sound arose from both the armies, as they emerged to do battle. It was like the
great ocean. King Duryodhana, Chitrasena, Vivimshati, Bhishma, supreme among rathas, and the brahmana who
was Bharadvaja's son united themselves and arrayed the great army of the Kouravas. O king! They armoured
themselves and formed a vyuha to counter the Pandavas. O lord of the earth! Your father, Bhishma, constructed a
great vyuha. It was as terrible as the ocean, with the mounts as its waves. Bhishma, Shantanu's son, advanced at
the forefront of all the soldiers. He was supported by the Malavas, those from the south and those from Avanti.
Bharadvaja's powerful son was next to him. The Pulindas, the Paradas and the lesser Malavas were with him. O
lord of the earth! The powerful Bhagadatta was next to Drona, together with the Magadhas, the Kalingas and the
Pishachas. Brihadbala, the king of Kosala, was behind Pragjyotisha, together with the Mekalas, the Tripuras and
the Chichchilas. Next to Brihadbala was the brave Trigarta, the lord of Prasthala. He was accompanied by a large
number of Kambojas and thousands of Yavanas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Drona's brave son was next
to Trigarta and advanced to do battle. He roared like a lion and made the earth resound. Surrounded by his brothers, Duryodhana was next to Drona's son and Kripa Sharadvat was behind him. It was thus that the great vyuha advanced, like an ocean. O lord! There were resplendent flags and dazzling umbrellas. There were colourful bracelets
and extremely expensive bows.

'"On seeing the great vyuha of your soldiers, maharatha Yudhishthira quickly addressed Parshata, the supreme
commander. 'O great archer! Behold the vyuha that has been constructed. It is like an ocean. O Parshata! Without
any delay, create a counter vyuha.' Having been thus addressed, the brave Parshata constructed an extremely terrible vyuha. O great king! It was called Shringataka[Meaning that it had cusps or horns.] and it was destructive of the vyuhas of enemies. Bhimasena
and maharatha Satyaki were at the two horns, with many thousands of chariots, horses and infantry. The foremost
of men, the one with the white horses and the ape on his standard, was next to them. King Yudhishthira was in the
centre, with the Pandavas who were Madri's sons. Other kings who were great archers, skilled in the use of
weapons, filled up the vyuha with their soldiers. Abhimanyu was at the rear, with maharatha Virata, Droupadi's delighted sons and the rakshasa Ghatotkacha. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thus did the Pandavas array
themselves in the form of a gigantic vyuha. The brave ones stationed themselves in that battle, wishing to fight and
desiring victory. The tumultuous sound of drums mingled with the sound made by conch shells. Armpits were
slapped and a terrible noise arose in all the directions.

'"In that battle, the brave ones then confronted each other. O king! They glanced at each other in rage, without
blinking their eyes. O Indra among men! They challenged each other, summoning each other by name first. A battle commenced. The battle that started was terrible in form and fearful. Those on your side, and those of the enemy, sought to kill each other. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Sharp iron arrows descended in that battle.
They were like fearful snakes with gaping mouths. There were polished and extremely energetic lances that had
been washed in oil. O king! They were as radiant as lightning[The word used is shatahrada. Literally, this means something with a hundred rays of light.] in the clouds. There were polished and thick
clubs, covered in cloth and decorated with gold. They were seen to descend, like beautiful summits of mountains.
There were radiant swords, as clear as the sky. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were shields made out
of the hides of bulls, with a hundred moons marked on them. O king! They were resplendent in that battle, as they
descended in every direction. O lord of men! The two armies encountered each other in that battle. They dazzled
like the armies of the gods and the daityas, when arrayed against each other. In that battle, they clashed against
each other in every direction. In that supreme battle, chariots quickly clashed against chariots. As those bulls
among men fought, the yokes of one got entangled with the yokes of another. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! Tuskers fought with tuskers and because of the friction, flames were seen in every direction, mingled with
smoke. In all directions, struck by lances, some warriors on elephants were seen to fall down, like the summits of
mountains. Infantry was seen to kill each other. The brave ones fought in many colourful ways and used lances and
bare nails. Thus did the soldiers of the Kurus and the Pandavas attack each other. Many terrible weapons were used
in that battle, to despatch others to the eternal worlds[The land of the dead.]. The chariot of Bhishma, Shantanu's son, roared in that
battle. He advanced against the Pandus and confounded them with the twang of his bow. The chariots of the Pandavas also emitted a terrible roar. With Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, they advanced together. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Thus did the battle between you and them commence. Men, horses, chariots and elephants got
entangled with each other."'
