Vyasa said, "O Yudhishthira! O mighty-armed one! Do what the great-souled Dhritarashtra, descendant of the
Kuru lineage, has asked. Do not think about this. This king is aged. More specifically, his sons have been
killed. It is my view that he will not be able to bear this hardship for a long time. The immensely fortunate Gand-
hari is wise and speaks piteously. O great king! She has borne the grief on account of her sons with great fortitude.
I am asking you to act in accordance with my words. Grant the king permission. Let him not die in vain[At home.]. Let the
king follow the ancient path meant for rajarshis. At the end, all rajarshis have resorted to the forest."'

Vaishampayana continued, 'Vyasa, extraordinary in his deeds, spoke in this way to the king. The immensely energetic Dharmaraja Yudhishthira replied, "O illustrious one! We respect you. O illustrious one! You are our preceptor. O illustrious one! You are the refuge of the kingdom and the lineage. O illustrious one! I am your son. You are
my father, my king and my preceptor. According to dharma, the son must follow the instructions of the father."

Vyasa, supreme among the upholders of dharma, was addressed in this way. O lord of the earth! He again spoke to
the immensely energetic Yudhishthira. "O mighty-armed one! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It is exactly as
you have said. The king is aged and it is evident that he is in the last stages. O lord of the earth! You and I should
grant him the permission. Act according to his wishes and do not cause an obstruction. O Yudhishthira! This is the
supreme dharma of rajarshis. Their death should be in the field of battle, or following the proper ordinances, in the
forest. O Indra among kings! When your father, Pandu, ruled the earth, he served this king, like a disciple tends to
his preceptor. He[This is a reference to Dhritarashtra, not Pandu.] performed sacrifices with different kinds of dakshina that were piled up as high as hills. He obtained large objects of pleasure and enjoyed them, also protecting his sons. For the thirteen years when you were in
exile, he ruled the subjects of the kingdom like sons and enjoyed and gave away many kinds of riches. O tiger
among men! With your servants, you have served this king and the illustrious Gandhari as seniors. Grant your father permission. The time has come for him to perform austerities. O Yudhishthira! He does not harbour the slightest bit of anger towards you." With these words, he gave the king permission and Kounteya agreed. After the illustrious Vyasa left for the forest, the king who was Pandu's son spoke these soft and gentle words to his aged father.

"I will swiftly follow the instructions of the illustrious Vyasa, your views, the words of the great archer, Kripa, and
those of Vidura, Yuyutsu and Sanjaya. All of them are well-wishers of our lineage and I must pay heed to them. O
king! However, I am lowering my head in front of you and asking for something. Before going to the hermitage,
please eat something."'
