Janamejaya asked, 'O brahmana! King Dhritarashtra, tiger among men, went to the forest with his wife and his
daughter-in-law, Kunti. Vidura obtained success and merged himself into Dharmaraja. All the sons of Pandu
were then residing in the circle of the hermitage. What wonderful deed did the supremely energetic maharshi,
Vyasa, accomplish? What did he speak of doing? O brahmana! For how long did the undecaying Kouravya king,
Yudhishthira, reside in the forest with his people? O lord! While he dwelt there, what did he and his soldiers eat?
What about the great-souled ones and the women of the inner quarters? O unblemished one! Tell me that.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'O king! With the permission of the king of the Kurus, the Pandavas prepared many
kinds of food and drink and felt refreshed. With the soldiers and the women of the inner quarters, they resided
there for one month. O unblemished one! After this, as I have told you, Vyasa arrived there. In the presence of the
king, all of them began to converse. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When Vyasa had come, other
sages also arrived there-Narada, Parvata, Devala, great in austerities, Vishvavasu, Tumbaru and Chitrasena[Vishvavasu, Tumbaru and Chitrasena are actually the names of gandharvas. But here, they are mentioned as
sages.]. With
Dhritarashtra's permission, Yudhishthira, the great-minded king of the Kurus, followed the proper rites and worshipped them. Having been worshipped by Yudhishthira, all of them sat down on sacred and excellent seats covered with grass. When they were seated, the immensely intelligent king who was the extender of the Kuru lineage[Dhritarashtra.]
also sat down, surrounded by the sons of Pandu. Gandhari, Kunti, Droupadi, Satvati[Subhadra.] and the other women also
seated themselves. O king! The conversation that ensued was divine, full of dharma and concerned accounts of the
ancient rishis, the gods and the asuras.

'When this conversation was over, Vyasa, foremost among eloquent ones and supreme among those who knew
about all Vedas, was pleased. The immensely energetic one again spoke these words to the lord whose sight was
his wisdom. "O Indra among kings! I know the desire that is there in your heart. You are burning with grief on account of your sons. O king! That grief is also there in Gandhari's heart. O great king! It is also there in the hearts of
Kunti and Droupadi. Subhadra, Krishna's sister, is also holding up a fierce sorrow on account of her son being
killed. That is also known to me. O king! I heard that all of them had come here and were residing here. O descendant of the Kourava lineage! I have accordingly come here to dispel doubts. Over a long period of time, I have accumulated the valour of austerities. All of these gods, gandharvas and maharshis will witness that today. Therefore,
tell me. O mighty-armed one! I will grant you whatever you wish. I am lofty and can grant you a boon. Behold the
strength  of  my  austerities."  The  Indra  among  kings  was  thus  addressed  by  the  infinitely  intelligent  Vyasa.  He
thought for a short while and then spoke. "I am blessed that you are showing me your favours. Since you have
come here today, with all these virtuous ones, my life has become successful. Today, I understand the destinations
obtained by great-souled ones. All of you are Brahma's equal. You are stores of austerities and have come here to
meet me. There is no doubt that I have become purified through the act of seeing you. O unblemished ones! I no
longer entertain any fears about the world hereafter. However, I loved my son and always remember him. My mind
is distressed. He was evil-minded and extremely wicked. What has happened to him? He was evil in his intelligence and oppressed the innocent Pandavas. He violently destroyed the earth, with its men and elephants. There
were great-souled kings, the lords of many countries. They assembled for my son's sake and all of them came under the subjugation of death. Those brave ones gave up their sons and wives, dearer to them than their own lives.
They went to the abode of the lord of the dead. What has happened to them? O brahmana! What has happened to
those who were slain in the battle for the sake of their friends? What about my sons and grandsons who were killed
in the encounter? My heart is pained at the immensely strong and aged Bhishma, Shantanu's son, being brought
down, as it is for Drona, supreme among brahmanas. My son was foolish and wicked. He hated his well-wishers.
Desiring the kingdom of the earth, he conveyed his blazing lineage to its destruction. I remember all this and am
burnt night and day. Overwhelmed by sorrow and grief, I cannot obtain any peace. O father! This is what I think
about. There is no tranquility for me."'
