'Vidura said, "O king! There is no doubt that your friends have spoken that which brings your greatest welfare. But
words do not remain with those who are unwilling to listen. O king! Bhishma, the son of Shantanu and supreme
among the Kurus, has spoken that which is for your greatest welfare. But you do not accept it. In many ways,
Drona also said that which is for your welfare. But Karna, the son of Radha, does not believe this to be good for
you. O king! After thinking about it, I do not find anyone who is a better friend to you than these two[Bhishma and Drona.] lions
among men, supreme in their wisdom. These two are old in age, in wisdom and in their knowledge of the sacred
texts. O lord over kings! They regard the sons of Pandu with equal eyes. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O
king! There is no doubt that in virtue and truthfulness, they are not inferior to Rama, the son of Dasharatha, or
Gaya[A famous king who performed many sacrifices.]. Never before have they given you bad advice. Nor have they ever done that which brings you injury.
Therefore, why should these tigers among men, whose strength comes from their truthfulness, give you advice that
is not for your welfare? O ruler of men! These best of men are known in this world for their wisdom. They will
never give you bad advice, nor say that which is wicked. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! It is my firm conviction that these two, well versed in what is right, will not take either side for the sake of personal gain. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! I consider this to bring the greatest welfare to you. O king! There is no doubt that the Pandavas are your sons, as Duryodhana and the others are.

'"Therefore, those advisers who unwisely advise you against them, don't really have your interests at heart. O
king! If you have partiality in your heart[For your own sons.], it is certain it does you no good to encourage your inner feelings. O
king! Therefore, I certainly do not think that those two great-souled and illustrious ones have said anything that
leads to evil. However, you are not inclined towards that. O tiger among men! What those bulls among men have
said about their[The Pandavas'.] invincibility is quite true. May you be fortunate. O king! Can the handsome Pandava,
Savyasachi Dhananjaya[Arjuna.], ever be vanquished in battle by Maghavan[Indra.] himself? Can the great Bhimasena, with
strong arms and the strength of 10,000 elephants, ever be vanquished in battle by the gods? Can anyone who wishes to live vanquish in battle the twins[Nakula and Sahadeva.], well skilled in battle and like the sons of Yama himself? How can the eldest Pandava, in whom patience, compassion, mercy, truthfulness and valour are always present, ever be vanquished in war? With Rama[Balarama.] on their side, Janardana[Krishna.] as their adviser and Satyaki as their supporter, is there
anyone whom they have not already vanquished in battle? Drupada is their father-in-law. Drupada's son, Parshata
Dhrishtadyumna and his other brave brothers are their brothers-in-law. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Knowing that they cannot be vanquished and knowing that their claim to the kingdom is prior to yours, you must
act towards them in accordance with dharma.

'"O king! On account of the act of Purochana, you have been stained by great infamy. You must cleanse yourself
of that by behaving kindly towards them. O king! We have earlier waged a great war with King Drupada. Our side
will be strengthened if we can get him as an ally. O ruler of the people! The Dasharhas[The Yadavas.] are powerful and numerous. They will be where Krishna is. And where Krishna is, victory will certainly be there. O king! Unless cursed
by destiny, who seeks to obtain through war that which can be obtained through conciliation? O king! Having
heard that Pritha's[Kunti's.] sons are alive, the inhabitants of the city and the country are extremely happy and eager to
see them. Do what is pleasing to them. Duryodhana, Karna and Shakuni, the son of Subala, are evil, foolish and
young. Do not listen to their words. O king endowed with all the qualities! Long ago, I told you that this kingdom
and its subjects will be destroyed through Duryodhana's fault."'
