'"Indra said, 'O gods! This entire indestructible universe has been pervaded by Vritra. There is nothing that is
equal to him and can stand up to him. I was capable in earlier times. But I am now incapable. O fortunate ones!
What can I do? It seems to me that it is extremely difficult to overcome him. This energetic and great-souled one is
infinitely valorous in battle. He will devour the three worlds, with all the gods, the asuras and men. O residents of
heaven! Therefore, listen to what I have decided. We must approach the abode of the great-souled Vishnu. We
must consult with him about the means for killing this evil-souled one.'"

'Shalya said, "At these words of Maghavan, the gods, together with the masses of rishis, then sought refuge with
the immensely strong god Vishnu, one with whom refuge should be sought. All of them were oppressed with the
fear of Vritra and spoke to Vishnu, the lord of all the gods. 'O lord! You covered the three worlds in three strides[This, and the reference to Bali, is a reference to Vishnu's dwarf (vamana) incarnation.].
O Vishnu! You killed the daityas in battle and obtained the amrita[This is a reference to the churning of the ocean.]. Having bound down the great daitya Bali, you
made Shakra the lord of the gods. You are the lord of all the worlds. Everything is vested in you. You are the god
who is the great god. You are revered by all the worlds. O supreme among the immortals! Become the salvation of
Indra and the gods. O destroyer of asuras! The entire universe has become pervaded by Vritra.' Vishnu replied, 'I
will certainly do that which ensures your supreme welfare. I will tell you a means whereby he will cease to exist.
With all the rishis and the gandharvas, go to the spot where the one with the universal form resides. Use conciliation towards him. You will then be able to vanquish him. O gods! Shakra will go there. Using my energy, I will invisibly enter his supreme weapon, the vajra. O supreme among gods! Go there with the rishis and the gandharvas.
Without any delay, bring about a truce between Vritra and Shakra.' Having been thus addressed by the god, the
rishis and the denizens of heaven went together, having placed Shakra at the forefront.

'"All those greatly energetic ones approached him. He was burning the ten directions with the radiance of his
energy. He seemed to be swallowing the three worlds and was like the sun and the moon. Together with Shakra,
the gods saw Vritra there. The rishis approached and spoke to Vritra in pleasant words. 'O invincible one! The entire universe is pervaded by your energy. But you will not be able to vanquish Vasava, who is supremely valorous.
Since the two of you began to fight, a very long period of time has elapsed. All the beings, including the gods, the
asuras and men, are oppressed. O Vritra! Let there always be friendship between you and Shakra. You will then
obtain happiness and eternally dwell in Shakra's world.' Hearing these words of the rishis, the greatly strong asura
Vritra bowed his head in obeisance before all of them and said, 'O immensely fortunate ones! O all the gandharvas! O unblemished ones! I have heard everything that you have said. Now listen to me. O gods! We are both extremely energetic. How can there be friendship between us?' The rishis replied, 'Righteous ones should meet, at
least once. After that, what is destined will happen. No one transgresses an agreement with a righteous person.
Therefore, there should be an agreement between those who are righteous. An agreement between the righteous is
firm and eternal. Even in times of difficulties, the wise say that this is desirable. Great welfare derives from an
agreement with a righteous person. That is the reason wise ones do not cause violence to righteous ones. Indra is
honoured by righteous ones and great-souled ones reside with him. He also speaks the truth, isn't mean, follows
dharma and is determined in his decisions. Let there always be peace between you and Shakra. You must have
trust. Do not think otherwise.' Having heard the words of the maharshis, the immensely radiant one told them, 'O
illustrious ones! I must certainly revere ascetics. O gods! If you carry out everything that I am asking you to, I will
do everything that these bulls among the brahmanas have asked me to do. O Indras among brahmanas! I will be
incapable of being killed by Shakra, together with the gods, by anything that is dry, anything that is wet, anything
made of stone or wood, by any weapon, by the vajra[The critical edition mentions the vajra here. Instead of 'by the vajra', other versions say, 'by anything that is not
a weapon'. Since Indra did use the vajra, these other versions seem to be more accurate.], and during the day or during the night. Such an agreement
with Shakra will always please me.' O bull among the Bharata lineage! The rishis said that it would be this way.
When this agreement had been made, Vritra was delighted.

'"But Shakra was always full of resentment. He kept thinking about a means of killing Vritra. The destroyer of
Bala and Vritra was always anxious and kept looking for a weakness. One day, he saw the great asura on the shores
of the ocean. It was evening and the extremely lovely, but terrible, muhurta had arrived[This is sandhya, twilight or dusk, when demons begin to roam around.]. He thought about the
boon that the great-souled one had been granted. 'It is the terrible evening. It is not night or day. He is the enemy
who has robbed me of everything. I can certainly kill him now. He is immensely powerful and has a gigantic body.
If I do not kill the great asura Vritra through deceit today, it will not be good for me.' Shakra thought in this way
and remembered Vishnu. He saw the foam in the ocean, as large as a mountain. 'This is not wet, nor dry. Nor is it a
weapon. If I fling it at Vritra, he will perish in an instant.' With the vajra, he swiftly flung the foam at Vritra. Vishnu entered the foam and destroyed Vritra. With Vritra dead, the darkness vanished from all the directions. An auspicious breeze began to blow and the beings rejoiced. All the gods, the gandharvas, the yakshas, the rakshasas, the
serpents and the rishis praised the great Indra with many hymns. Having been honoured by all the beings, he pronounced benedictions on all the beings. With the enemy having been slain, Vasava was delighted, and together
with the gods, showed his homage to Vishnu, who is learned in dharma and is supreme in the three worlds.

'"After the extremely valorous Vritra, who had terrified the gods, had been killed, Shakra was overcome by
falsehood[Because he had violated the agreement.] and was extremely depressed. After having killed Trishira earlier, he had taken on the sin of killing a
brahmana. Bereft of his senses and consciousness, Indra of the gods went to the extremities of the world. Overcome by his own sins, he no longer possessed any wisdom. He remained immersed in water, writhing like a serpent. Thanks to the fear of having killed a brahmana, Indra of the gods was destroyed. The earth seemed to be ravaged[Indra is the god of rains and with Indra gone, there were no rains.]. There were no trees and the groves dried up. The flows stopped in the rivers and the ponds were without
water. Because of the lack of rains, there was great distress among the beings and the gods. All the maharshis were
extremely terrified. The entire universe was without a king and was confronted with calamities. The frightened
gods thought, 'Who will be our king now?' The gods and the rishis in heaven no longer had a king of the gods.
And none of the gods had a desire to be the king."'
