Vaishampayana said, 'Having heard of Rama's deeds, King Yudhishthira was filled with great wonder and replied
to Janardana. "O Varshneya! The great-souled Rama is like Shakra. Through his valour and anger, he emptied the
earth of kshatriyas. The extenders of the kshatriya lineage were frightened because of Rama and were protected by
cattle, the oceans, golangulas, bears and apes. O Achyuta! It is amazing. Men on earth are fortunate that such an
act of dharma was performed by the brahmana." O son[The word used is tata.]! That is the way Achyuta and Yudhishthira proceeded
together. They went to the spot where the lord Gangeya was lying down on a bed of arrows. They saw Bhishma
lying down on that bed of arrows. He was like the evening sun or the fire, surrounded by a net of his own rays.
That spot, on the banks of the river Oghavati, was extremely auspicious. The sages surrounded and honoured him,
like the gods around Shatakratu. From a distance, Krishna, the king who was Dharmaraja, the four Pandavas and
Sharadvata and the others saw him. They descended from their vehicles and controlled their agitated minds. They
concentrated their senses and approached the great sages. Govinda, Satyaki and the Kouravas greeted Vyasa and
the other rishis and then presented themselves before Gangeya. Gangeya was rich in austerities. All the Yadus and
the Kouravas, bulls among men, asked about his welfare and then sat down around him.

'Gangeya was fading, like a fire that had been pacified. Somewhat distressed in his mind, Keshava told Bhishma, "O king! I hope your knowledge is as clear at it used to be. O supreme among eloquent ones! I hope anxiety
has not affected your intelligence. I hope the wounds from these arrows are not causing great pain to your limbs.
Mental pain makes the physical one stronger. O lord! Your father Shantanu, devoted to dharma, granted you the
boon that you could choose when to die. But that does not reduce the pain. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
The slightest of stakes generates pain in the body, not to speak of this storm of arrows. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! If you so wish, you can instruct the gods on the origins, the prosperity and the destruction of all living beings. O bull among men! You are revered for your age and wisdom. It is as if the past, the present and the future
are inscribed on the palm of your hand. O immensely wise one! For beings, you know about the fruits of dharma
and the cycle of death and rebirth. You are a store that is full of the brahman. You were established in this prosperous kingdom and your limbs were without disease. You were surrounded by thousands of women. However, we
have seen you hold up your seed. O king! With the exception of Shantanu's son, Bhishma, there is no one in the
three worlds who is as devoted to the truth, as immensely valorous, as brave and as conscious of dharma. O
father[The word used is tata.]! You are about to die and we have not heard of anyone else who, lying down on strewn arrows, is so full
of natural power. In truth, austerities, generosity, performing of sacrifices, dhanurveda, the Vedas, non-violence,
purity, self-control and engagement in the welfare of all beings, we have not heard of any other maharatha like
you. There is no doubt that you are capable of vanquishing the gods, the gandharvas, the suras[The suras are also gods. But the text uses both the words for gods, devas and suras.], the asuras and
the rakshasas on a single chariot. You are the mighty-armed Bhishma, like a Vasava among the Vasus. The brahmanas always refer to you as the ninth, but you are not the ninth in qualities[There are eight Vasus. Though Bhishma is himself regarded as one of these Vasus
born on earth, he is regarded as a ninth Vasu. However, because of his qualities, he
is not ninth in merit.]. O supreme among men! I know
who you are. Because of your own capacity and great strength, you are renowned among the thirty gods. O Indra
among men! Among men, there is no man on earth who is your equal in qualities, none that has been seen or heard
of. O king! In all the qualities, you surpass even the gods. Through your austerities, you are capable of creating
worlds, with mobile and immobile objects. The eldest son of Pandu is tormented because of the destruction of his
kin. O Bhishma! Dispel his sorrow. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You know everything about what is said
to be the dharma of the four varnas and the four ashramas[The four stages of life.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! This is said to
be the eternal dharma, spoken about in the four Vedas, followed by the four officiating priests[There are four types of officiating priests-hotar (one who recites from the Rig
Veda), udgatar (one who recites from the Sama Veda), adhvaryu (one who recites
from the Yajur Veda) and brahman (one who recites from the Atharva Veda).] and stated in
samkhya yoga[One of the six schools of philosophy (darshana) associated with the sage Kapila.]. O Gangeya! There is one single dharma followed, and not contravened, by any of the four varnas and that is also known to you[The text does not indicate what that single dharma is.]. You know all the itihasa[Itihasa is history and is specifically used for the two epics.] and the Puranas. All the Dharmashastras[Specific sacred texts, in the smriti tradition, about dharma.] are
always established in your mind. O bull among men! With the exception of you, there is no one else in this world
who can dispel any doubt that may arise about their meanings. O Indra among men! Using your intelligence, dispel
the sorrow that has arisen in Pandaveya's mind. You possess many kinds of extensive intelligence and you should
assure the people who are confused."'
