Yudhishthira asked, "O grandfather! I desire that you should tell me about the time of a funeral ceremony.
What have the gods and the rishis ordained about the gods and about dharma?"

'Bhishma replied, "One must perform rites for the gods in the forenoon and those for the ancestors in the afternoon. This must be done after one has made efforts to purify oneself and has completed the recommended auspicious rites. At an appropriate time towards midday, gifts can be made to men. The learned say that the rakshasas
obtain a share of anything that is given at the wrong time. Anything left over, anything licked or touched, anything
performed that has been preceded by a discord and anything that has been seen by a woman who is in her season-
the learned say that the rakshasas obtain a share of these. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If there has been
public proclamation of a gift, if it has been eaten by someone who doesn't follow vows and if it has been seen or
licked by a dog-the learned say that the rakshasas obtain a share of these. If hair or worms are found in food, if
someone has sneezed into it, if a dog has looked at it, if drops of tears have fallen into it, or if it is unclean-the
learned say that the rakshasas obtain a share in it. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If food has been tasted by
an unworthy person[A translation cannot do justice to what is intended. The text uses the word niromkara, meaning a person who is
not worthy to utter the syllable 'Om'.] or by someone who is armed and if food has been tasted by an evil-souled person-the
learned say that the rakshasas obtain a share in it. If food has been tasted by someone else, or if it has been eaten
without offerings first being made to the gods and the ancestors-the learned say that the rakshasas always obtain
a share in it. If reprehensible or censured food is offered to the gods and the ancestors, or if it is served with anger
-the learned say that they don't accept it and that the rakshasas obtain a share. O foremost among men! At funeral
ceremonies, if the three varnas serve food without mantras and without rites, the learned say that rakshasas obtain
a share in it. If food is served without offerings of clarified butter being made first, or if it has been tasted by
wicked people earlier, the learned say that the rakshasas obtain a share in it. O bull among the Bharata lineage! I
have spoken to you about the shares that have been stated to be for the rakshasas.

'"I will now tell you how one should determine higher classes of brahmanas. Listen. O king! In rites performed
for gods and ancestors, brahmanas who have become outcasts and those who are stupid and mad should never be
invited. O king! Nor should one invite and honour one who suffers from white leprosy or leprosy, one who is impotent, one who has been afflicted by tuberculosis, one who suffers from epilepsy or one who is blind. One who is
a physician, one who is in a temple, one who practises futile rituals and one who sells soma should never be invited to a funeral ceremony[The emphasis is clearly on payment in certain professions. For instance, the temple bit is about a brahmana who
is paid to serve in a temple.]. A king must never invite those who are singers, dancers, acrobats, players of musical
instruments, raconteurs and warriors. A king must never invite those who officiate at the sacrifices of vrishalas[A vrishala is an inferior person, usually equated with a shudra.],
teaches vrishalas or become the disciples of vrishalas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A brahmana who becomes a teacher or a student because of payment should never be invited to a funeral ceremony. They are sellers of
the brahman. Even if a brahmana is foremost and is learned in every possible way, if he marries into an inferior
varna, a king should never invite him. A brahmana without a sacrificial fire, one who tends to dead bodies, one
who is a thief and one who is an outcaste-a king should never invite such a person. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! One whose earlier antecedents are unknown, one whose tribe is unknown and one who is a putrika-putra
should never be invited to a funeral ceremony[A putrika-putra son is the outcome of a special kind of contract. The father of a maiden may have a daughter,
but no sons. The daughter is married off, with the understanding that the first son will be regarded as her father's
son, rather than her own. This son is known as putrika-putra and he has no links with his biological father's
family.]. A king must never invite a brahmana who earns a living off the
interest on loans given to kings, or one who makes a living by selling animals. O bull among the Bharata lineage!
A brahmana who was a woman in a former life, one who is the husband of a courtesan, or one who does not perform his meditations, should never be invited to a funeral ceremony. O bull among the Bharata lineage! There are
brahmanas who have been recommended for funeral ceremonies and for rites to the gods. They can affectionately
give and receive[The word affectionately requires explanation. These brahmanas are actually unworthy. However, out of affection towards them, they have been permitted some kind of atonement and become worthy.]. Listen. O king! If they observe vows, possess qualities, know about the savitri mantra and
perform rites, they are capable of being invited, even if they happen to be agriculturists. O son! If a brahmana has
been born in a noble lineage, even if he resorts to the dharma of kshatriyas or is a trader, he can be invited to a funeral ceremony. O king! A brahmana who observes the agnihotra sacrifice, resides in a village, is not a thief and
tends to guests, can be invited. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O king! One who chants the savitri mantra three
times a day, survives by begging for alms and performs the rites can be invited. O king! If a person is rich in the
morning and poor in the evening[Implying that the wealth has been spent on good purposes.], if he is non-violent and only has minor faults, he can be invited. O bull among
the Bharata lineage! O king! If a brahmana is not mean and is not prone to arguing, if he consciously resorts to
begging for alms, he can be invited. There may be one who is devoid of vows, deceitful, a thief, a merchant, or a
person who earns a living by selling living beings. O king! If he subsequently drinks soma, he can be invited. A
person may have earlier earned riches through terrible deeds, or through agriculture. O king! If he subsequently
serves the guests, he can be invited. Wealth obtained by selling knowledge, that earned by living off a woman and
that earned by living off a eunuch must never be given to the gods and the ancestors. O bull among the Bharata lineage! After a brahmana has officiated at a rite, if he does not speak the words which should be uttered, he commits
adharma that is equal to gavanrita[Gavanrita is a lie about a cow. The sense is that the sin is the same as that when one lies in a dispute over a cow.]. O Yudhishthira! On the day of the new moon, when one has obtained a
brahmana, curds, clarified butter and the flesh of wild animals, that is the time for performing a funeral ceremony.
When a brahmana's funeral ceremony has been completed, one must say 'svadha'. For a kshatriya, one must say,
'May your ancestors be pleased.' O descendant of the Bharata lineage! For a vaishya, one must say, 'May everything be inexhaustible.' For a shudra, one must say, 'svasti'. For a brahmana, it is recommended that the sacred
word must be pronounced for the gods[The sacred word is Om.]. In this way, for a kshatriya, words pronounced for the gods must not
have the word 'Om'. For a vaishya, one should say, 'May the gods be pleased.'

'"Listen to what has been decreed about the rites that must be performed, one after the other. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Those associated with jatakarma[Ceremonies at the time of birth.] must be performed for all the three varnas. O Yudhishthira! For brahmanas, kshatriyas and vaishyas, these must be performed with the aid of mantras. A brahmana's girdle
must be made out munja grass. For someone belonging to the royal family, it will be made out of hemp[The word is murva, which means hemp. Since hemp was used to make bowstrings, one could have also translated this as bowstring.]. O Yudhishthira! It is dharma that for a vaishya it should be made out of balbajika[A type of grass.]. O lord! Listen to what is dharma
and adharma for the giver and the receiver. If a brahmana utters a lie, that is an act of adharma and he commits a
sin. It is said that for a kshatriya, this becomes four times and for a vaishya, it becomes eight times[The sin from a lie becomes that many multiples of a brahmana's sin.]. If a brahmana has earlier been invited by another brahmana, he should not eat anywhere else. If he does so, he becomes inferior and commits adharma that is equal to causing injury to animals[Meaning, the futile slaughter of animals, when no sacrifices are intended.]. If he eats elsewhere after having first
been invited by a king or a vaishya, he becomes inferior and commits a sin that is half of what is committed by
causing injury to animals. O king! When a sacrifice is performed for the gods, the ancestors, or brahmanas and the
other varnas, if a brahmana eats without having bathed first, he commits the adharma of gavanrita. When a sacrifice is performed for kings, brahmanas and the other varnas, and a brahmana eats there out of greed, knowing himself to be impure[For instance, for a limited period of time, one is impure when there is a birth or a death in the immediate family.], he commits the adharma of gavanrita. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O Indra among
kings! If a person invites someone else to perform a task, because of greed for food or anything else, he is said to
commit adharma that is equal to uttering a falsehood. O Yudhishthira! In the three varnas, there may be people
who do not observe the vows of the Vedas, are devoid of character and serve without the necessary mantras. They
commit adharma that is equal to gavanrita."

'Yudhishthira asked, "O grandfather! There may be things intended for the ancestors and the gods. To obtain
great fruits, whom should one give these to? I wish to hear about this."

'Bhishma replied, "O Yudhishthira! Just as farmers wait for excellent rains, there are wives who wait for the
leftovers, after their husbands have eaten. Feed them[That is, feed the husbands.]. There are kings who possess good character. They are
emaciated because their subsistence has suffered. Their wealth has disappeared. Great fruits are obtained by giving
to them. O king! There are those who are without food, without homes, without riches and without shelter. When
they seek riches, great fruits are obtained by giving to them. O Yudhishthira! There are those who have suffered at
the hands of thieves and others and are oppressed by fear. They seek riches so that can obtain food. Great fruits are
obtained by giving to them. There are guiltless brahmanas who have made up their minds to beg. When such brahmanas beg, great fruits are obtained by giving to them. There are brahmanas who have lost their possessions and
their wives when the country has been flooded. When they desire riches, great fruits are obtained by giving to
them. There are learned brahmanas who are mendicants. They resort to rituals and desire riches so that these can
be completed. Great fruits are obtained by giving to them. There may be those whose dharma has suffered because
of rules enforced by the wicked. Their lives and riches are afflicted. Great fruits are obtained by giving to them.
There are innocent people who have been robbed of everything by those who are stronger. They desire some food.
Great fruits are obtained by giving to them. There may be ascetics who are devoted to austerities and have resorted
to begging for sustenance. When they desire some riches, great fruits are obtained by giving to them. O bull among
the Bharata lineage! You have heard about what has been decreed concerning the great fruits from giving.

'"Now hear about what makes one go to hell and what makes one go to heaven. Those who seize other people's
wives, those who oppress other people's wives and those who have intercourse with other people's wives go to
hell. Those who seize other people's property, those who destroy other people's possessions and those who point
out the weaknesses of others go to hell. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Men who destroy stores of drinking
water, assembly houses, roads and apartments go to hell. Men who deceive women without protectors and those
who are young, aged, terrified and ascetics, go to hell. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Those who destroy
means of sustenance for others, or their homes or wives, those who destroy other people's hopes and those who
cause  dissension  among  friends  go  to  hell.  Those  who  proclaim  the  weaknesses  of  others,  those  who  destroy
bridges, those who earn a living off others and those who are ungrateful towards friends go to hell. Those who are
heretical and censure[Interpreted as heretical in the sense of not believing in the Vedas.], those who censure the ordinances and those who deviate from their beliefs go to hell.
Those who cause divisions and take away the shares of those who have accomplished their tasks and are waiting
go to hell[This is probably a reference to wages and salaries not being paid to servants.]. Those who eat without giving shares to wives, fires, servants and guests and those who deviate from
making offerings to ancestors and gods go to hell. Those who sell the Vedas[Accept payment for teaching the Vedas.], those who censure the Vedas and
those who render the Vedas in writing go to hell. Men who are outside the four ashramas, outside the boundaries of
learning and survive through perverse deeds go to hell. O king! Those who sell hair, those who sell poison and
those who sell milk go to hell. O Yudhishthira! Those who cause obstructions in the tasks of brahmanas, cattle and
women go to hell. O Yudhishthira! Those who sell weapons and make them and those who make stakes and bows
go to hell. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Those who cause obstructions along roads, using stakes, pits and
holes, go to hell. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Those who abandon preceptors, servants and followers without any valid reason go to hell. Those who make under-age animals work, pierce their noses and tether them go to
hell. Having accepted one-sixth of the produce as taxes, those who do not protect, despite being capable, go to
hell[This is a reference to kings.]. There are people who are forgiving, self-controllled and wise. Despite having associated with such people
for a long time, if a person discards them when they are no longer of any use, he goes to hell. Men who eat first,
without giving to children, the aged and servants go to hell. All these who have thus been named go to hell. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! I will now tell you about the various categories that go to the world of heaven.

'"O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In all the tasks undertaken by brahmanas, where gods are placed at the
forefront, if a person causes hindrances, all his sons and animals are slain[If he doesn't do this, he goes to heaven.]. O Yudhishthira! Men who follow
dharma through donations, austerities and truth go to heaven. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Men who have
obtained learning through servitude and austerities and are no longer attached to what they receive go to heaven.
Men who act so as to free others from fear, sin, impediments in the way of learning and affliction from disease go
to heaven. Men who are forgiving, patient, prone to performing acts of dharma and those who follow auspicious
indications go to heaven. Men who refrain from liquour, flesh, intercourse with other people's wives and drinking
go to heaven. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Men who construct hermitages and establish lineages, countries and cities go to heaven. Men who give garments, ornaments, food, drink and grain and those who give to their
matrimonial allies go to heaven. Men who refrain from all kinds of violent conduct and withstand everything and
men who are refuges to all creatures go to heaven. Men who serve their mothers and fathers, are in control over
their senses and are affectionate towards their brothers go to heaven. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Men
who are patient and conquer their senses, despite being rich, powerful and young, go to heaven. Men who are kind
towards those who cause injury, men who are mild and affectionate towards their friends and those who gratify and
make others happy go to heaven. Despite being surrounded by thousands, men who give to thousands and save
thousands go to heaven. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Men who give away gold, cattle, vehicles and mounts
go to heaven. O Yudhisthira! Men who give garments to maidens at the time of marriage and to servants go to
heaven. Men who construct viharas[The word vihara has many meanings, including temple. In this case, a public pleasure ground is probably
intended.], houses, gardens, wells, resting-houses, assemblies and vapras[The word vapra has multiple meanings-fortification, embankment, ditch, wall, rampart. All of these fit.]  go  to
heaven. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Men who give houses, fields and habitations to those who ask for
them go to heaven. O Yudhishthira! Men who give juices, seeds and grain of their own accord go to heaven. Men
who are born in noble lineages, have hundreds of children, live for one hundred years, possess compassion and
have conquered their anger go to heaven. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I have told you about the rites that
must be performed for the gods and the ancestors. As laid down earlier by the rishis, I have also told you about
dharma and adharma concerning gifts."'
