'Sanjaya said, "Arjuna's son robbed the brave ones of their lives and was like Death robbing all beings of their
lives, when the time arrives. The powerful one was the son of Shakra's son and was Shakra's equal in valour. Agitating your army, Abhimanyu was seen to be extremely resplendent. O Indra among kings! That killer of the best
of kshatriyas was like Death when he penetrated. He descended on Satyashrava, like a tiger descending on deer.
When Satyashrava had been thus attacked, the other maharathas quickly grasped a large number of different
weapons and rushed against Abhimanyu. 'I will be the first. I will station myself in the forefront.' Those bulls
among kshatriyas rivalled each other and spoke thus. They attacked Arjuna's son together, wishing to kill him. On
seeing that army of kshatriyas advance against him, he received them, like a whale grasping small fish in the
ocean. Like rivers do not return once they head towards the ocean, not a single one who approached wished to run
away. That army was like a boat in the ocean, when it has been grasped by a mighty storm and is tossed around by
the force of the wind. It was oppressed by fear, trembled and was destroyed.

'"The powerful Rukmaratha was the son of the lord of Madra[That is, he was Shalya's son.]. He wished to assure the frightened soldiers and
fearlessly spoke these words. 'O brave ones! You should not be terrified. As long as I am stationed here, he is nothing. There is no doubt that I will capture him alive.' Having spoken thus, the valiant one advanced against Subhadra's son. He was borne on a dazzling chariot that was constructed well and was well-stocked[With implements of war.]. He pierced Abhimanyu in the chest with three arrows and roared. He pierced him in the right arm with three and in the left with
three sharp arrows. However, Phalguna's son severed his bow, and his left arm and his right. He swiftly severed his
head, with beautiful eyes and eyebrows, and made it fall down on the ground. Rukmaratha was Shalya's revered
son. He had desired to capture alive, or destroy, Subhadra's illustrious son. O king! On seeing him killed, the
friends of Shalya's son, armed princes who were unassailable in battle and had standards decorated in gold, surrounded Arjuna's son from every direction. The maharathas stretched bows that were as long as palm trees and
showered down arrows on him. Subhadra's unvanquished son was brave and alone. In that battle, he was surrounded by these brave ones, who were skilled, powerful, youthful and extremely intolerant. They enveloped him with
their storm of arrows. On seeing this, Duryodhana was delighted and thought that he would go to Vaivasvata's
abode[Vaivasvata is Yama. That is, Abhimanyu would die.]. Those sons of kings used excellent gold-tufted arrows that were of many different kinds and forms and
Arjuna's son disappeared in the twinkling of an eye. O venerable one! He, his charioteer, his horses, his standard
and his chariot were seen by us to be covered with arrows, like locusts. He was severely pierced and wounded and
became as angry as a goaded elephant. He affixed the gandharva weapon and its powers of maya. After tormenting
himself with austerities, Arjuna had obtained it from gandharvas, Tumburu being the foremost. He[Abhimanyu.] confounded
them with this. O king! He was sometimes seen as one, or hundreds, or thousands. He was like a circle of fire in
that battle, exhibiting the swiftness of his weapons. The scorcher of enemies confounded them with the skill with
which his chariot was driven and with the maya of his weapons. O king! He pierced the bodies of the kings in a
hundred places. O king! In that battle, his sharp arrows took out the breath of life away from living bodies and they
attained the other world, their bodies falling down on the ground. Phalguna's son used his sharp and broad-headed
arrows to sever their bows, horses, charioteers, standards, arms decorated with bracelets and heads. They were like
five-year-old mango trees that were destroyed, though they were ready for yielding fruit. One hundred princes
were killed by Subhadra's son. They were delicate and deserved happiness, but were slain by him alone, with angry and virulent serpents[A reference to the arrows.]. On seeing this, Duryodhana was terrified. Duryodhana saw that his chariots, elephants, horses and infantry were shattered and quickly rushed at him, in intolerance. The battle that commenced
lasted only for a short instant. Your son was oppressed by hundreds of arrows and retreated."'
