'Bhishma said, "In your kingdom, trees that bear edible fruit should not be cut down. The learned ones have said
that according to dharma, roots and fruits belong to brahmanas. If something is left over by brahmanas, other people can consume that. Causing injury to a brahmana, no one must ever take anything away. If a brahmana prepares
to leave, saying that he is afflicted and cannot find a means of sustenance, the lord of men must think of a means of
sustenance for him and his wife. If he does not refrain, he should be addressed in an assembly of brahmanas in
these words. 'Which person will now be able to set limits for him[The king has found a means of sustenance. Even then, there is no limit
to the brahmana's greed.]?' There is no doubt that he will then desist. O
Kounteya! If he does not, he should be told, 'It is your duty to forget what has happened in the past. This is my
command.' Though I do not hold that view, there are those who hold that a brahmana should only be entitled to a
means of sustenance. If he does not accept the invitation for only a means of sustenance, one should give him other
objects of pleasure. In this world, agriculture, animal husbandry and trade provide a means of living for people.
Above this, the three kinds of learning[The three Vedas.] ensure prosperity. Those who act contrary to these efforts are bandits.
Brahma created kshatriyas so that they could be slain. O king! Slay the enemies. Protect the subjects. Perform rites
and sacrifices. O descendant of the Kourava lineage! Be brave and fight in battles. A king who protects those who
should be protected is supreme among kings. Those who do not protect them, never obtain any success. O Yudhishthira! The king must always know about all the people. It is for this reason that a man uses other men[A reference to the king employing men as spies.]. Protect those inside from those outside and those outside from those inside. Protect those outside from those outside
and those inside from those inside[The outside and inside can be interpreted in geographical terms. It can
also be interpreted in terms of those who are close to the king and those
who are not.]. Always protect everyone. The king must always protect himself and protect
the earth. Those who are learned say that one's own self is the foundation for everything. 'What is my weakness?
Who are my associates[Alternatively, what are my addictions?]? What hardships can bring me down? What are my sins?' He must always think along
these lines. He must appoint secret spies to travel throughout the earth. 'Let them find out if my policy is sound
and whether my conduct is praised. Do they like me in the countryside and what is my reputation in the kingdom?'

Be knowledgeable about dharma, possess fortitude, do not run away in a battle, live for the kingdom, and live for
those who follow the king, for all the advisers and all those who are neutral and also those who praise and censure
you. O Yudhishthira! Ensure that all action is implemented well. O son! It is not possible that everyone should only
be delighted with you. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Among all the people, there will be friends and enemies, and those who are neutral. There are those who are equal in the strength of arms and also in the qualities that
they possess. How is it that some are superior and succeed in ruling other men? They do this because those who
are mobile devour those who are immobile, those with teeth devour those without teeth and angry and poisonous
snakes devour other snakes. O Yudhishthira! You must always make efforts to be careful and act like them. If you
are careless, they will descend on you like a bharunda bird[The bharunda bird is a mythical predatory bird with two heads. If the
king isn't careful, others will descend on him, like this predatory bird.]. I hope the merchants in your kingdom are not afflicted by taxes and that those who tirelessly make efforts in desolate regions are able to buy a lot after spending a
little. I hope that those who live on agriculture in the kingdom are not going away because they are oppressed.
Those who bear burdens for the king also sustain others. What is given in this world sustains gods and the large
number of ancestors and also men, serpents, rakshasas, birds and animals. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
This is how the kingdom sustains itself and this is how it should be protected. O Pandava! I will again tell you
about what this prosperity is based on."'
