The illustrious one said, "Surya and Chandra and their eternal rays are said to be my hair. They are known to
separately exist and heat up the universe. Since they heat up the universe in this way, they cause delight. O
descendant  of  the  Pandu  lineage!  It  is  because  of  these  deeds  of  Agni  and  Soma  that  I  am  known  as
Hrishikesha[There is a play on barsba (delight) and kesha (hair), to provide another convoluted explanation for the name
Hrishikesha.].  I  am  Ishana,  the  granter  of  boons  and  the  creator  of  the  worlds.  When  I  am  invoked  through
prayers at a sacrifice, I accept the share. Since my complexion is the best one of tawny, I am known as Hari[Hari means tawny, or reddish-brown.].
Those who have thought about it regard me as amrita and the refuge of all the worlds. Since I am the truth, brahmanas praise me as Ritadhama[The abode of truth.]. In earlier times, the earth had disappeared and was hidden. Since I found her
out and raised her,  the gods  praise me as  Govinda[Vinda means finding or getting and go means the earth.].  I  am known  as  Shipivishta, since I  am devoid of  body
hair[Sbipi means skin, so Shipivishta is someone who is only covered in skin.]. Someone who is only covered in skin is known as Shipivishta. This is the only name in which the rishi
Yaska  anxiously  chanted  my  name  in  sacrifices.  Thus,  I  came  to  hold  the  secret  name  of  Shipivishta.  Having
praised me through the name of Shipivishta, the intelligent rishi, Yaska, could use my favours to recover the nirukta, which had got submerged[Yaska is a grammarian who is regarded as the author of nirukta.]. I was not born earlier. I have not been born now. I will never be born. I  am
kshetrajna in all creatures. That is the reason I am known as Aja[Aja means without birth.]. I have never spoken anything that is inferior
or obscene. The goddess, Sarasvati, Brahma's daughter, is the truth and is always with me. O Kounteya! The existent and the non-existent are immersed in my atman. In Pushkara, in Brahma's abode, the learned rishis addressed
me as Satya[Meaning truth.]. I have never deviated from sattva. Know that sattva has been created by me. O Dhananjaya! In this
life too, as earlier, I have resorted to sattva. Those who act, but without any desires, think of me as Satvata. I can
be seen by those who have the knowledge of sattva. I am Satvata, the lord of the Satvatas. O Partha! Assuming the
form of a plough made up of black iron, I till the earth. O Arjuna! It is because of my dark complexion that I am
known as Krishna[Krishna means dark.]. I have united the earth with space, the space with wind and wind with energy. The quality of
Vaikuntha[Without hesitation.] is in me. Emancipation is supreme felicity and dharma is said to be superior to both of these. Since I
have never deviated from these in my deeds, I am known as Achyuta[Someone who has not deviated or been dislodged.]. People on earth know that the earth and
the firmament extend in all directions. Since I hold all of them up, I am known as Adhokshaja[Someone who prevents things from falling down.]. Those who are
learned about nirukta and the Vedas and have thought about the purport of words have sung my praises, giving me
the first share, and addressing me as Adhokshaja. The supreme rishis have invoked me by that single name too.
With the exception of the lord Narayana, there is no one else in the world who can be addressed as Adhokshaja.
Clarified butter, which sustains the life of creatures in this world, represents my rays. That is the reason concentrated ones who know about the Vedas address me as Ghritarchi[Someone for whom, clarified butter represents the rays or radiance.]. There are said to be three elements-bile, phlegm
and the wind. Their union is said to constitute all deeds. It is said that when these are weak, creatures are also
weakened. In  Ayurveda, I  am therefore spoken  of  as  Tridhatu[The three elements.].  O  descendant of  the Bharata lineage! In  the
world, the illustrious Dharma is known by the name of Vrisha. Thus, in the words of Nighantuka, I am known as
the supreme Vrisha[Nigbantu or Nighantuka was a glossary of obscure terms used in the Vedas.]. Kapi is said to be the best among boars and Vrisha is said to be the best among dharma.
Therefore, Prajapati Kashyapa has addressed me as Vrishakapi[The word means man-ape and is a term used for both Agni and Surya.]. I am without beginning, without middle and
without end. The gods and the asuras have never been able to comprehend my beginning, my middle, or my end. I
have been praised as the lord, the lord who is a witness to the worlds. O Dhananjaya! I do not hear, or cause to be
heard, anything that is inauspicious. I do not accept anything that is wicked. Hence, I am Shuchishrava[One who nears auspicious things.]. In earlier times, I assumed the form of a boar and it possessed a divine form, with a single horn. In that form, I raised up
the earth. That is the reason I am Ekashringa[One with a single horn.]. When I assumed that form of a boar, I had three humps. As a
measure of my body, I became famous as Trikakud[One with three humps.]. Those who have thought about the knowledge propounded
by Kapila speak of me as Virincha[Virincha is Brahma's name.]. I am Prajapati, the consciousness that created all the worlds. With knowledge as a companion, I am established in the eternal Aditya. Those who have arrived at conclusions about sankhya
also refer to me as the preceptor, Kapila. I am praised in the chants as the radiant Hiranyagarbha. I am always worshipped by yogis and I am known as Vibhu[The powerful, excellent and omnipresent one.]. I have been spoken about in the twenty-one recensions of the Rig
Veda[Only one major one survives now.]. Those learned in the Vedas have spoken about me in one thousand branches of the Sama Veda. Devoted
brahmanas who sing about me in the Aranyakas are extremely rare. The adbvaryu priests have spoken about me in
one hundred and one branches of the Yajur Veda. The brahmanas who know about the Atharva Veda have thought
of me as the five kalpas and the rituals of the Atharva Veda[In this context, it is not obvious what kalpa means. Period is logical, but part makes better sense.]. Know that all the recensions, divisions, knowledge,
branches, songs, vowels and pronunciation have been fashioned by me. O Partha! Hayashira, the granter of boons,
arose. I am he and all the subsequent sections, divisions and syllables are based on me. It is through the instructions of Rama and my favours that the great-souled Panchala progressively obtained that eternal being[Panchala is a reference to the rishi Galava. It is not clear who the Rama in question is.]. He was
born  in  the  Babhravya  gotra  and  progressively  became  accomplished.  Through  Narayana's  boon,  he  attained
supreme yoga. Thus, Galava was progressively led on to set out rules on shiksha[As in the Vedanga of phonetics and phonology.]. Kandarika and King Brahma-
datta repeatedly kept thinking about the misery that comes through birth and death[Brahmadatta was a king of Panchala. Brahmadatta is believed to have rearranged some parts of the Rig Veda
and the Atharva Veda. His minister Kandarika did the same for the Sama Veda.]. Through their efforts, they
obtained supreme prosperity for seven births. O Partha! In earlier times, for a certain reason, I was born as Dharma's son. O tiger among the Kuru lineage! I was therefore known as Dharmaja. Earlier, I performed undecaying
austerities as Nara-Narayana. On the slopes of Mount Gandhamadana, I ascended on that vehicle that leads to
dharma. There was a time when Daksha performed a sacrifice. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He refused to
earmark a share for Rudra. Following Dadhicha's instructions, he repeatedly hurled his blazing spear and uprooted
Daksha's sacrifice. The spear reduced Daksha's entire sacrifice to ashes and violently advanced towards us in the
hermitage of Badari. O Partha! It descended with great force on Narayana's chest. Narayana's hair became suffused with energy and assumed the complexion of munja grass. That is the reason I am known as Munjakesha. The
great-souled Narayana repulsed the whirling spear with the sound of 'Hum' and it returned to Shankara's hand. At
this, Rudra attacked the rishis who were engaged in austerities. When he attacked in this way, Narayana, the soul
of the universe, seized his throat with his hand, and he became Shitikantha. To destroy Rudra, Nara picked up a
blade of grass. He swiftly invoked mantras and it became a giant battle axe. He hurled it violently, but Rudra shattered it into fragments before it reached him. Since the battleaxe was shattered, I came to be known as Khandaparashu[Literally meaning shattered battleaxe. Nara and Narayana are often regarded as the same person.]."
'Arjuna said, "O Varshneya! That encounter was capable of devastating the three worlds. O Janardana! Who
was victorious? Tell me."

'The illustrious one replied, "An encounter started between the souls of Rudra and Narayana. All the worlds
suddenly became anxious. The fire god no longer accepted the auspicious oblations offered at sacrifices. The Vedas
no longer manifested themselves before the rishis who possessed cleansed souls. Rajas and tamas penetrated the
gods. The earth trembled and the firmament started to waver. All the energy diminished and Brahma was dislodged
from his seat. The oceans dried up and the Himalayas were shattered. O descendant of the Pandu lineage! Ominous
portents manifested themselves. Brahma, surrounded by large numbers of gods and the great-souled rishis, swiftly
went  to  the  spot  where  the  battle  had  commenced.  The four-faced one[Brahma.]  can  only  be  comprehended  through
nirukta. Because of those portents, he joined his hands in salutation and spoke to Rudra. 'Let everything in the
worlds  be  auspicious.  O  lord  of  the  universe!  For  the  welfare  of  the  universe,  you  should  thrown  down  your
weapon. He is indestructible. He is unmanifest. He is the lord who has created the worlds. He is subtle. He is the
doer. He is beyond opposites. He is the learned one. He has assumed this manifest form. Nara and Narayana have
been born in Dharma's lineage and actually have a single and auspicious form. These best of gods are engaged in
great austerities and major vows. For a different reason, I have also been generated from them. O son! Though you
are eternal, in an earlier cycle of creation, you have been born from his rage. O one who is the granter of boons!
With the gods and the maharshis, I am soliciting your favours. Let there quickly be peace in the worlds.' Thus addressed by Brahma, Rudra withdrew the fire of his anger and sought to please the lord god Narayana. He sought
the refuge of the one who should be worshipped, the granter of boons, Hari. The god, the granter of boons, was in
control of his rage and had vanquished his senses. He cheerfully met Rudra. He was worshipped by the rishis,
Brahma and the gods. Hari, the lord of the universe, spoke to the god Ishana. 'He who knows you, knows me. He
who follows you, follows me. There is no difference between you and me. Do not think otherwise. Your spear will
leave the srivatsa mark on my chest. My hand will leave a beautiful mark on your throat, to be known as shrikantha[Literally, beautiful throat.].' They thus left marks on each other. Rudra and the rishis exhibited a great deal of friendliness towards each
other. Giving permission to the residents of heaven to go, they[Nara and Narayana.] engaged in austerities again. O Partha! I have
told you how Narayana was victorious in that encounter. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I have also told you
about the secret names and their meanings. The rishis speak about these and recount them. O Kounteya! In this
way, I roam around the earth in many forms and also in the world of Brahma and eternal Goloka[Vishnu's world.]. You were protected by me in the great battle and obtained victory. O Kounteya! When the battle presented itselft, there was a
being who advanced in front of you. Know him to be Rudra Kapardin, the god of the gods. He is also known as
Kala[Death, destruction, destiny, in addition to meaning time.] and he was born out of my rage. He had already slain all your enemies. Uma's consort, the god of the
gods, is immeasurable in his power. Bow down before that god. He is the lord of the universe and he is the undecaying Hara[Hara is Shiva's name.]."'