Bhishma said, "Having acted in accordance with his preceptor's words, Vipula performed terrible austerities.
The valiant one thought that he had accomplished a lot of austerities. O lord of the earth! He rivalled the entire earth in these deeds. He roamed around without any fear. Amongst men, he was regarded as one who had obtained great fame. O Kourvya! The lord Vipula thought that he had conquered both the worlds because of his deeds
and austerities. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! After some time had passed, an occasion arose when gifts of
riches and grain were to be made to Ruchi's sister. At that time, a celestial damsel was travelling through the sky.
Her dazzling beauty was supreme. From her body, some flowers fell down on the ground, not very far from the
hermitage. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Their fragrance was divine. O king! Ruchi, the one with the beautiful eyes, picked them up. Soon, an invitation arrived from the kingdom of Anga. O son! Her elder sister, named
Prabhavati, was the wife of the king of Anga, Chitraratha. The beautiful one braided those flowers in her hair. To
honour the invitation, Ruchi went to the house of the king of Anga. On seeing those flowers, the queen of the kingdom of Anga, possessing beautiful eyes, asked her sister to get some flowers for her. Ruchi, with the extremely
beautiful face, told her husband everything about this. She told the rishi everything that her sister had said.

'"The great ascetic, Devasharma, summoned Vipula. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He instructed him to
go in search of the flowers. Without any hesitation, the great ascetic, Vipula, accepted his preceptor's command. O
king! He agreed and went to the spot and the region where those had fallen down from the sky. He saw some other
flowers lying there and they were still not faded. He took those divine and beautiful flowers, which were divine in
scent. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He managed to get them because of his own austerities. Having obtained them, he was delighted at having been able to follow his preceptor's words. With that garland of champaka
flowers, he quickly left for the city of Champa[Champaka is a fragrant flower. The city of Champa is in Chhattisgarh. But this Champa is Champapuri, the capital of Anga. The kingdom of Anga is now what is part of the states of Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal.]. O son! In a desolate forest, he saw a human couple. Holding
each other's hands, they were dancing around in a circle. O king! One of them quickly advanced too far ahead and
a quarrel ensued between them. One said, 'You moved too fast.' The other said, 'No.' O son! They disagreed and
argued with each other. While they debated with each other, each one of them muttered an oath and in the words
that each of them mentally spoke, each named Vipula. 'If I have spoken falsely, in the world after death, may I face
the end that is destined for the brahmana Vipula.' Hearing this, Vipula's face became cheerless. 'I have undergone
terrible austerities and find this difficult to accept. Why has this couple said that I will attain an evil end? Why
have they said that my end will be the worst among all creatures?' O supreme among kings! Vipula thought along
these lines. He bowed his head down and, distressed, began to think about any wicked deed that he might have
committed. As he proceeded, he saw six men gambling with golden and silver dice, so excited that their body hair
stood up. They also took oaths just like the ones the couple had uttered and mentioned Vipula in their words. 'If
there is anyone among us, who is driven by avarice and plays unfairly, after death, may he obtain the kind of end
that Vipula will get.' O Kouravya! Hearing this, Vipula began to think about everything that he had done since
birth, but could not remember any transgression of dharma. O king! He was tormented, like a fire burning in the
midst of another fire. Because of the curse he had heard, his mind burnt in grief. O son! While he proceeded, he
thought about this for many days and nights. He then remembered the way he had protected Ruchi. 'I penetrated
her vision with my vision and her face with my face. But I did not narrate the truth to my preceptor.' O Kouravya!
This was the wicked deed that Vipula thought of. O immensely fortunate one! He thought that there was no doubt
that this was the transgression. He went to the city of Champa and gave his preceptor the flowers. Loved by his
preceptor, he followed the rites and worshipped his preceptor."'
