Bhishma said, "Thus addressed, Arjuna was silent and Vayu spoke again. 'O best among the Haihaya lineage!
Listen to the deeds of the extremely great-souled Atri. Once upon a time, there was a terrible battle between
the gods and the danavas. Svarbhanu[Rahu.] pierced the sun and the moon with his arrows. O tiger among kings! Devoured by darkness, the gods were slain by the danavas, together with the sacrificial animals. Struck by the asuras,
the residents of heaven began to lose their lives. They saw the brahmana Atri performing austerities in a great forest. He had conquered his senses and all his rage had been pacified. The gods spoke to him. "Both the moon and
the sun have been struck by the arrows of the asuras. We are being killed and have been enveloped by the enemies.
O lord! We cannot find peace and there is nothing to save us from our fear." He asked, "How can I save you?"

They said, "You become the moon. You become the sun, the dispeller of darkness. Become the one who slays
these bandits." Thus addressed, Atri became the sun and the moon. He showed his amiable form as the moon and
he also showed himself as the sun. O king! Seeing that the sun and the moon had lost their radiance, in that battle,
Atri used the power of his austerities to display himself in those forms. The universe was covered in darkness, but
he illuminated everything again. With his own energy, he destroyed the large numbers of enemies of the gods. The
gods saw that the giant asuras were being burnt down by Atri. Protected by Atri, they used their valour to slay their
enemies. In his form as the sun, he saved the gods and slew the asuras. Using his supreme energy, Atri became the
moon. The sage, who meditated and was attired in skins, had no second. He subsisted on fruits. O rajarshi! But behold the deeds Atri performed. In detail, I have spoken to you about the deeds of the extremely great-souled Atri. I
have told you. You tell me if there is a kshatriya who is superior to Atri. O king! Listen to the great deeds that the
great-souled Chyavana performed. Having given his promise to the Ashvins, Chyavana spoke to the chastiser of
Paka and to all the other gods and said, "Give the Ashvins a share of the soma." Indra replied, "We have cast them
away[Because they were unclean physicians.]. How can we give them soma? They are not revered as gods. Therefore, we cannot do what you have
asked us to. O one who is great in vows! We do not desire to drink soma with the Ashvins. Let anyone else who
desires to drink with them do so. We are not interested in drinking with them." Chyavana said, "O slayer of Bala!
You should not act against the words that I have spoken. Forced by me, you will drink soma with them at a sacrifice." With the Ashvins and for their benefit, Chyavana started a rite and as a result of the mantras, sura manifested
itself. On seeing that he had started the rite, Indra became senseless with rage. He raised a huge mountain and attacked Chyavana. With intolerance in his eyes, he also attacked the illustrious one with his vajra. Chyavana was
full of austerities. On seeking that he was advancing, he sprinkled some water on him, the vajra and the mountain
and thereby paralysed him. The great sage also created an extremely terrible enemy for Indra. He used mantras to
summon Mada, with a gaping mouth. He possessed one thousand teeth that extended for one hundred yojanas. His
extremely terrible jaws extended for two hundred yojanas. One of the jaws rested on earth, while the other one rose
up and touched heaven. All the gods, together with Vasava, were stuck at the base of his tongue. They were like
fish in the great ocean, in the process of being devoured by a whale. Because of the invocation of the mantras, the
gods entered Mada's mouth. With Shakra, all of them said, "We bow down before brahmanas. Without any anxiety, we will drink soma with the Ashvins." Shakra bowed down before Chyavana. Thus did Chyavana ensure that
the Ashvins would drink soma. The sage withdrew Mada and instructed him about the tasks that he should henceforth do[Mada means intoxication, arrogance, lust.]. The valiant one was instructed to reside in dice, hunting, liquor and women. O king! There is no doubt
that men confront destruction because of these sins. Therefore, men must always avoid them from a distance. O
king! I have thus recounted to you Chyavana's deeds. I have told you about this. Tell me if there is a kshatriya superior to Chyavana.'"'
