Yudhishthira said, "O king! You have properly described to me the path of yoga, which is approved by the virtuous. You have explained it, as if to a disciple whose benefit you desire. I am now asking you about all the
principles of sankhya. You know all the knowledge that is to be known in the three worlds."

'Bhishma replied, "Listen to the pure principles of sankhya. Intelligent ascetics who know about the atman have
laid them down, Kapila and the other lords being the first. O bull among men! No errors can be seen in those doctrines. They have many qualities and no taints. O king! Through knowledge, one can enumerate that all objects
have faults. Men and pishachas are associated with objects that are extremely difficult to conquer. The rakshasas
and yakshas are associated with objects. The serpents and the gandharvas are associated with objects. O king! The
ancestors, who roam diagonally above, are associated with objects. The Suparnas[In this context, large birds.] and the Maruts are associated
with objects. The rajarshis and the brahmarshis are associated with objects. The asuras and the Vishvadevas are associated with objects. The devarshis and the lords of yoga are associated with objects. The lords of subjects and
Brahma are associated with objects. O supreme among eloquent ones! Knowing about all these and knowing the
truth about the ultimate lifespans and time in this world, they find happiness in the supreme truth. At the right time,
those who search for objects descend into hardships. Some find misery as inferior species, others descend into hell.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There are all the qualities and all the demerits of heaven. There are taints and
qualities in the words of the Vedas and in those who speak about the Vedas. O king! There are taints and qualities
in jnana yoga and in yoga itself. O king! There are also taints and qualities in the knowledge of sankhya. There are
ten qualities in sattva, nine qualities in rajas, eight qualities in tamas, seven qualities in intelligence, six qualities in
the sky, five qualities in the mind, four qualities in intelligence and yet again, three great qualities in tamas, two
qualities in rajas and one single quality in sattva[The ten qualities of sattva are delight, cheerfulness, enthusiasm, fame, virtue, contentment, faith, uprightness,
generosity and power. The nine qualities of rajas are faith, generosity, enjoyment, enterprise, desire, anger, pride,
malice and calumny. The eight qualities of tamas are lack of consciousness, confusion, delusion, lack of understanding, sleep, carelessness, procrastination and blindness towards consequences. The seven qualities of intelligence are Mahat, consciousness and the five elements. The six qualities of the sky are space, water, wind, light,
earth and expanse. The five qualities in the mind are the five senses. The four qualities in intelligence are doubt,
determination, pride and memory. The three qualities of tamas are inability to understand, partial understanding
and wrong understanding. The two qualities of rajas are action and sorrow. The single quality of sattva is enlightenment. But this is only indicative and other listings also exist.]. One gets to know all this. One gets to know and obtains insight
about the path of destruction. Having become full of jnana and vijnana and learnt the auspicious reasons behind
everything, one obtains sacred emancipation, as subtle as the ultimate parts of the sky. Sight is attached to form,
just as the nose is attached to the quality of smell. Sound is attached to hearing, the tongue to the quality of taste
and touch to the skin. The wind finds refuge in the sky. Confusion is attached to tamas and has greed for riches as
its foundation. Vishnu is attached to motion, Shakra to strength and Agni to the stomach. Water is attached to the
goddess[The earth.] and water has the fire as its foundation. Fire is attached to the wind and the wind has space for its foundation. Space is attached to Mahat and Mahat has intelligence for its foundation. Intelligence is attached to tamas
and tamas has rajas for its foundation. Rajas is attached to sattva and sattva is attached to the atman. The atman is
attached to the lord and god, Narayana. That god is attached to emancipation and emancipation has no foundation.
One knows that sattva is attached to this body, surrounded by the sixteen qualities[The five elements, the five senses, the five organs of action and the mind.] and that natural consciousness
has the body as a foundation. O king! One knows that the single atman is in the middle and that sin cannot attach
to it and that the second element is acts committed in pursuit of the objects of the senses. All the senses and the objects of the senses have their foundation in the atman. There is also the truth about prana, apana, samana, vyana
and udana. One knows about the two breaths of life that flow upwards and downwards. These seven breaths of life
also possess their determined roles. O scorcher of enemies! One knows about Prajapatis, the rishis, the many different supreme paths and the large number of saptarshis and rajarshis. There are the great celestial rishis and the
maharshis, as resplendent as the sun. O king! One knows that in the great course of time, they are also dislodged
from their prosperity. O  king! One  learns that the large number of  great creatures are destroyed. O  king! One
knows the outcome of inauspicious acts and evildoers. When Yama brings about destruction, there are hardships
undergone by those who fall into Vaitarani[The river that flows in the nether regions.]. There are many kinds of inauspicious wombs in the cycle of life.
There is residence in inauspicious wombs, feeding on blood, water, phlegm, urine and excrement, terrible in smell.
Bodies result from the union of semen and blood and have marrow and sinews. In that inauspicious city with the
nine gates[The body.], there are hundreds of veins and arteries. O king! One learns about the many kinds of yoga that bring
welfare to the atman and about tamas, which envelopes the beautiful atmans of creatures. O bull among the Bharata lineage! There is sattva among creatures, but also the abhorrent and censured one[Rajas.] from the perspective of
greatness. Those who know about sankhya know about the atman. They see the terrible devouring of the energy of
the moon[An eclipse.], the fall of the stars and the deviation of the nakshatras. O king! They see the piteous coming together
and separation of creatures and the unholy ways in which they eat each other. They know the delusion of childhood and the inauspicious destruction of bodies and because of attachment and confusion, the rare resort to sattva.
Among thousands of men, only one possesses intelligence that turns to moksha. They know what the sacred texts
have said earlier, that emancipation is extremely difficult to obtain. O king! They know of the great importance
that is given to things that have not been obtained and the limited importance to those that have been obtained,
since the objects of the senses are overwhelming. O Kounteya! When life has departed, they see that the bodies are
unholy. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They know that in the midst of homes and families, creatures are in
misery. They know of the extremely terrible ends faced by those who are the killers of brahmanas and evil-souled
brahmanas who are addicted to drinking. O Yudhishthira! They know the unholy ends that come to those who have
intercourse with the wives of their preceptors, to those who do not show proper respect to their mothers and men in
this world who do not revere the gods. They have the knowledge to know what happens to the perpetrators of
wicked deeds and they are also conversant with the different kinds of birth as inferior species that takes place.
They know about the colourful words of the Vedas, the progress of the seasons and the fading of the years and the
months. They see the decay of the fortnights and the decay of the days. They can directly see the waxing and waning of the moon, the ebb and the flow in the oceans and the destruction of riches and their subsequent increase. In
particular, they see the coming together and separation of the yugas, the destruction of mountains and the destruction of rivers. They see the decay and repeated destruction of varnas. They see old age, death, birth and hardships.
They know the truth about the taints of bodies and their miseries. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They are
conversant with the frailties of bodies. They know about the faults in their own atmans and those that all atmans
are prone to. They know about the inauspicious scents that arise from their own bodies."

'Yudhishthira asked, "O immensely valorous one! What are the faults that you see in your own body? I have a
doubt about this. You should explain in detail the truth about this to me."

'Bhishma replied, "O lord! The learned have said that there are five faults in the body. Those who know about
the paths propagated in Kapila's sankhya have spoken about this. O destroyer of enemies! Listen. There are desire,
anger, fear, sleep and the fifth is said to be the breath. These faults are seen in all those who possess bodies. Anger
can be severed through forgiveness and desire through the abandoning of resolution. In that way, sattva and good
conduct can be used against sleep and lack of distraction against fear. O king! The fifth one of breath can be severed through a restrained diet. The qualities can be comprehended through hundreds of other qualities, the faults
through hundreds of faults. One can understand the truth about colourful reasons through hundreds of diverse reasons. The world is surrounded by one hundred of Vishnu's maya and is like foam in the water. It has the appearance of something that has been painted and its essence is as futile as that of a reed. One sees that it is like a dark
pit and the years are like bubbles. It is about to be destroyed and is without happiness, with the characteristics of
inevitable destruction. It is submerged in rajas and tamas and is as immobile as an elephant stuck in mud. O king!
The immensely wise ones who know about sankhya generate offspring and then discard their bodies. O king! They
use the great and pervasive knowledge of sankhya. O king! As instructed, they use the auspicious scent of sattva to
dispel all the inauspicious scents of rajas and tamas, all the sense of touch that resides in the body. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! They quickly sever these through the weapon of knowledge and the rod of austerities. The waters of the ocean[Of life.] are terrible misery. Anxiety and sorrow are its large lakes. Disease and death are the giant crocodiles. The great fears are the giant serpents. Tamas is the tortoises and rajas is the fish. One can cross over with
the use of wisdom. Affection is the mud. O scorcher of enemies! Old age represents the impenetrable fortifications
and touch is like the islands. Deeds are the great depth, truth represents the banks. O king! One has to base oneself
on one's vows. Injury represents the swift and strong current. The many kinds of tastes are like large mines. The
different  kinds  of  gratification  are  the  gems.  Grief  and  fever  are  the  breeze.  Sorrow  and  thirst  are  the  giant
whirlpools. Fierce diseases are the large elephants. O destroyer of enemies! Bones are like flights of stairs and
phlegm is foam. Donations provide the pearls. Lakes of blood are the coral. Loud laughter constitutes the roar. The
different kinds of knowledge[Because they confuse a person.] make it extremely difficult to cross. Tears are the salt. One should resort to the
refuge of abandoning attachment. O king! Sons are the large number of leeches. Relatives are the inhabitations.
Lack of injury and truthfulness set boundaries to this. The giving up of life is the giant wave. Vedanta is an island
one advances towards and all creatures can use it as pots[Water pots used as buoys while swimming.] for support. Emanicpation is an object that is extremely
difficult to obtain, but that is the reason one is heading to the ocean, with subterranean fire that is like a mare's
head. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Through using the yoga of knowledge, sages can successfully cross it.
Having been born and having crossed what is extremely difficult to cross, they enter into the sparkling sky. From
there, the sun uses its rays to bear those who practise sankhya, the performers of virtuous deeds. O king! This is
like the stalk of a lotus bearing the water. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The breeze that blows there receives them. Those stores of austerities are devoid of attachment. They are full of valour and successful. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The breeze is subtle, cool, fragrant and pleasant to the touch. Those best of the seven
Maruts convey them to an auspicious world. O Kounteya! It takes them to the ultimate end of space. O lord of
men! Space conveys them to the ultimate end of rajas. O Indra among kings! Rajas conveys them to the ultimate
end of sattva. O one who is pure in soul! Sattva conveys them to the supreme lord, Narayana. The lord bears those
pure-souled ones and makes them part of the paramatman. O lord! They attain immortality there and never return.
O Partha! Those great-souled ones are beyond opposites and attain the supreme objective."

'Yudhishthira asked, "O illustrious one! Those who are firm in their vows obtain that supreme region. O unblemished one! Do they remember anything about their birth and death? You should tell me the truth about this. O
Kourava! Other than you, there is no no man I should ask this. I find this taint in the description about the greatness of moksha. Having reached and obtained success there, do the rishis retain consciousness and continue to endeavour for something else? O king! In that case, I see that the dharma of pravritti[Undertaking action.] is supreme. Once one is immersed in supreme knowledge, what can be more miserable than that?"

'Bhishma replied, "O son! The question that you have asked is proper, but it is extremely difficult. O bull among
the Bharata lineage! Such  is  this  question  that  even  the  learned  have  been  confounded.  Listen properly to the
supreme truth on this. The great-souled ones who follow Kapila have supreme intelligence. O king! Embodied beings have senses in their bodies so that they can perceive. But these are instruments and the subtle atman uses them
to perceive. Without the atman, they are like lumps of wood. They will no doubt be destroyed, like foam in the giant ocean. O scorcher of enemies! When the senses sleep, the subtle atman roams around everywhere, like the
wind in space. O lord! It sees what can be seen and touches what can be touched. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It comprehends everything, just as in a state of being awake. All the senses continue to be there, in their respective places. But because they are without their lord[The atman.], they are extinguished and are like snakes with their poison missing. There is no doubt that the subtle atman roams around, goes to the respective places of the senses and
performs their tasks then. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O one with dharma in your soul! O Partha! O Yudhishthira! All the qualities of sattva, all the qualities of rajas, all the qualities of tamas, all the qualities of intelligence, all the qualities of the mind, all the qualities of space, all the qualities of wind, all the qualities of energy, all
the qualities of water, all the qualities of earth and all the qualities of the atman are in the atman. It is the atman
which makes the atman perform good and bad acts. O lord! The senses wait on the great atman, like disciples. The
undecaying atman transcends prakriti and proceeds. It goes to the supreme atman, Narayana, who is beyond opposites and is beyond prakriti. Free from taint and emancipated from good deeds and evil ones, it[The jivatman.] enters the paramatman and does not return from the qualities there. O son! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! But the mind and
the senses remain. At the right time, on the instructions of the preceptor, they have to return[The body isn't dead, but is in a state of samadhi.]. If a person desires
peace and the qualities, he is capable of obtaining it within a short period of time. O Kounteya! United with knowledge in this way, they can find emancipation. O king! The immensely wise ones, who know about sankhya, go to
that supreme objective. O Kounteya! There is no knowledge that is equal to this knowledge. Do not have any
doubt about this. The views of sankhya represent supreme knowledge. They are without decay and certain and
were earlier revealed by eternal Brahma, who is the creator without a beginning, a middle and an end, beyond opposites and everlasting. Those who have tranquility in their souls say that he is deep and eternal. All the acts of
creation and destruction flow from him. This has been praised in the sacred texts and spoken about by the supreme
rishis. For all the brahmanas, gods and people who know about the sacred texts, the eternal and undecaying brahman is the supreme god and there is nothing superior to him. The brahmanas pray to him and the learned speak
about his qualities. This is the view of the far-sighted ones who properly practise yoga and sankhya. O Kounteya!
The sacred texts of sankhya are a manifestation of the one who is without form[Brahma.]. O bull among the Bharata lineage! That is the reason these views have been regarded as his signs. O lord of the earth! There are two kinds of
creatures on earth, mobile and immobile, and the mobile are superior. O king! This knowledge, which is the greatest of the great, is in the Vedas, in sankhya and in yoga. O Indra among men! Whatever is seen in the various Puranas can be found in sankhya. O king! Whatever is seen in the great accounts of history, in the sacred texts about
artha, as prescribed by the virtuous, and all the knowledge that exists in the world, can be found in sankhya. It is
the greatest of the great. O king! Tranquility, supreme strength, the subtle knowledge that has been spoken about,
subtle austerities and happiness can be found in sankhya. O Partha! Even when they suffer, the practitioners of
sankhya always go to the gods and enjoy happiness there. Having followed it and having become successful in
their objectives, in cases of a downfall[Because they fall short of emancipation and are dislodged from heaven.], they become brahmanas and ascetics. O Partha! Those who  practise
sankhya give up their bodies, join the residents of heaven in the firmament and find emancipation. O lord of the
earth! The excellent knowledge of sankhya is the best and is revered by all virtuous brahmanas. O king! If a brahmana knows about this and is devoted to this knowledge, he is not seen to be born as inferior species, or reach the
abodes that are meant for the perpetrators of wicked deeds. O king! Sankhya is large, supreme and ancient. It is
like a giant, sparkling, infinite and generous ocean. A great-souled person who follows all of sankhya sustains the
immeasurable Narayana. O god among men! I have now told you the truth about the ancient Narayana, who is
everywhere in the universe. At the time of creation, he causes creation. He is the one who again withdraws at the
time of destruction."'
