Vaishampayana said, 'When the supreme maharshi finished speaking, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira worshipped him
and was given permission to speak. Yudhishthira said, "O illustrious lord! What you have stated as just and dharma
is certainly right. I duly observe what is just to the best of my powers. There is no doubt that acts performed by
kings in ancient times, and the way in which they were performed, were successful in attaining just and proper objectives. O lord! I wish to walk along that righteous path. But we are not able to walk it the way those self-controlled ones did." Having uttered these words and worshipped him, Yudhishthira, with his soul devoted to dharma,
paused for some time. Then seeing that Narada, the sage who travelled the worlds, was comfortably seated and he
was seated below him, the immensely wise Pandava asked him in the assembly of kings. Yudhishthira asked, "You
always travel the many and varied worlds Brahma created in ancient times, at the speed of thought and like a witness. O brahmana! I am asking you. Tell me if you have ever seen anywhere a sabha like this, or one superior to
it." Hearing these words of Dharmaraja, Narada smiled and replied in soft words. Narada said, "O son! O king! O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! I have never seen nor heard of an assembly hall like the bejewelled one that belongs to you in the world of men. I shall describe to you the sabhas of the king of the ancestors[Yama is the king of the ancestors.], the wise Varuna,
Indra and the one who dwells in Kailasa[Kubera, the lord of treasure and wealth, lives in Kailasa.]. O bull among the Bharatas! If your mind wishes to hear, I will also describe Brahma's divine sabha, the dispeller of all fatigue." Having been thus addressed by Narada, Dharmaraja
Yudhishthira and his brothers, in that assembly of kings, joined their hands in salutation. The great-souled Dharmaraja then replied to Narada, "Describe to us all those assembly halls. We wish to hear from you. O brahmana!
What are those sabhas made of? How long are they and how wide? Who waits upon the grandfather[Brahma.] in his sabha? Who on Vasava, king of the gods, and who on Vaivasvata Yama[Yama's father is Vivasvat, the sun. Hence, Yama is Vaivasvata.]? Who wait on Varuna and Kubera in their
sabhas? O devarshi! Tell us. We wish to hear all this exactly. We have been filled with great curiosity." Having
been thus addressed by Pandava, Narada replied, "O king! Then hear about those divine sabhas, one by one."'
