'Bhishma said, "O Yudhishthira! The king must always exert himself. Without exertion, a king fades away, like a
woman. O lord of the earth! The illustrious Ushanas has a shloka on this. O king! As I recite it, listen attentively to
me. 'Like a snake that swallows animals who live in burrows, there are two things that are swallowed up by the
earth-a king who does not oppose and a brahmana who does not leave his home[Because of excessive attachment for his wife and children.].' O tiger among men! Therefore, you must bear this in your heart. You must ally with those one should have alliances with. You must resist
those who should be resisted. The kingdom has seven limbs[The king, the army, advisers, allies, the treasury, forts and the geographical expanse of the kingdom.]. Anyone who acts against these must be slain, even
if he happens to be a preceptor or a friend. O Indra among kings! King Marutta sang an ancient shloka about governing a kingdom, in conformity with Brihaspati's ancient views. 'It is recommended that a preceptor must be
abandoned, if he is haughty, cannot distinguish between what should be done and what should not be done, and is
inclined to take the wrong path.' To ensure the welfare of the citizens, the intelligent King Sagara, Bahu's son, exiled his eldest son Asamanja[This story has been recounted in Section 33 (Volume 3). Bahu was also known as Asita.]. O king! Asamanja had earlier drowned the children of the citizens in the Sarayu.
His father censured him and exiled him. The great ascetic Shvetaketu was the beloved son of rishi Uddalaka. But
because he falsely made brahmanas follow him, he was abandoned.

'"The eternal duty of kings is ensuring the pleasure of the subjects, protecting the truth and uprightness in conduct. He must not cause harm to the possessions of others. At the right time, he must give what should be given. A
king who is brave, truthful in his speech and forgiving, does not deviate from the path to be trodden. His counsels
are secret. He conquers anger. He is firm in determining the purport of the sacred texts. He is always devoted to
dharma, artha, kama and moksha. The king must always cover weaknesses in the three[Probably referring to dharma, artha and kama.]. There is nothing as important for kings as the control of the wicked. The lords of the earth must protect the dharma of the four varnas.
The eternal dharma of kings is to prevent a mixing of dharma[The dharma of the four varnas should not be mixed up.]. The king must not trust and must not trust too
much. Using his own intelligence, he must always examine the good and the bad in the six aspects[The six aspects of policy-alliances, war, marching, halting, dividing and fortifying the army and sowing
dissension in the enemy.]. A king who
can detect weaknesses in the enemy is always praised. So is one who knows the truth of the three objectives[Dharma, artha and kama.] and
uses the strategy of employing spies. Like Yama and Vaishravana[Kubera.], he must add to the treasury. He should know
about the increase and decrease in the status of the ten[Advisers, fortified cities, the countryside, the treasury and the army add up to five. There are these five on
one's own side and five on the side of the enemy. The king must know about these ten.]. He should support those who have no one to support
them. However, he must also have an eye towards those who possess support. A king must have an excellent face
and must smile before he speaks. He must revere those who are aged and conquer excessive lassitude. He should
consider the conduct of the righteous and set his mind on the conduct of the righteous. He must never take away
riches from the hands of the righteous. Instead, he must take it away from those who are wicked and give it to
those who are righteous. He is himself the one who gives and takes away. Therefore, his soul must be under control and so must those who serve him. He will be pure in his conduct. At the right time, he will give and enjoy.
Men who are born in noble lineages, are without disease and are brave and faithful must be employed as advisers.
They must be good in conduct. They must not be disrespectful towards relatives[The king's relatives.] and must not be proud. They
must possess learning and be conversant with this world. However, they must also be able to look at the world
hereafter. They must be virtuous and devoted to dharma. They must be as immobile as mountains. The king must
always reward these aides and they should be his equal in the objects of pleasure that they enjoy. In addition, the
king will only possess his umbrella. The king's behaviour towards them, directly and indirectly, will be the
same[He will not differentiate between them and him.]. If he acts in this way, an Indra among kings will never repent. A king who is suspicious of everything, a
king who takes everything away and a king who is addicted to wickedness is quickly restrained by his own subjects. However, a lord of the earth who is pure and is engaged in attracting the hearts of the subjects is not devoured by the enemy when he falls. Even when he falls, he rises again. A king who is without anger, not addicted
to vices, a king who wields a mild rod of punishment and has conquered his senses, is trusted by beings, as if he
was the Himalayas. He is wise. He possesses all the qualities and is engaged in detecting the weaknesses of the enemy. He is extremely handsome. He considers the truth about what is good and bad for the four varnas. He is swift
to act. He has conquered his anger. He is high-minded and is extremely easy to please. He is naturally free from
disease. He acts and does not boast. He endeavours to complete all the tasks that have been begun.

'"When such a king is seen, that king is supreme among kings. Men in his kingdom roam around fearlessly, like
sons in the house of a father. That king is supreme among kings. Citizens who reside in his kingdom know about
good policy and bad and do not need to hide their riches. Such a king is supreme among kings. Men who reside in
his kingdom are engaged in their own tasks. They do not quarrel and are generous. They are properly protected.
They are docile, obedient and humble. They are not inclined to fight. In a kingdom where men find pleasure in donating, he is indeed a king. There is no fraud and deceit. There is no maya. There is no malice. In the kingdom of
such a king, there is eternal dharma. He shows proper respect to learning. He is engaged in good policies that bring
benefits to citizens. He follows the dharma of the righteous and is ready to renounce. He is indeed a king in the
kingdom. He uses spies. However, his counsels, what he will do, and what he will not do, is never known to enemies. He is indeed a king in the kingdom. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There is an ancient shloka that the
great-souled Bhargava had sung, which was recited to the king when he was told about Rama's conduct[The king in question is Yudhishthira himself, who was told Rama's (i.e., Parashurama's) story (by
Krishna) earlier in this section. Bhargava is Parashurama.]. 'First,
get a king[That is, choose a kingdom where you wish to live.]. Get a wife after that. After that, obtain riches. If there is no kingdom in this world, how can there be
a wife? How can there be riches?' O lion among kings! Therefore, this is the eternal dharma of kings and nothing
else. One must clearly protect. The world is sustained on that protection. O Indra among kings! Manu, the son of
Prachetasa, recited these two shlokas about rajadharma[Son is to be interpreted as descendant. Prachetasa is Daksha and the Manu in question is Vaivasvata
Manu.]. Listen attentively to this. 'There are six men who must
be avoided, like a broken boat on an ocean-a preceptor who does not speak, an officiating priest who has not
studied, a king who does not protect, a wife who does not speak sweetly, a cowherd who wishes to be in a village
and a barber who desires to go to the forest[The cowherd's tasks are in pastures, not in the village. The barber's tasks are in the village, not in the
forest.]."'