Vaishampayana said, 'Thus addressed by Krishna, the intelligent Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, approached Vyasa
and spoke these words. "When you truly know that it is the time for the horse sacrifice, please consecrate me.
My sacrifice is dependent on you." Vyasa replied, "O Kounteya! There is no doubt that when it is time, I, Paila and
Yajnavalkya will perform all the requisite rites. Your initiation will happen on the night of the full moon in the
month of Chaitra[March-April.]. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Let all the objects required for the sacrifice be prepared.
Let there be brahmanas and sutas who are knowledgable about the science of horses. Let them examine the horses
and choose one that will make the sacrifice successful. Follow the sacred texts and let it be released, to wander
around the entire earth, up to the girdle of the ocean. O king! This will increase your fame and name." O Indra
among kings! Thus addressed by the one who knew about the brahman, the Pandava king agreed and did everything just as he had been instructed. O Indra among kings! He collected all the required objects. The king who was
Dharma's son brought all these objects together. The one who was immeasurable in his soul then told Krishna
Dvaipayana that the arrrangements had been made.

'The  greatly  energetic  Vyasa  spoke  to  the  king  who  was  Dharma's  son.  "At  the  right  time,  we  will  make
arrangements to intitiate you into the sacrifice. O Kourava! Let the sphya, kurcha and everything else be made out
of gold[Sphya was a wooden sword used to kill the horse after it had returned from its wanderings. Kurcha was a handful of kusha grass.]. Let everything used as a harness also be made out of gold. Let the horse be released today, so that it can
progressively roam around the earth. O Yudhishthira! Following the sacred texts, when it roams around, let it be
protected well." Yudhishthira replied, "O brahmana! I have released this horse, so that it can roam around the
earth, as it wishes. I have made all the arrangements for the horse to wander around the earth, wherever it wills. O
sage! But you should tell me about who should protect it." O Indra among kings! Addressed thus, Krishna Dvaipayana replied. "He is younger to Bhimasena and he is supreme among all archers. Jishnu is patient and can withstand everything. He will be the protector. The destroyer of nivatakavachas[In Section 35 (Volume 3), Arjuna defeated the nivatakavachas.] is capable of conquering the entire
earth. He possesses celestial weapons and he is capable of withstanding the gods. He has a divine bow and arrows
and he will follow it. He is accomplished in dharma and artha and is knowledgable about all the sacred texts. O
best among kings! He will follow the sacred texts in making the horse wander around. The prince is mighty-armed.
He is dark and has eyes that are like the petals of lotuses. The brave one is Abhimanyu's father and he will follow
it. O lord of the earth! The energetic Kounteya Bhimasena is infinite in his valour. With Nakula, he is capable of
protecting the kingdom. O  Kouravya! The  intelligent  Sahadeva  is  immensely  illustrious.  Following  the  proper
rites, he will welcome all the relatives who have been invited." The extender of the Kuru lineage properly followed
everything that he had been asked to do. He gave Phalguna instructions about the horse.

'Yudhishthira said, "O Arjuna! O brave one! Protect the horse. No man other than you is capable of protecting
the earth. O mighty-armed one! The kings will advance against you. O  unblemished one! But if possible, you
should avoid any fights with them. You should tell all of them about my sacrifice. O mighty-armed one! Depart
and try to have alliances with those kings."'

Vaishampayana continued, 'The one with dharma in his soul spoke in this way to his brother, Savyasachi. He
instructed Bhima and Nakula to protect the city. With the permission of King Dhritarashtra, Yudhishthira asked Sahadeva, the lord of warriors, to tend to the relatives who had been invited.'
