'"Nala said, 'There is no doubt that your father's kingdom is my own. But I will never go there in these difficult
circumstances. There was a time when I went there in my prosperity and increased your happiness. How can I go
there in my misery and increase your unhappiness?"'

'Brihadashva said, "Thus King Nala repeatedly spoke to Damayanti. He comforted the fortunate one, now covered in only half her garment[Damayanti had shared her garment with Nala.]. With only a single garment between them, they roamed here and there. They
were hungry, thirsty and fatigued, and eventually arrived at a public dwelling house[The word used is sabha. This means an assembly hall or council. It also means a place where gambling occurs. But it is also generally used for any place frequented by the public.]. On reaching that dwelling
house, the king who was the lord of Nishadha sat down with the daughter of Vidarbha on the bare ground. He was
naked and filthy. His hair was dishevelled and he was covered with dust. He was tired. With Damayanti, he slept
on the ground. The fortunate and delicate Damayanti, devoted to austerities, had suddenly been overtaken by misfortune. She slept. O lord of the earth! As Damayanti slept, King Nala could not sleep, as he had slept earlier, because his mind was agitated with grief. He thought about the loss of his kingdom and the desertion by all his well-
wishers and the difficulties in the forest. He kept thinking about these. What will happen from my acting in this
way? What will happen from my not acting in this way? Is it better for me to die? Or should I abandon her? She is
devoted to me and has suffered this unhappiness for my sake. But without me, it is possible that she might go to
her relatives. If she is with me, this supreme one will certainly confront more unhappiness. But if I desert her, it is
possible that she might find happiness. The lord of men reflected on these repeatedly in many ways. Then he decided that it would be superior if he deserted Damayanti. Realizing that he had no garments and that she had only a
single garment, the king thought that he would tear her garment in half. But how could one tear the garment without the beloved one waking up? Thinking thus, King Nala began to wander around that dwelling house. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Nala walked here and there. Then, near that dwelling house, he found an excellent and
unsheathed sword. That scorcher of enemies used it to slice off half the garment. Leaving the daughter of Vidarbha
asleep, he swiftly went away, bereft of his consciousness. But his heart was tied to her and he returned again to the
dwelling house. On seeing Damayanti there, the king of Nishadha wept, 'My beloved one was earlier not seen by
the wind or the sun. She is now sleeping, without any protection, on the ground of this dwelling house. The sweet-
smiling one is clad in a sliced-off garment. When she regains consciousness, the one with the beautiful hips will be
like one maddened. What will she do? Alone and deserted by me, how will this faithful and beautiful daughter of
Bhima roam in this terrible forest, frequented by animals and predators?' Departing again and again, King Nala
returned to the dwelling house again and again. He was drawn away by Kali but was drawn back by his love. It
seemed as if the heart of the miserable one was divided into two. Like a swing, it went to the dwelling house and
back from it. But Nala was attracted by Kali and deluded. Lamenting piteously many times, he deserted his sleeping wife. Touched by Kali, his soul was tainted and without thinking about it, the king went away, abandoning his
miserable wife in that deserted forest."'
