Vaishampayana said, 'The chief of the Yadus was named Shura and he was Vasudeva's father. His daughter was
named Pritha and her beauty was matchless on earth. Earlier, that valorous one had promised his first-born child to
his father's sister's son, because this valorous one had no children. The first-born happened to be a daughter. To do
a favour and an act of friendship to his friend, he gave her to the great-souled Kuntibhoja. In her father's[The adopted father, Kuntibhoja.] house,
she was appointed to honour the gods and guests. One day, she happened to tend to the Brahmana who was rigid in
his vows and who was known as Durvasa. He was fearsome and was learned in the secret mysteries of dharma.
Attending to his needs in every way, she pleased the self-controlled one. Through his foresight, he knew that she
would face the dharma that is indicated for times of distress[She would face a difficulty in having sons.] and need magic. The sage gave her a mantra and
said, "Whichever gods you summon through the use of this mantra, will grant you sons through their grace." Having been told this by the Brahmana, she was curious.

'Though still a virgin, the illustrious one summoned the god Arka[The sun-god.]. She immediately saw the sun, who makes
the worlds come alive. On seeing that wonderful sight, the one with the unblemished form was astounded.
Tapana[The sun-god.], who spreads light, placed an embryo in her womb. Through him, she gave birth to a warrior who was
supreme among those who knew the use of all weapons. He was born with natural armour, blessed with good fortune and handsome like a son of the gods. His natural armour and earrings lit up his face. This son was known in
all the worlds as Karna. After giving her, the supremely radiant one and the best among those who give, Tapana,
restored her virginity and returned to heaven.

'So as to hide her misconduct and frightened of her relatives, Kunti[Once she was reared by Kuntibhoja, Pritha obtained the name Kunti.] hurled the son, who bore all the auspicious marks, into the water. Radha's illustrious husband[His name was Adhiratha.], who was the son of a suta, saved the child, and he and
his wife brought him up as their son. They gave the child a name. Since he was born with riches, he was given the
name of Vasushena. 264 He grew up to be powerful, skilled in the use of all weapons. The valorous one worshipped the sun until his back was burnt. During that time of worship and meditation, there was nothing that the
brave, truthful and great-souled one would not give to Brahmanas. Indra, who looks after the welfare of all creatures, came in the form of a Brahmana begging for alms and asked for the radiant natural armour and earrings.
Without a thought, and with blood streaming, Karna cut off the natural armour and the earrings and offered them
with joined hands. The amazed Shakra[Indra. Indra was attempting to protect and help Arjuna.] gave him a shakti[A shakti is a spear or lance. But this one was divine.] and said, "Whoever you wish to kill among the
gods, the asuras, humans, gandharvas, uragas and rakshasas with this weapon, will certainly be killed." Earlier, he
was known by the name of Vasushena. But after this deed, he became known by the name of Vaikartana
Karna[Vikartana is the sun, so Vaikartana means the sun's son. Karna means the ear.].'