'Gandhari said, "O son[The word used is tata.]! This Shalya has been slain and he is lying down. He was Nakula's maternal uncle. In the
battle, he was killed by Dharmaraja, who is knowledgeable about dharma. O bull among men! He always tried to
rival you, everywhere. That maharatha king of Madra has been slain and is lying down. O son! He controlled the
chariot of Adhiratha's son in the battle. For the sake of the victory of the sons of Pandu, he deprived him of his energy[Shalya had promised to sap Karna's energy in the battle.]. Alas! Shame! Shalya's face is as beautiful as the full moon, but wild crows have pecked at it and wounded
it. His eyes are like the petals of lotuses. O Krishna! His complexion is like that of molten gold and the tongue that
is sticking out of his mouth is golden. But it is being devoured by the birds. Shalya, the adornment of an assembly,
has been slain by Yudhishthira. The women from the lineage of the king of Madra have surrounded him and are
weeping. These kshatriya women are clad in extremely fine[The word used is sukshma, which is difficult to translate in a single word, because it has multiple meanings.
While 'fine' is acceptable, there is also a sense of subtle, sheer, short and insignificant.] garments and approaching that bull among kshatriyas and bull among men, the king of Madra, are shrieking. With Shalya having been brought down, those
women are stationed around him. They are like cows that desire a bull that has got mired in the mud. Look at
Shalya, supreme among rathas. He was one who provided refuge to others. Mangled by arrows, he is lying down
on a bed meant for heroes.

'"This powerful King Bhagadatta resided in a mountainous region. He was foremost among those who wielded
goads on elephants. Having been brought down, he is lying down on the ground. A golden garland decorated his
head and though he is being devoured by carnivorous beasts, it is still radiant on his hair. The battle between him
and Partha was certainly terrible. It was fierce and made the body hair stand up, like that between Shakra and Bali.
The mighty-armed one challenged Partha Dhananjaya and fought with him. Having advanced towards that calamity, he was brought down by Kunti's son.

'"There was no one on earth who was equal to Bhishma in valour and prowess. Bhishma has been struck and is
lying down. O Krishna! Look at Shantanu's son lying down, like the sun in his radiance. He has been brought
down by destiny, like the sun from the sky at the end of a yuga. In the battle, this valiant one scorched the enemy
with the energy of his weapons. O Keshava! This sun among men has set, like the sun sets. The brave one is lying
down on a bed of arrows. He was Devapi's equal in dharma[Devapi was Shantanu's elder brother.]. Look at him. He is lying down on a bed meant for
heroes, one that is liked by brave ones. This supreme bed is strewn with barbed arrows, hollow arrows and iron arrows. He is lying down, like the illustrious Skanda entering and lying down on a clump of reeds[Skanda was born in a clump of reeds.]. Gangeya's excellent pillow is not stuffed with cotton. It was given to him by the wielder of Gandiva and is made out of three arrows. The immensely illustrious one protected his father's injunction and held up his seed[Bhishma remained celibate, so that Shantanu could marry Satyavati.]. O Madhava! Shantanu's son, the unmatched warrior, is lying down. O son! He had dharma in his soul. He knew about dharma, as it
has been laid down in continuous tradition[Passed down from one generation to another.]. He was mortal, yet immortal[Bhishma could choose the time of his death.]. He still has life in him. In battle,
there was no one else as accomplished, learned and valorous as him. Bhishma, Shantanu's son, has been brought
down by the enemy and is lying down now. The brave one always spoke the truth. He was learned about dharma.
When he was asked by the Pandavas, he himself told them about his means of death in the battle. When the lineage
of the Kurus was destroyed, he again resurrected it[This could be a reference to Bhishma's remaining celibate, so that Shantanu could marry. However, it is probably a reference to Bhishma's marrying Vichitravirya to Ambika and Ambalika.]. Together with the Kurus, the immensely intelligent one has
been defeated and has departed. O Madhava! Now that Devavrata[Bhishma's original name.], bull among men and an equal of the gods, has
gone to heaven, whom will the Kurus ask about dharma?

'"He was Arjuna's teacher and preceptor, and Satyaki's too. Look at the one who has been brought down-
Drona, the supreme preceptor of the Kurus. His knowledge of the four types of weapons[Leaving aside divine weapons, these four categories are mukta (those that are released from the hand, like a
chakra), amukta (those that are never released, like a sword), muktamukta (those that can be released or not released, like a spear) and yantramukta (those that are released from an implement, like an arrow).] was like that of the lord
of the gods. O Madhava! Drona was as immensely valorous as Bhargava[Parashurama.]. It is because of his favours that Bibhatsu Pandava could perform an extremely difficult deed[It is not clear what this is a reference to. Given the context, it probably means the defeat of Drupada by the Pandavas (in the enmity between Drona and Drupada), or Arjuna's saving Drona from a crocodile. Both incidents
have been described in Section 7 (Volume 1).]. All his weapons could not protect him and he has been
slain and is lying down. With him at the forefront, the Kurus challenged the Pandavas. He was foremost among the
wielders of weapons. However, Drona himself has been severed by weapons. He scorched the soldiers, like a moving fire. But he has been slain and is lying down on the ground, like a fire whose flames have been pacified. O
Madhava! The bow in his hands is still intact and so are his arm-guards. Though he has been slain, Drona seems to
be alive. O Keshava! As with Prajapati at the beginning of everything, the four Vedas and all the weapons never
abandoned the brave one. His auspicious feet deserved to be honoured and were honoured by bards and worshipped by hundreds of disciples. But they are now being dragged by jackals. O Madhusudana! Drona was slain by
Drupada's son[Dhrishtadyumna.]. Kripi[Drona's wife.] is full of misery and the sorrow has made her lose her senses. Look at her. She is weeping in distress. Her hair is loose and her face is cast downwards. She is tending to her dead husband, Drona,
supreme among the wielders of weapons. O Keshava! Dhrishtadyumna shattered his body armour with his arrows
in the battle. Her hair is matted and she is a brahmachari. She is tending to Drona. Overcome with grief, Kripi is
performing the funeral rites. The delicate and illustrious one's husband has been slain in the battle. Fires have been
lit, in the proper way, on every side of the funeral pyre. Drona was placed on this and those who were learned
about samas chanted the three samas[Sama (saman) is a metrical hymn, not necessarily belonging to the Sama Veda. The number three probably
means that hymns from the Rig Veda, the Sama Veda and the Yajur Veda were chanted.]. O Madhava! Brahmacharis with matted hair[Drona's disciples.] are hurling bows, javelins
and the seats of chariots into the funeral pyre. Many other weapons will also burn with these. Having placed the
infinitely energetic Drona on it, they are praising him and weeping. There are others who are quietly mouthing the
three kinds of samas. Like a fire being offered into a fire, Drona is being offered as an oblation into the fire.
Drona's brahmana disciples have circumambulated the pyre, keeping it to the left. With Kripi in front, they are
now headed towards the Ganga."'
