'Sanjaya said, "After his son[Bhurishrava.] was killed by Satyaki, though he had decided to fast to death, Somadatta became
extremely angry and spoke these words to Satyaki. 'In earlier times, the gods have laid down norms of dharma for
kshatriyas. O Satvata! You abandoned those. Why did you resort to the dharma of bandits[Dasyus.]? In a battle, one who
is wise and follows the dharma of kshatriyas should not strike someone who is running away, someone who is distressed, someone who is without weapons or someone who has sought refuge. O Satvata! It is indeed said that,
among the Vrishnis, there are two mighty-armed warriors who are maharathas-Pradyumna and you. When his
arm had been severed by Partha, he had decided to fast to death. Why did you act cruelly and bring him down
then? O Satvata! O one who prides himself on bravery! I swear by my two beloved sons[Bhurishrava and Shala.] and by all my good
deeds, that as long as Partha Jishnu does not protect you, with your sons and your brothers, before this night is
over, I will kill you. O wretch of the Vrishni lineage! If not, let me descend into a terrible hell.' Having said this,
the immensely strong Somadatta angrily blew on his conch shell and roared loudly, like a lion. The immensely
strong Satvata possessed teeth like a lion and eyes like the petals of lotuses. He became extremely angry and spoke
these words to Somadatta. 'Your brave son, maharatha Bhurishrava, has been killed. O king! His brother, Shala,
has also been afflicted by grief[In Section 69, Shatanika killed Shala.]. I will also kill you today, with your sons, animals and relatives. O Kourava!
Make special efforts to remain stationed in this battle. O one with a drum on your banner! King Yudhishthira has
always engaged in donations, self-control, purity, non-violence, modesty, fortitude and forgiveness. Because of
that constancy, your energy has already been sapped. With Karna and Soubala, you will be destroyed in this battle.
I swear on Krishna's feet and on all my good deeds, that I will angrily slay you and your sons in this battle. You
will escape only if you decide to run away.' Having addressed each other in this way, those two supreme of men
began to shoot arrows at each other, with eyes that were red with rage.

'"With a thousand elephants and ten thousand horses, Duryodhana surrounded Somadatta and stationed himself
there. The angry Shakuni, supreme among wielders of all weapons, also surrounded him, with his sons, grandsons
and brothers who were like Indra in valour. O mighty-armed one! Your brother-in-law was young and was capable
of withstanding the vajra. The intelligent one had one hundred thousand horses ahead of him. He surrounded and
protected the great archer, Somadatta, with these. Protected by these, the powerful one[Somadatta.] enveloped Satyaki with
arrows. On seeing that he was enveloped by arrows with straight tufts, Dhrishtadyumna became angry. He gathered a large army and advanced. O king! Those two armies clashed against each other, as if two oceans were agitated by turbulent storms. Somadatta pierced Satyaki with nine arrows and Satyaki struck the bull among the Kuru
lineage with ten. Having been thus pierced in the battle by the powerful one with a firm bow, he[Somadatta.] became senseless and sank down on the floor of his chariot. On seeing that he had lost consciousness, Somadatta's charioteer
quickly bore the maharatha away from the field of battle. On seeing that he had lost his senses and was afflicted by
Yuyudhana's arrows, Drona's son angrily attacked Satvata in the field of battle.

'"On seeing that he was descending towards the chariot of Shini's descendant, Bhimasena's son[Ghatotkacha.] angrily countered him. He was on an extremely large and terrible chariot that was made completely out of iron and covered
with the skins of bears. It was drawn by mounts that looked like elephants. But those were neither horses, nor elephants. It had eight distorted wheels. A king of vultures was perched on the top of the standard. It dilated its eyes
and shrieked. The flags were red and green and decorated with garlands of entrails. He was stationed on that large
chariot with eight wheels. Riding this, he was surrounded by one akshouhini of rakshasas, possessing terrible
forms. On seeing him advance with his great bow, the kings were agitated and distressed. He was like the Destroyer at the end of a yuga, like Yama with a staff in his hand. On seeing him, your son's army was agitated and afflicted by fear. They were like waves in the Ganga, agitated by the wind into whirlpools. Ghatotkacha roared like a lion
and terrified by this, the elephants exuded urine. The men were extremely miserable. Once twilight has passed, the
rakshasas become even more powerful on earth. In every direction, they brought down a shower of boulders. Iron
wheels, catapults, lances, javelins, spears, shataghnis and battleaxes showered down incessantly. On seeing the
fierce and terrible state in the field of battle, the kings, your sons and Karna were distressed and fled in different
directions. However, Drona's son was proud of his strength of weapons and he alone was not distressed. He used
his arrows to destroy the maya that had been created by Ghatotkacha. When that maya was destroyed, Ghatotkacha
became angry. Senseless with rage, he showered down terrible arrows. These were forceful and penetrated Ashvatthama, like snakes entering a termite hill. The arrows were covered with blood and penetrated Sharadvati's
son[Ashvatthama's mother was Kripi (Sharadvati), who was Sharadvata's daughter.]. Those gold-tufted arrows, sharpened on stone, swiftly entered the ground. The powerful Ashvatthama, light
in the use of his hands, became angry. He angrily pierced Ghatotkacha with ten arrows. Ghatotkacha was severely
wounded in his inner organs by Drona's son. He picked up a chakra with a hundred thousand spokes. Its edges
were as sharp as a razor. It had the complexion of the rising sun and was decorated with gems and diamonds.
Wishing to kill Ashvatthama, Bhimasena's son hurled it. Though it descended with great force, Drona's son used
arrows to swiftly shatter it into fragments. It was foiled and fell down on the ground, like the wishes of an unfortunate person. On seeing that the chakra had been brought down, Ghatotkacha quickly enveloped Drona's son with
arrows, like Svarbhanu[Rahu.] covering the sun.

'"Ghatotkacha's son was handsome and was like a mass of collyrium. As Drona's son advanced, he checked
him, like a king of mountains against the wind. Anjanaparva, Bhimasena's grandson, brought down a shower of
arrows and he[Ashvatthama.] looked like Mount Meru, with rain from a cloud pouring down on it. Ashvatthama was like
Rudra, Upendra[Vishnu.] and Indra in his valour and he was not frightened. He severed Anjanaparva's standard with an
arrow and cut down his two charioteers with two others. With three others, he severed the trivenu[Literally, trivenu means something with three poles. A trivenu was a triangular piece made out of bamboo, used
to provide strength to a chariot. The base was towards the chariot. The other two poles were extended in the direction of the horses and were fastened to the central yoke.]. He severed
his bow with one and struck his four horses with four. Deprived of his chariot, he[Anjanaparva.] grasped a sword in his hand
and it was decorated with golden dots. With an extremely sharp arrow, he[Ashvatthama.] severed the sword into two fragments.
O king! The son of Hidimba's son quickly grasped a golden club and whirling it, hurled it. However, Drona's son
struck it with his arrows and made it fall down. At this, Anjanaparva rose up into the sky and began to roar like a
dark cloud. He showered down trees from the sky. Ghatotkacha's son was versed in maya. But Drona's son used
arrows to strike him in the sky, like the rays of the sun against clouds. He then descended and once again stationed
himself on his chariot, decorated with gold. Anjanaparva was as beautiful as a lofty mountain. He was clad in iron
armour. But Drona's son killed Anjanaparva, the son of Bhima's son, like Maheshvara against Andhaka.

'"On seeing that his immensely strong son had been killed by Ashvatthama, he[Ghatotkacha.] approached Drona's son,
whose armlets seemed to be blazing with anger. Without any fear, he spoke these words to Sharadvati's son, who
was then consuming the army of the Pandavas, like a fire that has arisen in the forest. 'O Drona's son! Stay. You
will not escape from me with your life. I will kill you today, like Agni's son destroyed Krouncha[Agni's son means Kartikeya, who shattered the Krouncha mountain.].' Ashvatthama
replied, 'O child! Go and fight with others. O one who possesses the valour of an immortal! O Hidimba's son! It is
not proper that a father should fight with a son[In the sense that Ashvatthama was like a brother to the Pandavas.]. O Hidimba's son! I have no desire to be angry with you. However, if anger is generated, one may end up killing one's own self.' Bhimasena's son was overcome with sorrow on
account of his son. On hearing these words, his eyes became coppery red with rage. He approached Ashvatthama
and said, 'O Drona's son! Do you think that I am an ordinary person, who will be distressed in this battle? I have
been born from Bhima, in the noble lineage of the Kurus. I am a son of the Pandavas and they never retreat from a
battle. I am a lord of the rakshasas and I am Dashagriva's[Dashagriva is Ravana's name.] equal in strength. O son of Drona! Wait. Wait. You
will not escape from me with your life. On the field of the battle today, I will destroy your love for fighting.' Having spoken these words, the extremely strong rakshasa, with eyes coppery red in rage, angrily attacked Drona's
son, like a lion against a king of elephants. Ghatotkacha showered down wheels of chariots and arrows, like a
cloud showering rain. These descended on Drona's son, bull among rathas. But before that shower of arrows could
reach him, Drona's son countered them with his arrows. It seemed that a battle was raging in the sky between those
two sets of arrows. Because of the friction from those weapons, sparks of flame were generated and at the commencement of the night, the sky seemed to be bright with fireflies. Drona's son, proud in battle, pacified and destroyed that maya. Seeing that his maya had been dispelled, Ghatotkacha disappeared again. He assumed the form
of a lofty mountain, with trees crowding the summit. It had large fountains, from which, spears, javelins, swords
and clubs flowed like water. Drona's son saw that mountain, which was like a mass of collyrium. Large numbers of
weapons issued from it. Drona's son smiled and invoked the vajra weapon. Struck by that weapon, that king of
mountains was quickly destroyed. He[Ghatotkacha.] then became a blue cloud in the firmament, decorated with Indra's
weapon[Indra's bow, the rainbow.]. He brought down a shower of boulders and covered Drona's son in that battle. Drona's son, supreme
among those who have knowledge of weapons, then affixed the vayavya weapon and struck the blue cloud that had
arisen. Drona's son covered all the directions with his large numbers of arrows. The supreme of men killed a hundred thousand rathas. He then saw that Ghatotkacha was again fearlessly advancing towards him on a chariot, with
his bow stretched, and surrounded by many rakshasas. They were like lions and tigers and like crazy elephants in
their valour. They were on elephants and chariots and astride the backs of horses. Their mouths gaped. Their heads
and necks were fierce. These were the followers of Hidimba's son. There were Poulastyas and Yatudhanas[Poulastya rakshasas were descended from the sage Pulasta. Yatudhanas are evil spirits.]. They
were extremely terrible in their valour. Those brave ones wielded many kinds of weapons and were clad in many
kinds of armour and ornaments. They were immensely strong and made a fierce noise. Their eyes were dilated
with rage. Those rakshasas, invincible in battle, arrived to fight.

'"On seeing them, your son was distressed and Drona's son spoke to him. 'O Duryodhana! Wait. You should not
feel any fear now. With your brothers, and with the kings who are like Indra in valour, remain here. I will slay your
enemies, so that you do not suffer defeat. I tell you this truthfully. Assure your army.' Duryodhana replied, 'Since
your mind is vast, I do not think that what you have said is wonderful. O descendant of the Goutama lineage! Your
devotion to us is great.' Having spoken these words to Ashvatthama, he then spoke to Soubala. 'Dhananjaya is surrounded by a hundred thousand rathas, who are ornaments on the field of battle. Advance against Dhananjaya with
sixty thousand elephants and Karna, Vrishasena, Kripa and Nila. The ones from the north, Kritavarma, Purumitra,
Shrutaparna, Duhshasana, Nikumbha, Kundabhedi, Urukrama, Puranjaya, Dridharatha, Pataki, Hemapankaja,
Shalya, Aruni, Indrasena, Sanjaya, Vijaya, Jaya, Kamalaksha, Puru, Krathi, Jayavarma and Sudarshana-these will
follow you with sixty thousand foot soldiers. O maternal uncle! Slay Bhima, the twins and Dharmaraja, like Indra
of the gods against the asuras. My hopes of victory are established in you. They have been severely struck by the
arrows of Drona's son and have been wounded in the battle. O maternal uncle! Kill the Kounteyas, like the son of
the fire[Kartikeya.] against the asuras.' O king! Having been thus addressed by your son, Soubala swiftly departed to destroy
the Pandavas and delighted your son.

'"Meanwhile, during that night, there was an extremely terrible battle between Drona's son and the rakshasas,
like that between Shakra and Prahlada. Extremely angry, Ghatotkacha struck Goutami's son in the chest with ten
arrows that were as firm as poison or the fire. He was severely struck by those arrows shot by Bhima's son and wavered on his chariot, like a tree struck by the wind. Ghatotkacha then used an anjalika arrow that was extremely
radiant to quickly sever the bow in the hand of Drona's son. Drona's son grasped another bow that was large and
was capable of bearing a heavy burden. He showered down sharp arrows, like rain flowing down from a cloud. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! Sharadvati's son dispatched many gold-tufted arrows that were capable of
killing the enemy, towards the sky and towards the one who was ranging in the sky[Ghatotkacha was in the sky.]. Afflicted by the arrows of
Drona's son, those large numbers of broad-chested rakshasas looked like crazy elephants that were tormented by
lions. The lord consumed those rakshasas, with their horses, charioteers and chariots, with his arrows. He was like
the illustrious fire, consuming beings at the time of the destruction of a yuga. He severely consumed one akshouhini of nairritas[Another term for rakshasas.] with his arrows, like the god Maheshvara burning down the city of Tripura in the sky[Tripura was a city of the demons and actually consisted of three (tri) cities (pura). They revolved separately in
the sky and converged once in a thousand years. Because of Brahma's boon, they could only be destroyed when
they converged into a single city. Shiva destroyed Tripura with an arrow.]. He was
like the powerful god[Agni.] who burns all beings at the end of a yuga. Having consumed them for the sake of your
welfare, Drona's son, foremost among victorious ones, was resplendent. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! No
one among the thousands of kings and the Pandavas was capable of glancing towards Drona's son in that battle.
The only exception was the brave Ghatotkacha, the immensely strong Indra among the rakshasas.

'"O foremost among the Bharata lineage! His eyes were red with rage. He slapped his palms against each other
and bit his lower lips. He angrily addressed his own charioteer. 'Take me to the son of Drona.' He was borne on a
chariot that was terrible in form and had a victorious flag fastened to it. The destroyer of enemies again engaged in
a duel with Drona's son. The rakshasa angrily hurled an extremely terrible vajra, made by Rudra, towards Drona's
son. It possessed eight wheels. Drona's son abandoned his chariot and bow and leapt down. He seized it[The vajra.], hurled
it back and again ascended his chariot. Immensely radiant, it consumed his[Ghatotkacha's.] horses, charioteer, standard and
mounts. Having done this, the extremely terrible vajra penetrated the earth. On witnessing that deed of Drona's
son, where he had leapt down and seized the extremely terrible weapon made by Shankara, all the beings worshipped him. O king! Going to Dhrishtadyumna's chariot, Bhimasena's son again released sharp arrows towards
the broad chest of Drona's son. Without any fear, Dhrishtadyumna also shot gold-tufted arrows that were like venomous serpents towards the chest of Drona's son. Drona's son shot thousands of iron arrows at them. However,
those two lions among men used their own arrows, which were like flames of fire, to counter them. O bull among
the Bharata lineage! That extremely fierce battle delighted all warriors. With a thousand chariots, three hundred
elephants and six thousand horses, Bhima arrived at that spot.

'"Drona's son, the performer of unblemished deeds and with dharma in his soul, fought with the rakshasa who
was Bhima's son and Dhrishtadyumna and his followers. Drona's son displayed his extraordinary valour. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! We think that no other being is capable of such deeds. While Bhimasena, Hidimba's son, Parshata, the twin warriors, Dharma's son, Vijaya and Achyuta looked on, within an instant, he used
sharp arrows to destroy one akshouhini of rakshasas, with their horses, charioteers, chariots and elephants. Severely struck and afflicted by iron arrows, elephants sank and fell down on the ground, like mountains with two
peaks[These were tuskers and the tusks are being compared to peaks.]. The trunks of elephants were severed. Immobile elephants were strewn around on the ground. Others
writhed, like serpents. O king! The earth was beautiful, with golden rods that were flung away and umbrellas. It
looked like the firmament, at the time of the destruction of a yuga, studded with many moons, suns and planets.
Standards were strewn around like frogs and drums were scattered like tortoises. The umbrellas were like arrays of
swans. The garlands and whisks were like foam. Herons and vultures were giant crocodiles. The many weapons
were the fish. Chariots that were hurled away were like giant banks. The beautiful flags were the trees. The extremely terrible arrows were the smaller fish. The lances and spears were the fierce lizards. The marrow and flesh
constituted the large mire. Headless torsos were the rafts. The hair was the moss and it increased terror among
those who were cowards. The horse riders were giant serpents and there was an inexhaustible flow of bodies.
There was an immensely forceful river of blood that was created by Drona's son. Warriors lamented in loud tones.
The wounds[That is, blood flowing from the wounds.] were the waves. That extremely terrible river flowed towards the ocean that was Yama's eternal
abode.

'"Having killed the rakshasas, Drona's son struck Hidimba's son with his arrows. Drona's immensely strong son
was extremely angry. He again struck Vrikodara, the Parshatas and the other Parthas with large numbers of iron
arrows. The lord killed Suratha, Drupada's son. In that battle, he again killed Shrutanjaya, Suratha's younger brother. O Indra among kings! Drona's son slew Balanika, Jayanika, Jaya and Shrutaharya[Though not clear, all these seem to be Drupada's sons too, including the names that follow.] and sent them to Yama's
abode. With three other sharp arrows that were well tufted and garlanded with gold, he killed the powerful Shatrunjaya and sent him to Shakra's world. He killed Prishaghna and the insolent Chandradeva. He killed ten of Kuntibhoja's sons with ten arrows. Ashvatthama was extremely angry. He affixed a supreme arrow and drawing his
bow back all the way up to his ear, released that supreme arrow, which was terrible and like Yama's staff. He
quickly shot it towards Ghatotkacha. O lord of the earth! That great and well-tufted arrow pierced the rakshasa's
heart and swiftly penetrated the earth. On seeing him fall, maharatha Dhrishtadyumna thought that he had been
killed. O Indra among kings! He removed him from the presence of Drona's son and placed him on another chariot. O king! At this, Yudhishthira's chariots and soldiers retreated. They were defeated in that battle and Drona's
brave son roared. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He was worshipped by all the beings and by your sons.
Bodies of rakshasas[The text uses the word kshanadachara, which means a walker of the night.] were strewn around everywhere. Their bodies were mangled by hundreds of arrows and
they were killed and brought down. Having been killed, they fell down on the ground, which seemed to be strewn
with mountain peaks and was terrible and impassable. The siddhas, the gandharvas, masses of pishachas, serpents,
birds, ancestors, winged animals[The text uses the word vayasa. This means crow, as well as winged animal. Given the context, winged animal
seems more appropriate.], large numbers of rakshasas, innumerable beings, apsaras and gods worshipped
Drona's son."'
