Vaishampayana said, 'When the foremost among the Kurus had happily celebrated Abhimanyu's wedding with
their respective parties, they safely rested for four nights. Then they went to Virata's assembly hall. The assembly
hall of the king of the Matsyas was prosperous. It was marvellous, decorated with the best of gems and jewels.
There were seats and fragrant garlands. Those aged among the lords of men arrived there. Virata and Drupada, the
two Indras among men, seated themselves on the seats that were at the front. There was also the grandfather of
Rama and Janardana, aged and revered by the lords of the earth[The grandfather is Shurasena. Shurasena's son was Vasudeva. Vasudeva had two wives, Devaki and Rohini. Rohini's son was Balarama, the Rama referred to in the text. Krishna (Janardana) was younger to Balarama and was
Devaki's son.]. The foremost among the Shinis, together with
Rohini's son, was seated near the king of Panchala[Drupada is the king of Panchala. Rohini's son is Balarama. The foremost among the Shinis is a reference to
Satyaki. The Yadavas are referred to by different names, depending on the ancestor from whom the lineage is being drawn. They were all descended from Yadu. Further down the line, there were ancestors like Andhaka, Satvata,
Vrishni, Shini and Bhoja.]. Janardana and Yudhishthira were seated near the king of Mat-
sya. All the sons of King Drupada were seated there, Bhima, Arjuna and Madri's two sons. There were Pradyumna
and Samba, brave in battle, and Virata's son, together with Abhimanyu[Pradyumna was Krishna's son, through Rukmini. Samba was Krishna's son, through Jambavati.]. Droupadi's sons seated themselves, on
beautiful seats that were decorated with gold. They were the equals of their fathers in bravery. The maharathas
who were seated there dazzled in their colourful garments and brilliant jewels. With all the prosperous and assembled kings, it was as if the sky was covered with unblemished planets. As was proper, those brave ones among men
conversed with each other on various subjects. Then they reflected for some time and all the kings looked in
Krishna's direction. Having finished their conversation, those lions among kings who had been assembled by Madhava, looked towards him. They listened to his words, of deep meaning and great significance, about what should
be done regarding the Pandavas.

'Krishna said, "It is known to all of you how Yudhishthira was defeated by Soubala[Shakuni.] in a deceitful game of dice
and lost his kingdom. He made an agreement that he would spend some time in exile. They are capable of swiftly
conquering the earth. But they stuck to their pledge and conducted themselves in accordance with it. The sons of
Pandu are foremost among the Bharatas. But they stuck to that terrible vow of six plus seven years. They spent the
terrible thirteenth year near you, but were undetected. They bore many hardships. All of you know everything
about that. With that over, think about what is best for the king who is Dharma's son and for Duryodhana. Think
about what is best for the Kurus and the Pandavas, what is in accordance with dharma, is appropriate, and also ensures glory. Dharmaraja will not crave the kingdom of the gods, if that is not in accordance with dharma. He will
instead desire the lordship of a village, if that is in accordance with dharma and artha. It is known to all the kings
that he was robbed of his ancestral kingdom by Dhritarashtra's sons through falsehood. They[The Pandavas.] confronted great and
unbearable difficulties. Dhritarashtra's sons did not vanquish the Parthas in battle, through their own energy. But
even then the king[Yudhishthira.], together with his well-wishers, desires to see them healthy and happy. The sons of Kunti and
the sons of Madri are heroes among men. They only wish to obtain what the sons of Pandu won for themselves, by
conquering and subjugating the kings of the earth[This is a reference to the conquest by the Pandavas, described in Section 23 (Volume 2).]. You know everything about how they[The Kouravas.] used different means to
kill these destroyers of enemies, even when they were children. They seized their kingdom through unholy and terrible means. Witness their increasing avarice and Yudhishthira's devotion to dharma in his soul. Reflect on the relationship between them. Separately and collectively, decide on a course of action. They have always been devoted
to the truth and have faithfully completed the period of the covenant. Therefore, if they are not treated fairly now,
let them kill all the assembled sons of Dhritarashtra. On learning that the king[Yudhishthira.] is oppressing them[The Kouravas.], all their well-
wishers will gather around them. Let them be brought down in battle. Those who wish to fight will be slain. But if
it is your view that they[The Pandavas.] are too feeble and too few to be able to defeat them, let all the well-wishers gather together and endeavour to destroy all of them[The Kouravas.]. Duryodhana's intentions are still not known now. Nor does one
know what he plans to do. With the intentions of the enemy not being known, how can one decide on an appropriate course of action? Therefore, let someone who is devoted to dharma go there, a man who is controlled, pure and
born of a noble lineage. Let the messenger try to persuade them that half of the kingdom should be returned to
Yudhishthira."'

Vaishampayana said, 'O king! On hearing Janardana's sweet and calm words, full of dharma and artha, his elder
brother[Balarama. Balarama is also known as Baladeva.] strongly welcomed and applauded those words and spoke these words of his own.'
