'Sanjaya said, "After night had passed, Drona, supreme among the wielders of weapons, started to arrange all his
arrays in the form of a vyuha. O king! The brave ones roared in anger and intolerance. As they sought to kill each
other, many wonderful sounds were heard. They stretched their bows and touched the bowstrings with their palms.
They sighed deeply and exclaimed, 'Where is that Dhananjaya?' Others unsheathed their sharp, yellow and well-
tempered swords, which had decorated hilts and the complexion of the sky, and tossed them up. Thousands of
brave ones were seen, their minds set on war. They were skilled and roamed around, performing the motions for
swords and bows. Others raised clubs, decorated with bells, gold and diamonds and smeared with sandalwood
paste, and asked about the Pandavas. Still others possessed arms like clubs and were intoxicated with their
strength. They raised these[Raised clubs.] and obstructed the sky, as if with Indra's standards. Others wielded many weapons
and were garlanded with colourful flowers. Those brave ones desired to do battle and were stationed there. 'Where
is Arjuna? Where is Govinda? Where is the proud Vrikodara? Where are their well-wishers?' Thus did they summon them to battle then.

'"Drona blew on his conch shell and himself urged his horses to speed up. He swiftly roamed around here and
there. All the arrays that delighted in battle were stationed. O great king! Bharadvaja's son then spoke to
Jayadratha. 'You yourself, Somadatta's son, maharatha Karna, Ashvatthama, Shalya, Vrishasena and Kripa will be
stationed three govyutis[Govyuti is a measure of distance. Literally, it is the distance from which a cow's bellow can be heard. A govyuti
is thus roughly equal to four miles.] behind me, with a hundred thousand horses, sixty thousand chariots, fourteen thousand
elephants with rent temples and twenty-one thousand armoured infantry. There the gods, with Vasava, will not be
able to attack you, not to speak of all the Pandavas. O Saindhava! Therefore, be assured.' Thus addressed,
Jayadratha, king of Sindhu, was comforted. He went to the spot indicated, surrounded by maharathas from Gand-
hara. Armoured foot soldiers were stationed there, with lances in their hands. All of them had whisks decorated
with gold. O Indra among kings! Jayadratha's horses were well trained. There were seventy-two thousand Saindhava horses. Wishing to fight, your son, Durmarshana, stationed himself at the forefront of all those soldiers. He was
with fifteen hundred crazy and armoured elephants that were terrible in form and were the performers of fierce
deeds. Those who were skilled in fighting with elephants were astride them. To accomplish the objectives of the
king of Sindhu, your sons, Duhshasana and Vikarna, also stationed themselves ahead of the soldiers. The vyuha
that Bharadvaja's son constructed was partly in the form of a chakra and partly in the form of a cart[Shakata, meaning that it was in the form of a wedge. A chakra is circular.]. It was
twelve govyutis long and extended for five at the rear. Many brave kings were stationed there. There were chariots,
horses, elephants and infantry, stationed by Drona himself. At its rear, there was a core vyuha in the form of a lotus. It was extremely difficult to penetrate. In the midst of the lotus, he again created a deep vyuha in the form of a
needle. Having created the great vyuha in this fashion, Drona stationed himself in the vyuha. The great archer, Kritavarma, was stationed at the mouth of the needle. O venerable one! Kamboja and Jalasandha were stationed next
to him. And next to them was Duryodhana, with his advisers. There were hundreds and thousands of warriors who
never retreated. All of them stationed themselves in the cart, intending to protect it for a long time. O king! King
Jayadratha was behind them, to the side of the needle, and surrounded by a large force. O Indra among kings!
Bharadvaja's son stationed himself at the mouth of the cart. Bhoja was behind him, so as to protect him. Drona was
clad in white armour, garments and headdress. He was broad-chested and mighty-armed. He was stationed there
and stretched his bow, as angry as Death. On beholding Drona's chariot, the Kurus were delighted. It possessed a
standard and was yoked to red horses. The signs of an altar and black deerskin were on the standard. On seeing the
vyuha constructed by Drona, which was like an agitating ocean, the siddhas and the charanas were filled with great
wonder. All the beings thought that this vyuha would devour the entire earth, with the mountains, the oceans, the
forests and the many countries. The king[Duryodhana.] was delighted on seeing the great cart, which would shatter the hearts
of those who caused it ill. It had many chariots, men, horses, infantry and elephants. It was wonderful in form and
its roar gave rise to fear."'
