Vaishampayana said, 'O bull among the Bharata lineage! This is the sacred Koushiki, the river of the gods. Vishvamitra's hermitage is resplendent here. This is the hermitage of the great-souled Kashyapa, famous by the name
of Punya. His son was Rishyashringa, an ascetic who had controlled his senses. Through the power of his austerities, he made Vasava[Indra.] rain. Because of his fear, the slayer of Bala and Vritra[Indra killed two demons named Bala and Vritra.] showered down at the time of a
drought. Kashyapa's son, the energetic lord, was born from a deer. He performed a great and extraordinary deed in
Lomapada's territory. When the crops were restored[Because it had rained.], King Lomapada bestowed his daughter Shanta on him, as
Savita did for Savitri[Savita is the sun-god. Savitri's story will be recounted in Section 42. Savitri is not exactly Savita's daughter,
but was born as a boon from the sun-god.].

'Yudhishthira asked, "How was Kashyapa's son Rishyashringa born as the son of a deer? This is against the
norms of sexual intercourse. How did he acquire asceticism? Why was Shakra scared of that wise child? Why did
the slayer of Bala and Vritra shower down at the time of a drought? What kind of beauty did the princess Shanta,
rigid in vows, possess? How did she tempt him when he was in the form of a deer? It has been heard that rajarshi
Lomapada was a follower of dharma. Why did the chastiser of Paka[Paka is a demon killed by Indra.] not rain down in his territory? O lord! O
exalted one! Tell me all this exactly, and in detail. I wish to hear about Rishyashringa's deeds."

'Lomasha said, "The brahmana rishi Vibhandaka had controlled his soul through austerities. He was as radiant
as Prajapati and his semen was always successful. Hear how the powerful Rishyashringa was born as his son. He
was extremely energetic and though young, was respected by the aged. He was born in a great lake. Going to the
great lake, Kashyapa stayed there for a long time, engaged in austerities. The rishi, worshipped by the gods and the
rishis, became exhausted. O king! There, when he was washing in the water, he saw the apsara Urvashi and spilt
his semen. O king! A thirsty doe drunk it up with the water and conceived. Whatever has been decreed by destiny
and laid down by fate must inevitably happen. From that doe was born a son, the great rishi Rishyashringa[Rishya is a type of antelope and shringa means horn.]. He
was always engaged in austerities and grew up in the forest. O king! There was a horn on the head of that great-
souled one and because of that, he became famous as Rishyashringa. O king! Except for his father, he never saw
another man and therefore, his mind was always fixed on brahmacharya.

'"At that time, there was a lord of Anga famous by the name of Lomapada and he was Dasharatha's friend. It
has been heard that, driven by desire, he committed falsehoods on brahmanas. That lord of the earth was then
abandoned by brahmanas. Without a priest, the king acted as he willed. The one with the thousand eyes[Indra has a thousand eyes.]
stopped showering and the subjects suffered. The lord of the earth asked wise brahmanas, full of austerities, who
were capable of making the lord of the gods shower again. 'How will Parjanya[The god of rain, Indra.] rain again? Show me a way.'

Thus asked, each of those wise ones expressed his own view. But one supreme sage among them told the king, 'O
Indra among kings! The brahmanas are angry with you. Find a way to appease them. O king! Fetch the sage's son
Rishyashringa. He lives in the forest, immersed in virtue, and is inexperienced about the female sex. O king! If that
great ascetic comes to your territory, I have no doubt that Parjanya will immediately shower rain.' On hearing
these words, the king performed deeds to cleanse his soul. He went away and returned only when the brahmanas
had been appeased. On hearing that the king had returned, the subjects received him back. Then the lord of Anga
summoned his advisers, who were wise in offering counsel. He consulted so that endeavours might be made to
bring Rishyashringa. With the aid of his advisers, who were learned in the sacred texts, skilled in the ways of artha
and knowledgeable about policy, the unblemished one thought of a method.

'"The lord of the earth summoned the foremost of courtesans. The king told the courtesans, who were skilled in
everything, 'O beautiful ones! Find out some means of bringing the rishi's son Rishyashringa to my territory.
Tempt him and gain his confidence.' Those women were scared out of fear for the king's curse. They turned pale,
lost their senses and said that the task was impossible. But there was one among them who was old and she told the
king, 'O great king! I will attempt to bring the one with the ascetic riches here. But you will have to ask for some
objects of desire that I have in mind. I will then be able to tempt the rishi's son Rishyashringa.' The king ordered
that everything she wished for should be obtained. He gave her a lot of riches and many gems. O lord of the earth!
She took several women with her, endowed with youth and beauty. Then she swiftly went to the forest."'
