Janamejaya asked, 'O illustrious one! In earlier times, why did the maiden dwell there, engaging in austerities?
Why did she torment herself through austerities? What was her vow? O brahmana! I have heard supreme accounts of difficult deeds from you. Tell me everything. Why was she engaged in austerities?'

Vaishampayana replied, 'There was an immensely illustrious rishi. He was immensely energetic and his name
was Kuni-Gargya. O king! His austerities were great and in austerities, he was supreme among ascetics. Through
the powers of his mind, the lord generated a fair-browed daughter. On seeing her, the immensely illustrious KuniGargya was extremely happy. O king! He gave up his body and went to heaven. The fortunate and fair-browed one
had eyes like a lotus. The unblemished one undertook great hardships and performed fierce austerities. She fasted
and worshipped and satisfied the ancestors and the gods. O king! While she was engaged in these terrible austerities, a long period of time elapsed. Her father had desired that she should be given away to a husband. However,
she could not see a husband who was equal to her own self. She oppressed her mind and her body through those
fierce austerities. In that deserted forest, she was devoted to worshipping the ancestors and the gods. O Indra
among kings! Though she afflicted herself through austerities and was also overcome by old age, she did not regard herself to be exhausted. Finally, she was no longer capable of taking even a single step on her own. Therefore,
she resolved to depart to the world hereafter.

'On seeing that she wished to free herself of her body, Narada told her, "O unblemished one! Which worlds can
a maiden who has not been married go to? O one who is great in vows! This is what we have heard in the world of
the gods. Though you have performed supreme austerities, you have not obtained any worlds for yourself." On
hearing his words, she spoke in an assembly of rishis. "O supreme ones! I will give half of my austerities to anyone who accepts my hand." Hearing this, a rishi named Sringavan, Galava's son, accepted her hand. He proposed a
pledge and told her, "O beautiful one! I will accept your hand with this pledge. You will live with me for only one
night." Accepting this pledge, she gave him her hand. Galava's son accepted her hand and married her. O king!
That night, she became young and as beautiful as a goddess. She was adorned in celestial ornaments and garments
and adorned with divine garlands and unguents. On seeing her blazing beauty, Galava's son was delighted. He
spent a night with her. In the morning, she told him, "O brahmana! O supreme among ascetics! The pledge that I
had taken with you is over. O fortunate one! Since that has been accomplished, may you be at peace. I will leave."

Obtaining his permission, she again said, "Anyone who controls himself and spends a night at this tirtha, offering
oblations to the gods, will obtain the fruits that are obtained from observing brahmacharya for sixty-four years."

Having said this, the virtuous one gave up her body and went to heaven. The rishi was distressed and thought of
her beauty. Because of the agreement, though he found it difficult, he accepted half of her austerities. O foremost
among the Bharata lineage! He was miserable because of the power of her beauty. He cast off his own body and
followed her. This is the great account about the conduct of the aged maiden. While the one with the plough as his
weapon was there, he heard about Shalya's death. O scorcher of enemies! He gave away gifts to the brahmanas
there. He sorrowed that Shalya had been killed by the Pandavas in the battle. Madhava Rama then emerged
through the gates of Samantapanchaka and asked the large number of rishis about what had transpired in Kurukshetra. O lord! Asked by the lion among the Yadu lineage, those great-souled ones told him everyting that had
transpired in Kurukshetra, exactly as it had occurred.'
