Sanjaya said, "O king! Ten of your sons were brave and maharathas. They did not run away from the field of battle. When Duhshasana was slain, those immensely valiant ones were overcome with great rage and showered Bhi-
ma with arrows. Kavachi, Nishangi, Pashi, Dandadhara, Dhanurdhara, Alolupa, Shala, Sangha, Vatavega and Suvarchasa united and attacked together, overcome with grief on account of their brother. They enveloped the
mighty-armed Bhimasena with arrows. He was restrained in every direction by the arrows of those maharathas.
Bhima's eyes became red with rage and he looked like the wrathful Destroyer himself. Using ten immensely forceful broad-headed and sharp arrows that were gold-tufted and decorated with gold, Partha conveyed those ten to
Yama's eternal abode. When those brave ones were killed, your soldiers ran away, afflicted by fear of the Pandavas, while the son of a suta looked on.

' "O great king! On witnessing Bhima's valour, like Yama amongst beings, Karna entered the great battle. O destroyer of enemies! On discerning what was going on in his mind, Shalya, the ornament of an assembly, realized
that the time was right and spoke these words to Karna. 'O Radheya! Do not be distressed. This is not deserving of
you. These kings are being driven away, afflicted by their fear of Bhimasena. Overcome with misery and grief on
account of his brother, Duryodhana is numb. The great-souled one has drunk Duhshasana's blood. His mind is full
of sorrow, and grief has robbed him of his senses. O Karna! Kripa and the others and the remaining brothers are
tending to Duryodhana and have surrounded him from all directions. The brave Pandavas are unwavering in their
aim. With Dhananjaya at the forefront, they are advancing towards you, stationing themselves in the battle. O tiger
among men! Base yourself on your great manliness. Devoting yourself to the dharma of kshatriyas, fight against
Dhananjaya. Dhritarashtra's son has placed the entire burden on you. O mighty-armed one! Shoulder it, to the best
of your capacity and the best of your strength. If you are victorious, you will obtain great fame. If you are defeated,
heaven is certain. O Radheya! The wrathful Vrishasena is your son. Since you are confused, he is advancing towards the Pandavas.' Hearing the words of the infinitely energetic Shalya, he came to the human conclusion that
there was nothing to do but to base oneself well in the battle.

' "The angry Vrishasena was stationed on his chariot and wishing to slay the enemy, advanced against Vrikodara, who was like Yama with a staff in his hand, and with a club in his hand, was uprooting those on your side.
Nakula, foremost among brave ones, was full of anger and attacked this enemy with arrows. He cheerfully attacked Karna's son in the battle, like Jishnu and Maghavan wishing to kill Jambha[Jambha was a demon killed by Vishnu and Indra.]. Using a razor-sharp arrow,
the brave Nakula severed his standard, which had the complexion of a conch shell and sparkled like crystal. Karna's son possessed a colourful bow that was adorned with golden cloth. He severed this with a broad-headed arrow. Extremely quickly, Karna's son picked up another bow and pierced Pandava. Wishing to show his respect to
Duhshasana, who had lost his life, the one who knew about great weapons, then struck Nakula with divine and
great weapons. The great-souled Nakula was enraged and pierced him back with arrows that were like giant meteors. Karna's son was skilled in the use of weapons and pierced Nakula back with celestial weapons. O king! Karna's son slew all of Nakula's horses with supreme weapons. They were swift, delicate and pure, ornamented with
gold, and were of the vanayu breed. When the horses were slain, he descended from his chariot and picked up a
beautiful shield that was marked with the signs of eight moons. He also picked up a sword that sparkled like the
sky. With these, he leapt up and roamed around, like a bird. He executed many wonderful motions in the air and
sliced down the best of men, horses and elephants. They were struck by that sword and fell down on the ground,
like animals at an ashvamedha sacrifice, struck by the executioner. There were two thousand warriors who found
delight in battle. They were well trained and came from many different countries. They never missed their objective. The upper parts of their bodies were smeared with sandalwood paste. Quickly and single-handedly, Nakula
brought them down. While they were falling down, he[Vrishasena.] attacked Nakula and pierced him from every direction
with arrows. Nakula was thus struck by those arrows and angrily pierced the brave one back in turn. Single-handedly, Karna's son struck men, horses, elephants and chariots. He pierced the brave one who seemed to be
sporting[Nakula.] with eighteen arrows and was angrily pierced back in return. Wishing to kill him, Pandu's son, foremost among men, attacked Karna's son in that battle. In the great battle, Karna's son sliced down the shield, which
was decorated with one thousand stars, with his arrows. The sword was extremely sharp, keen at the edges. It had
been unsheathed and was capable of bearing a great load. It was extremely terrible and was being whirled around,
used to sever the bodies of the enemy. It was as fierce in form as a serpent. With six sharp and extremely pointed
arrows, he[Vrishasena.] shattered his enemy's sword. He then struck him again between the breasts with sharp and yellow
arrows and pierced him grievously. Madri's son was tormented by Karna's son. His horses were slain. He jumped
onto Bhimasena's chariot, like a lion leaping onto the summit of a mountain, while Dhananjaya looked on.

' "Nakula's bow and arrows had been severed. He was without a chariot and afflicted by arrows. He had been
mangled by the weapons of Karna's son. On discerning this, the five foremost sons of Drupada, Shini's descendant
as the sixth, and the five sons of Drupada's daughter, all destroyers of enemies, swiftly advanced against those on
your side and devastated the elephants, chariots, men and horses. Those supreme men were cheerful and were on
swift chariots drawn by speedy steeds. Their flags fluttered in the wind. They used hundreds of arrows and other
weapons that resembled the lords of serpents. The foremost of rathas on your side, Hridika's son[Kritavarma.], Kripa,
Drona's son, Duryodhana, Shakuni, Shuka, Vrika, Kratha and Devavridha speedily countered them. They wielded
bows and were on chariots that roared like elephants and clouds. Those best of men countered the eleven brave
ones[Five of Drupada's sons, Satyaki and five of Droupadi's sons.] and used supreme and fierce arrows to strike and repel them.

' "Those on your side were in turn countered by Kunindas who were on elephants that were fierce in force and
were like the summits of mountains, with complexions like that of newly formed clouds. They[The elephants.] had been prepared well, were crazy and were from the Himalaya regions. Accomplished riders who desired to fight were astride
them. The elephants were beautifully covered with nets of gold and looked like clouds tinged with lightning. Using
ten arrows that were completely made out of iron, the son of Kuninda[That is, the son of the king of Kuninda.] severely struck Kripa and his charioteer.
However, slain by the arrows of Sharadvata's son, he fell down on the ground, together with his elephant. The
younger brother of the son of Kuninda then struck, using javelins that were completely made out of iron and were
as radiant as the sun's rays. He hurled these at his[Kripa's.] chariot and roared loudly. But the lord of Gandhara[Shakuni.] severed his head, while he was still roaring. When the Kunindas were slain, the maharathas on your side were delighted. They loudly blew on conch shells obtained from the ocean and with bows and arrows in their hands, attacked
the enemy. An extremely terrible battle commenced again between the Kurus and the Pandus and Srinjayas. Arrows, swords, javelins, scimitars, clubs and battleaxes were fiercely used and men, horses and elephants destroyed.
As they attacked and wounded each other, chariots, horses, elephants and foot soldiers fell down here and there. It
was as if clouds tinged with lightining were stationed in the sky and were dispelled with fierce winds. Bhoja struck
Shatanika, the mighty elephants, the chariots and the infantry on their side. Using his weapons, Kritavarma
brought down the horses and the elephants. At that time, three elephants belonging to the enemy were struck by the
arrows of Drona's son. All of them were ridden by warriors and sported flags. They lost their lives, shrieked and
fell down, like large mountains shattered by the thunder. The third son of the king of Kuninda struck your son[Duryodhana.]
between the breasts with excellent arrows. Your son pierced his body and that of his elephant with sharp arrows.
With the son of the king, that king of elephants fell down, with copious quantities of blood issuing forth. It was as
if, at the onset of the moon, water mixed with red chalk was exuding from a mountain, when it had been struck by
the vajra of Shachi's consort[Indra is Shachi's consort.]. However, though struck, the son of Kuninda ascended another elephant and
brought down Shuka, with his charioteer, horses and chariot. The lord Kratha[The text of the Critical edition confuses between Shuka and Kratha. In other editions, in this description,
Kratha figures consistently.] was afflicted by the arrows and
fell down, like a mountain shattered by thunder. Seated astride an elephant, the invincible ratha from the mountainous regions[The prince of Kuninda.] slew and brought down the lord of Kratha with arrows. He was brought down with his horses,
charioteer and bow, like a giant tree struck by a mighty storm. Vrika used twelve arrows to severely strike the one
who resided in the mountainous regions and was astride his elephant. However, using great speed in the battle, he
brought down Vrika, with his four horses and chariot. But that king of elephants was severely struck and brought
down by Babhru's son, together with its driver. Devavridha's son was also struck, slain and brought down by Sahadeva's son. The elephant of the son of Kuninda was capable of slaying the enemy with its tusks and body. It impetuously rushed towards Shakuni, wishing to kill him. The lord of Gandhara severed its head. Mighty elephants,
horses, rathas and large numbers of infantry on your side were slain by Shatanika. They fell down on the ground,
crushed and immobile, like trees devastated through a storm raised by Suparna[Suparna is Garuda and the storm is raised through his wings. The text uses the word naga, which can only be
translated as tree. This is probably a typo and should read naaga or serpent. Given Garuda, that fits better.]. The son of Kuninda smiled and
shot many sharp arrows at Nakula's son[This entire section is replete with typos and this must be another one of those. Why should the son of Kunin-
da attack Nakula's son? It can only be rationalized, other than a typo, by presuming that some of the Kunindas
also fought on the side of the Kouravas.]. At this, Nakula's son used a razor-sharp arrow to sever his head,
which was like a lotus, from his body.

' "Karna's son pierced Shatanika with three swift arrows and Arjuna with three more. He pierced Bhima with
three arrows, Nakula with seven and Janardana with twelve. On witnessing that superhuman deed, all the Kurus
were delighted and applauded him. But they also knew about Dhananjaya's valour and thought that he[Karna's son, Vrishasena.] was like
an oblation that had been poured into the fire. Kiriti, the slayer of enemy heroes, saw that the best of men[Nakula. The Critical edition excises a shloka where we are told that Vrishasena deprived Nakula of his
horses.] was
without his horses, which had been slain. In the battle, he attacked Vrishasena, who was stationed in front of the
son of a suta. In that great battle, he descended, with thousands of arrows. On seeing him advance, Karna's maharatha son, fierce and foremost among men, also attacked, like Namuchi against Indra in ancient times[Namuchi was a demon killed by Indra.]. The
son of the son of a suta then pierced Partha with many wonderful arrows. The illustrious one roared loudly, like
Namuchi in ancient times, after having pierced Shakra. Vrishasena used fierce arrows to again pierce Partha in his
armpits. He struck Krishna with nine arrows and again struck Partha with ten sharp and fierce arrows. Kiriti became enraged in that field of battle and his forehead furrowed into three lines. The great-souled one shot arrows in
the battle, designed to kill the son of a suta in the battle[Meaning Vrishasena. Son is being used in the extended sense of a grandson.]. Kiriti pierced him violently in the inner organs with
ten arrows. With four razor-sharp arrows, he severed his bow, his arms and his head. He was struck by Partha's arrows and fell down from the chariot onto the ground, deprived of his arms and head. He was like an extremely
large and flowering shala tree, with a lot of leaves, which had been struck by a storm and brought down from the
summit of a mountain. The son of a suta saw that his son had been struck by arrows and had fallen down from his
chariot. He was tormented because his son had been slain. Powerfully and violently, he advanced on his chariot towards the ratha Kiriti." '
