Yudhishthira asked, "If a person is in the status of garhasthya, brahmacharya, vanaprastha or a mendicant, and
wishes to establish himself in success, which god should be worshipped? How can he certainly go to heaven?
How can one obtain supreme benefit? What rites should one observe in offering oblations to the gods and the ancestors? Where does one go when one is emancipated? What is the essence of moksha? Having obtained heaven,
how should one act, so as not to be dislodged from heaven? Who is the god of the gods? Who is the ancestor of the
ancestors? What is superior to him[Superior to the god of the gods and the ancestor of the ancestors.]? O grandfather! Tell me this."

'Bhishma replied, "O unblemished one! O one who knows how to ask! The question you have asked me is about
a mystery. Even if one speaks for one hundred years, one is incapable of answering this through arguments. O
king! Without the favour of the gods or without resorting to the sacred texts, this fathomless mystery cannot be recounted. O slayer of enemies! I will recount it to you. In this connection, an ancient history is cited. This concerns
a conversation between Narada and the rishi Narayana. My father told me that the eternal Narayana, the soul of the
universe, was born in four forms as Dharma's son. O great king! This happened in ancient times, during krita yuga,
during Svayambhuva[Each era (manvantara) is presided over by a Manu. After fourteen manvantaras, the cycle of destruction and
creation starts again. In the present cycle of fourteen manvantaras, Svayambhuva Manu was the first and we are
now in the seventh manvantara, presided over by Vaivasvata Manu. Each manvantara has seventy-one mahayugas and the reference to Svayambhuva probably means one of the krita yugas out of the seventy-one in
Svayambhuva manvantara.]. These were Nara, Narayana, Hari and Krishna. Out of these, Nara and Narayana travelled
to the hermitage of Badari in their golden wagons and engaged in fierce austerities there[Badrinath or Badarikashrama is in Uttarakhand.]. These were beautiful,
yoked to the elements and possessed eight wheels[This refers to the wagons. The interpretation is that these wagons are to be taken as metaphors, not literally.
That is, they are the bodies, consisting of the five elements. The eight wheels represent the five objects of the
senses, ego, ignorance and prakriti.]. Those protectors of the worlds went there and because of the
exertions that they undertook, became emaciated. The energy of their austerities was such that even the gods were
unable to look at them. Only a god to whom they showed their favours was capable of seeing them. Narada was
devoted to them in his heart and was goaded by a desire to see them. From the summit of the great mountain Meru,
he  descended  on  Gandhamadana  and  this  was  extremely  wonderful.  O  king! Roaming  through  the  worlds,  he
quickly went to the spot where the hermitage of Badari was. He was overcome by curiosity and went to the region
where those two, the foundations of all the worlds, with the gods, the asuras, the gandharvas, the rishis, the kinnaras and the serpents, were based. Earlier, they were in one single form. However, they had been born in four different forms as Dharma's offspring and had been reared by that great one. It was wonderful that Dharma had thus
been honoured by those gods, Nara, Narayana, Hari and Krishna. For some reason, Krishna and Hari were elsewhere then. However, those two[Nara and Narayana.] wished to enhance dharma and were engaged in austerities there. This was the
time for daily rites[Narada arrived at the time for daily rites.]. However, these two are the supreme refuge. What daily rites should they engage in? They
are illustrious gods and the ancestors of all creatures. Which god or ancestor will those extremely intelligent ones
worship? Thinking this in his mind and full of devotion towards Narayana, Narada suddenly appeared before those
two gods. When they finished their prayers to the gods and the ancestors, they glanced towards him and honoured
him, in accordance with the rites that are laid down in the sacred texts. Seeing that they followed the rites and
prayed, Narada was filled with great wonder. The illustrious rishi was pleased and sat down. Delighted in his mind,
he looked towards Narayana. Worshipping the great god, he spoke these words. 'You have been praised in the
Vedas, the Puranas, the Vedangas and the additional Vedangas. You are without birth and eternal. You are held to
be the creator and the supreme amrita. You are the foundation of everything in the universe, what has happened
and what will happen. O god! All the four ashramas, with garhasthya as their foundation, incessantly worship you
in the many forms in which you are established. You are the father and mother of the entire universe. You are the
eternal preceptor. Which god and ancestor are you worshipping? We do not understand this.'

'"The illustrious one replied, 'This is an eternal mystery and nothing should be said about this. O brahmana!
However, because of your devotion, I will tell you the truth about this. It is subtle, impossible to comprehend, unmanifest, without mutation and eternal. It is disassociated from the senses, the objects of the senses and all the elements. It is in the atman of beings and is known as kshetrajna. It is beyond the three qualities[Sattva, rajas and tamas.] and has been
thought of as Purusha. O supreme among brahmanas! The manifest one[Prakriti.], with the three qualities, has been generated from him. Though unmanifest, she has a manifest form and is the undecaying Prakriti. Know that she is the
womb from which we have been generated. We worship that pervading atman, thinking of him as gods or ancestors. There is nothing that is superior to him. There is no other ancestor, god or brahmana. He should be known as
our atman and we worship him. O brahmana! Thinking of the worlds, he is the one who has formulated the ordinances. The rites for gods and ancestors are based on his instructions. Brahma, Sthanu, Manu, Daksha, Bhrigu,
Dharma, Tapa, Dama, Marichi, Angiras, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Vasishtha, Parameshthi, Vivasvat, Soma,
the one known as Kardama, Krodha and Vikrita-these twenty-one Prajapatis are said to have been generated from
him. They worshipped the god's eternal ordinances. They always knew the truth about what had been laid down
for the gods and the ancestors. Those supreme among brahmanas knew, and obtained, their atmans. Through his
favours, embodied beings and those in heaven who worship him, obtain all the fruits and ends that they desire. It
has been determined that those who are devoid of deeds and the seventeen qualities[Five senses; five organs of action, five breaths of life, mind and intelligence.] and have cast aside the fifteen[This is a reference to the physical body, consisting of the five senses, five organs of action and five breaths of
life.], are liberated. Those who are liberated attain an end that has been thought of as the brahman or the kshetra-
jna. That is the destination of everything and has been spoken about as being devoid of qualities. We have been
generated from there and he can be seen through the yoga of knowledge. Knowing this, we worship that eternal
atman. The Vedas and the ashramas resort to many different kinds of forms. However, he is the one who is worshipped with devotion and he is the one who grants the objective. If a person in this world thinks of him alone and
is controlled, he obtains a superior end and penetrates into him. O Narada! O brahmana rishi! Because of your devotion and because of our affection towards you, I have recounted this mystery. It is because of your faith that you
have been able to listen to it.'"'
