'Markandeya said, "The fire named Bharata is subject to severe restrictions. The fire named Pushtimati provides
prosperity when it is satisfied. It is because it sustains all beings that it is known as Bharata[The word bharana means to sustain. Pushtimati seems to be another name for Bharata. The word pushti
means nourishment or development.]. The fire named
Shiva is always engaged in the worship of Shakti. Since he alleviates the sufferings of everyone and brings purification, he is known as Shiva[The word shiva means lucky, auspicious, propitious.]. When Tapas[Austerities personified. This is probably another name for Panchajanya.] witnessed the great fruits from austerities, an extremely wise son
named Purandara was born to him, with a desire to pass on these fruits. Another son named Ushma was born and
this fire can be seen in all beings. A fire named Manu was also born and he officiates as Prajapati. The brahmanas
who are learned in the Vedas speak of a fire named Shambhu. The brahmanas also speak of an extremely radiant
fire named Avasathya. Thus Tapas created five sons from his sacrifice-Urjaskara and Havyavahana, they were
like gold in their radiance[While Urjaskara and Havyavahana are clear, it is not obvious who the other three in the listing of five are.
Probably, Ushma, Shambu and Avasathya.]. O immensely fortunate one! When exhausted and pacified, the lord of the cows gave
birth to terrible asuras and various other beings on earth[The lord of the cows is the sun. When the sun sets, it is night and the time for demons.]. Angiras created Tapas's son Manu, and Bhanu too.
However, brahmanas who know the Vedas refer to him as Brihadbhanu. Bhanu's wife was Supraja, and so were
Brihadbhasa and Somaja. They gave birth to six sons. Listen to the offspring. The fire that provides strength to all
beings is Bhanu's first son and is known as Balada. The fire that is seen as terrible wrath in calm beings is Bhanu's
second son and is known as Manyumat. The fire in whose honour oblations are offered at the time of the new
moon or the full moon is known by the name of Vishnu, also named Dhritiman Angiras. There is a fire to whom
the first offerings of oblations are made, together with Indra. He is Bhanu's son and is named Agrayana. In addition to these four[Balada, Manyumat, Vishnu and Agrayana.], there is a son named Niragraha who always takes oblations at chaturmasya sacrifices. He is
Bhanu's son. Nisha was Manu's wife. She gave birth to a daughter, the two Agnishomas and five other fires. The
radiant fire, who receives the first offerings at chaturmasya sacrifices, together with Parjanya[The god of rain, Indra.], is known as
Vaishvanara. The fire that is said to be the lord of all beings is Manu's second son and has the name of Vishvapati.
Svishtakrit[Another of Manu's sons.] is regarded as the supreme, because there is great merit in offering oblations to him. The maiden
named Rohini was Hiranyakashipu's daughter. Because of her deeds, she became the wife of a fire who was a Prajapati. There is another fire that resides in the bodies of all living beings in their breath of life. This is named Samnihita and leads to sound and form. There is a god whose path is marked in black and white[The trails of smoke.]. He is the fire who
bears oblations. He is the lord of all that leads to taints in untainted ones and is based in anger. The fire named
Kapila is the expounder of sankhya yoga. Ascetics refer to him as the supreme rishi Kapila[The sage Kapila propounded sankhya yoga.]. In various rites,
there is a fire through which the first share of oblations is rendered to those who are deceased. This is known as
Agrani. Thus, he[Tapas.] created different famous fires on earth. When there are seen to be defects in agnihotra sacrifices, they correct these. If the action of the wind makes the fires interact with each other, eight different rites must
be performed to the fire Shuchi. If the fire to the south is mixed with the other two fires, eight different rites must
be performed to the fire named Viti. If the sacrificial fire is mixed with the fire of a conflagration, eight different
rites must be performed to the fire Shuchi. If the fire of agnihotra is touched by a woman who is in her season,
eight different rites must be performed to the fire Dasyumat. If one hears that a living being has died, or if an animal dies, eight different rites must be performed to the fire Abhimat. A brahmana who has not rendered offerings
into the fire for three nights, must perform eight different rites to the northern fire. He who still awaits the observance of new moon and full moon rituals, must perform eight different rites to the fire Pathikrit. If the fire of one
who is expecting touches the agnihotra fire, eight different rites must be performed to the Agnimat fire."'
