'Drona said, "O king! It has been heard that Dhritarashtra's friends who have been summoned for consultation
should always speak that which is right and true and brings fame. My views are the same as those of the great-
souled Bhishma. Let Kunti's sons have a share in the kingdom. That is eternal dharma. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Send a soft-spoken man to Drupada. Let him carry many riches for them. Let him carry many expensive
presents with him. Let him speak to him[Drupada.] in good fortune that comes about because of this alliance. O king! O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! Let him repeatedly tell Drupada and Dhrishtadyumna that both you and Duryodhana are extremely pleased with what has happened. Let him say that this alliance is appropriate and pleasing. Let
him repeatedly pacify the sons of Kunti and the sons of Madri. O king of kings! On your command, let him present
Droupadi with many brilliant and golden ornaments. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Let presents also be given
to all the sons of Drupada and appropriate ones to all the Pandavas and Kunti. Thus pacifying Drupada and the
Pandavas, he should immediately propose their return[To Hastinapura.]. When those warriors receive the permission to return, let
Duhshasana and Vikarna[One of Duryodhana's brothers.] go to receive them with a magnificent army. O best of kings! Let the sons of Pandu always be treated by you with honour. As desired by the people, let them be instated in their ancestral kingdom. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! O king! Bhishma and I believe that this should be your conduct towards the
Pandavas, who are like your own sons."

'Karna said, "These two[Bhishma and Drona.] have always been sustained, in all their actions, through your riches and your honour.
What can be more surprising than that they should now offer advice that is not for your own good? How can the
wise accept advice that is apparently good, rendered by a man with malice in his heart, though he hides his true intentions? In times of adversity, friends can neither do that which is good, nor that which is harmful. A man's misery or happiness depends on destiny alone. A wise one, a fool, an old man, a child, one who has friends and one
who has none finds anything anywhere. We have heard that in earlier times, there was a king named Ambuvicha.
He was the king in Rajagriha and ruled over Magadha. He was a king who had no abilities. All that he did was to
breathe air in and out. All his affairs were in the hands of his ministers. He had a minister named Mahakarni, who
became the sole lord and thanks to the authority he had obtained, began to dishonour the king. That fool appropriated for himself everything that belonged to the king-his objects of desire, his women, his jewels, his riches and
all his power. But having obtained all this, his avarice only increased and having appropriated everything else, he
coveted the kingdom. We have heard that the king had no abilities, he only breathed air. But despite this, and despite all his attempts, he[The minister, Mahakarni.] could not take the kingdom away from him[The king, Ambuvicha.]. O lord of the people! There was no human endeavour in him[The king, Ambuvicha.]. The kingdom was his through destiny. If this kingdom is yours through destiny, it will
remain with you without a doubt, notwithstanding the enmity of all the worlds. But if ordained otherwise, it will
never remain with you, no matter how much you try. You are learned. Therefore, remembering all this, judging the
honesty and dishonesty of your advisers, weigh the advice of those who have spoken for the good and those who
have spoken for evil."

'Drona said, "We know that you say this out of malice and the reasons for that. You are wicked and to bring injury to the Pandavas, you find fault with us. O Karna! Know that what I have said is for the supreme welfare of
everyone, for the propagation of the Kuru lineage. If you think this leads to evil, tell us that which brings supreme
welfare. If my advice, leading to the supreme welfare I have described, is not followed, it is my opinion that the
lineage of the Kurus will soon be destroyed."'
