'Arjuna said, "At some point, on seeing that I had recovered from the wounds of the arrows and was comfortable,
the king of the gods told me, 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the divine weapons are yours now. There is
no man on earth who is capable of vanquishing you. O son! When you are engaged in the field of battle, Bhishma,
Drona, Kripa, Karna and Shakuni, together with all the other kings, are not worth one-sixteenth of you[The word used is kala, which is a small measure. Sixteen kalas make up a larger measure.].' The
lord Maghavan then gave me this divine and impenetrable armour and a golden garland. He also gave me the
conch shell Devadatta, which emits a great sound. Indra himself fixed this celestial diadem on my head. Shakra
then gave me these divine garments and celestial ornaments, beautiful and many in number. O king! Thus honoured, I lived happily in Indra's abode, together with the children of the gandharvas. Extremely pleased with me,
Shakra, together with the immortals, told me, 'O Arjuna! The time for your departure has come. Your brothers are
remembering you.' O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O king! Thus did I spend five years in Indra's abode, remembering the discord that was brought on us because of the gambling. Then, when you came to Mount Gandhamadana, I saw you on the peak, surrounded by your brothers."

'Yudhishthira replied, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O Dhananjaya! You have obtained those weapons
through good fortune. It is also through good fortune that you satisfied the king and the lord who is the king of the
gods. O scorcher of enemies! O unblemished one! It is through good fortune that you beheld the lord Sthanu himself, together with the goddess, and satisfied him in the duel[Sthanu is Shiva's name. The goddess is Uma, Shiva's consort.]. O bull among the Bharata lineage! It is through
good fortune that you managed to meet the lokapalas. It is through good fortune that all of us have prospered and
have set our eyes on you again. I now think that we have conquered the goddess earth, with her garland of cities,
and have vanquished the sons of Dhritarashtra. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! But I wish to see those divine
weapons with which you killed the valorous nivatakavachas."

'Arjuna said, "When it is dawn tomorrow, you will see all those divine weapons with which I destroyed the terrible nivatakavachas."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having thus recounted the incidents connected with his return, Dhananjaya spent the
night there, together with his brothers.'
