Vaishampayana said, 'He then spoke to Arjuna and Vasudeva of the Satvata lineage. "You two, who are now so
near the Khandava tract, are supreme in the world. I am a voracious brahmana who always eats unlimited quantities. O descendants of Vrishni and Pritha! I beg you. Give me enough food to satisfy myself." Having been thus
addressed, Krishna and Pandava told him, "Tell us what kind of food will satisfy you. We will try to bring it for
you."

'Having been thus addressed, the illustrious brahmana then told the warriors, who had asked him about the kind
of food that should be prepared for him, "I do not eat ordinary food. Know me to be the fire. Therefore, seek to
bring me the food that is appropriate for me. This Khandava tract is always protected by Indra. So I am unable to
burn it down because that great-souled one protects it. His friend, the naga Takshaka lives there with his kin and is
protected by the wielder of the vajra and many other beings are also incidentally protected. Though I always wish
to burn it down, I cannot do so because of Shakra's[Shakra is one of Indra's names.] energy. Whenever he sees me ablaze, he pours down floods
of rain from the clouds. Though I earnestly wish to consume it, I cannot thus burn it down. Since the two of you
are skilled in the use of arms, I have now come to you for help. I will now be able to burn Khandava down and that
is the food I desire from you. You know about supreme weapons. Restrain the showers on all sides. Restrain all the
creatures[Prevent them from running away.]." On hearing these words, Bibhatsu told the fire, who wished to burn down Khandava, despite being
restrained by Shatakratu[Indra's name. Shatakratu means the performer of a hundred sacrifices.]. "I have many excellent and divine weapons with which I am capable of fighting many
wielders of the vajra. O illustrious one! But I do not possess a bow that can bear the strength of my arms and withstand the strength and speed I bring to battle. Because of my speed, I need arrows that are inexhaustible. My chariot cannot bear all the arrows that I desire. I want divine horses that are white and as swift as the wind. And a chariot that will shine like the sun in its energy and will thunder like the clouds. Nor does Krishna possess a weapon
that can equal his valour and Madhava requires one to kill the nagas and demons[The word used in the text is pishacha.] in battle. O illustrious one! Tell
us the means so that we may be successful and are able to restrain Indra from raining down on this extensive forest. O fire! We are ready to act according to our prowess. O illustrious one! But you should give us the means that
can support us."'
