'Sanjaya said, "On seeing the large army of Dhritarashtra's sons, ready to fight, Kunti's son, King Yudhishthira,
was overcome by grief. Pandava saw the impenetrable vyuha that Bhishma had crafted. Having seen that it was
impenetrable, he was distressed and spoke to Arjuna. 'O Dhananjaya! O mighty-armed one! When the grandfather
fights on the side of the sons of Dhritarashtra, how will we be able to fight with them in this battle? Bhishma, the
destroyer of enemies, whose energy is manifold, has crafted this immovable and impenetrable formation, in accordance with the decrees of the sacred texts. O destroyer of enemies! Together with our soldiers, we now have
doubts. How can we be successful against this great vyuha?' O king! Thus addressed by Partha Yudhishthira, the
destroyer of enemies, who was overcome by grief at the sight of your army, Arjuna replied, 'O lord of the earth!
Listen. Those who are few can vanquish many brave ones who are superior in wisdom and possess qualities. O
king! You do not suffer from malice and I will tell you the means. O Pandava! The rishi Narada, and Bhishma and
Drona, know this. On an earlier occasion, at the time of the battle between the gods and the asuras, the grandfather
himself said this to the great Indra and the denizens of heaven. "Those who desire victory, do not triumph through
strength and valour, but through truth, non-violence, devotion to dharma and endeavour. One must give up adharma, avarice and delusion and resort to endeavour. One must fight without pride. Where there is dharma, there will
be victory." O king! Know that it is for this reason that our victory in this battle is certain. Narada has said that
where there is Krishna, victory is there. Victory is Krishna's quality, it follows Madhava. Victory is one of his
qualities and humility is another. Govinda is infinite in his energy. He is without pain even amidst a multitude of
enemies. He is the eternal being. Where there is Krishna, victory is there. In earlier times, Hari manifested himself.
He is Vaikuntha. 64 He has no weakness before weapons. In a loud tone, he spoke to the gods and the asuras,
"Who among you wishes for victory?" The vanquished ones 65 replied, "We will follow Krishna and thereby obtain victory." Through his favours, Shakra and the other gods obtained the three worlds. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Therefore, I do not see any reason for despondency. You have the lord of the universe and the lord
of the thirty gods and because of this, you are assured of victory.'"'
