Janamejaya said, 'O Brahmana! I have now heard from you the great origins of my ancestors. I have also heard
about the noble kings who were born in my lineage. But I am still not satisfied with this account that I love, because it is too brief. Therefore, narrate it to me in greater detail-the divine account from Prajapati Manu onwards.
Who will not find pleasure in hearing of such a sacred lineage? There is abundant and established fame in the three
worlds about the qualities, righteousness, greatness, strength, influence, valour, energy and perseverance of these
men. I am not satisfied with what I have heard of this history, which is like the taste of amrita.'

Vaishampayana said, 'O king! Then listen to the complete and pure history of your lineage as I recite it, exactly
as I had heard it from Dvaipayana. From Daksha, Aditi. From Aditi, Vivasvat. From Vivasvat, Manu. From Manu,
Ila. From Ila, Pururava. From Pururava, Ayus. From Ayus, Nahusha. From Nahusha, Yayati. Yayati had two wives
-Vrishaparva's daughter was Sharmishtha and Ushanasha's daughter was Devayani. There is the account that Devayani gave birth to Yadu and Turvasu and Sharmishtha, Vrishaparva's daughter, gave birth to Druhyu, Anu and
Puru. From Yadu, the Yadavas. From Puru, the Pouravas. Puru's wife was Koushalya. Through her, he had a son
named Janamejaya. He performed three horse sacrifices and after performing the sacrifice known as vishvajita[Designed to ensure conquest (jita) of the world (vishva).],
retired to the forest. Yayati married Ananta, the daughter of Madhava. From this was born Prachinvata. He conquered the regions of the east, right up to where the sun rises and thus his name[The word prach means eastern or easterly.]. Prachinvata married Ashmaki
and she gave birth to Samyati. Samyati married Drishadvat's daughter Varangi and she gave birth to Ahampati.
Ahampati married Kritavirya's daughter Bhanumati and she gave birth to Sarvabhouma. Sarvabhouma conquered
and carried off Sunanda, daughter of Kekaya, and she gave birth to Jayatsena. Jayatsena married Sushrava from the
Vidarbha region and she gave birth to Arachina. Arachina married Maryada, also from the Vidarbha region, and
she gave birth to Mahabhouma. Mahabhouma married Prasenjit's daughter Suyajna and she gave birth to Ayutanayi. He was so named because he performed a sacrifice where one ayuta[An ayuta is 10,000.] of human sacrifices were made.
Ayutanayi married Prithushrava's daughter Bhasa and she gave birth to Akrodhana. Akrodhana married Karandu
from the Kalinga region and she gave birth to Devatithi. Devatithi married Maryada from the Videha region and
she gave birth to Richa. Richa married Sudeva from the Anga region and she gave birth to Riksha. Riksha married
Takshaka's daughter Jvala and through her had a son named Matinara. Matinara performed a sacrifice on the banks
of the Sarasvati for twelve years. When the sacrifice was over, Sarasvati herself came to him and chose him as her
husband. Through her, he had a son named Tamsu. On this, there is a saying that Sarasvati gave birth to a son
named Tamsu from Matinara and through Kalindi, Tamsu gave birth to a son named Ilina.

'Ilina had five sons through Rathantari; Duhshanta was the eldest. Duhshanta married Visvamitra's daughter
Shakuntala and she gave birth to Bharata. On this, there are two shlokas.
The mother is only a leather bag[The word used is bhastra, which is a leather bag or pouch, usually used for storing water.]. The son who is born from the father is the father himself. O Duhshanta!
Maintain your son and do not forsake Shakuntala.
O king of men! A son who has sperm rescues one from Yama's abode[By giving birth to offspring.]. You are the father who has planted
this embryo. Shakuntala has spoken the truth.
Hence his name was Bharata. Bharata married Sarvasena's daughter Sunanda, from the Kashi region. She gave
birth to Bhumanyu. Bhumanyu married Dasarha's daughter Vijaya and she gave birth to Suhotra. Suhotra married
Suvarna of the Ikshvaku lineage and she gave birth to Hasti. He established this city of Hastinapura, which is why
it was named Hastinapura. Hasti married Yashodhara from the Trigarta region and she gave birth to Vikunthana.
Vikunthana married Sudeva from the Dasarha region and she gave birth to Ajamidha. Ajamidha had 2400 sons
through Kaikeyi, Nagi, Gandhari, Vimala and Riksha. Each became a king and established a dynasty. Among
them, Samvarana was the one who carried the lineage forward. Samvarana married Tapati, Vivasvat's daughter,
and she gave birth to Kuru. Kuru married Subhagi from the Dasarha region and she gave birth to Viduratha. Vidu-
ratha married Sanpriya, daughter of Madhava and she gave birth to Arugvata. Arugvata married Amrita from the
Magadha region and she gave birth to Parikshit. Parikshit married Bahuda's daughter Suyasa and she gave birth to
Bhimasena. Bhimasena married Sukumari of the Kekaya region and she gave birth to Paryashrava, also known as
Pratipa. Pratipa married Shibi's daughter Sunanda and through her had sons named Devapi, Shantanu and Bahlika.

'Devapi retired to the forest when he was still a child. Shantanu then became the king. There is a saying about
this. "Those who were touched with his hands felt extreme pleasure and became young again. Therefore, he was
known as Shantanu[The word shanta means to appease, calm, satisy, pacify, cure or alleviate.]." Thus, he was known as Shantanu. Shantanu married Bhagirathi Ganga and she gave birth
to Devavrata, who later came to be known as Bhishma. To do that which would bring pleasure to his father, Devavrata got him married to Satyavati. She became his mother and she was also known as Gandhakali. Before that,
while she was still a virgin, she had a son named Dvaipayana through Parashara. She bore two more sons to Shantanu, Vichitravirya and Chitrangada. But before reaching manhood, Chitrangada was killed by a gandharva and Vichitravirya then became the king. Vichitravirya married two daughers born to the king of Kashi through his wife
Kousalya-Ambika and Ambalika. However, Vichitravirya died childless. Then Satyavati began to worry that
Duhshanta's lineage would become extinct. She thought of the rishi Dvaipayana and he appeared before her and
asked, "What is your command?" She told him, "Your brother Vichitravirya has gone to heaven childless. For his
sake, be the father of righteous children." Dvaipayana agreed and was the father to three sons-Dhritarashtra, Pandu and Vidura. Of these, because of a boon granted by Dvaipayana, Dhritarashtra had 100 sons through his wife
Gandhari. Four of Dhritarashtra's sons were chief-Duryodhana, Duhshasana, Vikarna and Chitrasena.

'Pandu had two gems among women as his wives-Kunti and Madri. One day, Pandu went out for a hunt and
saw a rishi, in the form of a stag, uniting with a doe. He shot him with an arrow while he was still mounted on the
doe, in a state of lust, but without his desire having been satiated. Wounded by the arrow, he told Pandu, "You follow dharma and you know the pleasure that comes from satisfaction of desire. But you have killed me before my
desire was satiated. Therefore, you will also be united with the five elements[That is, die.] in a similar state, before your desire is satiated." Pandu paled on hearing this curse and from that time, stayed away from uniting with his wives. He
told them, "This is the result of my own folly. But I have heard that in the hereafter there are no worlds for those
who are childless." Therefore, he asked Kunti to bear children for him and accordingly Kunti bore children.
Through Dharma, Yudhishthira. Through Marut, Bhima. Through Shakra, Arjuna. Pandu was pleased and said,
"Your co-wife doesn't have children either. Let the right offspring also be fathered on her." Kunti agreed and
Nakula and Sahadeva were then fathered on Madri through the Ashvins. One day, Pandu saw Madri dressed in her
ornaments and his desire was stirred. But he died as soon as he touched her. Then Madri ascended the funeral pyre
with him, requesting Kunti to affectionately rear the twins.

'Later, ascetics took the five Pandavas and Kunti to Hastinapura and introduced them to Bhishma and Vidura.
An attempt was made to burn them in the house of lac, but this failed, because of Vidura's counsel. After this,
Hidimba was killed and they went to a place named Ekachakra. In Ekachakra, they killed a rakshasa named Baka
and then went to the capital of Panchala. Thereafter, they obtained Droupadi as their wife and returned to their own
country, in good health. They had skilled sons-Yudhishthira had Prativindhya, Vrikodara[Bhima.] had Sutasoma, Arjuna had Shrutakirti, Nakula had Shatanika and Sahadeva had Shrutakarmana. In a svayamvara[Ceremony where the bride chooses her own groom.], Yudhishthira obtained Devika as his wife. She was the daughter of Govasana of the Shibi lineage and through her he had a son
named Youdheya. Through a viryashulka[Shulka is price, but this not a marriage where a bride price is paid. Virya means valour, so this is a marriage
where the bride is married to the person who exhibits the most valour.] marriage, Bhima obtained as his wife Baladhara, the daughter of the
king of Kashi. Through her, he had a son named Sarvaga. Arjuna went to Dvaravati and obtained Vasudeva's sister
Subhadra as his wife. Through her, he had a son named Abhimanyu. Nakula had Karenumati from the Chedi region as his wife and through her had a son named Niramitra. In a svayamvara, Sahadeva obtained Vijaya, daughter
of the king of Madra, as his wife and had a son named Suhotra. Before this, Bhima had a son named Ghatotkacha
through the rakshasa Hidimba. These are the eleven sons of the Pandavas.

'Abhimanyu married Virata's daughter Uttara. She gave birth to a stillborn child. On the command of Vasudeva,
supreme among men, Pritha[Kunti.] accepted him in her arms. He said, "I will instill life into this embryo that is six
months old." Having revived him, he said, "He was born in a lineage that was diminished[The word parikshina means diminished, decayed, thin. In this context, even extinct can be used.]. Therefore, he will
be known as Parikshit." Parikshit married Madravati and she gave birth to Janamejaya[There doesn't seem to be much point in telling Janamejaya this. Perhaps the intention is to make the account complete.]. Through Vapushtama,
Janamejaya had two sons named Shatanika and Shanku. Shatanika had a son named Ashvamedhadatta, through a
wife from the Videha region. Thus the lineage of Puru and Pandu has been recounted. He who hears about Puru's
lineage is freed from all sin.'
