Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing Yudhishthira's words, all the bulls among men, with Bhimasena at the forefront,
arose with happy faces. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the maharathas clad themselves in impenetrable
armour that was radiant with gold. They ascended chariots, all of which had pennants. With bows and arrows in
their hands, the Pandavas blazed like the fire. Those chariots were equipped well and were yoked to swift steeds.
Using those chariots, those tigers travelled fast. On seeing the maharatha sons of Pandu advance, the army of the
Kouravas let out a great roar. The travellers of the sky[The gandharvas.] and the maharathas were not frightened and were flush
with victory. In a short while, they encountered each other in that forest. All the gandharvas were flush at the
prospect of victory. On seeing the four brave Pandavas advance into battle on their chariots and on seeing them as
resplendent as the guardians of the worlds, the residents of Gandhamadana[Meaning, the gandharvas.] established themselves in battle formations. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Remembering the words of the king who was Dharma's son, the
first battle that was engaged was a mild one. But the soldiers of the king of the gandharvas were deluded in intelligence. They were incapable of realizing that something that was mild might benefit them.

'At that, Savyasachi, the invincible scorcher of enemies, addressed the travellers of the skies on the field of battle. "This is not an act that is worthy of the king of the gandharvas, oppressing the wives of other men and consorting with humans. Free the extremely brave ones, the sons of Dhritarashtra. On the instructions of Dharmaraja, free
their wives." On hearing the words of the famous Pandava, the gandharvas laughed. They replied to Partha in these
words. "O son[The word used is tata.]! There is only one person on earth whose instructions we obey. Under his rule, we roam around,
without any anxiety. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! We do only what he commands us to do. Other than that
lord of the gods, there is no one else who can command us." Having been thus addressed by the gandharvas, Kunti's son, Dhananjaya, replied to the gandharvas in these words. "O gandharvas! If you do not free the sons of Dhritarashtra through peaceful means, I will exhibit my valour and free Suyodhana myself." Having uttered these
words, Partha Savyasachi Dhananjaya released sharp arrows, which travelled through the sky, at those roamers of
the sky. The gandharvas were insolent of their strength and released a shower of arrows at the Pandavas, and the
Pandavas did the same to those residents of heaven. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thus began a terrible
battle between the swift gandharvas and the immensely swift Pandavas.'
