'Dhritarashtra said, "All the ones that you have named possess great enterprise. But Bhima alone is equal to all of
them together. O son[The word used is tata.]! The angry and intolerant Bhimasena creates as great a fear in me, as that of a great ruru
deer at the sight of a tiger. I am awake throughout the night, letting out deep and warm sighs. O son[The word used is tata.]! I am as terrified of Vrikodara as a weak animal is of a lion. This mighty-armed one is Shakra's equal in his energy. I do not
see anyone in this army who can withstand him in battle. That intolerant son of Kunti and Pandu is firm in his enmity. He does not smile, even in jest. He is mad. He has a sidelong glance. He has a loud voice. He is great in his
speed. He is great in his enterprise. He has mighty arms. He is immensely strong. He will destroy my wicked sons
in battle. Vrikodara is a bull in the Kuru lineage. When he brandishes his club in battle, like the god of death wielding his staff, the thighs of the enemies give away. I can see that terrible club in my mind's eye, made of steel[Shaikya.] and
burnished with gold, like Brahma's upraised staff. Like a strong lion wandering around among herds of deer, Bhi-
ma will roam around amidst my forces. He is a voracious eater and intolerant. His valour is cruel. Ever since his
childhood, alone, he has exhibited violence towards my sons. My heart was upset, when during childhood, Duryodhana and the others were oppressed by him, like a fighting elephant. My sons have always been oppressed by his
valour. Bhima, terrible in valour, has been the cause of this dissension. I can see Bhima before me in the field of
battle, senseless in rage and devouring arrays of men, elephants and horses. He is the equal of Drona and Arjuna in
weapons. His speed is equal to the wind. O Sanjaya! Tell me about the brave and intolerant Bhimasena. I think it
was a great gain that this intelligent one, the destroyer of enemies, did not kill all my sons at that time. Through his
terrible strength, he has slaughtered yakshas and rakshasas earlier. Which man can withstand his force in battle? O
Sanjaya! Even as a child, he was never under my control. How can the Pandava be under my control when my evil
sons have made him suffer? He is cruel. Because of that cruelty, he will break, but he will not bend. He has a sidelong glance. His brows are furrowed. How can Vrikodara be pacified? His shoulders are wide. He is irresistible. He
is fair and is as tall as a palm tree. In height, Bhimasena is a pradesha[The distance between an outstretched thumb and forefinger.] taller than Arjuna. He surpasses horses in
speed. He surpasses elephants in strength. He has a rumble in his voice. The medium Pandava is strong and has
eyes that have the complexion of honey. I have earlier heard from the mouth of Vyasa, that the Pandava was like
that in form and strength, even when he was a child[Because the Pandavas weren't born in Hastinapura and came there only after Pandu died.]. Bhima is supreme among warriors. Enraged in battle, he
will use his iron club to destroy chariots, elephants, horses and men. He is always intolerant, angry and fearsome.
His valour is cruel. O son[The word used is tata.]! Because he has acted against my wishes, he has been insulted earlier. That iron club is
heavy and decorated with gold. It has excellent sides and excellent rings. It is capable of killing one hundred.
When it is swung, with a hundred roars, how will my sons bear it? The ocean known as Bhimasena has no shores.
It cannot be crossed and is unfathomable. It is impenetrable. It has the arrows as its waves. O son[The word used is tata.]! Only fools can
seek to cross it. Those children think themselves to be learned and do not heed my words. Seeing only the honey,
they do not think of the fall that will come. They wish to fight against a wind in the form of a man. The creator
controls them, like great deer by a lion. O son[The word used is tata.]! The club is made of steel[Shaikya.]. It is four cubits[Kishku, the length of the forearm.] long and has six
sides. It is infinitely energetic. It is terrible to the touch. When it is flung, how will my sons withstand it? He will
whirl it around and smash the heads of elephants. He will lick the corners of his mouth and repeatedly shed tears of
rage. He will utter a terrible roar when he counters the elephants that attack him. He will roar back at those mad
and descending elephants. He will penetrate the paths followed by chariots and destroy the best soldiers. He will
blaze like a fire. Which of my sons will escape? The mighty-armed one will carve out a path by driving back my
army. He will seem to be dancing, with a club in his hand, as if displaying the end of the era. He will be like a rutting elephant that destroys trees in blossom. In battle, Vrikodara will rout the soldiers of my sons. He will rob chariots of their men and pennants. He will shatter the drums. That tiger among men will dislodge charioteers and riders, like the torrents of the Ganga flooding the banks and uprooting many trees. O Sanjaya! He will destroy the
great army of my sons. O Sanjaya! Oppressed by Bhimasena's strength, my sons, their servants and the kings will
come under his power. With Vasudeva at his aide, it was he who penetrated the inner quarters of the immensely
valorous King Jarasandha, and killed him. This entire goddess earth had been conquered by the strong and intelligent Jarasandha, the Indra of Magadha, who then oppressed her. Because of Bhishma's prowess, the Kurus, and
the Andhakas and the Vrishnis, because of their policies, did not come under his[Jarasandha's.] sway. Perhaps it was destined
that way. With the strength of his arms, Pandu's son swiftly went there. Without any weapons, the brave one killed
him. What can be greater than that? He is like a snake that has accumulated its poison for a long time. O Sanjaya!
In battle, he will release that energy against my sons. With the club in his hand, Bhimasena will kill my sons, like
the great Indra, supreme among the gods, once killed the danavas with the vajra. I can see the irresistible and inevitable Vrikodara, fierce in speed and valour. His eyes are more red than copper and he will descend. Who can
stand in front of that man, even if he fights with his bare arms, without a club, without a bow, without a chariot and
without armour?

'"Bhishma, the brahmana Drona and Sharadvat's son, Kripa, know about the valour of that intelligent one, just
as I do. Knowing the vow of aryas and unwilling to break their agreements, those bulls among men will establish
themselves at the forefront of my army. Destiny is always powerful, especially over men. I can see them triumph,
but I cannot restrain my sons. Those great archers will station themselves on the ancient path followed by Indra.
They will give up their lives in the turmoil and protect their fame on earth. O son[The word used is tata.]! The Pandavas are to them just
as my sons are. They are Bhishma's grandsons and the pupils of Drona and Kripa. O Sanjaya! Because they are
aryas, these three aged men will certainly repay whatever refuge and gifts we have offered them. When a brahmana takes up weapons and wishes to follow the dharma of kshatriyas, it is said that death is the supreme objective. However, I grieve for all those who wish to fight with the Pandavas. The danger foretold by Vidura at the beginning has now arrived. O Sanjaya! I do not think that knowledge can counter misery. Instead, when sorrow is excessive, it overwhelms knowledge. Even free rishis, who watch over the travails of the world, rejoice at its happiness and sorrow over its unhappiness. Why should I not be affected? I am a thousand times more attached to my
sons, my kingdom, my wife, my grandsons and my relatives. I have great doubts about whether I will see supreme
peace in the future. I think and see the destruction of the Kurus. This great destruction of the Kurus seems to have
started with the game of dice. This evil act was performed by that wicked one out of greed and desire for prosperity. I think that this is the dharma of time, which extends beyond the end. Everyone is affixed, like a rim to a
wheel[The image is of the wheel of time.], and no one is capable of running away. O Sanjaya! What can I do? How can I do it? Where will I go? Because they have come under the clutches of time, the wicked Kurus will be destroyed. O son[The word used is tata.]! I am helpless before the destruction of one hundred of my sons. I can hear the lamentations of the women. How is death going to
touch me? Like a blazing fire during summer is urged by the wind and burns the deadwood, the Pandava will wield
the club in his hand, and assisted by Arjuna, will slay my own."'
