Janamejaya said, 'He[Duryodhana.] has been prone to evil from his birth, coveting the riches of others and confounded by
avarice. He acts in ways that are not like those of an arya and is determined to bring about his own death. He is the
cause of grief to his kin and relatives and increases their misery. He causes difficulties for his well-wishers and increases the delight of his enemies. Why did his relatives and well-wishers not restrain him from this deviant path?
Out of friendship and affection, why did the illustrious one[Krishna.] and the grandfather not stop him?'

Vaishampayana said, 'The illustrious one spoke appropriate words and so did Bhishma. Narada also said many
things. Listen to them.

'Narada said, "Rare is a well-wisher who listens. Rare is a well-wisher who offers beneficial advice. Where
there is a well-wisher, there is no friend[The implication seems to be that if a well-wisher offers good advice, he no longer remains a friend.]. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! I think that your well-wishers
should be heard. One should not stick to obstinacy. Stubbornness is extremely terrible. In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about how obstinacy led to Galava's defeat. In ancient times, Dharma sought to test
Vishvamitra's austerities. He went to him himself, adopting the form of the illustrious rishi Vasishtha. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O king! Having adopted the form of one of the saptarshis, he went to Koushika's[Vishvamitra was Gadhi's son. Gadhi's grandfather was Kusha. Thus, both Vishvamitra and Gadhi are addressed
as Koushika, descended from Kusha, and Vishvamitra is sometimes also described as Koushika's (Gadhi's) son, in
addition to being described as Koushika. Vishvamitra was born a kshatriya and performed austerities so that he
could become a brahmana.]
hermitage, as if he was hungry and wished to satisfy his hunger. With reverence, Vishvamitra cooked some
charu[Rice boiled in milk and honey.]. Because of the extreme care he took on this, he could not attend to him in other ways. But without waiting for this food, he[Dharma in the form of Vasishtha.] ate what had been offered by other ascetics. Having brought the warm food, Vishvamitra
came to him. The illustrious one said, 'I have already eaten. Stay here.' And departed. O king! The immensely radiant Vishvamitra stood there. Because of his devotion, he grasped the food with his two hands and placing it on
his head, stood nearby. He stood immobile like a pillar, subsisting only on air. At that time, the sage Galava made
efforts to take care of him. Out of respect, reverence and affection, he did what brought him[Vishvamitra.] pleasure. After one
hundred years had passed, Dharma appeared before Koushika in Vasishtha's disguise and wished to eat. He saw
the intelligent maharshi Vishvamitra stationed there in devotion, subsisting on air and bearing the food on his head.
Dharma accepted it and it was still warm and fresh. Having eaten, he said, 'O brahmana rishi! I am pleased.' Then
the sage left. Because of Dharma's words, Vishvamitra was delighted and giving up the state of a kshatriya, assumed the state of a brahmana. Vishvamitra was pleased at the service and devotion of his disciple, the ascetic
Galava, and said, 'O son! O Galava! You have my permission to go wherever you desire.' Having been thus addressed, Galava, supreme among sages was pleased. He told the immensely radiant Vishvamitra in gentle words,
'What dakshina[In this context, dakshina is a fee paid by a student to his preceptor at the time of graduation. Dakshina is also
the stipend paid to brahmana s at the time of sacrifices.] will I give you for having performed the task of my preceptor? Man's rites only succeed when
dakshina has been given. When dakshina has been paid, virtuous ones are freed from their debts. Dakshina is the
fruit of a sacrifice, obtained in heaven, and is therefore said to constitute peace. O illustrious one! Tell me. What
will I give my preceptor?' The illustrious Vishvamitra knew that he had already been honoured by his service and
repeatedly asked him[Galava.] to go away. But despite Vishvamitra repeatedly asking him to leave, Galava kept repeatedly asking, 'What will I give?' The ascetic Vishamitra was slightly enraged at Galava's great obstinacy and told
him, 'Give me eight hundred horses that are as white as the rays of the moon and possess a single black ear each.
O Galava! Go now and do not delay.'"'
