Bhishma said, "The lord of the serpents advanced towards the brahmana, mentally thinking about the task that
might have brought him there. O lord of men! The Indra among serpents was intelligent and devoted to dharma. Having arrived there, he addressed him in naturally pleasant words. 'I  am addressing you  peacefully. You
should not be enraged with me. What is the task that has brought you here? What is your purpose? O brahmana! I
have arrived before you and am asking you affectionately. On the banks of the Gomati, whom do you desire to
worship?'

'"The brahmana replied, 'Know me to be Dharmaranya, foremost among brahmanas. I have come here to see
the serpent Padmanabha. I have some work with him. I have heard that he has gone away, so I am waiting nearby
for him, like a person waiting for a relative, or a farmer waiting for the rain. I wish to dispel his hardships and do
what is beneficial for him. Therefore, without any difficulty, I am engaged in yoga here, united with the brahman.'

'"The serpent said, 'O virtuous one! Your conduct is beneficial and you are devoted to righteous people. O immensely fortunate one! I have heard that you bear supreme affection towards him. O brahmana rishi! I am that serpent and you have now met me. What is your command? Tell me what I can do to bring you pleasure. I have heard
from my relatives that you had come here. O brahmana! That is the reason I have myself come here to meet you.
Now that you have come here, you will be successful in your pursuits. O foremost among brahmanas! You can instruct me to be engaged in whatever pursuit you wish. In particular, all of us have been won over by your qualities.
You have abandoned your own welfare and are engaged in seeking ours.'

'"The brahmana replied, 'O immensely fortunate one! I have come here with a desire to meet you. O serpent! I
do not know the truth and have a desire to ask you about the truth. With my atman based on the atman[The jivatman and the paramatman respectively.], I wish to
embark on a path that brings benefit to the atman. O immensely wise one! I am not attached to anything and wish
to worship that which is powerful. You are radiant and famous through your qualities, as if you are the origin of
the sun's rays. The radiant touch of your inner self now seems to be like the touch of the moon's beams. O one
who survives on air! Answer the question that has arisen. Later, I will tell you about the task that has brought me
here. I should hear about this from you.'"'
