Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing Bhimasena's words, Kunti's son Yudhishthira, a tiger among men and the
scorcher of enemies, sighed and reflected. Having reflected for an instant and having decided what he should do,
he immediately replied to Bhimasena, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O mighty-armed one! It is as you say.
O one who is wise with words! But also listen to the words that I have to say. O Bhimasena! O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Great sins that are begun only out of courage bring pain. O mighty-armed one! But an act that is
well advised, well powered, well executed and well planned is successful in its objective and is divinely auspicious. Out of your own strength and insolence and out of rashness, you have thought about a deed that needs to be
done. But listen to what I have to say about that. Bhurishrava, Shalya, the valorous Jarasandha, Bhishma, Drona,
Karna, Drona's valorous son[Ashvatthama.] and Dhritarashtra's invincible sons with Duryodhana at the forefront-all of them
have their weapons ready and are prepared to murder. The kings and the lords of the earth whom we suppressed
have resorted to the Kourava side and are affectionate towards them. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They
now seek to do good to Duryodhana, not to us. Their treasury is full and they have a large army. They will make an
effort to protect these. All the Kourava armies, with their sons, advisers and soldiers, have been given riches and
honours everywhere. The warriors have been specially honoured by Duryodhana. It is my certain view that they
will give up their lives for him in battle. Though the conduct of Bhishma, the mighty-armed Drona and the great-
souled Kripa is equal[Vis-à-vis the Kouravas and the Pandavas.], they will certainly be driven by the royal morsels[Because they are in the employment of the Kouravas.]. That is what I think. All of them
are knowledgeable in the use of divine weapons and all of them are devoted to dharma. Therefore, no matter how
precious, they will give up their lives in battle. My view is that they cannot be vanquished, even by the gods and
Vasava. Then there is maharatha Karna, intolerant and always angry. He is skilled in the knowledge of all weapons
and cannot be assailed, because he is covered with impenetrable armour. O Vrikodara! Without first defeating in
battle all these foremost of men and without any allies, you cannot kill Duryodhana. I cannot go to sleep when I
think of the lightness of hand of the suta's son[Karna.]. He is foremost among all those who handle the bow." Bhimasena was intolerant. But having heard these words, he became pensive and alarmed at the truth of these words and
did not reply anything.

'When the two Pandavas were thus conversing, Satyavati's son, the great yogi Vyasa arrived. When he arrived,
he was duly worshipped by the Pandavas and the supreme among eloquent ones then spoke these words to Yudhishthira, "O Yudhishthira! O mighty-armed one! O bull among men! I have swiftly come here, because with my
insight I got to know what was passing through your heart. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O killer of enemies! I will dispel the fear that exists in your heart about Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Karna and Drona's son. I will tell
you how they can be legitimately killed according to the rules. On hearing this, regain your composure and do
what needs to be done." Then Parashara's son[Vyasa is Parashara's son.] spoke to Yudhishthira alone and that eloquent of speakers told
him words of grave import. "O supreme among those of the Bharata lineage! The time for you to regain your fortune will come. Partha Dhananjaya will overcome the enemies in battle. Accept from me this knowledge known as
pratismriti, as I recount it to you. It is success personified. On receiving it from you, the mighty-armed Arjuna will
be successful. O Pandava! For the sake of weapons, he must go to the great Indra, Rudra, Varuna, the lord of
riches[Kubera.] and Dharmaraja[Yama.]. Because of his austerities and valour, he has the power to see the gods. He is an immensely energetic rishi. He is the ancient, eternal and everlasting god who is Narayana's companion and a part of
Vishnu[The reference is to Nara, with whom Arjuna is often equated.]. When he has obtained weapons from Indra, Rudra and the Lokapalas[Lokapala literally means lord or protector (pala) of the world (loka). There are eight Lokapalas in charge of
the eight directions and they are Indra, Agni, Yama, Nairita, Varuna, Marut (or Vayu), Kubera and Isha.], the mighty-armed one will
perform great deeds. O Kounteya! O lord of the earth! Think about leaving this forest and going to another forest
that is more appropriate for your residence. It is never very pleasant to live in the same place for a long time. This
can cause anxiety to the serene ascetics. Since you support many brahmanas who are learned in the Vedas and the
vedangas, the deer will be exhausted and the plants and herbs will decay." Having thus spoken, the illustrious lord,
Satyavati's intelligent son Vyasa who was learned in yoga, taught Dharmaraja, who had purified himself, that
supreme knowledge of yoga. He then took Kounteya's leave and instantly disappeared.

'Yudhishthira, the intelligent one with dharma in his soul, carefully nurtured that knowledge of the brahman in
his mind, repeating it from time to time. He was happy with Vyasa's words. Leaving the forest of Dvaitavana, he
went to the forest of Kamyaka, on the banks of the Sarasvati. O great king! Just as the rishis follow Indra of the
gods, the brahmana ascetics, learned in words and sounds, followed him. On arriving in Kamyaka, the great-souled
bulls among the Bharatas began to live there, with their advisers and followers. O king! Those intelligent ones
lived there for some time. The warriors engaged themselves in the science of archery and listened to the supreme
Vedas. They went out on hunts every day, seeking to kill deer with pure arrows[Pure arrows, probably means sharp arrows. But it could also mean non-poisonous arrows.]. In accordance with the rites,
they offered oblations to the ancestors, the gods and the brahmanas.'
