The brahmana said, 'A person who submerges himself in that receptacle[The brahman.], not thinking about his own self,
not even thinking about his own identity, progressively casting off the layers, is freed from all bonds[The shloka is cryptic and some liberties have been taken. The progressive casting away of layers is a reference to
the different steps of yoga.]. He
is a friend to everyone. He endures everything. He is attached to tranquility. He has conquered his senses. He has
overcome fear and anger. He has killed desire. Such a man is emancipated. He sees himself in all beings. He is
controlled and pure. He is without insolence and without ego. Such a man is emancipated in every way. He is impartial towards both life and death, happiness and unhappiness, gain and loss and the pleasant and the unpleasant.
Such a man is emancipated. He does not desire what belongs to someone else. He does not show disrespect towards anyone. He is beyond opposite pairs of sentiments and is devoid of attachment. Such a man is emancipated
in every way. He has no enemy. He has no friend. He has no offspring. He has abandoned dharma, artha and kama.
He does not hope for anything. Such a man is emancipated. He has neither dharma nor adharma. He has cast aside
everything from earlier[From earlier births.]. When the elements waste away[The elements in the body.], he is tranquil in his soul. He is without the opposite
pairs of sentiments. Such a man is emancipated. He has no acts. He has no hope and only looks at the eternal universe, always submerged helplessly in ill health, delusion and the cycle of birth. His intelligence is always focused
on detachment. He is indifferent towards difficulties of heat and cold. In a short while, he is able to free himself
from his own bonds. He sees his own atman, which does not experience smell, taste, touch, sound and ownership
and is without form and difficult to comprehend. Such a man is emancipated. It[The atman.] is independent of the five elements. It is without form and without cause. Though it enjoys the qualities, it is without qualities. A man who sees
the atman in this way is emancipated. He uses his intelligence to cast aside all resolutions of the body and of the
mind. Like a fire that is without kindling, such a person gradually obtains liberation. He is freed from all sacraments and obtains the eternal brahman. He obtains the supreme, which is tranquil and stable. This is the celestial
Akshara. Thereafter, I will tell you about the supreme and sacred texts of yoga. Knowing this, in this world, yogis
obtain success and see their own atmans. I will convey the instructions accurately, as I see them. Listen to me. By
always following this conduct, one passes through those doors and sees one's atman in one's own self. The senses
must be restrained. The mind must be fixed on the atman. Having first tormented oneself through terrible austerities, one must then undertake this yoga. An  ascetic abandons all resolution. He  is devoid of  pride and ego. A
learned brahmana uses his mind to see his atman in his own self. Such a virtuous person is capable of seeing his
atman in his own self. Devoted to good conduct alone, he sees his atman in his own self. He is always full of restraint. He is united with his atman. He conquers his senses. Such a virtuous person, engaged in yoga, sees his atman in his own self. In a dream, a man may see someone and recognizing him on waking up, exclaim, "This is
he." In that way, a virtuous person engaged in yoga sees the image of the atman[There is the metaphor of a yogi waking up after samadhi.]. When the outer case is extracted
from munja grass, the strand inside can be seen. In that way, taking away the body, the yogi sees the atman. The
outer case of the munja grass is like the body. The inner strand is the beautiful atman. Those who know about the
excellent texts of yoga cite this as an example. When a person with a body is united with yoga and sees the atman
properly, there is no one who can bring him down. He is like the lord of the three worlds. As he wishes, he moves
from one body to another one. Without any joy and without any grief, he withdraws himself from the phenomena
of old age and death. Such a person, engaged in yoga, can become a god over all the gods. Casting aside this temporary body, he obtains the undecaying brahman. Even if all the worlds are destroyed, no fear is generated in him.
Even if all creatures are afflicted, he is not afflicted in the slightest way. A person who uses yoga to unite with his
atman is without desire and tranquil in his mind. He is not disturbed by sorrow, misery, fear, terror, or the affection
that flows from attachment. Weapons do not pierce him. There is no death for him. There is no one in any world
who is happier than him. Having properly engaged himself in yoga, he looks at his atman. No one can touch him,
not even Shatakratu himself. If one has engaged in yoga, one obtains a state of indifference. This requires singleminded devotion to yoga alone. Listen to how one must embark on yoga. Wherever one resides, one must think of
the eastern direction. The mind should be fixed inside the house, not outside. Wherever one resides, one must remain inside that house. In that abode, the mind must be taken away from external and internal distractions and
fixed on the room that one is in. All the thoughts must then be withdrawn and fixed on the body one inhabits. The
mind must be fixed on the body, never on anything outside it. One can control all one's senses in a silent and desolate forest[This seems to be an alternative to meditating inside a house. These shlokas are somewhat terse.]. One must single-mindedly fix all one's thoughts inside the body. One must meditate on the teeth, the
palate, the tongue, the throat, the neck, the heart and the arteries and veins inside the heart.'

'"The brahmana said[There is abruptness in the text. This is now the brahmana who is speaking to Krishna and we realize that this
brahmana and the siddha brahmana are identical, though there was nothing to suggest this earlier.], 'O Madhusudana! Thus addressed by me, the intelligent disciple again asked me about
moksha dharma, which is extremely difficult to explain. "How is the food, eaten every once in a while, digested in
the stomach? How does it become juices? How is blood generated from that? How does this sustain flesh, marrow,
sinews  and  bones?  How  do  all  the  limbs  of  embodied  creatures  grow?  As  one  keeps  growing,  how  does  the
strength increase? How is waste that is without substance separately excreted? How does one inhale and exhale?
Which part of the body is inhabited by the atman? How does the jivatman exert itself and move the body around?
What is the complexion of the mind and where does it dwell?" O Madhava! I was asked this by that brahmana. O
mighty-armed one! O scorcher of enemies! Based on what I had heard, I replied. "If one has a vessel full of riches,
one places it in a room and guards it with one's mind. In that way, the mind must be guarded in the body and prevented from wavering. One must fix it on the path that leads to the atman and discard all carelessness. If one always exerts in this way, one will soon find delight in the atman. One will see and obtain the brahman and become
knowledgable  about  Pradhana.  It  cannot  be  grasped  with  the  eyes,  or  with  all  the  other  senses.  The  great
atman[Brahman.]can be seen with the lamp of the mind. His hands and feet are in all the directions. His eyes, head and faces
are in all the directions. The creature sees the atman, extracted from the body. Having abandoned the body, he is
sustained only by the brahman. As if smiling in delight, he sees the atman with the help of his mind. 'O supreme
among brahmanas[There is a minor inconsistency, because the siddha brahmana is now speaking to Krishna. However, he is also repeating what he told Kashyapa. To avoid confusion, we have put this part within quotes.]! I have now told you about all the mysteries. O disciple! I grant you permission. Cheerfully,
go wherever you wish to.'" O Krishna! Having been thus addressed, my immensely ascetic disciple, the brahmana,
went away as he desired, his doubts having been dispelled.'"

'Vasudeva continued, "O Partha! These are the words the bull among brahmanas spoke to me at that time. These
were appropriate words for those who wish to resort to moksha dharma. He then disappeared. O Partha! Have you
heard this truth with single-minded attention? This is exactly what you heard when you were on your chariot[A reference to the Bhagavadgita.]. O
Partha! It is my view that a man who is not accomplished in consciousness, is not learned and has not cleansed his
soul, will be confused about this and will find it extremely difficult to grasp it. O bull among the Bharata lineage!
This is a great secret even among the gods. O Partha! It is rare for any other mortal to have heard it, anywhere. O
unblemished one! No man other than you deserves to hear it. A person whose soul is confused will not be able to
comprehend it easily. O Kounteya! The world of the gods is full of those who observe rites. For those who have
mortal forms, the gods disapprove of withdrawal from sacrifices[In such an event, the gods will not get their shares and humans will also become like gods.]. O Partha! The eternal brahman is the supreme
destination. One obtains immortality there, abandoning misery. One is always happy. O Partha! If they resort to
this dharma, those with inferior births, women, vaishyas and shudras, also go to the supreme destination, not to
speak of extremely learned brahmanas and kshatriyas, who are always devoted to their own dharma and to the object of obtaining Brahma's world. This has been indicated in the reasons and means for that pursuit. There are determinations about misery and the successful obtaining of the fruits of emancipation. O bull among the Bharata lineage! There is no bliss that is superior to this. O Pandava! A man who is learned, faithful and brave, one who abandons the insubstantial practices of the mortal world, can use these means to quickly obtain the supreme destination.
This is all that needs to be said and there is nothing more. O Partha! This becomes evident if one steadily practises
yoga for six months."'
