'Sanjaya said, "Somadatta's immensely illustrious son pierced each of Droupadi's sons, great archers, with five arrows each and then struck them again with seven arrows more. O lord! They were sorely afflicted by the force of
that terrible warrior. In that battle, they were stupefied and for some time, did not know what they should do.
Shatanika, Nakula's son and the scorcher of enemies, used two arrows to pierce Somadatta's son, bull among men,
and roared in delight. In that battle, the others[The other four brothers-Prativindhya through Yudhishthira, Sutasoma or Shrutasoma through Bhima, Shrutakarma or Shrutakirti through Arjuna and Shrutasena through Sahadeva.] also made efforts and struck Somadatta's intolerant son with
three arrows each. O great king! He shot five arrows at them and struck each of those immensely illustrious ones in
the heart with an arrow. Those five great-souled brothers were struck by the arrows. They surrounded the brave
ratha and pierced him severely with arrows. Arjuna's son used four sharp arrows to angrily slay his horses and dispatched them to Yama's abode. Bhimasena's son severed the bow of Somadatta's great-souled son. He roared powerfully and pierced him with sharp arrows. Yudhishthira's son sliced his standard and brought it down on the
ground. Nakula's son brought down his charioteer from the seat on the chariot. O king! On ascertaining that he had
been forced to retreat by his brothers, Sahadeva's son used a kshurapra arrow to sever the great-minded one's
head[So far, the adjective used has been Somadatta's son. This is usually a description used for Bhurishrava. However, Bhurishrava was killed later by Satyaki. So Shatanika killed Bhurishrava's brother Shala, who was also Somadatta's son.]. That head, adorned with gold, fell down on the ground. It was resplendent on the field of battle, with a
complexion like that of the rising sun. O king! On seeing that the head of Somadatta's great-souled son had been
brought down, all those on your side were terrified and fled in different directions.

'"In that battle, Alambusa angrily fought against the immensely strong Bhimasena, like Lakshmana against Ravana's son[Ravana's son means Indrajit.]. All the beings were astounded and delighted at the battle between the man and the rakshasa. O
king! Bhima laughed and pierced Rishyashringa's intolerant son, Indra among rakshasas, with nine sharp arrows.
Pierced in the battle, the rakshasa let out a mighty roar and he and his followers attacked Bhima. He pierced Bhima
with five arrows that had drooping tufts. In that battle, the scorcher of enemies quickly destroyed thirty rathas who
were following Bhima. He slew four hundred more and pierced Bhima with arrows. Having been thus pierced by
the immensely strong rakshasa, Bhima sat down on the floor of his chariot. He lost his senses. When he recovered
his senses, the son of the wind god was overcome by great rage. He stretched his terrible and supreme bow, which
was capable of bearing a great burden. He struck Alambusha all over the body with sharp arrows. O king! He was
like a large mass of collyrium and pierced by these many arrows all over his body, looked as beautiful as a kimshuka. He was struck in the battle by those arrows that had been released from Bhima's bow and remembered how his
brother had been killed by the great-souled Pandava. He assumed a terrible form and addressed Bhimasena. 'O
Partha! Wait for a while in this battle and witness my valour today. O extremely evil one! The powerful Baka,
supreme among rakshasas, was my brother. It is true that you killed him, but that happened when I did not see it.'

Having thus spoken to Bhima, he disappeared and enveloped him with a great and severe shower of arrows. O
king! When the rakshasa became invisible in that battle, Bhima covered the sky with his straight-tufted arrows.
Thus struck by Bhima, he instantly returned to his chariot. He entered deep inside the earth and suddenly rose up
into the sky. He adopted many different kinds of forms, some large and some small. From above, he showered
down many different kinds of words in every direction. Many Pandava soldiers died[The Critical edition excises some shlokas. In these, after the words, Alambusa showered down weapons. Because of the excision, the continuity is broken.]. O king! So did fighting
elephants, many horses and foot soldiers. Because of those arrows, rathas were brought down in their chariots. A
river of blood began to flow and the chariots were eddies. It was infested by crocodiles in the form of elephants.
The umbrellas were the swans. It was full of mud[From the blood, flesh and marrow.]. The arms[Severed arms.] were like serpents. That river began to flow
and was populated by large numbers of rakshasas. O king! It flowed and bore along many Chedis, Panchalas and
Srinjayas. O king! Thus did he fearlessly roam around in that battle. The Pandavas became extremely anxious at
witnessing his valour. The hearts of your soldiers became full of joy. Musical instruments were sounded in fierce
and extremely loud tones and this made the body hair stand up. On hearing the terrible sound emitted by your soldiers, the Pandavas could not tolerate it, just as a snake cannot bear the slapping of palms.

'"Bhimasena's eyes became coppery red in anger and they seemed to consume, like the fire. O venerable one! In
the battle, he released the weapon known as tvashtra, as if it had been released by Tvashtra himself. From that,
thousands of arrows were produced in every direction. Because of those arrows, your soldiers were severely routed. It destroyed the great maya created by the rakshasa and also afflicted the rakshasa. Thus, the rakshasa was
struck in many parts of his body by Bhimasena. He abandoned that encounter with Bhima and fled towards
Drona's array. O king! When that Indra among rakshasas was vanquished by the great-souled one, the Pandavas
roared like lions and made all the directions resound. They delightedly honoured the wind god's immensely strong
son, like the masses of Maruts worshipping Shakra after he had vanquished Prahlada in battle[However, Prahlada was a good asura and devoted to Vishnu. There was no reason for Indra to fight with him.]."'