Janamejaya asked, 'The king saw his sons and grandsons, with their friends and followers. After this, what did
Dhritarashtra and King Yudhishthira do?'

Vaishampayana replied, 'Being able to see his sons again was a great and extraordinary wonder. After having
seen this, the rajarshi was freed from his grief and returned to his hermitage. Taking Dhritarashtra's permission, all
the ordinary people and the supreme rishis went away, as they desired. The great-souled Pandavas, with the superior and the inferior soldiers, followed the great-souled king and his wife. The intelligent sage who was Satyavati's
son, worshipped by brahmana rishis and the worlds, also went to the hermitage and addressed Dhritarashtra. "O
Dhritarashtra! O mighty-armed one! O descendant of the Kourava lineage! Listen. You have obtained knowledge
from the ancient rishis, the performers of auspicious deeds. They are senior, prosperous in knowledge and born in
noble lineages. They know about the Vedas and the Vedangas. They know about dharma and about the ancient
texts. They have told you about various accounts. Do not have any sorrow in your mind. A learned person is not
distressed because of ill fortune. You have also heard about the secrets of the gods from Narada, who knows about
what the gods intend. Your sons died after following the dharma of kshatriyas. They were sanctified by weapons
and obtained an auspicious end. You have seen your sons, happily roaming around as they will. With all his brothers, their wives and well-wishers, the intelligent Yudhishthira is awaiting your instructions. Let him go, so that he
can rule his own kingdom. He has dwelt in this forest for more than a month. O scorcher of enemies! The kingdom
must always be protected carefully. O lord of men! There are many who hope to seize the kingdom." The extremely intelligent Vyasa addressed the Kourava king in this way.

'Hence, the eloquent one summoned Yudhishthira and spoke  these words. "O  Ajatashatru! O  fortunate one!
With your brothers, listen to me. O lord of the earth! Through your favours, grief does not constrain me any longer.
O son! I am happy, just as I used to be with you earlier in Gajasahvya. O learned one! With you as my protector, I
am surrounded by everything agreeable. I have obtained the fruits of obtaining a son through you. I am extremely
happy with you. O mighty-armed one! I no longer suffer from rancour. O son! Leave quickly. Since I have met
you, my austerities have suffered. My body has suffered from austerities. But on meeting you, I am able to hold it
up again. Like me, your mothers[Gandhari and Kunti.] are also emaciated at having subsisted only on leaves. They are engaged in
vows like mine. O son! They will not live for a long time. We have seen Duryodhana and the others, who have
gone to the other world. That became possible because of the valour of Vyasa's austerities and you coming here. O
unblemished one! The purpose behind my long life has been met. You should grant me permission to engage in severe austerities. The ancestral rites and fame of the lineage are now vested in you. O mighty-armed one! O son!
Today or tomorrow, without any delay, leave. O bull among the Bharata lineage! You have heard a lot about the
policy to be followed by kings. O lord! I do not see what else I can instruct you. You are accomplished." O son!
These are the words the king spoke to the king[Yudhishthira spoke to Dhritarashtra.]. "O one who knows about dharma! You should not abandon me in
this way. I do not deserve it. If they so wish, let all my brothers and followers leave. I will carefully serve you and
the two mothers in the vows." Gandhari replied, "O son! It shouldn't be that way. Listen to my words. The Kuru
lineage and the ancestral rites of your father-in-law vest with you. O son! You should depart. You have worshipped
us enough. O son! The king has spoken to you about what you should do and you listen to your father's words."

Thus addressed, he wiped his eyes, which were overflowing with tears of affection. Weeping, he spoke these words
to Kunti. "The king has cast me away and so has the illustrious Gandhari. However, I have always been bound to
you. How can I miserably go away? O one who follows dharma! But I do not also wish to be an impediment in the
path of your austerities. There is nothing superior to austerities. Greatness is obtained through austerities. O queen!
My mind no longer turns towards the kingdom, as it used to do in earlier times. My entire mind and soul are now
attracted towards austerities. This entire world is now empty. O fortunate one! The relatives are fewer. Our forces
are no longer as strong as they used to be. The Panchalas have been severely diminished and only the maidens remain. O fortunate one! I do not see anyone who can establish their lineage again. In the encounter, all of them have
been reduced to ashes by Drona alone. Those who were left were slain by Drona's son in the night. We can see that
the Chedis and the Matsyas are no longer what they used to be. The Vrishnis alone are left, protected by Vasudeva's chakra. But I also see that dharma and artha must be established. There is no other reason. Therefore, cast
your auspicious glances on all of us. It will be extremely difficult for us to see you. O mother! The king will engage in fierce austerities." When he heard these words, the mighty-armed Sahadeva, the lord of any battle, spoke
these words to Yudhishthira, tears flowing down from his eyes. "O bull among kings! I am not interested in leaving
my mother. You should quickly go. But I will observe austerities in this forest. I will use austerities to dry up my
body here. I will serve at the feet of the king and my mothers." When he spoke in this way, Kunti embraced the
mighty-armed one in her arms and said, "O son! You should not speak in this way. Act in accordance with my
words. May everything be auspicious and well with you. May my sons be well. If you remain here, our austerities
will be obstructed. I am bound by the noose of affection to you and my supreme austerities will suffer. O son!
Therefore, depart. That is best for you. O lord! There is little time left for us." O Indra among kings! In this way,
through this and many other words spoken by Kunti, their minds were calmed, especially those of Sahadeva and
the king.

'The bulls among the Kuru lineage took permission from their mothers and from the king. They greeted the best
among the Kuru lineage and the mothers and said, "O king! We will return. We have been honoured through these
auspicious words. O king! With your permission, we will leave, cleansed of sin." This is what the great-souled
Dharmaraja said. The rajarshi granted him permission, honoured Yudhishthira and pronounced benedictions of victory over him. The king comforted Bhima, best among strong ones. The intelligent and valiant one honoured him
back in return. Kouravya embraced Arjuna and the twins, bulls among men. He honoured them and granted them
permission to leave. They grasped Gandhari's feet and sought her permission. The king's mother[Kunti.] inhaled the fragrance of his head and embraced him. All of them circumambulated her, like calves who were being separated[From their mothers.
 
 ].
As they circumambulated, they kept on glancing towards her repeatedly. So did the virtuous Droupadi and all the
other Kourava women. They followed the prescribed conduct and took leave of their father-in-law. The unblemished ones took leave from their mothers-in-law and were embraced by them. Having been instructed about their
duties,  they  left  with  their  husbands.  The charioteers shouted, "Yoke. Arrange  for  the  yoking."  There  was  the
grunting of camels and the neighing of horses. King Yudhishthira left for the city of Hastinapura, with his wives,
soldiers and his relatives.'

This ends Putra Darshana Parva.