'Vasudeva said, "Having been thus addressed by Bhishma, Drona, Vidura, Gandhari and Dhritarashtra, the evil one
was not brought to his senses. Not understanding, he angrily arose, his eyes red with rage. Wishing to give up their
lives, the kings rushed after him. The king[Duryodhana.] repeatedly instructed the kings, who were bereft of their senses. 'Go
to Kurukshetra. It is Pushya today[Meaning that Pushya (the eighth nakshatra) was in the ascendant.].' Driven by destiny, having made Bhishma the general, together with their soldiers, those lords of the earth then cheerfully left. Those lords of the earth have assembled eleven akshouhinis of
soldiers. Bhishma is at the forefront, with a palm tree on his standard.

'"O lord of the earth! Therefore, do what is appropriate under the circumstances. O king! O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! I have repeated the words that were spoken in my presence by Bhishma, Drona, Vidura, Gandhari
and Dhritarashtra in the assembly of the Kurus. O king! Hoping for fraternity, I first used conciliation, to prevent
dissension in the lineage of the Kurus and ensure the welfare of the subjects. When I saw that peace was not acceptable, I resorted to alienation and recounted your deeds, divine and human. When I saw that Suyodhana ignored
my words of conciliation, I assembled all the kings and tried to sow seeds of dissension. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! O lord! I showed them extraordinary and terrible manifestations and superhuman exploits. I censured the kings. I denigrated Suyodhana. I repeatedly tried to frighten Radheya and Soubala. I repeatedly recounted the meanness of the sons of Dhritarashtra. Through eloquence and counsel, I tried to create disunity among the
kings. Using conciliation again, I spoke to them about gifts, so that a division could be created in the lineage of the
Kurus and I could be successful in my objective. I said, 'The children, all the Pandavas, will abandon their pride
and seek refuge with Dhritarashtra, Bhishma and Vidura. Let them give the kingdom to you and let them not remain as lords. Let it be as the king[Dhritarashtra.], Gangeya and Vidura have said. Let the entire kingdom be yours, only give up
five villages. O supreme among kings! Surely your father can sustain them.' Having been spoken to in this way,
the evil-minded one was not ready to change his views. For that wicked one, I can see no other means but the
fourth one of chastisement[Sama (conciliation), dana (gifts) and bheda (dissension) being the other three, danda is chastisement or
punishment.]. Those lords of the earth have marched out to Kurukshetra, to their perdition. I have
told you everything that occurred in the assembly of the Kurus. O Pandava! They will not give up the kingdom
without a war. All of them are headed for destruction and are confronting death."'
