'"Bharadvaja asked, 'There are five elements[Fire, air, earth, water and space (sky), known as mahabhutas, the great
elements.] that Brahma created first. They pervade this world and are known
as the great elements. The immensely intelligent one created thousands of beings. Therefore, why are these five
known as the elements?'

'"Bhrigu replied, 'Only those infinite beings that were created with a loud noise are addressed by the appellation
"great element". The wind is exertion. The sound is the sky and space. The fire is solidified water. The earth resulted from their friction. The body consists of the five elements. Everything, mobile and immobile, is made out of
these five elements and the five senses-hearing, smell, taste, touch and sight, result from them[Hearing is equated with space, smell with earth, taste with water, touch
with air and sight with fire.].'
'"Bharadvaja asked, 'If all mobile and immobile objects are constituted from these five elements, why are these
five elements not seen in the bodies of immobile objects? Trees do not have any heat. They do not move. Their essence is dense. The five elements are not seen in their bodies. They do not hear. They do not see. They do not
know smell and taste. They do not know touch either. How can they be made out of the five elements? They do not
have any liquid in them, or fire, or earth, or wind, or space. In any measure of the trees, the elements don't exist.'

'"Bhrigu replied, 'Though trees are dense, there is no doubt that space exists in them. Manifestations of flowers
and fruits are always noticed in them. It is because of the heat in them that leaves, bark, fruits and flowers are seen
to decay. They decay and dry and this shows that they possess touch. Crushed by the wind and thunder, fruits and
flowers wither away. That sound is received by the ears. Therefore, trees can hear. A creeper winds around a tree
and envelopes it from every side. Someone without sight cannot advance along a path. Therefore, trees can see.
When trees are healthy, there are flowers and many kinds of auspicious and inauspicious scents and fragrances.
Therefore, trees can smell. They drink water with their roots. It is seen that they suffer from disease. Those diseases can also be cured. Therefore, trees possess taste. One can raise water and drink it up through the bent stalk of
a lotus. Like that, aided by the wind, trees drink water through their roots. They experience happiness and unhappiness. When severed, they grow again. I see trees as living. They are not without consciousness. The water that has
been ingested is digested with the fire and the wind. Depending on the amount of food it has taken, the tree grows
and is cool. The five elements exist in the bodies of all mobile objects, though the extent differs from one to the
other. It is because of these that the bodies move. The skin, the flesh, the bones, the marrow and veins as the fifth-
these things that exist in the body are enumerated as made out of earth. Energy, anger, the eyes, the internal fire
and the fire of digestion-these five things in the body are made out of fire. The ears, the nose, the mouth, the heart
and the stomach-these five elements in the bodies of living beings are made out of space. Phlegm, bile, sweat, fat
and blood -these are the five kinds of water that are always in the bodies of living beings. Prana makes a living
being move, vyana provides the impulse to act[In pranayama, the breath of life is prana and this has five actions-prana
(exhalation), apana (downward inhalation), vyana (diffusion through the
body), udana (upward inhalation) and samana (digestive breath).]. Apana advances towards the tongue. Samana resides in the heart.
Udana is the state of not breathing and when it penetrates, one can speak. These are the five kinds of wind that enable bodies to move. The quality of the earth enables smell. Taste is the water in the body. The eyes see because of
the fire. One experiences touch because of the wind. Of these, I will recount the qualities of scent in detail. Ishta,
anishta, madhura, katu, nirhari, samhata, snigdha, ruksha, vishada-these are the nine types of scent that are
known to be extensions of the earth[With the exception of nirhari, respectively, agreeable, disagreeable,
sweet, bitter, composite, gentle, rough and clear. The meaning of nirhari
is unclear and probably means a scent that can be smelt from a long
distance.]. Sound, touch, sight and taste are said to be the qualities of water. I will tell
you about the knowledge of taste. Listen to me attentively. The gods, famous for their souls, have spoken about
many kinds of taste. They are sweet, salty, bitter, astringent, sour and pungent. These six kinds of taste are said to
be extensions of the water. Sound, touch and form are said to be the three qualities of fire. It is said that the fire
sees and makes one see many different kinds of form. Short, tall, thick, quadrangular, triangular, circular, white,
black, dark red, blue, yellow, light red-these twelve kinds of form are said to represent the extensive qualities of
the fire. Sound and touch are known as the two qualities of the wind. Touch represents the quality of the wind.
There are said to be many different kinds of touch-hard, smooth, soft, slippery, mild, terrible, warm, cold, pleasant, disagreeable, delicate and clear. These twelve are said to be the extensive qualities of the wind. It is said that
space has only one quality, that of sound. I will now tell you in detail about the many different kinds of sound.
Know them to be shadaja, rishabha, gandhara, madhyama, panchama, dhaivata and nishadaka[Sa-re-ga-ma-pa-dha-ni.]. These are said
to be the seven types of qualities and signs of space. Though it may exist in drums and other musical instruments,
sound is everywhere. It is said that sound is characteristic of space and mingles with the qualities of the air, because it cannot be heard when different kinds of touch are not used. The elements are always mixed with other elements. Water, fire and air are always awake in the bodies of living beings.'"'
