'Yudhishthira asked, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If a man wishes to base himself on dharma, how
should he conduct himself? O learned one! O bull among the Bharata lineage! I wish to know. Tell me. Both truth
and falsehood pervade the world. O king! Therefore, if a man is determined to follow dharma, how should he act
vis-à-vis these two? What is truth? What is falsehood? What is eternal dharma? When should one speak the truth?
When should one utter a lie?"

'Bhishma replied, "Truthful speech is virtuous. There is nothing superior to truth. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! In this world, this is an extremely difficult thing to understand and I will tell you the truth about this.
When falsehood is truth and when truth is falsehood, one should not speak the truth and one should utter a lie. A
juvenile person is confused about truth that is injurious. One who can discriminate between truth and falsehood
knows about dharma. There may be an extremely terrible man who is ignoble and unaccomplished in his wisdom.
However, even he can obtain extremely great merits, such as Balaka did when he killed a blind being[The Balaka story has been recounted in Section 73 (Volume 7). The
hunter Balaka killed a blind beast that was causing injury. The Koushika
story has also been recounted in Section 73 (Volume 7). An ascetic
named Koushika spoke the truth and caused great harm. There were robbers who pursued some people, desiring their riches, and Koushika told
the robbers where those people were hidden.]. What is
extraordinary in this? But there can be a person who desires dharma, but acts like one who does not know dharma.
On the banks of the Ganga, Koushika perpetrated a great sin. What you have asked me is complicated when it becomes extremely difficult to state what dharma is. It is extremely difficult to enumerate it, even if one resorts to
reasoning. The words of dharma were created for the prosperity of beings. It is certain that anything that does not
cause injury is dharma. It is said that dharma is anything that holds up[From the etymological root for holding up, dhri.]. Beings are held up through dharma. It is
certain that anything that serves to hold up is dharma. There are some who say that dharma is that which is laid
down in the shruti texts, but there are other people who do not agree. I cannot find fault with this, since everything
is not laid down there. If someone asks, desiring the riches of others, one should not answer[A reference to the Koushika story.]. It is certain that not
telling them would have been dharma. If one can escape without speaking, one should not speak. However, if not
speaking gives rise to suspicion, one must certainly speak. Having thought about it, in that situation, when one
consorts with wicked people, uttering a lie is superior to speaking the truth, even if one has taken an oath. If it is
possible, one must never give riches to the likes of those. If riches are given to wicked people, this makes the giver
suffer. Even if this involves an injury to one's body, it is better not to give them what they wish. However, there
may be witnesses who have to speak to ascertain the nature of the truth. If they do not speak what must be spoken,
they are liars[This shloka breaks the continuity in the argument about not speaking the
truth. The argument resumes after this shloka.]. If life is at stake and at the time of a marriage, one should lie. So should one for the sake of preserving riches or for the sake of ensuring dharma for others. However, if he does this out of a desire to share in the
dharma of others, he is begging for dharma and is inferior. If someone has promised to pay and later deviates from
his duty, he must be compelled by force. If a person deviates from a pledge that has been taken in accordance with
dharma, then he establishes himself in adharma. A deceitful person may deviate from his own dharma, but still
pretend to live in accordance with it. He is evil and fraudulent in his life and must be restrained in every possible
way. All the wicked people in the world are certain to strive for riches. If one tolerates them or if one eats with
them, one is wicked in conduct and is certain to fall down. Such a person will be dislodged from gods and men and
it will be as if he is dead already. He will be miserable because his riches will be taken away and his remaining
alive becomes pointless. One must make efforts to tell him, 'This is the dharma that you should find agreeable.' It
is certain that there is no dharma for those who are wicked. If one kills a person who has reached such a state, one
does not suffer from any sin. That person has already been slain because of his deeds and is only killing someone
who has already been slain. Anyone who concludes an agreement with such a person, whose intelligence has been
destroyed and whose life is wicked, behaves like a crow or a vulture[Examples of deceit.]. When they are freed from their bodies and
rise upwards, they are reborn in those wombs. Whichever is the way in which a man behaves towards one's own
self, that is the conduct one should show towards him and this is dharma. Deceit should be used against those who
are deceitful. Those who are virtuous must be repaid with virtuous conduct."'
