Souti said, 'O you who are rich in austerities! When the night was gone, it was morning and the sun arose. The sisters Kadru and Vinata, having laid a wager on slavery, were impatient and driven by jealousy. They started out to
see the horse Ucchaihshrava, who was nearby. On their way, they saw the deep and great ocean, the treasury of the
waters, full of fish that swallow whales[The word used is timingila. A whale is a timi, a timingila is that which swallows whales.], crowded with sharks[The word used is makara. Since a makara is a mythical being, it is impossible to translate it satisfactorily.
But shark or crocodile is close enough.] and populated by thousands of other creatures of
many forms. No other creatures could approach it, because of the perennial and terrible presence of crocodiles and
turtles. It was the source of all jewels. It was the abode of Varuna. It was the beautiful and supreme home of the
nagas. It was the lord of all the rivers. It was the home of the subterranean fire, friend to the demons and a terror to
all creatures. It was the great reservoir of the waters and never decayed. It was blessed and brought welfare to the
gods. It was the source of the ambrosia. It was beyond measure, beyond imagination, sacred and supreme. It was
also fearful, with the terrible roars of aquatic creatures making a thunderous noise and full of deep whirlpools. It
was a source of fear to all creatures. Buffeted by the winds, with the shoreline changing, heaving up with the agitation and the turbulence, it seemed to dance everywhere, its waves like raised hands. Its waves heaved with changes
in the moon. It was the source of the panchajanya[Krishna's conch.]. It was the source of the best of jewels.

'In days gone by, it was agitated by Lord Govinda[Vishnu. This is a reference to Vishnu's boar (varaha) incarnation.] of infinite energy, when he assumed the form of a boar and
found the earth at the bottom of the waters. Though he tried for 100 years, the brahmarshi Atri could not find its
bottom, lower than the nether regions. At the beginning of every yuga, when Vishnu of infinite energy falls asleep
in spiritual meditation, it is the bed of the lotus-navelled[Vishnu.]. Its waters were the sacrificial offerings in the subterranean fire's blazing flames. It was holy, without limits, vast, beyond measure and the lord of the rivers. They saw
the great ocean, with thousands of great rivers rushing towards it with pride, like rivals towards lovers' rendezvous. They saw that it was deep, populated by whales and sharks, thundering with the sounds of other aquatic
creatures. They saw it was vast, as extended as the sky, unfathomable and the infinite and great treasury of the waters. When they thus saw the deep ocean, populated with whales, sharks and waves, serene and extended like the
sky, shining with the flames of the subterranean fire, they swiftly passed over it.'
