Yudhishthira asked, "When the brahmana disappeared, what did the king do? What did his immensely fortunate wife do? O grandfather! Tell me this."

'Bhishma replied, "When the rishi could no longer be seen, the king and his wife were tired. Ashamed and
bereft of their senses, they returned. In distress, they entered the city and did not say anything. They only thought
about what Chyavana had done. With an empty mind, the king entered his house and saw that the descendant of
the Bhrigu lineage was lying down on his bed. They were amazed at seeing this and thought about this marvel. The
sight of the sage removed their exhaustion. They remained in their places and again began to tend to him. However, this time, the great sage was sleeping on his other side. The valiant one arose after the same time span. Though
they were scared, they did not display any of their agitation. O lord of the earth! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having awoken, the sage said, 'Give me some oil for my limbs. I wish to have a bath.' Despite being hungry
and afflicted by exhaustion, they agreed. They presented him with some extremely expensive oil that had been
boiled one hundred times. When the rishi was happily seated, they controlled their words and rubbed him with the
oil, until the immensely great ascetic, Bhargava, said that he had had enough. Bhargava noticed that they seemed
to be indifferent. He suddenly arose and entered the bathroom. Everything required for taking a bath, befitting a
king, had been kept there. Ignoring all this, while the king looked on, the sage disappeared again.

'"O bull among the Bharata lineage! However, the couple was not disturbed at this. Kushika and his wife then
saw the illustrious lord, the descendant of the Bhrigu lineage, seated on the throne, after having taken his bath.
Cheerfully, King Kushika and his wife offered the sage some food that had been cooked, feigning complete indifference. The sage had told the king that food should be brought, and with his wife, the king served it. There were
many  kinds  of  meat  and  many  kinds  of  vegetables.  There  were  spices  and  condiments,  and  light  drinks  were
served. There were succulent biscuits, colourful cakes and confectionery. There were many kinds of tasty items,
including wild fare that sages feed on. There were varied kinds of fruit and piles of good. There were jujubes, inguda nuts, kashmari nuts and cashew nuts. There was food meant for householders and for forest dwellers. Fearing
the sage's curse, the king offered all kinds of food. All of this was brought and placed before Chyavana. Once this
had been brought, a bed and a seat were offered to the sage. The food was placed in vessels and covered with white
cloth. But Chyavana, the descendant of the Bhrigu lineage, burnt all this down to ashes. Engaged in their great
vow, the couple did not exhibit any rage at this. While they looked on, he disappeared again. For the entire night,
the rajarshi stood there, with his wife. The prosperous one did not say anything. Nor did he allow rage to penetrate
him. Every day, in the king's abode, he was honoured with many kinds of mantras, given the best of beds and all
the expensive requirements for having a bath. There were large piles of garments that were offered. Chyavana was
incapable of detecting any change in their behaviour.

'"The brahmana rishi again spoke to King Kushika. 'You and your wife get yoked to a chariot and quickly bear
me to wherever I ask you to.' Without showing any doubt, the king agreed to what the store of austerities had said.
He only asked, 'Should it be a chariot for pleasure or a chariot for fighting?' The king cheerfully spoke these
words to the sage. Chyavana cheerfully replied to the destroyer of enemy cities. 'Swiftly prepare a chariot that is
used for warfare. Equip it with weapons, flags, spears, spikes and staffs. Let it roar with hundreds of bells. Stock it
with javelins. Let it also be stocked with clubs and swords and armed with the best of weapons.' He agreed and
prepared a giant chariot. His wife was yoked to the left and he was himself yoked to the right. A three-pointed
goad was placed on the chariot. It was as hard as the vajra and as sharp as a needle. Having equipped it in this way,
the king spoke these words. 'O illustrious one! The chariot is ready. Where does the descendant of the Bhrigu lineage want it to go? O brahmana rishi! The chariot will go wherever you ask it to.' The illustrious one told the king,
'Let it proceed one step at a time, gently. The two of you should drag it so that I am not exhausted and the rhythm
does not break. While all the people look on, I should be borne pleasantly. If any passer-by approaches me, I will
give him riches. Along the way, there may be brahmanas who desire riches. Without retaining anything, I will give
them all the riches and the gems. O king! Without any reflection, act entirely in this way.' Hearing these words, the
king summoned his servants and said, 'Without any doubts, give the sage everything that he has asked for.' Many
kinds of riches, women, pairs of sheep, raw and polished gold, large elephants that were like elephants and all the
king's advisers were made to follow the rishi's chariot. Lamentations arose from every part of the afflicted city.
The king and the queen were violently struck on their backs and flanks by the pointed goad. However, they displayed no signs of agitation. They trembled, because they were hungry and had not eaten for fifty nights. But the
brave couple managed to drag along that excellent chariot. They were severely struck in many places and blood
began to flow from their wounds. O great king! They looked like flowering kimshuka trees. On seeing them, the
citizens were overcome by great grief. However, afraid of being cursed, no one said anything. They gathered in
groups of two and said, 'Behold the strength of austerities. Though we are angry, we are incapable of looking at
the best of sages. Great is the valour of the illustrious maharshi, who has cleansed his soul. But also behold the fortitude of the king and his wife. They are exhausted and afflicted. Nevertheless, they are dragging the chariot along.
The descendant of the Bhrigu lineage cannot detect any signs of agitation in them.' The extender of the Bhrigu lineage saw that they were indifferent. As if he was Vaishravana[Kubera.], he began to give away the riches. Despite this,
the king remained cheerful in his soul and did all that he was asked to do.

'"The illustrious one, supreme among sages, was pleased. He descended from the best of chariots and released
the couple. Having released them in the proper way, he spoke these words. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Bhargava was extremely happy and spoke these gentle and deep words. He said, 'I wish to grant you the best of
boons.' The learned one, the best of sages, rubbed their delicate bodies with his hands. O supreme among the
Bharata lineage! The touch of his affection was like that of amrita. The king spoke these words. 'We have not suffered from any exhaustion.' Their exhaustion was dispelled through Bhargava's powers. Cheerfully, the illustrious
one said, 'I have never spoken a falsehood. What I say will happen. This is an auspicious and beautiful spot on the
banks of the Ganga. O king! Devoted to my vow, I will dwell here for some time. O son! You are exhausted. Return to your own city. O lord of men! Come here with your wife tomorrow and you will see me. You should not
yield to rage. A  beneficial time is imminent. Everything that is in your  heart will be accomplished.' Thus  addressed, Kushika was cheerful in his mind. He spoke these words, which were full of purport, to the tiger among
sages. 'O immensely fortunate one! I have no anger. O illustrious one! We have been purified by you. Our bodies
have become young and strong. I and my wife no longer see any of the wounds that were caused by the goad on
our bodies. With my wife, I am hale. O sage! I see that this queen looks like a divine apsara. She possesses great
beauty, just as I have seen her in earlier times. O great sage! All of this has become possible because of your
favours. O illustrious one! O one with truth as one's valour! There is no marvel in your having accomplished this.'

Thus addressed, Chyavana told Kushika, 'O lord of men! With your wife, come here tomorrow.' Hearing this, the
rajarshi honoured him and took his permission. With a body that was like that of the king of the gods, he returned
to the city. The advisers and priests came out to meet him. So did all the soldiers, the courtesans and the ordinary
people. King Kushika blazed in his supreme prosperity and they surrounded him. He happily entered his city and
was praised by the bards. Having entered the city, he performed all the ablutions. With his wife, the king ate and
spent the night. They looked at each other. Their old age was gone and it was as if their youth had just bloomed.
They were like immortals. They were delighted with these new bodies and went to sleep. Because of the boon
granted by the brahmana, they had become extremely handsome. The rishi was an extender of the fame of the lineage of the Bhrigus. The store of austerities changed that forest into a prosperous spot. The learned one adorned it
with many kinds of jewels. This was a beauty that Shatakratu's abode didn't possess."'
