'Sanjaya said, "That shower of arrows was difficult to withstand, even by the danavas. But that Indra among kings
withstood it in battle, like a giant elephant bearing rain. Overcome with rage, he sighed like a serpent. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! Your son confronted a supreme danger. He released twenty-five extremely sharp iron
arrows. O king! They suddenly descended on that bull among rakshasas, like angry and violent serpents on Mount
Gandhamadana. He was pierced by them and blood began to flow. He was like an elephant with a shattered temple.
The maneater then made up his mind to destroy the king. He grasped a giant javelin that was capable of shattering
a mountain. It blazed like a giant meteor and was like Maghavan's vajra. The mighty-armed one raised it, wishing
to kill your son. The lord of Vanga was astride an elephant that was like a mountain[Although described as the lord of Vanga, this is Bhagadatta.]. On seeing it raised, he
swiftly advanced towards the rakshasa. That supreme of elephants was powerful and was extremely fast. He
reached the path where Duryodhana's chariot was stationed and protected your son's chariot with the elephant. O
great king! On seeing that the path had been restricted by the intelligent king of Vanga, Ghatotkacha's eyes became
red with rage. He raised a giant javelin and hurled it towards the elephant. O king! When it was hurled from his
arms, the elephant was struck. It was covered with blood and hurt grievously, fell down and died. When the elephant fell down, the powerful lord of Vanga quickly jumped down and resorted to the ground.

'"Duryodhana saw that the supreme of elephants had fallen down and that his soldiers were scattered. He was
gravely distressed. He held the dharma of kshatriyas to be of paramount importance and was also proud of his own
self. Though he had been defeated, the king remained as immobile as a mountain. He affixed a sharp arrow that
was like the fire at the time of destruction and in great rage, unleashed it at the terrible traveller of the night. The
arrow was as radiant as Indra's vajra. On seeing it descend, the gigantic Ghatotkacha avoided it through his dexterity of movement. He roared terribly again, his eyes red with anger. This frightened all beings, like clouds at the end
of a yuga. On hearing the fearful roar of the terrible rakshasa, Bhishma, Shantanu's son, went to the preceptor and
said, 'I have heard the terrible roar emitted by the rakshasa. I have no doubt that Hidimba's son is fighting with
King Duryodhana. No being is capable of vanquishing him in battle. O fortunate one! Therefore, go there and protect the king. The immensely fortunate one has been attacked by the evil-souled rakshasa. O scorchers of
enemies[Bhishma is addressing others too.]! This is the supreme duty for all of us now.' On hearing the words of the grandfather, the maharathas
used the utmost speed to quickly go to the spot where Kourava was-Drona, Somadatta, Bahlika, Jayadratha, Kripa, Bhurishrava, Shalya, Chitrasena, Vivimshati, Ashvatthama, Vikarna, the one from Avanti[It is not clear which of the two from Avanti is meant.] and Brihadbala.
Many thousand rathas followed them. They advanced to rescue Duryodhana, your son, who was oppressed. That
invincible army was protected by the best in the worlds. The supreme of rakshasas saw that it was advancing to kill
him. However, like Mount Mainaka, the mighty-armed one did not tremble at all. Surrounded by his relatives, he
grasped a giant bow. With spears, clubs, bare hands and many kinds of weapons, a tumultuous battle commenced
and it made the body hair stand up. The rakshasas were on one side and the foremost of Duryodhana's soldiers on
the other. O great king! The tremendous sound of bows being twanged could be heard everywhere, as if bamboos
were being burned. Weapons descended on bodies protected by armour. O king! That sound was like that of mountains being shattered. O lord of the earth! Javelins were hurled from the arms of brave ones and as they travelled
through the sky, they looked like snakes. The Indra among rakshasas became extremely angry. The mighty-armed
one drew his extremely large bow and let out a terrible roar. In anger, he used an arrow in the shape of a half-moon
to slice down the preceptor's bow. He roared and used a broad-headed arrow to bring down Somadatta's standard.
He used three arrows to pierce Bahlika between the breasts. He pierced Kripa with one arrow and Chitrasena with
three. He drew his bow to the full extent and used a well-aimed arrow to strike Vikarna in the joint of his shoulders. Covered in blood, he sank down on the floor of his chariot. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The one whose
soul was immeasurable was wrathful. He despatched fifteen iron arrows in the form of half-moons towards Bhurishrava. These swiftly penetrated his armour and penetrated the ground. He next struck Vivimshati and Drona's
charioteers. They fell down on the floors of their chariots, giving up the reins of their horses. The standard of the
king of Sindhu bore the mark of a boar and was decorated with gold. O great king! He uprooted that with an arrow
in the shape of a half-moon and used another to sever his bow. The great-souled one's eyes were red with rage. He
used four iron arrows to slay the four horses of Avanti. O great king! He stretched his bow back to the fullest extent and used a yellow and sharp arrow to pierce Prince Brihadbala. Gravely pierced and wounded, he sank down
on the floor of the chariot. The lord of the rakshasas was full of great rage and was stationed on his chariot. He shot
many arrows that were sharp at the tip and were like venomous serpents. O great king! Though Shalya was skilled
in battle, they pierced him."'
