Vaishampayana said, 'Then the artisans, all the chief advisers and the immensely wise Vidura spoke to Dhritarashtra's son. "O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The time for the supreme sacrifice has arrived. The extremely expensive plough, made out of gold, has been constructed." O lord of the earth! On hearing this, Dhritarashtra's son, foremost among kings, instructed the kings that the king of sacrifices should be initiated. Then the
sacrifice, well designed and with many ingredients, was started. Gandhari's son was consecrated, in due order, in
accordance with the sacred texts. Dhritarashtra, the immensely famous Vidura, Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Karna and
Gandhari's famous son were delighted. O Indra among kings! Swift messengers were dispatched to invite the kings
and the brahmanas. As instructed, the messengers ascended on swift mounts.

'Duhshasana spoke to a messenger who was about to start. "Go swiftly to Dvaitavana and invite the Pandavas,
evil men, in accordance with what is prescribed, and also the brahmanas who are in that great forest." He went to
where the Pandavas resided. Bowing down to them, he said, "O great king[The messenger addressed Yudhishthira.]! Duryodhana, supreme among kings,
is observing a sacrifice. He is supreme among the Kurus and has acquired a lot of riches through his own valour.
The kings and brahmanas are going there from all directions. O king! I have been sent here by the great-souled
Kourava, with an invitation from the king who is Dhritarashtra's son and is the lord of men. O king! He loves that
sacrifice and you should come and witness it." On hearing the messenger's message, King Yudhishthira, tiger
among kings, replied. "It is fortunate that King Suyodhana is performing the foremost of sacrifices. He will extend
the deeds of his ancestors. We will go there, but we cannot do that now. We will have to abide by our oath until
thirteen years have passed." Hearing Dharmaraja's words, Bhima said, "Dharmaraja Yudhishthira will go when
that king has been hurled into a flaming fire lit with weapons and missiles[Shastra and astra respectively.]. When thirteen years have passed, the
king who is Dhritarashtra's son will be offered as oblation into the fire of war by the angry Pandavas. We will then
come. Say this to Suyodhana." O king! The other Pandavas did not speak any unpleasant words. The messenger
reported everything to Dhritarashtra's son.

'Many foremost among men, many kings of countries and many immensely fortunate brahmanas went to the
city of Dhritarashtra's son. They were honoured, in accordance with the sacred texts, in accordance with their varnas and in due order. O lord of men! They were supremely delighted. O Indra among kings! Surrounded by all the
Kouravas, Dhritarashtra's son was extremely happy and spoke to Vidura. "O Kshatta[Vidura's name. The word means the son of a shudra mother and a kshatriya father.]! Act so that everyone is
happy and has plenty of food. You should swiftly act so that everyone at the site of the sacrifice is satisfied." O destroyer of enemies! The learned Vidura, devoted to dharma, entertained all the varnas, as he had been instructed.
He happily honoured them and gave them food, drinks, garlands, fragrances and many garments. When the brave
one had observed the sacrifice in accordance with the sacred texts and in the proper order, he comforted kings and
brahmanas in thousands. The Indra among kings gave away a large quantity of riches. Then, having given all the
kings permission to leave, surrounded by his brothers, he entered Hastinapura, together with Karna and Soubala.'
