Vaishampayana said, 'Having been thus addressed, Prince Dhrishtadyumna, foremost of the lunar dynasty, cheerfully told his father all that had occurred and by whom Krishna had been won.

'Dhrishtadyumna said, "The handsome youth with the long and red eyes, dressed in black deerskin and like a
god in his form, who strung that supreme bow and brought down the target on the ground, left hurriedly and without concern. He was soon surrounded by the chief among the Brahmanas, who offered him homage. He strode as if
he had vanquished Diti's sons[The daityas. Although the word Indra isn't directly used, the suggestion is clearly that he resembled Indra.], surrounded by the gods and the rishis. Like an elephant bride happily follows the
male elephant, Krishna followed, holding his deerskin. Unable to bear that sight, the assembled lords of men[The kings.]
were angered and advanced to fight him. At that, another hero arose in that assembly of kings. He uprooted a gigantic tree and drove away those masses of kings, like angry Yama strikes down all living creatures. O lord of
men! Those assembled kings could only watch. Those foremost among men took Krishna and went away, resembling the sun and the moon. They went to a potter's house outside the city. A lady sat there, as radiant as a flame of
fire. Around her sat three[Yudhishthira, Nakula and Sahadeva, who had returned earlier.] foremost men, each one like a fire himself. I think she was their mother. Coming to
her, those two heroes paid homage at her feet and asked Krishna to pay homage too. Leaving Krishna there, those
foremost among men went out to beg for alms. It was Krishna who took from them the alms and offered a share to
the gods and another to a Brahmana. She then served a part to that old lady and those five heroes among men and
ate herself. O king! Then they all lay down to sleep together, with Krishna like a foot pillow. Their bed was made
on the bare ground with darbha[Synonym for kusha grass.] grass on which deerskins were spread. They conversed on various subjects in
voices that were as deep as dark clouds-wonderful tales that Vaishyas, nor Shudras, could speak of. Nor did those
heroes speak of Brahmana tales. O king! There is no doubt that they are foremost among Kshatriyas. The stories
that they told were about wars. Our hopes have clearly been fulfilled. We have heard that Pritha's sons escaped
from the fire. From the way in which the bow was strung and the target brought down with strength, from the way
in which they conversed with each other, it is certain that they are Pritha's sons, living in disguise." Thereupon,
King Drupada was extremely happy.

'He sent his priest to them, directing him, "Go and tell them we know who they are. Ask them if they are by any
chance the sons of the great-souled Pandu." As instructed by the king, the priest went to them and praised them.
He told them in detail and in the right order the king's message. The priest said, "O first among those who deserve
homage! The king of Panchala, the granter of wishes, wishes to know who you are. Seeing the one who has shot
down the target, his joy has no bounds. Tell us the details of your family and your lineage. Place your feet on the
heads of your enemies. Gladden the hearts of the king of Panchala and his men, and mine as well. King Pandu was
a dear friend of King Drupada, who regarded him as his own self. He has all along desired that his daughter should
be given to that Kourava as his daughter-in-law. O heroes of unblemished limbs! This desire was always in King
Drupada's heart, that the strong and long-armed Arjuna should marry his daughter according to dharma." After the
priest had spoken these words and was quiet, the king[Yudhishthira.] looked at the humble messenger and instructed Bhima,
who was next to him, "King Drupada's priest is worthy of respect and let him be given more than normal homage.
Get water to wash his feet, and offerings be given." O ruler of men! Bhima did as he had been instructed and he[The priest.]
accepted the offerings and happily seated himself.

'Yudhishthira then spoke to the Brahmana. "The king of Panchala gave his daughter away according to his wishes and according to his own dharma. He set a price[Shulka.] and this brave one has won her in accordance with that.
Therefore, no questions can be asked about his varna, action, intention, means of living, lineage or gotra[Tribe, family or race, for want of a better word.]. All
those questions have been answered by the act of stringing the bow and striking the target. In doing that, this great-
souled one has won Krishna in an assembly of kings. Since that is the case, the king of the lunar dynasty has no
reason to regret his decision or be unhappy. O Brahmana! King Drupada's eternal desire will certainly come to be
true for the king, because I think that this king's daughter was unattainable otherwise. No one weak in strength or
of low birth or unskilled in the use of arms could have strung that bow and shot down the target. Today, it is therefore not proper for the king of Panchala to grieve over his daughter. No man on earth can now undo the fact that he
succeeded in shooting down the target." While Yudhishthira was uttering these words, another messenger swiftly
came from the king of Panchala, to announce that the feast had been prepared.'
