Narada said, 'There are sacred texts that dispel sorrow and destroy all grief. They lead to tranquility and are
auspicious. If one listens to them, one obtains intelligence and attains happiness. From one day to another,
there are thousands of reasons for sorrow and hundreds of reasons for fear. They pervade a foolish person, but not
one who is learned. Therefore, for the sake of destroying the undesirable, listen to the history. If one follows their
instructions, one obtains the intelligence that destroys sorrow. Through association with the disagreeable and lack
of association with the agreeable, men of limited intelligence suffer from mental grief. When things belong to the
past, one should not think about their qualities. By not having bonds of attachment with what is in the past, one can
be emancipated. Whenever there is attachment, one should look for evils in it. If one sees the undesirable in such
bonds, one is quickly separated from them. If a person sorrows over the past, he has no artha, dharma or fame.
Thinking about their absence does not make them return. Creatures obtain some qualities and are also separated
from them. All of these, and not just one, are reasons for grief. If a person grieves over the past, over something
that is dead or destroyed, he piles misery on misery and doubles the grief. On seeing the progress of the worlds,
intelligent people do not shed tears. Those who do not shed tears are the ones who see everything properly. A
calamity may lead to physical or mental grief and even if one makes the best of efforts, one may be incapable of
doing  anything  about  it.  Then,  one  should  not  think  about  it.  Not  thinking  about  it  is  the  medicine  for  grief.
Thoughts do not dispel it, but make it increase. Mental grief is destroyed through wisdom, physical through medication. Such is the capacity of learning and one must not behave like a child. Youth, beauty, life, stores of possessions, health and dwelling with loved ones are temporary. A learned person does not desire them. One should not
sorrow alone over a calamity that has affected the entire country. Instead of grieving, if one perceives a way, one
should act so as to counter it. In life, there is no doubt that there are many more reasons for misery than for joy.
There is delusion over the fondness for satisfying the objects of the senses. Death is regarded as unpleasant. A man
who casts aside both unhappiness and happiness obtains the brahman, and learned people do not sorrow over the
end that he has obtained. There is misery in abandoning riches. But there is no happiness in protecting it. There is
misery in obtaining it. Therefore, if there are no riches left, one should not think about it. Specific kinds of men obtain different types of riches. However, they are discontented and meet destruction. Learned people are content. All
stores are destroyed. Anything that goes up, falls down. Association ends in disassociation. Life ends in death.
There is no end to thirst. Contentment is supreme happiness. Therefore, learned people look upon contentment as
the greatest prosperity. One's lifespan passes in an instant. It does not tarry. When one's own body is transitory,
there is nothing that one can think of as permanent. Those who think about the nature of beings realize that everything is covered in darkness. They do not sorrow over those who have departed, but look towards the supreme objective. If a person is not satisfied with objects of desire and thinks that they are insufficient, death seizes him and
departs, like a tiger grasping an animal. Therefore, one should seek means to be freed from misery. Even if one
confronts a hardship, one should not sorrow. Even if one possesses a little riches, once one has enjoyed sound,
touch, form, scent and taste, there is nothing further to tie one down[Sensual pleasures are temporary.]. Before a creature was united with these,
there was no misery and all was well. Consequently, a separation from these results in the natural state and there is
nothing to grieve about. Fortitude must be used to control the penis and the stomach, the eyes to control the hands
and feet. The mind should be used to control the eyes and the ears and knowledge used to control the mind and
speech. If a person controls affection towards those who are superior and inferior and conducts himself in accordance with humility, such a person is learned and happy. A person who is devoted to adhyatma, is seated[In yoga.], is indifferent, without desire and depends only on the atman, is happy.'"'
