'Sanjaya said, "Vrikodara could not tolerate the slaughter of the soldiers. He struck Bahlika with sixty and Karna
with ten arrows. Drona wished to kill him and used sharp and iron arrows that were whetted at the tip and penetrated the inner organs to swiftly strike him, wishing to take away his life. Karna pierced him with twelve arrows,
Ashvatthama with seven and King Duryodhana with six. But the immensely strong Bhimasena pierced all of them
back in return. He struck Drona with fifty arrows, Karna with ten arrows, Duryodhana with twelve and Drona's son
with eight swift arrows. Having engaged in that battle, he let out a loud roar. They fought, prepared to give up their
lives, and death was easily achieved. Ajatashatru sent many warriors, instructing them to save Bhima. Those infinitely energetic ones approached near Bhimasena. There were Yuyudhana and the others and the two Pandavas
who were Madri's sons. Those bulls among men were angry and united. They advanced, wishing to shatter
Drona's army, which was protected by the supreme among great archers. Those immensely valorous ones, Bhima
and the other rathas, advanced and were fiercely received by Drona and the best of rathas. Those brave and immensely strong atirathas were the ornaments of any battle. Outwardly giving up all fear of death, those on your
side fought with the Pandavas. Riders killed riders and rathas killed rathas. The battle commenced, lances against
lances, and with swords and battleaxes. There was a terrible clash with swords and it led to a cruel carnage. Because of the clash of elephants, the battle became extremely dreadful. Some fell down from elephants. Others fell
down from horses, their heads hanging down. O venerable one! Other men fell down from chariots, pierced by arrows. Others were crushed in that encounter and fell down, shorn of their armour. Elephants attacked the chests
and crushed the heads. In other places, elephants crushed men who had fallen down. Elephants struck the ground
with their tusks and mangled many rathas. Other men were crushed by elephants that were pierced with weapons.
Hundreds of elephants roamed around and crushed hundreds of men. There were men with bronze armour on their
bodies and horses, chariots and elephants. They fell down and were crushed by elephants, as if they were thick
reeds. Kings lay down to sleep on beds made out of the feathers of vultures[That is, on beds made out of arrows.]. They were modest. But having
been ripened by time, they lay down on beds of great distress. Advancing on a chariot, the father killed the son.
Out of confusion and disregarding all honour, the son killed the father. Wheels of chariots were shattered. Standards were torn. Umbrellas were shredded and brought down. Dragging broken yokes, horses ran away. Arms
wielding swords were brought down. Heads sporting earrings were severed. Powerful elephants threw down chariots and crushed them down on the ground. Charioteers struck elephants with iron arrows and brought them down.
Severely wounded by elephants, riders fell down from horses. A cruel and great battle raged and it was extremely
terrible. 'Alas, father! Alas, son! Friend, where are you? Stay! Where are you going? Strike! Capture! Kill!' These
and other words mixed with the roars and sounds of laughter and many other kinds of noise were spoken and
heard. The blood of men, horses and elephants mingled together. The dust that arose from the ground was
pacified[Because of the blood.]. Those who were cowards became distressed. They dragged each other by the hair. There were terrible
fights with fists. Brave ones fought with nails and teeth, wishing to find refuge where no refuge could be found.
Heroes raised swords in their arms, but those were severed. So were others holding bows, arrows or goads. Someone loudly challenged another. Someone else fled, running away. Others confronted others and severed the head
from the body. Some attacked others with loud roars. Others were severely frightened at the sounds and fled. Some
killed the enemy, or those on one's own side, with sharp arrows. Elephants that were like the peaks of mountains
were brought down by iron arrows. They lay down, like islands in a river during the summer. There were elephants
that exuded musth like mountainous streams. They crushed chariots down on the ground with their feet, together
with the horses and the charioteers. There were brave ones who were skilled in the use of weapons. On seeing that
they were covered with blood, but were still striking each other, those who were cowards and weak in heart lost
their senses. Everyone was distressed and nothing could be distinguished. Despite the dust raised by the soldiers,
the cruel battle raged on.

'"The commander[Dhrishtadyumna.] said, 'Make haste. This is the time.' He swiftly led the Pandavas, who were always full of
enterprise. Having been thus instructed, the illustrious Pandaveyas advanced towards Drona's chariot, wishing to
kill him, like swans descending on a lake. 'Seize! Do not flee! Do not be scared! Cut him down!' These and other
sounds were heard in the vicinity of the invincible one's chariot. Drona, Kripa, Karna, Drona's son, King
Jayadratha, Vinda and Anuvinda from Avanti and Shalya repulsed them. The Panchalas and the Pandavas were noble in their dharma. They were angry. They were difficult to counter and difficult to resist. Though oppressed by
arrows, they did not withdraw from Drona. Drona became extremely enraged and released hundreds of arrows,
causing a great carnage among the Chedis, Panchalas and Pandavas. O venerable one! The twang of his bowstring
and the slapping of his palms were heard in all the directions. They were like the sound of thunder and caused
fright among many of the Pandavas.

'"At this time, having slain the powerful samshaptakas, Jishnu arrived at the spot where Drona was crushing the
Pandus. He had crossed many whirlpools made out of arrows and giant lakes made out of blood. Having crossed
them and having killed the samshaptakas, Phalguna showed himself. He was the accomplisher of deeds. He was
like the sun in his energy. The one with the monkey on his banner was seen to be radiant in his energy. He had
dried up the ocean of the samshaptakas with the rays of his weapons. Pandava now scorched the Kurus, like the
sun at the destruction of a yuga. All the Kurus were burnt by the energy of Arjuna's weapons, like a comet that has
arisen and destroys all beings at the end of a yuga[The word used in the text is dhumaketu. While this means comet, it can also be translated as something that
has smoke as its banner, that is, a fire.]. Elephants, horses, rathas and warriors were struck by the
thousands of arrows released by him and oppressed by these arrows, discarded their weapons and fell down on the
ground. Some wailed in lamentation. Still others roared. Slain by Partha's arrows, some fell down, deprived of
their lives. Remembering the vow of warriors, Arjuna did not kill the warriors who had fallen down, or were falling down, or were retreating. Most of the Kurus were shattered and, devoid of their chariots, were in retreat. They
called upon Karna for protection. On discerning the lamentation and the cries for refuge, Adhiratha's son assured
them that they need not be frightened and advanced in Arjuna's direction. He was foremost among all the Bharata
rathas and was the one who brought delight to all the Bharatas. He was supreme among those who knew about
weapons and he invoked the agneya weapon. A mass of blazing arrows was released by the one who wielded a
blazing bow. But Dhananjaya repulsed that mass of arrows with his net of arrows. Weapon was countered by
weapon and these arrows preserved life.

'"Dhrishtadyumna, Bhima and maharatha Satyaki approached Karna and each pierced him with three swift arrows. Radheya countered Arjuna's weapon with his own shower of arrows. He then used three tufted arrows to
sever the bows of those three. With their weapons gone, those brave ones were like snakes without venom. They
hurled javelins from their chariots and roared like lions. Those javelins hurled from their arms were immensely
forceful. Those mighty javelins were like snakes and blazed. They descended towards the chariot of Adhiratha's
son. But Karna severed them with three swift arrows and powerfully shooting arrows at Partha, roared. Arjuna
pierced Radheya with seven swift arrows. With three sharp arrows, he then killed Karna's younger brother. Partha
killed Shatrunjaya with six arrows. As Vipatha stood on his chariot, he severed his head with a broad-headed arrow[Shatrunjaya and Vipatha are sometimes stated to have been Karna's sons, though they are described as brothers
here.]. While the sons of Dhritarashtra looked on, Kiriti single-handedly killed the three, who were foremost
among the brothers of the son of the suta. Bhima leapt down from his chariot, like Vinata's son[Garuda.
]. With a
supreme sword, he killed the fifteen who were guarding Karna's flank. He then again ascended his chariot and
grasped another bow. He pierced Karna with ten arrows and his charioteer and horses with five. Dhrishtadyumna
grasped a supreme sword and a lustrous shield. With these, he killed Chandravarma and Pourava Brihatkshatra.
Panchala then ascended his chariot and grasped another bow. In that battle, he pierced Karna with seventy-three
arrows and roared. Shini's descendant grasped another bow that was like Indra's weapon in its radiance. He
pierced the suta's son with sixty-four arrows and roared like a lion. With two broad-headed arrows that were released well, he severed Karna's bow. He again pierced Karna in the arms and the chest with three arrows. Radheya
was about to be submerged in the ocean that Satyaki represented. At this, Duryodhana, Drona and King Jayadratha
rescued him. Dhrishtadyumna, Bhima, Subhadra's son, Arjuna himself, Nakula and Sahadeva began to protect
Satyaki in that battle.

'"Thus the extremely terrible battle between those on your side and that of the enemy raged. It was destructive
of all archers. They were prepared to give up their lives. Infantry, chariots, elephants and horses fought with elephants, horses, chariots and infantry. Chariots fought with elephants and infantry, chariots fought with infantry and
chariots fought with elephants. Horses fought with horses, elephants with elephants and chariots with chariots. Infantry was seen to be engaged with infantry. Thus did that extremely fierce battle continue and it caused delight to
flesh-eating creatures. Those great warriors were without fear and this extended Yama's kingdom. Many men,
rathas, horses and elephants were killed there by elephants, rathas, horses and infantry. Elephants were killed by
elephants, rathas by armed rathas, horses by horses and large numbers of infantry by infantry. Elephants were slain
by rathas, giant horses by the best of elephants, men by horses and horses by the supreme of rathas. Tongues were
lolling out. Teeth and eyes were gouged out. Armour and ornaments were shattered. Destroyed, they fell down on
the ground. There were many others who were struck down by the best of warriors. They fell down on the ground
with fearful visages. They were mangled and crushed by the feet of horses and elephants. They were severely hurt
and wounded by the wheels of chariots and hooves. It brought delight to carnivorous beasts, birds and flesh-eaters.
There was a terrible carnage of people there. Those extremely strong ones were angry. Using the utmost of their
energy, they sought to kill each other. When the strength of both sides was severely diminished, they glanced towards each other, their bodies drenched with blood. The sun was stationed above the mountain on which it sets. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! The armies retreated to their respective camps."'
