'Yudhishthira said, "Intent on my selfish interest of becoming an emperor, how can I force you to go out, depending on strength and courage alone? Bhima and Arjuna are my eyes and you, Janardana, are my mind. What kind of
life will be left for me without my eyes and my mind? When you have met Jarasandha's invincible and valorous
forces, exhaustion alone will defeat you. What will your efforts serve? There is disaster if the opposite of what is
intended becomes the outcome. O Janardana! Listen to my thoughts. I think it best to always refrain from this
course of action. My heart is against it. The rajasuya is too difficult to accomplish."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Partha[Arjuna.], who had obtained the supreme bow, the two inexhaustible quivers, the chariot,
the pennant and the sabha[Arjuna obtained the sabha in the sense that it was because of him that Maya built the assembly hall.], now spoke these words to Yudhishthira. "O king! I have obtained the bow, weapons,
arrows, valour, allies, land, fame and strength. Though they are desired, it is difficult to achieve them. Those who
are learned always praise the greatness of noble lineage. But nothing equals power and nothing pleases me as
much as valour. What purpose is served if one is born in noble lineage, but has no valour? O king! A kshatriya's
livelihood is always defeat[Of his enemies.]. He who has valour, but lacks all other qualities, will still vanquish his enemies.
What purpose is served if one possesses all the qualities, but lacks valour? All qualities exist in nascent form in
valour. Mental concentration, enterprise and fortune are the causes of victory. One who possesses the forces, but is
careless, does not succeed and is not favoured by fortune. It is because of this that a powerful one perishes when
confronted with his foes. Misery encompasses those without strength and also strong ones who are deluded. A king
who wishes to attain victory must forsake both these routes to destruction. There is nothing that can surpass the act
of destroying Jarasandha and freeing the kings when achieving the sacrifice. If we do not attempt this, we will certainly be regarded as bereft of all qualities. O king! We certainly possess the qualities. Why do you doubt our qualities? Red garments are easily available to those who later wish to obtain peace of mind[By becoming ascetics.]. But wishing to see you
emperor first, we will therefore fight with the enemy."'
