Bhishma said, "Thus addressed, the illustrious one[Vyasa.] replied to Maitreya. 'It is through good fortune that you
possess learning. It is through good fortune that your intelligence is like this. In this world, these qualities are
repeatedly praised. There is no doubt that beautiful, young and prosperous people cannot surpass you and that is
because of good fortune. The gods have shown you their favours. There is something that is superior to donations.
Listen. All the rites of pravritti described in the sacred texts and all the other kinds of pravritti that have progressively evolved, are based on the primacy of the Vedas. I praise donations. You praise austerities and learning. Austerites are sacred. Austerities are the means to acquire the Vedas and heaven. We have heard that greatness can be
obtained through austerities and learning. It is through austerities that all the evil acts can be destroyed. However,
whatever a man obtains by tormenting himself with austerities can also be obtained by a brahmana who is accomplished in the Vedas. Anything that is difficult to do, anything that is difficult to conquer, anything that is difficult
to get and anything that is difficult to cross-all these can be obtained through austerities. Austerities are supremely strong. A person who drinks liquor, a person who violates agreements and seizes, a person who kills a foetus
and a person who has intercourse with his preceptor's wife-can be freed from all the sins through austerities. A
person with all kinds of knowledge has true sight. He can see what cannot be seen. Both of them[One with austerities and one with learning.] are ascetics and
one must always bow down before them. All those who possess learning are ascetics and must be worshipped. A
person who donates obtains happiness and prosperity in this world and in the next. Those who perform the good
deed of donating food obtain this world and other worlds, Brahma's world and worlds that are superior to that.
They should be worshipped and are worshipped. They should be revered and are revered. A donor is praised wherever he goes[There is a typo and we have corrected it. The text actually says a person who is not a donor.]. Gains are proportionate to what one does and what one does not do. Whether one resides in the upper regions or whether one resides in the lower regions, worlds are accordingly obtained[The principle also applies to gods.]. You will obtain the
food and the drink that you yourself give. You possess intelligence. You have been born in a noble lineage. You are
learned. You are not cruel. O Maitreya! Always be devoted to the vow of being celibate and not taking a wife. In
addition, receive this instruction about what is primarily praised for a householder. When the wife is pleased with
her husband and when the husband is pleased with his wife, in that family, all will be well. Water washes away dirt
from the body. The radiance of the fire dispels darkness. In that way, all sins are cleansed through donations and
austerities. O Maitreya! May you be well. May all be well in your house. I will depart. You should retain this in
your mind and you will obtain benefit.' Maitreya bowed down before him and circumambulated him. He joined his
hands in salutation before the illustrious one and pronounced benedictions for him."'
