Vaishampayana said, 'He entered her house[Krishna and Kunti respectively.], bowed at her feet and told her everything that had happened in the
assembly of the Kurus.

'Vasudeva said, "Many kinds of acceptable and beneficial words were spoken by me and the rishis, but he[Duryodhana.] did
not accept them. Cooked by destiny, all of them are under Duryodhana's control. I seek your leave. I will swiftly
go to the Pandavas. What shall I tell the Pandavas on your behalf? O immensely wise one! I wish to hear your
words and will act accordingly."

'Kunti replied, "O Keshava! Tell the great-souled King Yudhishthira, 'Your dharma has greatly declined. O son!
Do not act in vain. O king! You have learned the sacred texts, but not properly, and have missed out on their insight. You have focused on the literal words and therefore, your intelligence only focuses on limited dharma. Consider the complete dharma that was created by the one who created himself[Brahma.]. The kshatriya was created from his
chest, to earn a living through the valour of his arms, always resorting to cruel deeds for the protection of the subjects. Hear about an example that I have heard from the elders. In earlier times, Vaishravana was once delighted
and gave the earth to rajarshi Muchukunda[The son of King Mandhata, of the Ikshvaku dynasty. Vaishravana means Vishrava's son, in this case, Kubera.
Kubera offered Muchukunda the kingdom as a gift.], but he did not accept it. "I desire to enjoy a kingdom that I have obtained through the strength of my arms." On hearing this, Vaishravana was surprised and delighted. Subsequently,
King Muchukunda did rule over the earth, earned through the strength of his arms, completely following the dharma of a kshatriya. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If a king protects his subjects and they act in accordance
with dharma, the king enjoys one-fourth of that dharma. When a king acts in accordance with dharma, he warrants
the status of a god. If he practises adharma, he goes to hell. If a lord imposes chastisement on the four varnas in
accordance with the dharma that they should follow, that ensures that they do not transgress dharma. If a king follows chastisement properly and completely, this signifies the commencement of the best era, known as krita yuga.
You should have no doubts about whether the era creates the king, or the king creates the era. It is the king who
creates the era. The king is the creator of krita yuga, treta and dvapara. The king is also the cause of the fourth
yuga[Kali yuga.]. If a king is the cause of krita, he enjoys heaven for eternity. If a king is the cause of treta, he enjoys heaven, but not for eternity. By leading to the commencement of dvapara, a king obtains an appropriate share of those
fruits. An evil-acting one dwells in hell for an eternity[The critical edition excises a shloka here and that leads to a break in continuity. 'By contributing to the commencement of kali, an evil king suffers from great sin' and so on.]. The earth is touched by a king's taints and he is also
touched by the earth. Observe the dharma of kings that was followed by your fathers and grandfathers. The conduct that you wish to establish yourself in, is not that of a rajarshi. If a king is touched by lassitude and is based on
non-violence, he does not obtain the fruits that result from protecting the subjects. Pandu, I and your grandfather
did not bless you earlier, so that you might act in accordance with your intelligence. Sacrifices, generosity, austerities, valour, wisdom, offspring, greatness, strength and energy are what we always asked for. When they are satisfied through pure worship, the gods give men constant svaha, constant svadha[Oblations to the gods and the ancestors respectively.], long lives, riches and sons. Ancestors and gods always desire generosity, learning, sacrifices and the protection of the subjects in their sons.
Whether it is dharma or adharma, you should follow it by virtue of your birth. O son! You are learned and have
been born in a noble lineage. But you are oppressed because you have been following the wrong conduct. When
earth-dwellers are hungry, they search for a brave one who is the lord of generosity. They seek refuge with him for
their satisfaction. What can be a greater dharma than that? When one who follows dharma obtains a kingdom, he
always satisfies everyone-some through gifts, some through force, and others through truthful conduct. A brahmana must live on alms, a kshatriya must protect, a vaishya must devote himself to earning riches and a shudra
must serve them. Begging is forbidden for you and you should not resort to agriculture[That is for a vaishya, just as begging is for a brahmana.]. O son! You are a kshatriya, you are the one who saves from injuries, you sustain yourself through the strength of your arms. O mighty-
armed one! Your ancestral right has been immersed. Raise it up again. Use conciliation, generosity, dissension,
chastisement[Sama, dana, bheda and danda respectively.] and policy. What can be a greater misery for me than that I should be in this state, with my relatives destitute? O one who causes delight to your enemies! After having given birth to you, I have to look towards
the alms given by others. Fight according to the dharma of kings and do not keep your ancestors immersed. With
your merits exhausted, together with your younger brothers, do not travel along the evil route.'"'
