'Sanjaya said, "O king! Listen attentively to what you have asked. Those soldiers were driven away by the great-
souled Hardikya. They were overcome by shame and those on your side were delighted. The Pandus were immersed in fathomless waters, without a refuge, and sought refuge. O king! In that great battle, on hearing the fierce
roars emitted by those on your side, Shini's descendant swiftly attacked Kritavarma[Satyaki had gone on ahead, but returned.]. Hardikya Kritavarma angrily covered Shini's descendant with sharp arrows and Satyaki also became enraged. In the encounter, Shini's descendant released an extremely sharp and broad-headed arrow at Kritavarma and shot another four arrows at him.
These slew his horses and the broad-headed arrow severed his bow. Satyaki, for whom truth was his valour, used
sharp arrows to pierce his charioteer and those who guarded his rear and thus deprived him of his chariot. He then
afflicted the soldiers with arrows with drooping tufts. Oppressed by the arrows of Shini's descendant, the army
scattered. Satyaki, for whom truth was his valour, then swiftly departed. O king! Listen to what that valiant one did
to your soldiers.

'"O great king! He passed through the giant ocean that was Drona's army. Delighted at having vanquished Kritavarma in the battle, the brave one spoke these words to his charioteer. 'Proceed slowly and fearlessly.' On seeing
your forces, with a large number of chariots, horses, elephants and infantry, he again spoke to the charioteer. 'The
army on the left, which is like a cloud, is Drona's. It has a large army of elephants and Rukmaratha is at the forefront[In Section 67, Abhimanyu killed Shalya's son, Rukmaratha. Unless this is a different Rukmaratha, there is an
inconsistency.]. O charioteer! There are many of them and they are unassailable in a battle. Instructed by Duryodhana,
they are ready to give up their lives and are waiting for me. All these princes are great archers and are brave in
fighting. These foremost of rathas come from Trigarta and their standards are embellished with gold. These brave
ones are stationed there, desiring to fight with me. O charioteer! Urge the horses quickly and take me there. While
Bharadvaja's son looks on, I will fight with the Trigartas.' The charioteer was obedient to Satvata's instructions
and slowly proceeded there, on a chariot that possessed the complexion of the sun and was radiant with flags.
Supreme horses were harnessed to it and they were obedient to the charioteer. In a battle, they possessed the speed
of the wind and their complexions were like the kunda flower[Jasmine, white in complexion.], the moon, or silver. The chariot bore him there,
drawn by supreme horses that had the complexion of conch shells. In every direction, the brave ones surrounded
him with an army of elephants. They showered many kinds of sharp arrows that could easily penetrate. Satvata
also used sharp arrows to fight with that army of elephants. He was like a giant cloud that showers down on a
mountain at the end of the summer. The arrows were like the vajra or thunder to the touch and slaughtered the elephants. They were driven away from the field of battle by Shini's brave descendant. Their tusks were broken. They
were covered in blood. Their temples and frontal lobes were shattered. Their ears, faces and trunks were lopped
off. They were without riders and flags. Their armour and bells were fragmented. The giant standards were brought
down. O king! The blankets were torn apart. With the riders slain, they roamed around in different directions. They
shrieked and roared in many ways, like the thunder of the clouds. They were mangled by Satvata's iron and vatsadanta arrows.

'"When that army of elephants was routed, maharatha Jalasandha[Duryodhana's brother, Jalasandha, has been killed in Section 64 (Volume 5). This is Jalasandha from Magadha.] urged the elephant that he was riding towards the chariot with the silvery horses. The brave one had a golden complexion and was adorned with armlets
made of purified gold. He had earrings, a diadem and a conch shell and was smeared with red sandalwood paste.
There was a flaming garland made out of gold around his head. There were golden and resplendent chains on his
chest and around his neck. He was seated on the head of his elephant and stretched a golden bow. O great king! He
was as radiant as a cloud tinged with lightning. On seeing Magadha suddenly descend on him on a supreme elephant, Satyaki countered him, like the shoreline driving back the ocean. The elephant was checked by the supreme
arrows of Shini's descendant. O king! On seeing this, the immensely strong Jalasandha became enraged in that battle. Angrily, the great archer Jalasandha pierced Shini's grandson on his broad chest with arrows that were capable
of bearing great loads. He then used another yellow, sharp and broad-headed arrow to sever the bow of the brave
one from the Vrishni lineage, just as he was drawing it. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Once the bow had
been severed, the brave one from Magadha laughed and pierced Satyaki with five sharp arrows. He was pierced by
many arrows released by the valiant Jalasandha. But the mighty-armed one did not waver and it was extraordinary.
Without any fear, the powerful one thought about the arrows he should use. He took up another bow. Asking
Jalasandha to wait, Shini's descendant laughed and severely struck him on his broad chest with sixty arrows. He
then used a yellow kshurapra arrow to sever Jalasandha's giant bow in his hand and pierced him with three arrows.
Jalasandha cast aside the bow, which had an arrow still affixed to it. O venerable one! He swiftly hurled a lance towards Satyaki. In that great battle, this pierced Madhava's left arm and penetrated the earth, like a giant and fierce
serpent that was sighing. When his left arm had been pierced, Satyaki, for whom truth was his valour, struck
Jalasandha with thirty sharp arrows. The immensely strong Jalasandha picked up a sword and a giant shield that
was made out of the hide of bulls and was marked with the signs of one hundred moons. He whirled the sword and
hurled it at Satvata. Severing the bow of Shini's descendant, the sword fell down on the ground. When it fell down
on the ground, it looked like a circle of fire. He[Satyaki.] picked up another bow that was capable of shattering all bodies. It was as large as the trunk of a shala tree and its roar was like that of Indra's vajra. He angrily stretched that
bow and pierced Jalasandha with an arrow. The supreme one of the Madhava lineage laughed and used two kshurapra arrows to sever Jalasandha's arms, with their ornaments and their armlets. Those arms were like clubs and
fell down from that supreme of elephants. They fell down on the ground, like two five-headed serpents falling
down from a mountain. With a third kshurapra arrow, Satyaki severed his head, possessing beautiful teeth and a
handsome jaw and adorned with charming earrings. When the head and arms had been cut down, the torso looked
fearful and sprinkled Jalasandha's elephant with his blood. O lord of the earth! Having swiftly slain Jalasandha,
Satvata brought down the housing from the elephant's shoulder[There is a problem with the translation here. The word used in the text is naishadi. Beyond something associated with nishadas, this has no obvious meaning. However, clearly some kind of housing is indicated.]. Jalasandha's elephant was covered with blood,
all over its limbs. He was hanging upside down from that supreme seat. Afflicted by Satvata's arrows, the giant
elephant fled, uttering terrible and piteous shrieks, and crushing its own soldiers.

'"O venerable one! On seeing that Jalasandha had been slain by the bull among the Vrishni lineage, a giant roar
of lamentation arose among your soldiers. Your warriors retreated and fled in different directions. They were interested in running away and not in defeating the enemy. O king! At this time, Drona, supreme among those who
wielded weapons, quickly approached maharatha Yuyudhana, borne on his swift horses. On seeing that Shini's descendant was rampaging, many bulls among the Kurus angrily surrounded Satyaki, together with Drona. A battle
commenced between the Kurus, with Drona, and Satvata. O king! It was a terrible clash, like that between the gods
and the asuras."'
