The preceptor said, 'I will now tell you about the means one can use, if one uses the sight obtained from the
sacred texts. Using that knowledge, a wise person can attain the supreme objective. Among all beings, humans are said to be the best, brahmanas among humans and brahmanas who know the mantras among brahmanas.
Brahmanas who know the truth about the Vedas can determine the purpose and progress of everything. They know
everything and can see everything. They are special among all beings. A blind man who is travelling alone experiences hardships. It is like that for people devoid of knowledge. Therefore, those with knowledge are known to be
superior. Thus, those who are blind about dharma, but yet desire to follow dharma, go by the sacred texts. But they
only accomplish limited objectives and I will soon describe those qualities. Purity in words, body and mind, forgiveness, truthfulness, fortitude, learning-among all kinds of dharma, these are described as the qualities of those
who know about dharma. The form of the brahman is said to be there in brahmacharya. This is the supreme way
for all beings and takes one towards the supreme objective. This means the avoidance of any association with the
genital organ[The text uses the word lingam. While this has diverse meanings, given the context, the male genital organ is the
obvious one.]. It also means the avoidance of touch by the body, hearing by the ears, sight by the eyes and taste
by the tongue. All these are to be cast aside. Using the intelligence, one follows the unblemished conduct of brahmacharya. A person who follows this conduct in its entirety obtains Brahma's world. A person who follows it in an
average way obtains the world of the gods. A person who resorts to such conduct in an inferior kind of way is born
learned, as a foremost one among the brahmanas. It is extremely difficult to follow the methods of brahmacharya.
Listen to this. A brahmana who engages in this must control his mind. He must not speak to women, nor hear
them. He must not look at them when they are naked. Sometimes, when one looks at them, passion arises in those
who are weak. If there is attraction, one must follow a vow of hardship[Such as fasting.], enter the water and spend three days
there. If this happens when one is asleep, one must mentally recite aghamarshana thrice[This is a reference to the Aghamarshana suktam (after the sage Aghamarshana) from the Rig Veda. This is used
for consecration ceremonies, ablutions and at times of bathing.]. One must burn down
the sins of passion that are inside. Using knowledge, the discriminating person controls his mind. Excrement and
filth exist in ducts that are inside the body. Like that, know that the atman is also bound down inside the body.
There are arteries inside the human body, with bile, phlegm, blood, skin, flesh, bones, marrow and nets of veins.
These bear juices. Know that there are ten arteries that convey the qualities of the five senses[The text uses the word dhamani, which is really an artery. Shira is technically a vein. The number of arteries is
actually described as twenty-four, but ten of those (two each) are associated with sound, sight, smell, taste and
speech.]. From those arteries, thousands of others emanate out and those are subtler in form. The veins are like rivers that convey juices to
the ocean of the body. In the midst, attached to the heart, there is a vein known as manovaha. When men think of
it, it collects semen from all parts of the body and releases it. There are veins that follow it and extend to every part
of the body. They also convey the quality of energy and terminate at the eyes. There is butter hidden inside milk
and that is churned up through churning rods. Like that, when there is resolution, churning rods churn out semen
from the body. Even when one is asleep, passion can lead to resolution in the mind. The semen is touched by
manovaha  and  is  released  from  the  body.  The  illustrious  maharshi  Atri  knows  about  the  generation  of  semen.
There are three seeds, Indra is the associated divinity and this is spoken of as indriya[The three seeds, as in reasons, behind semen have to be deduced. They probably are food, desire and manovaha.
Semen is shukra and there may be a pun with Indra's name of Shakra. Indriya means senses and there may thus
be another pun with Indra.]. Know that the progress of
the semen is the reason behind an admixture of species. Detachment can burn these sins and such men do not have
to take up a body again. When it is the time to die and give up the functions of the body, if a person pacifies the
qualities[Sattva, rajas and tamas.] and uses his mind to draw them into manovaha, he is freed[Manovaha is also known as sushumna.]. The mind then obtains knowledge and
everything proceeds from the mind. Such great-souled persons become successful and divine and blaze like stellar
bodies. Therefore, one must undertake unblemished deeds. One must sever rajas and tamas and ascend upwards.
The knowledge one has obtained when one is young becomes weak with old age. However, when one's intelligence matures with age, one can regain it through one's mental strength. But this is an extremely difficult path to
follow and involves transcending the bonds of qualities. However, if one sees the sins, one can transcend them and
obtain immortality.'"'
