'Vasudeva said, "O lord of the earth[Krishna is speaking to Yudhishthira.]! O king! Had I been present in Dvaraka earlier, this misfortune would not
have befallen you. O invincible one! Even if I had not been invited to the gambling match by the Kouravas, by
Ambika's son[Dhritarashtra.] and by King Duryodhana, I would have gone and prevented the gambling by pointing out the
many evils that result. I would have brought in Bhishma, Drona, Kripa and Bahlika. For your sake, I would have
told the king who is Vichitravirya's son[Dhritarashtra.], 'O Kourava! O Indra among kings! O lord! Make your sons desist from
this gambling.' I would have pointed out the evils through which you have been removed from your seat and
through which, in earlier times, Virasena's son was deprived of his kingdom[Virasena's son is Nala, the story is recounted in Section 32.]. O lord of the earth! Whatever has
not been eaten up[Whatever remains of riches.] is destroyed through gambling. I would have described how the addiction to gambling lasts
continuously. Women, gambling, hunting and drinking are four things that arise out of desire. O king! It has been
said that these lead to loss of prosperity. Those who are learned in the sacred texts hold that while this is true of all
of them, it can be especially seen in the case of gambling. On a single day, one may lose all one's property. Misery
is certain. Wealth that has not been enjoyed is lost. Only harsh words are left. O Kouravya[Kouravya refers to Yudhisthira here.]! I would have recounted these and other bitter topics. O mighty-armed one! I would have spoken to Ambika's son about these effects of gambling. O descendant of the Kuru lineage[The word used is nandana. So, beloved of the Kuru lineage is also possible.]! If my words had been accepted by him, the dharma of the
Kurus would have remained undisturbed. O Indra among kings! O best of the Bharata lineage! If he had not accepted my soft words, which are like medicine[The word used is pathya, which can also be translated as diet or regimen.], I would have restrained him through force. In similar fashion, I
would have destroyed all the courtiers and gamblers, ill-wishers masquerading as well-wishers. O Kouravya! It
was my absence from Anarta[The region of Sourashtra or Surat.] that led to all your misfortunes from gambling. O Pandu's son! O best of the Kurus! When I reached Dvaraka, I learnt everything about your misfortunes from Yuyudhana[Satyaki's name.]. O Indra among
kings! As soon as I heard this, my mind was filled with great anxiety. O lord of the earth! I have swiftly come here,
in a desire to see you. O bull among the Bharata lineage! All of us are beset with great difficulties, since we find
you and your brothers immersed in this misfortune."'
