Vyasa said, 'There may be a disciple with qualities, one who has been freed from opposite sentiments and
having established himself in artha and dharma, is inquisitive. Such a person should be told, and made to
hear, about this greatness. Space, wind, light, water and the earth as the fifth, existence, non-existence and time-
these exist in all beings formed by the five elements. The gaps are space and the sense of hearing is formed by that.
A person who knows about the ordinances of the sacred texts knows that sound is its quality. Movement and prana
and apana are constituted by the wind. Know that the sense of touch and touch itself is its[The wind's.] essence. Heat and the
light in the eyes are full of light. Know that its qualities are the warmth in the body. Liquid discharges, juices and
fat are instructed as belonging to water. It is held that the sense of taste and the tongue represent qualities of water.
Bones, teeth, nails, beard, body hair, hair, veins, arteries, skin and all solid objects are the essence of the earth. The
nose is said to represent the sense of smell. The sense associated with scent is known to represent the essence of
the earth. Each succeeding element possesses the qualities of the preceding one[This has been explained earlier.]. The sages know that everything
flows from the aggregate of the five elements. The mind is the ninth and intelligence is said to be the tenth[There is a gap which can only be plugged through interpretations. Other than the five elements, there are ignorance, desire and acts committed earlier. These account for eight.]. The
eleventh is the atman inside and this is said to be superior to all the others. Intelligence tries to analyse the atman
and the mind tries to explain the atman. Through deeds, it is possible to infer that the atman is inside the body[This is a very difficult shloka to translate and some liberties have been taken.].
All living beings are characterized by these[Their earlier deeds.] and time. But a wise person sees it[The atman, which is untouched by deeds and time.] as untainted and does not suffer from confusion.'"'
