Vaishampayana said, 'O tiger among men! On seeing those two energetic ones[Narada and Vedavyasa.], who were like fires, Dhananjaya
quickly withdrew his divine arrow. He joined his hands in salutation and spoke to the best of rishis. "This weapon
was used by me to pacify the other weapon. Once I withdraw this supreme weapon, all of us will be destroyed. It is
certain that Drona's son, the perpetrator of wicked deeds, will consume us with the energy of his weapon. The two
of you are like gods. You should think of a means so that we, and all the worlds, are saved." Having spoken these
words, Dhananjaya again withdrew his weapon. In an encounter, it is difficult for even the gods to do this[To withdraw a weapon, once released. Knowledge of a divine weapon
meant not just knowledge about its release, but also knowledge about its
withdrawal.]. With
the exception of Shatakratu himself, no one other than Pandava was capable of withdrawing a supreme weapon,
once it had been released in a battle. Once invoked, it was full of Brahma's energy. With the exception of someone
with a cleansed soul and someone who was a brahmachari, no one else was capable of withdrawing it. If a person
is not a brahmachari, and having released the weapon, wishes to withdraw it, the weapon will sever his head, with
that of his descendants. Arjuna had followed the vows of a brahmachari. He had obtained a weapon that was difficult to get. However, he had never invoked it, not even in a time of great calamity. Pandava followed the vows of
truth. He was brave and a brahmachari. He was obedient to his superiors. It was because of this that Arjuna was
capable of withdrawing that weapon again.

'Drona's son saw that the two rishis were stationed in front of him. However, in the encounter, he was incapable
of again withdrawing that terrible weapon. In the encounter, he was incapable of restraining that supreme weapon.
O king! Distressed in his mind, Drona's son addressed Dvaipayana. "I was distressed because I confronted a great
calamity. I was scared of saving my life. I released the weapon out of fear. I was scared of Bhimasena. In attempting to kill Dhritarashtra's son, he acted in accordance with adharma. O illustrious one! Bhimasena resorted to
falsehood in the battle. O brahmana! Though I have not cleansed my soul, this is the reason I invoked this weapon.
I do not have any interest in withdrawing it, even now. Once this celestial weapon has been released by me, it is
invincible. O sage! I have invoked it with the energy of the fire and with mantras, 'To bring an end to the Pandavas'. Therefore, it has been created for the destruction of the Pandaveyas. It will now destroy all the sons of Pandu who are alive. O brahmana! With my senses destroyed by anger, I have committed a wicked deed. Created by
me in this encounter, this weapon will slaughter the Parthas."

'Vyasa replied, "O son[The word used is tata.]! Partha Dhananjaya knew about the weapon brahmashira. However, he did not release
it out of rage, or to slay you in this encounter. In the encounter, he wished to pacify the weapon that had been released by you. Arjuna released it, and withdrew it again. He obtained instruction in the use of brahmastra from
your father[Here, brahmastra seems to be equated with brahmashira. However, brahmastras were used in the Kurukshetra war. This is the only instance of
brahmashira being used. The two weapons were presumably different.]. However, the mighty-armed Dhananjaya was compassionate and did not deviate from the dharma of
kshatriyas. He possesses fortitude and is virtuous. He has knowledge of all the weapons and is righteous. Why do
you wish to kill such a person and his brothers? In a spot where the weapon named brahmashira is countered
through the use of another supreme weapon, in such a kingdom, it does not rain for twelve years. The mighty-
armed Pandava is capable. However, because he had the welfare of all subjects in his mind, he did not counter
your weapon with his. You, the Pandavas, you, and the kingdom must always be protected. O mighty-armed one!
That is the reason you should withdraw that divine weapon. Get rid of this rage and let the Pandavas always be
without disease. Rajarshi Pandava[Yudhishthira.] does not wish to win through the use of adharma. You possess a gem on your
forehead. Give that to me. Once you have given that, the Pandavas will grant you your life in return."

'Drona's son said, "The Pandaveyas possess jewels and there are riches obtained by the Kouravas. However,
this gem that belongs to me is superior to both of those. When this is worn, there is never any fear from weapons,
disease, hunger, lack of protection, gods, danavas and serpents. Nor is there fear from large numbers of rakshasas,
or fear from thieves. This is the kind of energy that is vested in this gem and I should never give it up. O illustrious
one! Take it. However, what should be done next? Here is the gem. But the reed invoked by me is invincible and it
will descend on the wombs of the Pandaveyas[That is, the Pandava women.]."
'Vyasa replied, "Do this and do not turn your mind to any other task. Release this towards the wombs of the
Pandaveyas and desist[The brahmashira weapon was thus diverted towards the wombs.]."'
Vaishampayana said, 'Ashvatthama was severely afflicted. At this, on hearing Dvaipayana's words, he released
that supreme weapon in the direction of the wombs.'
