Vaishampayana said, 'Dhritarashtra's great-souled son was thus summoned to do battle. He was brought back by
that goad of words, like a mad elephant with a goad. The maharatha became intolerant because of the insulting
words spoken by the spirited atiratha[An atiratha is greater than a maharatha. In this context, atiratha is being used for Arjuna and maharatha for
Duryodhana.]. Like a serpent that has been stepped on with the sole of the foot, the brave
one turned his chariot back. Karna saw that he was turning around. He also returned and tended to his[Duryodhana's.] wounded
limbs. He advanced towards Duryodhana's right flank and got ready to fight with Partha, the brave one among
men, who was adorned in a golden garland. Shantanu's son Bhishma also returned. He swiftly prodded his horses
with golden harnesses and protected Duryodhana from the rear from Partha, the mighty-armed one who wielded a
bow. Drona, Kripa, Vivimshati and Duhshasana also swiftly returned. All of them swiftly arrived with bows and
arrows to protect Duryodhana. Partha saw those armies return, like heavy clouds. Like a swan advancing towards a
descending cloud, the spirited Dhananjaya advanced towards them. They grasped divine weapons and surrounded
Partha from every direction. They showered down arrows on him, like clouds showering rain on the summit of a
mountain. The wielder of the Gandiva used weapons to counter the weapons of the bulls among the Kurus. The destroyer of enemies then made the weapon named sammohana[Sammohana is a divine weapon that causes one to lose one's senses. The god of love has five arrows and one of
these is also named sammohana.] appear. This was impossible to counter. He covered all the directions and all the smaller directions with sharp arrows that had fine tips and fine shafts. With the
roar of the Gandiva, the immensely strong one struck terror in their minds. He then grasped the giant conch shell in
both his hands, one that had a deep and trembling sound. Partha, the destroyer of enemies, used this to make the
sound echo in the directions, the smaller directions, the sky and the earth. At the roar of the conch shell blown by
Partha, the foremost among the Kurus fell down unconscious. They gave up their invincible bows and all of them
resorted to peace[Because they were unconscious. Presumably, the sammohana weapon, rather than the conch shell, made them
unconscious.].

'When they had lost consciousness, Partha remembered Uttara's[Virata's daughter Uttaraa.] words. He told Matsya's son, "Go from the
centre to where the Kurus are lying unconscious. Bring the preceptor's and Sharadvat's son's[Kripa's.] extremely white
garments and Karna's beautiful one. Those of Drona's son and the king[Duryodhana.] are blue. O brave one among men! Go
and fetch those garments. I think that Bhishma knows how to counter the weapon and is still in his senses. Therefore, when you approach those who have not lost their senses, you should leave his vehicles to the left[Bhishma's own army had not lost its senses, thanks to Bhishma.]." Virata's
great-souled son handed over the reins and jumped down from the chariot. He gathered the garments of the maharathas and again swiftly ascended his own chariot. Virata's son then drove those four well-trained horses with
golden harnesses. Bearing Arjuna, the white steeds passed through the midst of the army and its standards. When
that foremost among men passed through, the spirited Bhishma shot arrows at him. But he killed Bhishma's horses
and struck him in the side with ten arrows. Having killed his charioteer, Arjuna, the wielder of the invincible bow,
left Bhishma on the field of battle. He emerged from the midst of that mass of chariots, like the one with the thousand rays shatters Rahu[Rahu is the demon who causes an eclipse. But the sun (the one with one thousand rays) emerges from the
eclipse.].

'Dhritarashtra's son, foremost among the Kurus, regained his consciousness soon and beheld Partha, the equal
of the great Indra. He saw him stationed alone, away from the field of battle. He quickly asked[Asked Bhishma.], "How did he escape from you? Oppress him, so that he cannot escape." Shantanu's son laughingly replied, "Where did your intelligence disappear? Where was your valour? You had given up your colourful bow and your arrows. You were immersed in complete peace then. Bibhatsu is incapable of cruel deeds. His mind is never immersed in sin. He will
not give up his own dharma even for the sake of the three worlds[Heaven, earth and the nether regions.]. That is the reason all of us have not been
killed in this battle. O foremost among the Kurus! Return swiftly to the Kuru kingdom. Let Partha return with the
cattle he has conquered." On hearing these words of the grandfather, which were meant for his welfare, Duryodhana gave up all desire to fight. The intolerant king sighed deeply, but kept silent. All the others saw the wisdom in
Bhishma's words and knew the increasing fire within Dhananjaya. They therefore made up their minds to return
and carefully protected Duryodhana.

'On seeing the foremost among the Kurus leave, Partha Dhananjaya was delighted in his mind. The great-souled
one followed them for an instant, so as to honour his superiors. He bowed down, with his head on the ground, before the aged grandfather, Shantanu's son and the preceptor Drona. He used colourful arrows to show homage to
Drona's son, Kripa and all his superiors. Partha then used an arrow to slice off Duryodhana's jewelled crown from
his head. Having greeted the brave ones who deserved to be honoured, he filled the world with the roar of Gandiva.
The brave one suddenly sounded Devadatta[Devadatta is the name of Arjuna's conch shell.] and shattered the minds of his enemies. Having vanquished all his
enemies, his pennant, garlanded with gold, was radiant. On seeing the Kurus leave, Kiriti happily told the son of
Matsya, "The animals have been won. Make the horses return. The enemies have left. Let us return happily to the
city."'
