Yudhishthira said, "Tell me about the ends obtained by those who censure dharma and those who follow it. O
illustrious one! Where do they go?"

'Bhishma replied, "There are those whose consciousness is overwhelmed by rajas and tamas. These men hate
dharma and go to hell. O great king! A man who always serves dharma and is devoted to truth and uprightness is
virtuous and enjoys heaven. Because they serve their preceptors, they are devoted to dharma. Those who serve
dharma obtain the world of the gods. Whether they are men or gods, if they are devoid of greed and hatred and if
they give up their lives in the pursuit of dharma, they obtain happiness. The learned say that Brahma's first son was
Dharma. Those who follow dharma enjoy the ripe fruits that are desired."

'Yudhishthira asked, "What is the form of those who are wicked? What do virtuous people do? Tell me about
the nature of virtuous and wicked people."

'Bhishma  replied,  "Those  who  are  wicked  in  their  conduct  cannot  be  disciplined.  They are evil and foul in
speech. The virtuous possess good conduct. That good conduct is their attribute. O Indra among kings! Those who
follow dharma do not release urine or excrement on a royal road, amidst cattle, or in the midst of a cow pen. Virtuous people eat what is left after feeding the five[A reference to the five sacrifices.]. They do not talk while eating. They do not go to sleep with wet
hands. A person who follows dharma circumambulates a fire, a bull, a god, a cow pen, a crossroads, a brahmana
and a sanctuary. He yields the road to the aged, those who are bearing burdens, women, children, the afflicted,
brahmanas, cattle and kings. He protects all the guests, servants, relatives and those who seek refuge, welcoming
them. The gods have determined that men should eat in the morning and in the evening. A person should not eat in
between and one who behaves in this way is regarded as one who fasts. A sacred fire waits for the time when libations will be poured into it. In that way, a woman waits for her season to come. A person who does not have intercourse with anyone else is said to follow brahmacharya. Amrita, brahmanas and cattle-these three are regarded as
identical. Therefore, following the ordinances, one must always worship cows and brahmanas. There is no taint if
one eats meat purified with hymns from the Yajur Veda. However, the meat from the backbone, pointless meat and
the meat of one's son are equal and must be shunned. Whether one is in one's own country or whether one is in
someone else's country, one must not make guests fast. After one's tasks[Of studying.] have become successful, one must always give something to the preceptor. One must offer a seat to the preceptor. One must greet him and worship him.
Through worshipping the preceptor, the lifespan, fame and prosperity are increased. One must not censure an aged
person, or use him as a messenger. One should not be seated while such a person is standing. Then the lifespan will
not be diminished. One must not look at a naked woman, or at such a learned man. Sexual intercourse and eating
must always be done in secret. A preceptor is the greatest tirtha among tirthas. The heart is the most pure among
all objects that are pure. Knowledge is the supreme kind of sight. Contentment is supreme happiness. Morning and
evening, one must always listen to all the words spoken by the aged. A man always obtains learning by serving the
aged. In studying and in eating, one must use the right hand. One must always control one's speech and thoughts,
so that the senses are not distracted. In a ceremony on the eighth lunar day, the ancestors, the gods and the aged
must always be worshipped with properly cooked payasam, bits of barley, krisara and clarified butter. One must
not shave without pronouncing benedictions. If one sneezes, one must have blessings pronounced on one's own
self. For a long lifespan, blessings must be pronounced on all those who are diseased. One must not use the word
tvam for someone who is superior[Tvam means 'you' and is used for someone who is an equal or junior. For someone who is superior, bhavan
should be used instead.]. Know that the learned are superior and using tvam for them is tantamount to
slaying them. This word can be used for those who are inferior, equal or disciples. A person who is wicked in his
heart  always  boasts  about  the  wickedness  he  has  committed.  Even  if  a  person  willingly  hides  these  sins  from
learned people, he is destroyed. Those who willingly commit wicked deeds often seek to hide them from the virtuous. 'Men have not seen me. The gods have not seen me.' However, struck by the wickedness of his sins, he is reborn as a wicked person. The sin increases like the interest on a loan and waits for his body to be destroyed. A sin
can be destroyed through the practice of dharma and dharma can prevent sin from increasing. This is like salt dissolving, when water is poured over it. In that way, when there is atonement for a sin, it is immediately destroyed.
Therefore, a sin must never be hidden. The act of hiding enhances it. Having done such a deed, one should recount
it to the virtuous, thereby pacifying it. Objects are stored with hope. If they are not enjoyed at the right time, when
one is separated from one's body, they are enjoyed by someone else. The learned have said that dharma is in the
minds of all creatures. That is the reason all creatures have an inclination to follow dharma. One should practise
dharma alone. One should not raise aloft the flag of dharma, since those who practise dharma in this way are regarded as traders in dharma. Without any pride, one should worship the gods. Without any deceit, one should serve
the preceptor. Gifts made quietly are the store of riches that sustain a person in the journey to the world hereafter."'
