Kapila said, 'People regard the Vedas as proof and one should not turn one's back on the rites in the Vedas.
Know that there are two brahmans, Shabda-Brahma and Para-Brahma. Having attained Shabda-Brahma,
one can then proceed towards Para-Brahma. Having created the body, he follows the Vedas and creates the body[This is cryptic and is a reference to the father. Having physically created the body, at the ceremony following
conception, he chants mantras from the Vedas and endorses the creation of the body.].
When the body has thus been purified, that vessel becomes a brahmana. After this, other tasks must be undertaken
and I will tell you about them. Only the person can directly know whether there has been detachment in the mind.
Other people cannot bear witness to this fact. Dharma is followed by those who sacrifice without any desires. They
are those who renounce and are not greedy. They are devoid of sentiments of compassion or envy. Even when they
are engaged in the path of riches, they use it for visting places of pilgrimage. They never indulge in wicked deeds
and resort to the rites prescribed by birth. They are firm in their minds and resolutions. They have decided to pursue pure wisdom. They are not enraged. They do not suffer from malice. They have no sense of ego and do not indulge in jealousy. They  faithfully  pursue  unsullied  knowledge.  They  are  engaged  in  the  welfare  of  all  beings.
There were many such householders, following their own tasks. There were kings and brahmanas who practised
the indicated rites. For a long time, they followed uprightness. They were content, firm in their pursuit of knowledge. Those faithful and pure people clearly followed dharma, both Para and the other kind[Para-Brahma and Shabda-Brahma.]. They first cleaned
their souls and then acted in accordance with the vows. They acted according to that dharma, even when it was
very difficult to follow and involved hardships. Earlier, they followed that dharma collectively and earned happiness. Since they had no doubts, they did not have to perform atonements. They truly depended on dharma. Their
minds were such that they could not be dislodged. They did not transgress the norms and showed no deceit in the
practice of dharma. Collectively, those initial ones followed such conduct and because of this, they had no need of
atonements. The sacred texts say that atonements became necessary when the souls became weak. In earlier times,
there were many brahmanas like this. They performed sacrifices. They possessed the wisdom of the three[The three Vedas.]. They
were pure, good in conduct and illustrious. Those learned ones continuously performed sacrifices, but without being tied down by the bonds of desire. Their sacrifices and rites from the Vedas were in conformity with the sacred
texts, appropriate for the time, appropriate for their resolutions and appropriate for their vows. They had overcome
desire and anger and were naturally firm in their souls. They were upright and always tranquil. They were engaged
in their own tasks. In every way, they followed what we have come to know as the eternal sacred texts. They were
cheerful in their spirits. They performed tasks that were extremely difficult to accomplish. They were engaged in
their own tasks and performed terrible austerities. That ancient and eternal conduct was certainly extraordinary.
They acted without any uncertainty in their intelligence, clear about the signs of dharma. They were safe in the
practice of dharma. They were not distracted and not vanquished. All the varnas were engaged in this way and
there was no exception to this. Those bulls among men followed that single dharma which has four quarters. Having followed it in the proper way, those virtuous ones went to the supreme objective. They left their houses and resorted to the forest. There were others who remained in their houses and became brahmacharis. Learned brahmanas know that dharma consists of four ashramas. Those who attain the brahman's eternal abode are certainly
brahmanas. There were thus many ancient brahmanas who followed dharma. Those brahmanas can be seen in the
firmament, shining as  stellar bodies. Some are nakshatras and many are large numbers of  stars. Following the
Vedas, they are content and have obtained the infinite. If they happen to be reborn in this cycle of life, since they
are not tainted by wicked deeds, they rarely perform tasks that require births in wombs. Such people are brahmanas. How else can one be a brahmana? It is good and evil acts that enable the determination. We have learnt in
the sacred texts that all of them obtain the infinite in this way and that their wisdom has been ripened. They have
auspicious souls and only thirst for emancipation. The four kinds of dharma in the Upanishads is generally said to
apply to everyone[The four stages of life. However, an alternative interpretation of the number 'four' is possible, referring to the
four stages of sleep-wakefulness, sleep with dreams, dreamless slumber and turiya or samadhi. The sense
would then be that while everyone has to go through the four stages, yogis go straight into samadhi.]. Those brahmanas who control their souls are Siddhas and are always successful. They are
said to base themselves on knowledge, with contentment as the foundation. They possess renunciation in their
souls. This eternal search for the brahman has always been the dharma of mendicants. Sometimes others also pursue this, but only according to capacity. Whether one reaches that objective, or whether one only moves towards it
because one is weak, the brahman is the auspicious object of desire and frees a person from the cycle of life.'

'"Syumarashmi said, 'There are those who enjoy, donate, perform sacrifices, study and resort to a life of renunciation, after having pursued the dharma of serving the senses. Among these, when they die, who attains supreme
heaven? O brahmana! I am asking you about this. Tell me the exact truth.'

'"Kapila replied, 'All those auspicious ones who enjoy have all the qualities[A reference to householders.]. However, they do not obtain the
bliss that comes through renunciation. You can see this.'

'"Syumarashmi said, 'You based yourself on knowledge. Householders have determined to perform acts. However, it has been stated that the objective of all the ashramas is the same. No difference is seen between them,
singly or collectively. Which is superior or inferior? O illustrious one! Tell me this.'

'"Kapila replied, 'Acts clean the body, but knowledge is the ultimate objective. When sins have been thrown out
and one has tasted knowledge, non-violence, forgiveness, peace, lack of injury, truth, uprightness, lack of enmity,
lack of pride, modesty, renunciation and tranquility result. Through this path, one obtains the supreme objective of
the brahman. A learned person knows this in his mind and determines to act accordingly. There are brahmanas
who are always tranquil, pure, firm in the pursuit of knowledge and content. They are said to progress towards the
supreme objective. Those who know what it is to be known in the Vedas and also the contexts are said to know the
Vedas. The others are like bellows[Bellows that blow wind. That is, they are only full of wind.]. Since everything is established in the Vedas, a person who knows the Vedas
knows everything. All the faith is established in the Vedas and everything that exists and does not exist[The present is interpreted as what exists and the past and the future as what do not exist.]. All the
faith exists in this and everything that exists and does not exist[The sentence is repeated again, almost exactly.]. Those who realize know that it is the end and the
middle and everything that is true and everything that is false[True and false in the sense of existence and non-existence.]. When everything has been renounced, there is
tranquility and peace. There is contentment, and auspicious emancipation is based on this. There is lack of falsehood in this. There is truth in this. This is everything that is to be known. This[The brahman.] is inside all mobile and immobile
objects. The unmanifest brahman does not decay and is the source of creation. This gives all kinds of happiness
and is the supreme objective. Energy, forgiveness and unadulterated and auspicious tranquility-these are certainly
the eternal reasons for bliss. If the sight of knowledge is used, one reaches Shabda-Brahma. For the sake of the
brahman, I bow down in obeisance before Brahma.'"'
