Vaishampayana said, 'When Vidura spoke in this way, the valiant Keshava, the destroyer of large numbers of the
enemy, spoke to Duryodhana, Dhritarashtra's son. "O Suyodhana! In your folly, you think of me as a single person.
O one with extremely evil intelligence! You desire to overpower and capture me. Here are all the Pandavas, and
the Andhakas and the Vrishnis. Here are the Adityas, the Rudras, the Vasus and the maharshis." Saying this, Keshava, the destroyer of enemy warriors, laughed out aloud. When the great-souled Shouri was laughing, the thirty
gods sprouted from his sides. They were like lightning, but were as small as a thumb. They were as radiant as the
fire. Brahma appeared on his forehead and Rudra on his chest. The guardians of the world were on his arms[There are four guardians of the world (lokapalas). Krishna presumably manifested himself in his four-armed
form.] and
Agni was created from his mouth. The Adityas, the Sadhyas, the Vasus, the Ashvins, Indra and the Maruts and the
Vishvadevas manifested themselves and the forms of the yakshas, the gandharvas and the rakshasas also appeared.
Sankarshana[Balarama.] and Dhananjaya appeared on his two arms, the archer Arjuna on the right and Rama, the wielder of
the plough, on the left. Bhima, Yudhishthira and Madri's two sons appeared on his back. The Andhakas and the Vrishnis, with Pradyumna at the head, appeared in front of Krishna, with their great weapons raised up. The conch
shell, the chakra, the club, the spear, the Sharnga[Krishna's bow, made of horn.], the plough and Nandaka[The name of Krishna's sword.] could be seen. And many other
weapons were raised up. They were radiant in all the directions, around Krishna's many arms. From his eyes, nose
and ears emerged extremely terrible flames of fire with smoke. Rays like those of the sun emerged from the pores
of his body. When they saw the terrible form of the great-souled Keshava, all the kings were frightened in their
hearts and closed their eyes, with the exception of Drona, Bhishma, the immensely intelligent Vidura, the immensely fortunate Sanjaya and the rishis, rich in austerities, because the illustrious Janardana gave them divine
sight.

'At the great and extraordinary sight of Madhava on the floor of that assembly hall, the drums of the gods were
sounded and flowers were showered down. The entire earth trembled and the oceans shivered. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! All the lords of the earth were extremely astounded. Then that tiger among men, destroyer of enemies, withdrew his real form, which was divine, extraordinary, colourful, prosperous and radiant. Madhusudana
took the permission of the rishis and grasping Satyaki and Hardikya by the hand, departed. Narada and the other
rishis also disappeared and that was another extraordinary marvel in that confusion.

'On seeing him leave, the Kouravas, together with the kings, followed that tiger among men, like the gods follow Shatakratu. However, ignoring that entire circle of kings, Shouri, whose soul cannot be measured, went out,
like a fire trailing smoke. His chariot was large and bright, decorated with bells. It was colourful with nets of gold.
It was light and roared like a cloud. It was covered with bright tiger skins and was yoked to Sainya and Sugriva.
Daruka appeared. Maharatha Hardikya Kritavarma, the revered hero of the Vrishnis, also appeared, riding on his
chariot. Shouri, destroyer of enemies, was about to leave on his chariot, which had been prepared. The great king
Dhritarashtra again spoke to him. "O Janardana! You have seen how much power I possess over my sons. O destroyer of enemies! You have witnessed all of it and nothing has happened without your seeing it. O Keshava!
Knowing that I wish for peace among the Kurus and have made efforts and knowing about my condition, you
should not have any doubts about me. O Keshava! I have no evil intentions towards the Pandavas. You know the
words that I have spoken to Suyodhana. O Madhava! All the Kurus and the kings who are the lords of the earth
know that I tried for peace and made every kind of effort." Then the mighty-armed one told Dhritarashtra, the lord
of men, Drona, the grandfather Bhishma, Kshatta, Bahlika and Kripa, "You have witnessed what happened in the
assembly of the Kurus, when that wicked and evil one arose repeatedly in anger. Dhritarashtra, lord of the earth,
has said that he is helpless. I wish to take leave from all of you. I will go to Yudhishthira now." Having sought
their permission thus, Shouri, bull among men, left on his chariot. Those brave and great archers, bulls among
Bharatas, followed him-Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Kshatta, Dhritarashtra, Bahlika, Ashvatthama, Vikarna and maharatha Yuyutsu. While the Kurus looked on, he left on his bright and large chariot, decorated with bells, and went
to his father's sister, Pritha[Kunti.].'