Vyasa said, 'The kshetrajna has to experience the transformations of nature. These don't know it[The atman.], but it
knows them. It is made to undertake tasks because of the senses, with the mind as a sixth. Well-trained and
excellent horses are firmly controlled[The atman should control the mind and the senses in that way.]. The objects of the senses are superior to the senses and the mind is superior to these objects. Intelligence is superior to the mind and the mahat atman is superior to the mind. The unmanifest is superior to the mahat and the inmortal[The brahman.] is superior to the unmanifest. There is nothing that is superior to
the immortal. It is the highest limit and the supreme objective. The atman is hidden inside all beings and cannot be
seen. Only those who are sharp in their intelligence and can see the subtleties of the truth can fathom it. The intelligence must be used to collect all the senses, the many objects of the senses and the mind, as the sixth, into the atman. One must think about what should be thought about. Having used intelligence to goad the mind, one must
meditate on the supreme. Realizing that he has no power, the person must seek to obtain the immortal objective
through tranquility in his soul. But a person whose memory is fickle and whose self is under the subjugation of all
the senses and who gives his atman up to them, is like a person who is dead and obtains nothing but death. Abandoning all resolution, the consciousness must be merged in the truth. When consciousness is vested in the truth, a
person becomes like Kalanjara[Kalanjara is the name of a famous mountain. The obvious meaning is that one becomes as immobile as that
mountain. But kalanjara is also a meeting point for mendicants. With a pun on the word kala (time), there may
also be a sense of conquering time.]. With the consciousness gratified, the sage goes beyond the good and the bad. He
bases himself on the gratification of his atman and enjoys infinite happiness. A sign of that satisfaction is that he
sleeps in contentment. He is like the flame of a lamp that is not stirred by the wind. In this way, at the beginning of
the night and the end of the night[Evening and dawn.], he unites the atman with the atman[The first atman is the jivatman and the second atman is the paramatman.]. He is virtuous in his diet and pure in his
soul and beholds the atman in the atman[Now the second atman is the jivatman and the first atman is the paramatman.]. This is the essence of all the Vedas and the sacred texts. O son! For realizing the atman, these are the instructions of the sacred texts. This is the essence of all dharma and all accounts
about the truth. This amrita has been obtained by churning the ten thousand chants from the Rig Veda[There are different texts of the Rig Veda, with roughly 1,000 hymns and 10,000 chants (richs).]. It is like
wood and fire being used to churn butter from curds. O son! In that way, for you, I have given you the wisdom of
the learned ones. O son! These are the words of the sacred texts, given as instructions to snatakas. These should
not be given to people who are not tranquil, those who are not self-controlled and ascetics. Nor should they be given to those who are unacquainted with the words of the Vedas, or do not follow them. They should not be given to
those who are malicious, not upright, those who are directionless in their tasks, those who slander and those who
burn everything down in the science of argumentation. But they should be given to calm ascetics who are praised,
or should be praised, and beloved sons and devoted disciples. The secrets of this dharma should be revealed to
such people and not to anyone else. I think that even if a man is given the entire earth with all its treasures, this
truth is superior to that gift. There is a greater and superhuman mystery about adhyatma. This was seen by the maharshis and sung about in Vedanta. You have asked me about it and I will tell you the truth about it.'"'
