'Sanjaya said, "O great king! Then Yudhishthira and Pandava Bhimasena surrounded Drona's son from every direction. King Duryodhana and Bharadvaja's son attacked the Pandavas in that encounter and a battle commenced.
O great king! It was terrible in form and increased the terror of cowards. Yudhishthira was angry and dispatched
large numbers of Ambashthas, Malavas, Vangas, Shibis and Trigartas to the world of the dead. Bhima was indomitable in battle. He killed Abhisahas, Shurasenas and other kshatriyas and filled the earth with the mire of
blood. O king! In that battle, Kiriti used sharp arrows to send large numbers of Youdheyas, those from the mountainous regions and Madrakas to the world of the dead. They were severely afflicted with iron arrows. Tuskers fell
down on the ground, like mountains with two peaks[The two tusks are being compared to the two peaks.]. The trunks of elephants were severed and rolled around,
here and there. The earth was strewn with these and looked beautiful, as if with serpents that moved around. O
king! The earth was resplendent, because golden and colourful umbrellas were flung away. It was as if the sky was
resplendent with the sun, moon and planets at the time of the destruction of a yuga. 'Kill. Strike without any fear.
Pierce. Slice down.' These and other fierce sounds were heard in the vicinity of the chariot of the one with the red
horses[Drona.]. Drona became extremely angry and used the vayavya weapon in the battle. He was unapproachable and
killed them, like a turbulent wind driving away clouds. While Bhimasena and the great-souled Partha looked on,
the Panchalas were slaughtered by Drona and fled. But Kiriti and Bhima forcefully restrained them. They attacked
your army with a large number of chariots. Bibhatsu was on the right flank and Vrikodara on the left. They showered down great torrents of arrows on Bharadvaja's son. O great king! Maharatha Srinjayas, Panchalas, Matsyas
and Somakas followed them. There were the best of rathas in the army of your son, skilled in striking. With a large
army, they approached Drona's chariot. That large army of the Bharatas was slaughtered by Kiriti. On top of this,
they were afflicted by darkness and sleep. O great king! Though Drona himself and your son tried to restrain them,
they were incapable of restraining the warriors. That large army was shattered by the arrows of Pandu's son. With
the world covered in darkness, they fled in all the directions. Some kings abandoned hundreds of their mounts. O
great king! They were overcome by fear and ran away in different directions."'
