'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! O son[The word used is tata.]! I am asking you in the midst of these kings about the words spoken by the
great-souled Dhananjaya, indomitable in spirit, foremost in battle, and the destroyer of the lives of evil-souled
ones."

'Sanjaya replied, "Let Duryodhana listen to my words about what Arjuna spoke. The great-souled Dhananjaya is
ready for battle. He said this with Yudhishthira's permission and in Keshava's hearing. Knowing the strength of his
arms, he does not have the slightest fear. Kiriti is steadfast and ready to do battle. In Vasudeva's presence, he told
me, 'Tell Dhritarashtra's son in the midst of the Kurus and in the hearing of the kings who have assembled to kill
the Pandavas. Tell them all the words that I have spoken, so that the king[This might mean either Dhritarashtra or Duryodhana, probably the former.] and his advisers hear it.' Just as all the
gods listen to the words of the king of the gods, the wielder of the vajra, in that way, all the Pandavas[The other Pandavas.] and Srinjayas listened to the capable words spoken by Kiriti. 'Arjuna, the wielder of the Gandiva, is ready to do battle.'

With eyes like red lotuses, he spoke these words.

'"'If Dhritarashtra's son does not give the kingdom to King Yudhishthira Ajamidha, then it is certain that the
evil deeds committed by the sons of Dhritarashtra earlier will remain unaccounted[This is Arjuna speaking and his words are being repeated by Sanjaya. Ajamidha was an earlier ancestor and Yudhishthira and Dhritarashtra are often referred to as Ajamidha. Arjuna means that if the kingdom is returned, those
earlier crimes will be pardoned.]. If there is a desire to fight with
Bhima and Arjuna, the sons of the Ashvins[Nakula and Sahadeva.] and Vasudeva, with Shini's son[Satyaki.] who has raised his weapons, with
Dhrishtadyumna and Shikhandi, with Yudhishthira, who is equal to Indra and can burn up earth and heaven with
the ire of his thoughts-if Dhritarashtra's son wishes to fight with these, then all the objectives of the Pandavas
will be successful. Do not act so as to ensure the objectives of the Pandavas. Instead, should you so wish, come
and fight[This is directly addressed to Duryodhana.]. Pandava[Yudhishthira.], who acts in accordance with dharma, was banished to the forest and slept on a bed of grief.
Dhritarashtra's son will lie down and die on a more miserable bed and that will be his final one. The evil-souled
son of Dhritarashtra governed the Kurus and the Pandavas through evil conduct. But he[Yudhishthira.] possessed modesty, wisdom, austerities and self-control and conquered his anger through the protection of dharma. Though he was deceived, he was respectful and upright. He possessed austerities, self-control and the protection of dharma. He
spoke the truth and was pleasant, even when he was deceived. He endured the infinite hardships. The eldest Panda-
va has controlled his soul. He has controlled his anger for many terrible years. If that is unleashed on the Kurus,
Dhritarashtra's son will repent his decision to fight. When a fire with its black trails is kindled during the summer,
it burns down the dry wood. Thus will Yudhishthira's angry and blazing glance burn down the armies of Dhritarashtra's son.

'"'When Dhritarashtra's son sees the intolerant Pandava Bhimasena in battle, terrible in speed and with a club in
his hand, vomiting the poison of his anger, he will then repent this fight. When he sees Bhima, terrible in form and
with a club in his hand, begin to kill, like a mighty lion entering a pen of cows, Dhritarashtra's son will regret this
war. He is extremely fearsome and is without fear. He is skilled in the use of weapons. He will slay the assembled
enemy forces. He will counter an ocean of chariots on a single chariot. He will destroy a mass of infantry with his
club. He will swiftly destroy many soldiers. That brave one will bring down the soldiers of Dhritarashtra's son, like
a forest sliced down with an axe. Then Dhritarashtra's son will regret the war. Dhritarashtra's son will see his
mighty army scattered, like a village that is mostly made of straw burnt by a fire, or ripe grain burnt by lightning.
With the foremost warriors dead, the terrified soldiers will be reluctant. They will mostly be in flight, with no one
left with any enterprise. They will be burnt by Bhimasena's weapons. Then Dhritarashtra's son will regret the war.
Nakula, skilled and foremost charioteer among all charioteers, will use his right hand and shoot down hundreds of
enemy soldiers. Then Dhritarashtra's son will regret the war. Though he was earlier used to happiness, Nakula
slept on a bed of unhappiness in the forest for a very long time. He will sigh hard, like an enraged serpent. Then
Dhritarashtra's son will regret the war. He will see kings who are willing to fight on Dharmaraja's instructions, ride
white chariots and attack his soldiers. He will see them abandon his side. Thereafter, Dhritarashtra's son will repent. The Kourava will see five brave ones, who are children, but not like children in their skill with weapons[Droupadi's five sons.].
They will give up their lives to fight the Kekayas[Most of the Kekayas fought on the side of the Kouravas.]. Then Dhritarashtra's son will regret the war. Sahadeva, the
killer, will mount a chariot that is adorned with golden stars. Its wheels make no noise and it is yoked to well-
trained horses. He will slice off the heads of kings with floods of arrows. Dhritarashtra's son will see him mounted
on the chariot, skilled in the use of weapons, and attacking in all the directions in that extremely fearful war. On
seeing him in battle, Dhritarashtra's son will regret the war. Sahadeva is spirited and swift to act. He is restrained
by modesty, skilled and truthful. He is extremely strong and steadfast in all dharma. He will terribly slaughter soldiers as he finds his way towards the one from Gandhara[Shakuni. In Section 28 (Volume 2), Sahadeva had vowed to kill Shakuni.]. When he sees Droupadi's sons, brave and great archers
who are skilled in the use of weapons, expert in fighting with chariots, advance in battle, like terrible and poisonous serpents, then will Dhritarashtra's son regret the war. Abhimanyu is the slayer of enemy heroes. He will
shower arrows on enemies, like a cloud showering rain. Soubhadra[Abhimanyu. Abhimanyu was the son of Arjuna and Subhadra.] is skilled in the use of his arms and is like
Krishna's equal. When he advances, Dhritarashtra's son will regret the war. He will see Soubhadra, who is a child,
but is not like a child in valour. He will descend on that mass of enemies, like death itself. He is skilled in the use
of weapons and is Indra's equal. Then Dhritarashtra's son will regret the war.

'"'The young Prabhadrakas are swift to act and skilled[The Prabhadrakas were part of the Panchala army. However, some of them were from Panchala, others were
from Kamboja, but worked for the Panchala army. A few Prabhadrakas also fought on the Kourava side.]. Their valour is like that of lions. They will strike the
sons of Dhritarashtra, together with their soldiers. Then Dhritarashtra's son will regret the war. The aged Virata
and Drupada are maharathas. Each will advance with his soldiers against the enemy, when they see Dhritarashtra's
son, together with his soldiers. Then Dhritarashtra's son will regret the war. Drupada is skilled in the use of
weapons. He will be enraged in battle. Mounted on his chariot, he will use arrows to slice off the heads of younger
ones. Then Dhritarashtra's son will regret the war. Virata is the slayer of enemy heroes. He will penetrate the enemy army in its weak spots. He will be at the forefront of the Matsyas, who are terrible in form. Then Dhritarashtra's son will regret the war. Matysa Virata's eldest son[Uttara.] is terrible in form and is foremost among warriors. He
has donned armour for the sake of the Pandavas. When he sees him, Dhritarashtra's son will regret the war. When
Shantanu's virtuous son[Bhishma.], foremost among the Kouravas, has been killed in battle by Shikhandi, I tell you truthfully and without any doubt, that none of our enemies will be alive any more. Shikhandi will be on a chariot drawn by
celestial horses and protected well. He will advance towards Bhishma on his chariot and will mow down masses of
chariots. Then Dhritarashtra's son will regret the war. He will see the resplendent Dhrishtadyumna, at the forefront
of the Srinjaya forces. The intelligent Drona instructed him about secret weapons[Drona taught Dhrishtadyumna.]. Dhritarashtra's son will repent
then. He[Dhrishtadyumna.] is the immeasurable general. He will vanquish the sons of Dhritarashtra. He is capable of withstanding
enemies and will advance against Drona in battle. Then Dhritarashtra's son will regret the war. He is modest,
learned, strong and intelligent. He is blessed by prosperity and he is foremost among the Somakas[The Panchalas.]. Since our
leader is the foremost among the lions of the Vrishni lineage[Meaning Satyaki.], our enemies will not be able to withstand us. Tell
him this also[There is a minor inconsistency. The 'him' is Duryodhana and Arjuna is asking Sanjaya to tell Duryodhana.
However, the entire segment is in the form of Arjuna's message to Duryodhana and is within quotes, so to speak.]. There is no need to look for anyone else. We have chosen Shini's grandson, Satyaki, as our adviser.
He is a charioteer and is without a rival in battle. He is immensely strong, without fear and skilled in the use of
weapons. When instructed by me, the lord of the Shinis will shower arrows on the enemy, like a cloud showering
rain. He will envelope the warriors with a net of arrows. Then Dhritarashtra's son will regret the war. When he desires to fight, he is steady. The great-souled one's arms are long and his bow is firm. The enemies will be like ashes
in a fire. They will be like cows that have scented a lion. The great-souled one's arms are long and his bow is firm.
He can shatter the mountains and destroy all the worlds. He is skilled in the use of weapons and has dextrous
hands. He is radiant like the sun stationed in the firmament. The Yadava, the lion of the Vrishni lineage, is skilled
and subtle in his knowledge of the yoga of weapons. He has been instructed in what is said to be the most famous
yoga. All the qualities exist in Satyaki's form. Satyaki Madhava's golden chariot is yoked to four white horses.
When Suyodhana sees it in the field of battle, the evil one, who has no control over his soul, will repent.

'"'He will see the chariot studded with gold and gems. It is yoked to white horses and has a monkey on its banner. He will see it, driven in the battle by Keshava. Then the evil one, who has no control over his soul, will repent.
The evil-minded one will hear the great sound of Gandiva, as it is brandished by me in that great battle. The sound
will be like thunder, when the string of the bow strikes against my wrist guards. Then Dhritarashtra's stupid and
evil-minded son, with wicked companions, will regret the war. He will see his soldiers destroyed by that dark
shower of arrows in the battle, like a herd of cows. Like lightning emerging from the clouds, they will kill thousands of enemies in the encounter. My arrows will pierce the bones and penetrate the hearts. Then Dhritarashtra's
son will regret the war. He will see masses of arrows, released from Gandiva's string, descend with sharp tips and
destroy horses, elephants and armoured soldiers. Then Dhritarashtra's son will regret the war. The evil one will see
the arrows of our enemies countered and repulsed by my arrows. They will be obliquely sliced by my arrows with
razor tips. Then Dhritarashtra's son will regret the war. The arrows released from my arms will strike down the
heads of his young warriors, like birds plucking fruit from the top of a tree. Then Dhritarashtra's son will regret the
war. He will see warriors brought down from chariots, giant elephants and horses. They will be slain and brought
down by my arrows in the arena. Then Dhritarashtra's son will regret the war. Like death with a gaping mouth, the
flaming shower of arrows released by me will bring down the enemy assassins, the masses of infantry and masses
of chariots in every direction. Then the evil-minded one will repent. The dust from my chariot will cover every direction. He will see his own soldiers completely bewildered, oppressed by Gandiva. After that, the evil-minded
one will repent. Duryodhana will see all his soldiers, bereft of their senses, shattered in their limbs and overwhelmed. Their horses, warriors, kings and elephants will be slain. They will be thirsty, exhausted and terrified.
Killed, or about to be killed, they will lament piteously. Hair, bones and skulls will be scattered around, as if Prajapati[The creator.] left his work incomplete. On seeing this, the evil-minded one will repent. In that battle, Dhritarashtra's son
will see Gandiva, Vasudeva, the divine conch shell Panchajanya, Devadatta, the inexhaustible quivers and me on
my chariot[Panchajanya is the name of Krishna's conch shell, while Devadatta is the name of Arjuna's conch shell.]. In destroying the Kouravas, in burning that assembled mass of bandits[The word used is dasyus.], I will burn like a fire, like
the one between the end of a yuga and the onset of another yuga. Then Dhritarashtra's son will repent, together
with his sons. Having been overcome by anger, with his brothers, with his sons and with his soldiers, the weakminded one will see his prosperity destroyed. He will tremble when his insolence has been destroyed. Thereafter,
Dhritarashtra's wicked son will repent.

'"'On an earlier occasion, I had finished my meditations in the morning. When I arose from the water, a brahmana spoke these pleasant words. "O Partha! You will have to perform an extremely difficult task. O Savyasachi!
You will have to fight with your enemies. Destroying the enemies, Indra, with the vajra in his hand and drawn by
tawny horses, will lead from the forefront in this battle. Alternatively, Krishna Vasudeva will protect your rear, on
a chariot yoked to Sugriva[It is difficult to pinpoint this incident. In Section 32 (Volume 2), Indra arrived before Arjuna in the form of a
brahmana. However, the choice between Indra and Krishna did not arise. In Section 19 (Volume 2), Agni also arrived in the form of a brahmana, and in that incident, Krishna/Arjuna confronted Indra. The sense is that a passive
(at the rear) Krishna is superior to an active (at the forefront) Indra. Sugriva is the name of one of Krishna's horses,
Sainya being the other.]." In this battle, I have chosen Vasudeva as my aide, in preference to the great Indra,
with the vajra in his hand. I have obtained Krishna so as to slay the dasyus. But I think the gods have ordained this
for me. Though he has resolved not to fight, a man whom Krishna wishes to triumph will be victorious over all his
enemies, be they Indra with the gods, or men. There is no need to worry. One who wishes to defeat the brave and
spirited Vasudeva Krishna in a battle is like one who desires to swim across the ocean, the great store of immeasurable waters, with his bare arms. Mount Shveta is high and lofty with rocks and it is like trying to shatter it with
one's arms. The hands, with their nails, will be split. But nothing will happen to the mountain. Instead of vanquishing Vasudeva in battle, one should try to pacify a blazing fire with one's hands, restrain the sun and the moon, or
rob the gods of amrita. Alone on a chariot, he destroyed the kingdom of the king and abducted Rukmini of
Bhoja[Rukmini was the daughter of King Bhishmaka of Vidarbha (Bhoja). Her father wished her to marry Shishupala.
But she loved Krishna and Krishna abducted her. Pradyumna was the son of Krishna and Rukmini.]. He obtained a resplendent and famous wife and she bore him the great-souled Roukmineya[Rukmini's son, Pradyumna.]. Having defeated all of Nagnajit's sons, he spiritedly churned Gandhara and forcibly freed Sudarshaniya, beloved of the gods,
from bondage[The name is also written as Sudarshana. This Nagnajit was a king of Gandhara and had imprisoned Sudarshana
and other kings. Krishna liberated them. There is yet another Nagnajit, who was king of Koshala. Krishna married
his daughter Satya.]. He killed Pandya by striking him on the chest[Krishna defeated the king of Pandya.]. He vanquished the Kalingas in Dantakura. He
burnt down the city of Varanasi, which remained for many years without a protector[King Poundraka was the king of Karusha and fancied himself to be superior to Krishna. He also called himself
Vasudeva. The king of Kashi (Varanasi) became Poundraka's ally and Krishna defeated and killed them both. The
son of the king of Kashi was Sudakshina and he swore revenge, praying to Shiva. In the subsequent conflict,
Krishna burnt down Varanasi.]. He was challenged by
Ekalavya, the king of Nishadha, who was thought to be invincible. But Krishna killed him and robbed him of his
life, forcefully smashing him against a rock, like Jambha[Ekalavya allied himself with Jarasandha and was killed by Krishna when the Yadavas fought against Jarasandha.
There were several demons named Jambha and Vishnu killed one of these.]. With Baladeva as a second, he killed Ugrasena's extremely wicked son[Kamsa was Ugrasena's son.], who was radiant in the midst of the Vrishnis and the Andhakas, and returned the kingdom to
Ugrasena. He battled Soubha, which travelled in the sky, and the terrible King Shalva, who used maya[This story has been recounted in Section 31 (Volume 2).]. At Soubha's gates, he grasped the one who had killed one hundred[Shalva.]. Is there any mortal one who can withstand him?
There was the terrible and impregnable fortress city Pragjyotisha of the asuras. The extremely strong Naraka, born
of the earth, stole Aditi's beautiful and bejewelled earrings. Together with Shakra, the gods tried to get them back.
But they could not match him, and fled, terrified. However, they witnessed Keshava's valour and strength and his
irresistible weapons. Knowing Keshava's true nature, they entrusted Krishna with the task of killing the dasyus[Naraka was the son of the earth goddess and Vishnu in his varaha (boar) incarnation. He established the city of
Pragjyotisha in Assam (Kamarupa). After Naraka stole Aditi's earrings, Krishna killed him and his general, Mura.
Hence, Krishna is known as Murari, Mura's enemy. Pragjyotisha seems to be used both for the city and the kingdom. When it is used as a name for the kingdom, the capital is Nirmochana.].
Vasudeva pledged to perform that extremely difficult task, since he possessed the wealth of success. Piercing with
lances and striking with razors, he killed six thousand in Nirmochana. He killed Mura and he killed rakshasa warriors. Then the brave one entered Nirmochana. There, a great battle took place between the immensely strong
one[Naraka.] and the even stronger Vishnu. He was killed by Krishna and was robbed of his life. He was like a karnikara
tree uprooted by the wind. Having regained the bejewelled earrings, having killed the earth-born Naraka and Mura,
the wise one was surrounded by prosperity and fame. The one with the unmatched power returned. On witnessing
the terrible deed he had wrought in battle, the gods then granted him boons. "When you battle, you will not be
overtaken by fatigue. You will face no impediments in the sky and in the water. Weapons will never penetrate your
body." Krishna was gratified at these. The immensely strong and immeasurable Vasudeva is like this. He always
possesses the qualities. Vishnu is unassailable and infinitely valorous. Dhritarashtra's son wishes to vanquish him.
Though the evil-souled one doubts him, looking towards us, he[Krishna.] has ignored it. If he thinks that he will be able to
engender a quarrel between Krishna and me and make it flourish, and thus become capable of robbing the Pandavas, he will know what is true when he goes to war.

'"'I convey my respects to the king who is Shantanu's son, to Drona and his son, and to the unrivalled son of
Sharadvat[Kripa.]. Wishing to obtain the kingdom, I will fight them. I think that dharma will direct weapons at those
who fight against the Pandavas, who have conducted themselves in accordance with dharma. The sons of Pandu
were vanquished through deceit by violent ones and have waited for a long period of twelve years, spending a life
of hardship, as promised, in the forest. We have lived one year of concealment. While the Pandavas are still alive,
how can the sons of Dhritarashtra suddenly rob them of their station? If they conquer us in a battle, with the gods
headed by Indra as aides, the practice of adharma will be superior to that of dharma. Then it will be certain that being virtuous is pointless. If he thinks that a man is not bound down by his deeds, and if he does not think that we
are superior to him, then, with Vasudeva as a second, I hope to kill Duryodhana and his companions. If a man is
tied down by his karma, and even if a man is not tied down by his own karma, looking towards both of these possibilities, the defeat of Dhritarashtra's son is proper. O Kurus! I am telling you what is evident. The sons of Dhritarashtra will be destroyed in this war. If the Kurus seek to attain their objectives without a war and if they do not
fight, they will then survive. Having killed the sons of Dhritarashtra and Karna, I will conquer the entire kingdom
of the Kurus. Do whatever you can, according to your capacity. With your wives and your sons, enjoy whatever is
sweet. There are aged brahmanas among us. They are extremely learned, and possess virtuous conduct and noble
lineage. They are acquainted with the astrology of the years and are certain about the knowledge of the nakshatras,
the high and low of the mysteries of destiny, divine questions, mrigachakra[Mrigachakra seems to have been the circle of the nakshatras rather than the signs (rashi) of the zodiac.] and muhurtas. They have predicted
the victory of the Pandavas and the great destruction of the Kurus and the Srinjayas[Though the Srinjayas, that is the Panchalas, are the allies of the Pandavas.]. Ajatashatru[Yudhishthira.] already thinks
that success has been obtained in defeating our enemies. Janardana, lion among the Vrishnis, knows what is hidden
and does not see any reason for doubt. Without being distracted, I myself know and see the shape of the future. My
ancient foresight has not suffered. The sons of Dhritarashtra will die in this war. The Gandiva bow yawns without
being touched. Without being touched, the strings of the bow shudder. The arrows jump out from the mouths of the
quivers and repeatedly wish to fly out at every instant. My happy steel[The word used is shaikya. This means a metal that has been moulded or cast, though not necessarily steel.] emerges from its scabbard, like a snake
that has discarded its old skin. Terrible voices are heard from my standard, "O Kiriti! When will your chariot be
yoked?" Crowds of jackals are howling in the night. Rakshasas fall down from the firmament. Deer, jackals, white-
necked ones[Probably peacocks.], crows, vultures, cranes and hyenas are emerging. On seeing my chariot yoked with the white
steeds, birds[Suparnas.] are flying at the back. I will alone shower down arrows and convey the warrior kings to the world of
the dead. I will separately despatch each weapon along its route, like a fire that consumes a forest during the summer-Sthunakarna, the terrible Pashupata and Brahmastra[Names of divine weapons.]-all of which were given to me by Shakra. I will
swiftly release them for the sake of slaying. No remnants will be left of any of the beings. I will obtain peace and
supreme bliss. O son of Gavalgana[Arjuna is addressing Sanjaya now.]! Tell them that is my firm resolution. Look at the delusion of Dhritarashtra's
son. He seeks to quarrel with those who have always been his aides when he has confronted his enemies, even if
the gods, with Indra at the forefront, were on their side[The side of the enemies.]. Shantanu's son, the aged Bhishma, Kripa, Drona and his
son and the intelligent Vidura-all of them have said this. Let it be that way. Let all the Kurus enjoy long lives.'"'
