Vaishampayana said, 'O best of kings! After a long time, the beautiful Devayani went to the same forest to play.
With Sharmishtha and the 1000 maid servants, she reached the same spot and began to roam around as she
pleased. Being attended by all those friends, she felt very happy. All of them sported in abandon, drinking the nectar from madhavi creepers, eating diverse food and biting into fruit. In search of deer to hunt, the king who was
Nahusha's son again came to the same place, exhausted and thirsty. He saw Devayani and Sharmishtha, with all
those ladies. They were drinking and languid, adorned in celestial ornaments. He saw the sweet-smiling Devayani
seated there. Among all those beautiful women, she was unparalleled in her loveliness. She was waited upon by
Sharmishtha, who was massaging her feet.

'Yayati said, "It seems that these 1000 women are surrounding the two of you. O beautiful ones! Tell me your
names and your clans." Devayani replied, "O ruler of men! Hear my words and know that I am the daughter of
Shukra, the preceptor of the asuras. This friend is my slave. She goes wherever I go. She is Sharmishtha, the
daughter of Vrishaparva, the king of the danavas." Yayati asked, "This maiden is beautiful. She has lovely eyebrows. I am curious to know how this daughter of the asura king, your friend, has come to be your slave." Devayani replied, "O tiger among men! Everything follows what has been destined. Do not be surprised at what
seems to be out of the ordinary and know that everything is determined by destiny. Your form and attire is like that
of a king. Your speech is like that of one who knows the Vedas. What is your name? Where have you come from?
Whose son are you? Tell me." Yayati replied, "During my years of brahmacharya, the entire knowledge of the
Vedas penetrated my ears. I am a king and the son of a king. I am known as Yayati." Devayani asked, "O king!
Why have you come to this region? Is it to gather lotuses or hunt for deer?" Yayati replied, "O fortunate one! I
came to hunt for deer and came here to search for water. You speak a lot. Please allow me to leave now." Devayani
said, "With the slave Sharmishtha, the two of us and 1000 maid servants are at your command to serve you. O fortunate one! Please be my friend and husband." Yayati replied, "O beautiful one! I am not worthy of you. You are
the daughter of Ushanas. O Devayani! Your father cannot marry you to a king." Devayani replied, "Brahmanas
have already been united with Kshatriyas and Kshatriyas have been united with Brahmanas. You are a rishi and the
son of a rishi. O son of Nahusha! Therefore, marry me." Yayati replied, "O beautiful one! There is no doubt that
the four varnas have sprung from a single body. But their purity varies and so does their dharma. The Brahmana is
superior to the others." Devayani said, "O son of Nahusha! Earlier, no man except you has ever touched my hand.
Therefore, in accordance with the dharma of accepting the hand, I accept you as my husband. My hand has been
touched by you, who are a rishi and the son of a rishi. How can a proud one like me allow any other man to touch
my hand?" Yayati replied, "The learned men know that a Brahmana is more to be avoided than a virulently poisonous and angry snake or a blazing fire that spreads in all directions." Devayani asked, "O bull among men! Why
do you say that a Brahmana is more to be avoided than a virulently poisonous and angry snake or a blazing fire
that spreads in all directions?" Yayati replied, "The snake kills only one. The sharpest weapon kills only one. But if
angry, a Brahmana can destroy many cities and kingdoms. O timid one! Therefore, I think that it is harder to fend
off a Brahmana. O fortunate one! I cannot marry you unless your father bestows you on me."

'Devayani said, "O king! I have chosen you. It is agreed that my father will bestow me on you and you will marry me. You need have no fear you have not asked for me. You will receive what is given to you." Devayani quickly
sent a message to her father. On hearing this, Bhrigu's descendant went to meet the king. On seeing Shukra come,
Yayati, the lord of the earth, paid homage to the Brahmana Kavya with joined palms, worshipped him and waited.
Devayani said, "O father! This is the king who is Nahusha's son. He grasped my hand when I was in trouble. Bestow me to him. I will accept no one else in the world as my husband." Shukra said, "O son of Nahusha! You are
brave. You have been chosen by my beloved daughter as her husband. I give her to you. Accept her as your
queen." Yayati replied, "O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! I seek a boon from you. Let no great sin descend on
me as a consequence of my begetting offspring of mixed caste." Shukra said, "I free you from this non-adherence
to dharma. You will receive your desired boon. No sin will befall you as a result of this marriage. Maintain the
slender-waisted Devayani as your wife in accordance with dharma. With her, may you find incomparable happiness. O king! Always respect this maiden Sharmishtha, Vrishaparva's daughter, and you must never call her to
your bed." Having been thus addressed, Yayati circumambulated Shukra. With the great-souled one's permission,
he returned happily to his own city.'
