'Dhrishtadyumna said, "Duryodhana, Durvisaha, Durmukha, Dushpradharshana, Vivimshati, Vikarna, Saha,
Duhshasana, Sama, Yuyutsu, Vatavega, Bhimavegadhara, Ugrayudha, Balaki, Kanakayu, Virochana, Sukundula,
Chitrasena, Suvarcha, Kanakadhvaja, Nandaka, Bahushali, Kunduja and Vikata-these and others are the immensely powerful sons of Dhritarashtra. These warriors have come with Karna for your hand.

'"Hundreds are the famous and great-souled kings, bulls among the Kshatriyas-Shakuni, Bala, Vrishaka and
Brihadbala, all these sons of the king of Gandhara have come. Adorned with every ornament, the great-souled warriors Ashvatthama and Bhoja, skilled in the use of all weapons, have come. The kings Brihanta, Manimana and the
valiant Dandadhara, Sahadeva, Jayatsena, Meghasandhi of Magadha, Virata and his two sons Sankha and Uttara,
Vardhakshemi, Susharma, King Senabindu, Abhibhu with his sons Sudamna and Suvarchasa, Sumitra, Sukumara,
Vrika, Satyadhriti, Suryadhvaja, Rochamana, Nila, Chitrayudha, Amshumana, Chekitana, the immensely powerful
Shrenimana, Chandrasena, the powerful son of Samudrasena, Jalasamdha, the father and son Vidanda and Danda,
Poundraka, Vasudeva, the valorous Bhagadatta, Kalinga, Tamralipta, the king of Pattana, the maharatha Shalya,
king of Madra with his sons, the brave Rukmagandha and Rukmaratha, the Kourava Somadatta and his three maharatha sons Bhuri, Bhurishrava and Shala, Sudakshina, Kamboja, the Kourava Dridhadhanva, Brihadbala,
Sushena, Ushinara's son Shibi, Samkarshana, Vasudeva, Rukmini's brave son Samba, Charudeshna, Sarana, Gada,
Akrura, Satyaki, the immensely powerful Uddhava, Hridika's son Kritavarma, Prithu, Viprithu, Viduratha, Kanka,
Samika, Saramejaya, the brave Vatapati, Jhilli, Pindaraka, the brave Ushinara, all famous as descended from the
Vrishni lineage; Bhagiratha, Brihatkshetra, Jayadratha, the king of Sindhu, Brihadratha, Bahlika, the maharatha
Shrutayu, Uluka, King Kaitava, Chitrangada, Subhangada, the patient king of Vatsa, the king of Kosala.

'"O fortunate one! These and many other kings of many regions, famous on earth, have come here for you.
These brave ones will try to shoot the excellent target for your hand. O beautiful one! You will choose as a husband the one who hits it."'
