Brahma said, "The ancient ones who are certain in their determinations say that renunciation is an austerity.
Learned  brahmanas  who  are  immersed  in  the  brahman  say  that  knowledge  is  the  supreme  brahman.
Knowledge of the supreme brahman is a long distance away. The knowledge of the Vedas provides the refuge. It is
without the opposite pairs of  sentiments. It is without qualities. It is eternal. It  cannot  be  thought  of.  It is the
supreme secret. Those who have fortitude see that destination through knowledge and austerities. These are the purified and sparkling ones, who have transcended tamas and rajas and have been cleansed. Silently, those who resort
to austerities advance towards the supreme objective. People who know about the brahman are always devoted to
renunciation. Those who follow the pursuit of dharma say that austerities are like a lamp. They know that knowledge is supreme and that it is the best form of renunciation and austerities. There may be a person who has determined the truth and knows it, using his unobstructed knowledge. He succeeds in going everywhere and knows the
atman that is inside all creatures. Such a learned person can see association and also disassociation. He sees the
unity between the two and is freed from all misery. He does not desire anything. He does not disrespect anything.
Even when he is in this world, he thinks of himself as being immersed in the brahman. He knows the true qualities
of Pradhana, the one who has ordained all creatures. He is without a sense of ownership. He is without ego. He is
beyond the opposite sentiments. He does not bow down before anyone. He is devoid of sounds of svadha. He is
devoid of qualities and is always without any conflict. There is no doubt that such a person is liberated and advances towards tranquility. Such a being gives up everything associated with qualities and all tasks, good or bad.
He gives up both truth and falsehood. There is no doubt that such a person is emancipated. The unmanifest is the
seed of creation. Intelligence is the gigantic trunk. Great Ahamkara represents the branches and the senses are the
hollows inside them. The giant elements are the smaller branches and also the branches that are smaller still. This
eternal tree is the brahman. It is always full of leaves and flowers. It yields fruits that are good and bad. It provides
sustenance to all beings. Through the supreme seat of knowledge, one can cut and pierce this tree. One then abandons the association with death and birth and obtains immortality. Such a person is without a sense of ownership
and without a sense of ego. There is no doubt that he is liberated. There are always two birds that are friends[The two birds are the jivatman and the paramatman. In the absence of true knowledge, the jivatman is
unconscious.]. Of
these, one is said to be unconscious and the other is said to be conscious. The unconscious spirit is full of conflict.
The other intelligent spirit is inside the atman. The kshetrajna uses intelligence to understand the conflict of the
spirits. He overcomes the qualities and is freed from the noose of death."'"'
