Vaishampayana said, 'Dasharha's eyes showed his anger. In the assembly of Kurus, he laughed and spoke these
words to Duryodhana. "You wish to obtain the bed of a warrior and your desire will be fulfilled. Station yourself
with your advisers and there will be a great destruction. O foolish one! You think that there is nothing reprehensible in your conduct towards the Pandavas. Let all the lords of men listen. You were tormented with the prosperity
of the great-souled Pandavas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! You plotted a gambling match with Soubala. O
son[The word used is tata.]! Your relatives are superior and are honoured by virtuous ones. They are not crooked in their conduct. How
could they engage in a deceitful act with that deceitful one[The deceitful one is Shakuni and the deceitful act is the gambling match.]? O immensely wise one! Gambling with the dice destroys the joy of the virtuous. Among those who are not virtuous, it creates dissension and difficulties. It was you
who started this terrible and wicked gambling match with your wicked relatives, ignoring the norms of good conduct. Who else but you could have treated the wife of a relative in that way, bringing Droupadi to the assembly hall
and speaking to her in that way? She has been born in noble lineage. She possesses good conduct. She is dearer to
them than their lives. You maltreated that queen of the sons of Pandu. All the Kurus know how Duhshasana addressed the Kounteyas, the scorchers of enemies, in the assembly of the Kurus, when they were being exiled.
Which virtuous man will act towards his relatives, in this contemptible way? They have followed righteous conduct. They have been devoid of greed. They have always acted in accordance with dharma. Karna, Duhshasana
and you repeatedly used harsh words that are used by those who are violent and are not aryas. When they were
children, together with their mother, you made great efforts to burn them up in Varanavata. But you were unsuccessful. At that time, the Pandavas and their mother lived for a long time in concealment in Ekachakra, in a brahmana's house. Through poison, through the bonds of snakes, you made every effort to destroy the Pandavas. But
you were unsuccessful. This was your inclination towards the Pandavas. You were always devoted to falsehood.
How have you not commited a crime towards the great-souled Pandavas? You have committed many such cruel
deeds towards the Pandavas. You have resorted to false conduct, like one who is not an arya. You are now against
everyone. Your mother and father, Bhishma, Drona and Vidura have all told you that you should make peace. O
king! But you do not desire peace. There is great benefit to both you and Partha[Yudhishthira.] in peace. O king! But because
of the feebleness of your intelligence, this does not appeal to you. O king! But going against the advice of your
well-wishers, you will not obtain salvation. O lord of the earth! You are acting against dharma and against fame."

Dasharha was speaking to the intolerant Duryodhana in this way.

'Duhshasana then spoke these words in that assembly of the Kurus. "O king! It seems that if you do not have an
alliance with the Pandavas on your own volition, the Kouravas will tie us up and hand us over to Kunti's son. O
bull among men! Bhishma, Drona and your father will give the three of us-you, Vaikartana and I-to the Pandavas." On hearing his brother's words, Suyodhana, Dhritarashtra's son, arose in rage, hissing like a giant serpent.
That evil-minded one paid no attention to anyone-Vidura, Dhritarashtra, the great king Bahlika, Kripa, Bhishma,
Drona or Janardana. Insulting those who deserve to be honoured, the uncontrolled, wicked and shameless one departed. Having seen that bull among men leave, all his brothers, advisers and all the kings followed him.

'On seeing Duryodhana angrily rise and leave the assembly hall, together with his brothers, Bhishma, Shantanu's son, said, "He who is overcome by anger and acts against dharma and artha, will soon be laughed at by his
ill-wishers, when he is in difficulties. This evil-minded son of King Dhritarashtra does not know what is right. He
suffers from false pride because of the kingdom. He is under the power of anger and avarice. O Janardana! I think
the time has come for all the kshatriyas to be cooked by destiny, because in their delusion, all the kings and their
advisers are following him." The valiant and lotus-eyed Dasharha heard Bhishma's words and told Bhishma,
Drona and all the others who were there. "This is the supreme taint of all the elders among the Kurus, that they are
not forcibly restraining this evil-minded king who is misusing his prosperity. O destroyers of enemies! I think the
time has come to act in this way. O unblemished ones! Listen to me. If that is done, everything may still be well.
Reflect on my words, which are for your welfare. O descendants of the Bharata lineage! See if they appeal to you
as conducive to your welfare. While the aged king of Bhoja was still alive, his evil-minded and selfish son[Kamsa. Ugrasena was the king of the Bhojas.],
overcome by anger, seized his father's riches. Kamsa, Ugrasena's son, was abandoned by his relatives. For the
welfare of his relatives, I punished him in a great battle. The other relatives and I then honoured and instated Ahu-
ka's son, Ugrasena, as the king again and thereby extended the kingdom of the Bhojas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage[Primarily addressing Dhritarashtra.]! For the sake of the lineage, all the Bhojas, Andhakas and Vrishnis abandoned the solitary Kamsa and
lived in happiness. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When the gods and the asuras were arrayed in
battle formations, with their weapons raised, and the world was divided into two sides and was about to be destroyed, Parameshthi Prajapati[Brahma.] said, 'The asuras, together with the daityas and the danavas, will be defeated.
The Adityas, the Vasus and the Rudras will dwell in heaven. In this battle, the gods, the asuras, men, gandharvas,
serpents and rakshasas will angrily kill one another.' Thinking this, Parameshthi Prajapati told Dharma, 'Bind the
daityas and the danavas and give them to Varuna. Having been thus addressed and instructed by Parameshthi,
Dharma bound the daityas and the danavas and handed them over to Varuna. Having bound them with Dharma's
nooses and with his own nooses, Varuna, lord of the waters, has since then always carefully confined the danavas
to the ocean. In the same way, fetter Duryodhana, Karna, Shakuni Soubala and Duhshasana and hand them over to
the Pandavas. A man should be abandoned for the sake of a lineage. A lineage should be abandoned for the sake of
a village. A village should be abandoned for the sake of a country. The earth should be abandoned for the sake of
the soul. O king! O bull among the kshatriyas! If you bind up Duryodhana and make peace with the Pandavas, the
kshatriyas will not be destroyed for your sake."'
