'Arjuna said, "O Karna! You uttered many proud words in the midst of the assembly hall, to the effect that there
was no one who was your equal in war. Disregarding all of dharma, you spoke harsh words. But I think that your
wish is impossible to accomplish. You ignored me and spoke words earlier. O Radheya! Now, with me and in the
midst of these Kurus, make that true. You watched when evil-souled ones oppressed Panchali in the assembly hall.
You will now reap the fruits of that. Being bound down by the noose of dharma, my rage was restrained earlier. O
Radheya! You will now witness the victory of my anger in battle. O Karna! Now fight with me and let all the Kurus and their soldiers witness it."

'Karna replied, "O Partha! Carry out in deeds what you have spoken in words. It is known on earth that deeds
are superior to words. What you suffered earlier was because your powers were insufficient. O Partha! I will accept
it only if I witness your valour. If your rage was restrained earlier because you were bound down by the noose of
dharma, you are tied down even now, though you consider yourself to be free. You say that you are conversant
with dharma and artha. If you have dwelt in the forest in accordance with the promise, why do you wish to break
that agreement now[Implying that the period of exile is not yet over.]? O Partha! If Shakra himself decides to fight on your behalf, I will not deviate from displaying my valour. O Kounteya! Your desire will soon be fulfilled. You will fight with me today and witness my
strength."

'Arjuna said, "When fighting with me, you have earlier fled from the field of battle. O Radheya! That is the reason why you are still alive, though your younger brother has been killed. Which man other than you will see his
brother dead, and then flee from the forefront of battle? Then you speak like this in the midst of truthful ones."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having thus spoken to Karna, the unvanquised Bibhatsu attacked him and released arrows
that could penetrate body armour. Karna countered with arrows that were like the crests of flames and rained down
a great shower of arrows, like monsoon clouds. The terrible net of arrows covered every direction. They separately
pierced his[Arjuna's.] horses, arms and guards on his hands. Unable to tolerate this, he sliced off the strap of Karna's
quiver with a straight-tufted arrow, sharp at the tip. Grasping other arrows from his quiver, Karna pierced Pandava
on the hand, so that his grip weakened. The mighty-armed Arjuna then sliced off Karna's bow. He[Karna.] hurled a
javelin at him, but Partha cut that down with arrows. Then Radheya's large infantry attacked. But they were sent to
Yama's abode with arrows released from Gandiva. Bibhatsu then stretched his bow up to his ears and killed his
horses with sharp arrows that could take a great weight. They fell down dead on the ground. The mighty-armed
and valorous Kounteya took up another flaming arrow and pierced Karna in the chest. The arrow pierced his armour and penetrated his body. He was immersed in darkness and lost consciousness for some time. Suffering great
pain, he left the field of battle in a northern direction. Arjuna and maharatha Uttara started to censure him.'
