'"The son said, 'O mother! You have converted your heart into steel. There is no compassion in you. Incited by the
wisdom of bravery, you have become intolerant. Shame on the conduct of kshatriyas, about which you are censuring me, as if I am a stranger. You are speaking such words to your only son. If you can no longer see me, what purpose will the entire earth have for you? What use will there be of ornaments, or of the pleasures that life brings?'

'"The mother replied, 'O son! Everything done by the learned is for the purpose of dharma and artha. O Sanjaya! I have incited you with a view to those ends. The great moment has arrived for you to decide on your course
of action. With the time having arrived, if you do not act accordingly, you will be dishonoured and commit a deed
of extreme cruelty. O Sanjaya! You have already been touched by ill fame. If I do not speak to you in this way, my
affection towards you will be like that of a she-ass, without strength and without purpose. Abandon the path censured by the righteous and frequented by the stupid. This is the great ignorance to which all beings cling. If your
conduct is that of the virtuous, you will be my beloved, that is, if you have the qualities of dharma and artha and
never follow anything else. This recognizes destiny and human endeavour and is the conduct of the virtuous. If one
finds delight in a son or a grandson who does not have humility and does not exert himself, one loses the fruits of
obtaining offspring. Those who perform deeds that should not be performed are censured. Such inferior men obtain no happiness, in this world and the next. O Sanjaya! A kshatriya has been created to fight and be victorious,
for always performing cruel deeds and protecting the subjects. Whether he triumps, or whether he is slain, he attains Indra's world. But in Shakra's sacred and celestial world, the happiness that a kshatriya obtains from subjugating his enemy, is missing. Let the spirited man who has been defeated many times be tormented by rage and
wait to exact vengeance on the enemy. In what other way can he find peace, other than giving up his own life or
bringing down the enemy? In this world, a wise man is not delighted with a trifle. It is certain that a person who is
delighted with a trifle, will not remain happy with that trifle. In the absence of what he desires, a man will not be
radiant. It is certain that he will feel empty, like the Ganga after flowing into the ocean.'

'"The son said, 'O mother! You should not speak in this way, certainly not to your son. You should look for
compassion, like one who is deaf and mute.'

'"The mother replied, 'It is a great pleasure to me that you look on it in this way. You are inciting me in this
way, so that I can incite you some more. I will honour you when you have killed all the Saindhavas and I see you
victorious, free of all your worries.'

'"The son said, 'I have no treasury. I have no allies. How can I obtain the success of victory? This is my extremely terrible state and I know about my own self. I have withdrawn from the kingdom, like a performer of evil
deeds withdraws from heaven. This being the situation, I cannot see any means. You are mature in your wisdom
and I am asking you. Tell me exactly and I will act entirely in accordance with your instructions.'

'"The mother replied, 'O son! You should not demean yourself because of your earlier failures. Objects that
were not obtained earlier can be obtained. In the same way, those that were obtained can be destroyed. Stupid ones
cannot obtain objects through anger at their absence. O son! The fruits of all deeds are never permanent. Knowing
that they are not permanent, one may be successful or one may fail. But those who do not act, never obtain success. Lack of trying has only one consequence-failure. However, for those who try, there are two consequences-
success or failure. O son of a king! He who knows in advance that all success is impermanent, repels growth and
prosperity and acts against his own interests. One should arise. One should awake. One should yoke oneself to the
task that must be done. Without any hesitation, one must always make up one's mind that something needs to be
done. One should consider auspicious signs and honour brahmanas and the gods. O son! There is swift prosperity
for such a wise king. Like the sun rising in the east, Lakshmi returns to him. I have instructed you with many instances and words and you have appreciated them. Now display your form. Exhibit your manliness. It is appropriate that you should obtain the objects that you desire. Examine those who are angry, greedy, weak, dishonoured
and disrespected and those who hate him[The enemy.]. In this way, you can bring them together and create great dissension
in his ranks, like an extremely swift wind that disperses the clouds. Be the first to give them gifts. Make efforts.
Speak pleasantly to them. As soon as the enemy knows that you are ready to give up your life, he will shrink away
from you, like from a snake that has penetrated his house. If one knows that the enemy is too powerful to be conquered, one should use conciliation, friendliness and similar methods. Through such methods, one can obtain riches and extend them. Friends gather around those who are prosperous and serve them. O son! Then again, relatives
desert one whose prosperity has been dissipated. They do not gather around such a man, but shun him. If one can
convert an enemy into an ally and obtain his trust, one can then think about regaining the kingdom.'"'
