'Yudhishthira asked, "O great sage! Why was Vindhya angered and why did he suddenly begin to grow? I wish to
hear about this in great detail."

'Lomasha replied, "At the time of rising and at the time of setting, the sun used to circumambulate the great
mountain Meru, the golden king of mountains. On seeing this, Mount Vindhya told Surya, 'O Bhaskara[The sun.]! You
always go around Meru. Circumambulate me in the same way.' Having been thus addressed, Surya replied to the
king of the mountains, 'O mountain! I do not circumambulate him out of my own desires. He who created the universe has assigned this path for me.' Having been thus addressed, the mountain was angered and suddenly began
to increase. O scorcher of enemies! He sought to obstruct the paths of the sun and the moon. Then all the gods assembled and, with Indra, went to Vindhya, the great king of the mountains. They tried to restrain him from what he
was doing, but he paid no attention to their words. Then the gods went to the sage Agastya, the ascetic who was
supreme among those who followed dharma and radiant in his valour, in his hermitage. The gods told him everything. The gods said, 'Consumed and overcome by anger, Vindhya, king of the mountains, is obstructing the paths
of the sun, the moon and the nakshatras. O supreme among brahmanas! No one except you is capable of restraining him. O immensely fortunate one! Therefore, restrain him.' On hearing the words of the gods, the brahmana
went to the mountain.

'"He went to Vindhya with his wife and told him, 'O supreme among mountains! I wish that you should create a
path for me. I have to go in a southern direction for some work. O Indra among mountains! Restrain yourself until
I return from there and you can then grow as much as you wish.' O destroyer of enemies! Having made this agreement with Vindhya, Varuna's son went towards the southern direction and has not returned till this day. Just as you
asked me to, I have told you everything about why Vindhya does not increase, because of Agastya's powers.

'"O king! Now listen and I will tell you how the Kaleyas were destroyed by all the gods, once they had obtained
a boon from Agastya. Having heard the words of the thirty gods, Mitra and Varuna's son asked, 'Why have you
come? What boon do you wish from me?' Having been thus addressed, the gods spoke these words to the sage. 'O
great-souled one! O maharshi! We desire that you should act so as to drink up the great ocean. We will then be able
to kill those enemies of the gods, the Kaleyas, with all their relatives.' Having heard the words of the thirty gods,
the sage said, 'For the sake of the great happiness of the worlds, I will do what you desire.' Having said this, the
one who was rigid in his vows, went to the ocean, the lord of the rivers, with the gods and the rishis who were successful in their austerities. Men, nagas, gandharvas, yakshas and kimpurushas[There doesn't seem to be any difference between kinnaras and kimpurushas.] followed the great-souled one, in
a desire to witness the extraordinary feat. All of them went to the ocean, which was thunderous in its roar. It
seemed to be dancing with the waves that leapt up at the wind. It seemed to laugh with its foam, as it dashed
against the caverns. It was infested with many crocodiles and frequented by masses of diverse birds. With Agastya,
the gods, the gandharvas, the great nagas and the immensely fortunate rishis approached the great ocean."'
