Jajali said, 'O Tuladhara! You have spoken about the dharma that has been laid down and about the supreme
conduct that snould be followed by beings to reach the gates of heaven. Crops results from agriculture and it
is on the basis of those that you remain alive. O trader! It is with animals and herbs that mortal beings remain
alive. Sacrifices flow from those. You speak like a non-believer. This world will not be sustained and nothing will
be left if these doctrines are followed.'

'"Tuladhara replied, 'O Jajali! O brahmana! I will speak about sustenance. I am not a non-believer. I am not criticizing sacrifices. But a person who knows about sacrifices is extremely rare. I bow down before the sacrifices of
brahmanas and before people who know about sacrifices. Having abandoned their own sacrifices, brahmanas have
resorted to the sacrifices meant for kshatriyas. O brahmana! Greedy for the riches of others, it is the non-believers
who have led to such practices. Though they know about the words of the Vedas, they have disguised falsehood
behind apparent truth. "This should be given. That should be given." There is no end to this kind of desire. O Jajali! Theft and undesirable acts result from this. An oblation obtained through good means is what satisfies the
gods, such as bowing down, oblations, studying and herbs. The worship of gods should be in accordance with what
is laid down in the sacred texts. Through their sacrifices, wicked people give rise to wicked offspring. The greedy
give birth to the greedy. The contented give birth to the contented. The resultant offspring are just like the performer of the sacrifice and the officiating priest. Through sacrifices, offspring who are like the unblemished sky
can result. O brahmana! Oblations offered into the fire rise up into the sun. Rain results from the sun. Crops result
from rain and offspring come through these. Therefore, earlier, people performed their own sacrifices and obtained
all the objects of desire. The earth yielded crops without tilling. Herbs resulted because of the benedictions. No
sacrifices were seen to be undertaken with a view to obtaining selfish fruits. However, there were some who undertook sacrifices, despite having doubts about the fruits of sacrifices. Consequently, the wicked, the cunning, the
greedy and those who felt a need for riches were born. Those who have performed wicked deeds go to the worlds
earmarked for those with inauspicious deeds. Using arguments to counter arguments, a man performs inauspicious
deeds. O supreme among brahmanas! Such people are always evil-souled and unaccomplished in wisdom. O brahmana! They take deeds to be misdeeds and the reverse. They do not also follow the deeds that Brahma laid down
for the worlds. We have also heard that if deeds without qualities are performed, they lead to no fruits. If these are
not countered, they injure all beings. Truth is sacrifice. Self-control is sacrifice. So are lack of jealousy towards
everyone, contentment with one's own riches and lack of greed for riches. That is how a renouncer results. A person who knows the truth about kshetra and kshetrajna is engaged in his own sacrifice. He studies, wishing to know
about the brahman, and is satisfied in his own self. All divinity is in the brahman. Everything finds a refuge in the
brahman. O Jajali! When such a person is satisified, the gods are satisfied. When he is not satisfied, they are not
satisfied. If a person is satisfied with all the juices, he finds no delight in anything in particular. In that way, a person who is satisified with wisdom is always satisfied and this gives rise to happiness. Dharma is comfort for him.
Dharma is happiness and everything is established on that. Such a person knows the truth about existence and
searches for wisdom. There are others who know about jnana and vijnana and can cross over to the further shore,
which is always extremely auspicious and is full of sacred people. Having gone there, one does not grieve. Nor is
there distress of any kind. That is the place of the brahman and virtuous people attain it. That is not for those who
desire heaven, or for those who sacrifice for fame and riches. It is a path followed by the virtuous and their strength
is non-violence. They know about trees, herbs, fruits and roots[That is, these are the only appropriate sacrificial offerings.]. Those who sacrifice, and their officiating priests,
are not greedy and do not desire riches. There are also brahmanas who have accomplished all their tasks. Nevertheless, driven by compassion for other subjects, they perform their own sacrifices. Subjects obtain heaven by pursuing their own dharma. O Jajali! Thus, because of my intelligence, my conduct towards everyone is identical. O
bull among brahmanas! O great sage! The wise ones always engage themselves in these kinds of sacrifices and
through these, go along the path trodden by the gods. Some have to return[Be reborn.]. But there is no return for the learned.
O Jajali! However, both types go along the path trodden on by the gods. Using the resolution in their minds, they
become successful, yoking their own selves and using their own selves as beasts of burden, and milking their own
selves. They make their own selves the sacrificial altars and thus give away a lot of dakshina. A person who has
cleansed himself in this fashion should not be greedy for cattle. O brahmana! He performs a sacrifice by bowing
down, as if he was a herb. His intelligence places renunciation at the forefront. That is what I am describing to you.
He is beyond desire and beyond starting anything. He is beyond honour and praise. His deeds have been extinguished, but he is without decay. The gods speak of such a person as a brahmana. A person who does not listen to
the sacred texts, does not perform sacrifices and does not give to brahmanas is a person who follows common conduct. O  Jajali! What end will he attain? By  following  this  path,  observed  by  the  gods,  it  is  as  if  he  performs
sacrifices.'

'"Jajali said, 'I have not heard this truth from the sages. O trader! I am therefore asking you about a difficulty.
The rishis who came earlier did not consider this[Meaning yoga.]. Nor did those who came later establish this. O trader! If animals are capable of obtaining happiness by serving the tirtha of the atman, then why do they obtain misery because
of their deeds? O immensely wise one! Instruct me about this. I have great faith in you.'

'"Tuladhara replied, 'There are some sacrifices that do not actually become sacrifices[Because they are not properly performed, and this refers to both internal and external sacrifices.]. They should not sacrifice. A cow can be used for all the oblations at a sacrifice, because of milk, curds, clarified butter, hair, horns, feet
and everything that comes from the mouth[For external sacrifices, the yield from a cow offers sufficient oblations. For those who are poor, the dust from
the hooves and the water, in which the tail and the horns have been washed, will suffice.]. It has been ordained that one should not embark on a sacrifice without a wife. The sacrificial cake has been spoken of as representing sacrifices of all animals. This is like all the
rivers being akin to Sarasvati and all mountains being sacred. O Jajali! The atman is a tirtha and one does not have
to become a guest at different places[In search of places of pilgrimage.]. O Jajali! If one follows this kind of dharma, without searching for reasons
behind dharma, one will obtain the auspicious worlds.'"

'Bhishma said, "This was the kind of dharma that was praised by Tuladhara. This is always full of reason and is
followed by the virtuous."'
