'Yudhishthira asked, "After what action does a man need to perform rites of atonement? O grandfather! What must
be done to free oneself? Tell me that."

'Vyasa replied, "Having not done deeds that must be performed, having done what is forbidden and having acted
in a false way, a man must perform rites of atonement. O Kounteya! A brahmachari who is asleep when the sun
rises, one who goes to sleep before the sun sets, one with malformed nails, one with discoloured teeth, one whose
younger brother gets married first, one who marries before his elder brother, one who maligns the brahman, one
who is guilty of slander, one who is the husband of a didhishu, one whose first wife is a didhishu[The word didhishu has different meanings-a widow who has remarried, a woman
who has married twice, or an elder sister who marries before the younger sister.], one who has
violated his vow of chastity, one who kills a brahmana, one who teaches the brahman to an undeserving person,
one who does not teach the brahman to a deserving person, one who performs a sacrifice for ordinary people, one
who sells the king[Probably meaning a traitor.], one who slays a shudra or a woman, one whose ancestors were contemptible, one who slays
an animal without a good reason[A good reason being a sacrifice.], one who sets fire to a forest, one who subsists through deceit, one who goes
against his preceptor, one who abandons the sacred fire, one who sells the brahman[That is, one who sells knowledge.] and one who violates an
agreement-all of these are sinners[These are sins that require atonement.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Listen attentively as I tell you about
deeds that must not be done. Abandoning one's own dharma, following the dharma of another, officiating at the
sacrifice of someone who is not entitled to sacrifice, eating something that should not be eaten, abandoning those
who have sought refuge, not supporting servants, selling liquor[The text uses the word rasa. This has multiple meanings, such as salt, juice and
spices. Other than liquor, it is not obvious why the selling of any of these other
items should be regarded as a sin.], the killing of inferior species[Birds and animals, that is, killing them unnecessarily.], not performing
tasks that one is capable of undertaking, not giving the gifts that must be given every day, not giving dakshina to
brahmanas and humiliating them-those who know about dharma say that these are deeds that must not be done. A
son who quarrels with his father, one who has intercourse with his preceptor's wife and one who does not procreate according to dharma-these are people who follow adharma. These are deeds that should not be done and men
must perform atonement for them. However, even when men perform these deeds, there are some situations when
they are not tainted. If a brahmana who knows about the Vedas picks up a weapon and attacks you in a battle,
wishing to kill you, then you are allowed to kill him. O Kounteya! On this, there is a mantra in the Vedas. This is
dharma, as proved by the Vedas, and I am telling you this. 'If a brahmana has deviated from his conduct and attacks like an assassin, killing him does not amount to the sin of killing a brahmana. This is said to be rage countering rage.' If a person drinks liquor in ignorance, or because he has been instructed that this will save his life[Presumably by a physician.], he
should thereafter be brought back to dharma through purification. O Kounteya! I have also told you everything
about what should be eaten and what should not be eaten. For all this, purification through rites of atonement is
prescribed.

'"A man incurs no sin if intercourse with the preceptor's wife is for the sake of the preceptor. Through a disciple, Uddalaka had Shvetaketu as a son[Shvetaketu was Uddalaka's son and their stories figure in the Upanishads, particularly Chandogya Upanishad. However, this bit about Shvetaketu being born to Uddalaka through a disciple is not mentioned elsewhere.]. If one steals for the sake of imparting prosperity to one's preceptor, one
is not bound down. That happens if one steals a lot because of desire, or if it is for one's own sake. If one takes
from those who are not brahmanas, there is no sin and one is not touched by the crime, as long as it is not for one's
own self. Lying is allowed provided it is for the sake of saving one's own life or that of someone else, for the sake
of one's preceptor, when it is among women and in connection with a marriage. A vow is not broken if semen is
released through a wet dream. Offering oblations into a blazing fire are prescribed as atonement. If the elder brother has become an outcast or has renounced the world, there is no sin from marrying before him. When someone
else's wife solicits you, there is no taint or adharma from indulging her. One should never kill an animal without
good reason or cause such an act to be done. Animals deserve kindness and a violation requires due purification. If
one gives to an undeserving brahmana in ignorance, there is no sin, nor if one gives to an undeserving person or
does not give to a deserving person, provided there is a reason for this. There is no crime in casting off a wife who
is of bad conduct[Implicitly, a wife who is adulterous.]. If such a woman is purified, the husband is not to be blamed. There is no crime in selling
soma if one knows the truth about it[That is, it should really be used in sacrifices to the gods.]. If an incompetent servant is discarded, there is no crime. There is no crime
if a forest is burnt for the sake of cattle[To create pastureland.]. I have told you about deeds that do not lead to sin when they are done.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I will now tell you in detail about rites of atonement."'
