Dhritarashtra said, "O son! O king! Learned and content people must always be employed in the administration
of justice and spies must always be employed to observe them. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O Yudhishthira! These men must not be driven by affection. They must ascertain the gravity of the crime and, under the
law,  impose  a  punishment  that  is  commensurate.  Those  addicted  to  bribery,  those  who  oppress  other  people's
wives and those who are false in conduct warrant the severest of punishments. Depending on the time and the
place, those who indulge in calumny, those who are greedy, those who are murderers, those who are rash[This seems to be like manslaughter, just short of murder.], those
who cause disturbances in assemblies and at the time of pleasure and those who cause a pollution of the varnas
should be killed or punished with a fine of gold. In the morning, you must first ensure that all the acts of expenditure are taken care of. You must then attend to ornaments and food. After this, you must always seek to cheer the
warriors. In the evening, you must always attend to messengers and spies. The next part of the night must be devoted to determining acts connected with artha. One must always engage in pleasure at midnight or midday. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! You must always undertake all the tasks without any delay. At the right time, you must
adorn yourself with ornaments and give away large quantities of dakshina. O son! Like a revolving wheel, in due
order, all the duties must be undertaken. Following lawful means, you must always endeavour to fill the treasury. O
great king! But you must always avoid duplicity and perversity. Using spies, get to know about enemies who are
inside the kingdom. From a distance, use learned men to ensure that the enemies destroy each other. O extender of
the Kuru lineage! After examining their deeds, appoint the best servants. Use them to accomplish those tasks, irrespective of whether they have been employed for that particular task or not. O son! The commander of the soldiers
must be firm in his vows. He must be brave. He must love you and respect you. He must be capable of enduring
hardships. O Pandava! It is your task to ensure that all the noble residents of the countryside and the city have a
means of subsistence, like cattle. O Yudhishthira! You must always determine your own weaknesses and the weaknesses of the enemy. Inside the kingdom, there will be brave men. They must be shown proportionate favours, so
that, in all tasks, they ensure your welfare. O lord of men! It is your task to enhance the qualities of those who have
qualities and are learned. They will then be devoted to you and will not waver, like the great mountain, Meru."'
