Vaishampayana said, 'Then knowing Shakra's mind, the gods and the gandharvas welcomed Partha with a supreme
arghya. They offered the king's son[Arjuna.] padya[Water for washing the feet.] and achamaniya[Water for washing the face.] and guided him to the entrance to Purandara's
abode. Having been shown such homage, Jishnu lived in his father's house. Pandava learned about all the great
weapons and the means of withdrawing them. From Shakra's hands, he received his beloved vajra weapon, impossible to withstand. This made a great roar and was like lightning, marked by the signs of clouds and peacocks[The sense is that the vajra was like thunder and lightning. Consequently, there were clouds and peacocks figure because they dance when it rains.].
On receiving the weapon, Pandava Kounteya thought of his brothers. But on Purandara's instructions, he lived
there happily for five years. When Partha became skilled in the use of all weapons and the right time had come,
Shakra told him, "O Kounteya! Now learn singing and dancing from Chitrasena. Learn the music that is only
known to the gods and is unknown in the world of men. O Kounteya! If you learn this, it will bring your own welfare." Purandara then gave him to Chitrasena as a friend. Partha lived happily with him, free from all disease[The critical edition excises some sections that are part of popular renderings of the Mahabharata. That story
figures in regional versions and is a story about the apsara Urvashi's desire for Arjuna. Arjuna spurned her because
she was like his superior's wife or mother, the Puru dynasty having descended from Urvashi. Urvashi then cursed
Arjuna that he would have to live as a woman, bereft of his manhood. Indra reduced the duration of the curse to
one year.].

'One day, while travelling around, maharshi Lomasha went to Shakra's abode, with a desire to see Purandara.
The great sage met and bowed in obeisance before the king of the gods. He saw Pandava seated on half of Vasa-
va's throne. Having obtained Shakra's permission, the best of brahmanas, worshipped by all the maharshis, sat
down on an excellent seat[The word used is vishtara. This means a seat, stool or chair. It is also the seat of the officiating priest at a sacrifice, usually made of kusha grass.]. On seeing Partha seated on Indra's throne, the thought occurred to him[Lomasha.]. How could
a kshatriya like Partha attain Shakra's seat? What were his good deeds? What worlds had he won? How had he obtained a place worshipped by the gods? Shakra, the slayer of Vritra, divined his thoughts.

'Shachi's consort smilingly told Lomasha, "O brahmarshi! Hear about the thought that is passing through your
mind. Though he has been born as a kshatriya, this one is not a mere mortal. O Maharshi! This mighty-armed one
is my son, born from Kunti. He has come here for a specific reason, to obtain weapons. You have not recognized
him as that ancient and supreme rishi. O brahmana! Listen to me. I will tell you who he is and his purpose. Know
that those two supreme and ancient rishis, Nara and Narayana, are none other than Dhananjaya and Hrishikesha. O
brahmana! The sacred and famous hermitage named Badari[Alternatively, Badarika.], which cannot be seen even by the gods and the
great-souled rishis, was the place where Vishnu and Jishnu dwelt. Served by the siddhas and the charanas, that is
the place from where the Ganga arises. O brahmarshi! On my instructions, these two immensely radiant ones have
been born on earth. These two immensely valorous ones will remove the earth's burden. There are the asuras
known as the Nivatakavachas. Deluded by the boon they have obtained, they are engaged in causing us injury. Insolent because of their strength, they are now talking about killing the gods. Having been granted the boon, they do
not show regard for the gods. Those terrible and immensely strong sons of Danu live in the nether regions. All the
armies of the gods together are incapable of fighting with them. O supreme among brahmanas! Vishnu, the illustrious slayer of Madhu, the unvanquished god Hari, whose illustrious divine part lived on earth as Kapila and with an
instant glance destroyed the great-souled sons of Sagara[The story of Sagara will be told in Section 33. He had sixty thousand sons. When he performed a sacrifice,
the sacrificial horse was stolen by Indra and taken to the nether regions. The sons were sent in search of the horse
and proceeded to dig towards the nether regions. They falsely accused the sage Kapila of stealing the horse and
were burnt to ashes because of his rage. Subsequently, their souls were saved when their descendant Bhagiratha
brought down the Ganga to the nether regions. The nether regions are often known by the name of patala. However, there are seven nether regions-atala, vitala, sutala, rasatala, talatala, mahatala and patala. Patala is thus the
lowest of the seven nether regions and rasatala is an intermediate one.] who were digging towards rasatala, is alone capable of
this great task that has to be accomplished for our sake. There is no doubt that he, together with Partha, will undertake this great battle. This one[A reference to Arjuna.] is equal to all of them. Having killed them in battle, the warrior will again return
to the world of men. On my instructions, you should yourself return to earth. You will see the brave Yudhishthira
dwelling in Kamyaka. He has dharma in his soul and is always devoted to truth. Convey my words and message to
him. He should not be anxious on account of Phalguna. 'He will soon return, after accomplishing the task of obtaining weapons. Without the sacred valour of his arms and without having obtained the weapons, he will not be
able to withstand Bhishma, Drona and the others in battle. The mighty-armed and great-souled Gudakesha has obtained the weapons. He has become skilled in divine dancing, music and singing. O lord of men! O destroyer of
enemies! You yourself, with all your brothers, should see all the venerated places of pilgrimage. O Indra among
kings! Having bathed at these sacred places of pilgrimage, you will be cleansed of sin and overcome your fever[The word jvara should not be interpreted as physical fever only. It also means mental fever and distress.].
Bereft of sin, you will enjoy the kingdom[The quotation marks signify that this is a message from Indra to Yudhishthira.].' O best of brahmanas! O foremost among brahmanas! You have the
power of austerities. You should protect him as he travels the earth. Terrible rakshasas always live in the passes of
mountains and in uneven regions. Always protect him from them." Lomasha, great in austerities, promised accordingly. He then left for earth, towards Kamyaka forest. He met there Kounteya Dharmaraja, the destroyer of enemies, surrounded everywhere by ascetics and his brothers.'
