Yudhishthira said, "O grandfather! O mighty-armed one! O one who knows about all the sacred texts! I wish to
hear about the supreme cycle of life that mortals have to go through. O Indra among kings! O king! In a battle, what kind of conduct ensures that men obtain supreme heaven and what conveys them to hell? When people
die and give up this body, which is like a piece of wood or a lump of earth, and go to other worlds, who are the
ones who follow them?"

'Bhishma replied, "The illustrious and extremely intelligent Brihaspati is arriving here. Ask the extremely fortunate one about this eternal mystery. No one other than him is capable of explaining this. There is no speaker who is
Brihaspati's equal."'

Vaishampayana continued, 'Partha and Gangeya were thus conversing with each other. The illustrious Brihaspati, pure in his soul, arrived there. With Dhritarashtra at the forefront, the king arose. All of them, including the
advisers, worshipped him in an unmatched way. Following the prescribed method, the king who was  Dharma's
son, excellent in his vows, approached the illustrious Brihaspati and asked him a question.

'Yudhishthira asked, "O illustrious one! O one who knows about every kind of dharma! O one who knows about
all the sacred texts! Who is an aide to mortals? Is it the father, the mother, the son or the preceptor? When people
die and give up the body, which is like a piece of wood or a lump of earth, and go to the world hereafter, who are
the ones who follow them?"

'Brihaspati replied, "O Indra among kings! A creature is born alone and is destroyed alone. He tides over hardships alone. He advances towards calamities alone. The father, the mother, the brother, the son, the preceptor, large
numbers of kin and allies and large numbers of friends cannot be aides. When people die and give up this body,
which is like a piece of wood or a lump of earth, those people remain for a while and then return. When the body is
discarded, it is dharma alone that follows. Therefore, men must always serve dharma, which alone is the aide. A
being who is full of dharma goes to supreme heaven. One who is full of adharma goes to hell. Therefore, a learned
person always pursues artha that is obtained through dharma. In the world hereafter, dharma alone is the one who
helps men. A man undertakes tasks because of greed, confusion, compassion and fear. Even if he is extremely
learned, he is overcome by avarice and may do perverse deeds for the sake of others. Dharma, artha and kama-
these are the three fruits of remaining alive. While avoiding adharma, one should try to obtain these three."

'Yudhishthira said, "O illustrious one! I have heard the extremely beneficial words that you have spoken and
they are full of dharma. My intelligence now turns to what happens to the existence of the body[After death.]. After death,
what remains of the body is subtle and unmanifest[This is the subtle form of the body, the linga body.]. It can no longer be seen through the eye. How can dharma
follow it?"

'Brihaspati replied, "Earth, wind, space, water, light as the fifth, the intelligence, the atman and dharma always
look on. These elements are incessant witnesses for beings[To their good and bad deeds.]. Together with these, dharma follows the being[Since the word dharma is used twice, one probably means Dharma or Yama.]. O
immensely intelligent one! The body that consists of skin, bones, flesh, semen and blood is abandoned when life is
given up. However, if the being is full of dharma, it obtains happiness in this world[After being reborn.] or in the next. What will I
tell you about next?"

'Yudhishthira said, "O illustrious one! You have instructed me about how dharma follows. I wish to know about
how semen originates."

'Brihaspati replied, "O lord of men! The deities that are in the body, earth, air, space, water, light, and the mind,
eat the food. O Indra among kings! Those five elements[Excluding the mind.] are satisfied. This is also true of the mind, as the sixth.
O one who is pure in his soul! This leads to the great semen being generated. O Partha! When a man and a woman
unite, conception results from this. I have thus told you everything. What do you wish to hear next?"

'Yudhishthira said, "O illustrious one! You have explained how conception results. Explain to me how a being is
born and delivered thereafter."

'Brihaspati replied, "When the jivatman unites with the body, it is overcome by the elements. When it is freed
from the elements[At the time of death.], it again goes to its supreme destination. The jivatman unites with the elements[At the time of conception.]. The deities
who are in the five elements see all the good and the bad deeds. What do you wish to hear about next?"

'Yudhishthira said, "O illustrious one! The jivatman casts aside the skin, bones and flesh and also abandons the
elements. How can it then enjoy joy or misery?"

'Brihaspati replied, "The jivatman is united with dharma and swiftly unites with the semen. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! When it is time for women to ovulate, it unites and a birth results. A man must endure difficulties
and misery in this cycle of life. Following Yama's orders, Yama's messengers endow the embryo with difficulties
and the time of death. O king! From the time of birth in this world, a being has to enjoy the effects of his[The text is gender neutral.] own
earlier deeds and the fruits of the dharma he has resorted to. Since his birth, if he has followed dharma to the best
of his capacity, then when the man is reborn, he always enjoys happiness. However, if after following dharma, he
has served the cause of adharma, the being will experience happiness first, followed by unhappiness subsequently.
Full of adharma, the being will have to go to Yama's dominion. Born as inferior species, he will have to endure
great hardships. A being is overcome by confusion. Listen attentively to the different kinds of birth that result from
different kinds of acts. This has been spoken about in the sacred texts and in the historical accounts. Those from
the mortal world have to go to Yama's terrible dominion. If a brahmana who has studied the four Vedas is overcome by confusion and accepts a gift from an outcast, he is reborn as a mule. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
He lives as a mule for fifteen years. When he dies as a mule, he is reborn as a bull and lives in that state for seven
years. When  he  dies  as  a  bull,  he  is  born  as  a  Brahma-rakshasa.  After  living  as  a  Brahma-rakshasa  for  three
months, he is again born as a brahmana. A person[Obviously a brahmana.] who acts as an officiating priest for an outcast is born as a
worm. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He lives in that state for fifteen years. When he is freed from his state
of a worm, he is reborn as a donkey. He lives as a donkey for five years and then again as a pig for five years. He
next lives as a dog for one year. After that, he is reborn as a man. There is no doubt that a stupid disciple who injures his preceptor has to go through cycles of inferior birth. O Indra among kings! He is first born as a dog, then
as a predatory beast and finally as a mule. After going through these hardships after death, he is then reborn as a
brahmana. If a disciple has wicked intentions towards his preceptor's wife, even in his mind, because of that adharma in his mind, he has to go through inferior transformations in this cycle of life. He is reborn as a dog and lives in
that state for three years. When he dies, he is reborn as a worm. Having become a worm, he lives in that state for
one year. When he dies, he gets his status of a brahmana back. If without any reason, a preceptor slays a disciple,
who is like a son, because of that capricious act, he is born as a swan. O king! If a son disrespects his father or his
mother, when he dies, the creature gives up his earlier form and is born as a donkey. He lives as a mule for ten
months, as a dog for fourteen months and as a cat for seven months. After that, he is again born as human. O king!
If a person abuses his mother or his father, he is reborn as a sarika[A bird that is like a thrush.]. If he strikes them, he is reborn as a tortoise.
He lives as a tortoise for ten years and as a porcupine for three years. For six months, he is born as a snake. After
that, he is reborn as human. If a person lives on food that a king provides, but overcome with delusion, injures his
master, when he dies, he is born as a monkey. He is a monkey for ten years and a rat for three years. He then becomes a dog for six months. After that, he is reborn as human. A man who misappropriates what has been left to
him in trust has to go through one hundred transformations in the cycle of life after reaching Yama's dominion. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! He is first born as a worm and lives in that state for fifteen years[There are one hundred lives as a worm, adding up to fifteen years.]. After that,
when the evil deeds are exhausted, he is reborn as human. When a malicious man dies, he is born as a sharngaka
bird. An evil-minded man who causes breach of trust is born as a fish. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! After
having been a fish for eight years, he is born as a deer. After having been a deer for four months, he is born as a
goat. He dies after having lived as a goat for one year. The being is then born as a worm. It is after this that he is
reborn as human. O great king! If a shameless and confused man whose senses are afflicted steals paddy, barley,
sesamum, beans, pulses, mustard, chickpeas, groundnut, black gram, wheat, linseed and others kinds of grain, he is
born as a rat. O great king! After he dies, he is reborn as a pig. O king! As soon as he is born as pig, he dies from
disease. O king! Because of his foolish deeds, he is then born as a dog. After being in the state of a dog for five
years, he is then reborn as human. If a person oppresses another person's wife, he is born as a wolf. After that, he
is successively born as a dog, a jackal, a vulture, a snake, a heron and a stork. O king! If a confused and evil-minded person violates his brother's wife, he is born as a male cuckoo and lives in that state for a year. In that way, if a
person is overcome by desire and violates a friend's wife, a preceptor's wife or a king's wife, when he dies, he is
born as a pig. He spends five years as a pig and five years as a porcupine. He then becomes an ant for six months
and a worm for one month. In addition, he has to spend cycles of birth as a worm. Spending one month in each life
as a worm, he has to spend thirteen years as a worm. When the adharma has been extinguished, he is reborn as human. O lord! If a person presents himself and because of confusion, causes obstructions at a marriage, an act of donations or a sacrifice, when he dies, he is born as a worm. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He lives as a worm
for fifteen years. When the adharma has been extinguished, he is reborn as human. O king! If a person has already
promised his daughter to someone, but bestows her on a second person instead, when he dies, he is born as a
worm. O Yudhishthira! He lives in that form for thirteen years. When the adharma has been extinguished, he is reborn as human. If a person eats without having completed the rites of oblation for the gods and the ancestors, he is
born as a crow. After ten years as a crow, he is born as a cock. After being a snake for one month, he then becomes
human. If a person disrespects his elder brother, who is like a father, when he dies, he is born as a crane. He lives
as a crane for thirty-two months. When he dies, he becomes human again. A vrishala who has intercourse with a
brahmana lady is born as a worm. However, if offspring have resulted, he is born as a rat. O king! When an ungrateful person dies and goes to Yama's dominion, he suffers extremely terrible afflictions in Yama's dominion. He
is angrily struck there, with spears, clubs and tridents. He is flung into fierce pits of fire, forests that have swords as
leaves, heated sands and shalmali trees that are covered with thorns. There are many other fires he has to face in
Yama's dominion. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He confronts extremely sharp pain. He is then brought
back into the cycle of life and is born as a worm. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He lives as a worm for fifteen years. After that, whenever he is born, he dies as a child. He goes through one hundred different births as different kinds of creatures. Having gone through many such cycles of existence, he is born as inferior species. After
dying, he faces hardships for a very large number of years. He is then born as a senseless tortoise. Because of desire for riches or because of enmity, if a person who is armed kills a man who is unarmed, he is worst among men.
When he dies, he is born as a mule. He lives as a mule for two years and is slain through the use of weapons.
When he dies, he is born as a deer that is always anxious. After one year as a deer, he is slain through the use of
weapons. After having died as a deer, he is born as a fish that lives for four months and is slain through the use of a
net. He is then born as a predatory beast. After ten years as a predatory beast, he becomes a leopard for five years.
Goaded by the progress of time, he then confronts his death. When the adharma has been extinguished, he is reborn in human form. If an evil-minded person kills a woman, he faces many hardships when he goes to Yama's dominion. He goes through the cycle of life twenty times. O great king! After that, he is born as a worm. After twenty years as a worm, he is born as human. If a man steals food, he is born as a bee. He spends many months in the
company of bees. When the sin has been extinguished, he becomes human again. If a man steals a musical instrument, he is born as a mosquito. If a man steals food mixed with sesamum cakes, he is born as a fierce rat, the size
of the rat depending on how much was stolen. A person who steals salt is born as a cricket. A person who steals
curd is born as a stork. A person who steals fish is born as an unclean frog. A person who steals water is born as a
crane. A person who steals oil is born as a cockroach. An evil-minded person who steals honey is born as a gnat.
An evil-minded person who steals iron is born as a crow. A person who steals payasam becomes a partridge. A
person who steals cakes is born as an owl. A person who steals fruits, roots and cakes is born as an ant. An evil-
minded person who steals brass is born as a pigeon. A person who steals a silver vessel is born as a dove. A person
who steals a golden vessel is born as a worm. When a person who steals cotton dies, he is born as a heron. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If a man steals jute, he becomes a sheep. If a person steals a woolen garment, he is
born as a rabbit. If a man steals dyes, when he dies, he is born as a peacock. If a person steals red garments, he is
born as a pheasant. O king! Overcome by greed, if a man steals pigments and fragrances, he is born as a mole. If a
man violates trust and misappropriates what has been left with him, that man loses his lifespan and is born as a
fish. After he dies as a fish, he is born as a man. However, though he becomes a man, he only has a short lifespan.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Men who perform wicked deeds are born as inferior species. They do not
know any of the dharma that is there in their own souls. Having performed wicked deeds and having always ignored the vows, they suffer from disease and from joy and misery. There is no doubt that they are born as mlechchhas one should not associate with. Those are men who are wicked in conduct and are overcome by avarice and
confusion. There are also men who avoid sin from the time they are born. They are handsome and prosperous and
do not suffer from disease. Wicked women are also thought to go through the same kinds of progressions. They are
born as the wives of the creatures that have been mentioned. I have recounted all the sins that come from stealing
the possessions of others. O unblemished one! I have told you about this briefly. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In the course of some other conversation, you will hear about this again. O great king! In ancient times,
Brahma told me about this. I asked him about it and he told me the truth, in the midst of the divine rishis. I have
told you everything, just as it had been described to me. O great king! Having heard this, always turn your mind
towards dharma and act accordingly."'
