Vaishampayana said, 'O king! Two years passed since the return of the Pandavas. As he wished, devarshi Narada came to meet Yudhishthira. Mighty-armed Yudhishthira, king of the Kurus, worshipped him. When he was
seated and rested, the supreme among eloquent ones asked, "O illustrious one! It has been a long time since you
last came. O brahmana! Since you have arrived, is everything well and auspicious? Which countries have you
seen? What can I do for you? O foremost among brahmanas! Tell me that. You are our beloved guest." Narada
replied, "O king! I have not seen you for a long time and that is the reason I have come from my hermitage. O
king! I have seen the tirthas and the Ganga." Yudhishthira asked, "People who reside along the banks of the Ganga
say that the great-souled Dhritarashtra is resorting to supreme austerities now. Have you seen if the extender of the
Kuru lineage is well? What about Gandhari, Pritha and Sanjaya, the son of a suta? How is the king, my father,
now? O illustrious one! If you have seen the king, I wish to hear about this."

'Narada replied, "O great king! Be calm and listen. I will tell you everything about what I heard and what I saw
in that hermitage. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! O king! When you returned from residing in the forest, your
father left Kurukshetra and left for  Gangadvara[Near Haridwar.].  The  intelligent  one  went  with  Gandhari,  the  daughter-in-law,
Kunti, the suta Sanjaya, the sacrificial fire and the officiating priests. Your father is a store of austerities and resorted to fierce austerities. He placed pebbles in his mouth. He subsisted only on air. He became like a sage. In that
forest, the great ascetic was worshipped by all the sages. In six months, the king was reduced to skin and bones.
Gandhari subsisted only on water. Kunti ate only once a month. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Sanjaya ate
every sixth day. The lord and the officiating priests offered many kinds of oblations into the sacrificial fire. In that
forest, the king was sometimes seen and sometimes not seen[He roamed around.]. The king roamed around in that forest, without a
fixed abode. He was followed by the two queens and by Sanjaya. Sanjaya guided the king over plain and uneven
terrain. In a similar way, the unblemished Pritha became Gandhari's eyes. Once, the supreme among kings went to
a marshy tract near the Ganga. The intelligent one bathed in the Ganga and then headed for the hermitage. A wind
arose and there was a large forest conflagration. In every direction, it grasped everything and burnt down the entire
forest. In every direction, herds of deer and flocks of birds were burnt down. Herds of boar sought refuge in waterbodies. The forest thus confronted a great hardship. The king had not eaten. Because he was weak, he couldn't
move around. Your mothers were also extremely emaciated and incapable of moving. The king saw that the fire
was approaching near. Therefore, the lord of the earth anxiously spoke these words to the suta, Sanjaya. 'O Sanjaya! Go to a spot so that the fire does not burn you down. We will be burnt down by the fire and obtain the
supreme objective.' Sanjaya, supreme among eloquent ones, replied, 'O king! This destruction and death from a
fire is futile. However, I do not see any means of escaping from the fire. Therefore, you should tell me what needs
to be done now.' Thus addressed by Sanjaya, the king spoke again. 'Since we have left our house ourselves, this
death can cause us no harm. Water, fire, wind and emaciation of the body are praised for ascetics[As means of death. Had they not been ascetics, death from a fire is
inglorious.]. O Sanjaya!
Leave without delay.' Having told Sanjaya this, the king concentrated his mind. He sat down with Gandhari and
Kunti, facing an eastern direction. On seeing this, Sanjaya circumambulated them. The intelligent one replied, 'O
lord! Focus yourself.' The king, the learned son of a rishi, acted in accordance with these words. He restrained all
his senses and became like a piece of wood. So did the immensely fortunate Gandhari and your mother, Pritha.
Your father, the king, was burnt down in the forest conflagration. But Sanjaya, the great adviser, escaped from the
conflagration. I saw him on the banks of the Ganga, surrounded by ascetics. When I asked him, the energetic one
told me everything. The suta, Sanjaya, next left for the Himalaya mountains. In this way, the great-minded king of
the Kurus was killed. O lord of men! So were Gandhari and your mother, Pritha. O bull among the Bharata lineage! When I was wandering around as I wished, I saw the bodies of the king and the two queens. On hearing
about the king, many ascetics assembled in that hermitage. He was devoted and you should not grieve about him.
O supreme among men! O Pandava! That is where I heard everything about the king and the queens and about
how they were burnt down. O Indra among kings! You should not grieve about this. The lord of the earth, Gand-
hari and your mother desired that death by the fire voluntarily."'

Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing this about Dhritarashtra's departure, all the Pandavas were overcome by great
grief. O great king! On hearing that the king had obtained his end, great sounds of lamentation arose from the inner
quarters and from the citizens. Extremely miserable, the king exclaimed, "Alas!" Remembering his mother, Yudhishthira raised his arms upwards and wept. So did all his brothers, with Bhimasena at the forefront. O great king!
On hearing that Pritha had departed, great sounds of weeping arose from the inner quarters. All of them sorrowed
over the aged king who had lost his sons and had now been burnt down and about the ascetic Gandhari. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! After some time, those sounds stopped. Controlling his tears through his fortitude,
Dharmaraja spoke these words.'
