Yudhishthira asked, "O grandfather! It has been said that all the performers of good deeds obtain an identical
world. O grandfather! Or are there many worlds? Tell me this."

'Bhishma said, "O Partha! Because of their deeds, men go to many different worlds. People with good deeds go
to worlds meant for the virtuous and those with bad deeds go to places meant for the wicked. O son! In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about a conversation between the sage Goutama and Vasava. There was a
brahmana named Goutama. He was mild and self-controlled and had conquered his senses. In a great forest, he
saw a baby elephant that was distressed because it had lost its mother. The one who was firm in his vows was overtaken by compassion. On seeing it, he nurtured it. After a long period of  time, it became large and extremely
strong. It was a giant elephant with shattered temples, exuding musth everywhere. Assuming the form of Dhritarashtra[This is Dhritarashtra, the king of the nagas, not the Dhritarashtra who was Duryodhana's father.], Shakra seized the elephant. Goutama, firm in his vows, saw that it was being dragged away. The immensely ascetic one spoke to King Dhritarashtra. 'O Dhritarashtra! Do not be ungrateful and seize this elephant. It
is my son and I have nurtured it with difficulty. The virtuous say that one becomes a friend after taking seven steps
together[Implicitly, Dhritarashtra and Goutama were friends.]. O king! Let the sin of having injured a friend not touch you. It fetches me water and kindling. It protects my hermitage when I am away. It is humble towards the family of its preceptor. It is engaged in the tasks of
its preceptor. It is mild, restrained and grateful. I have always cherished it. O king! Ignoring my protestations, you
should not take this elephant away.'

'"Dhritarashtra said, 'I will give you one thousand cows, one hundred female servants and five hundred gold
coins. O maharshi! I will give you many other kinds of riches. What will a brahmana do with an elephant?'

'"Goutama  replied,  'O  king!  Keep  your  cows,  female  servants,  gold  coins  and  many  other  jewels.  O  Indra
among men[Since this is a naga, this is an anomaly.]! Keep your diverse riches. What will a brahmana do with wealth?'

'"Dhritarashtra said, 'What will brahmanas do with elephants? O brahmana! The race of elephants is meant for
kings. I am taking this best of elephants away as my mount and there is no adharma in this. O Goutama! Do not
obstruct me.'

'"Goutama  replied,  'After  death,  the  virtuous  rejoice  in  a  world.  After  death,  the  wicked  sorrow  in  another
world. O great-souled one! I will follow you to those worlds in Vaivasvata's abode to try and bring this elephant
back.'

'"Dhritarashtra said, 'There are those who lack faith and belief and do not follow rites. They are evil in soul and
are addicted to satisfying the senses. They suffer misery in Yama's abode. Dhritarashtra will go to a supreme region and not there.'

'"Goutama replied, 'In Vaivasvata's world, people are controlled. There is truth there and no falsehood is uttered. The weak can oppress the strong there. I will follow you there and try to bring this elephant back.'

'"Dhritarashtra said, 'There are worlds for those who are proud and do not follow the ordinances in their behaviour towards their elder sisters, fathers, mothers and preceptors. O maharshi! Dhritarashtra will go to a supreme
region and not there.'

'"Goutama replied, 'King Vaishravana's[Yama's.] dominion is Mandakini. It yields great objects of pleasure and is entered by those who are entitled to enjoy pleasure. There are large numbers of gandharvas, yakshas and apsaras
there. I will follow you there and try to bring this elephant back.'

'"Dhritarashtra said, 'There are people who are excellent in their vows and follow the vow of tending to their
guests. They give what they have pledged to brahmanas. They eat what is left after giving the others their shares.
They obtain adornments in Mandakini.'

'"Goutama replied, 'There is a beautiful forest on the summit of Meru. It has excellent flowers and rings with
the songs of kinnaras. There are beautiful and large jambu[Rose apple.] trees there. I will follow you there and try to bring
this elephant back.'

'"Dhritarashtra said, 'There are brahmanas who are mild and devoted to the truth. They are extremely learned
and seek to ensure the pleasure of all beings. They study itihasa and the Puranas. They offer libations and give offerings to brahmanas. O maharshi! Worlds are ordained for such people. Dhritarashtra will go to a superior world
and not there. If you know about such a region, tell me about it. I will quickly go there.'

'"Goutama replied, 'There is the grove of Nandana that belongs to the king of the kinnaras[Kubera.]. It possesses many
excellent blossoming trees and is loved by Narada. Large numbers of gandharvas and apsaras are always there. I
will follow you there and try to bring this elephant back.'

'"Dhritarashtra said, 'There are people who are always accomplished in dancing and singing. They are devoted
to the welfare of people and never seek anything. Worlds are ordained for such people. O maharshi! Dhritarashtra
will go to a superior world and not there.'

'"Goutama replied, 'O Indra among men! There is the beautiful region of Uttara Kuru, where you will find delight with the gods. The brahmanas who reside there were created from the fire. There are those who had other origins and those who were generated from the mountains. Shakra showers down and yields all the objects of desire
there. The women there pursue kama. There is no jealousy between men and women there. I will follow you there
and try to bring the elephant back.'

'"Dhritarashtra said, 'There are people who feel no desire about any creature. They do not eat meat and have
cast aside the rod of chastisement. They do not cause injury to mobile and immobile objects. They regard all creatures as being like their own selves. They are without desire and without any sense of ownership. They are devoid
of attachment. They are indifferent towards gain and loss and regard censure and praise as identical. Worlds are
ordained for such people. O maharshi! Dhritarashtra will go to a superior world and not there.'

'"Goutama replied, 'There are eternal worlds beyond these. Those sparkle and are supremely fragrant. They are
devoid of sorrow. That is the abode of King Soma. O great-souled one! I will follow you there and try to bring the
elephant back.'

'"Dhritarashtra said, 'There are those who are devoted to donating, but never accept anything back. For no reason do they accept anything from others. There is nothing that they are not prepared to give to the deserving and to
all their guests. These people are extremely gracious. They are forgiving and do not speak ill of others. They are
devoid of attachment and are always auspicious in conduct. Worlds are ordained for such people. O  maharshi!
Dhritarashtra will go to a superior world and not there.'

'"Goutama replied, 'There are resplendent and eternal worlds beyond these. They are free from dust, free from
darkness and free from sorrow. This is the extremely great world of Aditya, meant for those who possess excellent
conduct. I will follow you there and try to bring the elephant back.'

'"Dhritarashtra said, 'There are those who are devoted to studying. They are devoted to serving their preceptors.
They are ascetics, excellent in their vows and devoted to the truth. They never speak against their preceptors. They
always seek to tend to the tasks of their preceptors. Worlds are ordained for such people. O maharshi! These are
the pure and cleansed ones, restrained in speech. Those great-souled ones are established in the truth and learned in
the Vedas. Dhritarashtra will go to a superior world and not there.'

'"Goutama replied, 'There are resplendent and eternal worlds beyond these. Those sparkle and are supremely
fragrant. They are devoid of sorrow. That is the abode of King Varuna. O great-souled one! I will follow you there
and try to bring the elephant back.'

'"Dhritarashtra said, 'There are people who observe the chaturmasya sacrifice. There are worlds obtained by
those who perform one thousand sacrifices. There are faithful brahmanas who follow the ordiances and offer agnihotra oblations for three years. Those great-souled ones bear the burden of dharma with their own wives. They are
well-established along the appropriate path. There is said to be a destination for such people, who have dharma in
their souls. Dhritarashtra will go to a superior world and not there.'

'"Goutama replied, 'Indra's world is sparkling. It is devoid of sorrow. It is extremely difficult to reach and is
sought by men. That is the abode of the one with abundant energy. O king! I will follow you there and try to bring
the elephant back.'

'"Dhritarashtra said, 'There are brave men who live for one hundred years. They study the Vedas and without
any distraction, perform sacrifices. All of these wander around in Shakra's world. Dhritarashtra will go to a superior world and not there.'

'"Goutama replied, 'There are the great worlds of Prajapati. These are in the vault of heaven and all of these are
devoid of sorrow. These belong to the learned ones from whom all the worlds have been generated. I will follow
you there and try to bring the elephant back.'

'"Dhritarashtra said, 'There are kings who have bathed after a royal sacrifice. Those great-souled ones have protected their subjects. They have bathed their limbs after a horse sacrifice. But Dhritarashtra will not go to their
worlds.'

'"Goutama replied, 'There are blazing and eternal worlds beyond these. Those sparkle and are supremely fragrant. They are devoid of sorrow. Those worlds are extremely difficult to obtain and there is no oppression there.
This is Goloka. I will follow you there and try to bring the elephant back.'

'"Dhritarashtra said, 'There are people who possess one thousand cows and every year, give away one hundred.
There are people who possess one hundred cows and every year, according to capacity, give away ten. There are
those who possess ten and give away one. There are generous ones who possess five and give away one. There are
brahmanas who emaciate themselves through brahmacharya. They recite words about the brahman. Those spirited
ones are devoted to visiting the tirthas. In Goloka, they find delight on celestial vehicles. They go to Prabhasa, the
sacred Manasa, the great lake of Pushkara, the sacred Naimisha, the tirtha of Bahuda, Karatoya, Gaya, Gayashira,
Vipasha, Sthulavaluka, Tushniganga, Dashaganga, Mahahrada, Goutami, Koushiki, Sarasvati, Drishadvati and Yamuna. Those pure and great-souled ones, firm in their vows, go to divine and auspicious regions, where they are
adorned in celestial garlands. They go to those fragrant regions. But Dhritarashtra will not go there.'

'"Goutama replied, 'There are regions where there is no fear from the cold and no fear from heat. There is no
hunger, thirst, suffering, unhappiness and happiness. There is nothing hated or loved. There is no friend or enemy.
There is no old age or death. There is no good deed or bad. Those who are wise and spirited find extensive prosperity there. That is Svayambhu's auspicious world. I will follow you there and try to bring the elephant back.'

'"Dhritarashtra said, 'There are those who are free from all attachments. They have cleansed their souls and are
firm in their vows. They establish themselves in the yoga of adhyatma. They attain the destination of heaven. They
possess the attribute of sattva and obtain Brahma's auspicious world. O great sage! You will not be able to see
Dhritarashtra there.'

'"Goutama replied, 'The rathantara and brihat are chanted there[Types of Sama hymns.]. The sacrificial altar is strewn with lotuses.
The drinker of soma goes there on tawny horses[A reference to Indra.]. I will follow you there and try to bring the elephant back. I
know that you are Shatakratu, the slayer of Vritra. You are the one who roams through the earth and the universe.
Through mental affliction, I hope I have not said or done anything unpleasant to you.'

'"Shakra said, 'I came to this world traversed by people and followed in their footsteps so as to seize this elephant. I bow down before you. Command me. I will do everything that you ask me to.'

'"Goutama replied, 'Give my son, the white elephant, back. It is a child and is only ten years old. It resides in
this forest with me and I have no second companion. O Indra of the gods! Give me back the elephant.'

'"Shakra said, 'O foremost among brahmanas! This elephant is your son. It is sniffing in the air and looking towards you. It is sniffing your feet with its trunk. I bow down before you. Meditate so that I may obtain benefit.'

'"Goutama replied, 'O Indra of the gods! I always think of what will be auspicious for you. I always meditate
about  you  and  worship  you.  O  Shakra!  Grant  me  everything  auspicious.  Given  by  you,  I  am  accepting  this
elephant.'

'"Shakra  said,  'There  are  learned,  spirited  and  great-souled  ones  who  have  the  Vedas  hidden  inside  them.
Among all those great-souled ones, you alone have been able to recognize me. I am pleased with you now. Listen.
O brahmana! Swiftly come to me with your son, the elephant. Today, without any delay, you will obtain the auspicious worlds.'"

'Bhishma continued, "Placing Goutama and his son, the elephant, ahead of him, the wielder of the vajra went to
heaven, a place that is extremely difficult for even the righteous to reach."'
