Vaishampayana said, 'When the daughter heard these words of her parents, who were extremely sorrowful, she
was overcome with grief and spoke to them. "Why are you lamenting so grievously? Why are you weeping as if
you have no one to protect you? Now listen to what I have to say. On hearing my words, do what is proper. There
is no doubt that dharma dictates that I have to be sacrificed at some time. Since I have to be abandoned in any case,
abandon me now and save everyone through me alone. That is the reason men desire children, so that they can be
saved. That time has come. Use me as a boat and save yourselves. A child saves everywhere, in this world and in
the next. It is because a child saves everywhere that the learned know a child by the name of putra[There is a hell (naraka) named punnama. Those who do not have offspring are destined to go there. It is because a child (son) saves the ancestors from going to punnama that the name putra is given.]. My grandfathers have always desired to have daughter's sons through me. Now I shall myself save them by saving my father's
life. My brother is very young. There is no doubt that he will soon perish after you have left this world. When my
father has gone to heaven and my younger brother has perished, the funeral cakes offered to the ancestors will
come to an end and that act will displease them. Having been abandoned by my father, my mother and my brother,
I shall descend from misery to misery and will finally perish in great distress. There is no doubt that if you are
healthy and can save yourself, my mother and my child brother, and our lineage, the practice of offering funeral
cakes will continue. The son is one's own self. The wife is one's friend. The daughter is the cause of suffering.
Save yourself from that cause of suffering. Set me on the path of dharma. O father! Without you, I will be an unprotected and wretched girl, going everywhere and whenever, always miserable. Therefore, I shall save my lineage
and I shall acquire the merit that this difficult act brings. O best of the twice-born! If you abandon me and go
there[To the rakshasa.], I will be greatly oppressed. Therefore, be kind to me. O good father! Abandon me, who am to be abandoned eventually. Save yourself for my sake, for the sake of dharma and for the sake of your lineage. There should
not be any delay in performing the inevitable. By offering them[The ancestors. That is, by surviving.] water, you will do that which is good. What can
be more painful to us than you ascending to heaven and our roaming like dogs, begging food from others? But if
you are saved from this calamity with your relatives[In this context, relatives means the immediate family.] and are healthy, I shall be very happy in the immortal
world." When they heard her piteous lamentations, all three, the father, the mother and the daughter, began to
weep.

'Then, on seeing all of them cry, their young son uttered these mumbling words, his eyes wide open. "O father!
O mother! And you too, O sister! Do not cry." Saying this, he smilingly came to each of them. Picking up a blade
of grass, he again said happily, "I will kill the man-eating rakshasa with this." Though they were overcome with
grief, hearing the mumbling words of the child, they were cheered up. Knowing that this was the right time, Kunti
went to them and thus spoke, like ambrosia reviving the dead.'
