'Narada said, "O Yudhishthira! Varuna's celestial sabha is white in radiance. Its dimensions are exactly like those
of Yama's, with white walls and portals. Vishvakarma built it under the water and it is surrounded with divine bejewelled trees, yielding flowers and fruit. It is carpeted with blue, yellow, black, dark, white and red flowers and
there are bowers with clusters of blossoms. Hundreds and thousands of beautiful and sweet-toned birds of many
varieties are there, with forms impossible to describe. That sabha is pleasant to the touch, not too cold, nor too hot.
It is beautiful and white, ruled by Varuna, with many rooms and seats. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Varuna sits there with Varuni[Varuna's queen and consort.], adorned with celestial gems, ornaments and attire. Adorned and ornamented, bedecked with celestial garlands, the Adityas wait upon Varuna, the lord of the water, there. So do Vasuki, Takshaka,
the serpent named Airavata, Krishna[The name of a naga, not to be confused with the famous Krishna.], Lohita, Padma, the valorous Chitra, the nagas Kambala and Ashvatara,
Dhritarashtra, Balahaka, Manimana, Kundaladhara, Karkotaka, Dhananjaya[The name of a naga, not to be confused with Arjuna.], Prahrada, Mushikada and Janamejaya[The name of a naga, not be confused with the famous Janamejaya.]-all spreading their hoods, marked with pennants and auspicious circular signs. O Yudhisthira! Without
ever getting tired, these and many other serpents wait upon the great-souled Varuna-King Vairochana Bali[Bali was the son of Virochana and Prahlada's (or Prahrada) grandson. Vishnu subjugated him in his dwarf
(vamana) incarnation.],
Naraka the conqueror of the earth[There are different accounts of Naraka, all agreeing that he was the demon-king of Pragjyotisha and that
Krishna killed him.], Prahrada, Viprachitti, the danavas known as Kalakhanjas, Suhanu, Dur-
mukha, Shankha, Sumana, Sumati, Ghatodara, Mahaparshva, Krathana, Pithara, Vishvarupa, Surupa, Virupa, Mahashirsa, Dashagriva[Dashagriva is Ravana's name. But there is no indication that Ravana is meant here.], Vali[Not to be confused with the Bali mentioned earlier.], Meghavasa, Dashavara, Kaitabha[Vishnu killed two demons named Madhu and Kaitabha. But there is no indication that this is the same
Kaitabha.], Vitatuta, Samhrada, Indratapana. These
classes of daityas and danavas are all adorned with beautiful earrings, garlanded and crowned and attired in divine
garments. They have been blessed with boons, are brave, and have all transcended mortality. They are all correct in
observing their vows and worship the great-souled god Varuna, who holds them in dharma's noose[Varuna's weapon is the noose (pasha).].

'"O Yudhishthira. There are the four oceans[The word used for ocean is samudra. Actually, there are seven oceans, not four. However, the word samudra
also means four, perhaps explaining why four oceans are mentioned.], the river Bhagirathi, Kalindi[Another name for the Yamuna.], Vidisha[Vidisha is the capital of the Dasharna region, the eastern parts of Malava. Vidisha is located on the banks of
the rivers Vetravati (Betwa) and Kadambari. However, Vidisha is also a river and is probably the Beas, which joins
the Vetravati. However, the Beas is also mentioned separately later.], Venna[A river that joins the Krishna river.], Narmada, Vegavahini, Vipasha[Beas.], Shatadru[Sutlej.], Chandrabhaga[Chenab.], Sarasvati[Great river that has now dried up.], Iravati, Vitasta[Jhelum.], Sindhu[Indus.], Devanada[Devanada means the river of the gods. In the translation, Devanada has been listed as a separate river. But it
is also possible that this is an adjective for the Sindhu, describing it as the river of the gods.], Godavari, Krishnavenna[The river Krishna. The river Venna, which joins the Krishna, has already been mentioned earlier.], Kaveri the best of rivers-these and other rivers, fords and lakes, wells
and springs, ponds and tanks, in embodied form. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The directions, the earth, all
the mountains and all the aquatic creatures worship the great-souled one. All the masses of gandharvas and apsaras, skilled in singing and playing musical instruments, are seated and they praise Varuna. Mountains full of jewels and the juices of herbs are all there in embodied form, worshipping the lord. O bull among the Bharata lineage!
Such is Varuna's beautiful sabha, which I have myself seen in my earlier travels. Hear now about Kubera's
sabha."'
