Vaishampayana said, 'As Varshneya proceeded towards Dvaraka, those bulls among men, scorchers of enemies,
embraced him and with their followers, returned. Phalguna repeatedly embraced Varshneya. As  long  as  he
could see him, he continued to glance back at him. It was with a great deal of difficulty that Partha turned his eyes
away from Govinda. The invincible Krishna also withdrew his gaze in a similar way. I will now tell you the many
extraordinary  signs  that  were  associated  with  the  great-souled  one's  departure.  Listen. Ahead  of  the  chariot,  a
strong wind began to blow and cleared all stones, dust and thorns from the path. Ahead of the wielder of the Sharn-
ga bow, Vasava showered down pure and fragrant rain and divine flowers. As the mighty-armed one advanced, he
came upon the plains of a desert and saw the infinitely energetic Utanka, foremost among sages, there. The large-
eyed and energetic one worshipped the sage and asked the sage about his welfare, having been worshipped back in
return. Utanka worshipped Madhusudana and asked him about his welfare. The best among brahmanas then asked
Madhava, "O Shouri! You went to the residences of the Kurus and the Pandavas. Were you able to establish permanent fraternal relationships between them[This is a reference to Krishna's mission of peace, described in Section 54 (Volume 4).]? You should explain everything to me. O Keshava! O bull among
the Vrishni lineage! Those brave ones are your matrimonial allies and you have always loved them. Did you succeed in your intentions? O scorcher of enemies! Perhaps the five sons of Pandu and the sons of Dhritarashtra will
sport with you in this world. Will the kings be happy in their own kingdoms? O Madhava! With you as a protector,
the Kouravas must have been pacified. O son[The word used is tata.]! My trust about this possibility has always been vested in you. O
Krishna! That was my desire about the Bharatas and perhaps you have been successful."

'Vasudeva replied, "O brahmana! I made efforts to bring about fraternal feelings among the Kouravas. However,
they preferred adharma and I could not prevent the conflict. Therefore, all of them have been slain, with their sons
and their relatives. Whether one uses intelligence or whether one uses strength, destiny is impossible to overcome.
O maharshi! O unblemished one! You know everything about this. Bhishma and Vidura referred to me, but they
didn't listen to them either. Thereafter, they clashed against each other and went to Yama's abode. The five Pandavas alone remain, their friends and their sons have also been slain. All the sons of Dhritarashtra have been killed,
with their sons and their relatives."'

Vaishampayana continued, 'Hearing Krishna's words, Utanka was filled with severe rage. His eyes dilated in
anger and he replied, "O Krishna! Though you were capable, you did not save the Kurus and the Pandavas, despite
their being your matrimonial allies and you loving them. There is no doubt that I will curse you. O Madhusudana!
You did not restrain them and force them to retreat. Therefore, in my wrath, I will curse you. Despite being capable
and virtuous, you indulged in a false act. You were indifferent to the best among the Kurus and caused them to be
destroyed." Vasudeva said, "O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! Listen in detail to what I have to say. O Bhargava! You are an ascetic. Nevertheless, listen to my entreaties. Having heard what I have to say about adhyatma, free
me from the curse now. No man is capable of overwhelming me with a little bit of austerities. O supreme among
those who meditate! I do not wish to destroy your austerities[The act of cursing diminishing an ascetic's store of austerities.]. You have blazed in great austerities and you have
satisfied your seniors. O supreme among brahmanas! Since childhood, you have observed brahmacharya. You have
earned these austerities through hardships and I do not desire that they should be expended."'
