'Kripa said, "O Radheya! Your mind is always wicked and you are inclined towards war. You do not understand
natural objectives, nor do you consider the consequences. We should think about the many courses of action that
are laid down in the sacred texts. Those who are learned in the ancient accounts have said that a war is the worst. A
war guarantees victory only if it is at the right time and the right place. But if it is conducted at the wrong time, it
does not bring any fruits. Valour at the right place and the right time is recommended for our welfare. We must decide on a course of action in accordance with what is favourable. The learned do not gauge how much of load a
chariot can take on the words of its maker. Reflecting on all this, it is not desirable for us to encounter Partha. He
saved the Kurus alone and he satisfied Agni alone[Arjuna saved the Kurus from the gandharvas, a story told in Section 39 (Volume 3). Arjuna satisfied the fire god
Agni in Khandava, a story told in Section 19 (Volume 3).]. He alone spent five years in the pursuit of brahmacharya[This is the story of Arjuna's sojourn in heaven, recounted in Section 32 (Volume2).].
He was alone when he raised Subhadra onto a chariot and summoned Krishna to a duel[Recounted in Section 17 (Volume 2).]. In the forest, Krishna
won back Krishna when she was being abducted[As has been mentioned earlier, Krishna is one of Arjuna's names. The other Krishna in the sentence is Krishnaa
or Droupadi and the reference is to her abduction by Jayadratha, recounted in Section 42 (Volume 3).]. He alone spent five years in Shakra's abode, learning the use of
weapons[Section 32 (Volume2).]. He extended the fame of the Kurus by defeating Samyamini alone[Samyamini means the self-restrained one, or an ascetic. It is also the name of Yama's city. However, there is no
record of Arjuna having fought with Yama. Thus, it is difficult to pinpoint this.]. That destroyer of enemies swiftly vanquished Chitrasena, king of the gandharvas, in a battle, together with his invincible army[Section 39 (Volume 3).]. In a similar
way, he alone defeated the Nivatakavacha and Kalakhanja danavas, whom even the gods could not slay[Described in Section 35 (Volume 3).]. O Karna! What act have you single-handedly performed earlier? Have you, like each of them[The Pandavas.], brought lords of the
earth under your sway? Even Indra himself is incapable of facing Partha in battle. He who wishes to fight with him
had better take some medicine. You wish to extend your right hand and use your forefinger to pluck out a fang
from an angry and virulent snake. Or while roaming alone in the forest, and without a goad[Goad for the elephant, ankusha.], you wish to climb
onto a mad elephant and drive it into the city. Or smearing yourself with clarified butter and attired in bark, you
wish to pass through a blazing fire that has been kindled with clarified butter, fat and marrow. What manliness is
there in tying a giant rock around one's neck, binding oneself, and then trying to swim across the ocean? O Karna!
If one is unskilled in weapons and extremely weak, and yet wishes to fight with Partha, who is skilled in weapons
and strong, that shows foolishness. He has been deceived by us for thirteen years. He is now like a lion that has
been freed from its nooses. He will destroy all of us. We have unwittingly run into Partha waiting alone, like a fire
hidden in a well. We confront supreme danger. Although Partha is invincible in battle, we will fight him together
when he comes upon us. Let the soldiers be armed and stationed in battle formations. O Karna! Drona, Duryodhana, Bhishma, you, Drona's son and I-all of us will fight Partha. Do not be rash. Though Partha is fierce, like the
one with an upraised vajra in his hand[Indra.], if all six chariots[Drona, Duryodhana, Bhishma, Karna, Ashvatthama and Kripa.] are united together, we will be able to repulse him.
With the soldiers arranged in battle formations and with the supreme archers ready, we will fight Arjuna in battle,
like the danavas against Vasava."'
