'Dhritarashtra said, "Those rathas who returned to the battle, with Vrikodara at the forefront, were capable of afflicting even the soldiers of the gods. A man is certainly driven by destiny. That is the reason why different outcomes result from all action. That is the reason Yudhishthira had to spend a long time in the forest, wearing matted
hair and antelope skin, and also had to remain undetected to people. He has now assembled a mighty army in this
battle. What can befall my sons, other than what is determined by destiny? It is certain that a man's fortune is determined by destiny. He is compelled to do what he does not himself desire. Yudhishthira suffered hardship because of his addiction to gambling. It is again because of fortune that he has now obtained allies. 'I have obtained
half of the Kekayas[Some of the Kekayas were opposed to Duryodhana.], the Kashis and the Kosalas. The Chedis, the Vangas and others have sought refuge with me.
O father! The entire earth is on my side and not on that of the Parthas.' This is what my evil-minded son, Duryodhana, told me then. Drona was protected well, in the midst of the soldiers. If he has been killed by Parshata's son,
what can this be other than destiny? The mighty-armed one was in the midst of the kings and has always delighted
in battle. He was skilled in the use of all weapons. How could death have approached Drona? I am confronting distress and have been overcome by supreme senselessness. On hearing that Bhishma and Drona have been slain, I
have no interest in remaining alive any more. O son[The word used is tata.]! On beholding my affection for my son, Kshatta[Vidura.] had spoken to me. O suta! Duryodhana and I are now confronted with all of that. Had I abandoned Duryodhana, it would
have been supremely cruel. But my remaining sons would not have faced hardship and death. If a man gives up
dharma and is addicted to artha, he confronts decay in this world and falls prey to inferior sentiments. O Sanjaya!
With the bow and hump[In the sense of a metaphor.] of this kingdom destroyed, it has lost all enterprise. I see that nothing will be left. Those
two forgiving bulls among men were always our refuge. When they have been destroyed, how can anything be
left? Tell me details about how that battle raged. Who were the ones who fought? Who were the ones who attacked? Which inferior ones fled out of fear? Tell me what Dhananjaya, bull among rathas, did. We are scared of
him and especially of his brother[Bhima.]. O Sanjaya! When the Pandavas returned, there must have been an extremely
terrible confrontation between them and my remaining soldiers. Which brave ones on my side countered them
there?"'
