'Droupadi said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I will now tell you about my great unhappiness. I am telling
you this out of great misery and you should not be angry with me. I am bereft of my senses when you fight with
tigers, buffaloes and lions in the inner quarters and Kaikeyi[The daughter of Kekaya, Sudeshna, Virata's wife.] watches you. On seeing me unconscious, Kaikeyi
will arise and tell her women, 'I think this affection is born out of this sweet-smiling one living with the cook and
she sorrows when he fights with these immensely brave beings. Sairandhri is beautiful in form and Ballava is extremely handsome. The minds of women are impossible to fathom. But it seems to me that they are made for each
other. Sairandhri is always overcome by pity because they happily live together. They have lived in this royal
household for the same duration of time.' Through such words, she always makes me known. When she sees me
angered, she suspects that I am attached to you. When she utters such words, I am overtaken by great grief. I am
immersed in sorrow over Yudhishthira and I cannot bear to be alive.

'"Alone on a single chariot, he defeated gods, men and serpents. That youthful one is now a dancing master for
King Virata's daughter. The one with the infinite soul satisfied the fire god in Khandava. Partha has now gone to
the inner quarters, like a fire covered in a well. He was a bull among men and enemies were always frightened of
him. Dhananjaya is now in a form that is despised by the world. Enemies trembled at the twang of his bow and the
slapping of his palms. He now pleases women with the sweet sounds of his singing. A diadem that was like the sun
always adorned his head. Dhananjaya's unkempt hair is now braided. All the celestial weapons are known to that
great-souled one. He is the repository of all knowledge and now wears earrings. Thousands of kings, whose energy
was unlimited, could not cross him and overcome him in battle, just as the great ocean does not cross the shoreline.
That youthful one is now a dancing master for King Virata's daughter. He hides himself in disguise and serves the
daughter. O Bhima! The earth, with its mountains and forests and mobile and immobile objects, trembled at the
roar of his chariot. He is the immensely fortunate one whose birth destroyed Kunti's sorrow. O Bhimasena! I now
sorrow over your younger brother. He is adorned in golden ornaments and earrings and sports conch shells in his
hands[Implying that Arjuna wears bracelets made of conch shells.]. On seeing him approach, my mind is immersed in sorrow. O Bhima! The archer Dhananjaya wears his
unkempt hair in a braid. O Bhima! On seeing him surrounded by young maidens, my mind is immersed in sorrow.
He is equal to a god. When I see Partha surrounded by young maidens, in the midst of musical instruments, like a
bull-elephant in rut surrounded by she-elephants, and in the service of Virata, king of the Matsyas, who pays him, I
can no longer see any of the directions. Surely the arya[Lady, a reference to Kunti.] does not know the difficulties Dhananjaya has to confront, or those that Ajatashatru[Literally, one who has no enemies, one of Yudhishthira's names.] is immersed in, having become addicted to evil gambling.

'"The youngest Sahadeva is a lord of warriors. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing him tend to cattle, in the disguise of a cowherd, I become pale. O mighty-armed one! I repeatedly reflect upon Sahadeva's conduct. Truth is his valour. But I do not know of any evil act that Sahadeva has done, as a consequence of which, he
should attain such unhappiness. O best of the Bharata lineage! On seeing your beloved brother, appointed by Mat-
sya, like a bull among the cattle, fever overcomes me. He is clad in red garments and he is foremost among the
cowherds. He shows homage to Virata. Arya[Lady, meaning Kunti.] always praised brave Sahadeva because of his honoured reputation,
his conduct and his virtuous nature. 'He is modest, sweet in speech, devoted to dharma and dear to me. O Yajnaseni! Comfort him in the forest, even at night.' O best of warriors! O Pandava! On seeing Sahadeva engaged
with cows, covering himself with calf skins at night, how can I bear to live?

'"He[Nakula.] always possessed the three qualities of beauty, weaponry and intelligence. He now tends to Virata's
steeds. Behold! How times have changed! The great king looks and the assembled populace watches when Damagranthi[Granthika is the name Nakula has assumed. Granthi means knot and Granthika is a reference to tying a horse's
reins and saddle. Dama means to tame or subjugate. Hence, Damagranthi is the same as Granthika and brings in
the nuance of taming and subjugating horses.] trains horses and drives them swiftly. I have seen him wait upon the prosperous Virata of Matsya,
supreme in his radiance, showing off the horses. O Partha! O scorcher of enemies! How can you think that I will
be happy? Because of Yudhishthira, I am afflicted with a hundred different kinds of miseries. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! There are other miseries too, greater than these. O Kounteya! Listen and I will tell you about
them. These many types of unhappiness are drying up my body. What can be a greater misery than that? And all of
this is happening while you are still alive."'
