'Bhishma said, "The rakshasa[Virupaksha.] had a funeral pyre constructed for the king of the cranes. It was decorated with
gems, fragrances and garments. O king! The Indra among the rakshasas then followed the prescribed ordinances
and performed the funeral rites for the powerful king of the cranes. At that time, the auspicious and illustrious goddess, Dakshayani Surabhi[Accounts of creation vary. In some, Surabhi is one of Daksha's daughters. She was married to Kashyapa and gave birth to cattle. Surabhi is
also a celestial cow.], appeared overhead. O unblemished one! Froth and milk flowed from her mouth and
streamed onto Rajadharma's funeral pyre. O unblemished one! The king of the cranes was revived at this. The lord
of the cranes arose and approached Virupaksha. At that time, the king of the gods came to Virupaksha's city and
told Virupaksha, 'It is good fortune that he has come alive.' Indra told Virupaksha about an ancient curse that had,
in earlier times, been imposed by Brahma on Rajadharma. 'O king! When the lord of the cranes did not worship
Brahma, the grandfather was enraged and spoke to the Indra among the cranes. "This worst among cranes has foolishly not presented himself before me. Therefore, this evil-souled one will shortly be killed." Because of those
words, he was slain by Goutama. Having been sprinkled with amrita, the crane has again been brought back to
life.' When this was spoken, Rajadharma bowed down before Purandara and said, 'O Purandara! If your mind is
inclined towards showing me favours, let my extremely beloved friend, Goutama, come back to life.' O bull
among men! Vasava agreed to these words. He revived Goutama and handed him over to his friend. O king! The
lord of the cranes was supremely delighted and embraced his friend, who was still carrying the burden[The load of gold.]. Then,
Rajadharma, the lord of the cranes, took his leave of the evil-acting one and his riches and entered his own residence. The crane went to Brahma's assembly, as he should have. And Brahma honoured the great-souled one as a
guest.

'"Goutama again reached Shabara's abode. Through the shudra woman, he had many sons who were the perpetrators of wicked deeds. The large number of gods then imposed an extremely severe curse on him. O lord! Over a
long period of time, having given birth through his remarried wife[Because the wife had been married to someone else earlier.], the immensely ungrateful one would go to
hell. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Narada told me all this earlier. O bull among men! I remembered and
told you the great account. Everything happened exactly as I have recounted it. How can an ungrateful person obtain fame? What is his status? Where is his happiness? An ingrate is never respected. There is no salvation for an
ungrateful person. A man must, especially, never injure his friends. A person who injures his friends obtains a terrible and infinite hell. O unblemished one! One must always have sentiments of gratitude and affection towards
friends. Truth comes from friends. Strength comes from friends. The discerning person honours his friends well.
The learned avoid a person who is wicked, ungrateful, shameless, injurious towards friends, the worst of his lineage, sinful in his deeds and the worst among men. O best among those who uphold dharma! I have thus spoken to
you about the wicked person who was ungrateful and injured his friend. What do you again wish to hear?"'

Vaishampayana said, 'O Janamejaya! On hearing these words spoken by the great-souled Bhishma, Yudhishthira
was delighted.'

This concludes Apad Dharma Parva.