Bhishma said, "O great king! In every way, that fever penetrated Vritra. Listen to the signs that then manifested
themselves on his body. His mouth flamed and assumed a terrible form. He became extremely pale. His body
trembled mightily and he began to breathe heavily. His body hair stood up and turned fierce. O great king! He
sighed deeply. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! His memory assumed the form of an extremely terrible, fearful and inauspicious jackal, emerged from his mouth and fell down. Blazing and flaming meteors descended along
his flanks. Vultures, herons and cranes emitted extremely hideous shrieks and happily circled around above Vritra.
Stationed on his chariot in the battle, the god Shakra glanced towards Vritra and prepared to use the vajra. The
great  asura  released  a  superhuman  roar.  O  Indra  among  kings!  Overwhelmed  by  that  fierce  fever,  he  yawned.
While he was thus yawning, Shakra released the vajra. That extremely energetic vajra was like the fire of destruction. It swiftly brought down the giant form of the daitya Vritra. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On seeing that
Vritra had been slain, the gods again roared in every direction. Having slain the danava, Vritra, the illustrious and
immensely famous one[Indra.] entered heaven with the vajra, which was permeated by Vishnu.

'"O Kouravya! At this, the sin of having killed a brahmana[In personified form. Vritra was the son of a brahmana.] emerged from Vritra's body. She was extremely
terrible and horrible and caused fear to the worlds. Her teeth were fearsome. She was hideous and malformed, dark
and tawny. Her hair stood up and her eyes were awful. O bull among the Bharata lineage! She was thin and wore a
garland of skulls. O one who knows about dharma! She was attired in tattered rags and bark that were wet with
blood. O Indra among kings! O supreme among the Bharata lineage! That terrible form emerged and searched for
the wielder of the vajra. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! After some time, with the welfare of the worlds in
mind, Vritra's slayer was headed in the direction of heaven. On seeing that the immensely energetic Shakra was
advancing, she seized Indra of the gods by the throat and adhered to him. The sin of having killed a brahmana generated great fear in him. He therefore entered the stalk of a lotus and spent many years there. O Kouravya! But the
sin of  having killed a brahmana still sought to pursue  him. Grasped  by  her,  he  lost  all  his  enterprise.  Though
Shakra made great efforts to rid himself of the sin of having killed a brahmana, Indra of the gods wasn't able to
shake her off. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Indra of the gods was seized by her. He went to the grandfather
and bowed his head down before him. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! On knowing that Shakra had been
seized by the sin of having killed a brahmana, Brahma began to think.

'"O mighty-armed one! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In a reassuring and gentle voice, the grandfather
spoke to the sin of having killed a brahmana. 'O beautiful one! Do what is agreeable to me and free this Indra of
the thirty gods. Tell me what I can do for you now. What is your desire?'

'"The sin of having killed a brahmana replied, 'O god! You are worshipped by the three worlds. You are the creator of the three worlds and you are pleased with me. You have thus done everything that I wish for. But decree an
abode for me. It was for the sake of protecting the worlds that you laid down this rule[That killing a brahmana would be a sin.]. O god! This extremely
great ordinance was laid down by you. O one who knows about dharma! O lord and master of all the worlds! Since
you are pleased with me, I will leave Shakra. But decree an abode for me.'"

'Bhishma said, "At this, the grandfather spoke to the sin of having killed a brahmana. He thought of a means so
that the sin of having killed a brahmana might be removed from Shakra. Svayambhu thought of the great-souled
Agni. He presented himself before Brahma and spoke these words. 'O illustrious god! O scorcher of enemies! I
have presented myself before you. O god! You should tell me about the task that I have to accomplish.'

'"Brahma said, 'I will divide the sin of having killed a brahmana into many parts. For the sake of saving Shakra,
accept one-fourth of it from me.'

'"Agni replied, 'O Brahma! O lord! But think of a means whereby I shall also be saved. O one who is revered
by the worlds! I wish to know the truth about how that will come about.'

'"Brahma said, 'There will be people who will be enveloped by tamas. When they approach your blazing form,
they will not offer seeds, herbs and juices into the fire. O bearer of oblations! The sin of having killed a brahmana
will then swiftly leave you and enter into them. Let your mental anxiety be dispelled.'"

'Bhishma said, "Having been thus addressed by the grandfather, the illustrious lord who was the devourer of
oblations[The text uses havya-kavya for oblations. Havya is oblations offered to the gods. Kavya means offerings to the
wise and represents oblations offered to the ancestors.] accepted this. The grandfather summoned trees, herbs and grass. O great king! To accomplish the objective, he spoke to them along similar lines[Asking them to accept one-fourth of the sin.]. O king! But the trees, herbs and grass were just as distressed as
Agni and spoke to Brahma along similar lines. 'O grandfather of the worlds! If we accept the sin of having killed a
brahmana, what will become of us? We are naturally afflicted and you are oppressing us again. O god! We always
have to endure heat, cold, rain and wind, not to speak of the cutting down and chopping that we are subjected to.
On your command, we will accept the sin of having killed a brahmana. O lord of the three worlds! But while we
accept it, please think of a means so that we may be saved.'

'"Brahma said, 'If there is a man who is confounded by tamas and indulges in cutting down and chopping on
auspicious days, then it[The sin.] shall penetrate him.'"

'Bhishma said, "Thus addressed by the great-souled Brahma, the trees, herbs and grass worshipped him. They
quickly went to wherever they had come from. The god who was the grandfather of the worlds then summoned the
apsaras. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He reassured them and spoke to them in gentle words. 'O ones with
supreme limbs! Indra has been overcome by the sin of having killed a brahmana. Instructed by me, accept one-
fourth of that.'

'"The apsaras replied, 'O lord of the gods! On your instructions, we will make up our minds to accept it. O
grandfather! But let us have an agreement. Think of a means to save us.'

'"Brahma said, 'Do not have any mental anxiety. If a person has intercourse with a woman who is menstruating,
it will leave you and quickly go to him.'"

'Bhishma said, "The large numbers of apsaras became cheerful at these words. O bull among the Bharata lineage! They went to their respective regions and pleasured there. The immensely ascetic god who was the creators
of the three worlds then thought of the waters. When he thought of them and summoned them, all the waters appeared before the infinitely energetic Brahma. O king! They bowed down before the grandfather and spoke these
words. 'O god! O scorcher of enemies! On your instructions, we have thus arrived before you. O lord of the gods!
O lord! Command us.'

'"Brahma said, 'Puruhuta[Indra's name, meaning worshipped by many.] is suffering from this great fear on Vritra's account. Accept one-fourth of the disquiet that has come about because of killing a brahmana.'

'"The waters replied, 'O lord of the worlds! O master! It shall be as you say. But let us have an agreement that
you will think of a means for saving us. You are the lord of the gods. You are the supreme preceptor of the entire
universe. Who else can grant us favours? Therefore, free us of the hardship.'

'"Brahma  said,  'There  will  be  a  man  with  limited  intelligence  and  confused  understanding.  He  will  release
phlegm, urine and excrement into the water. It[The sin.] will then swiftly leave you and begin to reside in him. You will be
freed in this way. I am telling you this truthfully.'"

'Bhishma said, "O Yudhishthira! Thus Indra of the gods was freed from the sin of having killed a brahmana. On
the instructions of the god[Brahma.], it left him and went to the designated spots. O lord of men! In this way, Shakra was
afflicted with the sin of having killed a brahmana. With the grandfather's permission, he decided to perform a
horse sacrifice. O great king! It has been heard that Vasava was tainted by the sin of having killed a brahmana, but
obtained purification through performing the horse sacrifice. The god regained his prosperity and slew thousands
of enemies. O lord of the earth! Vasava obtained a great deal of delight. O Partha! Khurvundas[This is almost certainly a typo, though it is difficult to figure out what this should be. Probably some kind of
cock that scratches the ground is meant.] were born from
Vritra's blood. That is the reason brahmanas and ascetics who have consecrated themselves do not eat these. In
every situation, you must act so as to bring pleasure to brahmanas. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! They are
said to be gods on earth. O Kouravya! In this way, Shakra used his subtle intelligence to decide in advance about
means so that the infinitely energetic and great asura, Vritra, might be killed. O Kouravya! You will also be unvanquished on earth and be like the god Shatakratu, the slayer of enemies. If a person reads this divine account about
Shakra, in the midst of brahmanas and on auspicious occasions, he will never be tainted by sin. This is the great
and extraordinary account about Vritra's encounter with Shakra. O son! I have recounted that deed to you. What
else do you desire to hear now?"'
