Sanjaya said, "O great king! All those warriors were delighted at the prospect of battle and gathered together on
the slopes of the Himalayas. Shalya, Chitrasena, maharatha Shakuni, Ashvatthama, Kripa, Satvata Kritavarma,
Sushena, Arishtasena, the valiant Dhritasena, Jayatsena and the kings spent the night there. When the brave Karna
was killed in the battle, though your sons desired victory, they were terrified and could find no peace, other than on
the slopes of the Himalayas. O king! Having resolved to make every effort in the battle, in the presence of the soldiers, they honoured the king[Duryodhana.] in the prescribed way and, united, said, 'You should fight with the enemy after
having decided on a commander. All the well-wishers will then be protected by him and obtain victory.' Stationed
on his chariot, Duryodhana went to the supreme among rathas[Ashvatthama.], who knew about all the kinds of warfare and was
unmatched in a battle. He was pleasant in speech and his neck was like that of a conch shell. He possessed a sword
and his head was covered. His face was like a blooming lotus. His mouth was like that of a tiger and he had the
majesty of Meru. His shoulders, eyes, gait and voice was like that of Sthanu's[Shiva's.] bull. His arms were thick and
long, with excellent joints. His chest was extremely broad and well formed. In his speed and strength, he was like
Aruna's younger brother[Aruna's younger brother is Garuda. Aruna and Garuda were Vinata's sons, through the sage Kashyapa.]. He was like the sun in his splendour and like Ushanas[Shukra, the preceptor of the demons.] in his intelligence. He was
like the moon in three respects-the beauty of his form, his face and his prosperity. The joints on his body seemed
to be made out of golden lotuses. His thighs, waist and feet were formed well, and so were his fingers and nails. He
was created by the creator with great care, after remembering all the qualities that should be remembered. He possessed all the auspicious marks. He was skilled and an ocean of learning. He was capable of winning speedily, but
was incapable of being defeated by the forces of the enemy. He possessed knowledge about the science of fighting,
with its four parts and ten divisions[Dhanurveda (the science of fighting) had different classifications. The four parts could mean chariots, cavalry,
elephants and infantry. But it probably means four types of weapons-amukta (held in the hand while fighting),
mukta (hurled from the hand), muktamukta (weapons that can either be held in the hand or hurled) and yantra-
mukta (hurled through an implement). The ten divisions (anga) are more difficult to pin down. While each kind
of weapon had different modes of fighting and different positions, described for example in the Agni Purana,
there is no ready identification with the number ten.]. He knew the four Vedas and their angas, with accounts as the fifth[The four Vedas are Rig, Sama, Yajur and Atharva. Itishasa (the epics and the Puranas), that is, accounts, are regarded as the fifth Veda. The six vedangas are shiksha (articulation and pronunciation), chhanda (prosody),
vyakarana (grammar), nirukta (etymology), jyotisha (astronomy) and kalpa (rituals).]. Drona
was not born in a womb. The immensely energetic one observed fierce and careful austerities, worshipping Tryambaka and obtained him through someone who was also not born in a womb[Drona was born in a pot from the sage Bharadvaja's semen. Kripa and Kripi were also born in weeds, not a
womb, through the sage Sharadvat's semen. Drona married Kripi and their son was Ashvatthama. Drona obtained Asvatthama after worshipping Tryambaka or the three-eyed one, Shiva.]. His deeds and beauty were unmatched on earth. He was accomplished in all the forms of learning. He was unblemished and an ocean of qualities. He was immeasurable in his soul. Having approached this Ashvatthama, he said, 'O preceptor's son! For all
of us, you are the supreme refuge. Whom should I appoint as a commander now? You should tell me. With him at
the forefront, we will fight with the Pandavas and defeat them.'

' "Drona's son replied, 'Let Shalya be the commander of our army. He possesses lineage, bravery, energy, fame,
prosperity and all the qualities. He has abandoned his sister's sons[Shalya's sister was Madri, Nakula and Sahadeva's mother.] and has gratefully come to our side. He possesses a large army and is mighty-armed. He is like Mahasena[Kartikeya, the general of the gods. Skanda is also Kartikeya's name.] to the enemy. O supreme among kings! Make that
king the commander. We will then be able to obtain victory, like the triumphant gods after appointing Skanda.'

' "When Drona's son said this, all the lords of the earth surrounded Shalya and stationed themselves around him,
proclaiming his victory[Though not explicitly stated, this is Sanjaya speaking again.]. They set their minds on fighting and were filled with supreme delight. From his chariot,
Duryodhana alighted on the ground. He joined his hands in salutation and told Shalya, who was like Rama[This could mean either Rama or Parashurama.] and
Bhishma in battle, 'O one who is devoted to friends! The time has come for friendship. At such times, learned ones
can differentiate between a friend and an enemy. You are brave. Station yourself at the forefront of our army. When
you advance in the battle, the evil-minded Pandavas, with their advisers and the Panchalas, will lose enterprise.'

Shalya replied, 'O king! O king of the Kurus! I will accomplish the task you have thought for me. Everything that I
possess, my life, my kingdom and my riches, is for your pleasure.' Duryodhana said, 'O unmatched maternal uncle[Shalya was a maternal uncle by extension.]! I instate you as the commander. O foremost among warriors! Save us in this encounter, like Skanda saved
the gods in battle. O Indra among kings! I consecrate you, like the gods did to Pavaki[Pavaki means Pavaka's son, Pavaka being Agni. Pavaki is another name for Kartikeya. There are different stories about Kartikeya's birth. In some, he is directly born from Agni. In others, he is born from Shiva, but the semen is conveyed by Agni. In either case, Kartikeya can be described as Agni's son.]. O brave one! Slay the enemies in the battle, like the great Indra against the danavas.'" '
