Janamejaya asked, 'After the illustrious Vyasa had departed, what did King Dhritarashtra do? O brahmana
rishi! You should tell me that in detail.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'O best among men! After he[Dhritarashtra.] heard this, for a long time, he was conscious and
thought. He then asked Sanjaya to yoke[The chariot.] and told Vidura, "Quickly bring Gandhari and all the women of the
Bharata lineage here. Bring my sister-in-law, Kunti, and all the other women here." Thus did the one with
dharma in his soul speak to Vidura, who was knowledgeable about dharma. With his intelligence clouded by
sorrow, he[Dhritarashtra.] climbed onto the chariot.

'Gandhari was stricken by grief, but was goaded by the words of her husband[There is some abruptness and break in continuity in the text here.]. With Kunti and the other
women, she rushed to where the king was. Approaching the king, they were overcome with great sorrow.
They greeted each other and cried grievously. Kshatta[Vidura.], who was himself suffering even more, comforted
them. The voices of the women were choking with tears. He made them ascend their vehicles and left the
city. In all the houses of the Kurus, loud lamentations were heard. The entire city, including the children, was
afflicted by grief. Those women had earlier not been seen, not even by the large numbers of the gods. With
their lords slain, they were now seen by ordinary men. Their beautiful hair was dishevelled and they cast
aside their ornaments. Clad in single garments, those women ran around hither and thither, without protectors. The houses were as beautiful as white mountains and they emerged from these. They were like those
leaving homes in mountains, when leaders of the herds had been slain. Large numbers of women emerged. O
king! They ran around in sorrow, like young girls in an arena. They held onto each other's arms and wept,
lamenting their sons, brothers and fathers. They were seen there, as if the world was being destroyed at the
end of a yuga. They lamented and wept and ran around here and there. They were senseless because of sorrow and did not know what they should do. Earlier, the women used to be bashful, even before their friends.
They were shameless now and appeared in single garments before their mothers-in-law. Earlier, they used to
console each other in times of grief, even if it was of a mild kind. O king! Distracted by sorrow now, they ignored each other.

'The king was surrounded by thousands of such lamenting ones. He left the city in distress and quickly
headed towards the field of battle. With the king at their head, artisans, traders, vaishyas and those who
earned a living from all kinds of work emerged outside the city. At the destruction of the Kurus, the women
cried and lamented in piteous tones. A loud noise arose and oppressed the world. It was as if beings were being scorched when the time for the end of a yuga has arrived. The beings thought that they were being destroyed. At the destruction of the Kurus, all the citizens became extremely anxious. O great king! They were
devoted to them and cried in severe grief.'
