Vaishampayana said, 'O king! There was a skilled digger[Khanaka. Miner is more accurate as a translation. But in this context, digger seems more appropriate.] who was Vidura's friend. This man came and spoke to
the Pandava[Yudhishthira.] secretly. "I have been sent by Vidura to do that which is pleasing to the Pandavas. I am well skilled
in digging. Please tell me what I can do for you. Vidura told me to go to the Pandavas and do that which is for their
welfare. He trusts me. What can I do for you? On the fourteenth night of this krishnapaksha[The lunar month's darker fortnight.], Purochana will set
fire to the door of your house. O Partha! I have heard that Dhritarashtra's son has decided to burn the Pandavas,
bulls among men, together with their mother. O Pandava! Vidura told you something in the mleccha[A non-Aryan or barbarian. However, a mleccha was actually someone who spoke in a language other than
Sanskrit. There is a problem with the critical edition here. In other editions, Vidura spoke to Yudhishthira in mleccha language, so this reference makes sense. However, in the critical edition, Vidura speaking to Yudhishthira in
the mleccha language has been excised and what has been left is Vidura speaking to Yudhishthira in a riddle. So
this reference doesn't quite fit.] language
and you replied in that language. I am telling you this to establish my credentials."

'Yudhishthira, Kunti's truthful son, replied, "O agreeable one! I now know you to be a trusted and true friend of
Vidura's, always devoted to him. There is nothing that learned one does not know. Just as you are his, you are ours.
Do not distinguish between him and us. We are yours as much as his. Protect us the way that wise man does. I
know Purochana built this inflammable house for me on the command of Dhritarashtra's son. That evil-hearted and
malicious one, with control over riches and allies, has always oppressed us. Use all your efforts to save us from the
fire. If we are burnt to death, Suyodhana's wishes will be fulfilled. That evil-hearted one's store of arms is there.
This large house has been built along those walls. Vidura certainly knew in advance the evil crime that was being
plotted and warned me about it. The danger that kshatta foresaw earlier is upon us now. Help us escape from that
without Purochana knowing." The digger promised to help.

'Carefully, he began the work of excavation and made a deep tunnel under the ground. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! He built that tunnel in the centre of the house, with a narrow mouth and level with the ground,
and covered it with wooden planks. Because of the fear of Purochana, the opening was thus covered. He[Purochana.] constantly kept a watch on the gate of the house. O king! They lived in the hole in the night, with their weapons ready.
During the day, the Pandavas went out hunting, from forest to forest. O king! Deceiving Purochana with a display
of trustfulness and contentment, they were actually distrusting and discontented and lived very unhappily. The inhabitants of the city knew nothing about all this, except for Vidura's friend, the excellent digger.'
