Vaishampayana said, 'O king! The people did not see anything missing in the affection that King Yudhishthira
and Duryodhana's father displayed towards each other. O king! However, whenever the Kourava king remembered his foolish son, the king couldn't help mentally censuring Bhima. O Indra among kings! In that way, Bhimasena could never tolerate King Dhritarashtra and caused the aged one displeasure. Vrikodara didn't reveal these
disagreeable acts. Instead, he used deceitful men to ignore his commands. One day, in the midst of his well-wishers, Bhima intolerantly slapped his palms, in Dhritarashtra and Gandhari's hearing. He remembered his enemy,
Duryodhana, and Karna and Duhshasana. Extremely enraged, Bhima spoke these harsh words. "This aged king's
sons were skilled in the use of all weapons. However, my arms are like clubs and I used these to kill them and convey them to the world hereafter. My arms are said to be like clubs and are impossible to withstand. The sons of
Dhritarashtra were embraced by these and were destroyed. That is the reason these arms should be smeared with
sandalwood paste and revered. It is because of these that Duryodhana and his sons and relatives have been destroyed." Vrikodara spoke many other similar words and they were like stakes. Hearing these, the king was distressed. The intelligent queen, Gandhari, knew about the progress of time and knew about all kinds of dharma. Despite hearing this, she paid no attention. However, after fifteen years had elapsed, the king was extremely affected
by similar words from Bhima and they were like arrows. The king became distressed. King Yudhishthira, Kunti's
son, didn't know this, nor did the one with the white horses[Arjuna.], Kunti, the illustrious Droupadi or Madri's sons.
They did not know Bhima's mind, or that he was happy at this. They sought to protect the king and never spoke
anything that was disagreeable. After this, Dhritarashtra summoned his well-wishers and in a voice choking with
tears, spoke these purposeful and grave words.'
