Vaishampayana said, 'Arjuna took a great deal of care in worshipping his preceptor and showed the greatest devotion in learning the art of weapons. He became a great favourite of Drona's. Drona summoned the cook and told
him secretly, "Never give Arjuna any food when it is dark." One day, when Arjuna was eating, a wind arose and
blew out the lamp and its light. Arjuna continued to eat in the dark, his hand moving to his mouth from force of
habit. The Pandava then began to practise in the night. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Drona heard the
twang of his bowstring and came to him and embraced him. He said, "I promise you that I will do my utmost to
ensure that you are the best archer in this world and there is no one equal to you." Then Drona taught Arjuna the
art of fighting from horses, elephants, chariots and on the ground. Drona taught the Pandava how to fight in narrow
confines[Implying weapons that were held in the hand.] with clubs, swords, spears, javelins and lances. On witnessing his skills, thousands of kings and
princes assembled to learn the science of Dhanur Veda.

'O king! Ekalavya was the son of Hiranyadhanu, the king of the nishadas. He came to Drona. However, since he
was the son of a nishada[Hunter or fisherman. Usually, described as dwelling in the mountains and forests.], Drona, who was learned in dharma, thought about it and refused to accept him as a
student of archery, out of consideration for the others. That conqueror of enemies touched Drona's feet with his
head. He went to the forest and used clay to make Drona's image. He began to worship and treat this as his preceptor, devoting his mind to learning archery in accordance with the proper disciplines. As a consequence of his exceptional faith and supreme devotion, he acquired great dexterity in fixing an arrow to the string of the bow, aiming and then releasing it. One day, with Drona's permission, all the Kurus and the Pandavas, conquerors of their
enemies, went out on their chariots for a hunt. O king! A servant followed the Pandavas, carrying the required objects with him and he had a dog with him. They wandered around in the forest, their hearts set on what they wished
to do. The dog also wandered off in the forest, got lost and came upon the nishada. On seeing the dark nishada in
the forest, his body covered with dirt and clad in a dark deerskin, the dog began to bark. When it kept on barking,
he displayed great dexterity. In one instant, he shot seven arrows into its mouth. The dog dashed back to the Pandavas, its mouth full of arrows. On seeing this, the brave Pandavas were extremely surprised. At this supreme and
dextrous feat of shooting blind[The text uses the word shabdabheda, which is the art of shooting with the aid of sound alone, without seeing the object. Earlier, there was no suggestion that Ekalavya had not seen the dog when he was shooting the arrows. From the use of this word here, it seems that he had not seen the dog and had only heard it bark.],they praised the person who had done this, but were also ashamed of their own
skills. O king! The Pandavas went out to search for the forest-dweller who had done this and found him, tirelessly
shooting arrows. They did not know him and his appearance wasn't handsome. They asked him, "Who are you and
whose son are you?" Ekalavya replied, "Know me to be the son of Hiranyadhanu, the king of the nishadas. I am
Drona's student and I am trying to become skilled in Dhanur Veda." The Pandavas ascertained the details of everything that had happened.

'On return, they told Drona the entire story. O king! Kounteya Arjuna kept thinking about Ekalavya. He went to
Drona and affectionately told him, "In your affection, you embraced me and told me that no pupil of yours would
ever be my equal. How is it that you have another valorous pupil in this world, the son of the nishada king, who is
better than everyone else?" Thereupon, Drona thought for a moment and arrived at a decision. He took
Savyasachi[Arjuna.] with him and went to the nishada. He found Ekalavya, his body covered with filth. His hair was
matted and he was attired in rags. However, with a bow in his hand, he was ceaselessly shooting arrows. On seeing
Drona approach, Ekalavya went up to him. He prostrated himself on the ground and touched his feet with his head.
After worshipping Drona in the prescribed way, the nishada's son told him that he was his student and stood before
him with joined hands. At this, Drona told Ekalavya, "If you are my student, give me my fee." On hearing this,
Ekalavya happily asked, "O illustrious one! What can I give you? Command me. O you who know the brahman!
There is nothing that cannot be given to the preceptor." Drona said, "Give me your right thumb as a fee." On hearing Drona's terrible words, Ekalavya kept his promise. Always devoted to the truth, he cheerfully cut off his own
right thumb, with happiness on his face and peace in his heart, and gave it to Drona. O lord of men! After that,
when he pulled the bowstring with his other fingers, the nishada found that he was no longer as swift as earlier.
Arjuna was pleased and his fever went away. Drona's words, that no one would be able to surpass Arjuna, came
true.

'Among all the Kurus who were Drona's students, two became particularly skilled in fighting with clubs-Duryodhana and Bhima. Ashvatthama excelled in the use of all secret weapons. The twins were better than all other
men in the use of the sword. Yudhishthira was supreme in fighting with chariots. However, Dhananjaya[Arjuna.] was the
best in fighting with every weapon. The Pandava was famous on earth, right up to the frontiers of the ocean, for his
intelligence, perseverance, strength and enterprise in all weapons. He was thus the foremost among all warriors.
Arjuna was special, not just in his knowledge of weapons, but also in his devotion to his preceptor, though the instructions were the same for everyone. Alone among all the princes, Arjuna became an atiratha[A maharatha is a warrior who can take on 10,000 warriors single-handed. An atiratha can take on 60,000.]. O lord of
men! Dhritarashtra's evil-souled sons could not stand Bhimasena's great strength and Arjuna's great skill and hated
them.

'O bull among men! When they became skilled in all knowledge, in a desire to examine their skill with
weapons, Drona assembled them together. He got an artisan to construct an artificial bird and placed it on top of a
tree. The princes could hardly see it and it was to be used as a target. Drona said, "Quickly pick up your bows, all
of you. Fix arrows to the string of the bow, stand here and aim at that bird in the tree. O sons! When I give you permission, one after another, slice off the bird's head." The greatest of Angirasa's descendants first addressed Yudhishthira. "O invincible one! Aim with your arrow and let it go, as soon as I have asked you to." Yudhishthira first
picked up a bow that made a loud noise. Then, as instructed by his preceptor, he stood, aiming at the bird. The descendant of the Kuru lineage stood there, with his bow stretched. O, bull among the Kuru lineage! After a short
time, Drona asked, "O prince! Can you see that bird on the top of the tree?" "I can see it," Yudhishthira replied to
his preceptor. After some time, Drona again asked, "Can you see the tree? Can you see me? Can you see your
brothers?" In reply to each question, Kounteya[Kunti's son. In this case, Yudhishthira.] answered, one after the other: "I can see the large tree. I can see
you. I can see the bird." Drona was displeased at these words and reproachfully told him, "This is not for you. You
will not be able to hit the target." Then the immensely illustrious one placed Duryodhana in the same position and
Dhritarashtra's other sons, one after another, so as to test them. Bhima and the other students and the kings who
had come from other countries were also asked. All of them said that they could see everything and were scolded.

'Smilingly, Drona then summoned Dhananjaya. "This target is for you to shoot down. Listen. As soon as I ask
you to, you must shoot. O son! Stand here for a moment, with your bow taut." Thus addressed, Savyasachi drew
his bow into a semicircle, aimed at the target and stood there, as his preceptor had instructed. After a while, Drona
asked him in the same way. "O Arjuna! Do you see the bird seated there? Do you see the tree? Do you see me?"

Arjuna replied, "I can only see the bird. I cannot see the tree. Nor can I see you." Pleased, the invincible Drona
waited again for a moment. Then he again addressed the Pandava, bull among warriors. "If you can see the bird,
describe it to me." Arjuna replied, "I can only see the bird's head. I cannot see its body." At Arjuna's words, Drona
was delighted and his hair stood up. He told Partha, "Shoot," and he let the arrow go. The Pandava sliced off the
head of the bird on the tree with his sharp arrow and brought it down on the ground. When Phalguna[Arjuna.] succeeded
in this task, Drona embraced him and deduced that Drupada and his relatives had already been vanquished in
battle.

'O bull among the Bharata lineage! A few days later, the best of those of the Angirasa lineage went with his students to the Ganga to bathe. When Drona entered the water, a powerful crocodile grabbed him by the thigh, as if
sent by destiny itself. Though quite capable of saving himself, Drona told his students, "Kill the crocodile and
quickly save me." Even before he had finished speaking, Bibhatsu[Arjuna.] let loose five sharp arrows that killed the
crocodile under the water. The others were still standing around, looking confused. On seeing the Pandava's swiftness in action, Drona was extremely pleased and decided that he was the best of his students. The crocodile was
chopped into many pieces through Partha's arrows. It let go of the great-souled one's thigh and returned to the five
elements. Bharadvaja's son told the great-souled maharatha, "O mighty-armed one! Receive this invincible and
supreme weapon, named brahmashira, with the knowledge of releasing it and withdrawing it. You must never use
it against human beings. If it is used against an enemy whose energy is inferior, it will burn up the entire universe.
O son! It is said that there is nothing superior to this weapon in the three worlds. Therefore, preserve it carefully
and listen to my words. O brave one! If a superhuman enemy ever fights with you, use this weapon to kill him in
battle." With joined hands, Bibhatsu promised that he would do as he had been asked and received the supreme
weapon. His preceptor again told him, "No man in the world will be a greater archer than you."'
