Vaishampayana said, 'King Yudhishthira then entered. The lord of men fed ten thousand brahmanas with ghee,
payasa, roots and fruits and gave them unused garments and many garlands. The lord gave each of them one thousand cows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The cries of "what an auspicious day" seemed to touch heaven.
The supreme among the Kurus worshipped the gods with music, diverse songs and many fragrances. Then, for
seven nights, the great-souled Yudhishthira was served by wrestlers, dancers, fighters, raconteurs and minstrels.
When the homage had thus been paid, the Pandava and his brothers pleasured in that beautiful sabha, like Shakra
does in heaven.

'Rishis and kings from many countries were seated with the Pandavas in that sabha-Asita, Devala, Satya,
Sarpamali, Mahashira, Arvavasu, Sumitra, Maitreya, Shunaka, Bali, Baka, Dalbhya, Sthulashira, Krishna Dvaipayana and we ourselves, Vyasa's disciples-Shuka, Sumantu, Jaimini and Paila. Then there were Tittira, Yajnavalkya, Lomaharshana and his son Apsuhomya, Dhoumya, Animandavya, Koushika, Damoshnisha, Traivani,
Parnada, Ghatajanuka, Mounjayana, Vayubhaksha, Parasharya, the two Sarikas, Balavaka, Shinivaka, Sutyapala,
Kritasharma, Jatukarna, Shikhavana, Subala, Parijataka, the immensely fortunate Parvata, the sage Markandeya,
Pavitrapani, Savarni, Bhaluki, Galava, Janghabandhu, Raibhya, Kopavegashrava, Bhrigu, Haribabhru, Koundinya,
Babhrumali, Sanatana, Kakshivana, Oushija, Nachiketa, Goutama, Painga, Varaha, Shunaka, the immensely ascetic Shandilya, Karkara, Venujangha, Kalapa and Katha. These sages were immersed in dharma, were self-controlled and had their senses under restraint. There were many others who were learned in the Vedas and the Vedangas. All these supreme rishis waited upon the great-souled one in the sabha. They were learned in dharma and immaculate and discoursed about pure tales. In that same way, the best of kshatriyas also waited on Dharmaraja-the
fortunate, great-souled, righteous and prosperous Munjaketu, Samgramajit, Durmukha, the valorous Ugrasena, the
lord of the earth Kakshasena, the undefeated Kshemaka, Kamala the king of Kamboja, the mighty Kampana who
alone made the Yavanas[The Greeks, but can also be applied to all foreigners or barbarians.] tremble the way the Kalakeya asuras were made to tremble by the wielder of the
vajra[Indra.], King Jatasura beloved by the Madras, kings Kunti and Kuninda of the Kiratas, Anga, Vanga and Pundra,
Pandya, Udraja, Andhraka, King Sumana of the Kiratas, the king of the Yavanas, Chanura, Devavrata, Bhoja, Bhi-
maratha, Shrutayudha of Kalinga, Jayatsena of Magadha, Susharma, Chekitana, Suratha the destroyer of enemies,
Ketumana, Vasudana, Kritakshana of Videha, Sudharma, Aniruddha, the immensely strong Shrutayudha, the invincible Anuparaja, the great alms-giver Kshemajit, Shishupala and his son, the king of Karusha, the invincible Vrishni princes who were like the gods, namely, Ahuka, Viprithu, Gada, Sarana, Akrura, Kritavarma, Shini's son Satya-
ki, Bhishmaka, Ahriti, the valorous Dyumatsena, the great archers from Kekaya, Yajnasena of the Somakas. O
king! There were all the immensely powerful princes of the Vrishnis who had learnt the science of archery from
Arjuna and were dressed in deer and antelope hides[The words used in the text are rourava and ajina. Ruru is a deer and rourava is its skin. Ajina can be used to
mean the hide of a tiger, lion or elephant too, but is commonly used for the hide of a black antelope.] and other princes who had been similarly taught-Rukmini
son[Pradyumna.], and Samba and Yuyudhana Satyaki[Yuyudhana is one of Satyaki's names.]. O ruler of the earth! These and many other kings were there.
Dhananjaya's eternal friend Tumbaru was there, Chitrasena with his advisers and many other gandharvas and apsaras, skilled in singing and music, knowledgeable in the beating of tala[Time. The word also means a cymbal. So an alternative translation is, knowledgeable in the playing of
cymbals.] and kinnaras, who were excellent
pupils of laya[Keeping time in music.]. At Tumbaru's command, those learned ones sang in celestial tones, as was laid down in the rules,
and pleasured and paid homage to Pandu's sons and the rishis who were assembled in the sabha, rigid in their vows
and devoted to the truth. They paid homage to Yudhishthira the way the gods do so to Brahma in heaven.'
