Vaishampayana said, 'When all those great-souled ascetics had departed, the illustrious lord Hara[Shiva.], the destroyer
of all sins and the one with the pinaka in his hand, assumed the form of a kirata, blazing like a kanchana tree[Kanchana means gold or golden. The word kanchana is applied to several different kinds of trees.]
and resplendent in form, like Meru among the mountains. He grasped his handsome bow and many arrows that
were like venomous serpents. He descended with great force, like a flame, like a fire consuming the undergrowth.
The illustrious one was accompanied by the goddess Uma[Shiva's consort.], attired in the same way and observing the same
vow. All the beings, in their different forms, were then greatly delighted. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In his form of a hunter, and accompanied by thousands of women, he blazed forth. In an instant, that entire
forest became silent. The sounds of streams and birds stopped.

'As he approached Partha of the unblemished deeds, he saw the extraordinary sight of Muka, a son of Diti[The sons of Diti were daityas or demons. Muka was a demon.].
He had assumed the form of a boar and the supremely evil one wished to kill Arjuna. Phalguna picked up his Gan-
diva bow and arrows that were like venomous serpents. He strung his supreme bow and as the twang of the bowstring resounded, he said, "I have come here, without causing you any injury. But since you nevertheless desire to
kill me, I will first send you to Yama's abode today." On seeing the firm-bowed Phalguna about to shoot, Shankara
in the form of the hunter suddenly restrained him, "I was the one who sought this one with the colour of a blue
cloud[Referring to the boar.] first." However, disregarding these words, Phalguna struck. At that very instant, the hunter also unleashed his immensely radiant arrow at the same target, like the crest of a fire or like lightning. The arrows shot by
those two simultaneously struck Muka's gigantic body, which was as solid as a mountain. The two arrows struck
him like the force of lightning and the roar of thunder descended on a mountain. He was pierced by more arrows
that were like serpents with flames in their mouths. Assuming the terrible form of a rakshasa, he then gave up his
life.

'On seeing the man with the golden complexion, dressed in the garb of a hunter and accompanied by women,
Kounteya Jishnu, the destroyer of enemies, was delighted and smilingly told him, "O one with the golden complexion! Who are you, wandering in this deserted forest and accompanied by women? This animal had been chosen by me. Why did you pierce it? When the rakshasa had arrived here, I was the one who had picked him first.
Whether you did this from desire or with the intention of insulting me, you will not escape with your life. What
you have done towards me today is not in accordance with the rules of hunting. O one whose refuge is the mountains! Therefore, I will kill you today." At Pandava's words, the hunter laughed at him and told Pandava
Savyasachi in soft words, "He became my target first. I was the one who chose him first. It was my shot that
robbed him of his life. Insolent about your own strength, do not blame others for your own faults. O evil-minded
one! You have insulted me. You will not escape with your life. Stay there. I will shoot arrows like thunder at you.
Do the best you can and unleash your arrows at me." Thereupon, both of them repeatedly shouted at each other.
They shot arrows that were like venomous serpents at each other. Arjuna covered the hunter with a shower of arrows. But in a happy frame of mind, Shankara received them all. For an instant, the wielder of the pinaka received
that shower of arrows, but stood there like an immobile mountain, unhurt in body. On seeing that his shower of arrows had no effect, Dhananjaya was extremely surprised and exclaimed, "Excellent! Excellent! Aha! This one with
the delicate body makes a home on the peak of the Himalayas. But he receives the iron arrows[The word used is naracha, which means an iron arrow.] unleashed from
the Gandiva and is not moved. Who is he? Is he a god? Is he Rudra himself? Is he a yaksha or the lord of the gods?
The thirty gods often frequent this best of mountains. Except the god Pinaki, there is no one who can withstand the
force of the net of thousands of arrows I have created. As long as it is anyone other than Rudra who stands here, be
it a god or a yaksha, I will send him to Yama's abode with my sharp arrows." O king! Like the sun spreads out its
rays, Jishnu then shot iron arrows by the hundreds, capable of piercing one's weak spots. But the illustrious god,
the one who brings fortune to the worlds and holds the trident in his hand, cheerfully received them, like a mountain withstands a shower of rocks. In a short while, all of Phalguna's arrows were exhausted.

'On seeing that all his arrows were exhausted, he began to tremble. Jishnu thought of the illustrious fire-god,
who had earlier given him two inexhaustible quivers in Khandava. "What will I unleash from my bow now? My
arrows have been exhausted. Who is this man who swallows up all my arrows? I will kill him with the curved end
of my bow, like a terrible spear is used on elephants. Yama wields the staff and I will send him to his abode."

Kounteya, the destroyer of enemies, then grasped him with the curved end of his bow. But the mountain-dweller
snatched away his divine bow. Bereft of his bow, Arjuna stood there, with a sword in his hand. Wishing to end the
fight, he dashed at him with great force. With all the valour in his arms, the courageous descendant of the Kuru lineage[The word used is nandana.] struck at his head with the sharp sword, one that even mountains could not resist. However, on striking his
head, it shattered into pieces. Then Phalguna began to fight with trees and rocks. But the gigantic and illustrious
god who was in the form of a hunter withstood the trees and the rocks. Smoke billowed from the immensely strong
Partha's mouth. He struck that invincible one, who was in the form of a hunter, with fists that had the force of the
vajra. However, the illustrious one who was in the form of a hunter struck Phalguna with terrible fists that were
like Shakra's thunder. As a result of this fight with fists between Pandava and the hunter, the terrible sound of slapping arose there. That great and hair-raising battle with the fists went on for some time, like that ancient battle between Vritra and Vasava. The powerful Jishnu grasped the kirata and pressed his chest and the kirata struck Panda-
va with great force. As a result of the pressure of their arms and the pressing of their chests, a fire with smoke and
embers emerged from their bodies. Then Mahadeva grasped his[Arjuna's.] body firmly and attacked him with energy and
force, so that he was deluded of his senses. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thus oppressed by the god of the
gods, Phalguna's body was bruised and became like a ball of flesh. He lost control over his body. Oppressed by the
great-souled one, his breathing stopped. He fell down unconscious and Bhava was pleased.

'The illustrious god said, "O Phalguna! I am pleased with you because of your matchless deeds. There is no
kshatriya who is equal to you in valour and endurance. O unblemished one! Your energy and valour has been equal
to mine today. O mighty-armed one! O bull among men! I am pleased with you. Behold me. O large-eyed one! I
will give you eyes[So that Arjuna can see Shiva.]. You have been a rishi earlier. You will triumph over all your enemies in battle, even if they
happen to be dwellers of heaven." At that, Phalguna saw that immensely radiant god, the god Mahadeva
Girisha[Lord (isha) of the mountains (giri), Shiva's epithet.], who wields the trident, and the goddess[Uma was with Shiva.]. He knelt down on the ground and bowed down his head in
homage. Partha, the conqueror of the cities of enemies, gratified Hara[Shiva.]. Arjuna said, "O Kapardin[Kapardin is one of Shiva's names. Kaparda or kapardaka means braided or matted hair and Shiva is named
Kapardin because his hair is matted.]! O lord of
all the beings! O destroyer of Bhaga's eyes[At the time of Daksha's yajna, Shiva uprooted the god Bhaga's eyes.]! O illustrious god! O Shankara! Pardon my transgression. O illustrious one! It was in a desire to see you that I came to this great mountain, beloved by you, lord of the gods, and
the supreme abode of the ascetics. O illustrious god, worshipped by all the beings! Be pleased. O Mahadeva! Pardon my crime and my extreme bravery. Out of ignorance and insolence, I fought with you. O Shankara! I seek
refuge with you. Pardon me." Then the immensely energetic Vrishabhadhvaja[Shiva's name, the one with a bull (vrishabha) on his banner (dhvaja).] smiled, and grasping Phalguna's
beautiful hands, said, "I have pardoned you."'
