Vaishampayana said, 'The immensely wise Dhritarashtra spoke to Suyodhana in this way. He again asked the immensely fortunate Sanjaya. "O Sanjaya! Tell me what else Arjuna said after Vasudeva had spoken. I am extremely
curious."

'Sanjaya replied, "After hearing Vasudeva's words, in Vasudeva's hearing, the invincible Dhananjaya, Kunti's
son, spoke these words at that time. 'O Sanjaya! Go to the grandfather who is Shantanu's son, Dhritarashtra,
Drona, Karna, the great king Bahlika, Drona's son, Somadatta, Shakuni Soubala, Duhshasana, Shala, Purumitra,
Vivimshati, Vikarna, Chitrasena, the king Jayatsena, Vinda, Anuvinda, the two from Avanti, the Kourava Dur-
mukha, the invincible Saindhava[Jayadratha.], Bhurishrava, King Bhagadatta, King Jalasandha and all the other kings who
have assembled to fight for the cause of the Kouravas. O suta! Having gathered for the sake of Dhritarashtra's son,
they are destined to die in the blazing fire of the Pandavas. As is proper, honour them and ask about their welfare.
When they have assembled, tell them my words. O Sanjaya! Tell this in the midst of that assembly of kings to Suyodhana, foremost among wicked ones. "The prince is intolerant and evil-minded. Dhritarashtra's son is avaricious
and wicked in his soul." O Sanjaya! Tell him my complete words, while he listens with his advisers.' Having thus
started, the wise Partha Dhananjaya, with long and red eyes, looked towards Vasudeva and told me these words
that were full of dharma and artha. 'You have listened attentively to the words spoken by the great-souled chief of
the Madhus. Those words are mine too and convey them to all the assembled kings. Let all the assembled ones endeavour so that there isn't a great sacrifice of battle, with arrows as the smoke of fire, chariots as chants and the ladle of the bow pouring oblations on your soldiers. Since you did not return to Yudhishthira, the destroyer of enemies, what he desires as his share, I will use my sharp arrows to send you, with your horses, infantry and elephants, to the pure region of the ancestors[The land of the dead.].' Then I quickly took my leave of Dhananjaya and the four-armed
Hari[Vishnu has four arms.]. I returned with the radiance of the immortals, to report those great words to you."'
