'Sanjaya said, "O lord of the earth! Having thought in this way, Drona's son descended from the seat of his chariot
and bowed down in obeisance.

'"Drona's son said, 'I seek refuge with Ugra[The fierce one.], Sthanu[The immobile one.], Rudra, Sharva, Ishana, Ishvara, Girisha[The lord of the mountains.], the god
Varada[Varada means one who is the granter of boons.], Bhava[The excellent one, the one who brings into existence.], the undecaying Bhavana[Meaning, the creator of the universe.], Shitikantha[The one with a dark neck.], Aja[The one without birth.], Shakra, Kratha, Kratuhara[The destroyer of a sacrifice, referring to Daksha's sacrifice.], Hara, Vishvarupa[One whose form is the universe.], Virupaksha[The one with deformed eyes.], Bahurupa[One with many forms.], Umapati[Uma's consort.], Shmashanavasina[One who dwells in cremation grounds.], Dripta, the lord who is Mahaganapati[Ganas are demonic beings who are Shiva's followers. Ganapati is the lord or leader of ganas, while Mahaganapati is a great Ganapati.], Khattangadharina[The wielder of khattanga, a staff with a skull at the top.], Munda[The one with a shaved head.], Jatila[The one with matted hair.] and Brahmachari. He is the one who has to be carefully thought of in the mind. He
is the one who those of limited intelligence find extremely difficult to attain. In the sacrifice, I offer myself as a gift
to the destroyer of Tripura[City of the demons, destroyed by Shiva.]. He is the one who has been praised. He is the one who deserves to be praised. I am
praising the irresistible one, who has hides as his garment. O Vilohita[The deep-red one.]! O Nilakantha[The blue-necked one.]! O Aprikta[The one who is not mixed.]! O Durnivara[The irresistible one.]! O Shukra[The seed.]! O Vishvasrija[The creator of the universe.]! O brahman! O brahmachari! You are the one who follows vows. You are always engaged in austerities. You are infinite. You are the objective of austerities. You have many forms. You are
the lord of ganas. You are three-eyed. You are the one who loves your attendants. You are the one towards whom
the lord of the ganas always looks[Here the lord of the ganas means Kubera. That is, Kubera looks towards Shiva.]. You are the lord of Gouri's heart[Gouri is another name for Uma/Parvati.]. You are the father of Kumara. You are
tawny. You have a bull as your mount. Your body is like your garment. You are extremely fierce. You are eager to
adorn Uma. You are greater than everything. You are supreme. There is nothing that is greater than you. You are
the lord of all arrows and weapons. You are the southern horizon. You are clad in golden armour. You are the god
who is adorned with the moon on his head. O god! I meditate supremely on you. I am facing this great calamity
now, one that is extremely difficult to counter. You are the purest of the pure. I am offering all the elements in my
body as a gift to you in this sacrifice.' On realizing that this was the great-souled one's intention and that he had
made up his mind to give himself up, a golden altar appeared before him[Before Ashvatthama.].

'"O king! A wonderful fire manifested itself on the altar. The flames enveloped the directions, the sub-directions
and the firmament. Many beings also manifested themselves there. They possessed flaming mouths and eyes. They
had many feet, heads and arms. They were like elephants and mountains, with giant faces. There were forms like
dogs, boars and camels. There were mouths like horses, jackals and cows. There were faces like bears and cats and
mouths like tigers and leopards. There were faces like crows, mouths like apes and faces like parrots. Some possessed mouths like giant snakes. Others had mouths that were white in complexion and like those of swans. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Some possessed mouths like woodpeckers and faces like blue jays. There were
mouths like tortoises and alligators, mouths like porpoises. Some had mouths like giant sharks[The word used is makara.]. Others had
mouths like whales. Some had mouths like lions, or faces like curlews. Others possessed mouths like doves or pigeons. Others had mouths like snakes. Some had ears on their hands. Others had thousands of eyes and hundreds
of stomachs. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were those without flesh, with mouths like wolves[The word used is koka. This can mean wolf, frog, or house-lizard.] and
mouths like hawks. Some had no heads. O king! Some had terrible mouths like bears. Eyes and tongues blazed.
There were others with flaming mouths. O king! There were others with faces like sheep and mouths like goats.
There were those with the complexion of conch shells, with mouths like conch shells and ears like conch shells.
Some wore garlands of conch shells. Others had voices like conch shells. Some had matted hair, five tufts, or were
shaven. Others had lean stomachs. There were four teeth and four tongues. Some had conical ears, or were diademed. O Indra among kings! Some wore grass on their bodies. Others had curly hair. Some wore headdresses
and crowns. Others had beautiful mouths and were ornamented. Some wore lotuses and white lotuses, others were
decorated with lilies. They were full of greatness and there were hundreds and thousands of them. Some had
shataghnis[Unidentified weapon that could kill one hundred people at one go.] and chakras in their hands. Others had clubs in their hands. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
There were those with catapults and nooses in their hands, others with bludgeons in their hands. Some girded quivers on their backs, full of colourful arrows. They were indomitable in battle. They were with standards, pennants,
bells and battleaxes. Some raised giant nooses in their hands. Others had maces in their hands. Some had pillars in
their hands. Others had swords in their hands. There were those with snakes around their crowns. Others had giant
snakes as their armlets and were adorned in colourful ornaments. Some were covered with dust. Others were covered with mud. All of them were attired in white garments and garlands. Some had blue limbs. Others possessed
orange limbs. Some had faces that were shaven. With complexions like gold, those cheerful companions played on
musical instruments like drums, conch shells, smaller drums, jharjharas[Kind of musical instrument, a variety of drum.], other drums and trumpets. Some sang.
Others danced. Those immensely strong ones jumped, leapt and whirled around. They ran swiftly and fiercely, the
hair raised up by the wind. They were like crazy and giant elephants and roared repeatedly. They were extremely
terrible, fearsome in form. They had spears and swords in their hands. Their garments were of many different
colours. They were adorned with colourful garlands and unguents. They wore beautiful armlets decorated with
jewels and their arms were raised up. They were brave and the slayers of enemies. They could withstand. But it
was impossible to withstand them. They drank blood and ate fat and marrow. They sustained themselves on flesh
and entrails. Some had hair that was tied up in tufts. Some had earrings. Some were thin. Others had thick stomachs. Some were extremely short. Others were extremely tall. Some were strong and extremely terrible. Some
were terrible to look at. Others had drooping lips. Some possessed long penises. Others had knotted bones. Some
wore extremely expensive crowns. Others were matted or shaven. They were capable of bringing down the sun,
the moon, the planets and the nakshatras on the ground. If they so desired, they were capable of slaughtering the
four types of beings[Those born from wombs, those born from eggs, those born from sweat (insects and worms) and plants and trees.]. They were always without fear and were capable of tolerating Hara's frowns. They were
successful in doing whatever they wanted. They were the lords of the lords of the three worlds. They were always
engaged in sporting. They were the lords of speech. They were always devoid of malice. Having obtained the eight
kinds of prosperity[Compassion, forgiveness, cleanliness, lack of jealousy, altruism, lack of greed, purity and self-control.], they were no longer overcome by wonder. However, the illustrious Hara was always amazed
at their deeds. He was always devotedly worshipped by them in thought, words and deeds. In thought, words and
deeds, he devotedly protected them like sons. There are other angry ones who always drank the blood and fat of
haters of the brahman. They always drank soma, which has four kinds of taste[There are actually six kinds of taste-sweet, sour, salty, pungent, bitter and astringent. Here, bitter and astringent are probably being left out.]. They worshipped the wielder of
the trident through learning, brahmacharya, austerities and control and obtained Bhava's presence. The illustrious
Maheshvara, with Parvati, oversees the past, the present and the future. With the large number of demons, the illustrious lord enjoys the past, the present and the future.

'"They laughed in many kinds of ways. They slapped their arms and roared loudly. They played musical instruments. All this made the universe resound. Those extremely radiant ones praised Mahadeva and approached
Drona's great-souled son, increasing his glory. They wished to test his energy and witness the carnage in the night.
They had terrible and fierce clubs, tridents and swords in their hands. Those large numbers of demons were terrible
in form and approached from every direction. On seeing them, fear was generated in the three worlds. However, on
seeing them, the immensely strong one wasn't distressed. Drona's son had a bow in his hand. There were guards
made from the skins of lizards on his fingers. He offered himself as a sacrifice to the one to whom sacrifices were
offered[Meaning, Shiva.]. Bows and arrows were the sacred kindling there. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that act of sacrifice, his own self was the oblation. Drona's powerful son used mantras of pacification. In great anger, he offered
himself as a sacrifice to the one to whom sacrifices are offered. The undecaying Rudra is the performer of terrible
deeds. Having performed this terrible deed, he joined his hands in salutation. Worshipping the great-souled one, he
said, 'I have been born in the lineage of Angirasa. I am offering myself as a sacrifice. O illustrious one! I am offering myself as an oblation into the fire. Please accept me as a sacrifice. O Mahadeva! Devotedly, I am offering myself to you, as supreme kindling. With you in front of me, I am doing this in this time of difficulty. You are the soul
of the universe. All beings are in you and you are in all beings. All the chief qualities are combined and vested in
you. O lord! You are the refuge of all beings. I am offering myself as an oblation to you. O god! Accept me, since I
am unable to defeat the enemy.' Having spoken these words, Drona's son ascended the altar, into the blazing fire.
Overcome by anger, he controlled his soul and entered the one with the black trails[The fire.]. He presented himself as an
oblation, with his arms raised up.

'"On seeing him immobile, the illustrious Mahadeva himself smiled and said, 'Krishna, who is unblemished in
his deeds, has worshipped me through truth, purity, sincerity, yoga, austerities, rituals, endurance, devotion, fortitude, intelligence and speech. Because of this, there is no one who is dearer to me than Krishna. I have tested you
so as to show him honour. I have protected the Panchalas and exhibited many different kinds of maya. I have protected the Panchalas and have shown him honour. However, they have been overtaken by destiny and can no
longer remain alive now.' Having spoken these words to the great archer, the illustrious one entered his body[Shiva entered Ashvatthama's body.].
Before entering, he gave him a supreme and sparkling sword. Penetrated by that illustrious one, he again blazed in
energy. Because of the energy created by the divinity, his body became powerful. As he attacked and advanced towards the camp of the enemy, many invisible beings protected him. He was like the lord of the gods[Mahadeva.] himself."'
