Vaishampayana said, 'They lived on that king of mountains. Those great-souled ones established themselves in
good vows. They found pleasure and amused themselves, waiting to see Arjuna. Those valorous ones were extremely pure in their souls, energetic and devoted to truth and fortitude. Masses of gandharvas and maharshis were
kindly disposed towards them and came to visit them. Having reached that supreme mountain, adorned with blossoming trees, the maharathas were extremely happy in their hearts, like the Maruts are on attaining heaven. They
beheld the peaks and the ridges of that great mountain, resounding with the calls of peacocks and swans and
strewn with many flowers, and felt great joy. Kubera himself tended to them. They saw on that supreme mountain
streams with wooded banks and ponds full of lotuses, kadambas, karandavas and swans. There were beautiful pleasure grounds, coloured and prosperous, adorned along the sides with garlands and studded with gems that please
the mind, like those that are in the possession of the king of riches. The peak of that mountain had many colours
and was fragrant. It had large trees and was covered with masses of clouds. Though they were always devoted to
austerities, when they roamed around, they could not fathom it. O warrior among men! Because of the energy of
that great mountain and the luminescence of its great herbs, no difference could be seen between night and day.
While dwelling there, those brave lions among men saw the rising and the setting of the sun, the infinitely energetic sun who lived there and nourished all beings, mobile and immobile. The brave ones saw how darkness was
dispelled when the sun rose and how it returned when it had set. They saw how all the directions were enveloped
in the nets spread by the rays of the sun. They waited for the arrival of the maharatha who was truthful in his vows.
They studied and always performed the rituals. They followed dharma and were pure in their vows. They were always established in truth. "We will soon find joy in this spot, when Dhananjaya returns, having obtained the
weapons." This is what the Parthas pronounced as a supreme benediction and they devoted themselves to austerities and yoga.

'They saw many beautiful mountains and forests, but constantly thought about Kiriti[Arjuna's name. Literally, the one with a diadem on his head.]. Every day and every
night seemed like an entire year to them. From the moment when the great-souled Jishnu had obtained Dhoumya's
permission and had left with matted hair, from that instant happiness had deserted them. How could they find pleasure when their hearts were with him? They had been stricken with grief ever since Jishnu, whose gait was like
that of an elephant, had followed the instructions of his brother Yudhishthira and had left Kamyaka forest. They
thought of the one whose steeds were white[Arjuna's horses were white.]. He had gone to Vasava in search of weapons. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! In this way, the Bharatas spent a month in that mountain, immersed in melancholy.

'Then one day, when the maharathas were thinking of Arjuna, they rejoiced when they suddenly saw Mahendra's chariot approach, like a flash of lightning, and yoked to tawny horses. It suddenly blazed in the firmament,
like a giant meteor hidden in the clouds or like the flaming crest of a fire that has no smoke. It was driven by
Matali[Indra's charioteer.]. Kiriti could be seen in it, garlanded and adorned in the best of ornaments. Dhananjaya was the equal of
the wielder of the vajra in his power and arrived at the mountain, dazzling in his beauty. When the one with the diadem on his head arrived at the mountain, he descended from Mahendra's chariot and first paid his respect at
Dhoumya's feet, followed by Ajatashatru next[Ajatashatru is one of Yudhishthira's names.]. He then bowed down at Vrikodara's feet and was himself worshipped by Madri's sons. Then he went to Krishna and comforted her. With humility, he stood below his
brother[Yudhishthira.]. Those who were there were extremely delighted at being reunited with the one who cannot be measured. The one who had the diadem on his head was also delighted on seeing them and praised the king. With happiness in their hearts, the Parthas approached and circled Indra's chariot. On this, the slayer of Namuchi had destroyed seven groups of Diti's sons[Indra killed a demon named Namuchi. Diti's sons are daityas or demons.]. The princes of the Kuru lineage were extremely happy. They showed honour to Matali, equal to what the king of the gods would have warranted. As was appropriate, they asked him about
the welfare of the gods. In turn, Matali greeted them and instructed them, like a father does his sons. In that chariot
that was unmatched in its splendour, he then returned to the lord of the gods.

'When the chariot of the supreme god had departed, Shakra's great-souled son, the destroyer of all enemies, presented all the expensive and beautiful gifts that Shakra had given. The ornaments that he lovingly gave to his
beloved, Sutasoma's mother[Droupadi. Sutasoma was the son of Arjuna and Droupadi.], glittered like the sun's rays. Then he seated himself in the midst of the bulls of the
Kuru lineage, resplendent like the sun and the fire. He sat in the midst of the brahmana rishis and recounted everything that had happened. "I have learnt these weapons from Shakra, the wind-god and Shiva themselves. Together
with the gods, Indra was pleased at my conduct and my concentration." Having briefly told them about his entry
into heaven[Entry is pravesha and this is what the critical edition says. Some other versions say pravasa, which means
residence. While describing the entry into heaven is possible, description of the residence in heaven is more likely.], Kiriti, the performer of pure deeds, happily went to sleep, spending the night with Madri's sons.'
