'Dhritarashtra said, "O immensely wise sage! It is exactly as you say. I know this and so do all the other lords of
men. O sage! What you consider to be beneficial for the welfare of the Kurus was also pointed out to me by Vidu-
ra, Bhishma and Drona. If you have compassion for the Kouravas, teach my evil-souled son Duryodhana."

'Vyasa replied, "O king! The illustrious rishi Maitreya has come to see you, after having spent time with the
Pandava brothers. O king! For the sake of bringing rightful peace to this lineage of yours, this great rishi will instruct your son Duryodhana. O Indra among kings! Whatever he says should be done without any hesitation. If the
task is not done, he will curse your son in rage."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having said this, Vyasa went away and Maitreya appeared. The lord of men[Dhritarashtra.] came and
worshipped him, together with his sons, offering gifts, water to wash his feet and performing other rituals. After
the bull among sages had rested, Ambika's son, King Dhritarashtra, courteously asked him questions. "O illustrious one! Has your journey from Kurujangala[The forest region around Kurukshetra.] been comfortable? Are the brave warriors, the five Pandava brothers, well? Do those bulls among men desire to spend their time in accordance with the agreement? Will the fraternal affection among the Kurus continue unabated?" Maitreya replied, "Setting out on a journey of pilgrimage, I arrived in Kurujangala. While roaming around, I saw Dharmaraja in Kamyaka forest. He had matted hair, wore deer-
skins and was living in a hermitage. O lord! Many sages had assembled there to see the great-souled one. O great
king! It was there that I heard about the blunder committed by your son and about the evil course of action he
adopted through the gambling match. I have therefore come to you out of affection for the Kouravas. O lord! I
have always had affection and love towards you. O king! When you and Bhishma are still alive, it is not proper
that your sons should act against each other. O king! You yourself are the central pillar[The word used can be translated more literally as the central pillar to which bulls are tethered when threshing
work is undertaken.], in both punishing and
rewarding. Why did you then ignore this terrible evil that has now arisen? O descendant of the Kuru lineage[The word used is nandana, so it can also be translated as beloved of the Kuru lineage.]! O
king! What happened in the sabha was like the behaviour of dasyus[Dasyus are a class of evil beings that are enemies of both man and god and were slain by Indra. The word
also means outcast and bandit, or a villain in general.]. You will no longer be able to shine in an
assembly of ascetics." Then he turned to the intolerant King Duryodhana.

'The illustrious rishi Maitreya spoke to him in soft tones, "O mighty-armed Duryodhana! O supreme among eloquent ones! Listen. O immensely wise one! The words I utter are for your welfare. O king! O bull among men! Do
not fight with the Pandavas. Do what is good for you, for the Pandavas, for the Kurus and for the world. All those
tigers among men[The Pandavas.] are brave warriors, valorous in war. All of them have the strength of ten thousand elephants
and are as firm as the vajra. All of them follow the vow of truth and all of them have pride in their manliness. They
have killed rakshasas, who can assume any form at will and are the enemies of the gods. These rakshasas had
chiefs like Hidimba, Baka and Kirmira. When they left this place, he[Kirmira.] obstructed the path of those great-souled
ones. His soul was terrible and he was as immobile as a mountain peak. Bhima, supremely proud in battle and
supreme in strength among strong ones, killed him like an animal, the way a tiger kills small animals. O king!
Look at the royal conquest, where the mighty archer Jarasandha, with the strength of ten thousand elephants, was
killed in battle by Bhima. They have Vasudeva as their relative and Parshata[Prishata's son. Prishata is Drupada and Drupada's son is Dhrishtadyumna, Droupadi's brother.] as a brother-in-law. Which man,
susceptible to old age and death, would dare confront them in battle[The sense is that only gods would contemplate such a confrontation.]? O bull among the Bharata lineage! That is
the reason you should strive for peace with the Pandavas. O king! Listen to my words. Otherwise, you will expose
yourself to death." O lord of the earth! Having heard these words spoken by Maitreya, Duryodhana smiled and
drew patterns on the ground with his feet. With his arms, he slapped his thighs, which were like the trunks of elephants. The evil-minded one said nothing, but stood there, with his head slightly bent.

'O king! On seeing Duryodhana ignore him and draw patterns on the ground, Maitreya was angered. Maitreya,
supreme among sages, became overcome with anger. As if decreed by destiny, the sage got ready to curse him.
Maitreya's eyes were red with anger. He touched the air[The text says vayu, which means wind or air. There is probably a typo here. Touching the water is a preparatory ritual before a curse is pronounced. Therefore, instead of air, it should probably have been var, or water.] and cursed Dhritarashtra's evil-minded son, "Since you
ignored me and since you did not find my words attractive, you will soon reap the fruits of your insolence. In the
great war that will result from the enmity created by you, the powerful Bhima will smash your thigh with the blow
of a club." When he had uttered these words, Dhritarashtra, lord of the earth, sought to pacify the sage and pleaded
with him that this might not happen. Maitreya replied, "O king! O son! It is only if your son makes peace that what
I have said won't happen. But if the opposite occurs, it will happen." O Indra among kings! Deviated from his objective, Duryodhana's father then asked Maitreya how Kirmira had been killed by Bhima. Maitreya replied, "I will
not tell you, since you are intolerant and my words find no favour with your son. After I have left, Vidura will tell
you everything." Having said this, Maitreya went away, just as he had come. Duryodhana also left the place, anxious about the killing of Kirmira.'
