'Yudhishthira said, "O grandfather! O immensely wise one! O one who is accomplished in all the sacred texts! Tell
me about the dharma that should be followed by someone who is protecting a person who has sought refuge."

'Bhishma replied, "O great king! There is great dharma in protecting someone who has sought refuge. O
supreme among the Bharata lineage! That you have asked such a question is deserving of you. O king! After they
protected those who came and sought refuge, Nriga and the other kings obtained supreme success. O great king! It
has been heard that a pigeon honoured its enemy when he sought refuge. As is proper, it honoured him and offered
him its own flesh."

'Yudhishthira asked, "In ancient times, how did an enemy come and seek refuge with a pigeon? O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! What objective did it attain after offering him its own flesh?"

'Bhishma replied, "O king! Listen to this divine account, which destroys all sins. This was recounted by Bhargava[Parashurama.] to King Muchukunda. O Partha! O bull among the Bharata lineage! In ancient times, King Muchukunda
bowed down and asked Bhargava about this. At this, Bhargava recounted the story to the one who wished to listen.
O lord of men! He told him about how the pigeon attained success. This account is certainly full of dharma and of
kama and artha too. O king! O mighty-armed one! Listen as I tell you this."

'"There used to be a wicked and terrible hunter of birds. Inferior in conduct, he roamed around the earth. He was
regarded as death on earth. His limbs were as dark as a raven. He was harsh and full of wickedness. His middle
was like barley[Probably meaning a sack of barley.]. His neck was thin. His feet were small. His jaws were large. He did not have any well-wishers.
Nor did he have any allies or relatives. Because of his terrible deeds, all of them abandoned him. Grasping a net[Alternatively, a cage or a basket for birds.],
he would always kill birds in the forest. O lord of men! He would then sell those birds. This is the way that evil-
minded one found a means of survival. Without understanding that this was adharma, he followed this for a very
long period of time. For a long period, he pleasured with his wife. He was confounded by destiny and no other
means of livelihood appealed to him. On one occasion, he was in the forest. A great storm arose and whirled
around and brought down the trees. Clouds gathered in the sky and they were tinged with flashes of lightning. In a
short period of time, it was as if the ocean was covered with many boats[A reference to the clouds in the sky.]. Delighted, Shatakratu poured down
torrents of rain. In a short while, he flooded the earth with water. Because of that torrential downpour in the world,
he[The fowler.] was terrified and lost his senses. In that forest, he was afflicted with cold. His mind was greatly anxious. The
bird-killer could not see any low ground anywhere[Which would have drained the water off.]. The path in the forest was covered in a flood of water. Birds
were killed by the force of the wind and vanished. Deer, lions and boars resorted to bits of land and stayed there.
All the residents of the forest were terrified because of the strong wind and the rain. They were oppressed by fear.
They were afflicted by hunger. Together, they wandered around in the forest. His[The fowler's.] body was afflicted by the cold.
Instead of stopping, he wandered around and in a thicket in the forest, he saw a tree that was as blue as the clouds.
Against the background of stars in the clear sky, it looked like a lotus. Lubdhaka[Lubdhaka means a hunter and also a greedy person. We have interpreted
it as a proper name.] was afflicted by the cold and
saw that the sky was clear of clouds. O lord! The evil-souled one looked towards the directions and thought that
his home in the village was a long distance away from the spot. He therefore made up his mind to spend the night
there. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Joining his hands in salutation, he spoke these words to the tree. 'I seek
refuge from whatever gods reside here.' He spread out some leaves on the ground and laid his head down on a
stone. In great misery, the slayer of birds slept there."'
