Vaishampayana said, 'Prithivinjaya, the eldest son of the king, then entered. He showed obeisance at his father's
feet and then saw Dharmaraja. He was seated alone on the floor at one end, distracted, and smeared with blood.
Sairandhri[Droupadi.] attended to him. Quickly, Uttara asked his father, "O king! Who has struck him? Who has perpetrated
this evil act?" Virata replied, "I have struck this wretch and he deserves more than this. When I praised your bravery, he praised the eunuch." Uttara said, "O king! You have done that which should not have been done. Swiftly
ask for his pardon. Otherwise, this brahmana's terrible poison will burn you down, right down to the roots." Having heard his son's words, Virata, the extender of the kingdom, sought the forgiveness of Kounteya, who was like a
fire hidden behind ashes. Pandava told the king, who was begging his pardon, "O king! I have already forgiven
you. There is no anger left in me. O great king! If that blood from my nose had fallen down on the ground, there is
no doubt that you would have been destroyed, together with your kingdom[Because of Arjuna's vow.]. O king! I do not blame you for striking one who had committed no crime. O great king! One who is powerful is always prone to quickly perform terrible acts." When the bleeding had stopped, Brihannada entered. He saluted Virata and Kanka and remained
standing.

'After seeking Kouravya's pardon, Matsya began to praise Uttara, who had returned from the field of battle, in
Savyasachi's hearing. "O one who extends Kaikeyi's joy[Uttara's mother Sudeshna hailed from Kekaya. Thus, she is referred to as Kaikeyi.]! I have truly obtained an heir in you. I do not have, nor
will there be, sons who are your equal. O son! How was your encounter with Karna? He does not miss a step when
he takes a thousand steps. O son! How was your encounter with Bhishma? There is no one equal to him in the
world of men. He is as calm as the ocean and as unbearable as the fire of destruction. The brahmana[Drona.] is the preceptor of the warriors among the Vrishnis[The Yadavas.] and the Pandavas. He is the preceptor of all the kshatriyas and is
supreme among all wielders of arms. O son! How was your encounter with Drona? The brave son of the preceptor
is supreme among those who have knowledge of all weapons. He is famous as Ashvatthama. How was your encounter with him? On seeing Kripa in battle, people are distressed, like traders whose goods have been lost. O son!
How was your encounter with him? Prince Duryodhana has shattered mountains with his great arrows. O son!
How was your encounter with him?"

'Uttara replied, "The cattle have not been won back by me. Nor have I vanquished the enemies. All those deeds
have been accomplished by the son of a god. On seeing me run away in fear, that young son of a god restrained
me. He is like the one with the vajra in his hand[Indra.] and ascended my chariot. He has won back the cattle and he has
vanquished the Kurus. O father! All these brave deeds are his. They have not been accomplished by me. He released arrows and repulsed Sharadvat's son[Kripa.], Drona, Drona's valorous son, the son of the suta[Karna.] and Bhishma.
Like the leader of a herd of elephants, he shattered Duryodhana in the battle and told that immensely strong and
frightened prince, 'I do not see any escape for you in Hastinapura. O son of a Kourava! Save your life through endeavour. O king! You will not be able to save your life by running away. Make up your mind to fight. If you win,
you will enjoy the earth. And if you are killed, you will enjoy heaven.' That tiger among men then returned and
discharged arrows that were like the vajra. Surrounded by his advisers, the king stood on his chariot, like a hissing
serpent. On seeing this, my body hair stood up. O revered one! My thighs began to tremble. But he struck that
army, which was like a mass of clouds, with his arrows. That young one was like a lion and repulsed that army of
chariots. O king! He laughed and stripped the Kurus of their garments. Alone, that brave one surrounded the six
charioteers, like an angry tiger amidst deer roaming in the forest."

'Virata asked, "Where is that brave and mighty-armed one, the immensely famous son of a god? He is the one
who has won back my riches, which had been conquered by the Kurus in battle. I wish to see that immensely
strong one and show him homage. That son of a god has protected you and my cattle."

'Uttara said, "O father! The powerful son of a god disappeared. But I think that he will reappear tomorrow, or
the day after."'

Vaishampayana said, 'While this was being described, Pandava[Arjuna.] remained concealed in his disguise. Virata did
not know that Partha Arjuna was residing there. Having obtained the great-souled Virata's permission, Partha himself gave those garments to Virata's daughter. They were extremely expensive and fine and the beautiful Uttara
happily accepted those garments. O king! Kounteya then secretly devised a plan with Uttara[Arjuna and Prince Uttara respectively. Arjuna and Uttara decided on a plan for the Pandavas to reveal
themselves.], about everything
that should be done vis-à-vis Yudhishthira. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Together with Matsya's son, the bull
among men cheerfully carried this out.'
