Vaishampayana said, 'After having been seated with Markandeya, the other brahmanas and the great-souled Pandavas and spoken to them about pleasant subjects, Janardana Madhusudana took his leave in the appropriate way.
Keshava ascended his chariot and asked for Satya. Then Satyabhama embraced Drupada's daughter and spoke
these cordial words to her, as was in conformity with her affectionate sentiments. "O Krishna! May you not suffer
from any anxiety or grief. May you not lie awake at night. You will win the earth when your husbands, who are the
equals of the gods, subjugate it. You are good in conduct. You have the propitious marks. O black-eyed one! No
one like you can confront difficulties for long. I have heard that it is certain that, together with your husbands, you
will enjoy the earth, without any enemies and without any thorns. O Drupada's daughter! When the sons of Dhritarashtra have been killed and the enmity has been avenged, you will behold the earth, protected by Yudhishthira.
You will soon see those wives of the Kuru lineage, who, deluded by insolence, laughed at you when you left for
banishment, in a state of despair. O Krishna! Know that all those who caused you misery, when you were in a situation that was unpleasant, will depart for Yama's abode. Your sons Prativindhya, the illustrious Sutasoma, Arjuna's
son Shrutakarma, Nakula's son Shatanika and Shrutasena begotten by Sahadeva are all brave and skilled. Your
sons are skilled in use of weapons. They are living happily with Abhimanyu in Dvaravati, a place they love. Like
you, Subhadra loves them with all her soul. Without any conflict, she is affectionate towards them and has no worries on their account. Pradyumna's mother[Pradyumna's mother is Krishna's wife Rukmini.] loves them with all her soul. Keshava instructs them, with Bhanu[Bhanu was the son of Krishna and Satyabhama.] and
the others. My father-in-law always looks after their food and attire. With Rama[Balarama.] and the others, all the Andhakas
and Vrishnis are devoted towards them. O beautiful one! They love them as much as Praduymna." Having spoken
these affectionate and kind words, pleasant to the mind, she made up her mind to leave and went towards Vasudeva's chariot. The beautiful Satyabhama, Krishna's queen, circumambulated Krishna[That is, Krishnaa or Droupadi.] and ascended Shouri's[Shouri is Krishna's name.]
chariot. After he had smiled and comforted Droupadi, the best of the Yadu lineage, the scorcher of enemies, took
his leave and left on those swift steeds.'
