Bhishma said, "Arjuna was silent and the wind god spoke again. 'O lord of men! Listen to what that foremost
of brahmanas did. Indra and all the other residents of heaven were engulfed in Mada's mouth. At that time,
Chyavana took the earth away from them. Since both the worlds had been taken away from them, the gods were
distressed. Afflicted with grief, they sought refuge with the great-souled Brahma.'

'"The gods said, 'O one who is worshipped by the worlds! We have been seized by Mada's mouth. O  lord!
Chyavana has seized the earth and the Kapas[This word is probably being used in the sense of the deceitful ones.] have taken over heaven.'

'"Brahma replied, 'O residents of heaven! With Indra, quickly go and seek refuge with the brahmanas. With
their favours, you will obtain back the worlds, as in earlier times.'

'"The wind god continued, 'They went and sought refuge. However, the brahmanas asked, "Whom will we subjugate?" They told the brahmanas, "Defeat the Kapas." However, the brahmanas responded that they could only
vanquish those who were on earth. Nevertheless, the brahmanas initiated rites to destroy the Kapas. Hearing this,
the Kapas sent a messenger named Dhani to the brahmanas. Dhani conveyed the words of the Kapas to the brahmanas. "All of the Kapas are exactly like you. Why have you embarked on this task? All of  them are knowledgable about the Vedas. All of them are wise. All of them observe the rites and the sacrifices. All of them follow
the vows of truth. All of them are equal to the maharshis. Shri[Lakshmi, the goddess of prosperity and wealth.] roams happily amidst them and they also sustain
Shri. They do not pointlessly seek intercourse with the wives of others. They do not pointlessly eat meat. They offer oblations into the blazing fire. They follow the words of their preceptors. All of them are restrained in their
souls. They give children their shares. They travel on vehicles together[Without forcing someone to walk on foot.]. They do not have intercourse during the
menstrual period. They do not eat when others are unfed. They do not sleep during the day. The Kapas possess
these and many other qualities. Why do you wish to conquer them? Refrain. It will be better for you to withdraw."

The brahmanas replied, "We will defeat the Kapas. We have promised the gods this. Therefore, the Kapas deserve
to be slain by us. O Dhani! Return to where you came from." Dhani went and told the Kapas that the brahmanas
wouldn't do what was agreeable to them. Therefore, all the Kapas seized weapons and attacked the brahmanas.
The brahmanas saw that all the Kapas were advancing, with upraised standards. They released blazing fire at the
Kapas, designed to destroy their lives. The brahmanas released those eternal fires, meant to devour the Kapas. O
lord of men! They blazed in the firmament, like clouds. Because of this energy, the energy and valour of the gods
increased. They praised the brahmanas and the illustrious Brahma. They got their immortality back and were worshipped in the three worlds.'"

'Bhishma continued, "Hearing Vayu's words, Arjuna worshipped him and replied. O mighty-armed one! O lord
of men! Hear what he said. 'O lord! In every way, I always remain alive for the sake of brahmanas. I always bow
down before Brahma and brahmanas. I have obtained this fame through Dattatreya's favours. That is the reason I
have been able to perform supreme deeds in this world and have observed great dharma. O wind god! I have heard
the truth about the deeds of the brahmanas. You have told me everything and I have listened attentively.' Vayu
replied, 'Use your senses and the dharma of kshatriyas to protect brahmanas. There is a terrible danger to you from
the Bhrigu lineage[A reference to Kartavirya Arjuna being killed by Parashurama.]. But that will occur in the distant future.'"'
