Vaishampayana said, 'O great king! On hearing these words, Dhritarashtra, Ambika's son, became anxious. His
senses were overcome with grief. He spoke to the suta, Sanjaya. "O son[The word used is tata. Though this means son, it is affectionately used towards anyone who is younger or
junior.]! All this is the result of my evil policy. My mind and my soul are overcome. On hearing that Vaikartana has been killed, the sorrow is tearing out my
inner organs. He was skilled in the use of supreme weapons. This is like a stake and I wish to cross the ocean of
grief. Among the Kurus and the Srinjayas, who are the ones who remain alive and who are dead?"

'Sanjaya replied, "O king! Shantanu's son[Bhishma. There is a great deal of inconsistency in the names that follow.] was brought down. He was unassailable and powerful. He killed
ten thousand Pandava warriors for each of ten days. The great archer, Drona, was invincible. The one with the
golden chariot roamed around amidst the Panchala rathas and killed warriors. Thereafter, he was slain. Having
slain half the soldiers[On the Pandava side.] who remained after the slaughter by the great-souled Bhishma and Drona, Vaikartana Karna was killed. O great king! The immensely strong, Prince Vivimshati, killed hundreds of warriors from the Anarta
region. He was then killed in the battle. Remembering the duty of kshatriyas, your brave son, Vikarna, stood stationed, facing the enemy, though he was without mounts and without weapons. Bhimasena remembered the diverse and extremely terrible hardships caused by Duryodhana and his own pledge and brought him down[Bhima pledged to kill Duryodhana and all his brothers. However, so far, there has been no mention of
Vivimshati having been killed. In describing the deaths of Duryodhana's brothers, there is lack of consistency in
the text. Vikarna was killed in Section 69 (Volume 6), though he is mentioned again in Section 70 (Volume 6).]. Having performed extremely difficult deeds, the immensely strong princes from Avanti, Vinda and Anuvinda, went to
Vaivasvata's abode[Vinda and Anuvinda were killed by Arjuna in Section 69 (Volume 6). Vaivasvata is Yama.]. O king! The immensely valorous Jayadratha was the foremost among those from the Sindhu
kingdom. The brave one controlled ten kingdoms and he was always obedient to your instructions. Having vanquished eleven akshouhinis with his sharp arrows, Arjuna killed him[Jayadratha was Dhritarashtra's son-in-law and was killed by Arjuna in Section 69 (Volume 6). The Sindhus,
Souviras and Shibis seemed to be more like a confederation of assorted kingdoms. Hence, the reference to ten
and  109,350 soldiers on foot. Since the entire Kourava army consisted of eleven akshouhinis and since the 
war is  not yet over, this only means that Arjuna defeated them, not killed them.
kingdoms. An akshouhini is a large army consisting of 21,870 chariots, 21,870 elephants, 65,610 horses]. Duryodhana's son was spirited and invincible in battle. He followed his father's instructions and was brought down by Subhadra's son[Subhadra's son is Abhimanyu. He killed Duryodhana's son, Lakshmana, in Section 67 (Volume 6).]. Duhshasana's son
was brave and possessed strength of arms. He prided himself in battle and was dispatched to Yama's abode by
Droupadi's sons[So far, there is no information about Duhshasana's son having been killed by Droupadi's sons.]. Bhagadatta was the lord of the kiratas[Hunters.] and those who dwelt along the shores of the ocean.
He had dharma in his soul and was the revered and beloved friend of the king of the gods. That lord of the earth
was always devoted to the dharma of kshatriyas. Through Dhananjaya's valour, he went to Yama's abode[Bhagadatta was Indra's friend. He was killed by Arjuna in Section 66 (Volume 5).]. O
king! The immensely illustrious and brave Bhurishrava, son of the Kourava Somadatta, was killed by Satyaki in
the battle[Bhurishrava was killed by Satyaki in Section 69 (Volume 6).]. Shrutayu from Ambashtha was a foremost archer among the kshatriyas. He fearlessly roamed around
in the battle and was killed by Savyasachi[Arjuna killed Shrutayu from Ambashtha in Section 69 (Volume 6). Savyasachi was Arjuna's name.]. O great king! Your son, Duhshasana, was skilled in the use of
weapons and was invincible in battle. He was brought down by Bhimasena[However, Duhshasana has not yet been killed.]. O king! Sudakshina possessed many
thousands of wonderful armies of elephants. Savyasachi slew him in the battle[Sudakshina of Kamboja was killed by Arjuna in Section 69 (Volume 6).]. The lord of Kosala killed many
hundreds of the enemy and through the valour of Subhadra's son, was sent to Yama's abode[Abhimanyu killed Brihadbala, the king of Kosala, in Section 67 (Volume 6).]. Having fought with
many warriors and Bhimasena, Chitrasena, your maharatha son, was brought down by Bhimasena[Chitrasena was killed by Bhima in Section 69 (Volume 6).]. The handsome and brave son of the king of Madra increased the terror of his enemies. He wielded a sword and a shield and
was brought down by Subhadra's son[Shalya was the king of Madra and his son was Rukmaratha. Rukmaratha was killed by Abhimanyu in Section
Sixty Seven (Volume 6).]. The immensely energetic Vrishasena was Karna's equal in battle. He was
swift in the use of weapons and did not deviate from his aim. Dhananjaya remembered Abhimanyu's death and the
pledge that he had made and while Karna looked on, used his valour to send him to Yama's abode[Vrishasena was Karna's son. However, he has not yet been killed.]. Shrutayu,
lord of the earth, was firm in his enmity towards the Pandavas. Reminding him of that enmity, Partha brought him
down[This Shrutayu (distinct from the Shrutayu from Ambashtha) was killed by Arjuna in Section 69 (Volume 6).]. O venerable one! O king! Rukmaratha, Shalya's son, was brave. He was the son of Sahadeva's maternal
uncle, but was nevertheless killed by his brother in the battle[Since Rukmaratha was killed by Abhimanyu, there is an inconsistency. Shalya was Madri's brother and Sahadeva's maternal uncle. Thus, Rukmaratha and Sahadeva were brothers.]. The aged King Bhagiratha and Brihatkshatra of
Kekaya were brave and powerful, but despite their supreme valour, they were killed[Brihatkshatra was killed by Drona in Section 69 (Volume 6). We do not know about Bhagiratha.]. O king! Bhagadatta's son
was immensely strong and wise. He was brought down by Nakula, who roamed in the battle like a hawk. Your
grandfather Bahlika, with all the others from Bahlika, was sent to Yama's abode through Bhimasena's valour[Bahlika was Pratipa's son and was killed by Bhima in Section 70 (Volume 6). Pratipa had three sons, Devapi,
Bahlika and Shantanu. Shantanu was Dhritarashtra's grandfather and so, by extension, was Bahlika. However,
that Bahlika would have been too old to take part in the battle.]. O
king! Jayatsena was Jarasandha's immensely strong son. That descendant of Magadha was slain by Subhadra's
great-souled son in the battle[We do not know anything about Jayatsena having been killed. In Section 67 (Volume 6), Abhimanyu killed
Ashvaketu from Magadha.]. O king! Your sons, Durmukha and maharatha Duhsaha, prided themselves on their
valour. Bhimasena killed them with his club[Durmukha and Durjaya were killed by Bhima in Section 69 (Volume 6). There is no information yet about the
deaths of Duhsaha, Durmarshana and Durvishaha.]. Having performed excellent deeds, maharatha Durmarshana,
Durvishaha and Durjaya went to Yama's eternal abode. The suta Vrishavarma was your adviser and was extremely
valorous. Because of Bhimasena's valour, he went to Yama's abode. The king possessed the strength of ten thousand elephants and had a large army of ten thousand elephants. With his followers, he was killed by Pandu's son,
Savyasachi[The name of this king is not indicated.]. O great king! There were two thousand Vasatis, skilled in striking and the brave Shurasenas. All
these warriors were killed. The Abhishahas were armoured. They could strike and were mad with insolence. They
were slain, together with the best of rathas from among the Shibis and the Kalingas. There were those who were
reared in Gokula. They were extremely well versed in fighting. Many thousands of them arrayed themselves as
masses of samshaptakas. All of them approached Partha and went to Vaivasvata's eternal abode[Arjuna killed the samshaptakas in Section 66 (Volume 5).]. O great king!
The kings Vrishaka and Achala were your brothers-in-law and those brave ones fought in your cause. They were
killed by Savyasachi[Vrishaka and Achala were Shakuni's brothers and were killed by Arjuna in Section 66 (Volume 5).]. O great king! King Shalva was famous because of his terrible deeds and his acts as a great
archer. He was brought down by Bhimasena[If this is Shala (not Shalva), he was killed by Satyaki in Section 70 (Volume 6).]. O great king! Together with Brihanta, Oghavan was valiant in the
battle, for the sake of their friends. They have gone to Vaivasvata's eternal world[So far, we have no information about these deaths.]. O lord of the earth! In that
fashion, Kshemadhurti was the best among rathas. O king! In the battle, he was killed through Bhimasena's
club[Section 69 (Volume 6) says that Kshemadhurti was killed by Brihatkshatra.]. King Jalasandha was immensely strong and a great archer. He performed extremely great deeds in the battle and was killed by Satyaki[Section 69 (Volume 6).]. Alayudha, Indra among the rakshasas, possessed charming asses as his mounts.
Through Ghatotkacha's valour, he went to Yama's abode[Section 70 (Volume 6).]. The ones descended from Radheya[Radheya is Karna's name.], the son of the
suta, and all his maharatha brothers and all the Kekayas were killed by Savyasachi. The Malavas, Madraka and
Dravidas were terrible in their valour. O venerable one! There were the Mavellakas, the Tundikeras, the Savitriputrakas, the Anchalas, those from the east, north, west and the south. Large numbers of infantry and tens of thousands of horses were slain. When the horses and best of elephants were killed, chariots wandered around. There
were those who were reared in noble lineages and made the best of efforts at the right time. They had standards,
weapons, every kind of garment and ornament and were brave. O king! Partha, never exhausted in his deeds, killed
them in the battle. There were others who were infinitely strong, wishing to kill each other[This is left implicit. They were killed in the battle.]. In the battle, there
were many other kings, with their followers. O king! They were killed in thousands. I will now tell you what you
have asked me. Such was the carnage when Karna and Arjuna clashed against each other. It was like the great Indra against Vritra[Vritra was a demon killed by Indra.], or Rama against Ravana. It was like Mura being brought down and slain by Krishna in a battle, or the brave Kartavirya, indomitable in battle, being killed by Bhargava Rama in an encounter, together with
his kin and relatives, after an extremely great and terrible fight that is famous in the three worlds[Mura was the general of the demon Narakasura and was killed by Krishna. Hence, Krishna is known as Murari,
or Mura's enemy. Bhargava Rama is Parashurama and he killed Kartavirya Arjuna.]. O king! In that
fashion, in a duel, Karna, supreme among strikers and indomitable in battle, was killed by Arjuna, together with
his advisers and relatives. He was the main cause behind the enmity and he was the one on whom the sons of Dhritarashtra depended for their victory. O king! The Pandavas have accomplished what they could not have contemplated earlier. O great king! However, your relatives who were your well-wishers had told you about this. That is
the reason this great catastrophe has arisen now. O king! Your sons desired the kingdom and you concurred with
their wishes. Ill action was practised and the fruits of that have arrived."

'Dhritarashtra said, "O son[The word used is tata.]! You have so far recounted the names of those on my side who have been killed
by the Pandavas[Since Brihatkshatra (killed by Drona) has been mentioned, this is not entirely correct.]. O Sanjaya! Tell me about the Pandaveyas who have been killed by those on my side."

'Sanjaya replied, "The sons of Kunti were valiant in the battle. They possessed great spirits and immense
strength. Bhishma brought down their warriors, with their relatives and their advisers. In a battle, Satyajit possessed valour and strength that was Kiriti's equal. He was unwavering in his aim and he was killed by Drona in the
encounter[Drona killed Satyajit in Section 66 (Volume 5). Kiriti is Arjuna's name. Drupada and Virata were killed by
Drona in Section 71 (Volume 6).]. Virata and Drupada were aged and fought valiantly, for the sake of their friends. With their sons,
those kings were killed in the battle by Drona. Though a child, he was revered in battle and the lord was as unassailable as Savyasachi, Keshava or Baladeva. He was skilled in fighting and performed great deeds. Though he
was alone, he was surrounded by six enemies who were rathas. They were incapable of withstanding Bibhatsu, but
brought down Abhimanyu[Abhimanyu was killed in Section 67 (Volume 6). Though he was surrounded by seven great warriors, he killed
one of them (Brihadbala) before he was slain.]. Though he was deprived of his chariot, the brave one remained established in the
dharma of kshatriyas. O great king! Subhadra's son was killed by Duhshasana's son in the battle. Brihanta, the
great archer, was skilled in the use of weapons and indomitable in battle. Through Duhshasana's valour, he went to
Yama's abode. The kings Maniman and Dandadhara were unassailable in battle and fought valiantly for the sake of
their friends. They were brought down by Drona. King Anshuman of Bhoja was a maharatha. Because of the valour of Bharadvaja's son, with his soldiers, he went to Yama's abode. Chitrayudha was wonderful in fighting and
performed great deeds. He exhibited his valour in wonderful modes and was killed by Karna in the battle. The
Kekaya warriors were firm in fighting and were Vrikodara's equals. Brother brought down brother and they were
slain through the valour of the Kekayas[The Kekayas were divided in the war. While most fought on the side of the Kouravas, five Kekaya brothers
fought on the side of the Pandavas.]. Janamejaya fought with a club. That powerful one hailed from the
mountainous regions. O great king! He was brought down by your son, Durmukha. The Rochamanas[The dual is used, so there were two Rochamanas.] were tigers
among men and were like blazing planets. O king! Drona shot arrows into the sky and killed them simultaneously.
O lord of the earth! There were kings who fought back valiantly. They performed extremely great deeds and went
to Vaivasvata's eternal abode. Purujit Kuntibhoja was Savyasachi's maternal uncle[Purujit Kuntibhoja is the same individual. Kuntibhoja was Kunti's father and Kuntibhoja's son was Purujit. Purujit Kuntibhoja means Purujit, the son of Kuntibhoja. Purujit was thus Arjuna's maternal uncle.]. In the battle, he won many
worlds for himself and was killed by Drona's arrows. Abhibhu, the king of Kashi, was surrounded by many from
Kashi. Vasudana's son made him give up his body in the battle. The valiant Yudhamanyu and Uttamouja were infinitely energetic. In the battle, those brave ones killed hundreds and were then themselves slain. O venerable one!
Kshatradharma and Kshatravarma from Panchala were supreme archers. Drona made them go to Yama's abode. O
king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Kshatradeva, Shikhandi's son, was chief among warriors and was
killed in the battle by your grandson, Lakshmana[Lakshmana was Duryodhana's son.]. Suchitra and Chitradharma were father and son and were maharathas. They roamed around with great valour and were killed by Drona in the battle. O great king! O great king!
Vardhakshemi performed great deeds in the battle. O great king! He was brought down by the Kourava Bahlika. O
great king! Dhrishtaketu was a foremost ratha among the Chedis. Having performed great deeds, he went to
Vaivasvata's eternal abode. O father[The word used is tata. Though this means father, it is affectionately used towards anyone who is senior.]! In that fashion, Satyadhriti performed great deeds. He fought valiantly for
the sake of the Pandavas and went to Yama's abode. Suketu, lord of the earth, was Shishupala's son. The warrior
killed many enemies in the battle and was then slain by Drona. The brave Satyadhriti[Satyadhriti is mentioned again.], the valiant Madirashva
and the valorous Suryadatta were killed by Drona's arrows. O great king! Shrenimana fought valiantly and having
performed great deeds, went to Vaivasvata's eternal abode. O king! Magadha[This means Sahadeva, Jarasandha's son.], the destroyer of enemy heroes,
fought valiantly and powerfully and was killed in the battle by Bhishma. Vasudana performed extremely great
deeds in the battle. Because of the valour of Bharadvaja's son, he went to Yama's abode. There were many other
maharathas on the side of the Pandavas. They were slain through Drona's valour. This is what you had asked me."

'Dhritarashtra said, "O supreme among eloquent ones! The foremost of soldiers on my side have been killed. O
suta! I think the remnants will also be destroyed. What is the point of remaining alive? You have told me about the
names of the ones who have been killed. I think that the ones who are still alive will also ascend to heaven. That is
my view."

'Sanjaya replied, "O king! Drona's son is still alive. He is a brave maharatha who is skilled and swift in the use
of his arms. He is firm in wielding weapons and his fists are also firm. He is valiant and spirited. Drona, supreme
among brahmanas, gave him many valuable weapons that are wonderful, sparkling and of four different types[Weapons are of five types-mukta (those that are released from the hand, like a chakra), amukta (those that are
never released, like a sword), muktamukta (those that can be released or not released, like a spear), yantramukta
(those that are released from an implement, like an arrow) and mantramukta (magical weapons unleashed with
incantations). If one leaves out mantramukta or divine weapons, there are four kinds of weapons.].
This includes divine weapons. He is still stationed, desiring to fight for your sake. Bhoja Kritavarma is skilled in
the use of weapons. He resides in the Anarta region and is the son of Hridika[Anarta was the kingdom of the Yadavas in the northern part of Gujarat. Kritavarma was a Yadava and Satvata is
a term for the Yadavas.]. He is a maharatha and is foremost
among the Satvatas. He is still stationed, desiring to fight for your sake. O king! Sharadvata Goutama[Kripa, Sharadvata's son and descended from the Goutama lineage.] is immensely strong and can fight in many wonderful ways. He possesses a wonderful bow that is capable of withstanding a great burden. He has grasped it and is stationed, desiring to fight. Artayani[Shalya. Shalya's sister was Madri. Ajatashatru is Yudhishthira's name and Shakra is Indra's name. In Section 49
(Volume 4), Shalya sided with the Kouravas, but promised Yudhishthira that he would sap Karna's energy in the
battle.] does not tremble in the battle
and is the first among the soldiers who are on your side. He has abandoned the Pandaveyas, who are the sons of his
sister. The spirited one wishes to make his pledge come true, that he will sap the energy of the son of the suta in
the battle. This is the promise that he made to Ajatashatru earlier. Shalya is unassailable and is Shakra's equal in
valour. He is stationed, desiring to fight for your sake. The king of Gandhara[Shakuni.] is united with his own army, which
comes from Sindhu, Kamboja, Vanayu, Bahlika and other mountainous and unnamed regions. He is stationed, desiring to fight for your sake. O Indra among kings! Your son Kurumitra is also stationed. He is foremost among the
Kurus and is on his chariot, with a blazing complexion that is like that of the sun or the fire. He is as dazzling and
resplendent as the sun. Duryodhana is immensely valiant and is with the best of soldiers. He is in the midst of an
army of elephants. His chariot is decorated with gold and he is stationed in the battle, desiring to fight. In the midst
of the kings, Chitravarma is blazing in gold[The names that follow are the names of Duryodhana's brothers. However, there is often a problem with these
names, because of lack of consistency. For example, Chitrasena has been killed in Section 69 (Volume 6).]. He is brave among men and is resplendent. His complexion is like
that of a lotus, or a flame that is without smoke. He is shining, like the sun emerging from clouds. Your sons, the
brave Satyasena and Sushena, have swords and shields in their hands. They are cheerfully stationed in the battle,
together with Chitrasena, and wish to fight. The princes of the Bharata lineage, Chitrayudha, Shrutakarma, Jaya,
Shala, Satyavrata and Duhshala are modest. However, they are powerful and are stationed, wishing to fight. The
lord of Kaitavya is proud of his valour[There is no kingdom named Kaitavya. This is probably an adjective, drawing on kaitava, which means gambling and deceit. This is usually associated with Shakuni, but Shakuni has already been mentioned. This is thus a
probable reference to Uluka, Shakuni's son.]. From one battle to another, that prince kills his enemies. He is advancing
with infantry, horses, elephants and chariots. He is stationed in the battle, desiring to fight for your sake. The brave
Shrutayu and Shrutayudha[However, these two have already been killed in Section 69 (Volume 6).] and the valiant Chitrangada and Chitravarma, foremost among men, are stationed.
They are proud strikers, who are unwavering in their aim. Karna's son, the great-souled Satyasena, is stationed in
the battle, wishing to fight. O Indra among kings! Karna has two other supreme sons who are dexterous in the use
of their hands. They are stationed. They desire to fight for your sake and are at the heads of two large armies that
are impatient. O king! These and others are the foremost warriors. They are infinite in their power. For the sake of
victory, the king of the Kurus is stationed in the midst of an army of elephants, like the great Indra."

'Dhritarashtra said, "You have accurately described to me those who are still alive, on our side and that of the
enemy. From this, I can understand what is obvious, about which side will triumph." '

Vaishampayana said, 'Dhritarashtra, Ambika's son, realized that the foremost among the warriors on his side
had been killed and that only a little bit of his army remained. Having heard this and having spoken thus, he was
overcome by confusion and sorrow and his senses were benumbed. He became unconscious for a while and then
said, "O Sanjaya! Wait. O son! Having heard this extremely unpleasant news, my mind is anxious." The lord of the
earth lost his senses and fell down.'
