Vaishampayana said, 'Those performers of unsullied deeds[The Pandavas.] were ready to leave for the forest. When night had
passed and morning dawned, the brahmanas who subsisted by begging for alms stood before them. At that, Kunti's
son Yudhishthira spoke to them. "We have been robbed of everything. We have been robbed of our kingdom. We
have been robbed of our prosperity. In our sorrow, we will now go to the forest and live on fruit, roots and meat.
The forest is full of many dangers and has many predators and serpents. It seems to me that without a doubt, you
will face many difficulties there. The sufferings of brahmanas overwhelm even the gods, not to speak of men. O
brahmanas! Return where you wish to go." The brahmanas replied, "O king! We are ready to travel where you are
travelling. Please do not abandon those who are devoted to you and those who can see what true dharma is. The
gods themselves show compassion for their devotees, especially brahmanas who follow good conduct." Yudhisthira said, "O brahmanas! I too always have supreme devotion towards brahmanas. But the difficulties of my associates overwhelm me. My brothers are capable of collecting fruit, roots and deer. But they are deluded by the
misery and the sorrow that has overtaken them, by the oppression faced by Droupadi and by the robbing of the
kingdom. Since they are so miserable and wretched, I cannot impose painful tasks on them[That is, the brothers cannot find means of subsistence for the brahmanas.]." The brahmanas
replied, "O lord of the earth! Do not have any thoughts in your heart about our subsistence. We will follow you.
We will find our food ourselves in the forest. We will bring you good fortune through our meditation and our
prayers. We will entertain you in the forest through stories and ourselves be happy." Yudhishthira said, "There is
no doubt that it will be this way. We will find pleasure in associating with brahmanas. But because of the lowly
condition to which I have been reduced, I only see my own inferiority. How can I witness all of you collecting
your own food and suffer undeserved difficulties because of your affection for me? Shame on the evil sons of
Dhritarashtra!" Having said this, the king sat down on the ground and began to sorrow.

'There was a learned brahmana named Shounaka. He was skilled in samkhya yoga[Samkhya is one of the six schools of philosophy, attributed to the sage Kapila. Both samkhya and yoga will
be encountered later, in the Bhagavad Gita section. This entire section is reminiscent of the Bhagavad Gita.] and he spoke to the king,
"There are a thousand reasons for grief and a hundred reasons for fear that delude people every day. But not those
who are learned. Intelligent ones like you do not get caught in deeds that are counter to knowledge and afflicted by
many faults, so that welfare is destroyed. O king! The eight[Yoga has eight elements-yama (restraint), niyama (rituals), asana (posture), pranayama (breathing), pratyahara (withdrawal), dharana (retention), dhyana (meditation) and samadhi (liberation). That's the reason the expression ashtanga (eight-formed) yoga is used.] forms of knowledge exist in you. This is the best of
everything and destroys evil, and is in conformity with shruti[Sacred texts that have been revealed, they have no author.] and smriti[Sacred texts that have authors. They have been heard and memorized, and thus passed down the generations.]. When calamities arise because of
penury or hardship, or are caused by the deeds of kin, learned ones like you don't become miserable because of
physical or mental sorrow. Listen. I will recount to you the shlokas that the great-souled Janaka[A royal sage, not to be confused with the Janaka who was Sita's father.] chanted in earlier times, for imparting stability to one's soul. 'The world is engulfed in two kinds of misery, those resulting from
the mind and from the body. Individually and collectively, listen to the means of alleviating them. There are four
kinds of reasons behind physical sorrow-disease, the touch of something painful, labour and distance from loved
things. Mental and physical pain can be reduced through treatment, or by not thinking about them. These are the
two courses of action. That is the reason intelligent physicians first try to pacify mental pain by saying that which
brings pleasure and offering objects that bring pleasure. Just as a hot iron ball affects the water in a pot, mental
pain affects the body. Just as water quenches fire, knowledge quenches mental ailments. When the mind is pacified, the body is also pacified. The root of all mental ailments is affection. Affection makes a man attached and that
leads to misery. Attachment is the root of all unhappiness and attachment causes fear. Every kind of unhappiness
and happiness results from attachment. It is attachment that leads to the desire for material objects. Both are evil,
but the former has been said to be more serious[Attachment is a more serious evil than the desire for material objects.]. The fire in a hollow tree burns down the entire tree, right to the
roots. Like that, the evil of attachment, no matter how small, destroys dharma and artha. He who has withdrawn is
not detached. But one who can see the faults[One who can see the faults of attachment, without withdrawing.] from proximity is dispassionate, bears no hatred and is detached
from objects. Therefore, one should not be attached to one's allies, one's friends or the riches one has accumulated.
Learning destroys attachment to that which results from one's body. Like water on a lotus leaf, one who is united
with the learning of the sacred texts has controlled his soul and is not touched by affection. A man overcome with
attachment is immersed in desire. From the desire that is created, thirst expands[The thirst for material possessions.]. Thirst is everything evil and
always disturbs man. It is terrible and leads to a lot that is against dharma. It ties one down in sin. Those who cannot give it up are deluded. It does not decay with the body's decay. It is like a fatal disease. He who discards this
thirst, becomes happy. This thirst has no beginning and no end. It destroys men from inside their bodies. Like a fire
that has no origin but has arisen, it destroys. Like kindling is destroyed by the fire that it has created, one who has
not controlled his soul is destroyed through his natural avarice. Just as those who are alive are scared of death,
those who have riches are always scared of the king, water, fire, thieves and relatives. A meat in the air is devoured
by birds, on the ground by predatory beasts and in the water by fish. But one with riches is devoured everywhere.
To some men, riches are the source of disaster. A man who is addicted to the superiority of riches will never attain
superiority. Therefore, the acquisition of riches always increases the delusion of the mind and is the source of
miserliness, insolence, vanity, fear and anxiety. The wise ones know that riches are the source of miseries in bodies. There is misery in earning riches, preserving it and in its decay. Its destruction brings unhappiness. Its expenditure brings unhappiness. Even then, people murder for riches. There is unhappiness in giving up riches. But there
is unhappiness also in preserving it. Since its possession brings such misery, one should not think about its loss.
Deluded ones are always dissatisfied, the learned are content. There is no end to thirst. Contentment is the supreme
happiness. The learned ones know that youth, beauty, life, collection of riches, prosperity and association with
loved ones are temporary and never crave for these. Therefore, one should refrain from accumulation of riches and
consequent unhappiness. One who has accumulated riches is never seen without difficulties. For this reason, those
who are righteous praise those who have no desire for wealth. It is better not to touch mud than wash after touching it[The text does not state this explicitly. But this seems to be the place where Janaka's quote ends.].' O Yudhisthira! Therefore, you should not have a desire for riches. If you wish to act in accordance with
dharma, free yourself from desire for riches."

'Yudhishthira replied, "O brahmana! I do not desire riches because I wish to enjoy them after acquisition. I do
not desire them out of avarice. I desire them so that I can support the brahmanas. O brahmana! How can someone
like me, who is in the householder stage, fail to support and sustain those who follow him? It is taught that one
must divide among all beings. One who is a householder should give to those who do not cook themselves[Ascetics do not cook for themselves.]. The
houses of good men should never lack four things-grass, ground, water and welcoming words. Those who are
sick must be given a bed[The grass or straw is for this.]. Those who are tired of standing must be given a seat[The ground is for this.]. Those who are thirsty must be
given a drink and those who are hungry must be given food. One's eyesight must be given[To the guest, in the sense of paying attention to him or her.]. One's heart must be
given. One's pleasant words must be given. One must stand up to greet the guest and offer him proper homage.
Agnihotra, bulls, kin, guests, relatives, sons, wives and servants-burn down those who do not offer homage. No
one should cook food only for one's own self. Nor should animals be killed in vain. No one should eat food oneself, without having offered it in the proper fashion. In the morning and in the evening, let food be spread out on
the ground for dogs, svapachas[Svapachas are chandalas or outcasts. Svapacha is sometimes translated as dog-eater, but this doesn't follow.
Unlike others, chandalas kept dogs and were accompanied by them. Svapacha can also mean someone who cooks
in the company of dogs, or cooks for dogs.], birds and the Vishvadevas[Ten gods regarded as the sons of Vishva-Vasu, Satya, Kratu, Daksha, Kala, Kama, Dhriti, Kuru, Pururava
and Madravashva. Alternatively, the food offerings on the ground are for the Vishvadevas (counted as one), Agni,
Soma, Dhanvantari, Kuhu, Anumati, Prajapati, heaven, earth and Agni.]. Eating the food that is left is like partaking of ambrosia. What is left at the end of a sacrifice is also like ambrosia. It is said that one who leads the life of a householder while following these practices follows the supreme dharma. O brahmana! What do you think?"

'Shounaka said, "Alas! It is a great misery that the world is full of contradictions. The evil find satisfaction in
that which scares the good. Driven by delusion and attachment, slaves to gratification of their senses, foolish men
perform many acts for the sake of the penis and the stomach. Like a charioteer who has lost control over evil and
wild horses, even sensible men lose their bearing and are led astray by their senses. When any of the six senses[The mind and the five senses of hearing, touch, sight, taste and smell.]
comes close to an object, preconceived desire springs up in the mind and manifests itself through them. When the
mind is directed towards enjoying the object of the senses, attachment and resolution are created. That resolution is
the seed of desire towards an object, and pierced, one falls into the flames of avarice, like a moth in its greed for
light. Thus, immersed in the great delusion of happiness and deluded by the desire for pleasure and food, he does
not know his own self. He descends on earth, from one womb to another. As a result of ignorance, karma and
thirst, he is whirled around in a wheel, changing from one being to another-from Brahma to a blade of grass, born
repeatedly in water, on the ground and in the sky. This is the path of those who don't know. Listen to that of the
ones who know. This is the way of those who are always devoted to superior dharma and seek to free themselves.
These are the words of the Vedas. Act, but be detached from the act. According to this, one should not practise any
dharma because of desire. It has been said that there is an eightfold path towards dharma-sacrifices, studying,
gifts, austerities, truthfulness, forbearance, self-control and lack of avarice. Of these, the first four are established
in pitriyana[The way of the ancestors. Along this path, one has to be reborn.]. Therefore, one should always act because a deed has to be done, not because of desire. The second
four represent devayana[The way of the gods. Along this path, one is freed and does not have to be reborn.], always followed by those who are virtuous. One whose soul is pure should always
travel along these eight paths-through correct resolution and association, correct deprivation of the senses, correct observance of the specific vows, correct serving of superiors, correct regulation of food, correct studying and
dissemination, correct renunciation of rituals and correct restraining of thoughts. Those who have conquered life[They do not have to be born again.]
perform their deeds in this way. It is because they are united with the powers of yoga and are bereft of attachment
and hatred that gods like the Rudras, the Sadhyas, the Adityas, the Vasus and the Ashvins are able to sustain beings
and possess prosperity. O Kounteya! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Like them, you must attain great equanimity. You must seek to obtain success in austerities and in yoga. Through your deeds, you have already obtained
success for your father and your mother. So that you can sustain the brahmanas, you must now seek success in
your austerities. Those who obtain such success can obtain whatever they wish because of that. Therefore, practise
austerities. Accomplish everything that your soul desires."'
