Vaishampayana said, 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thus addressed by Gudakesha[Arjuna's name.], Kouravya Kounteya did not say anything in reply. Dvaipayana said, "O
Yudhishthira! Bibhatsu's[Bibhatsu is also one of Arjuna's names.] words are completely true. It has been said in the sacred texts that supreme dharma is vested in the status of a householder. O one who
knows about dharma! In accordance with the sacred texts and following the stipulations, follow your own dharma. It is not recommended that you should give up the
status of a householder and go to the forest. The gods, the ancestors, the rishis and
the servants always sustain themselves on the householder. O lord of the earth!
Support them. Birds, animals and other beings also owe their sustenance to householders. O lord of the earth! Therefore, garhasthya is the best of the ashramas.
Among the four ashramas, it is the most difficult one to follow. O Partha! Those
who are weak in their senses find it difficult to follow. Since you are not distracted,
follow it. You possess all the knowledge of the Vedas. You have performed great
austerities. You should therefore bear the burden of the kingdom of your father and
grandfathers. O great king! Austerities, sacrifices, learning, begging, deprivation of
the senses, meditation, solitude in conduct, contentment and donations-in a desire
to be successful, these should be followed by brahmanas, to the best of their ability.
Though it is already known to you, I will now tell you what it is for kshatriyas: sacrifices, learning, exertion, lack of contentment about one's prosperity, wielding the
fierce rod of chastisement, protecting subjects, knowledge of the Vedas, performing
all the austerities, good conduct, the earning of many material objects and giving
them to the deserving. O lord of the earth! These are the duties for kings. We have
heard that, when performed well, they bring success in this world and in that
world[The world after death.]. O Kounteya! Among these, wielding the rod of chastisement is said to be
the best. There is always strength in the kshatriya and the rod is based on that
strength. O king! These endeavours bring success for kshatriyas. On this, there is a
chant sung by Brihaspati. 'Like a snake swallowing up animals in their holes, the
earth swallows up peaceful kings and brahmanas who do not leave their homes.' It
has been heard that rajarshi Sudyumna wielded the rod and obtained supreme success, like Daksha, the son of Prachetasa[Accounts of Daksha's creation are not consistent. In one version, Prachetasa was a son born through Brahma's mental powers and Daksha was
the son of Prachetasa.]."'