'"Vibhandaka said, 'O son! These are rakshasas. They roam around in their extraordinary forms. They are unsurpassed in beauty and are extremely terrible. They always endeavour to create obstacles in the way of austerities. O
son! They assume beautiful forms. They assume different forms to tempt. Those terrible deeds are used to dislodge
the sages of the forest from the happiness of their worlds. Sages who are in control of their souls never serve them,
particularly if they desire the worlds of the virtuous. O one who doesn't perform evil acts! Those ones of evil
deeds find delight in obstructing ascetics and destroying their austerities. O son! Those liquids are for those who
aren't virtuous. They are wine and desired by evil ones. These garlands, coloured, bright and fragrant, are not regarded by the learned as fit for sages.'"

'Lomasha said, "Having restrained his son and told him that these were rakshasas, Vibhandaka went out to
search for her. After searching for three days, he failed to find her, and returned to his hermitage. When Kashyapa
again went out to gather fruit, as was the practice for hermits, the courtesan again returned to tempt the sage
Rishyashringa. As soon as he saw her, Rishyashringa was delighted. His mind was deluded and he told her, 'Let us
go to your hermitage before my father returns.' O king! Then she tempted Kashyapa's only son into the boat and
unmoored it. She tempted him through various means and brought him to the king of Anga. That extremely beautiful boat was moored within sight of a hermitage. A beautiful wood was created near the bank and named Rajashrama[Literally, the king's hermitage.]. The king brought Vibhandaka's only son and lodged him in the inner quarters. And he suddenly saw the
god[Indra.] showering rain, until the world was full and flooded with water. His wishes fulfilled, Lomapada bestowed
his daughter Shanta on Rishyashringa. To counter the wrath[Vibhandaka's wrath.], he instructed cattle to be placed on the roads and
the land tilled. Along the road that Vibhandaka would follow, the king placed many animals and warriors to look
after the animals. 'When maharshi Vibhandaka arrives in search of his son and asks you, you must join your hands
in salutation and tell him, "O maharshi! These animals and this tilled land belong to your son. What can we do to
please you? All of us are your servants and await your command[These are Lomapada's instructions to his warriors.]."' Meanwhile, after gathering roots and fruit,
the sage who was exceedingly wrathful returned to his hermitage. He searched for his son and on not finding him
there, became extremely angry. Rent asunder by rage, he suspected that this was the work of the king.

'"Deciding that he would burn up the king of Anga and all his possessions, he left for Champa[Champa was the capital of Anga. Anga is the eastern part of Bihar, and east of Munger, there are two villages by the name of Champa.]. Exhausted
and hungry, Kashyapa arrived at settlements that were prosperous with cattle. He was honoured by the herdsmen in
accordance with the prescribed rites, as if he was a king, and spent the night there. Having received great homage
from them, he asked them, 'O pleasant ones! Whose servants are you?' All of them respectfully told him, 'All
these riches belong to your son.' He was thus worshipped in region after region and heard similar pleasant words.
Thus, his anger was greatly appeased and in a happy frame of mind, he approached the city of the king of Anga.
He was worshipped by that bull among men. He saw his son, like Indra in heaven. He also saw his daughter-in-law
Shanta there, looking like a flash of lightning. Having seen the villages, the settlements of cattle, his son and Shanta, his extreme anger was pacified. O Indra among men! Vibhandaka showed his supreme favours to that lord of
the earth. The maharshi, as resplendent as the sun and the fire, left his son there and told him, 'Having done everything that pleases the king, you will return to the forest once a son has been born.' Rishyashringa acted according
to his words. He returned to where his father was. Shanta tended to him[Shanta went to the hermitage with Rishyashringa.], like the devoted Rohini attends on the
moon in the sky, like the fortunate Arundhati waits on Vasishtha, like Damayanti on Nala and like Shachi on the
wielder of the vajra[Indra.]. O Ajamidha[Yudhishthira's name is Ajamidha.]! Like Nadayani Indrasena was always obedient to Mudgala[There are different stories about Mudgala. He was both a king and a sage. In some accounts, Mudgala's
wife was Indrasena. In other accounts, Indrasena was his daughter-in-law. Indrasena was Narayana's daughter.
Thus, Nadayani could also read Narayani, as in some non-Critical texts.], thus was
Shanta towards Rishyashringa in the forest. O Indra among men! Driven by love, she tended to him. That sacred
hermitage is radiant here. The great lake, site of sacred deeds, is radiant here. O king! Having bathed here and purifying yourself, you will accomplish all your deeds and then go on to other tirthas."'
