Yudhishthira asked, "How does a man become wicked? How does he follow dharma? How does he obtain
emancipation and where does he go?"

'Bhishma replied, "You know everything about dharma. You are only asking to confirm your belief. Hear about
emancipation  and  renunciation  and  the  foundations  of  wickedness  and  dharma.  On  knowing  about  the  five[The five senses.],
wishes first run after them. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Having obtained these, desire and anger are generated. To accomplish these, he then takes delight in performing tasks. Form, taste and the others attract as desirable
objectives. From this, attachment results and aversion follows after that. Greed follows and confusion comes after
that. When one is overcome with greed, confusion, attachment and aversion, no dharma is generated. The intelligence turns to acts of adharma. One uses deceit to practise dharma. One finds delight in using deceit to pursue
artha. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! Through deceit, one tries to be successful in obtaining riches. The intelligence turns to this and wickedness becomes attractive. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! This is despite well-
wishers and learned people trying to restrain him. He replies to them in words that seem to be full of reason, supported by the ordinances. Because of attachment and confusion, three kinds of adharma increase. He thinks of sin,
speaks of it and does it. When he thus engages in adharma, the virtuous perceive his taints. But those who have
similar dispositions become his friends and serve the evildoer. He does not obtain happiness here, not to speak of
the hereafter. This is how one has evil in his soul. Now hear about the person who has dharma in his soul. He is accomplished in dharma and obtains benefits. Because of his wisdom, he can see the sins in advance. He is skilled in
ascertaining happiness and unhappiness and serves virtuous people. Because he consorts with those who are righteous, his proclivity towards such conduct also increases. He finds delight in wisdom and dharma. He sustains himself through dharma. Even if his mind turns towards obtaining riches, he does this only through dharma. He sprinkles his foundations only with those things where there are qualities. He has dharma in his soul and obtains friends
who are good. Having obtained friends and riches, he finds delight in this world and in the next. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! The learned know that as the fruits of dharma, a living being obtains lordship over sound,
touch, form, taste and scent[Through yoga, one obtains the objects of desire.]. O Yudhishthira! However, having obtained the fruits of dharma, he is not satisfied.
Through the sight of learning, he is not content until he has renounced. Through the sight of wisdom, he sees sins
in desire. He no longer finds delight in desire, and dharma liberates him. On seeing that everything in the world is
destroyed, he strives to give up everything[All fruits are destroyed. Therefore, he is no longer interested in the fruits.]. He uses every means possible for emancipation and avoids those that
are against it. He quickly resorts to renunciation and abandons all wicked deeds. He has dharma in his soul and obtains supreme emancipation. O son! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I have told you what you asked me about
-sin, dharma, emancipation and renunciation. O Yudhishthira! Therefore, in every situation, you must practise
dharma. O Kounteya! If you base yourself in dharma, you will obtain eternal success."'
