Vaishampayana said, 'O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When Vidura had left for the hermitage of the
Pandavas, the immensely wise Dhritarashtra repented. He went to the door of the sabha and deluded by his memories of Vidura, fell down unconscious in the presence of the lords of the earth. When he regained consciousness, he
got up from the ground. Sanjaya was with him and the king told him these words, "My brother and well-wisher is
like Dharma himself. On remembering him, my heart is being torn apart. Go quickly and bring my brother to me,
one who is knowledgeable about dharma." Uttering these words, the king lamented piteously. He was tormented
by repentance and deluded by Vidura's memory. Out of brotherly affection, the king again spoke these words to
Sanjaya. "O Sanjaya! My brother Vidura suffered because of my evil wrath. Go and find out if he is still alive. That
brother of mine is wise and has infinite intelligence. Never has he practised the slightest falsehood. Why should
this supremely intelligent one suffer a wrong from me? O Sanjaya! That wise one should not give up his life. Go
find him and bring him back." On hearing the king's words, Sanjaya approved and said that he would act
accordingly.

'Sanjaya set out for the Kamyaka forest. He soon arrived at the forest where the Pandavas were and saw Yudhishthira, attired in the skin of ruru deer. He was seated with Vidura, with thousands of brahmanas. He was surrounded by his brothers, like Shatakratu by the gods. Coming up to Yudhishthira, Sanjaya showed him homage and
to Bhima, Arjuna and the twins, as each one deserved. The king[Yudhishthira.] asked him about his welfare. When Sanjaya was
happily seated, he explained the reasons for his coming and said, "O Kshatta! Ambika's son, King Dhritarashtra,
remembers you. Please go and see him quickly and revive the king. O descendant of the Kuru lineage[The word used is nandana. So this can also be translated as beloved of the Kuru lineage.]! Take
your leave of the Pandavas, supreme among men. O revered one! On the command of that lion among kings, return immediately." Having been thus addressed, the intelligent Vidura, always affectionate towards his relatives,
took Yudhishthira's leave and returned to Gajasahrya. The powerful Dhritarashtra told the immensely wise one, "O
unblemished one! O one who is knowledgeable in dharma! It is through good fortune that you have remembered
me. It is through good fortune that you have come back. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Because of you, I
could not sleep during the day and during the night. While awake, I saw my body as if it had no soul." He then
took Vidura on his lap and smelt the top of his head. He said, "Forgive what I had said to you in anger." Vidura
replied, "O king! I have forgiven you. You are my greatest preceptor. I have come here swiftly so as to see you. O
tiger among men! O king! Men who have dharma in their hearts, come to those who are distressed, without thinking whether the deed should be done. Your sons are as dear to me as Pandu's sons. But since they are now in distress, my intelligence went out towards them." Having thus become reconciled towards each other, the immensely
radiant brothers, Vidura and Dhritarashtra, obtained supreme happiness.'
