'Dhritarashtra said, "My soldiers, and those of the others, were arranged in battle formations. Who was the first to
strike, the Kurus or the Pandavas?"

'Sanjaya said, "O king! Your son Duryodhana advanced with his brothers[In the course of the war accounts, several of Duryodhana's brothers are mentioned by name. There is a listing of
Duryodhana's brothers in Section 1 (Volume 1). However, the names of some of the minor brothers in the war
accounts are at odds with that listing in Section 1 (Volume 1).], placing Bhishma at the forefront of
the army. Delighted in their minds and wishing to fight with Bhishma, so did the Pandavas, with Bhimasena at the
forefront. There were clamorous sounds in both the armies, with krakachas, trumpets made out of the horns of
cows, drums, kettledrums, tambourines and the roars of horses and elephants. O king! With a tumultuous sound,
they rushed at us and we at them. In that great encounter and confrontation, the giant armies of the Pandavas and
the sons of Dhritarashtra trembled, like a forest stirred by the wind. The loud roar of those masses of kings, elephants, horses and chariots, dashing against each other at that inauspicious hour, was like that of the ocean agitated
by a storm. When that tumultuous sound arose and made the body hair stand up, the mighty-armed Bhimasena
roared like a bull. Bhimasena's roars transcended the sounds of conch shells and drums, the trumpeting of elephants and the lion-like roars of the soldiers. Bhimasena's loud roar surpassed the neighing of thousands of horses
in both the armies. On hearing the roar of that brave one, which was like the sound of the clouds or the sound of
Shakra's thunder, your soldiers were frightened. All the animals excreted urine and dung, like animals do at the
sound of a lion. He showed himself in a terrible form and roared like a giant cloud. He terrified the soldiers of your
sons and attacked them. O king! When that mighty archer attacked them, he was surrounded by all the brothers
who are your sons-Duryodhana, Durmukha, Duhsaha, Shala, atiratha Duhshasana, Durmarshana, Vivimshati,
Chitrasena, maharatha Vikarna, Purumitra, Jaya, Bhoja and Somadatta's valorous son[Bhurishrava.]. They showered him with
arrows, like clouds enveloping the sun. They brandished their giant bows, which were like clouds tinged with
lightning. They unleashed sharp arrows that were like virulent serpents.

'"At that, Droupadi's sons, Subhadra's maharatha son[Abhimanyu.], Nakula, Sahadeva and Parshata Dhrishtadyumna repulsed the sons of Dhritarashtra and pierced them with sharp arrows. They shattered them, like summits with the
great force of thunder. In that first encounter, with the terrible sound of bows twanging against arm-guards, neither
your side, nor that of the other, retreated. O bull among the Bharata lineage! I witnessed the dexterity of Drona's
disciples. O king! They shot many arrows, which always found their mark. The roar of the bows did not cease,
even for an instant. The flaming arrows were like stars in the sky. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All the other kings were spectators, witnessing the spectacular encounter between relatives. O king! Remembering the injuries they had suffered from each other, the maharathas were enraged and challenged and strove. With elephants,
horses and chariots, the armies of the Kurus and the Pandavas were extremely beautiful on the field of battle, like
figures on a painting. Then all the kings grasped their bows. Instructed by your son, they advanced with their
armies. Thousands of kings were instructed by Yudhishthira. They roared and attacked your son's army. The encounter between the soldiers of both the armies was terrible. Because of the dust raised by the soldiers, the sun disappeared. They advanced. They retreated. They advanced again. One could not detect any difference between ours
and those of the enemy. An extremely fearful and tumultuous battle raged. But your father[Bhishma.] surpassed all the other soldiers."'
