'Janamejaya said, "O supreme among Brahmanas! You have told me in brief the account known as Mahabharata,
containing stories about the great Kurus. O blameless performer of austerities! But I now feel a great desire to hear
this wonderful history in detail, with all descriptions. You should therefore recite it in its entirety. I am not satisfied
with hearing a brief account of this great story. It cannot be for a trifling reason that the virtuous Pandavas killed
those who should not be killed, and yet continue to be praised by men. Why did those tigers among men, despite
being innocent and capable of wreaking vengeance on their enemies, suffer the oppressions of those evil ones quietly? O supreme among Brahmanas! Why did Vrikodara, who in his mighty arms had the strength of 10,00030 elephants, keep his anger under control, despite being oppressed? Why did not the pure Krishna Droupadi, oppressed
by the evil sons of Dhritarashtra, burn them with her angry eyes, capable though she was of doing it? Why did
those tigers among men, the two sons[Bhima and Arjuna.] of Pritha and the two sons of Madri[Nakula and Sahadeva.], though oppressed by the evil ones,
follow Yudhishthira, addicted to the evil vice of gambling? Why did Yudhishthira, the best among righteous men
and the son of Dharma himself, suffer extreme misfortune, though he knew the path of virtuous conduct? Why did
Pandu's son Dhananjaya, with Krishna as his charioteer, and capable of dispatching many warriors to the land of
the dead with his arrows, suffer so much oppression? O blessed with the power of austerities! Tell me everything
that those great warriors did in every situation."

'Vaishampayana said, "I shall recount the entire history, that which was composed by the great-souled maharshi
Vyasa, whose powers are infinite and who is worshipped in all the worlds. This contains 100,000 sacred shlokas,
composed by Satyavati's son, Vyasa, of infinite powers. The learned man who recites it to others and also those
who hear its recital attain the world of Brahma and become the equals of the gods. This is equal to the Vedas. It is
sacred and supreme. It is the best of all that can be heard. It is a purana worshipped by the rishis. It contains all the
useful instructions on artha and kama. This immensely sacred history makes the mind desire to attain salvation.
The learned man who recites Krishna's[Krishna Dvaipayana's.] Veda to those who are noble, generous, truthful and faithful, will attain
great fortune. Even sins like the killing of embryos in wombs are destroyed. On hearing it, the most evil is freed
from the most evil of sins. This history, called jaya, should be heard by those who wish to attain victory. On hearing it, a king can bring the entire world under his subjugation and defeat all his enemies. This is the best way to obtain a son and the great path to ensure welfare. It should be heard several times by heirs apparent and their wives.

'"Vyasa, of infinite intelligence, has said that it is the sacred arthashastra and the supreme dharmashastra. It has
been said that it is also the great mokshashastra. It is recited in the present time and it will be recited in the future.
He who hears it obtains sons, descendants and servants who perform desired acts. He who hears it is immediately
freed from all sins committed in body, mind and speech. He who hears the history of Bharata, without finding
fault, is freed from all fear of disease, not to speak of fear in the next world. Krishna Dvaipayana, in a desire to
bring welfare to the world, composed this to bring wealth, fame, long life, pure deeds and attainment of heaven,
spreading in the world the fame of the great-souled Pandavas and other Kshatriyas of immense energy. It is said
that this Bharata is the treasury of jewels, like the ocean who is the lord and the great snow-clad mountain[This can also specifically be translated as Himalaya.]. The
learned man who recites it to Brahmanas during sacred parvas[Days of the full moon and days of the new moon.] is cleansed of his sins and becoming victorious
over heaven[That is, is freed from the desire of attaining heaven.] attains union with the eternal brahman. He who causes even a single line from it to be read to Brahmanas at his shraddha makes his shraddha becomes inexhaustible and his ancestors are satisfied with the offerings
that are made to them. The sins committed ignorantly by men every day are destroyed on hearing the account of
the Mahabharata. It is said that the Mahabharata is the history of the births of the Bharata lineage. He who knows
the etymology of this name is freed from all sin. The sage Krishna Dvaipayana arose regularly[In the morning.] for three years
and composed this wonderful history known as the Mahabharata. O bull among the Bharatas! Whatever is found
here on dharma, artha, kama and moksha, may be found elsewhere. But whatever is not in it, cannot be found anywhere else."'
