'Sanjaya said, "On seeing that Drona was near him, Yudhishthira was not frightened, but received him with a
mighty shower of arrows. Sounds of applause arose in Yudhishthira's army, like that made by a herd of elephants
when its leader is attacked by a lion. On seeing that Drona was advancing to capture Yudhishthira, the brave Satyajit, with truth as his valour, attacked the preceptor. The preceptor and Panchala fought against each other. They agitated each other's soldiers, like Indra and Virochana's son[Virochana's son was Bali.]. The preceptor swiftly pierced Satyajit with ten sharp
arrows that penetrated the inner organs and severed his bow and arrows. The powerful one quickly grasped another
bow and struck Drona with twenty arrows shafted with the feathers of herons. On learning that Satyajit had been
grasped by Drona in the battle, Vrika from Panchala oppressed Drona with hundreds of sharp arrows. O king! On
seeing that Drona was enveloped by the maharatha in the battle, the Pandavas roared and waved their garments
around. O king! Extremely enraged, the powerful Vrika pierced Drona between the breasts with sixty arrows and it
was extraordinary. Maharatha Drona dilated his eyes in rage. Using great force, he powerfully shrouded them with
showers of arrows. Having severed the bows of Satyajit and Vrika, Drona killed Vrika, his charioteer and his horses with six arrows. Satyajit took up another bow that was more powerful and pierced Drona, his horses, his charioteer and his standard with arrows. Drona could not tolerate this oppression by Panchala in that battle. He released
arrows, so as to quickly destroy him. Drona shot thousands of showers of arrows to envelope his horses, his standards, the handle of his bow and his parshni charioteers. Despite his bow being repeatedly severed, Panchala, who
knew about supreme weapons, continued to fight the one with the red horses[Drona.]. On witnessing Satyajit's increasing energy in that great battle, the great-souled one sliced off his head with an arrow that was in the shape of a
crescent. When the mighty warrior, the Panchala who was a bull among rathas, was slain, Yudhishthira became
frightened of Drona and fled on swift horses.

'"On seeing Drona, the Panchalas, Kekayas, Matsyas, Chedis, Karushas and Kosalas wished to protect Yudhishthira and cheerfully attacked. The preceptor, the destroyer of large numbers of the enemy, wished to capture
Yudhishthira. He slew those soldiers, like a fire consuming large masses of cotton. On witnessing that Drona was
repeatedly consuming the soldiers, Shatanika, the younger brother of Matsya, attacked him. He severely pierced
Drona, his charioteer and his horses with six arrows that were like the rays of the sun and had been polished by artisans, and roared. While he was thus roaring, Drona swiftly sliced off his head, adorned with earrings, from his
body with a kshurapra. At this, the Matsyas fled. Having defeated the Matsyas, Bharadvaja's son repeatedly vanquished the Chedis, Karushas, Kekayas, Panchalas, Srinjayas and Pandus. On beholding the angry one on the golden chariot, consuming the soldiers in his rage, like a fire in a forest, the Srinjayas trembled. The one who was swift
in his deeds drew his bowstring and the excellent sound of the twang was heard in all the directions, as he slaughtered the enemy. The terrible arrows released from his hands mangled elephants, horses, infantry, charioteers and
elephant-riders. He was like a roaring cloud at the end of winter, mingled with the wind, pouring down a shower of
hailstones and the enemy was frightened. The great archer, powerful and brave, the one who protected his enemies
from fear, roamed around in all the directions, causing agitation and fright. The infinitely energetic Drona's bow
was decorated with gold and looked like lightning flashing in the clouds. It was seen in all the directions. Drona
caused great carnage among the Pandava soldiers, like that caused by Vishnu, revered by gods and asuras, among
the masses of daityas. He was brave and truthful in speech. He was wise and powerful. Truth was his valour. He
was noble-minded. He created a terrible river, like the one at the time of destruction, terrifying to cowards. Armour
was the waves. Standards were eddies. It flowed and carried away the mortals. Elephants and horses were the giant
crocodiles. The swords were fish and it[The river.] was difficult to cross. The bones of brave ones were its terrible stones.
Drums and tambourines were the turtles. Shields and armour were the terrible boats. The hair was moss and weeds.
Masses of arrows and bows were the current. It was full of serpents in the form of arms[The severed arms of warriors.]. It flowed fiercely
through the field of battle and bore along the soldiers of the Kurus and the Srinjayas. The heads of men were the
boulders. Javelins were the fish and clubs were rafts. The headdresses were the foam on the surface. The disemboweled entrails were the reptiles. It was fierce and bore brave ones away. The flesh and the blood was the mud.
The elephants were the crocodiles. The standards were the trees[Along the banks of the river.]. Kshatriyas were submerged in it. It was terrible
and congested with bodies. The riders were the sharks and it was difficult to cross. Drona created a river there and
it flowed to the world of the dead. It was full of large numbers of carrion-eaters and had tens of thousands of dogs
and jackals. In every direction, it was frequented by extremely fierce flesh-eaters.

'"On seeing that the great ratha was consuming the soldiers, like Death, they attacked Drona from all sides, with
Kunti's son at the forefront. Those on your side, the kings and the princes, raised their weapons and surrounded the
brave and great archer. Drona never deviated in his aim and was like an elephant with a shattered temple. He overcame that mass of chariots and brought down Dridhasena. He approached King Kshema, who was fighting fearlessly, and piercing him with nine arrows, slew and felled him from his chariot. He penetrated the midst of the soldiers and roaming around, repulsed them in every direction. He protected all the others. But he himself had no
need for protection. He pierced Shikhandi with twelve and Uttamouja with twenty arrows. With a broad-headed
arrow, he sent Vasudana to Yama's abode. He struck Kshatravarma with eighty arrows and Sudakshina with twenty-six. With a broad-headed arrow, he brought Kshatradeva down from the seat of his chariot. He pierced Yudhamanyu with sixty-four arrows and Satyaki with thirty. The one on the golden chariot then quickly approached
Yudhishthira. The deceitful[Because he did not stay to fight.] Yudhishthira, supreme among kings, swiftly fled on fast horses. Panchala[This particular Panchala is not named.] attacked
him. But Drona struck him, his bow, his horses and his charioteer. Slain, he fell down on the ground from his chariot, like a stellar body dropping down from the sky. When that illustrious prince of Panchala was killed, there was
a great and tumultuous sound of 'Kill Drona! Kill Drona!' The Panchalas, Matsyas and Kekayas were filled with
great rage. However, the powerful Drona crushed the Srinjayas and the Pandavas. Satyaki, Chekitana, Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi, Vardhakshemi, Chitrasena, Senabindu, Suvarchas-these and many other kings from many
different countries were all vanquished in that battle by Drona, who was surrounded by the Kurus. O great king!
Those on your side obtained victory in that great battle. As the Pandavas fled in all directions, they were slaughtered in that battle, like the danavas being slaughtered by the great-souled Indra. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The Panchalas, Kekayas and Matsyas trembled."'
