Vaishampayana said, 'After this, the great yogi, the sage Krishna Dvaipayana, spoke. "O son[Vedavyasa was speaking to Yudhishthira.]! Read this[Shiva's names.].
May you be fortunate and let Maheshvara be pleased with you. O son! In ancient times, I tormented myself
through supreme austerities on the slopes of Meru. O great king! That was for the sake of a son and I praised him
through this chant. O descendant of the Pandu lineage! Thus did I obtain my desires. In that way, you will also obtain all your wishes from Sharva." Then, Shakra's beloved friend, Chatushirsha, also known as Alambayana[The name of a sage.],
spoke, driven by a feeling of compassion. "I went to Gokarna and performed austerities for one hundred years,
thus obtaining one hundred sons who were not born from any woman's womb. They were self-restrained, learned
about dharma and extremely radiant. Without  facing  old  age  and  misery,  they  lived  for  one  hundred  thousand
years. O son of King Pandu! In ancient times, I obtained them through Sharva." Next, the illustrious Valmiki spoke
to Yudhishthira. "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Once, in the course of a dispute, sages who were learned in
the Sama Veda accused me of having killed a brahmana[This was a metaphorical and not literal killing of a brahmana and concerned a dispute over Sama rituals.]. As soon as they said this, in an instant, that adharma
overcame me. To cleanse myself, I sought to satisfy the unblemished Ishana. I was incapacitated. But that dispeller
of grief freed me. The destroyer of Tripura told me that I would obtain great fame." O son! Jamadagni's son[Parashurama.],
supreme among the upholders of dharma, spoke to Kounteya. Stationed amidst the rishis, he was like the sun radiating heat. "O  eldest  among  the  Pandavas!  I  was  afflicted  because  I  had  killed  brahmanas  who  were  like  my
father[On his father's instructions, Parashurama had killed his mother. There are no stories about his having killed
brahmanas. His elder brothers (brahmanas) were actually killed by his father, Jamadagni, and Parashurama revived them.]. O king! To purify myself, I sought Mahadeva's refuge. I chanted the god's names and praised him. Bhava was satisfied and gave me a battleaxe. The god also gave me divine weapons. He said, 'From now on, no sin
will attach to you and you will be invincible. Death will have no power over you and you will be famous.' The illustrious Shikhandi, auspicious in form, spoke to me in this way and I obtained everything through the favours of
that intelligent one." Next, Asita-Devala spoke to the king who was Pandu's son. "Earlier, because of Shakra's
curse, all my dharma was destroyed. I obtained my dharma, great fame and a long life because of Bhava." There
was a rishi named Gritsamada and he was Shakra's beloved friend. This illustrious one was like Brihaspati in his
radiance. He told Ajamidha[Yudhishthira's name.], "The illustrious Vasishtha was Chakshusha Manu's son. Shatakratu performed the
inconceivable task of a sacrifice that lasted for one thousand years. While that was going on, I was given the task
of reciting Sama hymns and he[Vasishtha.] told me, 'O foremost among brahmanas! The rathantara is not being chanted
properly. O supreme among brahmanas! Cast aside your delight and use your intelligence to consider what you are
doing again. O extremely evilminded one! Why are you acting so that the sacrificial offerings will not be conveyed?' Having said this, he was overcome by great rage. Wrathfully, he again spoke these words. 'You will become a forest dweller. You will be miserable and bereft of wisdom. You will always be terrified and you will remain in that state for ten thousand, eight hundred and ten years. You will have neither food nor water and you will
be abandoned by other animals[Gritsamada was cursed that he would become an animal.]. That spot will not have any trees that can be used for sacrifices and will be populated by ruru deer and lions. You will become a cruel animal and will face great hardships.' O Partha! Because of
his words, when I died, I was born as an animal. I sought refuge with Maheshvara and the yogi told me, 'You will
be without old age. You will be immortal. You will be free from misery. Your friendship[With Indra.] will be ensured and
both your sacrifices will prosper.' The illustrious lord exhibits his favours in this way. In matters of happiness and
unhappiness, he is always superior to the creator and the ordainer. In deeds, thoughts and words, the illustrious one
is  incomprehensible.  O  son!  I  know  of  no  warrior  who  is  superior  to  him,  nor  anyone  who  is  his  equal  in
learning."'

'Jaigishavya added, "O Yudhishthira! In ancient times, in Varanasi, the illustrious and powerful one carefully
protected me and gave me the eight kinds of powers[The eight powers associated with yoga.]."
'Gargya continued, "O Pandava! On the banks of the Sarasvati, I satisfied him through a mental sacrifice and he
conferred on me the sixty-four different branches associated with the knowledge of time[There was more than one Gargya. This is clearly the one who contributed to astronomy (jyotisha). There is no
obvious way to pin down the number sixty-four.]. He also gave me one
thousand sons who were my equal in knowledge of the brahman. I and my sons obtained life-spans of one million
years each."

'Parashara said, "O king! In earlier times, I thought of Sharva in my mind and gratified him. I desired a son from
Maheshvara,  one  who  would  be  great  in  asceticism,  great  in  energy,  immensely  famous  and  a  great  yogi.  He
should be one who would classify the Vedas, be the abode of prosperity and be driven by compassion towards the
brahmanas. Knowing that this was the desire in my heart, the supreme among gods spoke to me. 'The fruit that you
desire from me will be obtained and you will have a son named Krishna[Parashara was the father of Krishna Dvaipayana Vedavyasa.]. This will happen in the creation associated with Savarni Manu[The manvantara that will follow the current one.] and he will be one of the saptarshis. He will classify the Vedas and extend the Kuru
lineage. That son will compose itihasa[Itihasa is history and is used to mean the Ramayana and the Mahabharata, Vedavyasa being the composer of the
Mahabharata.] and be engaged in the welfare of the universe. That great sage will be
loved by the great Indra. O Parashara! Your son will be without old age and will be immortal.' Having said this,
the illustrious one vanished from the spot. O Yudhishthira! The great yogi is full of energy. He is without decay
and without transformation.

'"Mandavya added, 'I was no thief. But suspected of being one, I was impaled on a stake[Animandavya's story has been recounted in Section 6 (Volume 1).]. While I was in that
state, I praised the god. Maheshvara told me, "You will be freed from the stake and will live for one billion years.
O brahmana! But you will not suffer any pain from being impaled on the stake. You will be free from all kinds of
affliction and disease. O sage! Your atman has been generated from the fourth foot[Dharma has four feet. The sage was born from dharma's fourth foot, regarded as truth.]. Your birth is unrivalled.
Make it successful. Without any obstructions, you will be able to bathe in all the tirthas. O brahmana! When you
die, I ordain that you will obtain eternal heaven." The illustrious one, with the bull as his mount, spoke in this way.
O great king! Maheshvara deserves worship. The immensely radiant one is clad in hides. With his companions, the
best among gods then disappeared.'

'"Galava continued, 'Having obtained Vishvamitra's permission, I went to my father[Galava had studied under Vishvamitra. After completing his studies, he obtained Vishvamitra's permission and
returned home. By that time, Galava's father was dead.]. My mother was miserable and wept piteously. She said, "O son! Through Koushika's[Vishvamitra's.] favours, you have been adorned with knowledge of the Vedas. O unblemished one! O son! You are young and self-controlled. But your father is unable to see
you." On hearing my mother's words, I despaired, because I wouldn't be able to see my senior. I controlled my atman and devoted myself to Mahadeva. He showed himself and spoke to me. "O son! Your father and mother will
not suffer from death. Swiftly enter your house and you will be able to see your father there." O Yudhishthira!
Having obtained the illustrious one's permission, I went home. O son! I saw my father there, emerging after having
completed a sacrifice. He held some offerings, kusha and other grass. With tears in his eyes, my father flung these
away. O Pandava! I had bowed down before him. He raised me, embraced me and inhaled the fragrance of my
head.  He  said,  "I  have  seen  you  through  good  fortune.  O  son!  You  have  returned  after  completing  your
learning."'"'

Vaishampayana continued, 'The sages spoke about these and other extraordinary deeds of the great-souled one.
On hearing this, Pandava was astounded. Then Krishna[This is Krishna Vasudeva and not Krishna Dvaipayana Vedavyasa.], supreme among extremely intelligent ones, again spoke
to Yudhishthira, who was always devoted to dharma, like Ishvara speaking to Puruhuta[Puruhuta is Indra. It is not clear who is meant by Ishvara.]. "O Ajamidha! Aditya,
Chandra, wind, fire, heaven, the earth, the water, the Vasus, the Vishvadevas, Dhatri, Aryama, Shukra, Brihaspati,
the Rudras, the Sadhyas, Varuna, the protector of riches[Kubera.], Brahma, Shakra, the Maruts, the truth about the brahman, the Vedas, sacrifices, dakshina, those who chant the Vedas, soma, the one who sacrifices, all the offerings and
oblations,  protection,  consecration,  rituals,  svaha,  vashatkara,  the  brahmanas,  the  descendants  of  Surabhi,  the
wheel of dharma, the wheel of time, movement, fame, self-control, the steadfastness of intelligent and wise people,
good and bad, the seven sages, the best of intelligence, thoughts, sight and touch, success in deeds, success itself,
the large number of gods who drink heat and soma, the horizon, suyamas[A class of gods.], tushitas[A class of gods.], everything with a form of
the brahman, the shining bodies, those who survive on scent, those who survive on sight, those who restrain their
speech, those who restrain their thoughts, the pure, those who are devoted to emancipation, the gods who survive
on touch, the gods who survive on sight, the gods who survive on clarified butter, the foremost among gods that
one can think of, all the other gods, birds, gandharvas, pishachas, danavas, yakshas, serpents, charanas, the subtle,
the gross, the mild, the extremely subtle, happiness, unhappiness, all that is intermediate between joy and misery,
sankhya, yoga, everything that is superior to the most supreme and everything that I have recounted-know that all
these originate with Sharva. All creatures have originated from him. He is the one who deserves to be revered. In
ancient times, all the gods who are the protectors of the universe and all the rakshasas who have penetrated into the
earth were created by him. I think of him in my mind and please him. He is the reason behind this breath of life
and I bow down before him. When he is praised and pleased, that god, the lord without decay, grants boons. If a
man purifies himself and reads this praise after having controlled his senses, restrained and not deviating from
yoga for one year, then he obtains the fruits of a horse sacrifice. A brahmana obtains all the Vedas, a king conquers
the entire earth, a vaishya obtains gains and dexterity and a shudra obtains a good destination and happiness after
death. This is the king of chants. If one fixes one's mind on Rudra and chants it, one is freed from all sins and becomes pure, sacred and famous. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Such a man dwells in heaven for thousands
of years, for as many years as there are hairs on his body."'
