Yudhishthira asked, "O grandfather. Among all the varnas, including the mlechchhs, there is a view that there
should be fasting. But the reason for this is not known to us. We have heard that brahmanas and kshatriyas
must follow rituals. O grandfather! But why should the others fast? O king! How did the ritual of fasting come to
be applied to everyone? Tell me this. What kind of destination is obtained by those who are given to fasting? It is
said that fasting leads to supreme benefits and that one should fast. O foremost among men! What are the fruits
that are obtained through fasting? How is one freed from adharma and how does one obtain dharma? O supreme
among the Bharata lineage! How does one obtain supreme heaven? O lord of men! What must be donated after
fasting? Tell me about the dharma that leads to the obtaining of happiness and artha."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Kounteya knew about dharma and asked this. Bhishma, Shantanu's son, who knew the
truth about dharma, spoke these words to Dharma's son. "O bull among the Bharata lineage! O great king! In ancient times, I had heard about this, about the rituals of fasting and about its best qualities. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! I had asked Angiras, Prajapati's son. Asked by me, that store of austerities told me the truth. I
asked this question to the illustrious one who was generated from the fire. O bull among the Bharata lineage! He
told me about the sacred rituals of fasting.

'"Angiras said, 'O descendant of the Kuru lineage! It is recommended that brahmanas and kshatriyas should fast
for three nights. O bull among men! It has also been decreed that they can fast for two nights, or for a single night.
Out of confusion, if vaishyas or shudras fast for three nights or two nights, they gain nothing out of this[They should fast for a single night.]. Without
fasting, eating one-fourth of the normal food is recommended for vaishyas and shudras. Those who know about
dharma have not recommended that they should fast for three nights. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If a person who knows about the brahman fasts on the fifth or sixth lunar day, or on the day of the full moon, he obtains
the quality of forgiveness and beauty and becomes learned. If a person performs sacrifices and fasts either on the
fifth or the sixth lunar day, eating on the other, he is never without offspring. He is wise and is never poor. He gets
to feed brahmanas. O Kounteya! If a person fasts on the eighth lunar day, or on the fourteenth day of shuklapaksha,
he is without disease and becomes valiant. If a person devotedly eats only one meal during the month of Margashirsha[November-December.], he is freed from disease and sins and gets to feed brahmanas. He is full of all kinds of benefit and he
obtains all the herbs. He  obtains  crops  through  agriculture,  a  lot  of  riches  and  many  sons  are  born  to  him.  O
Kounteya! If a person devotedly eats only one meal during the month of Pousha[December-January.], he becomes extremely fortunate and handsome and obtains a share of fame. If a person is devoted to his father and eats only one meal during
the month of Magha[January-February.], he is reborn in a prosperous lineage and obtains greatness amidst his relatives. If a person
eats only one meal during the month of Bhagadaiva[Phalguna, February-March.], he is loved by women and they are under his control. If a
person is controlled and eats only one meal during the month of Chaitra[March-April.], he is reborn in a great family that has a
wealth of gold, jewels and pearls. If a person conquers his senses and eats only one meal during the month of
Vaishakha[April-May.], regardless of whether the person is a man or a woman, the person obtains superiority among all the
relatives. If a person eats only one meal a day during the month of Jyeshthamula[May-June.], that person obtains the greatest
and supreme prosperity, regardless of whether the birth is as a man or as a woman. Without any distraction, if a
person eats only one meal during the month of Ashadha[June-July.], he is reborn with a lot of grain, a lot of riches and a lot
of sons. If a person is controlled and eats only one meal during the month of Shravana[July-August.], he enhances his relatives
and is consecrated by them as superior. If a man eats only one meal during the month of Proshthapada[Bhadra, August-September.], he swells
with  wealth  and  his  prosperity  remains  stable.  If  a  person  eats  only  one  meal  a  day  during  the  month  of
Ashvayuja[Ashvina, September-October.], he obtains subjects and mounts and a large number of sons are born to him. If a man eats only one
meal a month during the month of Kartika[October-November.], when he is reborn, he is brave, obtains great fame and has many
wives. O tiger among men! I have recounted the benefits from fasting in different months.

'"'O king! Listen to the rules for the tithis. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If a person only eats when a
paksha is over[He only eats on the last day of the paksha and fasts on the other days.], when he is reborn, he obtains a long life, has many sons and owns many cattle. If a person fasts
for three nights in every month and does this for twelve years, he becomes an uncontested lord of the tribe[Gana.], with
no rivals. O best among the Bharata lineage! These are the rules and the rites that should be followed for twelve
years and you should also observe them. O king! If a person only eats in the morning and in the evening, and
doesn't drink even water in between, if he is always devoted to non-violence, if he offers oblations into the fire,
and if he does this every day for six years, there is no doubt that he will obtain success. Such a man obtains the
fruits got through an agnishtoma sacrifice. He gets to dwell with apsaras, who delight him with their dancing and
singing. He ascends on a celestial vehicle that has the complexion of molten gold. He obtains greatness in Brahma's world for a full one thousand years. When those merits are exhausted, he returns[Is reborn on earth.] and obtains greatness. If a
man takes only one meal a day for an entire year, he obtains the fruits of an atiratra sacrifice. He obtains greatness
in heaven for ten thousand years. When those merits are exhausted, he returns and obtains greatness. If a person
only eats on every fourth day for an entire year, if he is devoted to non-violence, if he is always truthful in speech
and if he controls his senses, he obtains the fruits of a vajapeya sacrifice. He obtains greatness in heaven for thirty
thousand years. O Kounteya! If a man only eats on every sixth day for an entire year, that man obtains the fruits of
a horse sacrifice. He travels on a celestial vehicle that is yoked to ruddy geese. He obtains delight in heaven for
forty thousand years. O king! If a man remains alive through only eating on every eighth day for an entire year, he
obtains the fruits of a gavamaya sacrifice[A sacrifice that lasts for an entire year.]. He travels on a celestial vehicle yoked to swans and cranes. He obtains delight in heaven for fifty thousand years. If a person only eats at the end of the fortnight and does this for a
year, the illustrious Angiras has said that this is like fasting for six months. He resides in heaven for sixty thousand
years. O lord of the earth! He is woken up from sleep with the sweet sounds of veenas, lutes and flutes. O son! O
king! If a man eats only once a day for an entire year, drinking only water at the end of every month, he obtains the
fruits of a vishvajit sacrifice. He travels on a celestial vehicle that is yoked to lions and tigers. He obtains delight in
heaven for seventy thousand years. O tiger among men! Fasting for more than a month has not been recommended. O Partha! Those who know about dharma have spoken about these rules for fasting. If a person is not afflicted
by disease and follows these indications for fasting, at every step, there is no doubt that he obtains the fruits of sacrifices. He travels to heaven in a celestial vehicle yoked to swans. That man finds delight with one hundred apsara
maidens. O lord! If a person is not afflicted by disease and follows these indications for fasting, he obtains delight
in heaven for one hundred thousand years. He is woken from his sleep to the sound of kanchis and nupuras[Ornaments worn by women. A kanchi is worn around the waist and a nupura is worn around the ankles.]. O
bull among the Bharata lineage! He travels on a celestial vehicle that is yoked to thousands of swans and is as radiant as the moon. He goes to a place surrounded by hundreds of women and finds delight there. There, he doesn't
have to look for something that will restore his strength when he is weak, or something that will heal his wound
when he is wounded. He will not have to look for medications that will cure his disease, or something to pacify
him when he is angry. He will not have to search for wealth to counter misery caused by a lack of riches. A person
who seeks heaven will find happiness and delight there. He will be astride a celestial vehicle that is golden in complexion, one that can travel anywhere at will. Such a man will be ornamented with everything auspicious and will
find pleasure, surrounded by hundreds of women. He will be well, successful in attaining his desires. He will be
happy and devoid of sin. Through fasting and the eventual giving up of the body, such a man obtains these fruits.
He will be on a celestial vehicle that is as radiant as gold, with a complexion that is like that of the rising sun. It
will be decorated with lapis lazuli and there will be the sounds of veenas and drums. There will be flags and lamps
and the sound of celestial bells. Followed by thousands of women, such a man will find happiness there. O Panda-
va! He will find delight in heaven for as many thousands of years as there are pores in his body.

'"'There is no sacred text that is superior to the Vedas. There is no preceptor who is equal to the mother. There is
no acquisition superior to obtaining dharma. There is no austerity superior to fasting. There is nothing superior to,
and more sacred than, brahmanas, on earth and in heaven. There is no task in austerities that is equal to fasting. It
is through following the rites of fasting that the gods obtained heaven. It is through fasting that the rishis obtained
supreme success. For one thousand celestial years, the intelligent Vishvamitra devotedly ate only one meal a day
and obtained the status of becoming a brahmana. Chyavana, Jamadagni, Vasishtha, Goutama and Bhrigu-all of
these maharshis were forgiving and obtained heaven.' This is what Angiras indicated to the maharshis earlier. A
person who always follows what he has indicated, never confronts any misery. O Kounteya! These are the progressive ordinances that were laid down by maharshi Angiras. If a man listens to these all the time, he doesn't suffer
from any sin. His mind is not overcome by wickedness and he is free from all kinds of confusion. He understands
the sounds made by everything, whether it has been born from a womb or has not been born from a womb. That
supreme among men obtains eternal fame."'
