Janamejaya said, 'O Brahmana! I have heard completely from you the account of the incarnations of devas,
danavas, rakshasas, gandharvas and apsaras. O Brahmana! I now wish to hear from the beginning the account of
the origin of the Kuru lineage. Please narrate it in front of these Brahmana sages.'

Vaishampayana said, 'O best of the Bharata lineage! The founder of the Pourava dynasty was the valorous
Duhshanta[Also spelt Dushyanta.]. The victorious one protected the entire earth up to its four limits and was the lord of the four quarters of the earth and also regions that are in the middle of the ocean. That chastiser of enemies was also lord of the
entire country of the mlecchas[Barbarians, non-Aryans, those who did not speak Sanskrit.], which was populated by the four varnas and beyond the ocean full of gems. During this king's rule, there was no mixture of castes and no performer of evil deeds. No one needed to plough the
land. No one needed to mine the earth. O tiger among men! Everyone was devoted to dharma and everyone acted
in accordance with the norms of righteous conduct. O son! While he was the ruler of the land, there was no fear
from thieves and no fear from famines. While he was the ruler of the land, there was no fear from disease. All the
four varnas took pleasure in undertaking their own duties, without an eye to the fruits of the action. Depending
upon him as a protector of the earth, they confronted no fear from anywhere. Parjanya[The god of rain. That is, Indra.] showered down rain at
the appropriate time and the crops were succulent. The earth abounded with great stores of riches then.

'He was young and his great prowess was extraordinary. His body was capable of withstanding the vajra. He
could have raised up and carried in his arms Mandara[Large mountain.], with all its woods and forests. He was skilled in fighting
with the bow and arrow, the club and all weapons, on the back of an elephant and on the back of a horse. He was
like Vishnu in his strength and like the sun in his radiance. He was like the ocean in his equanimity and like the
earth in his tolerance. The great king was loved by all his subjects, in cities and in the country. Everyone abided by
dharma.'
