Kunti said, "O illustrious one! You are my father-in-law. Therefore, you are like a god of the gods to me. Since
you are like a god of the gods, listen to my truthful words. An ascetic and wrathful brahmana named Durvasa
came to my father, soliciting alms. I gratified him by offering him food and through my purity, renunciation and
cleanliness of mind. Even when there was reason for great anger, I did not exhibit any rage. He was pleased with
me and said that he would grant me a boon. 'You must accept a boon.' That is what he told me. I was scared of being cursed by the brahmana and agreed. The brahmana spoke to me again. 'O fortunate one! O one with the beautiful face! You will be Dharma's mother. Whichever god you desire will obey your summons and present himself.'

Having said this, the brahmana disappeared and I was astounded. But in no situation, did it disappear from my
mind[The mantra, Durvasa having taught Kunti a mantra.]. Once I was seated in a floor of the palace and saw the rising sun. I remembered the rishi's words and remembered the sun god. I was still a child and did not comprehend the sin associated with this. The god, the one
with the one thousand rays, appeared before me. He divided his body into two parts, one for the sky and one for
earth. One of these continued to heat the worlds and the other presented itself before me. I was trembling and he
said, 'Accept a boon from me.' I bowed my head down before him and replied, 'Please go.' The one with the fierce
rays told me, 'A summons cannot be futile and I will not pardon you. I will burn down the brahmana who gave
you the boon and will also burn you down.' I wished to protect the brahmana. He had not committed any crime
that deserved a curse. So I told him, 'O god! Give me a son who will be like you.' At this, the sun god penetrated
me with his energy and confounded me. He told me that I would have a son and returned to the firmament. I was in
the inner quarters and wished to hide what had happened from my father. The son, Karna, was secretly born and I
cast the child into the waters. O brahmana! There is no doubt that through the god's favours, I once again became a
virgin, just as the rishi had said I would. I was foolish. Though I knew him as my son, I ignored him. O brahmana
rishi! This continues to consume me and you know it well. Whether this was a sin, or whether it was not a sin, I
have now told you about it. O illustrious one! You should free me from the fear that I suffer from[Kunti wants to know what has happened to Karna.]. O unblemished
one! Let the king also know what is in his heart. O supreme among sages! Through you, those wishes can be satisfied."'

Vaishampayana  continued,  'Having  been  addressed  thus,  Vyasa,  supreme  among  those  who  knew  about  the
Vedas, said, "You are praiseworthy. Everything will happen exactly as you have told me. There was no crime attached to you. You became a virgin again. The gods possess the power to enter human bodies. Since they are gods,
they can have offspring through resolution, words, sight, touch and intercourse. These are the five methods they
use. The dharma of humans must not be confused with the dharma of gods. O Kunti! Now that you know this, let
your mental fever be extinguished. For all those who are strong, there is medication. For all those who are strong,
there is purification. For all those who are strong, there is dharma. For all those who are strong, everything can be
owned."'
