'Dhritarashtra asked, "O Sanjaya! After the arrows had been severed and Dhrishtadyumna had been freed by
Yuyudhana[Satyaki.], foremost among the Vrishni lineage, what did the intolerant and great archer[Drona.], supreme among the
wielders of all weapons, do? How did Drona fight against Shini's grandson, the tiger among men?"

'Sanjaya replied, "He was venomous in his rage. His extended bow was like a gaping mouth. The sharp and iron
arrows were like his teeth. His eyes were coppery red with wrath. He sighed like a giant serpent. The brave one
among men was delighted. He was borne on extremely fast and red steeds. In every direction, he seemed to leap up
into the sky, or climb up mountains. He showered gold-tufted arrows and attacked Yuyudhana. He brought down a
mighty shower of arrows and the roar of his chariot was like that of the slayer of Bala[Indra killed a demon named Bala.]. He stretched his bow and
released many iron arrows that seemed to be tinged with lightning. His lances and swords were like those of the
wielder of the vajra. They seemed to have been stirred by the force of his anger. Drona was like an unassailable
cloud and his horses seemed to have been urged on by the wind. Shini's brave descendant, the destroyer of enemy
cities, saw him descend. He was invincible in battle and laughingly told his charioteer, 'This brahmana is cruel. He
has been dislodged from his own duties[Those of a brahmana.]. The preceptor is the refuge of the king who is Dhritarashtra's son, his
relief from fearful grief. That prince is always insolent about his bravery. Swiftly and cheerfully, urge the horses to
use their greatest speed and let us go and fight against him.' Madhava's[Meaning Satyaki's.] supreme horses were like silver in their
complexion. They possessed the speed of the wind and they swiftly advanced towards Drona. Those two brave
ones fought against each other and everything was covered with a net of arrows, so that it became intolerable to
others. There was a fearful darkness, without any gaps. Both Drona and Satvata were skilled in using their
weapons swiftly. Those two lions among men were seen to shower down arrows incessantly. As the torrent of arrows showered down and struck each other, the sound that was heard was like the sound when Shakra releases his
vajra. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They were pierced by iron arrows and their forms looked like those of
snakes which had been struck by venomous serpents. The extremely terrible sound of bowstrings and palms slapping was heard. It was like that of innumerable mountain tops shattered by thunder. The chariots, horses and charioteers of both looked beautiful. They were mangled by gold-tufted arrows and looked colourful. O lord of the
earth! The iron arrows were bright and flew straight. As they descended, they looked as terrible as snakes that had
shed their skins. Both their umbrellas were brought down. Both their standards were also brought down. The limbs
of both flowed with blood. But they were both dazzling, as they wished for victory. With blood flowing from their
limbs, they looked like exuding elephants. They struck each other with arrows that were fatal.

'"O great king! The sounds of delighted roars, mixed with the sound of conch shells and drums, ceased, because
no one else made any sound. The soldiers in the arrays became silent and the warriors stopped the fighting. Everyone was curious to witness the duel between those two. Rathas, elephant-riders, horse-riders and infantry surrounded those two bulls among men, witnessing what was going on, with unblinking eyes. The arrays of elephants stood
there, and so did the arrays of horses. There were divisions of chariots, stationed in counter-formation. They were
colourful with pearls and coral. They were decorated with gems and gold. They were colourful with standards and
ornaments and with golden armour. There were vaijayanti flags[Flags that signify victory (vijaya).] and caparisons, seats and blankets. There were
sparkling and sharp weapons on the horses. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The frontal lobes of the elephants
were decorated with gold and silver and there were garlands around their tusks. They looked like a net of clouds at
the end of the summer, bedecked with cranes and fireflies and decorated with lightning and flashes[The text uses airavata and shatahrada. Both mean lightning. So we have translated this as lightning and
flashes.]. Those on
our side and those on Yudhishthira's side were stationed. They wished to witness the battle between Yuyudhana
and the great-souled Drona. The gods assembled on their celestial vehicles, with Brahma and Shakra at the forefront. There were masses of siddhas and charanas, vidyadharas[Semi-divine species.] and giant serpents.

'"Those tigers among men displayed wonderful techniques of releasing, withdrawing and hurling weapons and
all of them beheld these diverse motions with wonder. The immensely strong ones exhibited the dexterity of their
hands in using weapons. Drona and Satyaki pierced each other with their arrows. In the battle, Dasharha[Satyaki.] used
swift and extremely firm arrows to sever Drona's arrows and then severed the immensely radiant one's bow too.
But in the twinkling of an eye, Bharadvaja's son grasped another bow. However, as he strung it, Satyaki swiftly
severed this too. Drona again grasped another bow and stood with it in his hand. As he repeatedly strung his bow,
it was again severed with sharp arrows. O Indra among kings! In the battle, Drona witnessed Yuyudhana's superhuman deed and thought about this in his mind. 'This kind of strength of arms has been seen in Rama[Parashurama.], Kartavirya, Dhananjaya and Bhishma, the tiger among men. This is now seen in the supreme one among the Satvata
lineage.' Having thought about this in his mind, Drona honoured his valour. The supreme among brahmanas beheld a dexterity that was like Vasava's. The foremost among those who was knowledgeable about weapons was
gratified, and so were the gods, with Vasava. O lord of the earth! That kind of dexterity of hand and swiftness of
action, as shown by Yuyudhana, had not been seen earlier by the gods, the gandharvas and the masses of siddhas
and charanas, though they had known what Drona was capable of doing. Drona, the destroyer of kshatriyas, then
picked up another bow. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The foremost among those who knew about weapons
released weapons in the battle. However, Satyaki repulsed them with the maya of his own weapons. He destroyed
them with his sharp arrows and it was extraordinary. His superhuman deeds were witnessed in the battle and no
one else was capable of these. This was the outcome of yoga. Those on your side, who were knowledgeable about
yoga, honoured this. Whatever weapon Drona used, Satyaki used that as well. Therefore, the preceptor, the
scorcher of enemies, fought carefully. O great king! The one who knew about the science of fighting became enraged. To slay Yuyudhana, he invoked a divine weapon. On seeing the extremely terrible agneya weapon, the destroyer of enemies, the great archer, released the divine varuna weapon. On beholding that both of them had resorted to the use of divine weapons, a great sound of lamentation arose. There were woes in the sky, from the beings
who had taken to the sky. However, the varuna and agneya weapons were pacified when they confronted each other's arrows.

'"At that time, the sun began its downward course in the sky. King Yudhishthira, Pandava Bhimasena and Naku-
la and Sahadeva wished to protect Satyaki. With Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, Virata, the Kekayas, the Mat-
syas and the soldiers from the Shalveyas quickly advanced against Drona. With Duhshasana at the forefront, thousands of princes advanced towards Drona, who was surrounded by the enemy. O king! A battle started between
them and your archers. The world was covered with dust and enveloped in that net of arrows. Everyone was anxious and nothing could be distinguished. The soldiers were covered in dust. But without any fear, the battle raged
on."'
