Vaishampayana said, 'The Vrishnis and the Andhakas tried in this way. But Death always wandered around, in
all their homes. His  embodied  form  was  that  of  a  fierce  and  malformed  man,  dark  and  tawny,  and  with  a
shaved head. Sometimes, the Vrishnis saw him looking into their houses. At other times, they couldn't see him.
Day by day, fierce and terrible winds began to blow and there were many other evil portents for the destruction of
the Vrishnis and the Andhakas and these made the body hair stand up. Rats covered the roads and the pots[Presumably water pots for drinking water, placed along the roads.] were
shattered. Sarika birds shrieked outside their houses and even inside the homes of the Vrishnis. Whether it was
night or whether it was day, those sounds did not cease. The cranes made sounds like owls. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! The goats made sounds like jackals. Pigeons wandered around in the houses of the Vrishnis and
the Andhakas. Goaded by destiny, there were other birds, pale in complexion and red of feet. Asses were born
from cows and elephants from donkeys. Cats were born from bitches and mice from mongooses. When they committed wicked deeds, the Vrishnis no longer repented. They hated and disrespected brahmanas, ancestors, gods and
seniors. Rama and Janardana were alone the exceptions. Wives deceived their husbands  and husbands  cheated
their wives. When a fire was lit, the flames circled to the left. Sometimes flames flared out and these were separately blue and red. When the sun was setting or rising, those wicked men always saw that it was surrounded by headless torsos. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O lord of men! When clean food was cooked in the kitchen, at the
time of eating, it was seen to be full of worms. When great-souled ones meditated and chanted, instead of those
sounds, the sounds of running feet could be heard, though no one was seen. The nakshatras repeatedly clashed
against each other. No one could any longer see his own planet[The planet of his birth.]. When Panchajanya[Krishna's conch shell.] was blown in the houses of
the Vrishnis and the Andhakas, in every direction, instead of its sound, one could hear the terrible sounds of donkeys braying. 'On seeing this Hrishikesha realized that the time of catastrophe had arrived. He saw that the thirteenth lunar tithi had merged into the night of the new moon and said, "Rahu has devoured the fourteenth and fifteenth lunar tithis. This happened at the time of the Bharata war and has again occurred for our destruction." Remembering that time, Janardana thought. The slayer of Keshi reflected[Keshi was a demon killed by Krishna.], "Thirty-six years have passed since the
time when Gandhari was tormented by sorrow on account of her sons and the slaying of her relatives. She was afflicted and the time has arrived. On an earlier occasion, when the battle formations were arrayed, Yudhishthira saw
similar extremely terrible portents and spoke about them. That kind of time has arrived." Thinking in this way, Vasudeva wished to make this come true[Gandhari had cursed Krishna, described in Section 81 (Volume 8). Krishna didn't want to falsify that curse.]. The scorcher of enemies instructed that they should leave for a visit to a
tirtha. On Keshava's instructions, the men issued such a proclamation. The bulls among men prepared to visit a
tirtha on the shores of the ocean.'
