'Sanjaya said, "We were first shattered by the infinitely energetic Arjuna. And because Yudhishthira was protected,
Drona's pledge was not fulfilled. All the warriors on your side had their armour splintered and were regarded as
having been vanquished. They were covered with dust. They were terribly anxious and glanced in the ten directions. Having obtained the permission of Bharadvaja's son[Drona.], they retreated. They were distressed on account of the
enemy, which was successful in its objective. They were severely humiliated in that battle. As they proceeded, they
heard all the beings praise Phalguna's[Arjuna's.] qualities and Keshava's[Krishna's.] affection towards the illustrious Arjuna. They
spent the night like those who had been cursed, reflecting on what had happened and resorting to silence.

'"When it was morning, Duryodhana spoke to Drona. The words had affection and petulance in them, since the
evil-minded one was overcome by the prosperity of the enemy. In everyone's hearing, the one who was eloquent
spoke these angry words. 'O supreme among brahmanas! There is no doubt that you have singled us out as those
who should be killed. Therefore, despite having approached Yudhishthira, you did not seize him. If you so wish, an
enemy that you glance towards in battle is incapable of escaping, even if the Pandavas, together with the immortals, desire to protect him. You were pleased and granted me a boon. But later, you did not act in accordance with
that. Those who are noble[The word used is arya.] never act so as to destroy the hopes of those who are devoted to them.' Having been
addressed in this unpleasant way, Bharadvaja's son spoke to the king. 'Knowing that I always seek to do what
brings you pleasure, you should not regard me in this way. The worlds, with the gods, the asuras, the gandharvas[Gandharvas are celestial musicians and semi-divine.],
the yakshas[Yakshas are semi-divine species and companions of Kubera, the god of treasure.], the serpents and the rakshasas, cannot defeat an army that is protected by Kiriti[Arjuna's name.]. O lord! Where
Govinda, the creator of the universe, and the commander Arjuna are stationed, other than Tryambaka[The one with three eyes, Shiva's name.], where is
the force that can overcome it? Today, I will bring down a supreme and brave maharatha[A maharatha is in general a mighty warrior. More specifically, a maharatha is skilled in the use of all weapons
and can take on ten thousand warriors single-handedly.]. Today, I am telling
you truthfully that it cannot but be otherwise. Today, I will construct a vyuha that cannot be penetrated even by the
residents of heaven. O king! But devise some means to take Arjuna away. There is nothing that is unknown to him.
There is nothing that he cannot achieve in battle. He has obtained strength and knowledge about fighting from different places.' After Drona had spoken in this way, the masses of samshaptakas again challenged Arjuna to a battle
in the southern direction. The battle that took place between Arjuna and the enemy was one the like of which had
not been seen before, nor heard of ever. O king! And Drona created a resplendent vyuha that was incapable of being looked at. It was like the sun when it reaches midday in its course and scorches down on everything. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On the instruction of his father's eldest brother, Abhimanyu penetrated the impenetrable chakra vyuha in many different ways. He performed an extremely difficult deed and killed many thousands of
brave ones. Then, six heroes attacked him together and he was finally slain by Duhshasana's son. All of us were
supremely delighted and the Pandavas were oppressed by grief. O king! After Subhadra's son had been killed, our
troops retreated."

'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! He was the son of a lion among men. He had just become a youth. On hearing
that he has been slain in battle, my mind is severely shattered. The dharma of kshatriyas, as laid down by those
who have set the principles of dharma, is terrible. Desiring a kingdom, brave ones shower down their weapons on
a child. He was a child and was reared in happiness. But he roamed around fearlessly. O Gavalgana's son[Sanjaya was the son of Gavalgana.]! Tell
me how many, skilled in the use of weapons, slew him. O Sanjaya! Subhadra's son was infinitely energetic and
sported around amidst that mass of chariots, wishing to penetrate. Tell me everything."

'Sanjaya replied, "O Indra among kings! You have asked me about the downfall of Subhadra's son and I will tell
you everything in detail. O king! Listen attentively. The young one penetrated and sported around amidst that array. He was like a forest fire amidst the enemy, burning down large numbers of creepers, grass and trees. Those on
your side were frightened of him, like the residents of a forest."'
