'Sanjaya said, "O lord of the earth! Sahadeva wished to advance against Drona. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that battle, Vaikartana Karna countered him. Sahadeva pierced Radheya with nine swift arrows. He again
pierced him with ten sharp arrows with straight tufts. Karna pierced him back with one hundred arrows with
straight tufts. Displaying the lightness of his hands, he quickly severed his bow. Madri's powerful son picked up
another bow. He pierced Karna with twenty arrows and it was extraordinary. Karna killed his horses with arrows
with straight tufts. With a broad-headed arrow, he swiftly conveyed his charioteer to Yama's eternal abode. Deprived of his chariot, Sahadeva grasped a sword and a shield. But Karna struck these down with his arrows and
laughed. He[Sahadeva.] then grasped an extremely terrible and extremely large club that was heavy and decorated with
gold. In that battle, he hurled it towards Vaikartana's chariot. It was violently released by Sahadeva and descended.
Karna shattered it with his arrows and made it fall down on the ground. On seeing that the club had been destroyed, Sahadeva swiftly hurled a lance towards Karna. But it was struck down by the arrows. O great king! On
seeing that Karna was stationed before him, Sahadeva was filled with rage and descended from his chariot. He
picked up the wheel of a chariot and hurled it towards Adhiratha's son. It descended powerfully, like an upraised
wheel of time. The son of a suta shattered it with thousands of arrows. Having rendered the wheel unsuccessful,
the great-souled Sahadeva was restrained with arrows and left the battle. O bull among the Bharata lineage! For a
short while, Radheya followed him. O lord of the earth! He laughed and spoke these words to Sahadeva. 'O brave
one! In a battle, do not fight with rathas who are superior. O son of Madri! Fight with those who are your equals.
Do not entertain any doubt about my words.' He then touched him with the tip of his bow and again spoke these
words. 'In the battle there, Arjuna is endeavouring to fight with the Kurus. O son of Madri! Go there. Or if you
wish, go home.' Having spoken those words, Karna, supreme among rathas, laughed. On his chariot, he proceeded
towards the Panchala and Pandu soldiers. O king! The maharatha was devoted to the truth and remembered the
words that he had given to Kunti[To the effect that he would not touch any of the Pandavas, with the exception of Arjuna.]. Though the destroyer of enemies could have killed Madri's son in the battle,
he did not slay him. O king! Sahadeva was miserable and afflicted by the arrows. Tormented by the stakes of Karna's words, he no longer wished to remain alive. In that battle, he swiftly ascended the chariot of the great-souled
Janamejaya from Panchala.

'"Virata advanced against Drona, powerfully and swiftly. But the king of Madra shrouded the archer with a torrent of arrows. In the battle, both of them were firm archers and a duel commenced between them. O king! It was
like that between Jambha[Demon killed by Indra.] and Vasava in ancient times. O great king! Virata was the leader of an army and the
king of Madra quickly struck him with a hundred sharp arrows with straight tufts. The king[Virata.] pierced him back
with nine sharp arrows. He then struck him again with seventy-three arrows and yet again with one hundred. The
king of Madra slew the four horses that were yoked to his chariot. In that encounter, he brought down his charioteer and his standard from his chariot. With his horses slain, the maharatha swiftly descended from his chariot. He
stretched his bow and released sharp arrows. While the entire world looked on, Shatanika[Not to be confused with the Shatanika who is Droupadi's son. This Shatanika is Virata's brother.] saw that his brother's
mounts had been slain and swiftly approached him on his chariot. In that great battle, the king of Madra saw that
Shatanika was approaching. He pierced him with many arrows and conveyed him to Yama's eternal abode. When
the brave one had been killed, Virata swiftly ascended his supreme chariot. That chariot was decorated with standards and garlands. His eyes were dilated with rage and his valour was doubled. He quickly enveloped the king of
Madra's chariot with arrows. The king of Madra became angry. He used a hundred arrows with straight tufts to
firmly strike Virata, the leader of an army, in the chest. O great king! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Having
been thus severely struck, Virata sank down on the floor of his chariot. He was gravely struck and lost his senses.
He was wounded by the arrows and his charioteer bore him away from the field of battle. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! In the night, that great army fled. Shalya, the adornment of a battle, slaughtered them with hundreds of arrows.

'"O Indra among kings! On seeing that the soldiers were running away, Vasudeva and Dhananjaya quickly arrived at the spot where Shalya was stationed. O king! Alambusa, Indra among rakshasas, advanced against them.
He was on a supreme chariot that possessed eight wheels. Pishachas, terrible in visage, were yoked to it and had
the faces of horses. The flags were red and yellow and it was decorated with red garlands. It was made out of black
iron and was covered with fierce and large bear skins. A fierce king of vultures was perched on the standard. Its
wings were spotted and it dilated its eyes as it shrieked. It had an elongated beak. O king! That rakshasa was as
beautiful as an unbroken mass of collyrium. He advanced against Arjuna, like a hurricane against a king of mountains. O king! He showered down hundreds of storms of arrows towards Arjuna's head. In that battle, there was an
extremely fierce encounter between the man and the rakshasa. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On witnessing it,
everyone was filled with delight. Arjuna struck him with one hundred arrows. He severed his standard and his umbrella with nine sharp arrows. He pierced his charioteer with three arrows and his trivenu with another three. He
severed his bow with one arrow and killed his four horses with four arrows. Deprived of his chariot, he[Alambusa.] raised a
sword, but that was shattered into two pieces with arrows. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Partha then struck
the Indra among rakshasas with four sharp arrows and he fled in fear. Having defeated him, Arjuna quickly advanced in Drona's direction. O king! He showered large numbers of arrows as he proceeded, towards men, elephants and horses. O great king! They were slaughtered by the illustrious Pandava. The soldiers were brought
down, like trees uprooted by a storm. They were thus shattered by the great-souled Phalguna. O lord of the earth!
The entire army of your sons was routed and fled."'
