Bhishma said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage. He[Bali.] was sighing like a serpent. Shakra laughed at him
and again spoke words that were more piercing than those uttered earlier. 'When you advanced earlier, you
were surrounded by one thousand vehicles and relatives. You scorched all the worlds and disregarded all of us. O
Bali! Behold your extremely miserable state now. Your relatives have abandoned you. Are you grieving or are you
not grieving? You obtained unsurpassed delight earlier. You were stationed, with all the worlds under your subjugation. You have been brought down now. Are you grieving or are you not grieving?'

'"Bali replied, 'I see that all of this is transient and is because of what the progress of time has wrought on me.
O Shakra! Since I know the truth about all of this, I do not sorrow. O lord of the immortals! These bodies of beings
have an end. O Shakra! That is the reason I do not grieve. This is not because of any crime that I have committed.
This life force and the physical body are born together and last till death. They grow up together and they are destroyed together. Having obtained this existence[Of an ass.], I am powerless only temporarily. Since I know this, because of
that knowledge, I suffer no pain. Just as all flows head towards the ocean, all beings end in death. O wielder of the
vajra! Men who know this are never confused. Those who do not know this are overcome by rajas and confusion.
They sink down when they face hardships and their intelligence is destroyed. A man who gains intelligence destroys all his sins. Bereft of sins, one obtains virtue. Such a person is hale and delighted. Those who retreat from
it[From virtue.] are born again and again. They are tormented by misery and are goaded by that which does not lead to welfare. Whether there is success in obtaining prosperity, whether there is adversity, whether one is alive or dead and
whether there are fruits of joy or misery, I do not hate them. Nor do I crave them. There is a slayer and there is
someone who is slain. But if a man thinks that he is the slayer, he is himself slain. Whether it is the slain or
whether it is the slayer, neither of them truly knows. O Maghavan! A person who kills and is victorious and then
boasts about his manliness, is not actually the doer. The actor who has done this is elsewhere. Who is the one who
has brought about the creation and the destruction of the worlds? It may be thought that this task has been accomplished by a doer. But the actual doer is someone else. All beings are generated from earth, wind, space, water and
light, as the fifth. Therefore, where is the scope for sorrow? Realize this great knowledge-a weak person, a strong
one, a malformed person, a handsome one, an unfortunate person and a fortunate one, are all afflicted by time,
deep in its own energy. Since I know that I have come under the subjugation of time, why should I be pained?
What is being burnt is something that has already been burnt[Because of destiny.]. What is being slain is something that has already
been slain. What is being destroyed is something that has been destroyed earlier. A man gets what has already been
obtained for him. There is no island[Destiny is being compared to an ocean.]. Where is the further shore? No boundary can be seen. This destiny is divine. Though I think about it, I do not see an end to it. O lord of Shachi! Had I not seen that time is behind the destruction of beings, then I might have felt delight, insolence and anger. I subsist on chaff. I have been abandoned
by the people of the household and am in the form of a donkey. Knowing this, you are condemning me. If I so desire, even now, I can assume many kinds of forms that are so terrible that, looking at them, you will run away from
me. But it is time that gives everything and it is time that takes everything away. Time pervades everything. O
Shakra! Do not boast about your manliness. O Purandara! Earlier, everyone was distressed because of my rage. O
Shakra! I know about the eternal dharma of the worlds. Like me, know about this and do not be overcome with
amazement. Power and influence are never due to one's own self. Your consciousness is like that of a child. It is
just as it was in ancient times[It has not progressed.]. O Maghavan! Glance towards everything with your intelligence and obtain what
is best for you. The gods, men, the ancestors, the gandharvas, the serpents and the rakshasas-all of them used to
be under my subjugation earlier. O Vasava! You know this. "We bow down before the directions where Bali, Virochana's son, is stationed." Their intelligence confused because of envy, this is what they used to say to me. O
lord of Shachi! I do not sorrow because of that reverence that was shown to me. My intelligence is firm and I will
remain under the subjugation of the one who ordains. One may see a person who has been born in a noble lineage.
He is handsome and influential. But with his advisers, he lives in misery. This can be nothing other than destiny. O
Shakra! On the other hand, one may see a person who has been born in an inferior lineage and is stupid. Despite
his inferior birth, with his advisers, he may live in happiness. This can be nothing other than destiny. O Shakra! An
auspicious  and  beautiful  woman  will  be  seen  to  suffer  from  misfortune.  O  Shakra!  An  inauspicious  and  ugly
woman will be seen to be fortunate. O Shakra! My state is not because of anything I have done. O Shakra! My
state is not because of anything you have done. O wielder of the vajra! Your state is not because of you and our
state is not because of us. O Shatakratu! This is not because of anything you have done, not to speak of something
I have done. Progressively, prosperity and adversity do not come about because of deeds. I see you in your resplendence, stationed as the king of the gods. You are handsome and radiant and are roaring at me. This would not have
happened had time not attacked me and remained stationed here. Had that not been the case, despite your holding
the vajra, I would have used my bare fists to bring you down now. But this is not the time for exhibiting valour.
The time for exhibiting forgiveness has arrived. Everything is established in time and time cooks everything. There
was a time when I was the lord of the danavas and was worshipped. I roared and tormented and there was no one
who could advance against me. O king of the gods! I single-handedly robbed the twelve great-souled Adityas of
their energy, with you included in that group. O Vasava! I was the one who soaked up the water and released it
again[Bali had become Indra then.]. I was the one who offered heat and light to the three worlds. I was the one who protected and I was the
one who destroyed. I was the one who gave and I was the one who took away. I was the one who restrained and I
was the one who released. I was the lord and master of the worlds. O lord of the immortals! That lordship has now
been taken away. I have been assailed by the soldiers of time and none of that can be seen in me. O lord of Shachi!
I am not the doer. You are not the doer. No one else is the doer. O Shakra! It is time that progressively destroys the
worlds, as it desires. People who are learned about the Vedas say that the year is his mouth[Time is being equated with Brahma.]. The months and the
fortnights are his body and days and nights are his attire. The seasons are the gates[Interpreted as the senses.]. There are also people who,
because of their learning, say that everything should be thought of as him. The five sheaths one thinks of are nothing but his five aspects[These five sheaths cover the atman and are annamaya (related to food), pranamaya (related to energy),
manomaya (related to the mind), vijnanamaya (related to knowledge) and anandamaya (related to bliss).]. Brahma is deep and fathomless, like a gigantic ocean. He is without beginning and without destruction. He is said to be supreme and without decay. Though he himself possesses no attributes, he assumes attributes in beings. Men who have comprehended the truth certainly think of him in this way. They think
that  he  brings  about  the  progression  and  regression  of  beings.  But  there  is  no  progression  for  that  which  is
inside[The atman.]. It is above nature. He is the resort of all beings. Where can one go, other than to that resort? One cannot
avoid this by running, or by remaining stationary. All the five senses are incapable of seeing him. Some speak of
him as Agni and some speak of him as Prajapati. Others say he is the seasons, the fortnights, the months, the days
and the moments. There are others who say he is the forenoon, the afternoon, or midday, or an instant. Virtuous
ones speak of him as one and many. Know him as time, the one who has everything under his subjugation. O Vasa-
va! There have been many thousands of Indras. O lord of Shachi! Their strength and valour were just like your
own. O Shakra! You are extremely strong. You are the king of the gods and are proud of your strength. However,
when  it  is  time,  immensely  valorous  time  will  pacify  you.  It  takes  away  everything.  O  Shakra!  Therefore, be
steady. Neither I, nor you, nor those who have come before us, are capable of transgressing it. You have obtained
this supreme royal prosperity now. Know that it was earlier vested in me. It is not real and does not remain with
one person alone. It was established in one thousand Indras before this and all of them were superior to you. O lord
of the gods! It is unstable. It abandoned me and has approached you now. O Shakra! You should not boast again.
You should be tranquil. If you have such sentiments, it will abandon you and swiftly go to someone else.'"'
