'"Galava said, 'O Garutman[Garuda.]! O enemy of the kings of serpents! O Suparna! O Vinata's son! O Tarkshya! Take
me to the east, where Dharma's two eyes are stationed. Take me to the eastern direction, the one you have described first. You have said that the gods are present there. You have truly said that dharma and truth reside there. I
wish to meet all those gods. O Aruna's younger brother! I wish to see those gods.'"

'Narada said, "Then Vinata's son told the brahmana, 'Mount on me,' and the sage Galava climbed onto Garuda.

'"Galava said, 'O destroyer of serpents! As you travel, your beauty can be seen, like the sun, the one who brings
light in a thousand rays, in the forenoon. O bird! As you travel, I can see how the trees are uprooted by the wind
created by your wings and leave a trail behind. O traveller in the sky! The storm created by your winds seems to
drag up the earth, with its oceans, mountains, forests and groves. Because of the great force created by the wind of
your wings, the water seems to be raised up into the sky, with its fish, serpents and crocodiles. I can see fish, whale
and timingilas[Aquatic animals that feed on whales (timis).], similar in their forms, churned up and also serpents, similar in forms to men. I have been rendered deaf because of the roar of the great ocean. I can hear nothing. I can see nothing. I do not even know why I
am here. Please travel slowly. Remember that you may kill a brahmana. O father[The word used is tata.]! O bird! The sun cannot be
seen, or the directions, or the sky. I can only see darkness. I cannot discern your body. O one born from an egg! I
can only see your two eyes, glistening like jewels. I cannot see your body, nor my own. At every step, I see fire rising out of the water. Swiftly extinguish it and again restore tranquillity to my eyes. O Vinata's son! You have been
travelling for a long time. Stop now. O destroyer of serpents! There is no reason for me to go. O one who travels at
great speed! Refrain, because I cannot bear your speed. I have promised my preceptor eight hundred horses that
are as white as the rays of the moon, with a single black ear each. O one born from an egg! But I see no means of
keeping that pledge. Therefore, the only path that I can see is to give up my own life. I possess no riches. I do not
have wealthy well-wishers. Even with great riches, this objective is incapable of being attained.'"

'Narada said, "Galava spoke many miserable words in this way. But Vinata's son laughed and continued to travel. He replied, 'O brahmana rishi! If you wish to kill yourself, you cannot be very wise. Death cannot be artificially
chosen. Death is determined by the supreme god. Why did you not tell me this earlier? There is great ease with
which you will accomplish your objective. On the breast of the ocean, there is this mountain named Rishabha. O
Galava! Rest here and having eaten, we will return.'"'
