Vaishampayana said, 'After this, Krishna instructed Daruka to yoke the horses. In a short while, Daruka informed him that the horses had been yoked. Pandava instructed that arrangements be made for the journey.

"Make the arrangements. We will leave for the city of Gajasahvya." O lord of the earth! Thus addressed, the soldiers made the arrangements and informed the infinitely energetic Partha that everything was ready. Krishna and
Pandava ascended the chariot and departed. O lord of the earth! On their way, they carried on a wonderful and affectionate conversation. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! Vasudeva was on the chariot and the greatly energetic Dhananjaya again spoke these words to him. "O extender of the Vrishni lineage! It is because of your favours
that the king has obtained victory. The enemy has been slain and he has obtained the kingdom, without any thorns.
O Madhusudana! The Pandavas possess a protector in you. You were the boat that enabled us to cross the ocean of
the Kurus. O creator of the universe! I bow down before you. O soul of the universe! O origin of the universe! I
know you only to the extent that you allow my mind to know you. O Madhusudana! The fire has always been created out of your energy. O lord! You find pleasure in your sporting. Heaven and earth are the result of your maya.
Everything in this universe, mobile and immobile, is established in you. You are the eternal creator of all the different categories of beings, earth, the firmament and everything mobile and immobile. The sparkling moonlight is
your smile. The seasons are your senses. The moving wind is your breath of life. Eternal death is your rage. O immensely intelligent one! Shri, seated on a lotus, is always established in your favours. You are sport. You are contentment. You are fortitude. You are forgiveness. Everything mobile and immobile is based in you. O unblemished
one! You are said to be the destruction that comes at the end of a yuga. Even if I try for an extremely long period
of time, I am incapable of recounting your qualities. O lotus-eyed one! You are the supreme atman. I bow down
before you. O unassailable one! I know from Narada, Devala, Krishna Dvaipayana and the grandfather of the Kurus[Bhishma.] that everything is based in you. You are alone the lord of men. O unblemished one! Because of your favours
towards me, you told me that too. O Janardana! I will properly follow all this. What you have done to ensure our
pleasure is wonderful. You slew Kouravya, Dhritarashtra's wicked son, in the battle and burnt down his soldiers. It
was only thereafter that I defeated them in the encounter. You performed the deeds whereby I obtained the victory.
It was through the valour of your intelligence that we could defeat Duryodhana in the battle. You showed us the
means to slay Karna, the wicked Saindhava and Bhurishrava. O Devaki's son! Without any reflection, I will do
everything that you have affectionately asked me to. O one who knows about dharma! O unblemished one! I will
meet King Yudhishthira, who has dharma in his soul, and request him to let you go. O lord! I think it is a good idea
that you should go to Dvaraka. O Madhusudana! You will soon see the maternal uncle[Meaning Arjuna's maternal uncle, Vasudeva, Krishna's father.], the invincible Baladeva
and all the other bulls among the Vrishnis." Conversing in this way, they reached Varanasahvya[Hastinapura.].

'It was full of people and they entered cheerfully. O great king! They went to Dhritarashtra's house, which was
like Shakra's residence, and saw Dhritarashtra, lord of men, the immensely intelligent Vidura, King Yudhishthira,
the invincible Bhimasena and the two Pandavas who were the sons of Madri. Dhritarashtra was seated and the unvanquished  Yuyutsu  stood  before  him.  The  immensely  wise  Gandhari  was  seen,  with  Pritha,  the  beautiful
Krishna[Droupadi.], Subhadra and all the other women of the Bharata lineage surrounding Gandhari. Those two scorchers
of enemies approached King Dhritarashtra. They announced their names and touched his feet. They worshipped
Kshatta and asked him if he was well. With the aged king, they honoured him too. O great king! Since it was night,
Dhritarashtra granted the extenders of the Kuru lineage and the intelligent Janardana permission to leave for their
houses. Having obtained the king's permission, they went to their own respective residences. The valiant Krishna
went to Dhananjaya's house. As is proper, he was honoured there with every object of desire. With Dhananjaya as
his companion, the intelligent Krishna slept.

'When night was over and it was morning, they performed their morning ablutions properly and went to Dharmaraja's residence. The great-minded Dharmaraja was there, with his advisers. Those two immensely strong ones
entered and saw him. Dharmaraja was seated and they saw him, like the Ashvins meeting the king of the gods.
Varshneya and the bull among the Kuru lineage approached the king. He affectionately gave them permission to be
seated. On seeing them, the intelligent king wished to speak to them. The best among eloquent ones, supreme
among kings, spoke these words. "O brave ones! O extenders of the Yadu and Kuru lineages! I think you wish to
say something. Do not hesitate and quickly tell me. I will do everything." Having been thus addressed, Phalguna,
accomplished in speech, humbly approached and replied to Dharmaraja in these words. "O king! The powerful Vasudeva has been away for a long time. With your permission, he wishes to see his father. If you so think, please
grant him permission to go. O brave one! Grant him leave to go to the city of Anarta[Anarta was the area of the Yadava kingdom.]." Yudhishthira replied, "O
Pundarikaksha! O fortunate one! O Madhusudana! Go now to the city of Dvaravati and see the lord who is the son
of Shura[Vasudeva was the son of Shura or Shurasena.]. O mighty-armed one! O Keshava! It pleases me that you should go. You have not seen my maternal
uncle and the goddess Devaki for a long time. O immensely wise one! O Madhava! Meet my maternal uncle, Vasudeva, and Baladeva and convey my words of worship, as they deserve. O Madhava! Always remember me, Bhi-
ma, supreme among powerful ones, Phalguna, Nakula and Sahadeva. O mighty-armed one! O unblemished one!
Having seen your father and the Vrishnis in the land of Anarta, you will again return for the horse sacrifice. O Sat-
vata! Depart after taking many kinds of jewels and riches and all the other desirable objects. O Madhava! O brave
one! It is through your favours that we have slain our enemies and obtained the entire earth." Kouravya Dharmaraja Yudhishthira spoke in this way. Vasudeva, supreme among men, replied in these words. "O mighty-armed one!
All the jewels, riches and the entire earth only belong to you now. O lord! You alone will be the lord of all the riches that are there in my house." Having said this, Gada's eldest brother worshipped Dharma's valiant son[In age, Krishna was younger than Yudhishthira.]. He met
his father's sister in the proper way[Krishna met Kunti, his father's sister.]. He worshipped her and circumambulated her. He was appropriately greeted
by her and by also Vidura and all the others. Gada's elder brother then left the city of Nagapura[Hastinapura.] on a divine chariot, with four tawny horses yoked to it. With the permission of Yudhishthira and his father's sister, the mighty-
armed Janardana also took Subhdra on his chariot[Subhadra clearly wanted to visit her father's household.]. He departed, surrounded by large numbers of citizens. The
one with the best of apes on his banner[Arjuna.], Satyaki, Madravati's sons, Bhima himself, with the valour of a king of
elephants, and Vidura followed the infinitely intelligent Madhava. Then the valiant Janardana asked all the extenders of the Kuru kingdom and Vidura to return. He asked Daruka and Satyaki to swiftly urge the horses. Janardana,
the one who crushed large numbers of the enemy, proceeded, followed by the foremost among the Shini lineage.
The powerful one advanced towards the city of Anarta, like Shatakratu going to heaven after slaying large numbers
of the enemy.'
