'Dhritarashtra asked, "What did those two great-souled ones, Vasudeva and Arjuna, say? O immensely wise one!
Tell me. I wish to listen to your words."

'Sanjaya said, "O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Listen to me and I will tell you how I found
Krishna and Dhananjaya and what those two brave ones said. O king! After purifying myself, I entered the quarters of those gods among men, looking at my toes and joining my hands in salutation. Abhimanyu and the twins
are not allowed entry into the abode where the two Krishnas, and Krishna[Krishnaa, Droupadi.] and the beautiful Satyabhama, reside.
Both of them were drunk with liquor and both had their bodies smeared with sandalwood. They wore garlands, excellent garments and were adorned with divine ornmanets. The two destroyers of enemies were seated on a large
and golden couch, which was covered with many carpets. I saw that Keshava's feet were on Arjuna's lap, while the
great-souled Arjuna's were on Krishna and Satya[Satyabhama.]. Partha pointed out a golden footstool to me. After touching it
with my hands, I seated myself on the ground[Sanjaya honoured the footstool, but did not wish to sit on it.]. When Partha removed his feet from the footstool, I saw two longitudinal auspicious marks on the soles of his pure feet. Having seen those two dark, large and young men seated
on the same seat, like the trunks of shala trees, I was struck by great fear. They were like Indra and Vishnu together. The evil-souled one[Duryodhana.] does not understand this, because he depends on Drona and Bhishma and listens to Karna's bragging. Since these two obeyed Dharmaraja's instructions, I became convinced in my mind that his desires
would be met. Having been honoured with food and drink and a garment, and having been shown respect, I placed
my hands on my head[As a sign of respect.] and conveyed the message. Partha's hand bore the auspicious marks made by a bow and
arrows. With this, he nudged Keshava's feet, prompting him to reply. Krishna is like Indra in his valour. He was
adorned with all the ornaments and he was as upright as Indra's standard. The most eloquent of speakers spoke
these words. They were appropriate and pleasant words. But though they were mild, they were extremely terrible
and frightening for Dhritarashtra's sons. I listened to the words of the one who should be heard. The syllables were
trained and clear. They were meant for everyone's welfare. But at the end, they dried up my heart."

'"Vasudeva said, 'O Sanjaya! In the presence of the foremost among the Kurus and in Drona's hearing, speak
these words to the intelligent Dhritarashtra. "Offer a large number of sacrifices and donate stipends to the brahmanas. Enjoy yourselves with your sons and wives. A great danger confronts you. Distribute your riches among
deserving ones. Have sons born out of love. Do good deeds towards those you love. The king[Yudhishthira.] will soon be victorious. That old debt is still impaled in my heart, because I have not repaid it. When I was far away, Krishna cried
out, 'Govinda[Govinda is Krishna's name. Krishnaa (Droupadi) had mentally appealed to Krishna when the Pandavas faced
difficulties at the time of gambling with the dice. But Krishna could not help, because he was far away.]!' Savyasachi's Gandiva bow is full of power and is invincible. He has an enmity with you and
that is the reason I am helping him now. With me as an aide, who wishes to challenge Partha, even if it were to be
Purandara himself, unless because of destiny, his time has come? He can raise the earth with his arms. He can angrily burn down these beings. He can dislodge the thirty gods from heaven. Who can defeat Arjuna in battle?
Among the gods, asuras, men, yakshas, gandharvas and serpents, I do not see anyone who is capable of withstanding the Pandava in battle. An extraordinary wonder in the city of Virata is spoken about and is sufficient example,
when a single one was enough to counter many. Faced with Pandu's son alone in the city of Virata, they were shattered and fled in all the directions. This is sufficient example. Such strength, valour, energy, speed, dexterity of
hand, perseverance and fortitude are found in no one other than Partha."'"

'Sanjaya said, "Thus spoke Hrishikesha, delighting Partha with words that roared like the chastiser of Paka[Indra. Indra is the god of rain. Indra also killed a demon named Paka.] in
the sky, when it is the time for rains. After having heard Keshava's words, Kiriti Arjuna, the one with the white
horses, himself spoke words that were extremely terrifying."'
