'Sanjaya said, "On learning that Bhishma had been slain, Adhiratha's son, the son of a suta, wished to save the Kurus, who were like a shattered boat in the fathomless ocean. He bore fraternal feelings towards the distressed ones.
He wanted your son's army to cross over. On hearing that Shantanu's maharatha and undecaying son, Indra among
men, had been brought down, Vrisha Karna[Vrisha is Karna's name.], the destroyer of enemies and supreme among those who wield
bows, swiftly arrived. After Bhishma, supreme among rathas, was slain by the enemy, the Kurus were like a boat
submerged in the ocean. He wished that your son's army might be able to cross over.

'"Karna said, 'He possessed fortitude, intelligence, valour, energy, self-control, truth, all the qualities of a hero
and divine weapons. Humility, affection and pleasant speech existed in Bhishma. He was always grateful and
killed those who hated brahmanas. These attributes were eternal in him, like Lakshmi in the moon. That destroyer
of enemy heroes has now obtained peace and I think that all the other warriors have already been killed. Because
everything in this world is assigned by action, there is nothing that is permanent. When the one who was great in
his vows has been slain, who can certainly say today that the sun will rise tomorrow? He possessed the power of
the Vasus. He was born from the energy of the Vasus. That lord of the earth has returned to the Vasus again. O Kurus! You should sorrow for your riches, your sons, the earth and the army[There is a pun that can't be captured in the English. Vasu means riches or prosperity and the earth is Vasundhara,
the store of riches.].'"
'Sanjaya said, "The granter of boons, the one who was great in his powers, was brought down. Shantanu's son
was foremost in the world and was greatly energetic. The Bharatas were defeated and dispirited. O king! Karna began to console your sons and your soldiers and hearing this, the brave ones lamented and shed tears from their
eyes, as copious as the words of woe. But urged by the kings, they returned again to the great battle and roared
again. The bull among all maharathas then spoke these delightful words to the bulls among rathas.

'"Karna said, 'This transient world is always moving[Heading towards death.]. Noticing this, I think of everything as temporary. When
all of you were present, how could that bull among the Kurus, who was like a mountain, be brought down in battle? Shantanu's maharatha son has been brought down, as if the sun has resorted to the ground. The kings are unable to withstand Dhananjaya, like trees against a storm that uproots mountains. With the foremost ones killed,
they are dispirited and their bravery has been destroyed by the enemy. I will be their protector now and protect the
army of the Kurus in battle, just as the great-souled one did. Such a burden now devolves on me. I notice that this
world is transient. Since that skilled one has been brought down in the battle, why should I have any fear about the
battle? I will roam around on the field of battle and use my straight-tufted arrows to convey the bulls among the
Kurus[Meaning the Pandavas.] to Yama's abode. Knowing that fame is the supreme objective in this world, I will kill the enemy in battle, or lie down myself. Yudhishthira possesses steadfastness, intelligence, dharma and spirit. Vrikodara is the
equal of one hundred elephants in valour. Arjuna has enterprise and is the son of the lord of the thirty gods. That
army is not easy to defeat, even by the immortals. The twins are the equal of Yama in battle and that army also has
Satyaki and Devaki's son. It is like death with a gaping mouth. A coward who approaches that army will not return. The learned ones say that austerities have to be countered with austerities and force with force. My mind is
firmly fixed on resisting the enemy and protecting my own. O charioteer! I will go and counter the power of those
intelligent ones and obtain victory today. I will accomplish this deed of a virtuous man, or give up my life and follow Bhishma. I will kill large numbers of the enemy in battle, or having been slain, will go to the world of heroes.
The women and children are crying for help. The manliness of Dhritarashtra's son has been defeated. O charioteer!
I know my duty. Therefore, I will vanquish the enemies of the son of Dhritarashtra. I will protect the Kurus and
slaughter the sons of Pandu, even if it means that I have to give up my life in this dreadful fight. I will kill large
numbers of the enemy in battle and give the kingdom to Dhritarashtra's son. Fasten my beautiful, golden and
bright armour, radiant with jewels. Bring my helmet, like the sun in brilliance, and my bow and arrows, like virulent snakes. Fasten sixteen quivers and divine bows. Also bring swords, lances, heavy clubs and the conch shell
that is decorated with gold. Bring my victorious and golden standard, with the complexion of a lotus and bearing
the marks of a victorious and healthy elephant. Have it cleaned with an excellent garment and decorate it with
colourful garlands and nets. Bring swift and white horses that have the hue of the clouds. They should be well-fed
and bathed in water from golden pots, and sanctified with mantras. They should possess golden harnesses. O son of
a charioteer! Quickly. Quickly. Bring an excellent chariot with nets of gold, decorated with gems and with the radiance of the moon and the sun. Let it be furnished with all objects and weapons. Let it be yoked to swift horses.
Bring colourful and powerful bows with the supreme of bowstrings, so that they are capable of striking. Let the
large quivers be filled with arrows. Let me be dressed with body-armour. Swiftly bring me everything needed for
departure. O brave one! Let golden and brass vessels be filled with perfume. Bring garlands and adorn my body
with them. Let the drums quickly announce my victory. O charioteer! Take me swiftly to the spot where Kiriti,
Vrikodara, Dharma's son and the twins are. I will confront and kill them in battle. Or I will be slain by the enemy
and follow Bhishma. That army has King Yudhishthira, who is firmly devoted to the truth, Bhima, Arjuna, Vasudeva, Satyaki and the Srinjayas. I think that it cannot be defeated by the kings. But even if Death, who robs everything, were to continually protect Kiriti in this encounter, I will confront him in battle and slay him. Or I will follow Bhishma's path to Yama. I am not saying that I will go there in the midst of these brave ones. Those who create dissension among friends and those who are weak in their devotion are evil-minded and are not my aides[Without specifically naming anyone, Karna is clearly casting aspersions on some on the Kourava side.].'"
'Sanjaya said, "He rode out on an excellent, supreme and firm chariot, which possessed a beautiful seat that was
decorated with gold. It had a standard and was yoked to steeds that were as fleet as the wind. He rode out for victory. The bull among rathas, on white horses, was worshipped by the great-souled Kurus. The terrible archer left for
the battle and went to where the bull among the Bharata lineage[Bhishma.] was. The army was large and had standards.
Karna's chariot was embellished with gold, pearls, jewels and diamonds. It was yoked to well-trained horses and
roared like the sound of the clouds. It was as energetic as the sun. The archer was resplendent on his resplendent
chariot. He was like the fire in his complexion and like the fire in his brilliance. Adhiratha's maharatha son was
stationed on his chariot, like the king of the gods established on his own vimana."'
