Yudhishthira said, "O father! You have recounted the fruits of donations and I have heard. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Food has specially been praised. What are the great and supreme fruits obtained from donating drinks? O grandfather! I wish to hear about this in detail."

'Bhishma replied, "O bull among Bharatas! I will accurately tell you about this. O one with truth as his valour! I
will tell you about this now. Listen. O unblemished one! I will tell you everything about gifts of drinks. I think that
the benefit that a man obtains from donating food and drinks is supreme and there is no other gift that is equal to
these. O son! In every way, life is upheld through food. Therefore, in this world, it is held to be the supreme donation. It is through food that the energy and strength of creatures are always increased. Therefore, Prajapati has said
that the donation of food is supreme. O Kounteya! Savitri's auspicious words about this have also been heard. O
immensely intelligent one! They were uttered on the occasion of a sacrifice of the gods. 'If a man donates food, he
donates life. There is no gift in this world that is superior to granting life[While it is not clear from the text, this seems to be a Savitri quote.].' O mighty-armed one! You have also
heard Lomasha's words, spoken in earlier times, when Shibi granted life to the pigeon[This incident has been described in Section 33 (Volume 3).]. O lord of the earth! If a
person  donates food  to a brahmana, he grants life and obtains a superior end. That is what we  have heard. O
supreme among the Kuru lineage! Drinks are superior to food. Without water, nothing can exist. The illustrious
Soma, the lord of  the large number of  planets, was  created from water. O  great king! Amrita, sudha[Sudha has multiple meanings. It is best taken here as nectar.],  svaha,
vashat, food, herbs and medicinal plants have originated from water. O lord of the earth! The breath of life of creatures results from this. Amrita is food for the gods and sudha is food for the serpents. Svadha is said to be food for
the ancestors and plants and herbs are food for animals. The learned have said that food is the breath of life for humans. O tiger among men! All of these have resulted from drink. Therefore, there is nothing superior to a gift of
drink. A man who desires his own prosperity must always gift it. O lord of the earth! A gift of drink ensures praise,
fame and long life. O Kounteya! One who gives water is always established above his enemies. He obtains all the
objects of desire and eternal fame. He is freed from sins. After death, he obtains the infinite. O tiger among men! O
immensely radiant one! A person who gifts water goes to heaven. He obtains the indestructible and eternal worlds.
This is what Manu has said."'
