Vaishampayana said, 'When the terrible war was imminent, the illustrious rishi Vyasa, best among all those who
knew all the Vedas and Satyavati's son, the grandfather of the Bharatas, watched, in the morning and the evening[The Critical edition may have got this wrong. It uses the word sandhya, which means both morning and dusk.
Some non-critical versions use the word sainya. In that case, Vyasa would have seen the soldiers extending to
the front and the rear (instead of morning and dusk) and that fits better.].
The illustrious one could see the past, the present and the future. He met the king, Vichitravirya's son[Dhritarashtra was Vichitravirya's son because his mother was Vichitravirya's wife. But Dhritarashtra was actually
Vyasa's son. In that sense, Vyasa was a grandfather.], in private,
in distress and in sorrow over the evil conduct of his sons and spoke these words.

'Vyasa said, "O king! The time has arrived for you, your sons and the lords of the earth. They have assembled in
battle and will kill each other. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Their time is over and they will be destroyed.
Remember that all this is due to destiny and do not sorrow in your mind. O lord of the earth! If you wish to witness
the battle, I will give you sight, so that you can see the war."

'Dhritarashtra replied, "O supreme among brahmarshis! I do not wish to see my relatives being killed. Through
your energy, I wish to hear about the smallest details in this war."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Since he did not wish to see the war, but wished to hear about it, the lord of all boons
granted a boon to Sanjaya[In earlier sections, such as Section 60, there is a suggestion that Sanjaya knew what was going on, without being
actually present. However, the boon of being able to see from afar, is bestowed here.].

'Vyasa said, "O king! This Sanjaya will describe the war to you. Nothing in this entire battle will remain unseen
to him. O king! Having obtained this divine eyesight, Sanjaya will know everything about the battle and will recount it to you. Whether it is evident or hidden, whether it is night or day, Sanjaya will know everything, even if it
is thought of in the mind. Weapons will not pierce him. Nor will he be constrained by exhaustion. Gavalgana's son
will emerge alive from the battle. O bull among the Bharata lineage! I will spread the deeds of the Kurus and all
the Pandavas. Do not sorrow. This was destined a long time ago. Therefore, you should not sorrow. It could not
have been averted. Where dharma exists, victory is there."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having spoken in this way, the illustrious great-grandfather[The text uses the word prapitamaha, though Vyasa is actually the paternal grandfather.] again spoke to the mighty-
armed Dhritarashtra. "O great king[The text does not explicitly state that this is Vyasadeva speaking. It is left implicit. Hence, we have inserted
these quotation marks.]! There will be a great destruction in this battle. Many fearful portents can be
seen. Hawks, vultures, crows, herons and wild crows are assembling in great numbers at the ends of the forests.
These birds are extremely agitated at seeing the prospects of a war. These predators will feed on the flesh of elephants and horses. With the terrible sound of 'khatakhata', signifying a calamity, the herons are flying in the centre, towards the southern direction['Khatakhata' is a crackling sound. When meteors fall down, signifying a calamity, they make this sound. The
south is the direction of death.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I have always been observing, both at
dawn and dusk. When it rises, the sun is covered by headless torsos[That is, clouds in this shape. The headless torso can be an allusion to Rahu.]. They have three colours. They are white
and red at the edges and are black in the neck. They are tinged with lightning. They look like clubs and envelope
the sun. Irrespective of what time of the day it is, during the day and at night, I have seen the sun, the moon and the
stars blazing. This signifies destruction. Even when it is the full moon night in Kartika, the moon is so bereft of radiance that it cannot be seen. It has the complexion of fire and the sky has the same complexion. Heroes, kings and
brave princes, with arms like clubs, will be killed. Those brave kings will cover the earth. At night, I always hear a
terrible sound in the sky, that of a boar and a cat fighting. The idols of the gods sometimes tremble and sometimes
laugh. They vomit blood from their mouths, sweat and fall down. O lord of the earth! Kettledrums sound without
being struck. The great chariots of the kshatriyas move, without being yoked. Cuckoos, woodpeckers, blue jays,
watercocks, parrots, herons and peacocks utter terrible sounds. When the sun rises, hundreds of locusts can be
seen. They are like ornamented warriors wielding arms, armoured and riding on horses. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! At both dawn and dusk, the directions blaze, as if on fire. There are showers of blood and bone. O
king! Arundhati is famous and revered by virtuous ones in the three worlds. She moves Vasishtha to the back[Arundhati is the rishi Vasishtha's devoted wife. However, Vasishtha and Arundhati are also stars in Ursa Majoris
or saptarshi, the constellation of the Great Bear. As a star, Vasishtha is prominent, while Arundhati is faint. As a
sign of abnormal times, Arundhati is shining more than Vasishtha.]. O
king! Shanaishchara is based in Rohini and is oppressing it. The mark on the moon has disappeared, signifying a
great danger[Shanaishchara or Shani is the planet Saturn. Rohini is the fourth of the twenty-seven nakshatras.]. Even when there are no clouds, a great and terrible roar can continuously be heard. The mounts
weep and shed drops of tears."'
