Janamejaya asked, 'Oppressed by fear of Duryodhana, how did my great grandfathers live in disguise in the city of
Virata[Virata was the name of both the kingdom and the capital, a kingdom ruled by the Matsya kings. Today, the capital, Virata or Virata-nagara, is known as Bairat and is in the Jaipur district of Rajasthan.]?'
Vaishampayana said, 'Having obtained boons from Dharma in that fashion[The details have been recounted in Section 44 (Volume 3).], the one who was foremost among
upholders of dharma[That is, Yudhishthira.] returned to the hermitage and told the brahmanas everything that had happened. Having recounted everything to the brahmanas, Yudhishthira returned the kindling to the brahmana[The brahmana whose kindling was robbed by a deer, the story having been told in Section 44 (Volume 3).]. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! Then Dharma's son, the great-minded King Yudhishthira, called all his younger brothers and
spoke to them in this way. "Dislodged from our kingdom, we have lived for twelve years and the thirteenth has arrived now. We will have to live through a difficult period. O Kounteya Arjuna! Therefore, think of a desirable
place where all of us may dwell, without being detected by our enemies." Arjuna replied, "O lord of men! O bull
among the Bharata lineage! Because of the boon that has been given to us by Dharma, we can roam undetected by
men. I will recount the kingdoms where we may dwell. Some of them are beautiful and secluded. Which of these
seems attractive to you? Around the kingdom of the Kurus, there are many beautiful countries with an abundance
of food-Panchala, Chedi, Matsya, Shurasena, Patachchara, Dasharna, Navarashtra, Malla, Shalva and Yugandhara. O king! Which among these seems to you to be an attractive place to live in? O Indra among kings! Where
will we dwell for a year?" Yudhishthira said, "O mighty-armed one! It will indeed be as the illustrious lord of all
beings[The god Dharma.] has said. It cannot be otherwise. We must certainly dwell in a place that is beautiful, auspicious and pleasant, where all of us can live without any fear. Let us consult among ourselves. The powerful Matsya Virata will
protect the Pandavas. He is aged, generous, with a great deal of riches and conducts himself in accordance with
dharma. O son[The word used is tata. While it means son, it is affectionately used for anyone who is younger or junior.]! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Let us happily spend a year in the city of Virata[Nagara means city. The city of Virata is an acceptable translation. But so is Virata-nagara, as the name of the
city.]. We will
perform tasks for him there[Since the Pandavas will be in disguise, they will have to enter the service of King Virata.]. O descendants of the Kuru lineage! Let each one of us describe the tasks that he will
perform, the kind of duties that we will undertake for him." Arjuna replied, "O god among men! O virtuous one!
What duty will you undertake in the kingdom of King Virata? What appeals to you? You are gentle, generous,
modest and devoted to dharma. Truth is your valour. O king! O Pandava! Confronted by this calamity, what will
you do? O king! You are not familiar with the hardships faced by ordinary people. How will you pass through this
calamity that has come over you?" Yudhishthira said, "O descendants of the Kuru lineage! Listen to the duties that
I will undertake. When I arrive before King Virata, bull among men, I will become a member of that great-souled
king's assembly. I will pose as a brahmana named Kanka, skilled in dice and fond of gambling[After Yudhishthira lost the two rounds of gambling, the Pandavas were banished to the forest. While they were
there, Brihadashva taught Yudhishthira the skills of gambling with dice. This has been recounted in Section 32.]. I will use beautiful dice made out of lapis lazuli, gold, ivory and lustrous fruit[Vibhitaka nuts were used as dice.], with black and red dots. If asked, I will tell the
king that in earlier times I used to be Yudhishthira's friend, as dear to him as life itself. I have now told you how I
wish to spend my time. O Vrikodara[Vrikodara is Bhima's name.]! What task will you perform in Virata?"'
