'Shalya said, "Then all the rishis and all the gods said, 'Nahusha is majestic. Let us appoint him king of the gods
and the lord of the thirty gods.' All of them went to him and said, 'O lord of the earth! Be our king.' O king!
Nahusha thought about his own welfare and told the gods and the masses of rishis, accompanied by the ancestors,
'I am weak. I am incapable of protecting you. It is a powerful one who should be the king. Shakra was always
powerful.' All the gods, with the rishis at the forefront, again told him, 'You will be endowed with the power of
our austerities. Protect the kingdom of heaven. There is no doubt that we are terribly afraid of each other[Referring to the rivalry between the gods.]. O Indra
among kings! Be our king in heaven. You will absorb the energy of gods, danavas, yakshas, rishis, rakshasas,
gandharvas and all beings as soon as you behold them. You will then be powerful. Always placing dharma at the
forefront, be the lord of all the worlds and the herdsman of the brahmarshis and gods in heaven.' Having obtained
this extremely rare boon, he became the king in heaven.

'"He had always had dharma in his soul. But he now became addicted to desire. Nahusha, the king of the gods,
sported in many different ways in all the gardens of the gods, in the grove of Nandana[Indra's pleasure garden.], in Kailasa on the slopes
of the Himalayas, on the mountains Mandara, Shveta, Sahya, Mahendra and Malaya and in oceans and rivers, surrounded by apsaras and the maidens of the gods. He listened to many kinds of celestial accounts, pleasant to the
ear, and to all kinds of musical instruments and songs with sweet sounds. Vishvavasu[The name of a foremost gandharva.], Narada, masses of gandharvas and apsaras and the six seasons in personified form, waited upon the Indra of the gods. A fragrant breeze
blew-pleasant, charming and cool.

'"While the great-souled Nahusha was sporting in this way, his eyes fell upon the goddess who was Shakra's
beloved queen. On seeing her, the evil-souled one spoke to all his courtiers. 'Why doesn't the goddess who is Indra's queen serve me? I am Indra of the gods now. I am also the lord of the worlds. Let Shachi swiftly come to my
abode today.' On hearing these words, the goddess was distraught and told Brihaspati, 'O brahmana! Protect me
from Nahusha. I am seeking refuge with you. O brahmana! You have always told me that I bear all the auspicious
marks. You have spoken of me as the beloved of the king of the gods, deserving of happiness, and as one who will
never be a widow. I will be the wife of one and will be devoted to my husband. Let those words that you have spoken to me earlier, come true. O illustrious one! O lord! What you have said earlier has never been false. O supreme
among brahmanas! Therefore, ensure that what you have said comes true.' At this, Brihaspati told Indrani[Indra's wife, Shachi.], who
was confounded with fear, 'O goddess! What I have told you will certainly come true. You will soon see Indra,
king of the gods, return here. I tell you truthfully that you have nothing to fear from Nahusha. In a short while, I
will unite you with Shakra again.' Nahusha heard that Indrani had gone and sought refuge with Brihaspati Angi-
rasa[Brihasapati was the son of Angirasa.]. The king was enraged."'
