'Sanjaya said, "On hearing these auspicious and beneficial words from Keshava, Karna honoured Krishna Madhusudana[The text actually says Madhunishudana, which means the same thing as Madhusudana.] and spoke these words. 'O mighty-armed one! Knowing everything, why did you wish to confuse me?
The destruction of the entire earth is imminent. Shakuni, Duhshasana and Dhritarashtra's son, King Duryodhana,
and I are responsible. O Krishna! There is no doubt that there will be a great and terrible war between the Pandavas and the Kurus, with the mud of blood. The kings and the princes who follow Duryodhana's instructions will
be burnt in the battle with the flames of weapons and will go to Yama's abode. O Madhusudana! Many terrible
dreams are seen. There are fearful portents and extremely terrible omens. They signify the defeat of Dhritarashtra's
son and Yudhishthira's victory. O Varshneya! There are many signs and they make the body hair stand up. The
sharp and extremely radiant planet Shanaishchara[Saturn or Shani. Shanaischara means something that travels (chara) slowly (shanai).] is oppressing the nakshatra Prajapatya[Rohini. Prajapati is the lord of Rohini.], implying greater suffering for all beings. O Madhusudana! Angaraka[Mangala or Mars.] is retrograde in Jyeshtha and is aspiring for Anuradha, as if
seeking its friendship[Anuradha is the seventeenth nakshatra and Jyeshtha is the eighteenth. Because Mars is retrograde, it is moving
from the eighteenth to the seventeenth. The lord of Anuradha is Mitra, signifying friendship. Mitra means a friend
and is also the name of a god.]. O Krishna! O Varshneya! A great calamity confronts the Kurus, in particular because the
planet is oppressing Chitra[Chitra (Spica) is the fourteenth nakshatra. The planet in question must be Mars, because Mars is the lord of
Chitra.]. The signs on the moon are distorted and Rahu is obstructing the sun. Meteors are
showering down from heaven. There are storms and earthquakes. The elephants are trumpeting. O Madhava! The
horses are shedding tears and no longer find pleasure in fodder and water. O mighty-armed one! When such omens
are seen, it is said that a great calamity is at hand and that it will be the terrible destruction of beings. O Keshava!
It is seen that though horses, elephants and men are eating little, they are releasing large quantities of excrement. O
Madhusudana! The learned ones have said that these are the signs of the defeat of the entire army of Dhritarashtra's son. O Krishna! It is said that the mounts of the Pandavas are happy. The animals are circumambulating them
from the right and that is a sign of their victory. O Keshava! But all the animals are circumambulating Dhritarashtra's son from the left. Invisible voices can be heard and these are signs of his defeat. Peacocks, pushpashakunas[This bird is not easily identified. Shakuna means bird and pushpa means flower.],
swans, cranes, chatakas and masses of jivamjivakas[A jivamjivaka is a mythical bird with two heads. Alternatively, it has the head of a human and the body of a
bird.] follow the Pandavas. Vultures, crows, badas[Kind of jungle crow.], hawks,
yatudhanas, jackals and masses of flies follow the Kouravas. There is no sound of drums in the army of Dhritarashtra's son. But even when they are not struck, the drums of the Pandavas are making a sound. The wells in the
army of Dhritarashtra's son are making a sound like that of cows and bulls. That is a sign of his defeat. O Madhava! The gods are showering down flesh and blood. A radiant city of the gandharvas has appeared. It has walls,
moats, turrets and beautiful gates. At dawn and at dusk, a black mace can be seen to envelope the sun. This signifies a great calamity. A jackal is howling terribly and that is a sign of his[Duryodhana's.] defeat. Terrible birds with black necks
hang around. Then they fly away towards the dusk, a sign of his defeat. O Madhusudana! He first hates the brahmanas, then his elders and his faithful servants. That is a sign of his defeat. The eastern direction is red. The southern direction has the complexion of weapons. O Madhusudana! The western direction looks like an unbaked vessel. O Madhava! For Dhritarashtra's son, all the directions are on fire. These signs that are seen presage a great
calamity. O Achyuta! I had a dream in which I saw a palace with a thousand pillars. I saw Yudhishthira, together
with his brothers, ascending this. All of them were seen to wear white headdresses and white garments. I saw all of
them seated on beautiful seats. O Krishna! O Janardana! I saw you in that dream, draping the earth, strewn with
blood, with entrails. The infinitely energetic Yudhishthira ascended a heap of bones. He happily ate ghee mixed
with payasa[Rice cooked in milk.] from a golden vessel. I saw Yudhishthira swallow the earth, which you had given him. It is evident
he will enjoy the earth. Vrikodara, terrible in his deeds, ascended a mountain. That tiger among men held a club in
his hand and seemed to be eyeing the earth. This clearly shows that he will kill us in a great battle. O Hrishikesha!
I know that where dharma exists, victory exists there. O Hrishikesha! Together with you, Dhananjaya held the
Gandiva and mounted a white elephant[In the dream.]. He shone in supreme radiance. O Krishna! There is no doubt that you
will slaughter all the kings, with Duryodhana in the forefront, in battle. Nakula, Sahadeva and maharatha Satyaki
were adorned in white bracelets and necklaces and wore white garlands and garments. Those tigers among men
ascended excellent vehicles that were drawn by men. Those three great ones had white umbrellas and garments. O
Janardana! O Keshava! I saw three from the army of Dhritarashtra's son too, wearing white headdresses. You
know who they are-Ashvatthama, Kripa and Satvata Kritavarma. O Madhava! All the other kings were seen with
red headdresses[Signifying blood.]. O mighty-armed one! O Janardana! Ascended on a vehicle drawn by camels, Bhishma and
Drona, together with me and Dhritarashtra's son, headed in the direction ruled by Agastya[The south, the direction of Yama and death.]. O Janardana! In a
short while, we reached Yama's abode. There is no doubt that I and the other kings, and the circle of kshatriyas,
will enter Gandiva's fire.'

'"Krishna replied, 'O Karna! The destruction of the earth is now near, since your heart does not find my words
to be acceptable. O son[The word used is tata.]! The destruction of all beings is imminent. That which is wrong appears to be right and is
not removed from the heart.'

'"Karna said, 'O Krishna! O mighty-armed one! If we remain alive, we may perhaps see you again after this
great battle, which will lead to the destruction of all the brave kshatriyas. O Krishna! Otherwise, we will certainly
meet in heaven. O unblemished one! Now it seems that we will only meet there again.'"

'Sanjaya said, "Saying this, Karna embraced Madhava tightly. Having obtained Keshava's permission, he descended from the chariot. Having ascended his own chariot, decorated with gold, Radheya returned with us[An unsatisfactory explanation to justify Sanjaya's knowledge of the secret conversation.], dejected in his mind. Together with Satyaki, Keshava then left at a greater speed, repeatedly urging his charioteer,
'Go! Go!'"'
