Vyasa said, "O Yudhishthira! It is my view that your wisdom is still not complete. No mortal person does anything himself, there is no action that is under his own control. A man is engaged by God and performs good
and bad deeds. Since it is Purusha who does the acts, where is the scope for repentance? You think that you have
yourself performed those wicked deeds. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Listen to the means whereby these
wicked deeds can be countered. O Yudhishthira! A wicked deed perpetrated by a man can always be overcome
through austerities, sacrifices and donations. O lord of men! O tiger among kings! Sacrifices, austerities and donations purify a man from his wicked deeds. To become sacred, the asuras and the gods performed rites. Those great-
souled ones sought to perform sacrifices. It is through sacrifices that the great-souled gods became even more powerful. Thus, after performing rites, the gods assailed the danavas. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O king! O
Yudhishthira! Prepare for rajasuya, ashvamedha, sarvamedha and naramedha[Rajasuya is a royal sacrifice. Ashvamedha (alternatively vajimedha) is a horse sacrifice. Sarvamedha is an universal sacrifice, a large sacrifice. Naramedha is a human sacrifice.]. Perform vajimedha and give away
dakshina in the proper way, distributing many desired riches, just as Rama, Dasharatha's son, did. King Marutta
did  that  too  and  so  did  the  immensely  valorous  king  who  was  the  son  of  Dushyanta  and  Shakuntala[Meaning Bharata.],  your
ancestor."

'Yudhishthira replied, "There is no doubt that vajimedha purifies the earth. However, I have an intention that
you should hear about.
O supreme among brahmanas! I have caused this extremely great slaughter of the kin. I am incapable of giving
away even limited riches.
I have no wealth left. I am not interested in asking these children for riches[Had the kings been alive, Yudhishthira could have asked them for riches, imposing a tribute on them. But the
kings were killed and young princes are now on the respective thrones. Yudhishthira doesn't wish to ask them.]. The princes alone are left and I am
responsible for their wounds and their hardships. O supreme among brahmanas! I have myself destroyed the earth
and they are overcome with grief. For the sake of performing a sacrifice, how can I impose a levy on them? The
earth and the kings were destroyed because of Duryodhana's crimes. O supreme among sages! But in the process,
we have been united with ill-repute. For the sake of riches, Duryodhana destroyed the earth. The treasury has been
exhausted because of Dhritarashtra's evilminded son. In the first place, the earth was thought of as dakshina. In the
case of adverse fortune, the learned and the virtuous have thought of an exception[The suggestion seems to be that in times of adversity, one can perform a sacrifice without giving away donations.]. O one who is rich in austerities! However, I do not desire to have such a proxy. O illustrious one! In this connection, you should advise me
about what should be done."'

Vaishampayana continued, 'Krishna Dvaipayana was thus addressed by Partha. He thought for a while and then
spoke to Dharmaraja. "O Partha! There are riches in the Himalaya mountains. At King Marutta's sacrifice, the
brahmanas left them there[King Marutta gave away a lot of dakshina. Unable to carry all of it, the brahmanas left a part in the Himalayas.]. O Kounteya! If you bring that, it will be enough." Yudhishthira asked, "What was
Marutta's sacrifice and what riches were distributed there? O supreme among eloquent ones! What was the era of
that king?" Vyasa replied, "O Partha! If you wish to, hear about that king from the Karandhama lineage. I will tell
you about that immensely valorous king and his era and his great riches."'
