'Sanjaya said, "O great king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It is exactly as you have said. It can be seen
that Gandiva will destroy the kshatriyas in battle. You have always been wise. But I do not know how, despite
knowing the spirit of Savyasachi, you have allowed yourself to be controlled by your sons. O great king! There is
no time now. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Right from the beginning, you yourself have always maltreated
the Parthas. A father who guides with his heart is always the best well-wisher. He should practise what is beneficial. One who disregards this cannot be called a superior. O great king! When you heard that they had been defeated at the game of dice, you laughed like a child and exclaimed, 'We have won! We have gained!' When harsh
words were addressed towards the Parthas earlier, you ignored them. Though you knew that they had conquered
the kingdom for themselves, you did not foresee your own downfall. O great king! Only the ancestral kingdom and
Kurujangala are yours. It was only later that you obtained the entire earth, when those brave ones conquered it.
The Parthas won the earth with the valour of their arms and handed it over to you. O supreme among kings! But
you think that you obtained it yourself. O supreme among kings! When your sons were grasped by the king of the
gandharvas and were drowning in a sea without bows, it was the Parthas who brought them back. O king! You
laughed like a child when the Pandavas were deceitfully defeated in the game of dice and had to repeatedly roam
around in the forest. When Arjuna showers his many sharp arrows, even the oceans dry up, not to speak of those
who are born from flesh. Phalguna is the best among archers. Gandiva is supreme among bows, Keshava among all
beings, Sudarshana[The name of Krishna's chakra.] among all chakras. Among all standards, the standard that bears the monkey is supreme[Arjuna's standard. Arjuna has white horses.].
The one with the white steeds will bear these on his chariot in the field of battle and destroy us. O king! He will
fling us away, like the upraised wheel of time. O king! O bull among the Bharata lineage! The entire earth now belongs to him. O supreme among kings! He who has Bhima and Arjuna as his warriors, is the king. Attacked by
Bhima, your army will be almost submerged. With Duryodhana at the forefront, the Kouravas will see this and
confront destruction. O great king! Your sons, and the kings who follow them, will be oppressed by fear of Bhima.
O lord! They will not be victorious. The Matsyas no longer revere you, nor do the Panchalas and the Kekayas. All
the Shalveyas and Shurasenas hate you and have gone over to the Parthas, knowing the valour of that intelligent
one[Yudhishthira.]. They are united with dharma and do not deserve to be killed or injured. That evil man[Duryodhana.], together with his
followers, must be restrained in every way. O great king! You should not grieve over your son. At the time of the
game with the dice, I told you, and so did the intelligent Vidura. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O Indra
among kings! All your lamentations about the Pandavas, as if you are incapable, are pointless."'
