'Bhishma said, "Having assumed the nature of a dog, it was overcome by
supreme misery. The rishi said 'hum[Mystical exclamation before a mantra.]' and expelled the wicked one from
the hermitage. In this way, an intelligent king must know about goodness of
conduct and purity and about uprightness, nature, spiritedness, lineage, conduct, learning, self-control, compassion, strength, valour, sentiments, tranquility and forgiveness. It is only then that extremely well-trained and
skilled servants must be appointed. Without examination, the lord of the
earth must not appoint servants. A king who is surrounded by those who
have been born in inferior lineages will not obtain happiness. If a person
who has naturally been born in a good lineage is reprimanded by the king
through no fault of his own, because of the nobility of the lineage, his intelligence will not turn towards wicked deeds. Because of a shortage of virtuous people, if a person born in an inferior lineage is appointed, even if he
thereby obtains extremely rare prosperity, once he is censured, he will turn
towards enmity. O king! Born in a noble lineage, learned, wise, accomplished in jnana and vijnana, knowledgeable about the purport of all the sacred texts, tolerant, born within the country, grateful, strong, forgiving, self-
controlled, with control over the senses, not avaricious, satisfied with one's
lot, friendly towards the master and friends, an adviser who knows about
the time and the place and is engaged in drawing people to him, one who
shows honour, firm in his mind, a constant seeker of welfare, with good
conduct in his own areas, knowledgeable about peace and war, knowledgeable about the three objectives[Dharma, artha and kama.], loved by the residents of the city and the
countryside, knowledgeable about vyuhas for defence and attack, knowledgeable about how one can cheer the forces, knowledgeable about signs
and expressions, skilled about marching and vehicles, learned about the
training of elephants, devoid of ego, eloquent, courteous, self-controlled,
powerful, reasonable in objectives, upright, one who associates with upright
people, well dressed, good-looking, a leader, skilled about policy, possessing the six qualities, flexible, modest, capable, mild in speech, patient, gentle, extremely wealthy, capable of taking measures according to the time
and the place-such people should not be ignored and should be made advisers. The kingdom will then extend, like moonlight from the lord of the
planets[The moon.].

'"The king must also possess these qualities and must be skilled in the
sacred texts. His desire must be supreme dharma and he must be devoted to
ruling the subjects. He must be patient, tolerant, pure, swift, exhibiting
manliness at the appropriate time, ready to serve, learned, ready to listen,
accomplished in reasoning, intelligent, firm in his mind, ready to implement
what is fair, self-controlled, always pleasant in speech, forgiving when there
is a catastrophe, ceaseless in generosity, ready to act on his own, possessing
excellent gates[This must be a reference to the organs of sense and action, often referred
to as gates.], pleasant to behold, ready to extend a hand to those who
are distressed, always engaged in policy indicated by the learned, without
ego, without opposite sentiments, without a tendency to act on everything,
unwavering in pursuing a task that has been undertaken, a master who is
loved by the servants, ready to bring people together, not rigid, always possessing a pleasant demeanour, generous, attentive towards the servants,
without anger, extremely broad-minded, ready to use the rod of chastisement, not failing to use the rod of chastisement, a ruler who ensures acts of
dharma, one who uses spies as his eyes, attentive towards enemies and always accomplished in dharma and artha. Such a king will possess a hundred
qualities and you should be like that. O Indra among men! In sustaining the
kingdom, you must search for warriors and excellent men as aides, those
who possess all the qualities. The king who desires prosperity should not
disrespect them. The warriors must be insolent in battle, grateful and accomplished in the use of weapons. They must know about the sacred texts
of dharma and must possess foot soldiers. If they are accomplished in the
use of chariots and skilled in the use of arrows and weapons, the king will
extend his prosperity and win the earth. The king who is always engaged in
attracting people to himself, who is engaged in enterprise and who is firm in
friendship is supreme among kings. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! If
one can collect one thousand men who are valiant horse riders, one is capable of conquering the entire earth."'
