Vaishampayana said, 'Having been thus addressed, the king who knew dharma and was always devoted to dharma,
addressed the queen again in these supreme words. "O Kunti! O fortunate one! What you have said is true. In ancient times, Vyushitashva did act this way. But he was like a god. Let me tell you what the ancient and great-souled
rishis, learned in dharma, have laid down as dharma. O one with the beautiful eyes! In ancient times, women went
around uncovered. They roamed around where they wished and were independent. O one with the beautiful hips!
O fortunate one! From the time when they became maidens, they were not faithful to their husbands. This was not
regarded as against dharma, because that was the dharma of those ancient times. Without desire and anger, this ancient dharma is still followed by those of inferior birth[Meaning those of non-human birth.]. The practice of this ancient dharma is sanctioned by the
maharshis. O one with thighs like that of a plantain tree! This is still practised in the northern Kuru region. This
eternal dharma is favourable to women. O one with the beautiful smiles! The present practice of the world was
only laid down later. Listen when I tell you completely when it was established and by whom."

'Pandu said, "We have heard that there was a maharshi named Uddalaka. He had a hermit son named Shvetaketu. We have heard that he laid down this rule for humans, in a fit of anger. O one with eyes like lotus petals! I will
tell you why. In ancient times, in the presence of Shvetaketu's father, a Brahmana came and grasped his mother's
hand and said, 'Let us go.' At this, the rishi's son was angry and indignant when he saw his mother being taken
away, as if forcibly. On seeing him angry, Shvetaketu's father said, 'O son! Do not be angry. This is the eternal
practice. Women of all varnas are uncovered on earth. All beings are established in their own varnas, like cattle.'

Shvetaketu, the rishi's son, did not accept this dharma. He established the present rule for men and women on
earth. O immensely fortunate one! This is for humans, not for animals. We have heard that since then this rule has
been established. 'From that day onwards, a woman who is not faithful to her husband will commit a sin that is
equal to that of foeticide and be miserable. He who seduces a virgin, one who follows brahmacharya, or a wife
who is devoted to her husband will also commit a sin on earth. A wife who is appointed by her husband to conceive a son, but refuses to do so, will also commit the same sin. O, timid one! In ancient times, thus did Uddalaka's
son Shvetaketu forcibly establish the present practice of dharma. O one with thighs like that of a plantain tree! We
have also heard that Sudasa's son appointed his wife Madayanti to obtain a son and she went to the rishi
Vashishtha. O beautiful one! Through him, she obtained a son named Ashmaka. Kalmashapada's[Kalmashapada was Sudasa's son.] wife did this
act so as to please her husband. O lotus-eyed one! You are acquainted with the story of our birth. O timid one! We
were begotten through Krishna Dvaipayana, so that the lineage of the Kurus might be extended. O unblemished
one! On seeing all these reasons, you must do what I am asking you to do and this is dharma. O princess! Those
who are learned in dharma say that at the time of her season, a wife who is strict in her vows must seek her husband. This is dharma. However, at other times, the woman is free to choose. Righteous ones who know dharma say
that this was the ancient practice. O princess! But those who know dharma have also said that it is the duty of a
wife to do what her husband instructs, be it in favour of dharma or against dharma. O one with an unblemished
form! This is especially the case if one is hungry for sons, but is unable to procreate on one's own. I am like that,
longing to set my eyes on a son. O beautiful one! I am joining my hands, like lotus leaves with red fingers, and
raising them above my head. Be propitiated. O one with the beautiful hair! Because of my instructions, give birth
to sons who have all the qualities, through Brahmanas who are ascetics. O one with broad hips! Through your act,
I will tread the path of those who have sons."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Pandu, the conqueror of enemy cities, thus addressed Kunti, the one with the beautiful
hips. She loved to please her husband and said, "When I was a child in my father's house, I was appointed to look
after the guests. There I satisfied, with all attentiveness, a fearsome Brahmana rigid in his vows. He had his senses
under control and was learned about the secret nuances of dharma. He is known as Durvasa. Pleased with my service, the illustrious one gave me a boon and taught me a mantra. Any god that I summon through this mantra will
come to me and be subservient to me, whether he desires it or not. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! This is
what he told me in my father's house. O king! The words uttered by a Brahmana are never false and the time has
come. If you permit, I can summon a god. O rajarshi! O lord! Through that mantra, we can have offspring. O
supreme among those who know the truth! Which god shall I summon? Know that I am waiting for your command, so as to act." Pandu replied, "O beautiful one! O one with the beautiful hips! You must act today itself, in
the proper way. Summon Dharma, because he is the one who partakes of what is sacred. That which is not dharma
is never united with that which is dharma. O one with the beautiful hips! The worlds will now think that what we
have done is dharma. There is no doubt that one who is devoted to dharma will be born into the Kuru lineage.
Since he will be given by Dharma, there will never be anything that is not dharma in his mind. O sweet-smiling
one! Therefore, always set dharma before you and summon him. Worship Dharma through your offerings and rituals." At these words of her husband, the most beautiful of woman agreed. With his permission, she circumambulated him.'
