Vasudeva said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! One does not obtain success by giving up external objects. Success may or may not be obtained by giving up physical objects. Even if one is freed from external
objects, one may still hanker after the body. Let the dharma and happiness that results from this be the lot of the
enemy. The word mrityu has two syllables[We have translated akshara as syllable. Mrityu means death and consists of the syllables mrit and yu.]. The eternal brahman has three syllables[Shashvata means eternal, consisting of the syllables shash, va and ta.]. A sense of ownership has
two syllables and represents death[Mama means mine and has the two syllables ma and ma. Namama is lack of ownership and has the three syllables, na, ma and ma.]. A lack of ownership is eternal. O king! Both mrityu and the brahman are inside all creatures, though they are invisible. There is no doubt that they are fighting with each other. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! If it is true that the soul is indestructible and eternal, then no injury results if one strikes the
physical bodies of creatures. Having obtained the earth with all its mobile and immobile objects, if a person has no
sense of ownership, there is nothing else left for him to do. O Partha! But there may be a person who dwells in the
forest, surviving on forest fare. If he still possesses a sense of ownership in objects, he is in the jaws of death. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! Behold the nature of external and internal enemies. If a person can see this in
creatures, he is freed from great fear. In this world, those with desire in the soul are not praised. But without desire,
there can be no inclination towards action. It is because of desire that one often undertakes the rites of the Vedas,
donations, studying the Vedas and austerities. Know the vows, sacrifices, rituals, meditation and yoga that are not
begun because of desire. That which is not undertaken because of desire is dharma. Something with rituals as the
foundation does not constitute dharma. Those who know about the ancient accounts have chanted the kamagita in
this connection[Kamagita is something recited by Kama (desire) personified. The text does not have the quotes. We have inserted
them in the appropriate place. This is not an easy translation. But the sense is that desire cannot be conquered
without detachment.]. O Yudhishthira! Listen to that being recounted in its entirety. 'No creature is capable of destroying me without using the proper methods. If someone knows my strength and tries to destroy me using weapons, I
destroy him using those same weapons and manifest myself again. If he tries to destroy me through sacrifices that
involve many kinds of dakshina, I become those mobile objects and the soul of those rites, thus manifesting myself
again. If he tries to destroy me through the rites of the Vedas and Vedanta, I become the tranquil soul in those immobile objects and manifest myself again. If someone tries to destroy me through fortitude and the valour of truth,
I become those sentiments and he is not able to comprehend me. If someone tries to destroy me through austerities
and rigidity in vows, I base myself on those austerities and manifest myself again. If a learned man tries to destroy
me by resorting to moksha, I base myself on that state of moksha and laugh and dance. Amongst all creatures, I
alone cannot be slain and am eternal.' Therefore, you should desire to perform a sacrifice with many kinds of dakshina. O great king! Act in accordance with dharma and kama will also be served by that. Perform a horse sacrifice
with the prescribed kinds of dakshina. Perform the other prescribed sacrifices, prosperous with dakshina. Do not
look towards your slain relatives and be repeatedly distressed. You are incapable of again seeing those who have
been killed in the field of battle. Perform great sacrifices, rich with copious quantities of dakshina. You will then
obtain fame in this world and obtain the supreme destination after death."'
