'Sanjaya said, "When Ghatotkacha was killed by the son of a suta in the night, Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, was
overcome by sorrow and intolerance. On seeing that your large army had been checked by Bhima, he spoke to
Dhrishtadyumna. 'Check the one who was born in a pot[Drona was born in a pot.]. O scorcher of enemies! For Drona's destruction, you
have arisen from the fire, with bows and arrows, armour and sword. You should not be frightened. In the battle, attack cheerfully. Let Janamejaya, Shikhandi and Durmukha's son[Durmukha was one of Duryodhana's brothers and it is not clear if this is that Durmukha's son.], Yashodhana, happily surround the one who has
been born in a pot from all sides. Let Nakula, Sahadeva, Droupadi's sons, the Prabhadrakas, Drupada and Virata,
with their sons and brothers, Satyaki, the Kekayas and Dhananjaya powerfully attack Bharadvaja's son, wishing to
kill him. Let all the rathas, all the elephants we have and the foot soldiers advance against maharatha Drona.' Having been thus instructed by the great-souled Pandava, all of them forcefully advanced against the one who had
been born in a pot, wishing to fight with him. Drona was supreme among the wielders of weapons. When the Pandavas violently advanced, making every effort in the battle, he received them. When the Pandavas angrily attacked,
King Duryodhana wished to ensure that Drona remained alive and made efforts to counter them. Though the
mounts and the soldiers were exhausted, a battle commenced between the Pandavas and the Kurus, and they roared
at each other.

'"O great king! The maharathas were blind with sleep. They were exhausted from fighting and did not know
what efforts they should make in the battle. The triyama night was terrible and generated fear[A yama consists of three hours. Night is called triyama because it lasts for nine hours.]. It was destructive
of lives and seemed equal to one thousand yamas[The night seemed to last forever.]. In particular, those on their side were killed and wounded.
Especially when it was midnight, they were blind with sleep. All the kshatriyas lost their enterprise and were distressed in their hearts. Your soldiers, and those of the enemy, no longer possessed any more weapons or arrows.
Because they were modest, they passed the time there, following their own dharma. They did not abandon their
own divisions. But other people were blind with sleep. They discarded their weapons and lay down. O descendant
of the Bharata lineage! Some lay down on the backs of elephants, others on chariots, still others on the backs of
horses. Some kings were blind with sleep and lost all sense of movement. In that battle, other warriors seized the
chance to send them to Yama's eternal abode. In their sleep and dreaming and unconscious, others killed those on
their own side, as well as the enemy. In that great battle, they were blind with sleep and uttered many sounds. They
fought in that battle, though their eyes were heavy with sleep. Some moved in that battle, and though blind with
sleep, killed each other. O king! In the course of fighting in that terrible darkness, some brave ones killed many on
their own side, as well as those on the enemy's side. Because they were overcome by severe sleep in that battle,
they could not distinguish.

'"O bull among men! On discerning that this was the state of affairs, Bibhatsu spoke loudly. 'All you, and the
mounts, are exhausted and blind with sleep. The soldiers are covered in darkness and a lot of dust. If you so think,
let the soldiers desist from fighting. In the field of battle, let them close their eyes for a while. Let them sleep and
rest until the moon rises. Then, for the sake of heaven, let the Kurus and Pandavas fight again.' Having heard the
words of the one who observed dharma, the soldiers who knew about dharma found this acceptable and loudly
spoke to each other[Meaning those on the Kourava side.]. 'O Karna! O Karna! O King Duryodhana! The Pandus have stopped attacking the army. Let
us desist.' O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing Phalguna's words, the Pandus ceased to attack your
army. The gods, the rishis and even the inferior soldiers were overjoyed and applauded the great-souled one's
words. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Those benevolent words were applauded by all the soldiers. O king!
O bull among the Bharata lineage! Those on our side, and on the side of the enemy, began to rest for some time. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having obtained some rest and sleep, your soldiers also honoured the brave Arjuna and said, 'The Vedas and all weapons are vested in you. You possess intelligence and valour. O mighty-armed
one! O unblemished one! You have dharma and compassion for beings. O Partha! Since we have obtained assurance from you, may you be prosperous. O brave one! May you swiftly obtain all those things that are dear to your
heart.' In this way, maharathas praised that tiger among men. O lord of the earth! They swiftly went to sleep and
there was silence. Some were on the backs of horses. Others were on the seats of chariots. Some lay down on the
backs of elephants. Others lay down on the ground. The men slept separately, with their weapons, their clubs, their
swords, their battleaxes, their lances, their armour and their horses. The elephants possessed trunks like serpents,
decorated with dust. They were blind with sleep and cooled the earth with their inhalation and exhalation. As the
elephants breathed on the ground, it was beautiful. They looked like scattered mountains, on which, large serpents
were breathing. There were horses with golden harnesses, their manes intertwined with their reins. They stamped
the level ground with their hooves and made it uneven. O Indra among kings! Everyone there slept, with his
mount. Without speaking, the armies slept there and it looked like a wonderful picture drawn by a skilled painter.
The kshatriyas were young and adorned in earrings. They had injured each other's limbs through arrows. They
slept against the temporal lobes of elephants, as if against the breasts of beautiful women.

'"The moon, the lord of lotuses that bloom in the night[Kumuda, because these lotuses bloom in the night, the moon is their lord.], arose and its complexion was as fair as the cheeks of
a maiden. It was a delight to the eyes and decorated the direction presided over by the great Indra[Indra presides over the eastern direction.]. In a short
while, the illustrious one with the mark of a hare[The moon has the mark of a hare and is hence known as Shashanka, shasha standing for hare or rabbit.] showed his red light. The lord outshone the light of the stellar
bodies. The red light yielded to the complexion of gold. Slowly, the great moon's net of rays spread everywhere.
The radiance of the moon's rays dispelled the darkness. They slowly covered all the directions, the sky and the
earth. In a short while, the world became illuminated. The darkness that could not be described quickly vanished.
The world was illuminated by the moon, as if it was day. O king! Some creatures that travel in the night continued
to roam, while others ceased. O king! The soldiers were awakened by the rays of the moon. They awoke like a
grove of lotuses[Shatapatras, literally those with one hundred leaves or petals. These are lotuses that bloom during the day.], when the great day dawns. When the moon arose, it was as if the ocean was agitated. When the
moon arose, the armies became like oceans. O lord of the earth! The battle commenced again. Desiring to attain
worlds and destroying the world[Attaining worlds in the hereafter, but destroying the present world.], the people began to kill the enemy."'
