Vaishampayana said, 'When they had only gone a distance of one krosha[Measure of distance between 3 and 4 kilometres, 4 kroshas are equal to 1
yojana.], they saw the maharathas-
Sharadvata Kripa, Drona's son and Kritavarma. They saw the king, the lord who possessed the sight of
wisdom. With voices choking with tears, sighing and weeping, they said, "O great king! Your son has performed an extremely difficult deed. O king! With his followers, the lord of the earth has gone to Shakra's
world. Out of Duryodhana's army, the three of us are the only rathas who have escaped. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! All the other soldiers have perished." Having addressed the king in this way, Kripa
Sharadvata spoke these words to Gandhari, who was afflicted by sorrow on account of her son. "He
fought without any fear. He slew large numbers of the enemy. Your son has been killed after performing
heroic deeds. It is certain that they have obtained the worlds that can be conquered through sparkling
weapons. They are roaming around with radiant bodies there, like immortals. Not a single one of them retreated from fighting with the brave ones. They never joined their hands in salutation. They were slain
through weapons. This is said to be the ancient and supreme objective of kshatriyas. Since they have been
slain through weapons in a battle, you should not sorrow. O queen! Their enemies, the Pandavas, have
nothing to be delighted about. With Ashvatthama at the forefront, listen to what we have done. We heard
that Bhimasena had killed your son through the use of adharma. We entered the camp of the sleeping Pan-
dus and created a great carnage. With Dhrishtadyumna at their head, all the Panchalas have been killed.
Drupada's sons and Droupadi's sons have been brought down. We massacred large numbers of your son's
enemies. Then the three of us fled from the battle, because we were incapable of remaining there. The
Pandavas are great archers and will come here quickly[These sentences suggest that the events of Section 79 (Volume 7) never
happened and there is some inconsistency.]. They will be full of intolerance and enmity and
will seek to exact vengeance. On hearing that their sons were killed while they were distracted, those illustrious and brave bulls among men will swiftly search out our footsteps. Since we have acted injuriously
against them, we are not interested in remaining here. O queen! We seek your permission. Do not sorrow
unnecessarily. O king! We seek your permission. Resort to supreme fortitude. You must ensure that the
dharma of kshatriyas alone remains established." O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having said this,
Kripa, Kritavarma and Drona's son circumambulated the king. They glanced towards the intelligent king
Dhritarashtra. Those great-souled ones swiftly urged their horses towards the Ganga.

'O king! All those maharathas took each other's leave and anxiously left in three different directions.
Kripa Sharadvata went to Hastinapura. Hardikya went to his own kingdom and Drona's son went to
Vyasa's hermitage. Those brave ones departed, glancing towards each other. Those great-souled ones were
frightened at having injured the sons of Pandu. O great king! Having met the king before the sun had
risen, those brave ones, the scorchers of enemies, departed in different directions, as they willed.'
