'"The gods said, 'All the four types of beings[Those born from wombs, those born from eggs, vegetables and plants and those born from sweat (insects).] prosper because of these favours. Having prospered, they prosper
the denizens of heaven through oblations[The text uses the term havyakavya. Oblations offered to gods are called havya and oblations offered to ancestors are called kavya.]. Thus the different worlds prosper, each depending on the other.
Through your favours, they are free from anxiety and are protected. Now this supreme fear has overtaken the
worlds. We do not know who kills the brahmanas in the night. If the brahmanas decay, the earth will also decay. If
the earth decays, heaven will also decay. O mighty-armed one! O lord of the universe! Through your favours, protect all the worlds, so that they do not advance towards their destruction.'

'"Vishnu replied, 'O gods! I know everything about the reasons behind the decay of beings. I shall tell you
everything. Listen and be free of your fever. There is a famous class of extremely terrible Kaleyas. Having sought
refuge with Vritra, they oppressed the entire universe. On seeing Vritra killed by the wise one with the thousand
eyes[Indra has one thousand eyes.], they have entered Varuna's abode, so as to save their lives. Having entered the terrible ocean, infested
with crocodiles and sharks, they kill the sages by night, with the intention of destroying the worlds. But they cannot be destroyed, since they have sought refuge in the ocean. You should therefore set your minds on destroying
the ocean. But except Agastya, who is capable of drying up the ocean?'"

'Lomasha said, "On hearing Vishnu's words about drying up the ocean, the gods took Parameshthi's[While Parameshthi is usually Brahma's ephithet, it is also an epithet for Vishnu and Shiva, and even for
Agni and Garuda.] leave
and went to Agastya's hermitage. There they saw Varuna's great-souled son blazing in his energy. He was being
worshipped by the rishis, just as the grandfather is by the gods. Going to the great-souled and undecaying son of
Mitra and Varuna, seated in his hermitage among the mass of his austere deeds, the gods recited his praises. The
gods said, 'In ancient times, you were the refuge of the worlds when they were oppressed by Nahusha. For the
welfare of the worlds, this thorn of the worlds was removed as the lord of the gods[Having killed the brahmana Vritra, Indra disappeared and Nahusha temporarily obtained the title of Indra,
the lord of the gods. There are different reasons for his fall from grace and one of these is Agastya's curse.]. Vindhya, supreme among
mountains, was angry with the sun and suddenly began to increase its height. But because it could not ignore your
instructions, the mountain ceased to grow. When world was covered with darkness, all the subjects were oppressed
because of their fear of death. But having obtained you as a protector, they attained the supreme objective. O illustrious one! Whenever we have been scared and frightened, you have always been our refuge. Therefore, we distressed ones are asking you for a boon. You are the granter of boons.'"'
