'Sanjaya said, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! Most of that terrible forenoon passed, an extremely terrible time
that was destructive of great warriors. Then, urged by your son, Durmukha, Kritavarma, Kripa, Shalya and
Vivimshati went to Bhishma and began to protect him. Protected by those five atirathas, the maharatha[Bhishma.] penetrated the Pandava army. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Bhisma's palm standard was seen to slice through the
Chedis, the Kashis, the Karushas and the Panchalas in diverse ways. Bhishma's bow and weapons then sliced off
the heads[Of enemies.] with extremely forceful, straight-tufted and broad-headed arrows. O bull among the Bharata lineage!
As the chariot travelled along its path, Bhishma seemed to be dancing. Some elephants were pierced by him in
their vital parts and screamed piteously.

'"Abhimanyu was extremely enraged and rushed towards Bhishma's chariot, stationed on his own chariot,
which was yoked to supreme and tawny horses. His standard was embellished with pure gold and looked like a
karnikara[Tree, the Indian laburnum.]. He attacked Bhishma and those supreme charioteers[The five who were protecting Bhishma.]. Striking the palm standard with sharp arrows,
the brave one fought with Bhishma and his followers. He pierced Kritavarma with one and Shalya with five arrows
and weakened his great-grandfather with nine sharp arrows. He drew his bow back fully and released an arrow that
sliced down the standard embellished with gold[Bhishma's standard.]. With a broad-headed and straight-tufted arrow that was capable
of penetrating every kind of armour, he severed the head from the body of Durmukha's charioteer. With another
broad-headed arrow, he sliced down Kripa's bow, decorated with gold. With many sharp and pointed arrows, he
wounded all of them. The extremely angry maharatha seemed to be dancing around. On witnessing his dexterity,
even the gods were satisfied. On seeing the success with which Krishna's son[Krishna is also one of Arjuna's names and Abhimanyu was Arjuna's son.] hit the targets, all the charioteers,
with Bhishma at the forefront, thought that he possessed the spirit of Dhananjaya himself. His bow twanged like
Gandiva and when it was stretched and stretched again in every direction, it seemed to whirl like a circle of fire.
Bhishma, the destroyer of enemy heroes, advanced towards him with great speed and in that battle, pierced Arjuna's son with nine arrows. He used three broad-headed arrows to slice down the standard of the immensely energetic one. Bhishma, rigid in his bows, used three broad-headed arrows to strike his charioteer. O venerable one!
Kritavarma, Kripa and Shalya also pierced Krishna's son. But they could not make him tremble and he was as firm
as Mount Mainaka. The brave one was surrounded by maharathas who were on the side of Dhritarashtra's son.
Nevertheless, Krishna's son showered down arrows on those five charioteers. He repulsed their great weapons with
showers of arrows. Releasing arrows towards Bhishma, Krishna's son roared loudly. O king! When he endeavoured thus in battle and released arrows towards Bhishma, his strength of arms was seen to be extremely great.
Though he was valorous, Bhishma showered arrows at him. But in that battle, he sliced down all the arrows released from Bhishma's bow. In that encounter, the brave one used nine invincible arrows to slice down Bhishma's
standard. At this, the people let out a loud shout. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It[Bhishma's standard.] was made out of silver
and was decorated with gold. It was extremely large and bore the mark of a palm. Sliced down by the arrows of
Subhadra's son, it fell down on the ground. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On seeing that the standard had
been brought down by the arrows of Subhadra's son, Bhima roared loudly, so that Subhadra's son might be encouraged. Then, in that extremely terrible moment, the extremely strong Bhishma made many great and celestial
weapons manifest themselves. The great-grandfather, immeasurable in his soul, enveloped Subhadra's son with
hundreds and thousands of arrows with drooping tufts.

'"At this, ten great maharatha archers from the Pandava side swiftly advanced on their chariots, so as to protect
Subhadra's son. O lord of the earth! They were Virata and his son, Parshata Dhrishtadyumna, Bhima, the five from
Kekaya and Satyaki. When they advanced towards him in battle, Bhishma, Shantanu's son, pierced Panchala[Dhrishtadyumna.]
with three and Satyaki with sharp arrows. He drew his bow completely back and used a sharp and tufted arrow,
like a razor at the tip, to slice down Bhimasena's standard. O supreme among men! Bhima's standard was decorated with gold and bore the mark of a lion. Brought down by Bhisma, it fell down from the chariot. At this, in that
battle, Bhima pierced Bhishma, Shantanu's son, with three arrows, Kripa with one and Kritavarma with eight. Riding on an elephant, Virata's son, Uttara, attacked the king who was the lord of Madra[Shalya.]. As that king of elephants
advanced towards his chariot in that battle, irresistible in force, Shalya countered it. However, that king of elephants was enraged. It placed its leg on the yoke of the chariot and killed the four large and well-trained horses.
Though the horses were killed, the lord of Madra remained on his chariot. So as to kill Uttara, he hurled a lance
that was like a serpent. His[Uttara's.] body and armour were pierced and he was submerged in great darkness[He lost his senses.]. With the
grip on goad and lance loosened, he fell down from the shoulder of the elephant. Shalya grasped a sword and descended from his supreme chariot. With great valour, he sliced off the great trunk of that king among elephants.
With its inner parts pierced by showers of arrows and with its trunk severed, the elephant let out a terrible roar. It
fell down on the ground and died. Having performed this extraordinary deed, the maharatha lord of Madra swiftly
ascended Kritavarma's radiant chariot.

'"On seeing that his brother Uttara had been slain and seeing that Shalya was stationed resplendently with Kritavarma, Shankha, Virata's son, blazed in anger, like a fire into which oblations have been poured. Wishing to kill
Shalya, the lord of Madra, the powerful one extended his great bow, decorated with gold and bearing the mark of
the sun, and attacked him. Surrounded on all sides by a large number of chariots, he advanced towards Shalya's
chariot and enveloped him with a shower of arrows. On seeing him advance, with the valour of a crazy elephant,
seven of your charioteers surrounded him from every direction[The Critical edition abruptly excises some shlokas here, so that we never get to know who these seven were, or
their subsequent bouts. They were Brihadbala, Jayatsena, Rukmaratha, Vinda, Anuvinda, Sudakshina and
Jayadratha.], wishing to protect the lord of Madra, who
seemed to be advancing into the jaws of death. Roaring like thunder, the mighty-armed Bhishma grasped a bow
that was as long as a palm tree and attacked Shankha in that battle. When they saw the immensely strong and great
archer, the army of the Pandavas trembled, like a boat that is tossed around in a storm. Then Arjuna swiftly advanced and placed himself in front of Shankha, so as to protect him from Bhishma and a battle raged between the
two. There were great cries and exclamations as the two warriors fought each other in that encounter. The energy
of one seemed to merge into the energy of the other[The energies of Bhishma and Arjuna.] and everyone was astounded. Then Shalya grasped a club in
his hand and descended from his great chariot. O bull among the Bharata lineage! He killed Shankha's four horses.
When his horses were slain, Shankha alighted from his chariot and grasping a sword, ran towards Bibhatsu's[Bibhatsu is Arjuna's name.]
chariot. Climbing onto it, he found peace again. Many shafted arrows were released from Bhishma's chariot and
they covered everything on earth and in the sky. Bhishma, foremost among the wielders of weapons, used his arrows to kill large numbers of Panchalas, Matsyas, Kekayas and Prabhadrakas. Abandoning the battle with Pandava
Savyasachi, he[Bhishma.] rushed towards Panchala Drupada, surrounded by his soldiers. O king! He enveloped his beloved
relative with many arrows. Like a forest consumed by a fire at the end of winter, Drupada's soldiers were seen to
be consumed by those arrows. Bhishma was stationed in that battle, like a fire without smoke. He was like the sun
at midday, scorching with his energy. The Pandava warriors were incapable of glancing at Bhishma. Oppressed by
fear, the Pandavas looked in every direction. But without seeing a protector, they were like cattle afflicted by the
cold. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The soldiers were slaughtered in large numbers and retreated in despondence. The Pandava troops uttered great sounds of lamentation. Shantanu's son, Bhishma, held a bow that was always drawn in the form of a circle. He released flaming arrows that were like poisonous snakes. Rigid in his vows,
he created a continuous stream of arrows in every direction. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! After indicating
which one he would target, he killed many Pandava rathas. When the soldiers were crushed and shattered in every
way, the sun set and nothing could be seen. O bull among the Bharata lineage! On seeing Bhishma stationed in that
great battle, the Parthas withdrew their soldiers."'
