Vaishampayana said, 'That supreme of mountains had cascading waterfalls and was full of kinnaras, birds and cardinal elephants[Eight elephants guard the eight cardinal directions.]. The bulls among the Bharatas had lived happily there and found no pleasure in leaving it. But
when the bulls among the Bharatas once again beheld Kailasa, Kubera's beloved mountain that looked like an
ocean of clouds, they found great joy. The brave ones saw passes in the mountains, pens for cattle in the mountains, crevasses in the mountains and many sharp falls, with plains and lowlands here and there. There were other
large forests, inhabited by many animals and deer. Armed with bows and swords, those foremost among men confidently went further. There were beautiful groves, rivers and ponds and caverns and recesses in the mighty mountains. By day and by night, those bulls among men always found places to rest there. After resting in this difficult
terrain and traversing Kailasa, whose form is unthinkable, they reached Vrishaparva's supreme and beautiful hermitage. On meeting them, King Vrishaparva heartily welcomed them. Overcoming all confusion, they gave Vrishaparva a complete account of their safe stay[In the mountains and on their way to Vrishaparva's hermitage.]. They happily spent a night in that sacred hermitage, favoured by
gods and maharshis. The brave ones then went to the giant Badari and happily dwelt there again. Then those great-
souled ones, foremost among men, arrived at Narayana's region. They saw Kubera's lotus pond, favoured by gods
and siddhas, and became devoid of grief. Pandu's sons, foremost among all men, saw those lotuses and became devoid of grief. They pleasured there, just as brahmana rishis enjoy themselves when they live in Nandana.

'Having spent a happy month in Badari, in due course, they went to the land of Subahu, the king of the kiratas,
following the route that other brave ones had traversed earlier. They passed the lands of chinas[Chinese.], tukharas[Alternatively, tusharas, identified with Turkmenistan or the Turkistan region of Afghanistan.],
daradas[Identified with the Gilgit region of Kashmir.], darvas[Identified as the region between Vitasta (Beas) and Chandrabhaga (Chenab).] and kunindas[Identified with Uttarakhand and the southern parts of Himachal Pradesh.] full of many jewels. The brave ones crossed the difficult terrain of the Himalaya region and saw Subahu's city. When he heard that all the sons and grandsons of kings had arrived, King
Subahu was delighted and came out to welcome them. The bulls of the Kuru lineage greeted him in return. They
met Subahu with all the charioteers headed by Vishoka, with Indrasena, with the servants, with the cooks and with
their supervisors[Vishoka is Bhima's charioteer. Indrasena is Yudhishthira's charioteer.]. They stayed there happily for a night. Retaining all the charioteers and the chariots, they dismissed Ghatotkacha and his followers. They continued towards Yamuna, the king of mountains[The river Yamuna originates in the Yamunotri glacier, on the slopes of the Banderpooch peaks. Mount Yamuna probably means this place.]. That mountain
is full of springs. Its red and pale slopes are covered with a mantle of snow. The foremost among men reached the
sacrificial pole Vishakha and lived there[Vishakha is the sixteenth star (nakshatra) and there is clearly an astronomical allusion here.]. The great forest was like Chaitraratha[The name of Kubera's pleasure garden.] and was infested by boars,
many animals and birds. Those foremost among hunters safely spent another year in that forest. In a cavern in that
mountain, Vrikodara came upon an extremely strong serpent. It was oppressed by hunger and had the terrible form
of death itself. Thereupon, his soul was pained through depression and delusion. But Yudhishthira, supreme among
those who uphold dharma and whose energy is infinite, freed Vrikodara in an island there, when all his limbs had
been grasped by the grasper[The serpent.]. The twelfth year had arrived and the Kurus pleasantly spent the time in the forest.
They lived in the forest that was like Chaitraratha. They were fortunate and radiant in their austerities. Then the
foremost ones among those who are devoted to the knowledge of arms, went to the neighbourhood of the desert.
They went to Sarasvati and found Lake Dvaitavana, wishing to live there. On seeing them come to Dvaitavana and
settling down there, the residents of that region arrived. They were engaged in austerities and restrained, devoted
to rituals and meditation. They came with grass, water, vessels, offerings and stones for grinding. Sarasvati's banks
were covered with many plakshas[Fig trees.], akshas[Also known as bibhitakas, Terminalia belerica.], rohitakas[The herb Tecomella undulate.], cane, snuhas[Acorns.], badaris[Tree with jujube berries.], khadiras[Acacia.], shirishas[Another variety of acacia or mimosa.],
bilvas[Aegle marmelos, tree sacred to Shiva.], ingudas[Balanites roxburghii.], pilus[Salvadora oleoides.], shamis[Large tree, Prosopis spicigera.] and kariras[Thorny plant eaten by camels, Capparis aphylla.]. This was a place loved by yakshas, gandharvas and maharshis. It was the sacrificial ground of the gods themselves. Those sons of a god among men lived there happily,
roaming delightedly along the banks of the Sarasvati.'
