'Yudhishthira said, "O Yajnaseni! We have heard the words that you have spoken. They are sweet, well crafted and
full of good expressions. But what you have said is atheism. O princess! I do not follow dharma because of its
fruits. I give what should be given. I sacrifice what should be sacrificed. O Krishna! Without bothering about
whether there is fruit or not, and to the best of my abilities, I do what a man who is a householder is supposed to
do. O one with the beautiful hips! I do not follow dharma because of the fruits of dharma, but because I do not
want to transgress the traditional texts and wish to follow the conduct of the virtuous. O Krishna! My mind is naturally fixed on dharma. He who wishes to milk dharma does not obtain the fruits of dharma. Nor does the evil-
minded atheist, who having performed a task, has doubts. Do not doubt dharma, driven by pride, or in an attempt
to debate. A man who doubts dharma is destined to be born as inferior species. Like shudras have no access to the
Vedas, weak-minded ones who are doubtful about dharma and the ways of the rishis are barred from the undecaying and immortal worlds. O famous one! If one studies the Vedas, follows dharma and is born in a noble lineage,
then kings who follow dharma refer to him as old[That is, wise.]. Vile ones who transgress the sacred texts and have doubts
about dharma in their evil-mindedness, are worse than even shudras and thieves.

'"With your own eyes, you have seen the immensely ascetic rishi Markandeya. Rendered immortal by dharma,
the one whose soul is immeasurable had come here. Vyasa, Vasishtha, Maitreya, Narada, Lomasha, Shuka and other rishis, whose minds are virtuous, have obtained success through dharma alone. You have yourself seen them,
possessing the powers of divine yoga, capable of every curse and boon, and superior to the gods themselves. They
have always told me that dharma alone is the task to be followed. They are like the immortals and clearly have
knowledge of the traditional texts. O fortunate one! Therefore, out of the confusion of passion or because your
mind is agitated, you should not doubt the creator or dharma, or censure them. He who doubts dharma finds nothing else against which he can measure himself. He considers himself as the measure and proudly debases the superior. He thinks like a child that the world connected with pleasuring the senses alone is real, and is deluded about
everything else. There is no atonement for one who doubts dharma. Despite all his reflections, there are no worlds
for such a mean and evil one. The ignorant one, who does not acknowledge what has been proved, criticizes the
meaning given to the Vedas and the sacred texts and is addicted to desire and avarice, descends into hell. O fortunate one! But he who unquestioningly and with a steady mind follows the path of dharma, obtains eternity in the
hereafter. O Krishna! He who transgresses the proof given by the rishis, does not follow dharma and transgresses
all the sacred texts, that deluded one doesn't obtain bliss in a hundred births. O Krishna! Do not doubt the dharma
followed by the righteous, which has been recounted by the ancient rishis who know everything and can see everything. O Droupadi! Like a boat to a merchant who wishes to cross to the other shore of an ocean, dharma is the
only boat that takes one to heaven and there is nothing else. O unblemished one! If the dharma followed by those
who observe dharma had no fruit, then this entire universe would have been immersed in darkness and would not
have been established. No one would have progressed towards salvation. Everyone would have lived the life of animals. There would only have been restraints and nothing would have been earned or gained. If austerities, brahmacharya, sacrifices, studying, generosity and honesty did not have their fruits, then the ancient ones and those
who came before them, would not have observed these. If these deeds did not have fruits, there would have been
extreme confusion.

'"Why do rishis, gods, gandharvas, asuras, rakshasas and all the other powerful lords follow dharma so assiduously? It is because they know that the creator will give the supreme fruits to those who follow dharma. O
Krishna! This is eternal dharma. This dharma bears fruits. It has never been said that dharma has no fruits. It can
be seen that learning and austerities also bear fruit. O Krishna! That is also the case with you. Remember the circumstances of your birth, as you have heard them. You also know how the powerful Dhrishtadyumna was born. O
one with the sweet smiles! This is sufficient proof. Knowing that deeds have fruits, the wise one is content with
only a little. But ignorant and stupid ones are not satisfied with even a lot. But after death, dharma gives them no
happiness or deeds. O passionate one! The fruits of deeds, both good and evil, and their origins and ends are mysteries to even the gods. No one knows them. Beings are in darkness about them. They are protected by the gods
and the maya of the gods is deep. Brahmanas who are lean of form, righteous in their vows and are austere, and
having burnt down their sins are of a serene mind, they can see them. Not being able to see the fruit, one should
not doubt dharma or the gods. Without distractions and envy, one should perform sacrifices and donations. Deeds
have their fruits. That is the eternal dharma. This is what Brahma told his sons and it was known by rishi Kashyapa[Marichi was Brahma's son and Kashyapa was Marichi's son.]. O Krishna! Therefore, let your doubt be destroyed like the mist[The word used is nihara, which also means dew. But mist seems more appropriate.]. Deciding that this is the way it is, give
up your atheism. Do not speak ill of the supreme god who is the preserver of all beings. Learn about him. Worship
him. Do not have the kind of thoughts you have had. O Krishna! It is through the grace of the supreme god that
faithful mortals can tread the path of the immortals. Do not disregard him in any way."'
