'Vasudeva said, "O lord of men! When Gandhari had spoken thus, Dhritarashtra, lord of men, spoke to Duryodhana in the midst of the kings. 'O Duryodhana! O son! O fortunate one! Listen to what I am going to tell you and
act accordingly, if you wish to respect your father. Soma Prajapati[The lunar dynasty of the Kurus is descended from Soma (the moon).] extended the lineage of the Kurus at the beginning. Nahusha's son, Yayati, was sixth in the line from Soma. He had five sons, all supreme among rajarshis. The
illustrious and immensely energetic Yadu was the eldest. Puru was younger than him and he extended our lineage.
He was born from Sharmishtha, the daughter of Vrishaparva. O foremost among the Bharatas! Yadu was the son of
Devayani and was the maternal grandson of the infinitely energetic Kavya Shukra[Shukracharya, the preceptor of the demons. Vrishaparva was the king of the demons.]. The ancestor of the Yadavas[Yadu.]
was powerful and was honoured for his valour. But because he was full of insolence and extremely evil-minded, he
insulted the kshatriyas[The story has been recounted in Section 7 (Volume 1).]. Because he was deluded by his strength and insolence, he did not follow the instructions
of his father. The unvanquished one insulted his father and brothers. Yadu was the strongest one in the four corners
of the earth. Having subjugated all the kings, he lived in Nagasahrya[Another name for Hastinapura.]. His father, Nahusha's son, Yayati, was enraged. O Gandhari's son! He cursed him and threw him out of the kingdom. Yayati also angrily cursed his other
sons, the brothers who were insolent because of their strength. The best of kings then instated his youngest son,
Puru, in the kingdom and he remained devoted to him[Puru and Yayati respectively.]. Thus, if he is insolent, an eldest son can be deprived of
the kingdom. If he serves his seniors, even a youngest one can obtain the kingdom. My father's grandfather, Prati-
pa, knew everything about dharma. He was a lord of the earth who was famous in the three worlds. That lion
among kings ruled the kingdom in accordance with dharma. Three sons were born to him. They were famous and
were like the gods in form. Devapi was the eldest and Bahlika came next. O son! The intelligent Shantanu, my
grandfather, was the third. Devapi was supreme among kings and greatly energetic. He was devoted to dharma,
truthful and served his father. He was revered by the citizens of the town and the country. He was honoured by the
virtuous. He was loved by everyone, the young and the aged. He was generous and devoted to the truth. He was
engaged in the welfare of all beings. He obeyed the instructions of his father and also those of the brahmanas. He
was the beloved brother of Bahlika and the great-souled Shantanu. Those great-souled ones were extremely fraternal towards each other. However, Devapi possessed a disease of the skin. In due course of time, the aged and best
of kings made arrangements for a consecration, in accordance with the sacred texts. The illustrious one performed
all the auspicious rites. But all the brahmanas and the elders, together with the citizens of the town and the country,
restrained him from consecrating Devapi. When the king heard about the prevention of the instatement, his voice
choked with tears. The king sorrowed over his son. He[Devapi.] was generous, learned about dharma and devoted to the
truth. He was loved by the subjects. However, he was tainted by a disease of the skin. The gods do not approve of
a lord of the earth who is inferior in his limbs. Because of this, that best among kings was restrained by those bulls
among brahmanas. On seeing that he[Pratipa.] was distressed and was sorrowing over his son, and died because of this,
Devapi resorted to the forest. Bahlika also gave up the kingdom and went to his maternal uncle's lineage. He abandoned his father and brothers and obtained another prosperous city instead. O king! On Bahlika's instructions, after
his father had died, Shantanu, famous in the world, became the king and ruled the kingdom. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! In the same way, I was the eldest, but was deficient in a limb[Dhritarashtra was blind.]. After a great deal of reflection, the
intelligent Pandu barred me from the kingdom. Though he was younger to me, Pandu obtained the kingdom as a
king. O destroyer of enemies! On his death, the kingdom belongs to his sons. If I could not obtain the kingdom,
how can you desire the kingdom? This kingdom rightfully belongs to the great-souled Prince Yudhishthira. With
his great qualities, he will be the protector of the lineage of the Kouravas. He is truthful. He is never distracted. He
abides by the sacred texts. He is loved by his friends and is virtuous. He is loved by the subjects and is kind towards his well-wishers. He has mastered his senses and is the protector of righteous ones. Forgiveness, patience,
control, uprightness, truthfulness to vows, learning, single-mindedness, compassion towards beings and control-
Yudhishthira has all these qualities of a king. You are not the son of a king and you are not an arya in your conduct.
You are always greedy and evil-minded towards your friends. You are insolent. How can you hope to seize a kingdom that, according to the line of succession, belongs to another? Devoid of your delusion, give them half of the
kingdom, with the vehicles and the attendants. O Indra among men! The remainder will be enough for you to obtain a living, together with your younger brothers.'"'
