'Brihadashva said, "When Nala had lost his kingdom and had left for the forest with his wife, Bhima sent brahmanas to search out and find Nala. Bhima gave them a lot of riches and asked them to go and find Nala and his
daughter Damayanti. 'Accomplish this task and find where the king of Nishadha is. I will give one thousand cows
to whoever does this. I will give him a village to live in and it will be the size of a city. Even if Nala and Damayanti are not brought back, but are only discovered, I will give riches equal to ten thousand cows.' Having been thus
addressed, the brahmanas happily left in all the directions. They looked for Nishadha and his wife in many cities
and countries.

'"There was a brahmana named Sudeva. In his search, he came to the beautiful city of Chedi and saw Vidarbha's
daughter in the king's palace. At that time, she was with Sunanda and it was the sacred time for the king to say his
prayers. Only a little bit of her great beauty could be seen, like the luminosity of the sun engulfed in a net of haze.
On seeing that large-eyed one, though she was extremely thin and dirty, he used different arguments to deduce that
she was Bhima's daughter. Sudeva said, 'This lady's beauty is exactly like what I have seen before. After seeing
her, I have accomplished my objective today. She is like Shri and brings pleasure to the worlds. Her face is like the
full moon. She is dark. Her breasts are beautifully rounded. Through her radiance, this goddess dispels darkness in
all the directions. Her eyes are beautiful, like the lotus or the palasha. She looks like Manmatha's Rati[Manmatha is the god of love and Rati is his consort.]. She is
desired by all the worlds, like the rays of the full moon. Because of destiny and the adversity of fate, she has been
dislodged from the lake of Vidarbha. Her limbs are encrusted with dirt and mud, exactly like the stalk of a lotus.
Or she is like the night of the full moon when the moon has been swallowed up by Rahu[Rahu is a demon who sought to drink amrita, but was caught, and resolved vengeance on the sun and the
moon. Consequently, as one of the nine planets, Rahu swallows up the sun and the moon at the time of eclipses.]. She is miserable and
despondent because of sorrow for her husband, like the course of a river that has run dry. She looks like a pond of
lotuses devastated by the trunks of elephants, with the flowers decayed and the birds scattered in fear. She is delicate and her limbs are of noble lineage. She should be in a house that is a store of jewels. But she burns in the heat
like the uprooted stalk of a lotus. She has the qualities of beauty and generosity. However, though she deserves
them, she is not adorned in ornaments. She is like a sliver of the moon in the sky, when it is covered by dark
clouds. She is deprived of objects of desire. She has been separated from her loved ones and distanced from her
relatives. The miserable one sustains her body, in the hope of seeing her husband again. The husband is the
supreme ornament for a woman, even if she has no other ornaments. Without him, even a beautiful woman does
not seem beautiful. Without her, Nala must be facing great difficulties. How does he hold up his body, without immersing himself in sorrow? She is there, with eyes like a lotus with a hundred petals. She is one who deserves happiness. But seeing her unhappy, my mind also suffers. When will this radiant one reach the other shore, overcoming this unhappiness? When will this faithful one unite with her husband, like Rohini with the moon[Rohini is the fourth nakshatra. While all the nakshatras are married to the moon, Rohini is the favourite
wife.]? The
Nishadha will certainly be delighted when he gets her back. The king who has lost his kingdom will regain it and
the earth with it. Nishadha deserves Vidarbha's daughter and the black-eyed one deserves him. They are similar in
conduct and age. They are similar in lineage. She is anxious to see her husband and he is immensely brave and
powerful. It is my duty to comfort the wife. I will console the one with a face like that of the full moon. She has
never before witnessed the misery she is suffering now. Because of her sorrow, she is now reflecting all the time.'

Through different signs and arguments, he arrived at this conclusion.

'"The brahmana Sudeva then approached Bhima's daughter and said, 'O Vidarbha's daughter! I am Sudeva. I
am your brother's beloved friend. I have come here on the instructions of King Bhima. I have come here looking
for you. O queen! Your father is well and so are your mother and brothers. Your son and daughter, who will have
long lives, are well. But because of you, though they are alive, the large numbers of your relatives seem to be
bereft of their senses.' O Yudhishthira! Damayanti recognized Sudeva and one after another, asked him about all
her well-wishers. O king! On suddenly seeing Sudeva, the best of brahmanas and her brother's friend, Vidarbha's
daughter was overcome by grief and wept piteously. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Sunanda saw her weeping there, overcome by grief, and conversing alone with Sudeva. She sent a message to her mother, 'Sairandhri is
weeping piteously, ever since she met a brahmana. If you think fit, find out the reason.' Then the mother of the
king of Chedi left the king's inner quarters and went to where the lady was meeting the brahmana. O lord of the
earth! The king's mother summoned Sudeva and asked, 'Whose wife is this beautiful one and whose daughter?
How has the one with the beautiful eyes been separated from her relatives and her husband? O brahmana! Do you
know how she has come to this state? I wish to hear everything from you in complete detail. I am asking about the
lady whose form is like that of a goddess. Tell me everything truthfully.' O king! Having been thus addressed,
Sudeva, supreme among brahmanas, sat down in comfort and recounted the true story about Damayanti."'
