'Dhritarashtra asked, "O supreme among eloquent ones! Life is unfathomable. But
how does one understand it? I wish to hear about it. Tell me truthfully. I am asking
you."

'Vidura replied, "O lord! Listen to everything about beings, about their birth and
other deeds. On earth, for some time, a being dwells as an embryo[The text uses the word kalala. An embryo goes through stages of development, progressively, kalala, arbuda, peshi and so on. So kalala is the
first stage in am embryo's development.]. When the fifth
month is over, flesh is formed. Within the womb, all the limbs are then formed within
a month. The being dwells in the midst of all this, smeared with flesh and blood. Because of the force of the wind, the feet are upwards and the head is downwards. It
faces great difficulties as it approaches the gate of the vagina. Accompanied by earlier
deeds, it is afflicted by the contraction of the vagina. Having been freed from this[Having been born.], he
sees the other calamities in this world. Evil demons grab him, like dogs after a piece of
meat[These are demons that afflict infants, newly born children.]. If he is still alive, in a subsequent phase, he is grasped by diseases. He is tied
down by his own deeds. He is bound down in the noose of senses and afflicted by the
succulent addiction to them. O lord among men! He confronts various temptations. He
is repeatedly tied down by these and is never satisfied. He does not realize when he
arrives in Yama's world. In the course of time, he dies and Yama's messengers drag
him around. Those who are inarticulate in speech utter good and bad words through
their mouths. Like that, the atman ties down the atman and fails to comprehend this[This is a difficult shloka to translate. The meaning is not evident and
some liberties have been taken in the translation.].
Thus, people are destroyed and are overcome by avarice. They become crazy because
of greed, anger and pride. They do not understand their own atman. He finds pleasure
in having been born in a good lineage and censures those who have been born in an
inferior lineage. He is vain in the pride of prosperity and censures those who are poor.
He reprimands others as stupid, but does not look at his own self. He inflicts teaching
on others, but does not teach himself. This world of mortals is not permanent. Since
the time of birth, whoever follows dharma in all his activities, attains the supreme objective. O lord of men! He who understands all this and acts accordingly, follows the
path of liberation and obtains it."'
