'Sanjaya said, "Your great army was shattered in that battle by the Pandus. On seeing this, Vrishasena exhibited the
power of his weapons and began to protect it single-handed. O venerable one! Vrishasena released arrows in the
ten directions. He roamed around and pierced men, horses, chariots and elephants. The mighty-armed one released
thousands of mighty and flaming arrows. They were like the rays of the sun during the summer. O great king!
Rathas and riders were oppressed by them and suddenly fell down on the ground, like trees broken by the wind. O
king! In that battle, masses of horses, masses of chariots and masses of elephants were brought down in every direction in hundreds and thousands. On seeing him fearlessly roam around in that battle alone, all the kings[On the Pandava side.] surrounded him and attacked him together. Nakula's son, Shatanika, attacked Vrishasena and pierced him with ten
iron arrows that penetrated the inner organs. At this, Karna's son severed his bow and brought down his standard.
Wishing to protect their brother, Droupadi's other sons rushed towards him. They made Karna's son disappear because of the shower of their arrows. Rathas, with Drona's son at the forefront, advanced towards them. O great
king! They quickly enveloped Droupadi's maharatha sons with many types of arrows, like clouds on a mountain.
Out of affection towards their sons, the Pandavas quickly countered them, together with warriors from the Pancha-
las, Kekayas, Matsyas and Srinjayas. The battle that raged between those on your side and the sons of Pandu was
fearful and tumultuous and made the body hair stand up, like that between the gods and the danavas. The Kurus
and the Pandavas fought well, excited by anger. They glanced towards each other, having earlier engendered the
animosity towards each other. Because of that wrath, those infinitely energetic ones seemed to be like the supreme
of birds[Garuda.] and the serpents, battling in the sky. With Bhima, Karna, Kripa, Drona, Drona's son, Parshata and
Satyaki, the field of battle was resplendent, as if the sun of destruction had arisen. The immensely strong ones
fiercely fought in that battle, seeking to kill each other, like Bali of the danavas against the gods. Yudhishthira's
army let out a mighty roar and began to slaughter your soldiers, driving the maharathas away.

'"On seeing that the army was routed and sorely oppressed by the enemy, Drona said, 'O brave ones! Do not run
away.' Drona possessed red horses. He was angry. He was like an elephant with four tusks. He penetrated the Pan-
dava army and attacked Yudhishthira. Yudhishthira pierced him with sharp arrows tufted with heron feathers. But
Drona severed his bow and quickly rushed against him. The illustrious Kumara from the Panchalas was protecting
his[Yudhishthira's.] wheels and countered the advancing Drona, like the shoreline against the lord of the rivers. On seeing Drona,
bull among the brahmanas, thus repulsed by Kumara, delighted leonine roars and sounds of applause were heard.
In that great battle, Kumara angrily pierced Drona in the chest with an arrow and repeatedly roared, like a lion. But
in that encounter, the immensely strong Drona repulsed Kumara. Having overcome all fatigue, he displayed the
dexterity of his hands and released many thousands of arrows. The brave one, supreme among brahmanas, devoted
to the conduct of aryas and well-versed in the use of weapons, slew Kumara, the protector of the chariot wheels.
He penetrated the midst of the army and roamed around in all the directions. Bharadvaja's son, bull among rathas,
was the protector of your soldiers. He pierced Shikhandi with twelve arrows, Uttamouja with twenty, Nakula with
five, Sahadeva with seven, Yudhishthira with twelve, each of Droupadi's sons with three, Satyaki with five and
Matsya with ten. In that battle, he agitated the warriors and rushed against them. With a desire to capture him, he
advanced towards Yudhishthira, Kunti's son. O king! Maharatha Yugandhara repulsed Bharadvaja's son, who was
enraged, like the ocean agitated by a storm. Having pierced Yudhishthira with straight-tufted arrows, he[Drona.] brought
Yugandhara down from the chariot with a broad-headed arrow. Virata, Drupada, the Kekayas, Satyaki, Shibi,
Vyaghradatta from Panchala, the valiant Simhasena and many others sought to protect Yudhishthira. They showered many arrows and obstructed his path. O king! Vyaghradatta from Panchala pierced Drona with fifty sharp arrows and the soldiers roared. Maharatha Simhasena swiftly pierced Drona, rigid in his vows, and suddenly laughed
out in delight. Drona dilated his eyes and rubbed the string of his bow. He slapped his palms loudly and attacked.
The powerful one used broad-headed arrows to sever the heads, adorned with earrings, of Simhasena and Vyaghradatta from their bodies. He used a shower of arrows to torment the maharatha Pandavas and approached Yudhishthira, like death, the destroyer. O king! A loud sound arose in Yudhishthira's army, among all the warriors,
when the one who was rigid in his vows approached him. On witnessing Drona's valour, this is what the soldiers
said. 'The king has been slain. The king who is Dhritarashtra's son will be successful today. In this battle, he will
return to us and to Dhritarashtra's son[After having captured Yudhishthira.].' While your soldiers were thus conversing, maharatha Kounteya swiftly
arrived.

'"His chariot roared. He had created a terrible river. The water was blood and the chariots were eddies. It was
full of the bodies and bones of brave ones and it conveyed beings to the world of the dead. Masses of arrows were
the giant foam and it was infested with fish in the form of javelins. Having routed the Kurus, Pandava quickly
crossed that river. Kiriti suddenly attacked Drona's army and shrouded and confounded it with a giant net of arrows. The illustrious Kounteya quickly affixed arrows and shot them incessantly, so that no one could distinguish a
gap between these[The two acts.]. O great king! The directions, the sky, the firmament and the earth disappeared, covered by
the arrows. O king! Nothing could be seen in the field of battle then. The wielder of Gandiva created a great darkness with his arrows. With the sun about to set, dust covered everything. Enemy could no longer be distinguished
from well-wisher. Drona, Duryodhana and the others announced a withdrawal. Knowing that the enemy was extremely terrified and no longer had its mind on the fight, Bibhatsu slowly withdrew his own soldiers. The Pandus,
Srinjayas and Panchalas praised Partha with pleasant words, like rishis praising the sun. Having vanquished the
enemy, Dhananjaya returned to his own camp, behind all the other soldiers. He was happy and was with Keshava.
Pandu's son was radiant on his colourful chariot, which was decorated with excellent and expensive emeralds,
crystals, gold, diamonds and quartz. He was as radiant as the moon in the sky, adorned with stars."'
