Dhritarashtra asked, "O Sanjaya! When Pandya was killed, what did Arjuna do in the battle, especially when the
brave Karna was single-handedly driving away the enemy? Pandava is brave and accomplished in learning. He is
powerful. The great-souled Shankara made all beings subservient to him[Shiva's boon has been described in Section 31 (Volume 2).]. That is the reason my greatest fear is
from Dhananjaya, the slayer of enemies. O Sanjaya! Tell me everything that Partha did there."

'Sanjaya replied, "When Pandya was killed, Krishna quickly spoke these beneficial words to him. 'Without
looking towards the king[Yudhishthira.], the Pandavas are retreating. To accomplish Ashvatthama's resolution, Karna is
killing the Srinjayas. He is creating a great carnage there, amidst the horses, men and elephants.' The extremely
unassailable Vasudeva spoke these words to Kiriti. On hearing this and on seeing that his brother was facing a
great and terrible calamity, Pandava asked Hrishikesha to quickly urge the horses. Hrishikesha advanced on that
chariot against those warriors.

' "O supreme among kings! Yet again, there was a terrible encounter and clash between Karna and the Pandavas
and it extended Yama's kingdom. Wishing to kill each other, they swiftly grasped bows, arrows, clubs, swords,
lances, spikes, maces, catapults, spears, scimitars, battleaxes, bludgeons, javelins, cutlasses, darts, slings and large
hooks and descended. The whizzing of arrows and the sound of palms against bowstrings extended into the sky,
the directions and the sub-directions. As they attacked, they roared and the earth resounded with the thunder of
chariot wheels. Those great sounds of battle cheered them. Brave ones fought extremely terrible battles with brave
ones, wishing to bring an end to the hostility. There were sounds from bowstrings, palm-guards and bows and the
trumpeting of elephants. They were attacked and as they fell down, roared loudly. There were many sounds generated by the arrows and by the roars of brave ones. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing this terrible
sound, some were frightened, turned pale and fell down. There were many among them who roared and showered
down arrows. In the battle, Atiratha Karna crushed many of them with his arrows. With his arrows, Karna conveyed five heroes from Panchala, ten rathas and five others, with their horses, charioteers and standards, to Yama's
eternal abode. Many foremost and immensely valorous warriors from the Pandus swiftly attacked Karna in that
battle and surrounding him from all sides, covered the sky with their weapons. Karna agitated the enemy soldiers
with his shower of arrows. He was like the leader of a herd[Of elephants.] plunging into a lake full of birds and lotuses. Rad-
heya penetrated into the midst of the enemy. He brandished his supreme bow and using his sharp arrows, began to
bring down their heads. The shields and armour were shattered and the bodies were deprived of life. There was no
one among them who needed the touch of a second arrow[That is, they were killed with the first arrow.]. The arrows that were released from the bow crushed
armour and bodies. The bowstrings and palm-guards were shattered, like horses lashed with a whip. Whenever
Pandus, Srinjayas and Panchalas came within the reach of his arrows, Karna quickly struck them in the inner organs, like a lion among large numbers of deer.

' "O venerable one! The son of Panchala[Dhrishtadyumna.], Droupadi's sons, the twins and Yuyudhana united and advanced
against Karna. When the Kurus were severly engaged with the Pandavas and the Srinjayas, warriors advanced
against each other, prepared to give up their lives in the battle. They were armoured well, with coats of mail, helmets and ornaments. The maharathas used clubs, maces and other kinds of bludgeons. They advanced fiercely, like
the god wielding his staff[A reference to Yama.]. O venerable one! They roared loudly and challenged each other. They struck each
other. Struck by the others, they fell down. They vomited blood and lost their limbs, heads and eyes in the battle.
Complete with teeth, but laced with blood, the faces looked like pomegranates. Though they had been brought
down by weapons, they seemed to be alive. They struck each other with spears, swords, lances, catapults, nails,
javelins and spikes. They were crushed and cut down by others. They also crushed and cut others down. They angrily killed and struck each other. They were brought down and killed by others. Losing their lives, they were covered with blood. They seemed to exude their own natural red juice, like sandalwood trees. Rathas were killed by
rathas, elephants by elephants, men by the best of men and thousands of horses were brought down by horses.
Standards, heads, umbrellas, the trunks of elephants and the arms of men were severed by razor-sharp and broad-
headed arrows, arrows in the shape of a half-moon and other weapons. In that battle, men, elephants, chariots and
horses were brought down. Horse riders slew brave warriors. The trunks of tuskers were severed. Flags and standards were shattered and brought down, strewn around like mountains. Foot soldiers destroyed elephants and chariots. Struck and killed, they fell down in every direction. Horse riders clashed against foot soldiers and were swiftly killed by them. In the battle, large numbers of foot soldiers were killed by horse riders and lay down. O greatly
intelligent one! The faces and limbs of those who were killed looked like crushed lotuses and faded garlands. O
king! The beautiful forms of elephants, horses and men looked like garments that had been sullied and therefore,
became supremely hideous to see." '
