Yudhishthira asked, "Many kinds of gifts are given to brahmanas. O grandfather! What are the special characteristics of the donor and the recipient?"

'Bhishma replied, "A brahmana can accept a gift from a person who is virtuous and also from a person who is
wicked. If the donor possesses the qualities, there is little sin in that. But if the donor doesn't possess the qualities,
the recipient is submerged. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In this connection, an ancient history is recounted
about a conversation between Vrishadarbhi[Vrishadarbha's son.] and the saptarshis. Kashyapa, Atri, Vasishtha, Bharadvaja, Goutama,
Vishvamitra, Jamadagni and the virtuous Arundhati[Vasishtha's wife.] had a common female servant named Ganda. Her husband
was the shudra Pashusakha. In ancient times, all of them performed austerities and wandered around the earth. Immersed in samadhi, they wished to see Brahma's eternal world. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! There was a
very long period of drought. The world was hungry and it became very difficult to remain alive. On an earlier occasion, a sacrifice had been performed by Shibi. As dakshina at that sacrifice, he had given away his own son to
the officiating priest. O lord! This son was not destined to have a long life and he died at that time. Tormented by
hunger, they sat around the dead body. The supreme rishis saw that the son of the one who had performed the sacrifice was dead. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Afflicted by hunger, they placed the body on a plate and
cooked it. There was no food available in the world of mortals. Desiring to save their lives and in search of a
means of sustenance, those ascetics had to resort to this calamity. While they were cooking, the king was passing
along that road. King Shaibhya, Vrishadarbha's son, was distressed to see this.

'"Vrishadarbhi said, 'If you accept a gift, you will be saved. For your sustenance, accept a gift. O ones rich in
austerities! Listen. I will tell you about the riches I possess. I love brahmanas who seek gifts from me. I will give
you one thousand mules. I will give each of you cows, with calves that have just been born. All of them will be
swift, with white hair. I will give each of you one thousand bulls that are capable of bearing loads. They will be
well born and auspicious. I will give you fat ones that can till the ground. I will give you well-behaved cows that
have only had one calf. There are the best of villages that yield succulent grain. There are other jewels that are extremely difficult to obtain. What will I give you? Do not act so as to eat something that should not be eaten. For
your sustenance, what can I give you?'

'"The rishis replied, 'O king! Receiving a gift from a king may seem to be sweet, but is like poison. Knowing
this, why are you trying to tempt us? It is destiny that kshatriyas must seek refuge with brahmanas. Their austerities are unblemished. By pleasing them, the gods are pleased. A brahmana earns merits through days of austerities.
If he accepts a gift from a king, those are destroyed, as in a forest conflagration. O king! May you always be fortunate, giving to those who solicit from you. Give them all those riches.'"

'Bhishma continued, "Having said this, all of them departed. The meat the intelligent ones had intended to prepare remained uncooked. Having abandoned it there, all of them left for the forest, wishing to search for food.
Urged by the king, his ministers went to the forest. They plucked some figs and tried to give those away as donations. The servants filled the insides of some of those plucked figs with gold and tried to persuade them to accept
these. Atri picked up some of those figs and found that they were heavy. He said, 'Do not take us to be fools. We
are not evil in intelligence. We know there is gold in these. We know and are awake. If accepted in this world, they
will lead to bitter results in the world hereafter. They should not be accepted by someone who desires happiness in
this  world  and  in  the  next.'  Vasishtha  said,  'One  gold  coin  will  be  counted  as  one  hundred,  or  even  one
thousand[In terms of the demerits.]. If we accept many, we will obtain the ends meant for the wicked.' Kashyapa said, 'All the paddy, barley, gold, animals and women on earth cannot satisfy one person's desire. Therefore, abandon greed and walk the
path of peace.' Bharadvaja said, 'Once horns appear on a ruru deer, as the animal grows, they also grow. There is
no limit to what a man wishes for.' Goutama said, 'All the objects in the world cannot fill up the world. A man is
like an ocean. He can never be filled.' Vishvamitra said, 'When desire is satisfied, that only leads to another desire
growing. The subsequent desire and thirst pierce like an arrow.' Jamadagni said, 'It is certain that self-restraint in
not accepting sustains austerities. A brahmana's avarice for riches makes him deviate.' Arundhati said, 'It is the
view of some that objects must be stored for the sake of dharma and artha. However, storing austerities is superior
to storing objects.' Ganda said, 'My lords are fierce and they are frightened of this. They are stronger than me. I
am weak. Therefore, I am even more terrified of this.' Pashusakha said, 'There is nothing superior to dharma and
brahmanas know about that wealth. I humbly wait on them, so that I may accurately get to know about that excellent learning.' The rishis said, 'Let him[Vrishadarbhi.] keep his subjects happy through the gifts that he makes. Let him gift the
stuffed fruits to them and not to us.' Having said this, they discarded the fruits that had gold inside them. Firm in
their vows, all the rishis went off elsewhere. The ministers said, 'O king! You should know that suspecting that the
fruits were stuffed, they have abandoned them and have gone elsewhere.' Thus  addressed by  his servants, Vrishadarbhi was enraged. Determined to take revenge on all of them, he went to his own house. Having gone there,
he ignited a fire. Resorting to terrible rituals, he poured oblations into this. To satisfy his wishes, the king uttered
well-pronounced mantras and offered oblations with each one of them. A demoness arose from the fire. She could
strike terror in the worlds. Vrishadarbhi named her Yatudhani. The demoness was like the night of final destruction. With hands joined in salutation, she presented herself before King Vrishadarbhi and asked, 'What will I do?'

Vrishadarbhi replied, 'Go to the seven rishis and Arundhati and also to their male servant and female servant. Find
out their names and remember those in your mind[So that the wrong people aren't killed. In addition, the names would provide an indication of their powers.]. Once you have found out their names, kill them all. Having
destroyed them, you can go wherever you want.' Yatudhani agreed. She assumed her own form[She had presumably assumed a pleasant form for the king.] and went to the
forest where the maharshis were roaming around."'
