'Bhishma said, "On this, an ancient history is recounted. O best among the Bharata lineage! This is a conversation
between a shalmali tree[The silk-cotton tree.] and the wind. There was a gigantic tree on the slopes of the Himalayas. It had grown
for many years and possessed a trunk, branches and foliage. O mighty-armed one! Crazy elephants, afflicted by
heat and oppressed by exhaustion, would rest there. So would other kinds of animals. The tree was dense with foliage and was a nalva[A furlong, 660 feet.] in circumference. It was covered with fruits and flowers and frequented by parrots and
sharika birds. This was beautiful and supreme among trees. Merchants in search of riches, ascetics, residents of the
forest and travellers along the path would rest under it. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Narada saw the large
trunk and the branches that extended in every direction. He approached and said, 'You are beautiful. You are handsome. O shalmali! O best among trees! You always please us. O son[The word used is tata.]! Birds, animals and elephants have always
cheerfully resided under your delicate shade. Your branches, larger branches and trunk are gigantic. Under no circumstance do I see any of these being shattered by the wind. O son! Is the wind your affectionate well-wisher? It is
certain that the wind always protects you in this forest. The wind uproots large and small trees from their places.
Its force dislodges the peaks of mountains. With its fragrant and sacred scent, the wind even dries up the nether regions and also the lakes, the rivers and the oceans. There is no doubt that the wind protects you as a friend. That is
the reason you have these many branches, leaves and flowers. O tree! O son! It is seen to be beautiful that these
birds sport and find pleasure in you. Their delicate voices can be separately heard. When it is the time for flowering, one can hear these extremely beautiful sounds. The elephants, the adornments of their herds, also take delight.
O shalmali! They are afflicted by the heat and find joy on seeking refuge with you. In that way, other kinds of animals are also radiant near you. Those who are in search of riches seek refuge. O tree! You are as resplendent as
Mount Meru. There are brahmanas, successful ascetics, hermits and mendicants. I think that your shelter is like
heaven. The wind goes everywhere and is fierce. O shalmali! There is no doubt that it protects you because you are
a relative or a friend. O shalmali! When the wind approaches you, perhaps you bow down supremely and say, "I
belong to you." That is the reason the wind always protects you. I have not seen a tree or a firm mountain that has
not been shattered by the wind. It is my view that there is nothing like this on earth. O shalmali! But then again, for
some reason, you and your family are always protected by the wind. That is the reason you stand, free from fear.'

'"The shalmali replied, 'O brahmana! The wind is not my friend, my relative, or my well-wisher. Nor is the
wind my supreme lord that it should protect me. O Narada! My energy and strength are more terrible than that of
the wind. The wind cannot even attain one-eighteenth of my force of life. When the strong wind arrives and destroys trees, mountains and everything else, I resist it with my force. The wind does the shattering[The wind is named prabhanjana, the one who shatters. This is the word
used in the text.], but has been
shattered by me many times. O devarshi! That is the reason I am not terrified of even an enraged wind.'

'"Narada said, 'O shalmali! There is no doubt that you look at this in a contrary way. There is nothing anywhere
that has a strength that is equal to the wind's strength. Indra, Yama, Vaishravana[Kubera.] and Varuna, the lord of the waters, are not the wind's equal, not to speak of a tree. O shalmali! When any living being moves on this earth, everywhere, it is the illustrious wind, the lord, who makes the breath of life move. When it exerts itself properly, it reassures all living beings. When it is not properly exerted, men move in perverse ways. This is the nature of the wind
and it is the supreme upholder of all life. You do not worship someone who should be worshipped. What can this
be, other than lack of intelligence? You have no substance. You are evil in your intelligence. You only speak a lot.
O shalmali! Since you have spoken in this false way, I am enraged with you. My anger has been roused at what
you have said. I will myself tell the wind about the many wicked words you have spoken. There are other trees that
are stronger still-sandalwood, spandana[Kind of tree.], shala[Vatica robusta.], sarala[Pine.], devadaru[Cedar or spruce.], cane and reeds. They are cleansed
in their souls and do not evil-mindedly speak about the wind in this way. They know their own strengths and that
of the wind. That is the reason those supreme trees bow down before the wind. You are deluded and do not know
about the wind's infinite strength.'"'
