Vaishampayana said, 'Having asked the son of the suta in this way, he was afflicted by terrible sorrow. Dhritarashtra lost all hope about his sons being victorious and fell down on the ground. On seeing that he had lost his senses
and had fallen down, the attendants sprinkled him with water. The water was extremely cold and was perfumed.
They fanned him. O great king! On seeing that he had fallen down, the women of the Bharata lineage surrounded
him from every direction and gently rubbed him with their hands. They gently raised the king up from the ground.
With tears choking their throats, the beautiful women placed him on his seat. Having attained his seat, the king was
still not conscious. He was immobile. They stood around him and fanned him. Having slowly regained his senses,
the king trembled. He once again began to ask the suta, Gavalgana's son, about what exactly had happened.

'"He is like the rising sun[Though not explicitly stated, this is Dhritarashtra speaking.]. He can dispel darkness through his own light. When Ajatashatru advanced, how
did Drona counter him? He is like an elephant with shattered temples. He is angry and swift. He is resplendent and
single-minded in purpose. He is incapable of being repulsed by a rival. When he advanced for victory, like one
who desires intercourse with a female[That is, a female elephant. The imagery is of elephants fighting over a she-elephant.], which brave warriors fought with that supreme of men in the field of battle? That mighty-armed one is capable of consuming Duryodhana's entire army with his terrible glance. He has intelligence and is devoted to the truth. The supreme archer can destroy with his sight, even if he is not protected,
and he is fixed on victory. He is self-controlled and is revered by the entire world. Which brave ones surrounded
him? That undecaying king is supreme among archers and is difficult to resist. When Kounteya, tiger among men,
swiftly advanced and attacked Drona, who on my side countered him? Which brave ones surrounded the advancing Bhimasena? Bibhatsu is extremely valorous. He rides on a chariot that is like a dense cloud. He creates a tumultuous shower, like thunder. He showers arrows, like Maghavan showering rain. The one with the monkey on
his banner envelopes the sky with his mass of arrows. All the directions resound with the clapping of his palms and
the roar of his chariot wheels. The sound of his arrows makes him difficult to cross. His anger can thwart the
clouds. His arrows are as swift as thought. His fierce arrows penetrate the inner organs. He floods the entire earth
with blood, so that men find it difficult to traverse. In that battle, Duryodhana made endeavours and raised his terrible club. What did he do when Vijaya, the wielder of Gandiva, used arrows sharpened on stone and tufted with the
feathers of vultures? When the intelligent one did this and destroyed the army with the sound of Gandiva, what
was his[Duryodhana's.] state of mind then? Arjuna performed terrible deeds and advanced fiercely. When Dhananjaya used his
arrows to attack Drona, what did he do? He was like the wind scattering clouds, or like a tempest destroying reeds.
Which man can stand against the wielder of Gandiva in battle? Soldiers trembled and brave ones were touched by
fear. Who were those who did not forsake Drona and who were the inferior ones who ran away? Who were the
ones who gave up their lives and advanced towards death? Dhananjaya had vanquished superhuman combatants.
Those on my side are incapable of withstanding the force of his white horses. Gandiva's noise is like the roll of
thunder. Vishvaksena is the charioteer and the warrior is Dhananjaya. It is my view that this chariot cannot be vanquished, even by the gods and the asuras. The brave Pandava is delicate, young, brave and handsome. He is intelligent and skilled. He is wise in war and truth is his valour. When Nakula emitted a loud roar, what did all the
Kouravas do? When the intelligent one advanced, which brave ones surrounded him? Sahadeva is like an angry
snake with virulent poison. He is invincible in battle. When he advanced against the enemy, who countered him?
He is noble in his vows. He cannot be assailed. He is modest and unvanquished. When he advanced against Drona,
which brave ones surrounded him? He[Satyaki.] crushed the large army of the Souvira kingdom. He obtained as his queen
the desirable princess of Bhoja, who was beautiful in all her limbs. Truthfulness, fortitude, valour and brahmacharya are always completely vested in him. Yuyudhana is a bull among men. He is strong. He is truthful in his
deeds. He is never distressed. He is unvanquished. He is Vasudeva's equal in battle and is regarded as second to
Vasudeva. Instructed by Dhananjaya, he has become as brave as his preceptor in deeds. He is Partha's equal in use
of weapons. Who restrained him when he advanced against Drona? He is supremely brave among the Vrishnis. He
is valiant among all archers. He is Rama's[Parashurama's.] equal in weapons, fame and valour. He is supreme in truthfulness,
fortitude, self-control, valour and brahmacharya. All these are in Satvata[Satyaki.], just as the three worlds are in Kesha-
va. Vested with all these qualities, he is incapable of being resisted by the gods. When that great archer advanced,
which brave ones surrounded him? The best of the Panchalas is loved by all those who have been born from noble
lineages. Uttamouja always performs supreme deeds in battle. He is always engaged in Dhananjaya's welfare and
in supreme injury towards me. He is the equal of Yama, Vaishravana, Aditya, the great Indra and Varuna. He is famous as a maharatha and fought against Drona in the battle. He was prepared to give up his life in that tumult?
Which brave ones surrounded him? Dhrishtaketu was the only one among the Chedis who went to the Pandavas.
When he advanced against Drona, who opposed him? The brave Ketuman slew Prince Sudarshana at the other end
of the gate to the mountains[The gate to the mountains may be a reference to Girivraja.]. When he advanced against Drona, who countered him? The tiger among men was a
woman earlier and is conversant with his own good and bad qualities. Yajnasena's son, Shikhandi, is never distressed in battle. He was the reason behind the death of the great-souled Devavrata in battle. When he advanced
towards Drona, which brave ones surrounded him? In all the qualities, the brave one surpasses Dhananjaya. His
weapons are always truth and brahmacharya. He is Vasudeva's equal in valour and Dhananjaya's equal in strength.
He is like the sun in his energy and like Brihaspati in his intelligence. The great-souled Abhimanyu is like death
with a gaping mouth. When he advanced towards Drona, which brave ones surrounded him? Subhadra's son is the
destroyer of enemy heroes. He is young, but is as celebrated as the ocean. When he advanced against Drona, what
was the state of your mind then[Actually meaning the state of Duryodhana's mind.]? Droupadi's sons are tigers among men. They rushed towards Drona in that battle, like rivers towards the sea. Which brave ones repulsed them? Those children gave up all play for twelve years.
They observed supreme vows and for the sake of weapons, served Bhishma. They were Kshatranjaya, Kshatradeva, Kshatradharma and Manina, the brave sons of Dhrishtadyumna. When they advanced against Drona, who opposed them? The Vrishnis look upon him as the equal of one hundred armoured ones in battle. When the great
archer Chekitana advanced against Drona, who countered him? Anadhrishti was the son of Vriddhakshema and
was never distressed in his soul. He once abducted the princess of Kalinga in a battle. Who restrained him when he
advanced against Drona? The five brothers from Kekaya are devoted to dharma and truth is their valour. Their
complexion is like fireflies. Their armour, weapons and standards are red. Those brave ones are the sons of the
Pandavas's mother's sister and desire their victory[The mother in question is Kunti. Kunti's sister was Shrutakirti and she was married to the Kekaya king,
Dhrishtaketu.]. When they attacked so as to kill Drona, which brave ones
surrounded them? The angry kings fought against him for six months in Varanavata, wishing to kill him, but could
not defeat him. He is the lord of battles. He is supreme among archers and is brave. He is extremely strong and is
unwavering in his aim. When that tiger among men attacked Drona, who countered Yuyutsu? In Varanasi, wishing
to obtain a wife, the maharatha used a broad-headed arrow in battle to bring down the son of the king of Kashi
from his chariot[This is a reference to Dhrishtadyumna.]. Dhrishtadyumna, the great archer, is the counsellor of the Parthas. He was created for Drona's
death and is engaged in causing injury to Duryodhana. In the battle, he consumed the warriors and shattered the
ranks. When he advanced towards Drona, which brave ones restrained him? Shikhandi's son, Kshatradeva, was
reared in Drupada's lap and is skilled in use of weapons. Who restrained his advance against Drona? Ushinara's
maharatha son[Ushinara's son is Shibi. But son is being used in an extended sense here, meaning grandson. The person in question is Shaibya, Shibi's son and Ushinara's grandson.] covered the entire earth with the pole of his chariot, as if girding it with the hide of a calf. He is
foremost among those who kill the enemy. He performed ten horse sacrifices, a substitute for all sacrifices, and
provided an abundance of food, drink and dakshina. He protected his subjects as if they were his own sons. The
brave one gave away as many cattle as dakshina as there are grains of sand in the waters of the Ganga. No man has
accomplished such a deed earlier, nor will any man perform this feat in the future. The gods themselves exclaimed,
'This is an extremely difficult deed. In the three worlds, with their mobile and immobile objects, we do not see a
second person like Ushinara's son, who has been born, or will be born.' Shaibya is brave. After death, he will go to
places that are not attainable by men of this world. Who repulsed the grandson Shaibya, when he advanced towards Drona, like death with a gaping mouth? Virata of Matsya has an army of chariots and is the killer of enemies. When he advanced against Drona in battle, which brave ones surrounded him? Vrikodara's son grew up in a
single day[Ghatotkacha grew up in a single day.]. He is immensely strong and powerful. He is a terrible rakshasa and knows the use of maya. He causes great terror among those on my side. He desires the victory of the Parthas and is a thorn for my sons. Who restrained the mighty-armed Ghatotkacha's advance towards Drona? O Sanjaya! There are many others who have
their objective in mind. They are prepared to give up their lives in battle. Who can they not vanquish? Their refuge
is the tiger among men, the wielder of the Sharnga bow. He desires the welfare of the Parthas. How can they be defeated? He is infinite. He is the preceptor of the worlds. He is the eternal protector of the worlds. The divine
Narayana is the protector in all battles. He is the lord with the celestial soul. The learned ones speak about his divine deeds. I will recount his deeds with devotion and thus obtain calmness in my own self."'
