Vaishampayana said, 'Yudhishthira bowed down before Hrishikesha and the grandfather. He took the permission
of all the seniors and asked, "Those who are learned about dharma say that ruling the kingdom is supreme dharma.
O king! I think that it is a great burden. Tell me about this. O grandfather! In particular, tell me about
rajadharma[The dharma of kings.]. All the beings in the world find a refuge in rajadharma. O Kourava! The three vargas[The three objectives, dharma, artha and kama.] are dependent on rajadharma. All the forms of mokshadharma[Mokshadharma is the dharma that leads to emancipation or liberation.] are also clearly based on it. It is like the harness for a
horse, or the goad for an elephant. It has been said that the dharma of kings restrains the world in that way. The rajarshis served that dharma earlier. It is becoming confused now, the world will no longer be established and everyone will become anxious. When the sun rises, it dispels the demonic darkness. In that way, rajadharma casts away
everything that is inauspicious in this world. O grandfather! O best of the Bharata lineage! O supreme among intelligent ones! Therefore, tell me about the true nature of rajadharma first. O scorcher of enemies! We obtain the truth
about all kinds of learning from you. Vasudeva thinks that you are supreme among intelligent ones."

'Bhishma replied, "I bow down before the supreme dharma. I bow down before the supreme Krishna. I honour
the brahmanas. I will now speak about eternal dharma. O Yudhishthira! Hear from me a complete account of rajadharma. Listen attentively to everything else that you wish to hear. O best of the Kuru lineage! In the beginning, a
king who desires pleasure must worship the gods and the brahmanas in the proper way. O extender of the Kuru lineage! Once one has worshipped the gods and the brahmanas, one is freed of the debts of dharma and is revered by
the worlds. O son! O Yudhishthira! You must always strive to uplift yourself. Without the exertion, fortune never
makes a king's objectives successful. In general, there are two aspects-destiny and enterprise. But I certainly
think it has been said that enterprise is superior to destiny. Even if a task begun does not go well, it is pointless to
rue that. O son! If a king is led astray, he must make greater efforts. With the exception of truth, there is nothing
that contributes to the success of kings. If a king is devoted to the truth, he finds delight here, and in the hereafter.
O Indra among kings! Truth is the supreme wealth for rishis too. Like that, nothing inspires as much confidence in
kings as adherence to supreme truth. If one possesses qualities and good conduct, is self-controlled and mild, is devoted to dharma and has conquered the senses, if one is extremely handsome and has a broad objective[Without getting bogged down by minute trivia.]-then
one never deviates from prosperity. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! One must resort to uprightness in all tasks.
One must reconsider policy and conceal the three[These three are left implicit and have to be deduced. One's weaknesses,
one's policy and the weaknesses of enemies have to be concealed.]. If a king is mild, everyone always disregards him. But if a
king is fierce, everyone is troubled. Therefore, act so that you are both. O supreme among generous ones! Brahmanas must never be punished. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Those who are brahmanas are named as
supreme beings in this world. O Indra among kings! The great-souled Manu sung two shlokas about this. O
Kouravya! This was about one's own dharma and you should bear this in your heart. 'Fire emerged from water.
Kshatriyas emerged from brahmanas. Iron emerged from stone. The energy of each of these is pacified by the
source[Fire is quenched with water, iron is blunted by stone and kshatriyas are
controlled by brahmanas.]. When iron confronts stone, fire faces water and kshatriyas hate brahmanas, then each of these three is
destroyed.' O great king! Knowing this, you must bow down before brahmanas. The best of brahmanas are full of
peace and represent the brahman on earth. O tiger among kings! However, you must always use your arms to restrain those who seem to be like that, but actually destroy the edifice of the world[Though not directly stated, this seems to mean that the king should restrain imperfect brahmanas.]. O son! Maharshi Ushanas
sang two shlokas in earlier times. O immensely wise one! O king! Listen to them attentively. 'A lord of men, who
is following his own dharma, should consider dharma and raise his weapons to even counter someone who knows
the Vedas in battle, if that person attacks him. If dharma is being destroyed, the one who protects it is the one who
is following dharma. If one counters anger with anger, the sin of killing a foetus does not result[The killing of a foetus is being equated with the killing of a brahmana.].' O best of men!
The brahmanas must be protected in this way. If they commit a crime, they must be exiled to the extremities of the
kingdom. O lord of men! But there must be compassion for those who are accused, even those who kill a brahmana, violate the preceptor's bed, or kill a foetus. A brahmana who hates the king must be banished outside the
kingdom and it is never recommended that there should be corporal punishment. O supreme among men! You
must always be affectionate towards men. For a king, there is no treasure as supreme as the store of men.

'"O great king! There are six kinds of forts that are indicated in the sacred texts[Those protected by deserts, water, earth, forests, mountains and men.]. Among all these, it is held
that the one protected by men is the most difficult to breach. Therefore, a learned king must act so as to be compassionate towards the four varnas. If a king has dharma in his soul and speaks the truth, he delights the subjects. O
supreme among men! However, you should not be indulgent all the time. A mild king follows adharma. He is like
a forgiving elephant. In the sacred texts of Brihaspati, a shloka was laid down in earlier times. O great king! It has
a bearing on this. I am reciting it. Listen attentively. 'A forgiving king is always subjugated by the inferior, who
are like elephant riders who mount the head of an elephant and wound it. Therefore, a king must not be gentle all
the time. He must also be harsh. He should be like the sun in the summer, not too cold and not too hot.' O great
king! You must always examine friend and foe through direction, examination, inference, analogies and instructions[Of the sacred texts.]. O one who donates a lot! You must give up all the vices. Even if one indulges in them, one must give up
addiction. In the world, people who indulge in vices are always overcome. If a king does not love his subjects, he
generates anxiety. The king must always treat them the way a wife treats her embryo. O great king! Listen to the
reasons why this is desirable. For the welfare of the embryo, a pregnant woman ceases to follow everything that
brings pleasure to her mind alone. The king must certainly be like that. O best among the Kuru lineage! He must
always follow dharma. For the welfare of the world, he must abandon everything that he likes. O Pandava! However, you must never abandon truth and fortitude. The commands of someone who is patient and firm in meting out
punishment are not contravened.

'"O supreme among eloquent ones! You must always avoid cracking jokes with the servants. O tiger among
kings! Listen to the reasons why it is wrong to do that. If one involves the servants in pleasure, they disregard the
master. They no longer remain in their appointed places and disobey his words. Sent on a task, they think about it
and disclose the secret. They ask what they should not ask for. They eat what they should not eat. They become
angry and flare up. They lie down on his bed. They resort to deceit, accept bribes and hamper the undertaking of
tasks. They indulge in forgeries and cause the prosperity to decay. They dress like the female guards and consort
with them. In his[The master's.] presence, they pass wind and spit. O tiger among men! They become shameless and laugh at
his words. When the king is cheerful and mild, they mount the king's beloved horse, tusker and chariot. 'O king! It
will be difficult for you to do this. You should not have attempted this.' The courtiers, known as well-wishers,
speak in this way. They laugh when he is angry. They are not delighted when they are honoured. For various reasons, they always begin to fight with each other. They divulge secrets and cover up their wicked deeds. They treat
his commands with mockery and disdain, such as about ornaments, food, bathing and unguents. O tiger among
men! They are comfortable with ignoring them, even when they listen to him. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They censure their own stations and abandon them. They are not satisfied with their salaries and appropriate
what belongs to the king. They toy with him as they will, like with a bird tied to a string. They tell people, 'The
king is devoted to us.' O Yudhishthira! When the king is mild and cheerful, these and many other sins manifest
themselves."'
