'Bhishma said, "For the sake of protection, the Indra among the birds had kindled a great and blazing
fire there and the wind was its charioteer. Having done this, the king of the cranes trustfully went to
sleep by the side. Wishing to kill him, the evil-souled ingrate remained awake. With a blazing brand,
he killed that trustful one. Having killed him, he was delighted, not seeing the consequences this would
lead to. He removed the wings and the feathers and cooked the rest over the fire. Then, taking this and
the gold, the brahmana left speedily.

'"After another day passed, Virupaksha told his son, 'O son! Today, I have not seen Rajadharma,
supreme among birds. Every evening, he always goes to show his obeisance to Brahma. After this, the
bird never goes home without having seen me first. It is now two evenings and two nights since he
came to my residence. Therefore, I am disturbed and must find out about my well-wisher. That worst
among brahmanas was disunited from studying and the radiance of the brahman wasn't there in him.
He has gone there and it is my fear that he might have killed him. I noticed that his conduct was
wicked and from signs, could make out that he was evil-minded. He did not perform rites and was terrible in form. He was dark, like the worst among bandits. Goutama has gone there. That is the reason
my mind is anxious. O son! Swiftly go to Rajadharma's abode. Immediately find out if the one who is
pure in his soul is still alive.' Having been thus addressed, he quickly went to the banyan tree with
some rakshasas and saw Rajadharma's skeleton there. Weeping, the intelligent son of the Indra among
the rakshasas speedily rushed, to the best of his capacity, to seize Goutama. A short distance away, the
rakshasas seized Goutama. They also obtained Rajadharma's body, bereft of the wings, the bones and
the feet. Having taken this, the rakshasas hastened to Meruvraja.

'"They showed Rajadharma's body and the ungrateful man, Goutama, wicked in his senses, to the
king. The king, with his advisers and priests, lamented on seeing him. Great sounds of lamentation
arose in the residence. The city, with the women and the children, were distracted. The king told his
son, 'Slay this wretch. As you wish, all of you merrily feast on his flesh. He is wicked in his conduct.
He is evil in his deeds. He is dastardly in his soul. His determination is sinful. It is my view that the
rakshasas should kill him.' Having been addressed by the Indra among the rakshasas, the rakshasas,
terrible in their valour, did not wish to eat him and said, 'He is wicked in his deeds. It is proper that this
worst among men should be given to the bandits.' O great king! The travellers of the night addressed
the Indra among the rakshasas in this way. Before the lord of the large number of rakshasas, they
bowed their heads down on the ground and said, 'You should not give him to us to eat. He is evil.'

Having been thus addressed by the travellers of the night, the Indra among rakshasas instructed the rakshasas that he should be given to the bandits. Thus instructed, the servants picked up tridents and clubs
in their hands. They chopped the wicked one up into pieces and gave him to the bandits. However,
even the bandits did not desire to eat the evil-acting one. O Indra among kings! Predatory creatures did
not eat the ingrate either.

'"If someone kills a brahmana, if someone is a drunkard, if someone is a thief, if someone has broken his vows-there are indicated means of atonement. O king! But there is no salvation for someone
who is ungrateful. Someone who injures his friends, someone who is violent and someone who is ungrateful is the worst among men. Predatory creatures, worms and other such beings will not devour
someone like this."'
