Yudhishthira said, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! O best among the great ones! I wish to ask you about all
the fruits of auspicious deeds. Tell me."

'Bhishma replied, "O Yudhishthira! Listen to this secret of the rishis, about the ends that they obtain and the
ends that they desire after death. Whatever are the deeds performed in these bodies, the proportionate fruits are
reaped in similar bodies. Whatever is the state in which one performs good deeds or evil deeds, from one birth to
another, the fruits are enjoyed in a similar state. Deeds that are performed with the five senses are never destroyed.
As a sixth, the atman always remains as a witness. A sacrifice must be performed by honouring with the five dakshinas-by giving one's eyes[Metaphorically.], by giving one's mind, by giving one's words and by giving one's devotions[Implicitly, for a guest.]. If
one cheerfully gives to an exhausted traveller, even if one has never seen him before, one obtains great and auspicious merits. If one lies down on the bare ground, one obtains houses and beds[In a subsequent life.]. If one wears rags and barks, one
obtains garments and ornaments. A  person  who  is a store of  austerities and immerses himself in yoga obtains
mounts and vehicles. A king who lies down alongside a fire is said to obtain manliness. A person who refrains
from tasty food obtains good fortune. A person who refrains from flesh obtains animals and sons. A person who
hangs, with his head downwards, lives in the water, or always sleeps alone[An indirect reference to brahmacharya.], obtains the desired objective. If a person honours a guest and gives him water to wash the feet, a seat, a lamp, food and refuge, it is as if he has performed a sacrifice with the five kinds of dakshinas. If a person sits on a seat meant for heroes, lies down on a bed
meant for heroes and frequents the places meant for heroes[All of these are references to the field of battle.], he obtains the eternal worlds where all the objects of
desire are available. O lord of the earth! Riches are obtained by making gifts. Silence leads to others being obedient. Objects of pleasure are obtained through austerities. A long life is obtained through brahmacharya. Beauty,
prosperity and lack of disease are the fruits obtained through non-violence. A person who eats fruits and roots obtains a kingdom. A person who eats leaves obtains heaven. If a person fasts, there is happiness everywhere in the
kingdom. Heaven is obtained through truth, an excellent lineage is obtained by being consecrated for a sacrifice.
Through subsisting only on vegetables, cattle are obtained. Those who desire to go to heaven should subsist on
grass. If one bathes thrice after intercourse with one's wife and inhales air, one obtains the fruits of a sacrifice. A
person  who  only  subsists  on  water  is  like  a  cleansed  brahmana  who  always  tends  to  the  fire.  A  desert-like
penance[That is, abstinence from drinking.] ensures a kingdom and indestructible residence in the vault of heaven. O king! If a person consecrates
himself in a sacrifice that involves fasting and performs this for twelve years, he obtains a region that is better than
the one meant for heroes. If one studies all the Vedas, one is instantly freed from all misery. If one follows dharma
in one's mind, one obtains the world of heaven. Evil intentions are extremely difficult to conquer. They are not destroyed, even when the body ages. They are like a disease that causes loss of life. If one can discard this thirst, one
obtains happiness. A calf is able to identify its mother even among one thousand cows. In that way, earlier deeds
always follow the doer. When the time arrives, flowers and fruits develop. So it is with deeds that have been performed earlier. When the body ages, the hair also ages. When the body ages, the teeth age. The eyes and ears also
age. However, thirst is not destroyed. When the father is pleased, Prajapati is pleased. When the mother is pleased,
it is as if the earth is worshipped. When the preceptor is pleased, it is as if Brahma is worshipped. When these three
are respected, all kinds of dharma are respected. When they are disrespected, all rites are fruitless."'

Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing Bhishma's words, the bulls among the Kurus were astounded. Their minds became cheerful and they were delighted. Mantras are futile without sacrifices. Soma is futile unless it is rendered as
an offering. A fire without oblations is futile. In that way, without studying, everything is futile. O lord! I have told
you what the rishis said about the fruits of good and bad deeds. What else do you wish to hear?'
