'Dhritarashtra asked, "O Sanjaya! The hopes of my sons being victorious have always been vested in him. On seeing him retreat in the battle, what did Duryodhana say? O son! In that encounter, what did Karna do after that?"

'Sanjaya replied, "On seeing Bhimasena in that battle, blazing like a fire, Karna resorted to another chariot that
had been properly prepared and again attacked Pandava, like an ocean agitated by the wind. O lord of the earth!
On seeing that Adhiratha's son was enraged, your sons thought that Bhimasena was like oblation being poured into
the mouth of a fire. Radheya created a great sound with the twang of his bow and a fierce sound with the slapping
of his palms. He advanced towards Bhimasena's chariot. O king! O lord of the earth! A great and extremely terrible sound arose again, in the conflict between the son of the suta and Bhima. The mighty-armed ones were wrathful and wished to kill each other. They glanced at each other and seemed to burn each other down with their eyes.
The eyes of the maharathas were red with rage and they sighed. Both of them were scorchers of enemies and they
attacked and mangled each other. They fought against each other like angry tigers, or swift hawks, or wrathful
sharabhas[Sharabha has many meanings-young elephant, camel. It is also a mythical animal with eight legs, believed to
be stronger than a lion. In this context, it probably means the mythical animal.].

'"Bhima remembered the hardships due to the gambling match and in the forest. The scorcher of enemies
thought of the difficulties in Virata's city. Their prosperous and bejewelled kingdom had been robbed by your sons.
You and your sons have always caused them difficulties and tried to burn down the innocent Kunti and her sons.
The evil-souled ones mistreated Krishna[Krishnaa, Droupadi.] in the assembly hall. 'Accept another husband, since your husbands
no longer remain. All the Parthas have descended into hell, like sesamum seeds that have no kernel[These were the words addressed to Droupadi in the assembly hall.].' O
Kouravya! In your presence, these were the words the Kurus spoke then. Your sons wished to enjoy Krishna, as
they would enjoy a servant maid. They were later banished, attired in black antelope skin. In your presence, in the
assembly hall, Karna then spoke harsh words to them. Your son thought that the Parthas were no more than mere
straws. They were in desperate straits and he, deluded of his senses, was insolent. The slayer of enemies[Bhima.]
thought about these and other miseries suffered since childhood. Vrikodara, with dharma in his soul, no longer
cared about remaining alive. He stretched his giant and invincible bow, with a golden back. Ready to give up his
life, the tiger among the Bharata lineage attacked Karna. Bhima released a net of arrows, sharpened on stone, towards Karna's chariot and shrouded him and the rays of the sun. Adhiratha's son laughed at this. He swiftly used
his own net of arrows, sharpened on stone, to counter these and pierce Bhimasena. Adhiratha's son was a maharatha. He was mighty-armed, immensely forceful and greatly strong. He pierced Bhima with nine sharp arrows.
It was as if an elephant had been goaded. Vrikodara countered those arrows and without any fear, attacked the son
of the suta. On seeing that the bull among the Pandava lineage was descending on him, with great ferocity and
force, Karna countered him in that battle, like an elephant against a maddened elephant. He blew on his conch
shell, with a sound that was like that of a hundred drums beating. Like a turbulent ocean, he agitated the army[The army that was with Bhima.].
That army was full of chariots, elephants, horses and infantry. On beholding the extraordinary sight[Of that army being agitated.], Bhima attacked Karna and covered him with arrows.

'"In that battle, Karna covered Pandava, and the horses and the men, with arrows. His supreme horses possessed
the complexion of swans and he mixed these up with the horses of his opponent, which had the complexion of
bears and were as swift as the wind or thought. On seeing that the horses had been mixed up, great lamentations
issued from your sons. As swift as the wind, those horses were mixed up and looked extremely beautiful. O great
king! They looked like black and white clouds that were mingled in the sky. Karna and Vrikodara were angry and
their eyes were coppery red in rage. On seeing this, the maharathas on your side trembled in fright. The terrain
where those warriors fought became as terrible as Yama's kingdom. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! It was
dreadful to look at, like the capital of the king of the dead. The maharathas seemed to look at a painted assembly,
where, in warding off each other, they could see neither destruction, nor victory. O king! O lord of the earth! They
only saw the clash of mighty weapons being released, a consequence of the evil counsels of you and your son.

'"Wishing to kill the enemy, those two[Karna and Bhima.] shrouded each other with sharp arrows. They showered down arrows
and covered the sky with nets of arrows. Those maharathas wished to kill each other and used sharp arrows. They
were beautiful to see, like two clouds showering down rain. O lord! The scorchers of enemies released arrows decorated with gold and made the sky look radiant, as if with flaming meteors. They shot arrows tufted with the feathers of herons and peacocks and these looked like arrays of excited cranes in the autumn sky.

'"On seeing that the son of the suta was engaged with Bhima, the scorcher of enemies, Krishna and Dhananjaya
thought that an extremely heavy burden had been imposed on Bhima. However, firm in the use of their hands, Adhiratha's son and Bhima shot arrows at each other and brought down horses, men and elephants with those arrows.
There were many that were falling and those that had fallen, devoid of their lives. O great king! There was a great
destruction of men amongst your sons. O bull among the Bharata lineage! In a short instant, men, horses and elephants lost their lives and their lifeless bodies were strewn around on the ground."'
