'Sanjaya said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having heard the words of the intelligent Dharmaraja, Subhadra's son urged his charioteer towards Drona's array. The charioteer was urged with the words, 'Go! Go!' O
king! He replied to Abhimanyu in these words. 'O one with a long life! An extremely heavy burden has been imposed on you by the Pandavas. You should advance to the fight only after you have thought over whether you have
the capacity to bear this. Drona, the preceptor, is skilled in the use of supreme weapons and has conquered exhaustion. You have been reared in extreme happiness and are not skilled in fighting.' On hearing these words, Abhimanyu laughed and spoke to his charioteer. 'O charioteer! Who is Drona? Who are these assembled kshatriyas?
Even if Shakra on Airavata[Shakra is Indra and Airavata is the name of Indra's elephant.] advances in the forefront of the battle, with the masses of immortals, I will engage.
Today, I am not bewildered at these kshatriyas. These enemy soldiers are not even a sixteenth part of me[The word used in the text is kala. The moon has sixteen kalas, or phases. Hence the fraction sixteenth.]. O son
of a suta! Even if I were to confront my maternal uncle Vishnu[Meaning Krishna.], the conqueror of the universe, or my father in
battle, I would not be terrified.' Abhimanyu disregarded the words of the charioteer and instructed him to swiftly
drive towards Drona's array. The charioteer was distressed in heart. But he urged the horses, which were three
years old and decorated with golden harnesses. Thus goaded by Sumitra, the horses advanced towards Drona's array. O king! Without any fear and with great force and valour, they advanced against Drona himself.

'"On seeing him attack, all the Kouravas, with Drona at the forefront, advanced to meet him and all the Pandavas followed him. His supreme standard bore the marks of a karnikara[Tree, the Indian laburnum.]. He was clad in golden armour. Arjuna's son was superior to Arjuna himself. He wished to fight with the maharathas, with Drona at the forefront. He
was like a young lion attacking a herd of elephants. He sought to attack them and advanced twenty steps. In an instant, there was a melee, like when the whirl of the Ganga meets the ocean. The brave ones fought and killed each
other. O king! An extremely tumultuous and terrible battle commenced. While that fearful battle raged, in Drona's
sight, Arjuna's son shattered and penetrated the vyuha. The immensely strong one penetrated into the midst of the
enemy and began to slaughter the foes. Warriors on elephants, horses and chariots, armed with weapons, descended on him and surrounded him. There was the sound of musical instruments. There were sounds of the slapping of
arms and roars. There were roars like lions and shouts of 'Stay! Stay!' There were terrible and repeated exclamations of 'Do not go! Wait! Come to me! I am here! That is the enemy!' This mingled with the trumpeting of elephants, the tinkling of bells and ornaments, sounds of laughter and the sounds of hooves and chariot wheels. The
earth resounded with these noises.

'"Those on your side descended before Arjuna's son. But the brave one was swift and firm. He was quick in using weapons that penetrated the inner organs and knew about the inner organs. He killed them. They were slaughtered by many different kinds of sharp arrows. They were like helpless insects descending into a fire. He swiftly
covered the earth with their bodies and limbs severed from their bodies, like a priest covering an altar with kusha
grass. There were arms with armguards and finger-guards, holding bows and arrows, swords and shields, goads,
reins, lances and battleaxes, balls with iron spikes, spears, scimitars, spikes, javelins, catapults, clubs, the best of
darts, kampanas[A kampana is a weapon that is difficult to identify. It made the enemy tremble.], whips, giant conch shells, spears[A specific type of spear called kunta.], kachagrahas[Weapon for grasping the enemy by the hair.], maces, slings, nooses, heavy maces and
stones. Those arms were decorated with armlets and bracelets and smeared with fragrances and unguents. Arjuna's
son severed the arms of those on your side in thousands. O great king! Covered with blood, they were strewn
around on the ground and looked radiant. O venerable one! It was as if five-headed serpents had been slain by
Garuda. There were many heads with beautiful noses, faces and hair, without the marks of wounds and adorned
with beautiful earrings. Copious quantities of blood flowed from these and the teeth gnashed the lips in anger.
They were adorned with beautiful garlands and headdresses, embellished with gems and jewels. They were like
lotuses severed from the stalks and possessed the radiance of the sun or the moon. Once upon a time, they could
speak many beneficial and pleasant words and were smeared with sacred fragrances. Phalguna's son covered the
earth with the heads of the enemy. There were many excellent chariots, with forms like the cities of the gandharvas. They possessed shafts in the front and curved staffs made out of bamboo poles. Their shafts, yokes and wheels
were shattered. They were bereft of their axles and pins. They lost their wheels, standards and seats. The implements of war were scattered. The expensive cushions were also scattered and thousands of riders slain. Everything
that could be seen was mangled with his arrows. He used sharp arrows, honed at the tip, to slice down the enemy
riders on elephants, with their flags, goads and pennants, quivers, armour, seats, reins and blankets, the bells on the
trunks and the tusks, and also those who guarded their steps from the rear. There were horses from Vanayu, Kamboja, Bahlika and the mountainous regions. They were well trained and swift and could keep their tails, ears and
eyes immobile. The warriors who rode on them were accomplished and wielded spears, swords and lances. They
were strewn around, deprived of cushions and whisks. Their tongues lolled out. The eyes were detached and the
entrails and livers were plucked out. Their harnesses were torn and their riders were killed. This delighted large
numbers of flesh-eaters. The mail and armour was sliced away and they were covered in urine and excrement.
Thus bringing down the best of your horses, he was resplendent. He accomplished these difficult deeds alone, like
the unfathomable Vishnu in earlier times. He crushed your giant army with the three kinds of forces[Chariots, elephants and horses.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He also killed your foot soldiers. Using sharp arrows, Subhadra's son was seen to single-handedly destroy your soldiers, like Skanda[Kartikeya, the general of the gods.] against the asura army. Those on your side and your sons
glanced in the ten directions. Their mouths were dry. Their eyes were restless. They were covered with sweat and
their body hair stood up. They lost all interest in vanquishing the enemy and made up their minds to flee. Wishing
to remain alive, they cried and called out to each other by name and lineage. They abandoned wounded sons, fathers, well-wishers, relatives and kin. They urged their horses and elephants, so that they could run away quickly."'
