'Yudhishthira asked, "O Krishna! O descendant of Vrishni[The word used is nandana. So, beloved of the Vrishni lineage is also possible.]! Why were you absent? Where did you go and what
did you do on your travels?"

'Krishna replied, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! O best of men! I went to Shalva's city Soubha to destroy
it. Listen to the reasons. O best of the Bharata lineage! The valiant King Shishupala, Damaghosha's son, immensely energetic, mighty-armed and greatly famous, was killed by me at your rajasuya sacrifice over the issue of who
should be given the homage. Because of his anger, that evil-souled one did not wish to see me receive it. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing that he had been killed, Shalva was filled with terrible rage. He went to the
empty Dvaraka, because I was with you then. O king! He went there ascended on Soubha[Soubha was a city that flew in the sky.], which could go wherever it wished. In cruel fashion, he fought with the young bulls among the Vrishnis. He slew many brave Vrishni
youth and the evil-minded one destroyed all the parks in the city. The mighty-armed one then shouted, 'Where is
that wretch of the Vrishni lineage? Where has the evil-souled Vasudeva, son of Vasudeva, gone[Krishna is actually Vaasudeva and the son of Vasudeva, though we have written both as Vasudeva. The context will make clear who is meant and there is no danger of confusion between father and son.]? He is desirous
of doing battle and I will destroy his pride in battle. O Anartas[Those who live in the Anarta region.]! Tell me truthfully where he is, and I will go
there. I will return after killing the slayer of Kamsa and Keshi. I truthfully swear on my weapons that I will not return without killing him. Where is he? Where is he? The lord of Soubha wished to fight me in battle and rushed
around, from one place to another. That mean one has performed an evil deed. He is treacherous. I am angry at the
killing of Shishupala. I will send him to Yama's abode today. Through his evil nature, he has killed my brother
Shishupala, lord of the earth[Shishupala wasn't Shalva's brother. The use of the word brother therefore signifies no more than that Shishupala was close to Shalva.]. I will kill him on the ground. Though a king, my brother was only a child. He
wasn't killed in proper battle. The brave one was killed when he wasn't ready. I will kill Janardana.' O great king!
Thus did he lament.

'"O descendant of the Kuru lineage[The word used is nandana. So, it can also be translated as beloved of the Kuru lineage.]! Thus abusing me, he took to the sky on Soubha, which is capable of going wherever it wishes. O Kouravya! On returning there, I learnt everything that the evilminded and evil-souled
king of Marttikavata had said about me. O Kouravya! O king! With eyes red with rage, I made up my mind. I resolved in my mind to kill him. O Kourava! I heard about his oppression of Anarta, his abuse of me, his great insolence and his evil deeds. O lord of the earth! I therefore left to destroy Soubha. When I was looking for him, I
found him whirling in the ocean. O king! I blew on Panchajanya[Krishna's conch shell.], which had been obtained from the water, and
challenging Shalva to battle, got ready. At that time, a terrible battle took place between me and the danavas there.
They were all vanquished and laid low on the ground by me. O mighty-armed one! It was this task that kept me
from coming to you in Hastinapura then, though I had heard about the terrible gambling match."'
