Souti said, 'Then the daityas and the danavas assembled, grasped their best shields and many weapons and rushed
at the gods. But the powerful god Lord Vishnu, accompanied by Nara, seized the ambrosia from the chief danavas.
Thereupon, in the tumultuous confusion, all the gods received the ambrosia from Vishnu and drank it. When the
gods were drinking the much desired ambrosia, a danava named Rahu assumed the form of the god Budha[Mercury.] and
began to drink it also. For the welfare of the gods, the sun and the moon informed the gods of what had happened
when the ambrosia had only reached the danava's throat. Then the great god[Narayana.] sliced off his[Rahu.] well-adorned head
with his weapon, chakra[A discus.], as he was drinking the ambrosia. Then, sliced off by the chakra, the gigantic head of
the danava fell down on the ground with thunderous roars. Ever since that day, a great enmity was created between
Rahu's head and the sun and the moon and even today, he swallows them both[The eclipses.].

'Then the great lord Hari[Vishnu.] abandoned his unparalleled feminine form and made them tremble by hurling many
weapons at them. On the shores of the salty ocean thus began the greatest of terrible battles between the gods and
the demons. Thousands of large and sharp spears, sharp-tipped javelins and many other weapons were hurled.
Then, wounded by fearful swords, lances and clubs, sliced by discuses, the demons vomited a lot of blood and fell
down on the ground. Cut off by sharp-tipped spears, in that terrible battle the heads fell down continuously, like
nets of molten gold[The heads were adorned with gold ornaments.]. Covered with blood on their bodies, the great demons lay dead everywhere, like mountain
peaks red with metals. When the sun was tinged with red, thousands of wails rose from everywhere, from those
killed by weapons. The roars of those killed in battle, with iron-tipped clubs when at a distance and with blows of
fists when close, rose up as if to touch the sky. "Slice down", "pierce them", "chase them", "throw them down",
"advance": these terrible words were heard in all directions.

'When this fearful battle was raging, the gods Nara and Narayana entered the battlefield. On seeing the divine
bow in the hands of Nara, the great Lord Vishnu thought of his danava-destroying chakra[Weapons had to be summoned with the power of the mind.]. As soon as it was
thought of, sudarshana chakra[Vishnu's discus.], the scorcher of enemies, as radiant as the sun, terrible to look at and unwavering
in its path, descended from the sky. When it arrived, Achyuta[Vishnu.], as bright as the blazing fire and with fearful arms
like an elephant's trunk, unleashed with great force that weapon of blazing energy, capable of destroying enemy
towns. Then, when the supreme man[Vishnu.] unleashed with his hand that weapon in battle, like the blazing fire at the
time of the destruction of the universe, it swiftly and repeatedly descended everywhere, destroying Diti and Danu's
progeny in their thousands. Sometimes it burnt, blazing like fire. Sometimes it struck down demons like the god of
death. Sometimes it was in the sky and sometimes it was on the ground, drinking blood in that battle like a malevolent spirit. Then, undeterred in spirit, the mighty demons rose into the sky like dishevelled clouds and troubled the
gods by showering mountains on them. Those terror-inspiring mountains, with many trees and flat peaks on them,
descended from the sky like masses of clouds, crashing against each other and producing tremendous roars. When
warriors shouted and the battle raged everywhere and mountains, with forests on them, began to fall, the earth and
all her forests began to tremble.

'Then the great Nara appeared in the terrible battle of the asura masses and using his gold-tipped arrows with
feathered shafts darkened the sky and reduced to dust the mountain peaks. Then the mighty demons, harried by the
gods and witnessing the fearful sudarshana raging like a flaming fire, entered the earth, while others plunged into
the salty waters of the ocean. Having become victorious, the gods respectfully returned Mandara to its place. The
clouds, making heaven resound everywhere, returned whence they had come. The gods rejoiced a great deal and
returned, keeping the ambrosia in safe custody. For safe-keeping, the killer of Bala[Indra. Indra had killed a demon named Bala.] and the other gods handed
over the vessel containing the ambrosia to Kiriti[Someone wearing a crown or diadem. Kiriti is another name for Arjuna. In this context, it probably means
the god Nara.].'