Vaishampayana said, 'Vidura spoke in this way to King Dhritarashtra. The king was delighted at what the king[Yudhishthira.]
and Jishnu had done. For the sake of Bhishma, his sons and his well-wishers, he examined and invited thousands of brahmanas and superior rishis. The supreme among kings instructed that food, drink, vehicles, spreads,
gold, gems, jewels, female servants, male servants, garments, blankets, hides, gems[Gems are mentioned more than once.], villages, fields, goats, sheep,
ornaments, elephants, horses, maidens and the best of women should be readied for the brahmanas. He named
Drona, Bhishma, Somadatta, Bahlika, King Duryodhana, his other sons and all the well-wishers, with Jayadratha
as the foremost, separately and gave these away in their respective names. With Yudhishthira's sanction, the funeral ceremony prospered, with large amounts of cattle, riches, dakshina and diverse kinds of wealth and jewels given
away. On Yudhishthira's instructions, men, enumerators and writers incessantly told the king, "Command us. What
should be given? Whom should it be given to? Everything is here." They recorded this. No sooner had he spoken,
than these objects would be seen. On the instructions of the intelligent king who was Kunti's son, a thousand was
given to the one who should be given one hundred and ten thousand was given to the one who should be given one
thousand[Yudhishthira multiplied Dhritarashtra's required amount by ten times.]. Like the monsoon showering down rain on the ground, the king[Dhritarashtra.] was like an ocean and showered
down a flow of riches on the brahmanas, thereby satisfying them. After this, the king segregated all the varnas. The
king flooded them with food and drink. The garments were like foam, the jewels were like currents, the drums
were like the roar of the waves. Cattle and horses were like whirlpools. There were extensive amounts of women
and gems. The villages were like crocodiles on the shore. The water in that ocean was made out of jewels and
gold. The ocean that was Dhritarashtra flooded the earth. O great king! Thus, he donated at that funeral ceremony
and gave for his sons, his grandsons, his forefathers, for himself and for Gandhari. After he had given away many
gifts, he became exhausted. The extender of the Kuru lineage then terminated the sacrifice of donations. In this
way, the Kouravya king performed that festival of donations. There was a lot of dakshina that was succulent[Food and drink.] and
actors and dancers performed incessantly. For ten days, the king who was Ambika's son gave away gifts in this
way. O bull among the Bharata lineage! He thus freed himself from the debt to his sons and grandsons.'
