'Bhishma said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When night was over, I woke up. I thought about my dream
and was extremely delighted. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Then a tumultuous battle started between him
and me. It was extraordinary for all beings and made the body hair stand up. Bhargava showered arrows down on
me. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I countered them with a net of arrows. Thereupon, the greatly ascetic
was again supremely enraged. Like it had happened the day before, he angrily hurled a spear at me. It was like Indra's vajra to the touch. It was as resplendent as Yama's staff. It flamed like the fire and licked all directions of that
field of battle. O tiger among the Bharata lineage! With great force, it struck me on the shoulder. It was like the altar of a sacrificial fire in the sky[Suggesting that it was large.]. Thus wounded by the mighty-armed Rama, whose eyes were red, terrible
streams of blood began to flow, like minerals streaming from mountains.

'"I was extremely angry at Jamadagni's son. I hurled an arrow at him. It was like death, like the poison of serpents. O great king! The brave one, supreme among brahmanas, was struck on the forehead and shone like a
mountain, with a peak at the top. He was extremely angry and turned towards me. Powerfully, he drew his bow
and shot an arrow at me. It was like time and death. It was terrible and was capable of destroying enemies. Like a
hissing serpent, the terrible arrow struck me on the chest. O king! Covered with blood, I fell down on the ground.
When I regained my senses, I hurled an unblemished spear at Jamadagni's intelligent son. It flamed like lightning.
It struck that foremost among brahmanas between the arms. O king! He lost his senses and began to tremble. His
friend Akritavrana, the great ascetic and brahmana, embraced him and repeatedly comforted him with auspicious
words. Thus comforted, Rama, the one with the great vows, became angry and was overcome with intolerance. He
manifested the supreme weapon known as brahma. To counter it, I also used the supreme brahma weapon. It
blazed, appearing like something at the end of an era[There is destruction at the end of an era, with an all-encompassing fire. The weapon is being compared to something at the time of destruction, such as the fire.]. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! The two brahma
weapons encountered each other in mid-air, without reaching either Rama or me. O lord of the earth! The sky became only a great mass of energy and all the beings were distressed. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Because
of the energy of those weapons, the rishis, the gandharvas and the gods were extremely tormented and oppressed.
The earth, with its mountains, forests and trees, trembled. The tormented beings were supremely afflicted. O king!
The sky blazed. The ten directions were full of smoke. Those that were in the sky were no longer capable of remaining in the firmament. There was a great lamentation in the world, with the gods, the asuras and the rakshasas.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I decided that this was the time and prepared to release my beloved prasvapan weapon, as those who knew about the brahman had asked me to. As soon as I thought about the weapon in my
mind, it appeared before me."'
