'Markandeya said, "They[Madhu and Kaitabha.] had an immensely energetic and immensely radiant son by the name of Dhundhu. He
had great energy and valour and performed austerities. He stood on one leg and became so thin that he was held
together by his veins. Brahma was pleased with him and gave him the boon that he asked for from that lord. He
asked, 'I should be incapable of being killed by gods, danavas, yakshas, serpents, gandharvas and rakshasas.' The
grandfather told him that it would be that way. Having been thus addressed, he touched his[Brahma's.] feet with his head
and departed.

'"Thus, after obtaining the boon, Dhundhu became immensely valorous and powerful. He remembered the
killing of his fathers and went to Vishnu. The violent Dhundhu defeated all the gods and the gandharvas. He then
began to cruelly oppress all the gods, together with Vishnu. O bull among the Bharata lineage! There is an ocean
of sand known by the name of Ujjanaka. The evil-minded one went to that region. O lord! He oppressed, with all
his strength, Utanka's hermitage. He entered the interior of the earth and hid in the sand. Dhundhu, Madhu and
Kaitabha's fearful and powerful son, sought to obtain the strength of austerities, so that he could destroy the world.
Near Utanka's hermitage, his breath was flames of fire. At this time, King Kuvalashva went to Dhundhu's residence, with his servants, soldiers and mounts. He was accompanied by his twenty-one thousand sons, the destroyers of enemies, and by Utanka. On Utanka's request, the illustrious Vishnu injected the lord with his energy, for the
welfare of the worlds. When the invincible one started out, a loud voice was heard from heaven. 'This handsome
one will become Dhundhumara.' The gods showered down celestial flowers in all directions. The kettledrums of
the gods began to sound on their own. While the wise one proceeded, a cool wind began to blow. The lord of the
gods showered down, removing dust from the earth. O Yudhishthira! Just above the spot where the great asura
Dhundhu was, the vimanas of the gods appeared in the sky. The gods, together with the gandharvas and the maharshis, assembled, curious to witness the battle between Kuvalashva and Dhundhu.

'"O Kouravya! Invigorated with Narayana's energy, the king swiftly advanced in all the directions, together with
his sons. King Kuvalashva had that ocean of sand dug up. When Kuvalashva's sons dug up that ocean of sand, after seven days, they saw the immensely strong Dhundhu. O bull among the Bharata lineage! His terrible body was
buried in the sand. It blazed like the energy of the sun. O great king! O tiger among kings! Dhundhu was asleep,
covering the western direction with effulgence that was like the fire of destruction. Surrounded by his sons, Kuvalashva assaulted him with sharp arrows, clubs, maces, battleaxes, bludgeons and swords that were sharp and
bright. Having been thus attacked, the immensely strong one was angered and arose. He wrathfully swallowed up
the different types of weapons. He vomited flames from his mouth, like the fire of destruction. He burnt down all
the sons of the king with his energy. O tiger among kings! In an instant, the angry one was about to consume the
worlds with the flames issuing from his mouth, just as the lord Kapila had done earlier, when he had angrily burnt
down the sons of Sagara[This story has been told in Section 33.]. It was extremely wonderful. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! When they had
been burnt down in this way, the immensely energetic King Kuvalashva approached the great-souled one, who was
like Kumbhakarna awakened[Kumbhakarna was Ravana's brother, who slept for six months. While this is a story from the Ramayana, it
will be briefly retold in Section 42.]. O great king! O king! A great flow of water issued from the body of the king and
this water doused the flames. Just as a practitioner of yoga uses yoga, the water pacified the flames. O best of the
Bharata lineage! Then the king burnt down the cruel and powerful daitya with his brahmastra and ensured the welfare of all the worlds. Rajarshi Kuvalashva consumed the great asura with this weapon. That destroyer of enemies
killed the enemy of the gods and became like the lord of the three worlds. From that day, he became known as
Dhundhumara.

'"Then the thirty gods, together with all the maharshis, were delighted. They wished to grant him a boon. O
king! Extremely delighted, he joined his hands in salutation, prostrated himself and spoke these words. 'Grant me
the boon that I may donate my riches to the best of the brahmanas and that I may be invincible against my enemies. May I enjoy friendship with Vishnu and may I not exhibit enmity towards any being. May my mind always
be devoted to dharma and may I have an eternal abode in heaven.' The delighted gods, together with the rishis, the
gandharvas and the intelligent Utanka, told the king that it would be that way. After pronouncing various other
auspicious benedictions on the king, the gods and the maharshis returned to their abodes. O Yudhishthira! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The king had three sons left and their names were Dhridhashva, Kapilashva and
Chandrashva. O king! The great-souled lineage of the Ikshvakus followed from them. O virtuous one! Thus did
Kuvalashva kill the immensely valorous daitya Dhundhu, the son of Madhu and Kaitabha. From that day, King
Kuvalashva has been known as Dhundhumara. Named thus, he became associated with many qualities. I have told
you everything that you asked, famous as the account of Dhundhumara and his exploits. This sacred account is associated with Vishnu's praise. The man who listens to this, has dharma in his soul and begets sons. By listening to
it on full moon days or days of the new moon[Parva, the day of the new moon or the full moon.], one obtains a long life, becomes persevering, has no fear of disease and is devoid of afflictions."'
