'Yudhishthira said, "O grandfather! Tell me about donations, sacrifices, tormenting oneself
through austerities and the serving of seniors."

'Bhishma replied, "If one's soul turns towards what is not beneficial, if the mind is immersed in sin, then one performs wicked deeds and has to suffer from great hardships.
Those perpetrators of wicked deeds are born poor. They starve in the midst of famine. They
face difficulties amidst hardships. They are terrified in the midst of fear. They become dead
in the midst of death. The performers of auspicious deeds are wealthy. They are festive
amidst festivities. They obtain heaven in celestial regions. They obtain bliss in the midst of
happiness. They are devoted and self-controlled. Non-believers are bound by their hands
and dispatched to desolate spots frequented by predatory beasts and elephants, full of fear
from snakes and thieves. What else should one say about them? However, there are those
who speak agreeably towards gods and guests. They are affectionate towards virtuous people. The tranquility of their souls takes them along paths that are travelled by those who are
correct[We have translated this as correct. Literally, the text translates as those
who are situated on the right (as opposed to the left) side.]. Those who do not find reasons in dharma are like shrivelled grain among grains,
termites[Alternatively, white ants or bees.] among birds and the worst among men. Ordained destiny follows and swiftly
pursues a person, sleeping when he sleeps and accompanying him in everything that he
does. It stands when he stands. It walks when he walks. It acts whenever he acts and follows him like a shadow. Whatever acts a man may have done earlier, it has been apportioned that he must enjoy the consequences. Destiny protects the fruits of his own deeds
and flings him into these. From every direction, time naturally attracts all beings. At the
right time, without being goaded, flowers and fruits blossom on their own. Like that, the
consequences of earlier deeds cannot be withdrawn. Repeatedly, destiny determines honour
and disrespect, gain and loss, decay and growth, until those have been exhausted. One has
oneself determined one's unhappiness. One has oneself determined one's happiness. From
the moment one lies down in the womb, one enjoys the outcome of earlier bodies. Whether
it is in childhood, youth or old age, whatever auspicious and inauspicious deeds are performed by a person, in exactly that way, he will enjoy this, from one birth to another. A
calf seeks out its mother, even in the midst of one thousand cows. In that way, deeds performed earlier follow the doer. A piece of cloth is drenched in water[A dirty piece of cloth is cleaned by washing.]. Like that, subsequent purification through fasting, austerities and repentance can lead to a long period of
infinite happiness. One can dwell in a hermitage and perform austerities for a long time.
One can wash away sins through dharma and be successful in attaining one's wishes. Like
birds in the sky and like fish in the water, the footsteps of a person who is wise in his learning cannot be discerned. There is no need to talk about any other acts of transgression. One
must delicately perform the tasks that will ensure one's own welfare."'
