'Duryodhana said, "When he met Chitrasena, Arjuna smiled. The scorcher of enemies spoke these words, which
weren't those of an impotent one. 'O brave one! O supreme among gandharvas! You should release our brothers.
They should not be oppressed as long as the sons of Pandu are alive.' O Karna! Having been thus addressed by the
great-souled Pandava, the gandharva revealed the reason why we had come-to see the Pandavas and their wife in
misery, devoid of happiness. When the gandharva revealed this through his words, I wished to enter a hole in the
earth in shame. Together with the Pandavas, the gandharva then went to Yudhishthira and told him about our plans,
handing us over to him in bonds. What greater misery can there be than being offered to Yudhishthira, miserable
and tied, under the control of the enemy, and in the sight of the women? They have always been persecuted by me.
They have always been my enemies. They set me free. I am evil-minded indeed, that I owe my life to them. O
brave one! It would have been better had I encountered my death in that great battle, than to obtain my life in this
way. Had I been killed by the gandharvas, my fame would have been recounted on earth. In Indra's world, I would
have obtained the sacred worlds of eternal bliss. O bull among men! Listen to what I have now resolved to do. I
will remain here and fast to death. The rest of you return home. Let all my brothers also return to the city now and
also my well-wishers and relatives, with Karna and the others. With Duhshasana at the forefront, let them return to
the city. Humiliated by the enemy, I will not return to the city. I used to rob the enemy of his honour and earn respect for my well-wishers. I have now inflicted sorrow on my well-wishers and have increased the delight of my
enemies. Having returned to Varanahrya[Another name for Hastinapura. Varana means elephant.], what will I tell the king? What will Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Drona's
son[Ashvatthama.], Vidura, Sanjaya, Bahlika, Somadatta, the others who are honoured by the elders, the brahmanas, the chiefs
of the various professions and those who are strangers, have to say to me? What will I reply to them? So far, I have
stood on the heads of my enemies and have trod on their chests. Through my own sins, I have now been dislodged.
What will I tell them? Insolent ones may obtain prosperity, learning and riches. But like me, because they are intoxicated by insolence, they cannot maintain that fortune for long. Out of my foolishness, I have committed an evil
act. I was deluded by my own evil intelligence. That is the reason why I am confronted with this calamity. I will
therefore fast to death. I am incapable of living any longer. No one with spirit wishes to remain alive after an enemy has saved him from a calamity. I am proud, but have lost my manliness. The enemy has laughed at me. The
Pandavas have great valour and have looked down at me with disrespect."'

Vaishampayana said, 'While he was thinking in this way, he spoke these words to Duhshasana. "O Duhshasana!
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Listen to my words. You are being instated as a king by me and accept this.
Protected by Karna and Soubala, rule over this extensive earth. Protect your brothers as confidently as the slayer of
Vritra[Indra.] protects the Maruts. Just as the gods earn a living from Shatakratu, let your relatives earn a living from
you. Without any deviation, always provide livelihood to brahmanas. Always be the refuge for your relatives and
well-wishers. Just as Vishnu looks after the masses of gods, look after the relatives. Protect the seniors. Go and
govern the earth. Gladden all your well-wishers and chastise the enemies." Embracing him[Duhshasana.] by the neck, he
asked him to go. On hearing these words, Duhshasana was miserable. He was extremely sorrowful and his words
were choked with tears. He joined his hands in salutation. In a broken voice, he told his elder brother to relent. His
heart burnt and he prostrated himself on the ground. In sorrow, he shed tears on his[Duryodhana's.] feet and the tiger among men
said, "This cannot be. The earth with its mountains can be shattered. They sky can be splintered. The sun can lose
its light. The moon can lose its cool. The wind can lose its speed. The Himalayas can begin to walk. The water of
the ocean may be dried up. The fire can lose its head. O king! But I will not govern the earth without you." He repeatedly spoke words asking him to relent. "In our lineage, you alone will be the king for one hundred years." He
touched the feet of his elder brother, who deserved to be honoured by him.

'On seeing Duhshasana and Suyodhana in grief, Karna, who was himself miserable, approached and said, "O
Kouravyas! Why are you overcome by childish grief, like two ordinary people? Sorrow can never be driven away
through grieving. Grieving never alters the state of the one who is sorrowful. What will be gained through this
lamentation? Get a grip on your own selves. Do not delight the enemies through this sorrow. O king! The Pandavas
performed their duty in freeing you. Those who reside within a king's dominions, must always do that which is
pleasant for him. Under your protection, the Pandavas have resided without any anxiety. You should not grieve like
an ordinary person. Your brothers are despondent because you have decided to fast to death. O fortunate one! Arise
and move around. Comfort your brothers. O king! I do not understand your present foolish conduct. O brave one!
O destroyer of enemies! What is surprising in the Pandavas setting you free, when you were in the clutches of your
enemies? O Kouravya! Those who live within the kingdom, especially those who are soldiers, must act for the
pleasure of the king, whether they are known to him or not. It often happens that the foremost among men, capable
of crushing enemy armies, are captured on the field of battle and are freed by ordinary soldiers. Men who are soldiers and reside within a king's dominions, must appropriately endeavour to accomplish the king's objectives. O
king! The Pandavas live in your kingdom. Even if they have freed you now, what is the reason for this lamentation? O king! O supreme among kings! When you marched out with your army, what is improper is that the Pandavas did not follow you at the back. They are brave and powerful. But they withdrew from the field of battle,
though they had earlier become your possessions in the assembly hall. You are enjoying the riches of the Pandavas.
But look at the Pandavas. They are still powerful and are not fasting to death. O king! O fortunate one! Arise! You
should not think about this. Those who live within a king's boundaries must do pleasant things for the king. Why
should one lament about that? O Indra among kings! Listen to my words. O destroyer of enemies! If you do not act
in accordance with them, I will stay here at your feet and serve you. O bull among men! Without you, I do not desire to live. O king! If you decide to fast to death, all the other kings will laugh at you." Having been thus addressed by Karna, King Duryodhana still decided not to rise, having set his mind on going to heaven.'
