'Vasudeva said, "These words are appropriate for the wise leader of the Somakas[Drupada was the king of Panchala and the Somakas seem to have been synonymous with the Panchalas. However, in some places, there is a suggestion that the Somakas were a sub-branch of the Panchalas.]. They will ensure welfare and
success for the infinitely energetic King Pandava. If we wish to act in accordance with right policy, this should indeed be the first course of action. A man who acts contrary to this will be foolish. But our relationships with the
Kurus and the Pandavas are equal, though at the moment we happen to be with the Pandavas. Like all of you, we
have been brought here because of the wedding. With the marriage having been concluded, we will return happily
to our houses. You are the oldest among the kings in age and learning[Krishna is addressing Drupada.]. There is no doubt that all of us are like
your pupils. Dhritarashtra has always shown you a great deal of honour. You are a friend to the preceptors Drona
and Kripa[Before Drona arrived, Kripa was the preceptor. However, Drona and Drupada's relationships were subsequently
strained.]. For the welfare of the Pandavas, you should be the one who should send word. It is certain that whatever message you send will be acceptable to all of us. If the bull among the Kurus seeks peace, as is proper, there
will be no great loss to the fraternal feelings that exist between the Kurus and the Pandavas. If Dhritarashtra's son
acts contrary to this, out of insolence and delusion, send word to the others[The other kings.] and then summon us. Then, having
enraged the wielder of Gandiva, the stupid and evil-minded Duryodhana will confront his destiny, together with
his advisers and his relatives."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having shown homage to Varshneya, Virata, lord of the earth, sent him home, together
with his followers and his relatives. When Krishna had left for Dvaraka, with Yudhishthira at the forefront, all of
them[The Pandavas.] made preparations for war, together with King Virata. Together with his relatives, Virata-and Drupada,
lord of the earth-sent word to all the lords of the earth. On receiving word from the lions among the Kurus and
Matsya and Panchala, all the extremely powerful lords of the earth gathered cheerfully. On learning that a great
force was being gathered for the sons of Pandu, Dhritarashtra's son also assembled many lords of the earth. O
king! The entire earth was thronged with lords of the earth who arrived for the sake of the Kurus and the Pandavas.
The forces of those brave ones arrived from every direction. With her mountains and forests, the goddess earth
seemed to tremble. With Yudhishthira's approval, Panchala despatched his priest, who was old in wisdom and in
years, to the Kurus.'
