'"Kripa said, 'O lord! Your words are full of reason and we have heard everything that you have said. O mighty-
armed one! But listen to some words I am about to tell you. All men are tied down by two things, restrictions[In the sense of destiny.] and
deeds. There is nothing superior to destiny and human action. O supreme one! Success does not come from destiny, to the exclusion of deeds. Nor do deeds alone succeed. Success comes from the union of the two. Everything,
whether it is superior or inferior, is tied down by these two. Whether it is engagement, or whether it is withdrawal,
everything is seen to depend on these[This probably implies engaging in action and withdrawing from action.]. What fruits are obtained when rain showers down on a mountain? What
fruits are obtained when rain showers down on a ploughed field? Both exertion with an unfavourable destiny and a
favourable destiny without exertion are always unsuccessful. What I have said earlier is correct. If the destiny of
rain showers down on a field that has been properly tilled, seedlings of great qualities result. Human success is like
that. Sometimes, having made up its mind, destiny follows its own course. However, according to their capacity,
the wise resort to manliness. O bull among men! All human objectives are accomplished by those two[Human action and destiny.]. Engagement and withdrawal are seen to be the result of this. One can resort to manliness, but success depends on destiny.
One undertakes tasks based on that and consequent fruits follow. In this world, it is seen that the enterprise of
skilled humans, if unaccompanied by destiny, are completely unsuccessful. That is the reason why lazy and ignorant men disapprove of enterprise. But this does not appeal to those who are wise. On earth, deeds are often seen to
be unsuccessful. However, the lack of action is also seen to lead to the great fruit of misery. No one can be seen to
obtain what he desires without action, nor is there one who obtains nothing after exertion. An industrious person is
capable of sustaining life. A lazy person never obtains happiness. In this mortal world, it is often seen that industrious people want to ensure their own welfare. If an industrious person undertakes action and fails to obtain the
fruits, he is not reprimanded in the slightest possible way. However, if one does not undertake action and yet obtains fruits, he is usually censured and hated. A person who disregards this and acts in a contrary way, injures himself. That is what intelligent people say. Enterprise does not give rise to fruits because of two reasons, either because manliness is lacking, or because destiny is deficient. If there is a lack of enterprise, no task ever becomes
successful. If an industrious and skilled person acts, after bowing down to destiny, the accomplishment of objectives is never baffled. This is also true of those who serve the elders and after asking them, act in accordance with
their beneficial words. If, after asking those who are revered by the aged, one resorts to enterprise, one always obtains supreme success. It is said that this is the root of success. If one listens to the words of elders and then engages in tasks, one soon obtains all the fruits. However, a man who seeks to obtain his objective because of passion, anger, fear and avarice has no control and is soon dislodged from his prosperity. This Duryodhana sought to
obtain his objective because of his greed. He was not far-sighted. He began a task that was not approved of. He
was foolish and did not think. He disregarded the beneficial words of the intelligent and sought the counsel of
those who were wicked. Though he was dissuaded, he engaged in an enmity with the Pandavas, who were superior
to him in qualities. Right from the beginning, he was evil in conduct and could not control his meanness. He did
not follow the advice of his friends and has been tormented through this catastrophe. We also followed that wicked
man. That is the reason we have confronted this great and terrible calamity. This great calamity has overtaken me
now. Even if I use my intelligence, I cannot fathom what is good for us. A man who is confused should ask his
learned well-wishers. Having asked them, he should act in accordance with their words. Therefore, let us unite and
go to Dhritarashtra, Gandhari and the immensely intelligent Vidura. Let us ask them. Asked by us, they will tell us
what is beneficial for us next. We should then act according to what they say. That is my firm view. One should
never embark on a task that will lead to disaster. If one resorts to enterprise and that task is unsuccessful, one
should certainly deduce that the task is not favoured by destiny.'"'
