Yudhishthira said, "O mighty-armed one! After this, tell me what is best for me. O grandfather! I am not satisfied with your words, which are like amrita. O supreme among men! What are the auspicious acts a man can
perform, so that he obtains supreme benefit in this world and in the world after death? Tell me that."

'Bhishma replied, "In this connection, I  will tell you  what the immensely illustrious King  Janaka asked the
great-souled Parashara in ancient times. 'What is best for all beings here and in the hereafter, so that one can obtain
prosperity? Tell me about this.' The sage was full of austerities and knew about the ordinances associated with all
kinds of dharma. To show favours to the king, he spoke these words. 'Deeds of dharma bring benefit in this world
and in the next. The learned ones have said that there is nothing that is superior to this. Through such dharma, a
man obtains greatness in the world of heaven. O supreme among kings! For all beings, the rites and ordinances that
have been laid down represent the essence of dharma. That is the reason virtuous people perform their respective
acts in their respective ashramas. O son[The word used is tata.]! Four kinds of modes have been laid down for progress in this world[This refers to the four varnas.].
When mortals follow these, they obtain what they desire. They perform good and bad deeds and attain their respective ends. In different ways, creatures are divided into five elements. Just as a golden or silver vessel reflects
the sheen of the metal, creatures are bound down by the acts that they have performed earlier. Nothing is generated
without a seed. Without acting for it, happiness cannot be obtained. When the body is destroyed, a man obtains
happiness because of the good deeds he has performed. O son! I do not see any destiny in this, nor any action on
the part of the gods. Gods, gandharvas and danavas become what they are because of their natures. After death,
people never remember what they have done in their earlier lives. But they obtain the consequences of the four
kinds of acts that they have performed[Acts are divided into nitya (daily), naimittika (occasional), kamya (desirable) and nishiddha (prohibited).]. For progress in the world, the words of the Vedas have described the
deeds that one must resort to. O son! That is what brings peace to the mind, not merely the instructions of the elders. There are four kinds of action one can perform with the eye, the mind, words and deeds. Whatever the nature
of the action, the consequence is like that. O king! Often, one obtains mixed consequences as a result of a deed.
However, whether it is good or bad, deeds are never destroyed. O son! Sometimes, the consequences of  good
deeds remain concealed and submerged in the cycle of life, one is not freed from misery. However, once the misery has been exhausted, the results of good deeds will become evident. O lord of men! Know  that when  good
deeds have been exhausted, the results of bad deeds will become evident. Self-control, forgiveness, fortitude, energy, contentment, truthfulness, modesty, lack of injury, not indulging in vices and skilfulness-these are the things
that yield happiness. For no creature are the effects of good deeds and bad deeds eternal. That is the reason an accomplished person always tries to fix his mind. One does not face the consequences of the good or bad deeds performed by another person. The consequences one reaps are commensurate with the deeds that one has performed.
Along one path[The path of knowledge.], a man can give up both happiness and unhappiness. O king! But there are many other people
who are always prone to attachment. A man must never undertake an act that he censures in someone else. If he
does  something  like  this,  he  will  be  laughed  at.  A  king  who  is  a  coward,  a  brahmana  who  eats  everything,  a
vaishya without exertion, an inferior varna[Meaning a shudra.] who is lazy, a learned person who lacks good conduct, a noble person
who is without a means of sustenance, a brahmana who has deviated from the truth, a wayward woman, a 'free'

person who is still attached, a person who cooks only for himself, a foolish person who is eloquent, a kingdom
without a king and a king who has no affection for his subjects-all these are reasons for grief.'"'
