Vaishampayana said, 'With Gandiva, the brave one remained stationed in the battle. The invincible one was resplendent in the battle, like the immovable Himalayas. The Saindhava warriors rallied again. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Angrily, they released showers of arrows. The immensely valorous one tolerated them and
still remained stationed. Kounteya spoke gentle words to those who were about to die. "Fight to the best of your
capacity. Make efforts to kill me. Make every kind of effort, because you are confronted with a great fear. I will
fight  with  you  and  repulse  all  your  arrows.  Stay  here  and  make  up  your  mind  to  fight.  I  will  destroy  your
insolence." Angrily, Kouravya, the wielder of Gandiva, spoke these words. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
However, he then remembered the words of his elder brother. "O son[The word used is tata.]! You should not kill the kshatriyas who
seek to defeat you in battle. But you should defeat them." The great-souled Dharmaraja had said this. Therefore,
Phalguna, bull among men, began to think. "This is what the Indra among men said, that the kings should not be
killed. How can I act so that Dharmaraja's auspicious words are not rendered false? I must follow the king's instructions and not kill these kings." Engaged in bringing pleasure to his brother, he thought in this way. The one
who knew about dharma then spoke these words to the Saindhavas, who were indomitable in battle. "In the battle,
I will not kill those among you who say, 'I am a child. I am a woman. Do not kill me. I have been defeated by
you.' On hearing these words of mine, do what is best for your own selves. Those who act contrary to this will face
hardships and be afflicted by fear." The bull among Kurus spoke these words and began to fight with those brave
ones. He roared in rage and wished to defeat those who were also angry.

'O king! The Saindhavas released hundreds of thousands of arrows with drooping tufts towards the wielder of
Gandiva. They descended, like cruel and venomous serpents. However, Dhananjaya sliced them down with sharp
arrows. He severed those arrows with arrows shafted with the feathers of herons and sharpened on stone. Then, in
that encounter, he pierced each of them with ten arrows. The Saindhava kings remembered Jayadratha's death and
again hurled javelins and spears towards Dhananjaya. However, the great-minded Kiriti rendered their resolution
futile. Pandava severed all those weapons and was delighted. On seeing that those warriors were descending on
him, desiring victory, he brought down their heads with broad-headed and straight-tufted arrows. Some ran away
and then returned and attacked again. When they returned, they roared, like a giant and billowing ocean. They
were slain by the infinitely energetic Partha. They fought against Arjuna, according to their strength and according
to their effort. Phalguna used arrows with drooping tufts to make many of them unconscious. The mounts and soldiers were exhausted.

'Duhshala[Jayadratha's wife. Suratha was the son of Jayadratha and Duhshala.], Dhritarashtra's daughter, got to know that all of them were cheerless. She took her young grandson, Suratha's son, and advanced towards the brave one's chariot. Desiring peace for all the warriors, she went towards Pandava. She reached Dhananjaya and lamented piteously. On seeing her, the lord Dhananjaya cast aside his
bow. Partha cast aside his bow and greeted his sister in the proper way. He spoke to her and asked her what he
could do for her. She said, "O foremost among the Bharata lineage! This child is the son of your sister's son. O
brave one! O bull among men! Behold. He is greeting you." When the father was thus addressed, Arjuna asked,
"Where is he[The sentence is rather convoluted. 'Father' is being used in a loose sense and Arjuna is the father.]?" O king! Duhshala replied, "There he is. He is tormented by grief on account of his father and is
afflicted by sorrow. His brave father is dead. Listen to how that happened. O unblemished one! He[Suratha.] heard that his
father had earlier been slain in the battle by you. He heard that you had arrived, following the horse, and were
ready to fight. O Dhananjaya! He was miserable on account of his father's death and gave up his life. O unblemished one! On hearing that Bibhatsu had come and on hearing the name, he was afflicted by grief. My son fell
down on the ground and died[Suratha does not seem to have died fighting Arjuna. He died of fright.]. O lord! On seeing that he had fallen down, I seized his son and came here, seeking refuge with you now." Dhritarashtra's daughter released shrieks of lamentation. She was miserable and in that
sorry state, with a downcast face, she spoke these words to Partha. "Look towards me, your sister. This is the son
of your sister's son. O one who knows about dharma! O extender of the Kuru lineage! You should exhibit pity towards me. You should forget the king of the Kurus[Duryodhana.] and the evil Jayadratha. Parikshit, the slayer of enemy heroes, has been born from Abhimanyu. O mighty-armed one! In that way, my grandson has been born from Suratha.
O tiger among men! I have seized him and have come before you. For the sake of pacifying all the warriors, listen
to my words. O mighty-armed one! Your young and unfortunate grandson has come before you. You should show
your favours to this child. That is the way you should act. O scorcher of enemies! With me, he is bowing his head
down before you. O mighty-armed one! O Dhananjaya! He is beseeching you. Seek peace. O Partha! This child's
relatives have been slain and he is ignorant of that. O one who knows about dharma! Show him your favours. Do
not come under the subjugation of anger. Forget his cruel grandfather and the injury he caused you. You should
show your favours towards someone who has come before you." Duhshala spoke in this piteous tone. Dhananjaya
remembered Queen Gandhari and King Dhritarashtra. Censuring the dharma of kshatriyas, he sorrowfully and miserably spoke these words. "Shame on the inferior Duryodhana. He was insolent and greedy for the kingdom. Because of what he did, I have conveyed all his relatives to Yama's abode." Having said this, Jaya comforted her in
many ways and showed her his favours. He happily embraced her and gave her permission to return to her house.
Duhshala also restrained those warriors from that great battle. The one with the beautiful face worshipped Partha
and left for her own house.

'Having defeated the Saindhava warriors, the bull among men again started to follow the horse, which wandered
around as it wished. O lord of the earth! In the proper way, the brave one followed the sacrificial animal, just as the
god of the gods, the wielder of Pinaka, followed the stellar deer in the firmament[At the time of Daksha's sacrifice, Shiva pursued the sacrifice. It assumed the form of a deer and fled through the
sky.]. As it wished, the horse wandered through other countries. It thrived because of Partha's deeds and roamed as it willed. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! In due course, as it roamed around with Pandava, the horse arrived in the country of Manipura.'
