Vaishampayana said, 'Placing their mother ahead of them, those bulls among men, the scorchers of enemies, set
out over smooth roads towards the north, as they had been directed. They walked day and night and reached the
pilgrimage of Somashravayana. Pandu's sons, those tigers among men, reached the Ganga. The immensely famous
Dhananjaya[Arjuna.] walked in front, with a torch in his hand to show the way and protect them.

'In the beautiful waters of the Ganga, the jealous king of the gandharvas was sporting with his wives. He heard
the sound[The sound of their footsteps.] as they approached the river. That strong one was inflamed with rage at the sound. Seeing the Pandavas, the scorchers of enemies, and their mother, he drew his terrible bow and uttered these words. "It is known
that except for the first eighty instants[Muhurta.], when terrible dusk colours and night is about to descend, the rest[Of the night.] is set
aside for yakshas, gandharvas, rakshasas and others who can travel wherever at will. For the rest of the time, it is
said that humans can travel at will. Therefore, if at those times, men wander around out of greed, we and the rakshasas attack and kill those stupid ones. Those who are learned in the Vedas disapprove of those men, even if they
are kings with their armies, who come near the water in the night. Stay at a distance and do not come near me. Do
you not know that I am bathing in the waters of the Bhagirathi? Know me to be the gandharva named Angaraparna. I rely on my own strength. I am proud and jealous and I am Kubera's beloved friend. This is my beautiful
forest on the banks of the Ganga, known as Angaraparna. I dwell here. No corpses[Kunapa. This can also mean those who smell like corpses and is therefore also used as a contemptuous term
for those who are alive.], horned animals, gods or humans dare to set foot here. How dare you come?"

'Arjuna said, "O evil-minded one! Whether it is night or day or twilight, how can the ocean, the Himalayas or
this river be barred to anyone? We are endowed with strength. We do not care even if we disturb you at the wrong
time. It is only weak men who worship you in this cruel hour. Issuing from the golden peaks of the Himalayas, this
Ganga descends into the ocean in seven streams. O gandharva! This holy Ganga, flowing through the celestial regions, is known there as Alakananda. In the region of the ancestors, it is known as Vaitarani and cannot be crossed
by those who commit sins. Krishna Dvaipayana has said that this divine and pure river, which can take one to
heaven, is accessible to everyone. How can you bar us access? That is not in accordance with eternal dharma. Because of your words, why should we not touch, as we will, the sacred waters of the Bhagirathi, accessible to everyone?"'

Vaishampayana said, 'Hearing these words, Angaraparna became very angry. He drew his bow and shot flaming
arrows that were like extremely venomous snakes. With the torch in his hand, Pandava Dhananjaya warded off the
arrows with his excellent shield. Arjuna said, "O gandharva! Don't try to frighten those who are skilled in the use
of weapons, because weapons unleashed at them disappear like froth. O gandharva! I know that gandharvas are superior to men. Therefore, I will fight you with divine weapons, not with the use of maya. In ancient times, this agneya missile was given by Brihaspati, Shatakratu's[Shatakratu is a performer of 100 sacrifices and is one of Indra's names.] preceptor, to Bharadvaja. From Bharadvaja it went to Agniveshya and from Agniveshya to my preceptor. Drona, supreme among Brahmanas, gave it to me." Having said
this, the angry Pandava unleashed the blazing agneya weapon at the gandharva and it instantly burnt down his
chariot. Knocked unconscious from the energy of the missile, the immensely powerful gandharva fell face down,
dislodged from his chariot. Dhananjaya seized him by the hair on his head, which was adorned with garlands, and
dragged the one knocked unconscious from the missile towards his brothers. On seeing this, his wife, who was
named Kumbhinasi, sought refuge with Yudhishthira so that her husband might be saved.

'The gandharva woman said, "O great king! Save me and set my husband free. O lord! The gandharvi Kumbhinasi seeks your protection." Yudhishthira said, "O destroyer of enemies! Which hero will kill an enemy who has
been defeated in battle, has lost his fame and is now protected by a woman? Set him free." Arjuna said, "O gandharva! Have your life. Go from here and do not grieve. Yudhishthira, king of the Kurus[There was no danger from this revelation of identity, since it wouldn't have reached the Kouravas.], has ordered safety for
you today."

'The gandharva said, "I have been defeated by you. Therefore, I will give up my earlier name of Angaraparna.
Among men, I can no longer show my pride in strength or in name. I wanted to fight, with the powers of maya of
the gandharvas, with someone who was at the peak of his youth. It is my good fortune that I encountered one with
celestial weapons. My supreme and adorned chariot has been burnt by the agneya weapon. I was earlier called Chitraratha[One with an adorned chariot; ratha is chariot.] and have now become Dagdharatha[One whose chariot has been burnt.]. I spoke to you about the knowledge that I earlier attained
through austerities. Today, I will give it to the great-souled one who has granted me life. He who saves the life of a
vanquished enemy who seeks sanctuary deserves good fortune. This knowledge is called chakshushi[Chakshu means eye. That is the reason the knowledge is called chakshushi.]. It was given by Manu to Soma and Soma gave it to Vishvavasu. Vishvavasu gave it to me.

'"When the preceptor gives the knowledge to a coward, it is destroyed. I have spoken to you about its origin and
transmission. Now learn from me its power. Whatever you wish to see through your eyes in all the three worlds
will be seen by you, exactly as you wish. One can acquire this knowledge by standing on one leg for six months. I
have given word that I will myself bestow this knowledge on you. O king! It is because of this knowledge that we
are superior to men. Because we have the power of seeing everything, we are the equals of the gods. O best of
men! I wish to give each of you five brothers, separately, 100 horses from the land of the gandharvas. They are divinely scented and possess the speed of the mind. They are used to transport the gods and the gandharvas. However tired they are, they never lose their speed. In ancient times, the great Indra created the vajra to kill Vritra. But it
shattered into a thousand pieces when flung on Vritra's head. Since then, the gods divided the vajra pieces among
themselves and worshipped them. Whatever is known as wealth in this world is but a piece of that vajra. The hands
of Brahmanas are the vajra. The chariots of Kshatriyas are the vajra. The alms of the Vaishyas are the vajra. The
servitude of the Shudras[The word used in the text is yaviyasa, which means Shudra.] is the vajra. The horses of the Kshatriyas are the vajra and it is said that they should
never be killed. The horses that draw chariots are the offspring of vadava[The word vadava means a mare.]. One who drives horses is called a
suta. These[This is now a reference to the horses the gandharva is giving.] can assume any colour at will, can assume any speed at will and can go anywhere at will. These
horses from the gandharva region will always fulfil any desire."

'Arjuna said, "O gandharva! I have no desire to accept the knowledge or the riches if you are giving them to me
out of satisfaction at my having saved your life."

'The gandharva said, "An encounter with a great person is always a matter of satisfaction. In addition to that,
you have given me my life. Being pleased with you, I am giving you the knowledge. O bull among the Bharata lineage! O Bibhatsu[Bibhatsu is one of Arjuna's names.]! In return, to make it equal, I shall take from you the supreme agneya weapon[An explanation is needed about the giving of a weapon. This act of giving doesn't involve the physical act of
giving something and has more to do with teaching the mantras required to release and withdraw a weapon. Therefore, giving a weapon away did not mean that the giver ceased to possess it. What was being given was the
knowledge.], so that our
friendship is eternal."

Arjuna said, "O gandharva! I shall accept your horses in return for my weapon. Let our friendship be eternal. O
friend! Tell me how we can be free from the danger from your race."'
