'Takshaka said, "O Kashyapa! If you can cure any creature that has been bitten by me, revive this tree once I have
bitten it. O best of the Brahmanas! I will set on fire this fig tree before your very eyes. Try your best and show me
the power of the mantras that you have spoken of."

'Kashyapa said, "O king of snakes! If that is what you wish, bite the tree. O snake! I shall revive it, once it has
been bitten by you."'

Souti said, 'Thus addressed by the great-souled Kashyapa, the king of snakes, supreme among snakes, went and
bit the fig tree. Bitten by the great-souled snake, the tree imbibed the poison and flared up all around. When he had
burnt the tree down, the snake again spoke to Kashyapa. "O best of the Brahmanas! Try your best and give life to
this lord of the forest." The tree had been reduced to ashes from the energy of the king of the snakes. But picking
up the ashes, Kashyapa uttered these words. "O king of snakes! Today you will witness the power of my knowledge. O snake! I will revive this lord of the forest in your very presence." Then the illustrious and learned Kashyapa, supreme among Brahmanas, revived through his learning the tree that had been reduced to a heap of ashes.
First, he created a sapling. Then he created two leaves in it. Then he created twigs and branches. Then he regenerated the entire tree.

'On seeing that the tree had really been revived by the great-souled Kashyapa, Takshaka said, "O Brahmana! It
is wonderful that you can destroy my poison or that of others like me. O king of the Brahmanas! O you who are
blessed with the power of austerities! Driven by what desire are you going there? I will give you whatever fruits
you hope to gain from that best of kings, however difficult they may prove to get. O Brahmana! Your success is
uncertain, because that king has been afflicted with a Brahmana's curse. His life has been shortened. Your blazing
fame, that is famous throughout the three worlds, will disappear, like the sun robbed of his splendour." Kashyapa
replied, "O snake! I am going there for riches. O best of the snakes! Give it to me and I will return home." Takshaka said, "O best of the Brahmanas! I will today give you more riches than you hope to get from the king. Therefore, return." Having heard what Takshaka had said, Kashyapa, supreme among Brahmanas, intelligent and with
great energy, meditated on the king.

'The powerful Kashyapa then learnt through his divine knowledge that the life of the Pandava king had indeed
been shortened. He returned, receiving from Takshaka all the riches that he wanted to possess. At the great-souled
Kashyapa's departure, Takshaka hastened towards Hastinapura[The name used in the text is Nagasahnya.]. On his way, Takshaka heard that the lord of the
earth was leading a careful life, protected by mantras and herbs that cured poison. At that, the snake thought to
himself, "The king must be deceived through my powers of maya. But what is the best way?" In the disguise of
ascetics, Takshaka sent some snakes to the king, with fruits, leaves and water as presents. Takshaka said, "Go
swiftly to the king, as if you have a rite to perform. Make the king a present of the fruits, leaves and water." Thus
commanded by Takshaka, the snakes did this and took darbha grass, water and fruits to the king. The valorous king
of kings accepted their presents. When their rites were performed, he gave them leave to depart.

'When those snakes disguised as ascetics had left, the king addressed his advisers and well-wishers. "All of you
eat with me the succulent fruits presented by those ascetics." O Shounaka! As the king was about to eat the fruit
with his ministers, a small worm appeared in the fruit that he had picked up. It was tiny, with black eyes, and had
the colour of copper. Picking it up, the best of kings told his advisers, "The sun is setting. Today, I no longer have
any fear from poison. Therefore, let this worm become Takshaka and bite me. Let the words of the hermit become
true and let a falsehood not be committed." Driven by destiny, the advisers applauded him. Having said this, the
king of kings smilingly placed the small worm on his throat, about to die and robbed of his senses. He was still
laughing when Takshaka, who had come out of the fruit that had been given to the king, coiled around him.'
