'Sanjaya said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When the forenoon of that day had passed, and when there
was a great destruction of chariots, elephants, infantry and horse-riders, Panchala fought with three maharathas-
Drona's son, Shalya and the great-souled Kripa. With ten sharp and swift arrows, Panchala's immensely strong
heir[Referring to Dhrishtadyumna.] killed the horses of Drona's son, which were renowned in the world. Deprived of his mounts, Drona's son
swiftly ascended Shalya's chariot and showered arrows on Panchala's heir. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
On seeing that Dhrishtadyumna was engaged in a duel with Drona's son, Subhadra's son quickly attacked, showering sharp arrows. O bull among men! He pierced Shalya with twenty-five arrows, Kripa with nine and Ashvatthama with eight. However, Drona's son also quickly pierced Arjuna's son with shafted arrows. Shalya pierced
him with twelve and Kripa with three sharp arrows. On seeing that your grandson was thus engaged in battle, your
grandson Lakshmana rushed at him in great anger and there was an encounter between the two[Both Abhimanyu and Lakshmana were Dhritarashtra's grandsons. Abhimanyu was the son of Arjuna and Subhadra. Lakshmana was the son of Duryodhana and Bhanumati.]. O king! In that
battle, Duryodhana's son angrily pierced Subhadra's son with nine arrows and it was an extraordinary sight. O bull
among the Bharata lineage! O king! Abhimanyu was filled with ire and with dextrous hands, pierced his brother
with five hundred arrows. At this, Lakshmana used shafted arrows to slice down his[Abhimanyu's.] bow at the handle. O great
king! On seeing this, the people raised a loud shout. Then Subhadra's son, the destroyer of enemies, discarded that
shattered bow and picked up another bow that was more beautiful and stronger. Those two bulls among men happily fought against each other, countering each other's efforts and piercing each other with sharp and shafted arrows.
On seeing that his maharatha son was thus assailed by your grandson, King Duryodhana, lord of men, rushed towards the spot. When your son advanced, all the kings used masses of chariots to surround Arjuna's son from
every direction. O king! But he was a brave and invincible warrior, equal in valour to Krishna. Despite being surrounded by those heroes, he was not distressed.

'"On seeing that Subhadra's son was fighting there, Dhananjaya swiftly advanced there, intending to save his
son. With chariots, elephants and horses and with Bhishma and Drona at the forefront, all the kings forcefully attacked Savyasachi. A thick dust suddenly arose from the ground, raised by the elephants, horses, chariots and infantry and it seemed to obstruct the path of the sun. When those thousands of elephants and hundreds of kings approached within striking distance of his[Arjuna's.] arrows, none of them could advance any further. All the beings lamented loudly and all the directions were covered in darkness. The army of the Kurus seemed to be terrible and dreadful. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! Because of the numerous arrows shot by Kiriti, the sky, the directions,
the earth or the sun could not be seen. Elephants were deprived of the standards on their backs. Many charioteers
were deprived of their horses. Having been deprived of their chariots, many charioteers were seen to be wandering
around there. Other charioteers discarded their chariots and were seen to flee. They were seen there, weapons in
their hands and with bracelets on their upper arms. O king! Because of their fear of Arjuna, horse-riders gave up
their horses and elephant-riders their elephants. They fled in all the directions. The kings were seen to fall down
from their chariots, elephants and horses. They were seen to fall down, oppressed by Arjuna. O lord of the earth!
Assuming a terrible form there, Arjuna used his terrible arrows to cut down the upraised arms of men who held
clubs, swords, lances, quivers, bows, arrows, goads and standards. O venerable one! O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! Heavy maces and clubs, lances, catapults, swords, sharp battleaxes, javelins, shields and armour were
shattered in that battle and fell down on the ground. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Flags, shields, many
kinds of whisks, umbrellas, golden rods and tassels were strewn around. O venerable one! There were whips, halters, thongs and reins. They were seen to be scattered on the field of battle. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
There was not a single man in your army who could advance against the brave Arjuna in battle. O lord of the earth!
In that encounter, whoever advanced against Partha was pierced by sharp and shafted arrows and conveyed to the
world of the dead. When all the warriors on your side were scattered, Arjuna and Vasudeva blew on their supreme
conch shells.

'"On seeing that the army had been shattered in that battle, your father, Devavrata, smiled and told Bharadvaja's
brave son, 'This brave and powerful son of Pandu is united with Krishna. He is dealing with our soldiers only as
Dhananjaya can. No one is capable of vanquishing him in battle today. His form seems to be like that of the destroyer at the end of an era. It is impossible to rally our great army now. Behold. They are looking at each other
and are running away. The sun can be seen aloft the supreme mountain Asta[The mountain over which the sun sets.]. It is as if it has robbed the sight of
the entire world. O bull among men! I think the time has come for retreat. The warriors are exhausted and frightened and will never fight.' Having spoken thus to the supreme preceptor Drona, maharatha Bhishma arranged that
your army should be withdrawn. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Your soldiers, and those of the others, were
withdrawn. The sun set and evening set in."'
