Vaishampayana said, 'O king! Having been thus addressed, Kunti told Pandu, bull among the Kurus, lord of the
earth and her husband, "O one who is learned in the law! O one with eyes like those of a blue lotus! You should
not speak in this way to me. I am your wife under the law and am always devoted to you. O mighty-armed one! O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! According to dharma, you should yourself father valourous sons on me. O tiger
among men! I will go to heaven with you. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! You should unite with me to obtain
offspring. Not even in my thoughts will I go to any other man but you. Which man on earth is superior to you? O
one with large eyes! O one with dharma in your heart! Listen to this story from the Puranas. I heard this and I am
now recounting it for you."

'Kunti said, "In ancient times, it is said that there was a king by the name of Vyushitashva. He extended the Puru
lineage and was extremely righteous. The gods with Indra and the devarshis came to a sacrifice that this mighty-
armed and righteous one performed. At the sacrifice of the great-souled rajarshi Vyushitashva, Indra was intoxicated with soma juice and the Brahmanas with their fees. O king! Thereafter, Vyushitashva was radiant beyond everything on earth, beyond all living beings and even beyond the sun, after dew has fallen. O supreme among kings!
The king conquered all the kings of the east, the north, the middle and the south. At this great horse sacrifice, the
powerful Vyushitashva, with the strength of ten elephants, became the king of all other kings. Those who know the
Puranas sing a verse. 'Vyushitashva has conquered the entire earth till the boundaries of the ocean. He protects all
the varnas, just as a father protects his own sons.' He performed many great sacrifices and gave riches to the Brahmanas. Collecting jewels, he later performed great sacrifices. Extracting a lot of soma juice, he performed the sacrifice known as somasanstha.

'"O lord of men! His beloved wife was named Bhadra, the daughter of Kakshivat. Because of her beauty, she
was unparalleled on earth. It has been heard that they desired each other a lot and addicted by desire for her, he became a victim of consumption. After some time, he went away like the setting sun. When that king of men died,
his wife was afflicted with grief. O tiger among men! O lord of men! It has been heard that she lamented. 'O,
supreme among those who know dharma! A woman without sons lives a life of misery, if she lives without her
husband. O bull among the Kshatriyas! Without her husband, it is better for a woman to be dead. Please take me
with you. I wish to go where you are going. Without you, I will not be able to bear life for an instant. O king!
Show your grace to me and take me quickly away. O king! I will always follow you like a faithful shadow and will
always be obedient towards you. O tiger among men! I will always do that which is pleasurable for you. O king! O
one with the eyes of a lotus! From now, a disease that dries up the heart will overcome me, since I will be separated from you. O king! I am unfortunate. In earlier bodies, I must have separated companions or separated a couple
that was united. O king! That evil act from an earlier body has now come upon me and I am suffering this pain as a
result. O king! From today, I will lie on a bed of kusha grass. I will give up all happiness and think only of seeing
you. O tiger among men! Show yourself to me and make me happy. O lord of men! I am overcome with grief, miserable, unprotected and lamenting.' Embracing the corpse, she lamented again and again. Then an invisible voice
addressed her. 'O Bhadra! O sweet-smiling one! Arise and leave. I will give you a boon. I will father offspring on
you. O one with the beautiful hips! After you have bathed after your season, on the eighth or fourteenth lunar day,
I will lie with you on your own bed.' At these words, Queen Bhadra, who was devoted to her husband and wished
to obtain sons, did as she had been asked to do. O lord of men! O supreme among those of the Bharata lineage!
The queen gave birth to sons through the corpse-the three Shalvas and the four Madras. O bull of the Bharata lineage! You too will be able to have sons on me, through the powers of yoga your mind possesses."'
