Yudhishthira asked,  "O  grandfather!  There  are  many  sacrifices  and  austerities,  all  with  a  single  objective.
Which of these sacrifices is recommended for dharma and not for the sake of happiness alone?"

'Bhishma replied, "In this connection, Narada recounted the ancient account of a brahmana. For the sake of performing sacrifices, he resorted to unchhavritti[There are grains left after a crop has been harvested, or after grain has been milled. If one subsists on these leftovers, that is known as unchhavritti.]. The brahmana lived in Vidarbha, best among kingdoms in the
practice of dharma. Surviving on unchhavritti, that rishi worshipped Vishnu. He ate shyamaka, suryapatni and suvarchala[Shyamaka is a kind of millet, suryapatni (also known as masbaparni) is a kind of herb used in traditional medicine and suvarchala is linseed.]. But because of his austerities, those bitter and tasteless herbs also tasted succulent. Having gone to the
forest, he refrained from injury towards all beings on earth. O scorcher of enemies! Desiring to go to heaven, he
offered roots and fruits in those sacrifices. His wife's name was Pushkaracharini and she was pure and thin through
the practising of vows. Satya[The brahmana's name.] instructed her to join him in the sacrifice as a wife. Though she did not approve of
this, she was terrified of his curse and her nature was also to follow[Though there has been nothing to indicate this so far, she disapproved of the idea of slaughtering animals for a
sacrifice.]. Her garments consisted of feathers that peacocks had cast aside. Though she was unwilling, she was summoned to the sacrifice by the officiating priest[Satya was the officiating priest.]. In
that forest, not very far away, dwelt a person who was descended from Shukra's lineage. He was in the form of a
deer. He was also jealous and a follower of adharma[Since the deer is later described as a form of Dharma, there is no reason for it to be jealous or a follower of adharma. The inconsistency cannot be explained.]. He spoke these words to Satya. 'You are trying to perform
an extremely difficult task. If a sacrifice is devoid of its mantras and other limbs, it will be performed improperly.
Therefore, fling me there as an oblation and without any distractions, go to heaven.' At this, Savitri herself manifested at the sacrifice and counselled him to do this. But though invited, he replied, 'I will not slay my neighbour.'

Having been restrained, she[Savitri.] entered the flames of the sacrifice. She did not wish to see a sacrifice that was improperly performed and wished to enter the nether worlds. However, the deer again joined its hands in salutation
and entreated Satya. But Satya embraced it and asked it to go away. The deer departed. But having gone eight
steps, it returned and said, 'O Satya! If you slay me, you will perform a good deed. Slay me and attain a virtuous
end. I am granting you divine sight. Look at those apsaras. Look at those wonderful vimanas and the great-souled
gandharvas.' With that sight, he glanced at those extremely beautiful worlds and he was touched by desire. He
looked at the deer and thought that he was capable of dwelling in heaven through violence. It was Dharma himself
who had spent many years in the forest in the form of a deer. Wishing to ensure his salvation, he said, 'In your
mind, you should not think of a sacrifice that involves the killing of a deer. Your great austerities will thereby be
destroyed. Sacrifices should not involve any violence.' The illustrious Dharma himself accepted an officiating role
at that sacrifice. He obtained the state of meditation and supreme austerities that his wife had already obtained. All
dharma involves non-violence. Violence does not bring success in a sacrifice. This is the truth that Dharma spoke
to Satya and I have told you about it."'
