Shuka said, 'You have spoken to me about what should be done in vanaprastha. When one is engaged in
this[Sannyasa.],  to  the  best  of  one's  ability,  how  should  one  engage  the  atman,  so  that  one  attains  the  supreme
objective?'

'"Vyasa replied, 'A person must cleanse himself in the two ashramas[A reference to garhasthya and vanaprastha. However, we have taken a call here. It could equally well be the
brahmacharya and garhasthya stages.]. Having done this, he must then engage
in tasks for the supreme objective. Listen attentively to this. Having eliminated all taints in the first three stages, he
must then resort to the supreme state of renunciation. Renunciation is the best stage. Listen to the conduct that
must be followed in that state. One should always roam around alone and seek to accomplish the objective without
any help. A person who roams around alone sees that there is nothing to be shunned and there is nothing that decays. He is without a fire. He is without an abode. At best, he enters a village for the sake of food. It is recommended that he should save nothing for the next day. His sentiments must be like that of a sage. He must eat little,
be restrained in his diet and eat only once a day. The signs of a mendicant are a skull[For drinking.], shelter under trees, old
garments as attire, lack of companions and indifference towards all beings. Words penetrate him like stones hurled
into a well[That is, they have no effect.] and do not return to the original speaker. Such a person is fit to dwell in the ashrama of isolation. He
does not see others. He does not hear others. He never speaks injurious words, especially about brahmanas. He always speaks words that are pleasant to brahmanas. He is silent when he is censured and finds treatment for this
within his own self. Though he is always alone, he fills the entire sky[The interpretation is that he sees himself in everything and everything in himself.]. To him, a deserted spot seems to be full of
people. The gods know such a person to be a brahmana. He covers himself with anything. He eats anything. He
sleeps anywhere. The gods know such a person to be a brahmana. He is afraid of company, as if they are serpents.
He regards anything that satiates as hell[This is interpreted as especially applying to food. One should eat only-enough to survive and not seek to satiate
oneself.]. He regards women as corpses[Kunapa, alternatively, the name of a specific hell.]. The gods know such a person to be a
brahmana. He is not angered or delighted, regardless of whether he is honoured or insulted. He does not cause any
being to be frightened. The gods know such a person to be a brahmana. He is not delighted at the prospect of
death. Nor is he delighted at the prospect of remaining alive. He only waits for the time[Of death.], like a servant awaiting
instructions. His consciousness has been cleansed. His food and words are clean. He is free from all sins. Since he
is without enemies, what fear can he have? He has been freed and has no cause for fear from anything that possesses a body. The footsteps of any animal that follows get lost in the footsteps of an elephant. Everything is absorbed
in the footprints of an elephant[The fruits of yoga are like the footprints of an elephant and everything gets absorbed in them.]. In that fashion, all dharma and artha are absorbed in lack of injury towards all
beings. A person who practises non-violence always resides in what is immortal. He is non-violent and looks on
everything equally. He is truthful. He has fortitude and controls his senses. He is the refuge of all beings. He attains the supreme objective. In this way, learned ones are content in their wisdom and are not frightened. He has
gone beyond death and the attributes of death do not affect him. Such a sage is free from all attachments and seems
to be established in the sky. He wanders alone and tranquil. The gods know such a person to be a brahmana. His
life is for the sake of dharma and his dharma is for the sake of others. His days and nights are for the sake of the
auspicious. The gods know such a person to be a brahmana. He is without desire. He is without exertion. He does
not bow down his head. He is without praise[He does not praise others, nor does he react to praise from others.]. He does not engage in any inferior deeds. The gods know such a
person to be a brahmana. He takes delight in the happiness of all beings. He is extremely distressed at the misery
of everyone. If they are frightened, he sorrows. He faithfully undertakes his own tasks. Granting beings freedom
from fear is superior to all donations and dakshina. A person who first gives up all injury to the bodies of beings
grants these subjects eternal freedom from fear. From the navel of the world, the face is raised upwards and obla-
tions are offered into it[There is the metaphor of a sacrificial altar and fire, being compared to the individual offering himself up as an
oblation.]. The head and the upper limbs of the fire receive everything, the good and the bad. In the
confines of his heart, he offers his own life up as a libation. All the worlds and the gods are satisfied with his offering up his atman as oblation in that agnihotra. It is divine and golden. It has three shells and three parts[These are difficult shlokas to translate. Quite clearly, the brahman is being described. One of the three is presumably sattva, rajas and tamas. But the second three is not obvious, though it could mean the three worlds.]. It is the
supreme objective and is foremost among things to be known. It is greatest in all the worlds. The gods and accomplished people with good deeds walk along that path. It has been spoken of as the greatest objective, the essence of
what is to be known in the Vedas and all the rites. He who knows it as the atman in his own body is always loved
by the gods. It is not attached to the earth and is divine. It cannot be measured. It is golden. It was born from an
egg and resides in the egg[The egg of creation.]. It is like a winged bird in the firmament. Blazing in its rays, it can be known inside
the atman. It whirls around and has no decay. It rotates on six naves, with twelve spokes and excellent joints[A reference to time, with six seasons and twelve months. The joints are the days.].
The wheel of time is deep and mysterious and everything in the universe heads towards its gaping mouth. It pervades the body of everything in the universe and all the worlds progress towards it. That is spoken of as something
that satisfies the gods. When they are satisfied, they gratify that open mouth. The body is ancient and eternal and is
full of energy. It is the end of all the worlds and offers freedom from fear. Beings are never frightened of him and
he never causes fright to beings[This is now about the person who knows the brahman.]. He is not censured. Nor does he censure anyone. A brahmana who sees the
paramatman in his own atman is like that. He is humble and without confusion. He is beyond all sins. He desires
nothing in this world, nor in the other world. He is without anger and without confusion. He regards a lump of clay
and gold in the same way. He is devoid of sorrow and is beyond friendship and enmity. He is beyond censure and
praise and beyond liking and disliking. He wanders around indifferent, as a mendicant.'"'
