'Narada said, "Galava was distressed. Suparna, supreme among those who have wings, told him, 'Gold is created
in the ground and is purified by fire. It is because of this that it is known as hiranya[There is probably a sense of virility, since hiranya means both gold and semen.]. Since it supports and sustains the prosperity of the three worlds, it is always known as dhana[Dhana means wealth or riches and dharana is to support and sustain.]. Shukra is the lord of riches. When the two
constellations of Proshthapada[The twenty-fifth and twenty-sixth nakshatras, Purva Bhadrapada and Uttara Bhadrapada.] are in the ascendance, Shukra grants men the riches that they have earned. Those
riches are guarded by Aja Ekapada[Aja Ekapada is a divinity, identified with Agni, the sun and the moon. Literally, Aja Ekapada can be translated
as a one-footed goat. Aja Ekapada is also the god who presides over Purva Bhadrapada.], Ahi Budhnya[Ahi Budhnya is the god who presides over Uttara Bhadrapada. Ahi Budhnya means the serpent who lives in the
deep.] and the lord of riches. O bull among brahmanas! They cannot be obtained if they are meant to be unobtainable. Without riches, you are incapable of obtaining the horses.
Ask a king for riches, one who has been born in a lineage of rajarshis. Such a king will be able to satisfy us, without oppressing his subjects. There is a king who has been born in the lunar dynasty. He is my friend. Let us approach him. He possesses a great deal of riches on earth. He is a rajarshi named Yayati, the son of Nahusha, and
truth is his valour. When he is asked by you and requested by me, he will himself give it. He possessed wealth that
was as great as that of the lord of riches. But by giving up some of those riches, the learned one cleansed himself.'

While they were conversing and thinking in this fashion, they reached King Yayati in Pratishthana.

'"After accepting the honours, the argha and the excellent food, Vinata's son was subsequently asked about the
reason for their arrival. 'O son of Nahusha! This is my friend Galava. He is an ocean of austerities. O king! He has
been Vishvamitra's pupil for ten thousand years. When he was given permission to leave, this illustrious brahmana
wished to return the favour and asked his preceptor about what should be given as a dakshina. When he kept asking, his teacher was enraged and asked him to give, though he knew that his riches were limited. "Give me eight
hundred pure-born horses that are as white as the rays of the moon and possess one black ear each. O Galava! If
you so desire, give this to your preceptor as a gift." This is what Vishvamitra, the store of austerities, told him in
anger. It is for this reason that this bull among brahmanas is tormented by a great grief. He is incapable of returning the favour and has sought refuge with you. O tiger among men! When he has accepted alms from you, he will
be free from his miseries. He will be freed from the debt to his preceptor and will practise great austerities. He will
give you a share of those austerities. You are full of a rajarshi's austerities, but you will be filled even more. O lord
of men! O lord of the earth! Those who give away a horse obtain as many worlds as there are body hairs on a
horse. He is the right vessel to receive and you are the right person to give. This will be like milk sprinkled into a
conch shell.'"'
