Brahma said, "O excellent ones! I will tell you the truth about rajas. O immensely fortunate ones! Listen to
everything about the qualities in this kind of conduct. O brahmanas! Conflict, beauty, effort, happiness, unhappiness, cold, heat, prosperity, war, peace, debates, discontent, forgiveness, strength, valour, ego, anger, physical
exertion,  dissension,  jealousy,  calumny,  battles,  sense  of  ownership,  protection,  slaughter,  imprisonment,  hardships,  buying,  selling,  slicing  off,  piercing,  severing,  mangling,  fierceness,  terror,  violence,  earning  a  living
through the wealth of others, thinking of worldly affairs, anxiety, intolerance in speech, false speech, false gifts,
hesitation in speech, censure, worship, praise, influence, contentment, being served, serving, obedience, thirst, being self-centred, separation, bad policy, distraction, repentance, receiving, the separate sacraments that are prescribed in the world for men, women, animals, objects and houses, torment, lack of confidence, rites, rituals, incessant gifts for  benedictions, svadha, bowing  down,  svaha, vashatkara, performing sacrifices, studying, receiving
gifts, attachment that is generated for various qualities, treachery, deception, dishonour, honour, theft, injury, slander, torment, wakefulness, vanity, insolence, attachment, devotion, joy, delight, gambling, scandal, alliances with
women, attachment to dancing, musical instruments and singing-these are said to be the qualities associated with
rajas. There are those who think about the past, the present and the future. They are always devoted to the three objectives of dharma, artha and kama. They act because they find delight in desire and in the successful obtaining of
all the objects of desire. Since their energy is enveloped in rajas, they head downwards. They find pleasure in this
world and are repeatedly born again. They desire what can be obtained in this world and in the world after death.
They give and they receive. They meditate and offer oblations. The qualities of rajas have been recounted in many
ways. The conduct that follows this quality has also been described. A man who always understands these qualities
is freed from all the qualities that are associated with rajas."'"'
