Ashtavakra replied, 'There is no doubt that I will undertake a successful journey there, just as you have said.
O virtuous one! May you also be truthful in your words.'"

'Bhishma continued, "The illustrious one headed further and further towards the north, to the slopes of the Himalaya  mountains,  populated  by  the  siddhas  and  the  charanas.  The  tiger  among  brahmanas  reached  the  great
mountains, the Himalayas. He went to the sacred river of Bahuda, the granter of dharma. He bathed in the clear
waters of the tirthas and rendered offerings to the gods. He then spread out a bed of kusha grass and lay down happily. Having spent the night in this way, the brahmana arose in the morning. Having bathed, he followed the rites,
kindling a sacrificial fire and offering oblations. He reached the cave known as Rudrani and rested near the lake
there. After resting, he awoke and headed towards Kailasa. He saw a golden gate that blazed in its beauty. He saw
Mandakini and Nalini, both belonging to the great-souled lord of riches[Mandakini is that part of the Ganga which flows through Kailasa. Nalini is a lake, full of lotuses, owned by
Kubera.]. There were rakshasas entrusted with
the task of protecting that lake full of lotuses and they were led by Manibhadra. On seeing the illustrious one, all of
them arose and greeted him. He also honoured those rakshasas, who were terrible in their valour, and told them to
quickly inform the lord of riches that he had arrived. O king! At this, the rakshasas told the illustrious one, 'King
Vaishravana is himself approaching you. The illustrious one knows the reason for your coming here. Behold. The
immensely fortunate one has arrived, blazing in his energy.' Vaishravana approached the unblemished Ashtavakra.
He duly asked him about his welfare and told the brahmana rishi, 'May you obtain happiness here. Tell me what
you desire from me. O brahmana! Tell me everything. I will do whatever you ask me to. O supreme among brahmanas! If it pleases you, do enter my residence. I will honour you properly. When your task has been accomplished, depart without any obstructions.' Having said this, he took that supreme among brahmanas and led him
into his residence. He gave him his own seat, water to wash his feet and a gift.

'"When both of them were seated, Kubera's companions, the yakshas, gandharvas and rakshasas, with Manibhadra leading them, also sat down. When they were seated, the lord of riches spoke these words. 'If they have your
permission, the large numbers of apsaras will commence dancing. It is my supreme duty to serve a guest like you.'

In  a sweet voice, the sage replied that it could commence. Urvara, Mishrakeshi, Rambha, Urvashi,  Alambusa,
Ghritachi, Chitra, Chitrangada, Ruchi, Manohara, Sukeshi, Sumukhi, Hasini, Prabha, Vidyuta, Prashama, Danta,
Vidyota, Rati-these and many other beautiful apsaras started to dance. The gandharvas played on many kinds of
musical instruments. The celestial music and dancing started. Without realizing it, the rishi, the extremely great ascetic, found pleasure and spent an entire divine year there. King Vaishravana spoke to the illustrious one. 'O brahmana! Behold. Since you arrived here, more than a year has elapsed. O brahmana! O noble one! This kind of performance is known by the name of gandharva. O brahmana! It shall be as you wish. Shall it continue? You are a
guest  in  my  household  and  a  guest  must  be  honoured.  All  of  us  will  quickly  follow  your  commands.  We are
supremely devoted to you.' Pleased with Vaishravana, the illustrious one replied, 'O lord of riches! You have honoured me, as is proper. I shall now depart. O lord of riches! I am pleased with you. Everything that you possess is
exactly like you. O illustrious one! Through your favours, I must now undertake the task the great-souled rishi[Vadanya.]
has entrusted me with. May your prosperity become even more prosperous.' The illustrious one emerged and headed in a northward direction. He passed Kailasa, Mandara and all the golden mountains.

'"Beyond this, there is the supreme region, the great mountain known as Kairata. He controlled himself, bowed
his head down and circumambulated it. Having descended again on the ground, he thought that he had been purified. Circumambulating the mountain thrice, he proceeded northwards. With joy in his heart, he advanced along
the plain ground that extended in front of him. He then saw another beautiful forest. There were roots and fruits
that grew in every season and it was full of birds. It was as if the beautiful forest was, here and there, adorned with
them. The illustrious one saw a divine hermitage there. There were hills with many kinds of forms, decorated with
gold and jewels. Gems were stuck to the ground and there were lakes. He saw many other extremely beautiful
things. At this, the maharshi with the cleansed soul was delighted in his mind. There, he saw a celestial and golden
house, covered everywhere with jewels. It was extraordinary in form and was superior to the residence of the lord
of riches. There were many giant palaces that were like mountains. There were beautiful vimanas and many kinds
of gems. The river Mandakini flowed there, covered with mandara flowers. There were gems that blazed with their
own radiance and the ground was strewn with diamonds. There were many kinds of houses, with colourful jewels
on their gates. Nets of pearls were flung around and there were decorations of gems and jewels. It was beautiful
everywhere, captivating the mind and the eye, and everything was auspicious. In every direction in that beautiful
place, he saw rishis. He began to think about where he might be able to find a residence. He advanced towards a
gate. Stationing himself there, he said, 'Let those who dwell here know me to be a guest who has arrived.' At this,
several maidens emerged from that house. They had many different forms and all of them were beautiful. O lord!
Actually, there were seven maidens. They were so beautiful that, whichever one he looked at, happened to steal his
mind. Despite making the best of efforts, he could not control his mind. Finally, the intelligent brahmana resorted
to his fortitude and controlled himself. The women said, 'O illustrious one! Enter.' The brahmana was filled with
curiosity about the extremely beautiful women in that house and entered the house. There, he saw an aged lady.
She was overcome with old age and was dressed in a white garment. Though she was lying down on a bed, she
was adorned with every kind of ornament. He spoke words of greeting and the lady reciprocated. She arose and
asked the brahmana to be seated.

'"Ashtavakra said, 'Let all these women go to their houses and let only a single one remain. Let the one who remains be extremely wise and extremely tranquil. As they wish, let the others depart.'

'"Thus addressed, the maidens circumambulated the rishi and left the house. The aged lady was the only one
who remained. She lay down on a radiant bed and he told her, 'O fortunate one! You should go to sleep. Night is
passing.' They were engaged in conversation, but the brahmana put an end to it, himself lying down on a second,
extremely radiant bed. After some time, she pretended that her limbs were trembling with the cold and she climbed
onto the maharshi's bed. The illustrious one respectfully welcomed her. O bull among men! She was delighted.
Stretching out her arms, she embraced the rishi. The rishi was indifferent and was as rigid as a piece of wood. On
seeing this, she was miserable and began to converse with the rishi again. 'O brahmana! A man may possess patience, but women are overcome by desire. I am overcome by kama and desire you. You should desire me. O brahmana rishi! Be happy and have intercourse with me. O brahmana! Embrace me. I am severely afflicted with desire
for you. This is the revered fruit obtained by your following dharma and observing austerities. As soon as I saw
you, I began to desire you. Desire me. All the riches that you see here, all the forests and everything else that you
see, are mine. There is no doubt that you will become their lord and also of me. If you find pleasure with me, I will
give you every object that you desire. O brahmana! Sport with me in these forests, which grant every fruit that one
desires. If you sport with me, I will become obedient to you. We will enjoy all the objects of desire, divine and human. For a woman, there is no task that is superior to that of having intercourse with a man. For us women, that is
the supreme fruit. When they are goaded by the god of love, women do whatever they wish. Even if they have to
walk over sand that is extremely hot, they do not get burnt.'

'"Ashtavakra replied, 'O fortunate one! I never have intercourse with another man's wife. The sacred texts of
dharma have decreed that intercourse with another person's wife is a sin. O fortunate one! I tell you truthfully that
I am indeed interested in kama. However, know that I am inexperienced in material objects and am only interested
in offspring for the sake of pursuing dharma and artha. There is no doubt that after having obtained a son, I will
proceed to those worlds. O fortunate one! Know that this is dharma and that there is nothing superior to this.'

'"The woman said, 'O brahmana! Anila, Agni, Varuna and the other residents of heaven are not loved by women
as much as Kama[Kama meaning the god of love. Anila is the god of the wind and Agni is the god of the fire.]. Women are addicted to sexual desire. Among thousands of women, even among hundreds of
thousands, there will perhaps be only one who is devoted to her husband. They do not care for the father, the lineage, the mother, the brother, the husband, the son or the husband's younger brother[Under the influence of desire.]. In the pursuit of pleasure,
they destroy the family, just as a great river destroys its banks[There is a pun which the translation misses. Kula means both family/lineage and bank.]. Prajapati himself has spoken about the wicked
vices of those evil ones.'"

'Bhishma continued, "The rishi was single-minded and replied to the woman, 'I find no pleasure or desire in
you. Tell me what I should do.' The woman said, 'O illustrious one! O immensely wise one! One sees according to
the time and the place[There is an implied suggestion that if Ashtavakra remains there, he may-find the lady attractive.]. Dwell here and my task will have been accomplished. After that, depart.' O Yudhishthira! The brahmana rishi agreed to this and remained there. He said, 'As long as I am interested in doing so, there is
no doubt that I will reside with you.' The rishi glanced at the woman and saw that she was overcome with old age.
He thought a lot about this and was tormented. Whenever the brahmana rishi looked at her limbs, he derived no
pleasure, because her beauty had been destroyed. 'She is the owner of this house. There is no doubt that her beauty
has been destroyed through some curse. I must deduce the reason and not arrive at any hasty conclusion.' He was
occupied with these thoughts and desired to know the reason. His mind was anxious and he thought about this, until the day was over. After this, the woman spoke to him. 'O illustrious one! Look at the sun. Its form is now tinged
by the evening clouds. What can I possibly do for you?' He told the woman, 'Bring me water for my bath. I will
restrain my speech and my senses. Having bathed, I will perform the evening rites.'"'
