The mongoose said, "O brahmanas! I will soon tell you about the supreme fruits of gifts. That brahmana donated only a trifle, obtained through lawful means. There are many who know about dharma who have resided in
the sacred area of Kurukshetra. In earlier times, this brahmana lived there, following unchha and dwelling like a
pigeon[There are grains left after a crop has been harvested, or after grain has been milled. If one subsists on these leftovers, that is known as unchhavritti. Hence the comparison with a pigeon.]. He lived with his wife, son and daughter-in-law and engaged in austerities. The daughter-in-law was
thus the fourth. The aged one was devoted to dharma and was in control of his senses. The brahmana was excellent
in his vows and with them, ate at the sixth hour[This 'hour' is more in the sense of a division of time. The day was divided into eight intervals (yama) of three
hours each-3 a.m., 6 a.m., 9 a.m., 12 noon, 3 p.m., 6 p.m., 9 p.m. and 12 midnight. This means he ate at six in
the evening.]. There were some occasions when there was nothing to be had at
the sixth hour. In such cases, that supreme among brahmanas would fast for the day and eat at the sixth hour of the
next day. He followed the dharma of pigeons. There happened to be a terrible famine. Listen. There was nothing
for the brahmana and he had not stored up anything. The collection of herbs and plants and all other objects was
destroyed. When the time for eating arrived, there was no food to be had. All of them were afflicted by hunger, but
managed to survive. On one occasion, it was midday and the sun was scorching down. It was shuklapaksha and the
brahmana was engaged in unchha[He was picking up grains from the ground.]. He suffered from the heat and from hunger. But nevertheless, he resorted to
that austerity. With his family, he sought to obtain something through unchha. Though he was hungry, following
the rituals, he touched water. That supreme among brahmanas spent the time, holding up his life with difficulty.
One day, at the sixth hour, he obtained a prastha of barley[A prastha is a measure. Sometimes, a prastha is taken to be 1 kilogram. But that is specific and here, something
more general is meant. A prastha is made up of four kudavas.]. The ascetic converted that prastha of barley into sak-
tu. Following the rites, they performed their ablutions and offered oblations into the fire. The ascetic divided up the
prastha into one kudava each. As they were about to eat, a guest came to the brahmana's house. On seeing the
guest, they were delighted. They cheerfully welcomed the guest and asked him questions about his welfare. They
were pure in their minds, self-controlled and full of faith and restraint. They were without malice, having cast aside
their anger. They were virtuous and without jealousy. O supreme among brahmanas! They were knowledgable
about dharma, had renounced and had conquered their anger. They respectively informed the guest about their own
brahmacharya and gotra. They asked the hungry guest to enter their cottage. 'This arghya is for you. This is the
padya. O unblemished one! This is the seat of kusha grass. O lord! This is pure saktu, obtained through fair means.
O fortunate one! O supreme among brahmanas! We are giving this to you. Please accept it.' Having been thus addressed, the brahmana accepted a kudava of saktu. O Indra among kings! But after having eaten it, his hunger was
not satisfied. The one who resorted to unchha could see that the brahmana's hunger was still not satisified. He began to think about what other food could be offered, so as to ensure satisfaction. O king! At this, his wife said, 'Let
my share also be given to him. Let the supreme among brahmanas be satisfied. He can then go wherever he wills.'

The bull among brahmanas was thus addressed by the virtuous lady. The one with dharma in his soul knew that she
was hungry and did not approve of giving away her share of saktu. He was aged and learned and knew that she
was afflicted by hunger. The ascetic lady was exhausted and distressed. Consisting only of skin and bones, she was
trembling. He  spoke  to  his  wife.  'O  beautiful one! Even  worms,  insects  and  animals  protect  and  sustain  their
wives. You should not speak in this way. A man is driven by compassion and protects and sustains a woman. A
man who does not do so is dislodged from blazing prosperity and does not obtain the worlds.' Thus addressed, she
replied, 'O brahmana! We are united in pursuing dharma and artha. Be pleased with me and accept one fourth of
the prastha of saktu. O supreme among brahmanas! For women, truth, intercourse, dharma, heaven, the acquisition
of qualities and everything desired is dependent on the husband. The mother provides the season, the father provides the seed. But the supreme divinity is the husband. It is through the favours of the husband that women obtain
sexual intercourse and the fruit of a son. You are my husband because you protect me[Here, the word used for husband is pati, based on the etymology of protection.]. You are my husband because you sustain me[Here, the word used for husband is bhatri, based on the etymology of sustenance.]. You have granted me a boon because you have given me a son. Therefore, accept the sak-
tu from me. You are overcome by old age. You are aged. You are afflicted by hunger. You are extremely weak. You
are exhausted because of the fasting. You are also suffering.' Thus addressed, he accepted the saktu and spoke
these words. 'O brahmana! O excellent one! Please accept some more saktu.' The brahmana accepted and ate it,
but was still not satisfied. The one who had resorted to the vow of unchha noticed this and began to think.

'"The son said, 'O excellent one! Take my share of saktu and give it to the brahmana. I think that this will be a
good deed. Therefore, we should do it. O supreme among brahmanas! I must make every effort to sustain you. Virtuous ones desire that aged fathers must be nurtured. O brahmana rishi! The sacred texts are famous in the three
worlds. For the son, it is recommended that the father must be maintained in old age. You are capable of undertaking austerities only through remaining alive. For those who have bodies, sustaining the life in the body is supreme
dharma[The allusion isn't clear. If the guest isn't satisified, the brahmana will probably give up his life.].'
'"The father replied, 'Even if you are one thousand years old, it is my view that you will still be a child before
me. After having a son, a father obtains success through him. O lord! I know that hunger is an extremely strong
force in children. I am aged and can sustain myself. O son! But you need to be strong. O son! I am old and aged
and hunger does not obstruct me. For a long time, I have tormented myself through austerities. I am not frightened
of death.'

'"The son said, 'I am your offspring. I am your son because the sacred texts make me known as a putra[Putra means son, the etymology is based on the son saving (trayate) the father from hell (a specific hell named
put). Someone who saves from that hell is called putra. A son thus repays a debt owed to the ancestors.]. It has
been said that a son is like one's own self. Therefore, using your own self, save your own self.'

'"The father replied, 'You are like me in form, conduct and self-control. I have tested you on several occasions.
Therefore, I will accept the saktu.'"

'The mongoose continued, "Having said this, the supreme among brahmanas happily accepted the saktu and
smilingly, gave it to the brahmana. But despite eating the saktu, he was not satisfied. The supreme among brahmanas, who had resorted to the vow of unchha, was ashamed. The virtuous daughter-in-law was standing there,
wishing to ensure the welfare of the brahmana. She cheerfully gathered up her saktu and addressed her senior in
these words. 'O brahmana! I will obtain a son through your son. Therefore, accept this saktu from me and give it to
the guest. Through your offspring, I will obtain worlds without decay and having gone there, I will not sorrow.
Your grandson will be generated through him. Dharma is based on three fires and it has three components now[The five sacred fires are known as dakshina, garhapatya, ahavaniya, sabhya and avasathya. The three being singled out are dakshina, garhapatya and ahavaniya, associated with any sacrifice.].
The son, the grandson and the great-grandson are the three who ensure heaven without decay. We have heard it
said in the sacred texts that it is because of the act of saving a father that a son is known as putra. Through sons
and grandsons, one always obtains worlds meant for the virtuous.'

'"The father-in-law replied, 'Your limbs have become emaciated because of the wind and the heat. You can be
seen to be pale. O one who is excellent in vows! Your senses are distracted because of hunger. How can I accept
your saktu and cause violence to dharma? O fortunate one! Devote yourself to fortunate conduct. You should not
speak in this way. You are devoted to your vows. You show good conduct and purity. The sixth hour has come.
You have resorted to hard vows. You have been fasting. How can I not notice this? You are a child. You are afflicted by hunger. You are a woman and I must always protect you. You are exhausted through fasting. You are the one
who delights my relatives.'

'"The daughter-in-law said, 'You are my senior's senior. You are the god of my god. O lord! Since you are the
god of my god, accept this saktu from me. The body, life and dharma are meant for providing service to a senior. O
brahmana! Through your favours, I will obtain many desired worlds. O brahmana! Look towards me. I am firm in
my devotion. Thinking about me in this way, you should give away the saktu.'

'"The father-in-law replied, 'O virtuous one! Because of this, you will always be radiant in your good conduct.
You follow the vows of dharma and always look towards the conduct of your seniors. O daughter-in-law! Therefore, I should not deprive you and will accept this saktu. O immensely fortunate one! You will be reckoned among
those who are supreme among the upholders of dharma.'"

'The mongoose continued, "Having said this, he accepted the saktu and gave it to the brahmana. The brahmana
was satisfied at the conduct of that virtuous and great-souled one. Cheerfully, he spoke these words to that bull
among brahmanas. That eloquent bull among brahmanas was actually Dharma in the form of a man. 'O supreme
among brahmanas! I am pleased with you, at your purity, generosity in carefully giving what was obtained through
lawful means, according to your capacity. This gift of yours is being praised in heaven by the residents of heaven.
Behold. Flowers are being showered down from the sky and are falling down on the ground. The rishis in heaven,
the gods, the gandharvas and the messengers of the gods, with the gods at the forefront, are praising you, astounded at your gift. O bull among brahmanas! The brahmana rishis, located on celestial vehicles, have come here from
Brahma's world, with a desire to see you. Go to heaven. All your ancestors, who have gone to the world of the ancestors, have been saved, for many yugas that have still not come. O brahmana! Go to heaven because of your
brahmacharya, sacrifices, donations, austerities and the following of dharma without deceit. You have resorted to
supreme devotion and have observed austerities and excellent vows. O supreme among the best of brahmanas!
That is the reason the gods are delighted with you. With a pure consciousness, you gave up everything now, in a
time of hardships. Through your deeds, you have conquered heaven. Hunger destroys wisdom and drives away
dharma and intelligence. Hunger overcomes knowledge and destroys fortitude. A person who defeats hunger, certainly conquers heaven. As long as one is inclined towards generosity, dharma does not suffer. You ignored the affection towards the son. You ignored the affection towards the wife. You did not pay cognizance to thirst and recognized that dharma was superior. For men, the acquisition of objects is minor. Donating it to an appropriate recipient is superior. A donation at the right time is superior and devotion is superior to that[Gifts must be given to the right person at the right time, and with devotion.]. The gate to heaven is extremely subtle and because of confusion, men do not see it. The bar to heaven has greed as its seed. That bar is
kept protected by attachment, which is extremely difficult to overcome. There are men who can see the truth. They
have conquered their anger and have subjugated their senses. These are brahmanas who are engaged in austerities
and donate to the best of their capacity. A person who is capable of giving away a thousand, but gives away a hundred; a person who is capable of giving away a hundred, but gives away ten; and a person who has nothing, but is
only capable of giving away water-it has been said in the sacred texts that the fruits obtained by all these are
equal. O brahmana! When he possessed nothing, King Rantideva gave away a little bit of water with a pure mind
and went to the vault of heaven. O son[The word used is tata.]! Dharma is not pleased with the fruits from giving a large amount of donations. He is instead satisfied with a little bit that has been obtained through lawful means and is given with faith
and purity. King Nriga gave away thousands of cows to brahmanas. However, because he gave away one cow that
did not belong to him, he went to hell. King Shibi, Ushinara's son, gave away flesh from his own body. He was excellent in his vows. He obtained the auspicious worlds and rejoiced in heaven. Virtuous men are radiant because of
the auspicious objects they have obtained themselves, according to their capacity. O brahmana! They don't obtain
this through the rituals of sacrifices, but through the stores that have been lawfully earned. Anger destroys the
fruits of donations. A greedy person does not go to heaven. Heaven is obtained through lawful conduct, austerities
and donations. The fruits that have been obtained by you are equal to those obtained through many royal sacrifices,
at which copious amounts of dakshina are given, and many horse sacrifices. O unblemished one! You have won
Brahma's world through a prastha of saktu. O brahmana! As you wish, go to Brahma's abode and be resplendent
there. O best among brahmanas! A celestial vehicle has appeared. As you desire, all of you ascend it.
O brahmana! Look at me. I am Dharma. You have purified your body. In this world, your fame will be eternal.
Go to heaven with your wife, with your son and with your daughter-in-law.' When he was addressed by Dharma in
these words, the brahmana ascended the vehicle. He went to heaven with his wife, with his son and with his daughter-in-law. That brahmana went to heaven with his son, with his daughter-in-law and with his wife as the fourth.
When the one who knew about dharma had departed, I emerged from my hole. There was the smell of the saktu,
which had formed some mud with the water. There were the celestial flowers, mixed with the barley that had been
given. Because of all this and the austerities of the brahmana, my head turned golden. O brahmanas! Because of
the trifling donation given by the one who was devoted to the truth, one half of my body turned into gold. Behold
the extremely great austerities of that intelligent one. O brahmanas! Repeatedly, I cheerfully went to the sacrifices
performed in hermitages, hoping that the other half of my body would also turn to gold. I heard about the sacrifice
performed here by the intelligent king of the Kurus. I was extremely hopeful. But I have not been turned into gold.
O supreme among brahmanas! That is the reason I spoke those words and laughed. This sacrifice is in no way
comparable to the one that involved the giving away of one prastha of saktu. With the grains in that prastha of sak-
tu, I was turned into gold. This great sacrifice is not equal to that. This is my view."'

Vaishampayana said, 'O king! At that sacrifice, having said this to the supreme of brahmanas, the mongoose disappeared and the brahmanas returned to their houses. O conqueror of enemy cities! In this way, I have told you
everything that happened, including the wonderful event at the great horse sacrifice. O king! You should never be
astounded at any sacrifice. Through austerities alone, thousands of rishis have gone to heaven. It has been held that
lack of injury towards all beings, contentment, good conduct, uprightness, austerities, self-control, truthfulness and
donations are also equal[To sacrifices.].'