Vaishampayana said, 'O bull among the Bharata lineage! In due course, Kounteya[Yudhishthira.] travelled to the two rivers
Nanda and Aparananda, the cleanser of sins and fear. On reaching Mount Hemakuta, the granter of health, the king
saw many extraordinary and unthinkable things. From mere words, clouds are created there and there are showers
of thousands of stones, so that people are saddened that they are incapable of ascending. The wind always blows
there and the gods shower down. In evening and in the morning, the lord who is the bearer of sacrificial
offerings[The fire.], is seen. The Pandava saw many such extraordinary things and again asked Lomasha about these extraordinary things.

'Lomasha said, "O destroyer of enemies! O king! I will tell you as I have heard it earlier. Listen attentively to
me. An ascetic by the name of Rishabha lived on this Mount Rishabha. The ascetic was aged many hundreds of
years and was extremely prone to anger. On being addressed by others, he angrily told the mountain, 'Shower
stones on whoever utters a word here.' The ascetic summoned the wind and said that not a sound should be uttered. Thus, if a man speaks a word, he is restrained by the clouds. O king! Through such deeds, the maharshi performed some acts out of anger and he restrained others from being done.

'"O king! We have heard that in ancient times, the gods came to Nanda and suddenly men assembled, in their
desire to see the gods. The gods, with Shakra at the forefront, did not desire to be seen. By erecting mountains,
they made the region difficult of access. O Kounteya! From that day, men cannot even look at the mountain, not to
speak of ascending it. O Kounteya! One who has not performed austerities cannot see the great mountain, or climb
it. Therefore, control your speech. It was here that the gods performed great sacrifices. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! Their marks can be seen even today. The durva grass here is like kusha grass[Both durva and kusha are sacred sacrificial grasses and the two are sometimes used synonymously. However, kusha seems softer and more sacred than durva.] and the ground is strewn
with it. O lord of the earth! There are many trees that look like sacrificial stakes. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The gods and the rishis live there even today. Their sacrificial fires can be seen in the evenings and in the
mornings. O Kounteya! If one bathes there, one's sins are instantly destroyed. O best of the Kuru lineage! Therefore, perform your ablutions there, together with your younger brothers. Then, having washed your limbs in Nanda, go to Koushiki, where Vishvamitra performed terrible and supreme austerities."'

Vaishampayana said, 'The king and his companions washed their limbs there. Then they went to the sacred and
beautiful Koushiki, the river whose waters are auspicious.'
