Vaishampayana said, 'The intelligent and enraged Vishvamitra cursed her. In that supreme tirtha, the auspicious
one's flows were made out of blood. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Rakshasas went there. In
delight, all of them drank that blood. They were extremely satisfied, delighted and devoid of anxiety. They danced
and laughed, as if they had won heaven for themselves. O lord of the earth! After some time had passed, rishis,
rich in austerities, went on a visit of tirthas to the Sarasvati. Those bulls among sages went and bathed in all the
tirthas. Those accomplished ones were supremely delighted and wished to obtain greater austerities. O king! They
went to the other tirthas. Those immensely fortunate ones went to the terrible tirtha[Vasishthapavaha, where the river flowed in the form of blood.]. O supreme among kings!
They saw that the waters of the Sarasvati were covered in blood and that these were being drunk by a large number
of rakshasas. O king! On seeing this, the sages, rigid in their vows, made supreme efforts to save Sarasvati from
the rakshasas. Those immensely fortunate ones, great in their vows, assembled and jointly summoned the river
with these best of words. "O fortunate one! Tell us the reason why this lake of yours has been reduced to this
plight[Saras means lake or pool and Sarasvati was so named because the river
had many lakes or pools.]. We have heard the reason behind your state of hardship. We will try to rescue you." Having been addressed, she looked at them. Trembling and miserable, she told them what had transpired. Those stores of austerities said, "O unblemished one! We have heard about the reason. We know why you have been cursed. All of us,
rich in austerities, will make the best of efforts." Having thus spoken to the best of rivers, they consulted among
themselves. "All of us will free Sarasvati from the curse." O king! They gave their word that Sarasvati would be
returned to her natural state and indeed, the waters became clean, as they had been earlier. Freed, the best of rivers
became as resplendent as she had been earlier.

'O king! Seeing what the sages had done to the waters of the Sarasvati, the rakshasas were overcome by hunger.
They joined their hands in salutation and repeatedly requested all the sages for compassion. "All of us are hungry.
We have been dislodged from our eternal dharma[Of feeding on blood.]. It is not of our own desire that we are the performers of
wicked deeds. It is because you do not show us favours that we perform these wicked deeds. Those among us who
are especially bad become brahma-rakshasas[A wicked brahmana becomes a brahma-rakshasa. In this, a varna-based
classification is being made of rakshasas.]. In a similar way, those among vaishyas, shudras and kshatriyas,
who hate brahmanas, also become rakshasas. Those beings who disrespect preceptors, officiating priests, elders
and the aged, also become rakshasas. Wickedness increases through the sexual transgressions of women[The text uses the word yonidosha. More literally, this is sexual defilement, or a defect in the female genital organ.]. O
supreme among brahmanas! You should therefore act so as to show us compassion. You are capable of saving all
the worlds." On hearing these words, the sages praised the great river. They controlled their minds. To save the
rakshasas, they said, "Food in which there are insects and worms, food that has been mixed with leftovers, food
that is mixed with hair, food that is mixed with grain that has not been broken and food that has been touched by
dogs-these will constitute the share of rakshasas. Knowing this, the learned will always avoid such kinds of food.
Those who partake of such food will eat food that is meant for rakshasas." Thus did those stores of austerities purify that tirtha. They instructed the river to save those rakshasas. O bull among men! Knowing the views of the maharshis, that supreme of rivers thought of a new form in her body, known as Aruna. Bathing there, the rakshasas
gave up their bodies and went to heaven. O great king! He who bathes in Aruna is saved from the crime of killing
a brahmana. Knowing the purport of all this, Shatakratu, the king of the gods, bathed in that best of tirthas and was
freed from a great sin.'

Janamejaya asked, 'How did the illustrious Shakra commit the offence of killing a brahmana? How was he freed
from his sin by bathing in that tirtha?'

Vaishampayana replied, 'O lord of men! Listen to that account, exactly as it happened. In ancient times, Vasava
broke his treaty of peace with Namuchi. Because of his fear of Vasava, Namuchi hid inside one of the sun's rays.
Indra entered into a pledge of friendship with him and told him, "O best of asuras! O friend! I will not kill you
with anything that is wet, or with anything that is dry, nor during the day or during the night. I swear this to you
truthfully." Having thus entered into an agreement, the lord created a mist. O king! Vasava severed his head with
the foam of water[Foam is neither wet, nor dry. Because of the mist, it was neither day,
nor night.]. Namuchi's severed head pursued Shakra from the rear and said, "O friend! You have committed a crime." He was repeatedly spoken to by the head. In torment, he went to the grandfather and told him
what had happened. The preceptor of the worlds said, "O Indra of the gods! You have committed the crime of
killing a brahmana[Because Namuchi was descended from the sage Kashyapa.]. Perform a sacrifice in accordance with the decreed rites and bathe in Aruna." O Janamejaya! Having been thus addressed, the slayer of Bala performed a sacrifice in the grove of Sarasvati and bathed in
Aruna. He was freed from the crime of killing a brahmana. Cheerfully, the lord of the thirty gods returned to heaven. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O supreme among kings! Namuchi's head was submerged in those waters
and he[Namuchi.] obtained many eternal worlds that grant every object of desire.

'The great-souled Bala bathed there and gave away many different kinds of gifts. Devoted to dharma and the
performer of supreme and noble deeds, he then went to the great tirtha of Soma. O Indra among kings! In earlier
times, in accordance with the prescribed rites, Soma had himself performed a royal sacrifice there. In that best of
sacrifices, the intelligent and great-souled Atri was chief among the officiating priests. When it was over, there was
a great clash between the danavas, daityas and rakshasas on one side and the gods on the other. That extremely terrible battle is known as Taraka and in this, Skanda killed Taraka. Mahasena[Skanda or Kartikeya's name. Kumara is another of his names.], the destroyer of the daityas, became the commander of the gods there. Kartikeya himself lives at that spot. Kumara always dwells there and there
is a king of plaksha trees there.'
