Vaishampayana said, 'Then the great archer and immensely radiant Arjuna smiled and spoke to Chitrasena in the
midst of the gandharva soldiers. "O brave one! Why did you decide to chastise the Kouravas? Why did you capture Suyodhana with his wives?" Chitrasena replied, "O Dhananjaya! The great-souled god resides here[As will be evident in a short while, this is a reference to Indra.]. He
knows the motives of the evil-souled Duryodhana and the evil Karna. Knowing that you were residing in the forest
and suffering, though you did not deserve it, they came here to see you and the famous Droupadi. On learning their
intentions, the lord of the gods told me, 'Go and bind Duryodhana and his advisers. Bring them here. Protect
Dhananjaya and his brothers in battle. The Pandava is your beloved friend and your student.' On the instructions of
the king of the gods, I swiftly came here. The evil one has been tied up and I will go to the abode of the gods." Arjuna replied, "O Chitrasena! Suyodhana is our brother. If you wish to do that which brings me pleasure, set him
free. Those are Dharmaraja's instructions." Chitrasena said, "He is evil and is always mean. He does not deserve to
be freed. O Dhananjaya! He has deceived Dharmaraja and Krishna[Droupadi.]. Kunti's son, Dharmaraja, great in his vows,
does not know why he decided to come here. After hearing the reason, do what you wish." Then all of them went
to King Yudhishthira. Having gone there, they told him about all his[Duryodhana's.] evil deeds.

'Having heard the words of the gandharva, Ajatashatru praised the gandharva and said that all of them should be
set free. "It is fortunate that despite your strength and might, none of you has injured the evil sons of Dhritarashtra,
or their advisers, kin and relatives[This is Yudhishthira speaking.]. O father[The word used is tata.]! This is a great favour that the travellers of the sky have done to
me. Because the evil-souled one has been freed, the honour of the lineage has not been tainted. I am delighted at
having seen you. Tell me what your instructions are. Having obtained everything that you wish for, return swiftly."

Thus, the gandharvas took their leave of the intelligent son of Pandu. Extremely delighted, they left with the apsaras, with Chitrasena at the forefront. With a divine shower of ambrosia[Amrita.], the king of the gods revived the gandharvas who had been killed in the battle with the Kouravas. Having performed the difficult task of setting their relatives and all the wives of the kings free, the Pandavas were extremely pleased. The maharathas were honoured by
the Kurus and their wives and sons. Amidst the Kurus, the great-souled ones were as resplendent as the fire. Having freed Duryodhana, together with his brothers, Yudhishthira lovingly told him, "O son[The word used is tata.]! Never commit such
rashness again. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! One who is rash never comes to a happy end. O descendant
of the Kuru lineage! Return safely with all your brothers. If it pleases you, without any despondency, return to your
houses." Having been thus given permission by the Pandava, King Duryodhana was overcome with shame and returned to his city. With the Kouravya gone, Kunti's son, Yudhishthira, was honoured by the brahmanas, together
with his brave brothers. Surrounded by the ones rich in austerities, like Shakra amidst the immortals, he pleasured
himself happily in Dvaitavana.'
