'Bhishma said, "On this kind of deed, those who are knowledgeable about ancient accounts recite definitive words. For a kshatriya who knows, dharma and artha are immediately evident and one cannot separate them. But some working of dharma is indirect. 'This is adharma.' 'That is dharma.' Such statements are like the footprints of a
wolf[They get blurred and a wolf's footprints cannot be distinguished from
those of a dog.]. The fruits of dharma and adharma can never be seen. A strong person can use
his strength to bring everything under his subjugation and prosper. A strong person obtains Shri, an army and advisers. One without wealth falls and is like a little bit of leftover food. However, even for a strong person, there are many inauspicious things and
these ensure that he is not saved from fear. It is only those two[Dharma and artha.] true foundations that
save him from great fear. I think that strength is superior to dharma. Dharma results
from strength. Dharma is established on strength, like mobile objects on the surface of
the earth. Just as smoke is controlled by the wind, dharma follows strength. Just as a
creeper depends on a tree, dharma provides strength to a weak person. Dharma is under the control of those who are strong, just as happiness is enjoyed by those who possess objects of pleasure. There is nothing that a strong person is not successful at. For
the strong, everything is pure[Nothing taints them.]. If a wicked person is weak in strength, his stature is
reduced. Therefore, everyone is alarmed at him, as if he is a wolf. He is censured and
dishonoured and lives a life of unhappiness. A life of humiliation is just like death.
When people say that he has been cast aside because of his wicked character, he is severely tormented and is wounded by words that are like stakes. On this, preceptors
have spoken about ways of freeing oneself from sins. He must serve the three kinds of
learning[The Vedas.] and tend to brahmanas. He must seek their favours through sweet words and
deeds. He must be great-minded and marry into a noble family. He must recount the
good qualities of others and say that he will be like them. He must meditate, perform
the water-rites, be gentle and not talk a lot. Having performed many extremely difficult
deeds, he should penetrate the ranks of brahmana and kshatriyas[To serve them.]. Even if many people reprimand him because of this, he should not pay any attention to it. If he does not
commit wicked acts, through such conduct he will quickly become greatly respected.
He will enjoy happiness and riches and must protect himself through his conduct. He
will obtain worship in this world and great fruits in the hereafter."'
