The brahmana said, 'I have entered this great forest, having crossed the terrain that is extremely difficult to
traverse[The brahman is being compared to a great forest and the material world to the terrain.]. It has grief, joy, cold and heat, and these are like gnats and mosquitoes. It is enveloped in the
blind darkness of confusion and greed is like predators and reptiles. Possessions are hardships and desire and anger
are like bandits along the road.'

'"The brahmani asked, 'O immensely wise one! Where is that forest? What are its trees and rivers? What are its
hills and mountains? How far away is the forest?'

'"The brahmana replied, 'There is nothing that is separate from it. There is nothing that is equal to it. Since there
is nothing that is separate from it, it is only a short distance away. There is nothing smaller than it. There is nothing
larger than it. There is nothing that is more miserable than it. There is nothing that is its equal in happiness. Once
brahmanas enter there, they no longer have any reason to grieve or rejoice. They are not frightened of anyone. Nor
does anyone have reason to be frightened of them. There are seven large trees in that forest, seven fruits, seven
guests, seven hermitages, seven kinds of meditation and seven different types of initiation[The seven trees are the five senses, mind and intelligence. The seven fruits are what are experienced by these,
the seven guests being the qualities that lead to this experience. These seven guests seek recourse with the seven
trees, which are thus also like seven hermitages. The seven kinds of meditation and initiation are meant to progressively extinguish the seven trees. Some of the imagery is not easy to understand.]. The trees that pervade that forest yield divine flowers and fruits of five colours. The trees that pervade that forest yield divine flowers and fruits that have excellent colours. The trees that pervade that forest yield divine flowers and fruits that have
four colours. The trees that pervade that forest yield flowers and fruits that have mixed and three colours. The trees
that pervade that forest yield flowers and fruits that are fragrant and have a single colour. The giant trees that pervade that forest yield flowers and fruits that have many colours that are not manifest. For a brahmana with an excellent mind, there is a single fire there. The five senses are the kindling. For the sake of emancipation, there are
seven kinds of initiation. The qualities are the fruits and the guests survive on those fruits. The seven maharshis
become the guests there. When they have been honoured and disappear, another beautiful forest manifests itself.
Resolution is that tree, full of shade. Tranquility is its fruit. Knowledge is the resort and contentment is the water.
Beyond  all  this,  the  kshetrajna  is  the  sun.  Virtuous  ones  who  go  there,  never  have  to  suffer  from  fear  again.
Whether upwards, diagonally or downwards, the extremeties of that tree cannot be discerned. Seven women always dwell there. Their visages face downwards and they are radiant mothers. From above, they provide juices to
the subjects. In every other way, they are all transient. The seven successful saptarshis, with Vasishtha as the foremost, are established there and repeatedly emerge from there. Fame, radiance, power, victory, success and energy
-these  always  follow  those  seven,  who  are  like  radiant  stellar  bodies.  Collected  together,  there  are  hills  and
mountains there. There are rivers and streams that bear water, all originating with Brahma. There is a sacred sacrificial ground at the confluence of the rivers. There, those who are content in their own atmans advance towards the
grandfather himself. Their desires have been extinguished. They are excellent in their vows. They have burnt their
sins through austerities. They enter the atman in their own selves and worship the brahman. People who know
about that forest of knowledge praise it with hymns from the Rig Veda. For those who intend that forest, patience
is generated. Learned brahmanas instruct us about that divine forest in this way. Having obtained the knowledge,
they follow the instructions of the kshetrajna.'"'
