Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing these unpalatable words in that assembly of the Kurus, Duryodhana spoke these
words to the famous and mighty-armed Vasudeva. "O Keshava! Before speaking, you should have reflected on the
matter. Why have you spoken as if you are specially censuring me? O Madhusudana! You have said that you are
devoted to the Parthas. But have you examined the strengths and the weaknesses of the two causes? You, Kshatta,
the king[Dhritarashtra.], the preceptor and the grandfather censure only me, and not any other king. But I do not perceive that I
have done anything wrong. But all of you, including the kings, blame only me. O destroyer of enemies! O Kesha-
va! On thinking about this, I do not see the slightest bit of wrong that I have committed. O Madhusudana! The
Pandavas happily agreed to the gambling match. They lost their kingdom to Shakuni. How was this my crime? O
Madhusudana! I ordered that whatever riches the Pandavas lost then, should instantly be returned to them. O foremost among victorious ones! It was not my crime that the invincible Parthas were defeated in another gambling
match and exiled to the forest. On the basis of what disrespect do they seek the enmity now? O Krishna! The Pandavas are incapable, but are happily against us. What have we done to them? Because of what wrong do the Pandavas, together with the Srinjayas, wish to kill the sons of Dhritarashtra? Because of terrible deeds and words, we
will not tremble and bow down out of fear, not even to Shatakratu. O Krishna! O slayer of enemies! I do not see
anyone, who follows the dharma of kshatriyas, who can aspire to vanquish us in battle. O Madhusudana! Bhishma,
Kripa, Drona and their armies are incapable of being defeated in battle by the gods, not to speak of the Pandavas.
O Madhava! If observing our own dharma, we face death in the field of battle from a weapon, because our time has
come, that will ensure heaven. O Janardana! The supreme dharma for kshatriyas is that we should lie down on a
bed of arrows in the field of battle. O Madhava! If, on the field of battle, we lie down on beds meant for warriors,
without bowing down before the enemy, we will not repent it. Is there anyone born in a noble lineage, following
the dharma of kshatriyas, who will bow down out of fear, wishing to protect himself? 'Manliness lies in raising
oneself and not losing enterprise. Even if all the joints are broken, one should not bow down before anyone.' These
are the words of Matanga[Famous sage.], cherished by those who desire their own welfare. A man like me only bows down before dharma and brahmanas. Without paying attention to anyone else, that should be one's conduct, as long as one
lives. This is the dharma of kshatriyas and that has always been my view. O Keshava! As long as I am alive, they
will not obtain the share of the kingdom that my father once gave them. O Janardana! O Madhava! As long as
Dhritarashtra is the king, we will lower our weapons and sustain ourselves from him. This kingdom should not
have been given away. O Janardana! But when I was a child and not independent, it was given away, out of ignorance or fear. O descendant of the Vrishni lineage! But it cannot be obtained again by the Pandavas. O mighty-
armed one! O Keshava! As long as I am alive, I will not give to the Pandavas even that much of land that can be
held on the point of a sharp needle."'
