Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing these words, King Duryodhana thought for a long time and then spoke to those
who were in the assembly hall. "It is indeed very difficult to examine all courses of action up to the ultimate end.
Therefore, all of you must try to determine where the Pandavas have gone. They were to spend the thirteenth year
in concealment. Most of it has passed and only a little bit remains. If the Pandavas, who follow the vow of truth,
can spend the remaining part of the year, they will have fulfilled their pledge. Because of their miseries, it is certain that they will all be angry with the Kouravas, like kings of serpents and virulent snakes. But if they are detected before the time has passed, all of them will again return to the forest, forced to control their wrath and wearing
miserable disguises. Therefore, take measures to swiftly detect them. Our kingdom will then be without dissension,
without decay and without rivals for a long time." Karna then said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Let other
men go, those who are shrewder, more skilled and loyal. Let those spies swiftly travel in disguise and roam in
countries that are prosperous and populated, in assemblages of virtuous ones and mendicants, along roads and
places of pilgrimage and places where mining takes place. Let them carefully ask men, with humility. The Pandavas are living in disguise. They must be sought by skilled spies, who are themselves disguised. Employ many,
one after another, to search in rivers and bowers, places of pilgrimage, villages, cities, beautiful hermitages and
mountainous caverns." The younger brother Duhshasana was addicted to evil traits. He then told his older brother,
"All of us should pay attention to what Karna has said. As instructed, let all the spies search in all those places. Let
many others be employed and let them search in every country, in the proper way. Nothing has been known about
their destinations, residences and occupations. They are dwelling in great secrecy. Or perhaps they have gone to
the other shore of the ocean. They are vain about their bravery and they may have been eaten up in the great forest
by predators. Or they may have confronted a calamity and been destroyed for eternity. O descendant of the Kuru
lineage! Therefore, forget all anxieties. O lord of men! If you so wish, do what must be done with appropriate enthusiasm."'
