'Narada said, "Having learnt about Karna's strength, King Jarasandha, the
lord of Magadha, challenged him to a duel. Both of them knew about the
use of divine weapons and a battle commenced between them. In the encounter, they showered down many kinds of weapons on each other. Their
arrows were exhausted. They were without bows. Their swords were shattered. The powerful ones descended on the ground and started to wrestle
with each other with bare arms. While fighting with him in that terrible duel
with bare arms, Karna was about to sever the two parts of the body that had
been brought together by Jara[Jarasandha was born in two parts and was united and brought together by
a rakshasi named Jara, thus obtaining his name. The story has been recounted in Section 22 (Volume 2).]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On
seeing that his body was about to face this hardship, the king cast aside all
enmity and spoke these affectionate words to Karna. 'I am pleased.' He
gave Karna the city of Malini. O tiger among men! Before this, the one who
had defeated his enemies had ruled over Anga. But now, Karna, the afflicter
of enemy forces, also began to rule Champa, after having obtained Duryodhana's permission. You know about all this. Thus, through the power of his
weapons, he became famous on earth. For the sake of your welfare, the king
of the gods begged his divine and natural armour and earrings from him[Indra persuaded Karna to part with the natural armour and earrings. This
has been described in Section 43 (Volume 3).].
The extremely revered one was confounded by the maya of the god and
gave away his natural earrings and armour. Deprived of his earrings and
natural armour, while Vasudeva looked on, he was slain by Vijaya. There
was the brahmana's curse and that of the great-souled Rama. There was the
boon that he had granted Kunti and Shatakratu's maya. Bhishma disrespected him and described him as only half a ratha[Recounted in Section 59 (Volume 4).]. Shalya sapped his energy.
There was Vasudeva's policy. In a battle, the wielder of Gandiva obtained
the divine weapons of Rudra, the king of the gods, Yama, Varuna, Kubera,
Drona and the great-souled Kripa. That is the reason Vaikartana Karna was
slain, though he was as radiant as the sun. This is the way your brother was
cursed and deprived by many. However, since he has met his end in a battle,
you should not sorrow over that tiger among men."'
