'"The prince said, 'O brahmana! I do not wish to live through fraud and deceit. I do not desire great riches, if they
are not obtained through the use of dharma. O illustrious one! I said at the beginning that these should be avoided.
I do not want anyone to doubt me and I desire my complete welfare. In this world, I desire to live through a dharma that does not cause injury. I am incapable of doing all this. It is not appropriate for me.'

'"The sage replied, 'O kshatriya! What you have spoken is deserving of you. O one who is wonderful in outlook! You are naturally intelligent. I will endeavour so that both of you attain your objectives. I will bring about an
eternal alliance between the two of you. You have been born in a lineage like his. You are non-violent and extremely learned. You are accomplished in ensuring the welfare of a kingdom. Who will not make someone like you
an adviser? You have confronted a supreme hardship and have abandoned your kingdom. O kshatriya! However,
you wish to live through non-violent conduct. O son[The word used is tata.]! The king of Videha is devoted to the truth and will come
to my house. There is no doubt that he will do what I ask him to.'"

'Bhishma said, "The sage summoned the king of Videha and spoke these words to him. 'This one has been born
in a lineage of kings and I know what is inside his mind. His soul is as pure as a mirror or the autumn moon. I have
tested him in every way and do not see anything crooked in him. You should have an alliance with him. Trust him
the way you trust me. O slayer of enemies! Without an adviser, you are incapable of ruling the kingdom. The adviser must be brave and full of intelligence. Both of these[Lack of valour and lack of intelligence.] cause fear for a king. Look towards the ruling of the
kingdom. In this world, a person with dharma in his soul is rare and there is no one like him. This prince is accomplished in his soul. He is established in the path of the virtuous. With dharma at the forefront, you will do well to
have him on your side. He will serve you and seize large numbers of the enemy. If he wishes to fight back against
you, he will resort to his own dharma of being a kshatriya and try to win back the kingdom of his father and grandfathers in a battle. If you are engaged in your vow of conquest, you will fight back against him. O lord of Videha!
However, if you do not fight, he will follow my instructions and remain under your control. Glance towards dharma and cast aside the inappropriate adharma. For the sake of desire or hatred, you should not abandon your own
dharma. O son[The word used is tata.]! Victory is not permanent. Nor is defeat permanent. One must give food and objects of pleasure
to an enemy who has been defeated. Think yourself to be like him, confronting victory and defeat. O son! Those
who seek to exterminate all danger end up exterminating their own selves.' He was thus addressed by that bull
among brahmanas and replied in the following words, after having honoured and treated him well and taking the
permission of the one who deserved worship. 'O immensely wise one! It is exactly as you have said. O immensely
learned one! It is exactly as you have said. As you have said, people desire what brings the most benefit. What you
have said is the best for both of us. I will follow your words and act exactly in accordance with them. This is
supremely beneficial. I do not need to reflect about this.' The king of Videha summoned the one from Kosala and
spoke these words to him. 'I have defeated you through the use of dharma, policy and strength. O supreme among
kings! However, you have conquered me through your qualities. Though you have been defeated, do not have a
low opinion of yourself. I do not disrespect your intelligence. I do not disrespect your manliness. Though you have
been defeated, do not think of yourself as having been defeated. O king! Come to my house. You will be honoured
and then go to your own house.' Having honoured the brahmana, the two of them trustingly went to the house. The
lord of Videha made the lord of Kosala enter his house and honoured him with water for washing the feet, a gift
and a mixture of honey[Respectively, padya, arghya and madhuparka, offered to a guest.]. He was honoured back in return and gave him his own daughter, with many kinds of
gems. This is the supreme dharma for kings. Both victory and defeat must be endured."'
