'Yudhishthira said, "Listen attentively for an instant. Cast your mind and your hearing towards your own inner
self. If you listen to my words in that way, you will find them to be acceptable. You will not be able to take me
back to the path travelled by the prosperous again. I will leave. I will abandon the path of ordinary pleasures and
depart. I will travel alone along that path of tranquility. If you ask me what that is, I will tell you. Even if you don't
wish to ask me, I will tell you. Listen. I will discard the pursuit of ordinary pleasures and torment myself through
great austerities. I will dwell in the forest, sustaining myself on fruits and roots, and roam around with animals. I
will pour oblations into the fire at the right time and perform ablutions at the right time. I will emaciate myself by
eating little. I will cover myself with skins and rags and wear matted hair. I will endure cold, wind, heat and bear
hunger, thirst and exhaustion. I will grind down my body through the prescribed austerities. In the forest, I will
cheerfully listen to the pleasant notes, high and low, of the animals and birds that live there. They are pleasant to
the mind and the ear. I will inhale the delicate fragrance of blossoming trees and creepers. I will observe the many
beautiful forms of those who live in the forest. I will not offend the sight of those who have resorted to
vanaprastha[The stage of life when one retires to the forest.] and dwell there with their families. I will act so that I do not cause anything unpleasant to them, not
to speak of those who live in villages. I will live alone and pass my time in contemplation, eating that which is ripe
and that which is unripe[A reference to fruits.]. I will satisfy the ancestors and the gods with wild fruits, water and eloquent words. I
will follow the fiercest of rites prescribed for those who dwell in the forest. Serving in this way, I will await the
end of my physical existence. Or, I will dwell alone and spend my night under different trees. I will shave my head
and beg for a living, destroying my body. I will be covered with dust and seek shelter in empty houses. I will find
an abode near the root of a tree and abandon everything that is pleasant and unpleasant. Sorrow and delight, praise
and censure, will be equal for me. I will have no desire and be free of any sense of possessiveness. Opposites will
mean the same and I will have nothing to receive. I will find pleasure in my own atman. I will find serenity in my
own atman. I will be like one who is dumb, blind and deaf. There will be no occasion for me to have conversations
with anyone else. I will not injure any of the four kinds of beings[Those born from wombs, those born from eggs, those that are trees and
plants and those born from sweat (insects and worms).], mobile and immobile, as they are engaged in
their own dharma. I will behave equally towards all those who have life. I will not laugh at anything, nor will I
frown at anything. My face will always be cheerful and all my senses will be well controlled. I will not ask anyone
about the route. I will travel along any path and not wish to go to any special country or direction. I will advance
impartially and not glance back. I will be upright and cautious, so that I avoid and do not frighten anyone along the
path. Nature is most important and food and drink will take care of themselves. I will not think about all the opposite sentiments[Like happiness and unhappiness, pleasure and pain.] that stand against this. If even a little bit of succulent food is not available at first, I will roam
around and seek to find it in seven houses[The shloka is cryptic and needs explanation. If food is not available in
the first house, he will go to a second house, then to a third house and so
on, up to seven such houses. He will beg for food at these houses.]. But I will go at the time when there is no smoke, when the pestles
have been put away, when the coal in the fire has died down, when food has been eaten, when the handling of the
pots is over and when all the mendicants have gone. At one time, I will roam around and beg from two to five
houses[The idea is not to beg from too many houses.]. I will roam around the earth, freeing myself from the noose of desire. I will be like one who does not
wish to live. I will act like one who is about to die. I will not find delight or sorrow in either life or death. If someone severs one of my arms and another person smears the other with sandalwood paste, I will not think of doing
good things to the latter and harming the former. There are acts that are done to improve the state of one's life. I
will abandon all of them. Blinking my eyes, I will give up attachment to all of them and abandon all the acts that
are connected to the senses. When I have abandoned all resolution, I will purify myself well. I will have freed myself from all attachment and will have passed beyond all bonds. I will not be under the subjugation of anything and
will follow the dharma of the wind[That is, be as free as the wind.]. I will roam around without any attachment and will obtain eternal satisfaction. It was because of my greed and ignorance that I performed extremely wicked deeds. There are men who perform good and wicked deeds because they are tied down, through cause and effect, to their relatives[The cause and effect refers to deeds in earlier lives affecting this life and
deeds in this life affecting future lives.]. When the
lifespan is over, the body is almost completely decayed. They then receive the fruits of those wicked deeds, but no
one except the doer obtains the consequence[The relatives do not bear the consequences of wicked deeds, even if those
wicked deeds are done for the relatives.]. The wheel of life goes on in this way, like the turning wheel of a
chariot. This collection of beings meet each other. This collection of beings acts. Birth, death, old age, disease and
pain are without any substance and transient. On this earth, one who can discard them is happy. The gods fall down
from heaven and so do the maharshis from their appointed spots. Which person, if he desires to know about the
reason and truth behind existence, would then desire to exist[In this cycle of birth, death and rebirth.]? A king may perform many kinds of deeds, in accordance with the rites and auspicious signs. But that king will be bound down by the slightest bit of action. For a
long time, this amrita of wisdom has presented itself before me. Therefore, I desire it and want the eternal and certain state, from which one does not decay. I will conduct myself in this virtuous way and roam around, without any
connection to the material world. I will fearlessly place my body on that path."'
