Yudhishthira said, "O bull among the Bharata lineage! O grandfather! In what kind of man or woman does
Shri[Lakshmi, the goddess of prosperity and wealth.], the one who resides in the lotus, always dwell? Tell me that."

'Bhishma replied, "I will tell you what transpired, as I have seen it and heard it. Rukmini asked this in the presence of Devaki's son[Devaki's son was Krishna. Rukmini was Krishna's wife and is regarded as Lakshmi's incarnation. Krishna and
Rukmini's son was Pradyumna. The one with the makara on the banner is Kama, the god of love, and Pradyumna was his incarnation.]. She saw the blazing Shri seated on Narayana's lap, with a face like that of a lotus. The one
with the beautiful eyes, the mother of the one with a makara on his banner, was surprised and curious and asked
this question. 'Who are the beings who worship you? Who are the ones you reside with? Who are the ones to
whom you do not show favours? You are loved by the one who is the lord of the three worlds and is the destroyer
of beings. O daughter of a maharshi[There are different stories about Lakshmi's origin. This is a reference to her being born as the daughter of the
sage Bhrigu.]! Tell me the truth about this.' Having been thus asked, in the presence of the
one who has Garuda on his banner[Narayana.], the goddess, whose face was as beautiful as the moon, was pleased and
replied in sweet words. 'O beautiful one! O eloquent one! I dwell in men who are truthful and accomplished, who
are engaged in deeds. I do not dwell in men who are not good in their deeds, or in those who are non-believers,
cause a mixture of varnas and are ungrateful. I do not reside in those who are violent in conduct or indulge in perverse conduct. Nor do I reside in those who are thieves or malicious towards seniors. There are those who are limited in energy, strength, spirit and essence, who are incessantly delighted and enraged. I do not reside with them. O
goddess! Nor do I reside with men who hide their true intentions. O goddess! If a man does not desire anything,
has no natural enterprise and is always content with whatever little he possesses, I do not reside with him either. I
dwell with those who follow dharma in their conduct, great-souled ones who know about dharma, those who serve
their seniors, are great-souled and restrained and spirited. I dwell with women who are forgiving, generous, devoted to gods and brahmanas, truthful in their conduct and naturally restrained. I avoid women who do not look towards the broken vessels in their homes, who always speak against their husbands, who prefer the houses of others
and are shameless. I avoid women who are fickle and unclean, who lick the corners of their mouths, who have no
patience and are quarrelsome, who are addicted to sleep and are always lying down. I always reside with women
who are truthful, beautiful to see, united with good fortune and qualities, devoted to their husbands, good in conduct and well-attired. I dwell in vehicles, maidens, ornaments, sacrifices, clouds, rain, blooming lotuses, nakshatras
in the autumn sky, mountains, pens of cattle, forests, lakes, blossoming lotuses[The text mentions three words for lotus-padma, utpala (also a water-lily) and pankaja.], rivers that resound with the calling of swans and the beautiful cries of cranes, with extensive banks and beautiful lakes, frequented by ascetics, siddhas and brahmanas. I always reside in large waterbodies where the water is agitated by lions and elephants. I am
always there in mad elephants, bulls, kings, thrones and virtuous people. I always dwell in houses where oblations
are offered to the fire, where cattle, brahmanas and gods are worshipped and in houses where, at the right time,
flowers are offered as sacrifices in rites[The suggestion is that flowers are offered as sacrifices, instead of animal sacrifices.]. I reside in brahmanas who are always engaged in studying, in kshatriyas
who are always devoted to dharma, in vaishyas who are engaged in agriculture and in shudras who are engaged in
servitude. Single-mindedly, I dwell in Narayana. In every way, I am part of his body. It is in him that great dharma,
the brahman and all delight exist. O goddess! I am incapable of saying that my embodied form resides in anything
other than these. When I dwell in a man in the form of my attributes, his dharma, fame, artha and kama are enhanced.'"'
