Vaishampayana said, 'The king who was Kunti's son honoured the inhabitants of the city and the countryside
and gave them permission to leave for their own homes. The king who was Pandu's son consoled the women
who had lost their brave husbands and gave them a lot of riches. Having obtained his kingdom back, the immensely wise Yudhishthira was instated there. The best among men followed his own nature in everything. The supreme
among the upholders of dharma obtained the benedictions of brahmanas, the foremost commanders of the army
and the citizens. Having spent fifty nights in that supreme and beautiful city, the bull among men remembered that
this was the period the foremost among Kouravas[Bhishma.] had indicated. Surrounded by priests, he emerged from Gajasahvya[Hastinapura.]. He saw that the sun had retreated and was proceeding towards uttarayana. Before leaving, Kounteya
Yudhishthira  took  clarified  butter,  garlands,  fragrances,  silken  garments,  sandalwood,  the  best  of  aloe  and  also
black aloe, all required for preparing Bhishma. There were expensive garments and many kinds of jewels. The intelligent bull among men placed Dhritarashtra, the illustrious Gandhari, his mother, Pritha, and his brothers in front
of him. Janardana and the intelligent Vidura followed, and so did Kouravya Yuyutsu and the lord Yuyudhana[Satyaki.]. The
king was surrounded by a large number of wagons with stores. O great king! Praises were sung. Fires were carried
for kindling Bhishma. Like a king of the gods, he emerged from the city and arrived in Kurukshetra, to the king
who was Shantanu's son. O rajarshi! Parashara's intelligent son, Vyasa, was worshipping him there and so were
Narada and Asita-Devala. The remaining kings, who had not been killed, had assembled there from many countries. In every direction, the great-souled one was protected by the guards. The king saw that he was lying down on
a bed meant for heroes. With his brothers, Dharmaraja descended from the chariot. Kounteya honoured his grandfather, the scorcher of enemies and Dvaipayana and the other brahmanas, who greeted them back. The undecaying
one was with his brothers and with the officiating priests, who were like Brahma himself. They approached the bed
of arrows, which was surrounded by the rishis.

'O Kouravya! With his brothers, Dharmaraja Yudhishthira addressed the son of the river, the foremost among
the Bharata lineage, who was lying down. "O king! O Jahnavi's son! I am Yudhishthira and am bowing down before you. O mighty-armed one! If you can hear, tell me what I should do. O king! O lord! The time has come and I
have brought the fire for you. The preceptors, the brahmanas, the officiating priests and my brothers are also here.
Your son, the immensely energetic King Dhritarashtra, is also present, with his advisers and the valiant Vasudeva.
O tiger among the Kuru lineage! All the kings from Kurujangala[Another name for the Kurukshetra region.], who have not been slain, are also here. Open
your eyes and look at them. Everything that needs to be done now has been arranged by me. Since this is the time
you had spoken about, everything has been arranged." Thus addressed by Kunti's intelligent son, Gangeya looked
at all those of the Bharata lineage who were standing there, surrounding him. Though Bhishma was strong, he
could not move. At that time, the eloquent one grasped his[Yudhishthira's.] strong hand and spoke in a voice that was as deep as a
torrent of water or the roar of the clouds. "O Kounteya! O Yudhishthira! It is good fortune that you have come here
with your advisers. The illustrious sun, the one with the one thousand rays, is returning. Fifty-eight nights have
passed since I have been lying down here, on these arrows that are sharp at the tip. It has been like one hundred
years. O Yudhishthira! The sacred month of Magha[January-February.] has arrived. One-fourth of shuklapaksha should still remain."

Gangeya spoke in this way to Yudhishthira, Dharma's son. At that time, he also greeted Dhritarashtra and spoke
these words. "O king! You know about dharma. Your doubts about artha have also been properly dispelled. You
have served many brahmanas who are extremely learned. O lord of men! You know all the sacred texts of dharma
associated with the Vedas, the four Vedas and all the Vedangas. O Kouravya! Since you know the truth about destiny, you should not grieve. From Krishna Dvaipayana, you have heard secret accounts connected with the gods. O
king! Under dharma, the Pandavas are also your sons. They are always engaged in attending to their seniors. Remain established in dharma and protect them. Dharmaraja is pure in soul and always follows your instructions. I
know that he is non-violent and is devoted to his seniors. Your sons were evil-souled and were addicted to anger
and greed. Overcome with jealousy, they indulged in wicked conduct. You should not grieve over them." Having
spoken these words to the learned Dhritarashtra, the mighty-armed Kourava addressed Vasudeva. "O  illustrious
one! O god of the gods! O one who is worshipped by the gods and the asuras! O Trivikrama[Vishnu's name, a reference to his covering the three worlds in three steps in the form of the
vamana (dwarf) incarnation.]! O wielder of the
conch shell, chakra and the club! I bow down before you. O Krishna! O Vaikuntha! O Purushottama! Grant me
permission. Protect the Pandaveyas. They are devoted to you. On an earlier occasion, I said this to the wicked and
evil-minded Duryodhana. 'Wherever Krishna exists, dharma is there. Wherever dharma exists, victory is there. O
son! Use Vasudeva as a tirtha and have peace with the Pandavas.' I repeatedly told him that the time had come for
an alliance. However, that evil-minded and stupid one did not act in accordance with my words. Having destroyed
the earth, he has himself been killed. O brave one! I know you as an ancient and supreme rishi. You spent a long
period of time in Badari[Badarikashrama or Badrinath, in Uttarakhand.], with the god Nara. Narada told me this and so did Vyasa, the great ascetic. They told me
that Nara and Narayana have been born as men[As Arjuna and Krishna respectively.]." Vasudeva replied, "O Bhishma! O king! I grant you leave. May
you become a Vasu[Bhishma was actually a cursed Vasu.]. O immensely radiant one! I have not seen the slightest bit of deceit in you. O rajarshi! In
your devotion to your father, you were like another Markandeya[Markandeya was devoted to his father, Mrikandu. Bhishma had been granted the boon of
choosing the time of his death.]. Like a servant with a bowed head, death was
under your control." Thus addressed, Gangeya again spoke to the Pandavas and to all his well-wishers, with Dhritarashtra as the foremost. "I wish to cast aside my breath of life. You should grant me leave. Strive to be truthful.
Truth represents supreme strength. O descendant of the Bharata lineage[Since this is in the singular, it singles out Yudhishthira.]! Always be with non-violent and excellent brahmanas, those who have controlled their souls, are devoted to dharma and always engage in austerities."

Having said this, he embraced all his well-wishers. Yet again, the intelligent one spoke these words to Yudhishthira. "O lord of men! Brahmanas, especially wise ones, preceptors and officiating priests, should always be worshipped by you."'
