'Dhritarashtra asked, "Having assembled in battle formation in this way, what did mine and those of the others do?
How did those supreme among wielders of weapons strike?"

'Sanjaya replied, "All the troops were arranged in battle formation. The warriors were armoured and waited.
The standards were raised up. On seeing his army, which was like the limitless ocean, your son, King Duryodhana,
stationed himself in its midst and spoke to all the warriors on your side. 'You are armoured. Now fight.' Their
minds were full of cruelty and they had given up the desire to live. With their standards raised, all of them rushed
against the Pandavas. A terrible battle started and it made the body hair stand up. Your chariots and elephants were
mixed up with that of the enemy. Charioteers released sharp arrows that were full of energy and shafted with gold.
These descended on elephants and horses. When the battle commenced, the mighty-armed and armoured Bhishma,
terrible in his valour, grasped a bow. The aged grandfather of the Kurus advanced and showered arrows on those
brave men-Subhadra's son[Abhimanyu.], Bhimasena, Shini's maharatha son[Satyaki.], Kekaya, Virata, Parshata Dhrishtadyumna
and the lords of Chedi and Matsya. At the encounter with that brave one, the great vyuha[Of the Pandavas.] wavered. The battle
that was fought by all the soldiers was extremely great. Many horse-riders, charioteers and the foremost among
elephants were slain. Masses of chariots on the Pandava side began to flee.

'"Arjuna, tiger among men, saw maharatha Bhishma. He angrily told Varshneya, 'Go where the grandfather is.
O Varshneya! It is evident that when he is extremely enraged, engaged in Duryodhana's welfare, this Bhishma will
destroy my army. O Janardana! Protected by the one who wields a firm bow, Drona, Kripa, Shalya, Vikarna and the
sons of Dhritarashtra, with Duryodhana at the forefront, will slaughter the Panchalas. O Janardana! For the sake of
our soldiers, I will go where Bhishma is.' Vasudeva replied, 'O Dhananjaya! O brave one! Be careful. I will take
you towards the grandfather's chariot.' O lord of men! Having said this, Shouri[Krishna.] took the chariot, famous in the
worlds, towards Bhishma's chariot. The horses had the complexion of cranes[This is a description of Arjuna's chariot.]. As it advanced, many flags fluttered. The standard was raised and the extremely terrible ape roared on it. The chariot was as radiant as the sun and
it roared like a giant cloud. Pandava slaughtered the soldiers of the Kouravas and the Shurasenas and the one who
dispelled the sorrow of his well-wishers swiftly advanced to the battle. He descended with the force of an intoxicated elephant, using his arrows to bring down warriors in that battle. Shantanu's son, Bhishma, was protected by
warriors who were led by Saindhava[Jayadratha.] and those from the east, Souvira and Kekaya and encountered him with
force. Who other than the grandfather of the Kurus and the two rathas Drona and Vaikartana[Karna.] are capable of withstanding the wielder of the Gandiva in battle?

'"O great king! Bhishma, the grandfather of the Kouravas, pierced Arjuna with seventy-seven iron arrows. O
king! Drona pierced him with twenty-five arrows, Kripa with fifty, Duryodhana with sixty-four, Shalya with nine
arrows and Vikarna pierced Pandava with ten broad-headed arrows. But though he was struck in every direction
with sharp arrows, the mighty-armed and great archer did not suffer and was like a mountain that has been pierced.
O bull among the Bharata lineage! Kiriti's[Kiriti is one of Arjuna's names.] soul is beyond measure. In return, he struck Bhishma with twentyfive arrows, Kripa with nine, Drona, tiger among men, with sixty arrows, Vikarna with three, Artayani[Another name for Shalya.] with
three and the king[Duryodhana.] with five arrows. Satyaki, Virata, Parshata Dhrishtadyumna, Droupadi's sons and Abhimanyu surrounded Dhananjaya. The great archer Drona was engaged in ensuring Gangeya's[Gangeya is another name for Bhishma.] welfare.
Panchala[Dhrishtadyumna.], supported by the Somakas, advanced against him. Bhishma, best among charioteers, swiftly pierced
Pandava with eighty sharp arrows. At this, your warriors were extremely delighted. The powerful Dhananjaya was
a lion among charioteers. On hearing these roars of applause, he cheerfully penetrated their midst and having done
that, sported with his bow and took aim at those maharathas. Dhananjaya reached the midst of those lions among
charioteers. On seeing that his own soldiers were tormented by Partha in that battle, King Duryodhana, lord of
men, spoke to Bhishma. 'O father[The word used is tata. While this means father, it is affectionately used for anyone who is senior.]! Pandu's powerful son is accompanied by Krishna. O Gangeya! He is destroying our soldiers and severing our roots, even though you and Drona, supreme among charioteers, are alive. It
is because of you that maharatha Karna has discarded his weapons and does not fight in this battle with Partha,
though he always has my welfare in mind. O Gangeya! Act so that Phalguna may be killed.' O king! Having been
thus addressed, your father, Devavrata[Bhishma.], exclaimed, 'Shame on the dharma of kshatriyas,' and advanced towards
Partha's chariot.

'"O king! All the kings saw that these two, both drawn by white horses, were ready to do battle. O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! They roared like lions and blew on their conch shells. O venerable one! When Bhishma was
stationed in battle, Drona's son[Ashvatthama.], Duryodhana and your son Vikarna surrounded him. All the Pandavas surrounded Dhananjaya. When they were stationed in battle, a great duel commenced. In that battle, Gangeya pierced
Partha with nine arrows and Arjuna pierced him back with ten arrows that penetrated the inner organs. O Kourava!
Arjuna prided himself on his skills in battle. With a thousand well-directed arrows, Pandava enveloped Bhishma in
every direction. But Bhishma, Shantanu's son, repulsed Partha's net of arrows with his own net of arrows. Both of
them were extremely cheerful. Both of them found delight in the battle. They fought against each other, each desiring to counter the other. But neither was superior to the other. The net of arrows released from Bhishma's bow
were seen to be repulsed by Arjuna's arrows. In that fashion, the nets of arrows released from Arjuna's bow were
all cut down by Gangeya's arrows and fell down on the ground. Arjuna pierced Bhishma with twenty-five sharp
arrows. And in that battle, Bhishma pierced Partha with thirty arrows. Those extremely strong ones wounded each
other's horses, pierced the standards and struck the chariots and wheels of the chariots. The destroyers of enemies
seemed to be playing. O great king! Bhishma, supreme among the wielders of weapons, was enraged. With three
arrows, he pierced Vasudeva between the breasts. O king! Pierced by Bhishma's arrows, Achyuta Madhusudana
was resplendent in that battle, like a blossoming kimshuka. On seeing Madhava thus pierced, Arjuna became extremely angry. In that encounter, he pierced Gangeya's charioteer with three arrows. In that encounter, the brave
ones took aim against each other and endeavoured to kill each other, but did not succeed. The chariots advanced
and retreated, traversing wonderful circles. Both charioteers displayed their skill and dexterity in many ways. O
king! In seeking their objective, the maharathas repeatedly changed their positions and adopted different paths, so
that they could strike each other. Both of them roared like lions and blew on their conch shells. Loud noises could
be heard as the maharathas twanged their bows. There was the sound of conch shells and roars from the axles of
the chariots. The earth began to tremble, as if there was an earthquake underneath. O bull among the Bharata lineage! No one could detect a weakness in either of them. Both of them were powerful and valiant in battle. Each
was equal to the other. It was only through the signs that the Kouravas could approach Bhishma and also through
the signs that the sons of Pandu could approach Partha[The sense is that it was impossible to distinguish between Bhishma and Arjuna, except through the signs on the
respective standards.]. O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On witnessing the valour displayed by these best of men in the battle, all the beings were struck with wonder. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that battle, no weakness was discernible in either of the two, like those established
in dharma. Nor could any deceit be seen. In that battle, both became invisible because of the nets of arrows and
suddenly became visible again.

'"On witnessing the valour, the gods, together with the gandharvas, the charanas and the rishis, spoke to each
other. 'When they are enraged, neither of these maharathas is capable of being vanquished in battle, even by the
gods, the asuras, the gandharvas and all the worlds. The worlds will regard this extremely marvellous battle as
wonderful. Such a battle will never take place again. In the encounter, Bhishma is incapable of being vanquished
by the intelligent Partha, even though he uses his bow, chariot, horses and arrows in the battle. In that fashion, in a
battle, even the gods cannot conquer Pandava. Though he makes every endeavour, Bhishma cannot vanquish that
archer in an encounter.' O lord of the earth! We heard these words of praise spoken about both Gangeya and Arjuna in that battle. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! While they fought, your warriors and those of the Pandaveyas, killed each other in the battle. They valiantly used polished and sharp swords, polished battleaxes, many
kinds of arrows and diverse types of weapons and other arms. As long as that extremely terrible battle continued,
the brave ones on either side killed one another. O king! There was a great encounter between Drona and
Panchala[Dhrishtadyumna.]."'
