'Sanjaya said, "On hearing that his son Iravat had been killed, Dhananjaya was overcome by great grief. He sighed
like a serpent. O king! In that battle, he spoke these words to Vasudeva. 'There is no doubt that the immensely
wise Vidura had foreseen all this earlier. The one with great intelligence had known about the terrible destruction
of the Kurus and the Pandavas. It was for this reason that he tried to restrain Dhritarashtra, the lord of men. O
Madhusudana! Many brave ones who cannot be slain have been killed by the Kouravas in this battle. We have also
killed those on their side. O best of men! Evil acts are being perpetrated for the sake of artha. Shame on artha. For
its sake, this slaughter of kin is being perpetrated. For one who possesses no wealth, death is preferable to this acquisition of wealth through the slaughter of relatives. O Krishna! What will we gain by killing these assembled relatives? Because of Duryodhana's crimes, and those of Shakuni Soubala, and because of Karna's evil counsel, all
the kshatriyas are headed towards destruction. O Madhusudana! O mighty-armed one! I now understand the king's
wise act, when he sought only half the kingdom from Suyodhana, or only five villages. But the evil-minded one
did not grant it. On seeing so many brave kshatriyas lying down on the ground, I censure myself severely. Shame
on the livelihood of kshatriyas. In this battle, the kshatriyas will know me as incapable. O Madhusudana! I no
longer derive pleasure from this battle with relatives. However, swiftly drive the horses towards the army of the
sons of Dhritarashtra. With my two arms, I will cross the ocean that this battle is, one that is difficult to cross. O
Madhava! This is not the time to act like a eunuch.' Thus addressed by Partha, Keshava, the destroyer of enemy
heroes, urged those white horses, which were as fleet as the wind. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A great
roar arose amidst your soldiers. It was like the ocean at the time of the new moon or the full moon, agitated by the
force of the wind.

'"O great king! It was afternoon and a battle commenced between Bhishma and the Pandavas, with a roar like
that of the clouds. O king! In that encounter, your sons surrounded Drona, like the Vasus around Vasava, and attacked Bhimasena. Bhishma, Shantanu's son, Kripa, supreme among rathas, Bhagadatta and Susharma attacked
Dhananjaya. Hardikya and Bahlika attacked Satyaki. King Ambashtha countered Abhimanyu. O great king! Others
who were left encountered other maharathas. A terrible battle that was fearful in form commenced. O lord of men!
On seeing Bhimasena, your son blazed in that battle, like oblations being poured onto a sacrificial fire. At that
time, your sons covered Kounteya with arrows. O great king! It was like monsoon clouds pouring down on mountains. O lord of men! He was thus enveloped by your sons in many ways and licked the corners of his mouth. The
brave one was as proud as a tiger. O king! Bhima brought down Vyudoraska with an extremely sharp and broad-
headed arrow and he was deprived of his life. With another sharp, yellow and broad-headed arrow, be brought
down Kundalina, like a lion bringing down a small animal[Both Vyudoraska and Kundalina are Duryodhana's brothers.]. O venerable one! Having approached your sons, he
swiftly took up seven extremely sharp and yellow arrows. Firm in wielding the bow, Bhimasena despatched these
arrows and brought down your sons, extremely great maharathas, from their chariots. These were Anadhrishti,
Kundabheda, Vairata, Dirghalochana, Dirghabahu, Subahu and Kanakadhvaja. O bull among the Bharata lineage!
As they fell down, these brave ones were radiant, like blossoming and dappled trees that fall down during the
spring. O lord of the earth! Your remaining sons fled. They thought that the immensely strong Bhimasena was like
Death himself. On seeing that the brave one had consumed your sons in the battle, Drona showered arrows on him
from every direction, like rain pouring on a mountain. We beheld the manliness of Kunti's son and it was extraordinary. Though he was restrained by Drona, yet he killed your sons. Like a bull bears a downpour of rain from
above, Bhima tolerated the shower of arrows released by Drona. O great king! Vrikodara performed a wonderful
deed. While repulsing Drona, he killed your sons in that battle. Arjuna's elder brother played with your brave sons,
like an immensely strong tiger roaming around amidst deer, or like a wolf stationing itself amidst animals and driving those animals away. Thus did Vrikodara drive your sons away in that battle.

'"Gangeya, Bhagadatta and maharatha Goutama countered the violent Pandava Arjuna. In that encounter, the
atiratha repulsed all their weapons with his own weapons. He despatched many brave soldiers on your side to the
land of the dead. Abhimanyu used his arrows to deprive King Ambashtha, famous in the world and foremost
among rathas, of his chariot. Deprived of his chariot, he was about to be slain by Subhadra's illustrious son. O lord
of men! In shame, he quickly leapt down from his chariot. In the battle, he hurled his sword at Subhadra's great-
souled son and ascended onto the chariot of the great-souled Hardikya. Subhadra's son was the destroyer of enemy
heroes and was skilled in all the techniques of war. On seeing the sword descend towards him, he avoided it
through his dextrous movements. O lord of the earth! At this, loud sounds of applause were heard among all the
soldiers. With Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, others fought with your soldiers. And those on your side fought
with the soldiers of the Pandus. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There was a great battle between those on
your side and theirs. They killed each other fiercely and performed extremely difficult deeds. O venerable one! In
that battle, the brave ones seized each other by the hair. They fought with their nails and teeth and with their fists
and thighs. They used their arms and palms and extremely sharp swords. They sought out each other's weakness
and despatched each other to Yama's abode. The father killed the son and the son the father in that battle. Those
men fought there, desperate and firm in their resolution.

'"O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that battle, beautiful bows with golden handles and extremely expensive ornaments were loosened from the hands of those who had been slain. There were sharp arrows, with tufts
made of pure gold and silver and washed in oil. They were as resplendent as snakes that have cast off their skin.
There were swords decorated with gold, with handles made out of ivory. There were shields and bow-sheaths for
the archers, with golden backs. There were spears, javelins, swords and spikes. All of these were decorated with
gold and embellished with gold. They were as bright as gold. O venerable one! Heavy clubs were destroyed and
fell down. There were maces, battleaxes and catapults. Colourful spears, decorated with gold, fell down. There
were many types and forms of carpets and whisks and fans. There were many types of weapons, dislodged from
men who had fallen down. Though they had lost their lives, the maharathas seemed to be alive. Their bodies were
shattered through clubs. Their heads were smashed through maces. The men lay on the ground, crushed by elephants, horses and chariots. O king! The earth was strewn everywhere with the bodies of slain horses, men and elephants, which looked like mountains, and seemed to be beautiful. Spears, swords, arrows, javelins, scimitars,
spikes, lances, darts, battleaxes, clubs, catapults and shataghnis[Unidentified weapon that could kill one hundred people at one go.] fell down on the field of battle there. The earth
was strewn with bodies that had been shattered by weapons. Some were silent. Others made slight sounds. They
were covered with blood. The earth was strewn with the bodies of those who had been killed by the enemy and
looked beautiful. The arms of the spirited ones had leather guards and bracelets and were smeared with sandalwood paste. Their shattered thighs were like the trunks of elephants. The crowns of the heads were adorned with
jewels. The heads bore earrings. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The earth was resplendent with the bull-
eyed ones who had fallen down. The earth was covered with armour and golden ornaments drenched in blood. It
looked as beautiful as a fire with calm flames. Ornaments were strewn around and bows had fallen down. Bows
and gold-tufted arrows were scattered in every direction. There were many shattered chariots, garlanded with nets
of bells. Dead horses were lying around, with protruding tongues and drenched in blood. There were the floors of
chariots, standards, quivers and pennants. Large and white conch shells belonging to the brave ones were scattered
around. Elephants were supine on the ground, their trunks severed and the earth looked as beautiful as a lady
adorned with many different kinds of ornaments. There were tuskers in great pain, pierced with lances. They repeatedly let out moans through their trunks. That field of battle was beautiful, as if with mobile mountains. There
were carpets of many different hues and cushions for the elephants. Dazzling goads, with handles made of lapis
lazuli, fell down. Bells for the kings among elephants were scattered around everywhere. There were colourful
seats and hides of ranku deer. There were colourful necklaces and golden harnesses for the elephants. There were
many shattered implements and lances and kampanas. There were shattered golden breastplates for the horses,
soiled with dirt. The severed arms of the horse-riders fell down, with the bracelets still there. There were polished
and sharp javelins and polished swords. Torn headdresses were scattered around there. There were colourful arrows in the shape of the half-moon, decorated with gold. There were cushions for the horses and the hides of ranku
deer. There were colourful and extremely expensive gems for the crests of those Indras among men. Umbrellas
were scattered around, and whisks and fans. The faces were as beautiful as the lotus or the moon and were still
adorned with earrings. The brave ones were ornamented and their beards were well-trimmed. O great king! They
were beautiful and radiant, with golden earrings. The earth looked like the sky, with its array of planets and stars.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thus did those two large armies, yours and that of the enemy, clash against
each other in that battle. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! They were exhausted, scattered and routed. Night set
in and nothing could be seen in the field of battle. The soldiers of the Kurus and the Pandavas retreated. The terrible and fearful night set in and the Kurus and the Pandavas withdrew from that extremely terrible encounter. With
the time having come, they retreated to their own camps."'
