'Yudhishthira asked, "O grandfather! For a man who is alone and unaided, even the slightest task is extremely difficult to accomplish, not to speak of running a kingdom. For the sake of prosperity, what should be the conduct of a
king's adviser? How should he behave? Whom should the king trust and whom should he not trust?"

'Bhishma replied, "O king! The king has four kinds of friends-those who have the same objective, those who
are devoted, those who are natural and those who are artificial[Natural friends are those who are friends by birth, that is, relatives. Artificial friends are those who have been made friends through various
means, such as gifts and affection.]. There is a fifth kind of friend, one with dharma
in his soul, who serves a single person and not two. He is on the side that has dharma, though he may also be neutral. Wishing to conquer, a king uses both dharma and adharma. However, to such a person, one should never disclose objectives that would not please him[Instances of adharma should not be revealed to such a person.]. Out of the four, the two in the middle are the best[Those who are devoted and those who are natural.]. The others
should always be suspected. However, if a king has to undertake a task himself, all of these should be suspected. It
is the king's duty to be never careless in protecting his friends. A king who is careless is overwhelmed by people.
A wicked person can become virtuous, a virtuous person can become terrible, an enemy can become a friend and a
friend can cause injury. Since a man's mind is uncertain, how can he be trusted? Therefore, the king must ensure
that the important tasks are undertaken in his presence. Blind trust can completely destroy dharma and artha. However, not trusting anyone is also worse than death. Trusting amounts to premature death. Trust leads to catastrophe.
If one trusts someone, life depends on the person one has trusted. Therefore, the king must trust some people and
mistrust others. O son! This is the eternal policy for prosperity. There may be someone who brings riches as soon
as one thinks about it. The learned ones say that such a person is an enemy and must always be distrusted. When
water flows from one person's field into another person's field, as long as the first one wants the water to flow, he
doesn't demolish all the embankments. But when he is worried about too much of water flowing down, he wishes
to demolish the embankments. One can discern this through signs and the signs must be used to determine the enemy. When someone is not satisfied with the king's prosperity and is distressed at his decay, it is said that this is the
sign of a best friend. If there is someone about whom one can think, 'My destruction is the same as his death,' that
person can be trusted, as if he was one's own father. You should try to increase such a person's prosperity in every
way and always prevent injury to him, since he is engaged in tasks of dharma. If someone is scared of injury to the
king, know that this is a sign that he is the best friend. Those who wish to cause him injury are said to be enemies.
There may be someone who is always frightened of injury to the king and satisfied with the king's prosperity[In this sentence, the word 'king' doesn't actually occur in the text and is
left implicit. We have introduced it for ease of comprehension and in this
particular case, insertion in the text works better than a footnote.]. A
friend who is like this is said to be one's equal. A person who is close to you must be handsome, with a good complexion and good voice. He must be patient and without malice. He must be born in a noble lineage and possess
good conduct. Intelligence, a good memory, skill, natural compassion and a capacity to never malign, irrespective
of whether one is honoured or dishonoured-these are the attributes of an officiating priest, a preceptor and a
friend. Such people must dwell in your house and must be supremely honoured. He can know about secret counsel
and also about the objectives of dharma and artha. One can trust such a person, the way one would trust a father.
Each task should always be given to one person. Otherwise, there will be dissension. A person for whom duties
and fame are the most important, who always sticks to a pledge he has made, who does not hate capable people,
who enables others, who does not abandon dharma for the sake of desire, fear, avarice or anger, one who is accomplished and competent in speech-such a person must always be next to you. Brave, noble, learned, powerful, accomplished, born in good lineages, possessing good conduct, patient, without malice-it is your duty to appoint
these as advisers and employ them in all the tasks. They must be honoured, given their shares, given good aides
and established in their own tasks. Completely immersed in great and important tasks, they ensure great prosperity.
They always seek to rival each other and perform these tasks. They consult each other and accomplish the objectives. You must always be frightened of your kin, as if they are death. A kin is like a minor king and can never tolerate the king's prosperity. O mighty-armed one! It is only a kin who is delighted at the destruction of someone
who is upright, mild, generous, modest and truthful in speech. However, there is no happiness in not having kin.
There is nothing that is worse than that. A man without kin is overwhelmed by the enemy. If a man has been treated badly by others, kin offer refuge. Kin never tolerate the prospect of kin being maltreated by others. Even if that
injury is caused by friends, it is regarded as one to one's own self. There are good qualities in them[Meaning, kin.], but the absence of qualities can also be discerned. He who is not kin, does not do any favours. But he who is not kin, does
not use poisoned arrows. In the world of kin, both can be seen-virtuous and wicked. One must always honour
them in words and deeds. He must act towards them in a pleasant way and never act in unpleasant ways. He must
always act as if he trusts them, even if he actually mistrusts them. It is seen that good and bad qualities are both
mixed in them. When a man conducts himself in this way and is not distracted, his enemies are disarmed and become his friends. This is the way he prospers in the circle of kin and relatives. For a very long period of time, he
obtains fame and mastery over his friends and enemies."'
