Vaishampayana said, 'O king! After he was worshipped by Magadha, Pandava, with the white horses, followed
the horse to the southern direction. Roaming as it willed, the powerful horse returned from there and went to
the beautiful city of the Chedis, known as Shuktisahvya[Shukti is a pearl. The capital is more commonly known as Shuktimati.]. Shishupala's son, Sharabha, honoured him. Having honoured him and shown him respect first, the immensely strong one then fought against him. O king! After having
been worshipped there, the supreme among horses then went to the Kashis, the Andhrakas, the Kosalas, the Kiratas
and the Tanganas. Pandava received the appropriate honours there. Kounteya then returned and went to Dasharna.
There was a powerful king named Chitrangada there. A terrible battle raged between him and Vijaya. Kiriti, bull
among men, subjugated him. He then went to the kingdom of Ekalavya, the king of nishadas. Ekalavya's son received him in an encounter. A battle that made the body hair stand up raged with the nishadas. Kounteya defeated
him in the battle. In the encounter, the brave one vanquished the one who sought to create an obstruction to the
sacrifice. O great king! After he had been defeated by the son of the chastiser of Paka, the son of the nishada honoured him. He[Arjuna.] headed towards the south, towards the salty ocean. Battles were fought between Kiriti and the
Dravidas, the Andhras, the terrible Mahishakas and the hill-dwelling Kollas there. Subjugating them, the protector
of the horse went to Surashtra. He went to Gokarna and then to Prabhasa. Beautiful Dvaravati was there, protected
by the brave ones from the Vrishni lineage. The beautiful sacrificial horse of the king of the Kurus arrived there. O
king! The young ones from the Yadava lineage sought to use force against the best of horses, but Ugrasena came
forward and restrained them. The Vrishnis and the Andhakas emerged from the city. They were with Vasudeva[Krishna's father.],
Arjuna's maternal uncle. Affectionately, and following the proper rites, they met the best among the Kurus. They
showed supreme honour to the best among the Bharata lineage. With their permission, he then left, following the
horse. The horse went to the western countries, along the ocean. In due course, it wandered around and went to the
prosperous land of the five rivers. O Kouravya! From there, the horse went to the kingdom of Gandhara. Followed
by Kounteya, it roamed around, as it willed. Shakuni's son continued the earlier enmity and a terrible battle ensued
between the king of Gandhara and the great-souled one.'
