'Sanjaya said, "On seeing that Duhshasana's chariot was stationed near his, Bharadvaja's son spoke these words to
Duhshasana. 'O Duhshasana! Why are all these rathas running away? Is the king well and is Saindhava still alive?
You are a prince and your brother is a maharatha. Why are you running away from the battle? Accept the status of
heir apparent[Yuvaraja is heir apparent, and this need not necessarily be the king's son. The sense is that Duhshasana should
fight and make Duryodhana the king, with Duhshasana as heir apparent.]. You have yourself brought on this great enmity with the Panchalas and Pandavas. In the battle,
how can you be frightened of the single-handed Satyaki? In the gambling match in earlier times, when you grasped
the dice, did you not know that they would become terrible arrows in the future, like venomous serpents? Your
words towards the Pandavas were especially hateful. You were the cause of the hardships that Droupadi faced in
earlier times. Where is that insolence, pride and swagger about valour now? You enraged the Parthas, who are like
venomous serpents. Why are you running away now? The army of the Bharatas is sorrowing now, as is King Suyo-
dhana. He has a harsh brother, who is now intent on running away. O brave one! The army is shattered and is afflicted by terror. There is no doubt that you should resort to the strength of your arms and protect it now. But you
are abandoning the fight in fright now and are delighting the enemy. O destroyer of enemies! You are the leader of
your army and are fleeing. When the refuge is itself frightened, which other terrified person will remain stationed
in the battle? O unblemished one! You are fighting with the single-handed Satvata now. Even then, your mind turns
towards flying from the field of battle. O Kourava! What will you do when you behold the wielder of Gandiva,
Bhimasena and the twins in the battle? In a battle, Phalguna's arrows are like the sun and the fire in their energy.
Satyaki's arrows are equal to those and you are terrified and are running away from those. In that event, let there be
peace and hand over the earth to Dharmaraja. Have peace with the Pandavas before Phalguna's iron arrows, which
are like snakes that have cast off their skins, penetrate your body. Have peace with the Pandavas before the great-
souled Parthas kill one hundred of your brothers in battle and fling them down on the ground[In a pedantic sense, ninety-nine brothers. To be even more pedantic, fewer, since several of them have already
been killed.]. Have peace with
the Pandavas before King Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, and Krishna, who prides himself in battle, are enraged.
Have peace with the Pandavas before the mighty-armed Bhima penetrates the large army and grasps your brothers.
This is what Bhishma told your brother Suyodhana earlier. "O amiable one! The Pandavas cannot be vanquished in
battle. Have peace with the Pandavas." But your wicked brother, Suyodhana, did not act accordingly. Therefore,
resolve to fight and endeavour to battle with the Pandavas. Swiftly go on your chariot to the spot where Satyaki is
stationed. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Without your presence, the army will be driven away. Truth is
Satyaki's valour. For your own sake, fight with him in the battle.' Having been thus addressed, your son did not
say anything in reply. He pretended not to have heard what had been said and went to the spot where Satyaki was.

'"He was accompanied by a large army of mlecchas who did not retreat. Having approached Yuyudhana in the
battle, he sought to fight with him. Drona, foremost among rathas, angrily advanced against the Panchalas and the
Pandavas, using a medium speed. In that battle, Drona penetrated the Panchala array. He drove away those warriors, in hundreds and thousands. O great king! Drona proclaimed his name in the battle and caused great carnage
among the Pandus, Panchalas and Matsyas. The radiant Viraketu, the son of Panchala, attacked him. He pierced
Drona with five arrows that had drooping tufts. He pierced his standard with one and his charioteer with another
seven. O great king! What I witnessed in that encounter was extraordinary. Despite his violence, Drona could not
approach Panchala in that battle. O venerable one! O king! On seeing that Drona had been checked in that battle,
all the Panchalas[There should be no confusion. The plural Panchalas is being used for all the Panchalas and the singular Pan-
chala is being used for Viraketu.] desired the victory of Dharma's son and surrounded him from all sides. O king! They enveloped Drona with arrows that were like fire, extremely thick javelins and many kinds of weapons. O king! But in
every direction, Drona destroyed those masses of arrows, like a giant cloud in the sky, driven away by the wind.
The destroyer of enemy heroes then released an extremely terrible arrow, which was like the sun and the fire, towards Viraketu's chariot. O king! That arrow penetrated the descendant of the Panchala lineage and quickly entered the earth, like a flaming and red mountain[It was red because of the blood.]. The descendant of the Panchala lineage swiftly fell down from
the chariot, like a giant champaka tree that has been shattered by the wind and has fallen from a mountain top.
When that prince, immensely strong and a great archer, was killed, the Panchalas quickly surrounded Drona from
every direction. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Chitraketu, Sudhanva, Chitravarma and Chitraratha were
stricken with grief on account of their brother. They attacked and unitedly fought against Bharadvaja's son. They
released showers of arrows, like clouds at the end of the summer. He was struck in many ways by these maharatha
princes. Those princes were angry in the battle. But he deprived them of their horses, charioteers and chariots. The
immensely illustrious one then used other extremely sharp and broad-headed arrows to sever and bring down their
heads, as if he was plucking flowers. O extremely radiant king! Slain, they fell down on the ground from their
chariots. They were like daityas and danavas, in the ancient battle between the gods and the asuras.

'"Those maharatha Panchalas were like the gods. On seeing that they had been killed, Dhrishtadyumna became
extremely angry and tears flowed from his eyes. In that battle, he angrily advanced towards Drona's chariot. O
king! In that battle, Drona was enveloped by Panchala's[Dhrishtadyumna's.] arrows and on seeing this, great sounds of lamentation
suddenly arose. But though he was enveloped in many ways by the great-souled Parshata, Drona was not distressed and smilingly, continued to fight. O great king! Panchala became senseless with rage and wrathfully struck
Drona in the chest with ninety arrows with drooping tufts. Bharadvaja's powerful and immensely illustrious son
was severely wounded. He lost his senses and sat down on the floor of his chariot. On seeing him in that state, the
valiant Dhrishtadyumna cast aside his bow. The brave one quickly grasped a sword. O venerable one! The maharatha quickly descended from his chariot and swiftly ascended the chariot of Bharadvaja's son. His eyes were
red with rage and he wished to sever his[Drona's.] head from his body. Meanwhile, the immensely strong Drona regained
his senses and grasped a bow. O king! He pierced him with vaitastika arrows[Vaitastika arrows were nine inches long.] that were meant to be used for
fighting at close quarters. O king! In that battle, maharatha Dhrishtadyumna was struck by vaitastika arrows that
are meant for fighting at close quarters. These were known to Drona and they weakened Dhrishtadyumna. Having
been struck by many such arrows, the immensely strong one quickly descended from the chariot. The brave one's
speed had been baffled. The brave one ascended his own chariot and grasped a giant bow. In that encounter, maharatha Dhrishtadyumna pierced Drona. O great king! The clash between them was marvellous and large numbers
of beings applauded it, the kshatriyas, as well as other soldiers present there. O king! The Panchalas loudly exclaimed, 'There is no doubt that, having engaged in this encounter, Drona will be subjugated by Dhrishtadyumna.'

In that battle, Drona quickly brought down the head of Dhrishtadyumna's charioteer, like a ripe fruit from a tree. O
king! The great-souled one's horses ran away. When they had run away in the battle[They also carried Dhrishtadyumna away.], the powerful one drove
away the Panchalas and the Srinjayas. Bharadvaja's powerful son defeated the Pandus and the Panchalas. The
scorcher of enemies re-established his vyuha and stationed himself there. O lord! The Pandavas evinced no interest
in defeating him in the battle."'
