Sanjaya said, "While that tumultuous engagement was going on, Bhima was fighting alone and countering the
army of the sons of Dhritarashtra. He was surrounded by large numbers of the enemy. In that situation of great
fear, he told his charioteer, 'O charioteer! Bear me swiftly on these horses. I will send all the sons of Dhritarashtra
to Yama.' Having been thus addressed by Bhimasena, the charioteer advanced with a fierce speed against the army
of your son, that is, towards the army that Bhima wished to advance against. A large number of Kurus advanced
against him from every direction and the enemy possessed elephants, chariots, horses and foot soldiers. With innumerable arrows, they powerfully struck the best of horses from every side. The great-souled one severed those descending arrows with his gold-tufted arrows. Those gold-tufted arrows were severed into two and three fragments
by the arrows released by Bhima and fell down[The enemy also had gold-tufted arrows.]. O king! In the midst of the kings on your side, elephants,
rathas, horses and foot soldiers were slain by Bhima and roared loudly. O Indra among men! They were like mountains shattered by the thunder. The foremost among kings were shattered by Bhimasena, who was single-handed.
In that encounter, they rushed against Bhima from every side, like birds in search of flowers heading towards a
tree. When they attacked him, in the midst of your soldiers, he[Bhima.] exhibited a force that was greater than the greatest. He was like the Destroyer at the time of destruction. He was the like the one who exterminates all beings, with
a staff in his hand[That is, Yama.]. In that battle, his speed was greater than that of the greatest. Those on your side could not
withstand it. It was as if the one who destroys all beings, when the time of destruction has arrived, had descended
with a gaping mouth. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that battle, the great-souled one scorched the army of
the Bharatas. They were frightened of Bhima and fled in different directions, like large masses of clouds driven
away by a great wind.

' "The intelligent and powerful Bhimasena then spoke cheerfully to his charioteer again. 'O suta! Chariots and
standards have assembled and are advancing towards us. Find out whether they belong to the enemy or to us. Since
I am engaged in fighting, I cannot make out. I should not envelop our own soldiers with arrows. O Vishoka[Vishoka was Bhima's charioteer.]! I
see the enemy on all sides and I am extremely anxious that the king[Yudhishthira.] should not be suffering. Kiriti has not yet
returned. O suta! That is the reason I am overcome by great sorrow. O charioteer! I am grieving that Dharmaraja
has abandoned me in the midst of the enemy and has departed. I do not know whether he and Bibhatsu are alive or
dead. That is the reason I am overcome with grief. However, I will assume a terrible form and drive away these
soldiers. Once they have been destroyed, I shall rejoice. Stationed in the midst of the enemy, I will slay the assembled ones. Then, I will rejoice with you. Count all the quivers and arrows and tell me. How many arrows are still
left on my chariot? What kinds are there and what is their length? O suta! Determine this and tell me.' Vishoka
replied, 'O brave one! There are sixty thousand arrows, ten thousand kshurapra arrows and the same number of
broad-headed arrows. O brave one! There are two thousand iron arrows. O Partha! There are three thousand
pradaras[A pradara is a special kind of arrow.]. O Pandaveya! The weapons that still remain cannot be carried on six carts pulled by bullocks. Release these and others in thousands. You possess clubs, swords, your arms and other stores.' Bhima said, 'O suta!
Behold. In this awful engagement today, I will shatter all the kings with my speed and force. In the encounter, my
fierce arrows will be terrible in form. The sun will disappear and it will be like the world of the dead. O suta! The
kings will know this today, and so will their sons, that Bhima has been submerged in this battle and has singlehandedly vanquished the Kurus in the encounter. All the Kurus will be destroyed in the battle, or let the worlds
know about my deeds since childhood[In the event that Bhima dies.]. Single-handedly, I will bring all of them down or let all of them crush
Bhimasena. There are those who pronounce benedictions on virtuous deeds. Let those gods bless me. Let Arjuna,
the slayer of enemies, come here, like Shakra swiftly summoned to a sacrifice. Behold. The army of the Bharatas
has been shattered. Why are those Indras among men running away? It is evident that the intelligent Savyasachi,
foremost among men, has shrouded the soldiers with his swift arrows. O Vishoka! Behold. The standards are being
routed in the battle, and so are the large numbers of elephants, horses and infantry. The chariots are being shattered, afflicted by arrows and javelins, and so are the rathas. O suta! Behold. The Kourava soldiers are being severely slaughtered and destroyed. Dhananjaya's force is like that of the vajra, and his golden arrows, tufted with
the feathers of peacocks and hawks, are devouring them. The chariots, horses and elephants are being driven away.
Large numbers of foot soldiers are being crushed. All the Kouravas are confounded. The terrified elephants are
running away, as if from a conflagration. O Vishoka! Sounds of lamentation are arising in the battle. Kings among
elephants are emitting loud shrieks.' Vishoka replied, 'O Pandava! All your desires have come true. In the midst of
the elephant arrays, the standard with the ape can be seen. Behold. Like lightning flashing amidst blue clouds, the
bow is being extended there. Astride the top of Dhananjaya's standard, the ape can be seen from every direction.
The celestial gem on the diadem is as radiant as the rays of the sun[Arjuna was known as Kiriti because he wore a diadem.]. Alongside, behold the terrible and extremely loud blare of Devadatta, pale in complexion[Devadatta was the name of Arjuna's conch shell.]. Janardana has the reins in his hand. He is driving through the
army of the enemy. Behold. Next to Janardana is his chakra, increasing Keshava's fame. It is sharp at the edges
and is like the sun in complexion. Its handle is like the vajra. It is always worshipped by the Yadus. O brave one!
Behold.' Bhima said, 'O charioteer! Because you have pleased me greatly and given me good news, I will give
you fourteen supreme villages, one hundred maidservants and twenty chariots. O Vishoka! You have given me
news about Arjuna.'" '
