'Bhishma said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Then Rama began to laugh and spoke to me. 'O Bhishma! It
is your good fortune that you wish to fight with me in battle. O Kouravya! Together with you, I will go to Kurukshetra. O scorcher of enemies! I will do what you have asked me to and you should also go there. O Bhishma! Let
your mother Jahnavi watch me kill you with hundreds of arrows, so that you become the food of vultures, crows
and cranes. O king! Let the goddess[Ganga.], worshipped by siddhas[Siddhi means accomplishment. Siddhas are semi-divine species who have attained these superhuman accomplishments or faculties.] and charanas[Celestial singers.], be miserable when she sees you
slain by me today and weep. The immensely fortunate river, the daughter of Bhagiratha, does not deserve to see
this[Ganga was brought down from heaven by Bhagiratha and is called Bhagiratha's daughter, Bhagirathi.]. But she has given birth to an evil and diseased one like you, who cherishes war. O Bhishma! Come with me
and let us go together. Let there be a battle today. O Kouravya! O bull among the Bharata lineage! Take everything, chariots and other things.' Rama, the vanquisher of enemy cities, spoke these words to me. O king! I bowed
my head before him and said that it would be this way.

'"After speaking these words, desirous of fighting, Rama went to Kurukshetra. I entered the city[Hastinapura.] and told
Satyavati everything. I performed the propitiatory rites and was blessed by my mother. O immensely radiant one!
The brahmanas pronounced sacred words of benediction. I mounted a beautiful and silver chariot, yoked to white
horses. It had been constructed well and had been prepared well. It was strewn with the hides of tigers. It was
loaded with great weapons and every kind of implement. O king! It was driven by a brave charioteer born in a noble lineage, skilled in the knowledge of horses. He had often witnessed my deeds. I was covered in beautiful and
white armour. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! I grasped a white bow. O lord of men! A white umbrella was
held aloft my head and white whisks were brandished. I was attired in white. My headgear was white. All my ornaments were white. Applauded with benedictions of victory, I left Gajasahrya. O bull among the Bharata lineage! I
arrived in Kurukshetra, the field where the battle would be fought. O king! Goaded by the charioteer, the horses,
with the speed of the mind and the wind, swiftly bore me to the supreme field of battle. Like me, the powerful
Rama also swiftly reached Kurukshetra. O king! In battle, we wished to show our valour to each other. I stood before the supreme ascetic Rama, so that he could see me. I grasped my supreme conch shell and began to blow on it.
O king! All the brahmanas, the ascetics who lived in the forest, the gods and the masses of rishis assembled to witness the divine battle. Celestial garlands manifested themselves repeatedly. Divine musical instruments sounded.
There was the rumbling of masses of clouds. All the ascetics who followed Bhargava surrounded the field of battle
as witnesses.

'"The goddess who is my mother desires the welfare of all beings. O king! She manifested herself before me
and said, 'What is it that you wish to do? O extender of the Kuru lineage! I will go to Jamadagni's son and plead
with him. I will repeatedly tell him, "Do not fight with Bhishma, your student." O son! O king! And you should
not behave so obstinately towards a brahmana. Why do you wish to fight with Jamadagni's son in a battle?' She
censured me. 'O son! Do you not know that Rama, the destroyer of kshatriyas, is equal to Hara[Shiva.] in valour? Why
do you wish to fight with him?' I joined my hands in salutation before the goddess. O foremost among the Bharata
lineage! I accurately told her everything that had transpired at the svayamvara. O Indra among kings! I told her
how I had tried to obtain Rama's favours earlier and about the ancient love of the daughter of the king of Kashi.
My mother, the great river, then went to Rama. For my sake, the goddess sought to pacify the rishi Bhargava. She
said, 'Do not fight with Bhishma, your student.' He replied to her, 'It is Bhishma that you should restrain. I am
here because he is not doing what I desire.'"

'Sanjaya[There is a conversation within a conversation, because Sanjaya is recounting the story to Dhritarashtra.] said, "Out of affection towards her son, Ganga then returned to Bhishma. But his eyes were red with
anger and he did not pay heed to her words. The great ascetic, foremost among the Bhrigus, with dharma in his
soul, then appeared. The supreme among the brahmanas challenged him again to the battle."'
