Upamanyu said, 'The great Hara has favoured many thousand others. O Madhava! Why will the illustrious
one not show you his favours? Such an assembly of the gods is to be praised, especially by someone like
you, who is faithful, devoted to brahmanas and non-violent. I will grant you the japa[The mantra for silent meditation.], through which, you will be
able to see Shankara'"

Krishna said[This is Krishna speaking to Yudhishthira.], "I told him, 'O brahmana! O great sage! Through your favours, I will see the lord of the gods,
the one who crushed the large numbers of Diti's sons[The daityas.].' On the eighth day, following the rites, I was initiated by
the brahmana. I received the staff and shaved my head. I held the kusha grass and dressed myself in rags. I sprinkled myself with clarified butter and wore a girdle made out of grass. For one month, I lived on fruits. For a second
month, I subsisted on water. For the third, fourth and fifth months, I only subsisted on air. I single-mindedly stood
on one foot, raising my arms upwards. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I saw the energy of one thousand suns
in the firmament. O descendant of the Pandu lineage! In the midst of that energy, I saw a cloud that was decorated
by an array of cranes. It looked like a blue mountain and there were rainbows all over it. Garlands of lightning
seemed to form a window inside it. The illustrious and extremely radiant one was seated there, together with the
goddess. With his wife, he blazed because of his austerities, energy and beauty. There, with the goddess, the illustrious Maheshvara looked resplendent. It was as if the sun was located inside that cloud, together with the moon. O
Kounteya! My body hair stood up in delight. My eyes dilated in wonder. He is the refuge of the large numbers of
gods. He is the dispeller of all affliction. I saw Hara. He wore a crown. He held a club and a trident in his hands.
He was attired in tiger skin. His hair was matted and he held a staff in his hand. He held the Pinaka and the vajra.
His teeth were sharp. He wore sparkling bracelets and his sacred thread was a snake. A celestial garland, with
many colours, adorned his chest. It was so large that it hung down, right up to his ankles. I saw him and he looked
like the moon in the evening, when the rains are over. Large numbers of demons[Pramathas, spirits and ghosts.] surrounded him on every side.
He was difficult to see, as dazzling as the autumn sun. He was seated on a bull and there were eleven Rudras
around him. They sought to praise the deeds of the one who is the performer of auspicious deeds. The Adityas, the
Vasus, the Sadhyas, the Vishvadevas, the Ashvins praised the god who is the lord of the universe. Everything in the
universe chanted his praise. Shatakratu and the illustrious Vishnu, both sons of Aditi, and Brahma were near Bhava, praising him with the rathantara Sama hymn. O Yudhishthira! There were many lords of yoga, ancestors and
preceptors who knew about yoga, brahmana rishis and their sons, devarshis, the earth, the firmament, the nakshatras, the planets, the fortnights, the months, the seasons, the nights, the years, the kshanas, the muhurtas, the nimeshas, the yugas in due order, the divine branches of knowledge, all the directions, Sanatkumara, the Vedas, itihasa,
Marichi, Angiras, Atri, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, the seven Manus, soma, the Atharvans, Brihaspati, Bhrigu, Dak-
sha,  Kashyapa,  Vasishtha,  kashya[This is probably the liquor known as kashya.],  the  metres,  diksha,  sacrifices,  dakshina,  the  fire,  oblations,  the  embodied
forms of all the articles required at sacrifices, all the guardians of the worlds, the rivers, the serpents, the mountains, all the mothers of the gods, the wives and the daughters of the gods and thousands, tens of thousands and billons of sages. They, and the mountains, the oceans and the directions, bowed down before the lord of tranquility.
There were gandharvas and apsaras, accomplished in singing and the playing of musical instruments. They sung
divine and wonderful praises to Bhava. O great king! The vidyadharas, the danavas, the guhyakas, the rakshasas
and all the beings, mobile and immobile, bowed down before the lord, in speech, thoughts and deeds. Sharva, the
lord of the gods, manifested himself before me. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On seeing that Ishana was in
front of me, the universe, with Prajapati and Shakra, glanced towards me. However, I did not possess the strength
to look towards Mahadeva.

'"At this, the god spoke to me. 'O Krishna! Look at me and speak to me.' Delighted, I bowed my head down before the god and the goddess, Uma. I praised Sthanu in words that are used by Brahma and the other gods to praise
him. 'I bow down before the eternal one who is the womb of everything. The rishis speak of you as Brahma's lord.
Virtuous ones speak of you as austerities, sattva, rajas, tamas and truth. You are Brahma. You are Rudra. You are
Varuna. You are Agni. You are Manu. You are Bhava. You are Dhatri. You are Tvashtri. You are Vidhatri. You are
the lord who faces all the directions. All creatures, mobile and immobile, originate in you. You are the origin of all
beings and you are the one who destroys them. The rishis speak of you as being superior to all the objects of the
sense, the mind, the wind, the seven kinds of fire and all the male gods who are in heaven. O illustrious one! There
is no doubt that you are the Vedas, the sacrifices, soma, dakshina, the fire, the oblations and everything else required for a sacrifice. Sacrifices, gifts, studies, vows, rituals, modesty, fame, prosperity, radiance, contentment and
success are offered to you. O illustrious one! Desire, anger, fear, avarice, insolence, confusion, malice, pain and
disease are your offspring. You are deeds. You are the outcome of those deeds. You are destruction. You are the
foremost one. You are power. You are immutable. You are the supreme origin of the mind. Your nature is eternal.
You are the unmanifest. You are the purifying lord. You are golden and possess a thousand rays. You are the origin
of  all  the  qualities.  All  life  is  dependent  on  you.  The  great  atman,  Mati[Understanding.],  Brahma,  the  universe,  Shambhu,
Svayambhu, Buddhi[Intelligence.], Prajna[Wisdom.], realization, consciousness, fame and fortitude are all words that the great-souled
ones have progressively used in the sacred texts to express your greatness. It is through comprehending you that
learned  brahmanas  overcome  the  confusion  that  is  in  the  hearts  of  all  beings.  The  rishis  have  praised  you  as
kshetrajna. Your arms and feet are in all the directions. Your eyes, heads and faces are in all the directions. You
hear everything in the worlds. You are established, pervading everything. You are the fruits of everything that the
one with the sharp rays[The sun.] performs in a nimesha. As Purusha, the rays of your power are in all hearts. You are the
obtaining of anima and laghima. You are Ishana, the resplendent and undecaying one. The worlds resort to your
understanding and intelligence and seek you out as a refuge. Those who have conquered their senses and are devoted to the truth always use yoga to meditate on you. There are those who know you as the eternal one, the lord
who is the deep refuge, the Purusha who is everywhere in the universe, the one who is golden in complexion, the
one who is supremely intelligent and is the greatest destination. These intelligent ones based themselves on what
transcends intelligence. Those intelligent ones know the seven subtle forms[Mahat, consciousness and the five primal elements.], the six of your attributes[Omniscience, completeness, contentment, independence, power and lack of finiteness.] and the
main techniques of yoga and penetrate into you.' O Partha! I spoke in this way to Bhava, the destroyer of all afflictions. At this, the entire universe and all mobile and immobile objects roared like lions. The large numbers of brahmanas, the gods, the asuras, the serpents, the pishachas, the ancestors, the birds, the large numbers of rakshasas,
the large numbers of spirits[Bhutas.] and all the maharshis bowed down before him. Fragrant and celestial flowers showered down on my head in large numbers. A pleasant breeze began to blow. For the welfare of the universe, the illustrious Shankara glanced towards the goddess Uma, Shatakratu and me and said, 'O Krishna! O slayer of enemies! We know of your great devotion towards us. I am extremely pleased with you and I will do what brings you
benefit. O Krishna! O supreme one! Ask for eight boons and I will give them to you. O tiger among Yadavas! Tell
me what you desire, even if it is something that is extremely difficult to get.'"'
