'Markandeya said, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There was a foremost among brahmanas by the name of
Koushika. He studied the Vedas and was rich in austerities. He was an ascetic and followed dharma in his conduct.
That supreme among brahmanas studied the Vedas, together with the Angas and the Upanishads[The Angas mean the six Vedangas of shiksha (articulation and pronunciation), chhanda (prosody),
vyakarana (grammar), nirukta (etymology), jyotisha (astronomy) and kalpa (rituals). The Upanishads are sacred
texts known as Vedanta, the last part of the Vedas.]. One day, he
was under a tree and was reciting the Vedas. A female crane was perched on the tree. At that time, it dropped some
excrement on the brahmana. The brahmana was angered. Overcome by anger, he directed a terrible stare at the
crane and injured by the brahmana, it fell down on the ground. On seeing that the crane had fallen down, bereft of
its senses, the brahmana was overcome by compassion and regret. 'Overcome by the force of passion and hatred, I
have done that which I should not have.' Having uttered these words several times, the learned one went to a village to beg for alms.

'"O bull among the Bharata lineage! He wandered around the pure households that were in the village. He finally entered a household that he had visited before. He asked, 'Please give.' And the lady replied, 'Wait.' O king!
While the housewife was cleaning the vessel for giving alms, her husband suddenly returned home, extremely hungry. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! On seeing her husband, the devoted lady neglected the brahmana. She
gave her husband water for washing the feet and the mouth and a seat. Then the dark-eyed one waited on her husband. She gave him tasty food to eat and spoke sweetly to him. O Yudhishthira! She always ate the food that had
been left over by her husband. Always following her husband's thoughts, she thought her husband to be a god. In
deeds, thoughts or any other way, she did not act in contrary fashion. Her sentiments were always devoted towards
serving her husband. She was faithful, pure and skilled. She strove for the welfare of the household. She always
followed that which would ensure her husband's welfare. She attended to gods, guests, servants, the father-in-law
and the mother-in-law. She was always devoted to serving and was always in control of her senses. While the one
with the beautiful eyes was thus tending to her husband, she noticed that the brahmana was standing there, wishing
for alms. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! The faithful one was ashamed.

'"The famous one emerged to give alms to the brahmana. The brahmana said, 'O one with the beautiful limbs!
What is the meaning of this? You asked me to wait. You requested me to wait and did not dispose of me first.' O
Indra among men! On seeing that the brahmana was burning in anger and flaming in his energy, the faithful one
pacified him and spoke these words. 'O brahmana! Please pardon me. My husband is my greatest god. He had returned hungry and exhausted and I had served him first.' The brahmana said, 'Brahmanas are not superior and you
make your husband to be superior. Though following the dharma of householders, you are insulting a brahmana.
Even Indra bows down to such a one, not to speak of men on earth. O impudent one! Do you not know and have
you not heard from the elders? Like a fire, a brahmana can burn down the entire earth.'

'"The lady replied, 'I am not insulting brahmanas. They are powerful and are the equals of the gods. O brahmana! O unblemished one! Please pardon my transgression. I know the energy of immensely fortunate and wise
brahmanas. Through their anger, they made the waters of the ocean salty and undrinkable[Brihaspati had cursed the ocean.]. I know of sages who
are blazing ascetics and in control of their souls. The fire of their anger has still not been pacified in Dandaka[Dandaka was born in the Ikshvaku lineage. He coveted Bhargava's daughter and was cursed by Bhargava
that his kingdom would become a wasteland. This is Dandaka Aranya or Dandaka forest.].
Because he oppressed brahmanas, the evil-minded cruel and great asura Vatapi was digested by the rishi
Agastya[This story has been told in Section 33.]. I have heard a lot about the influence of those who know the brahman. O brahmana! Their anger is
extremely great. But so are the favours of those great-souled ones. O brahmana! O unblemished one! You should
pardon this transgression of mine. O brahmana! The dharma that I must serve my husband is a pleasant one for me.
Among all the gods, my husband is the supreme god. O supreme among brahmanas! I must particularly serve that
dharma. O brahmana! Observe the fruits of my serving my husband. It is known to me that you burnt down a crane
through your anger. O supreme among brahmanas! But anger is the enemy that resides in the bodies of men. The
gods know him to be a brahmana who has discarded the delusion of anger, and he who speaks the truth and satisfies his preceptor. The gods know him to be a brahmana, who does not harm even when he has been harmed. The
gods know him to be a brahmana, who is in control of his senses, is devoted to dharma, is always engaged in
studying, is pure and is in control of desire and anger. He who looks upon the world as his own self is intelligent
and is learned in dharma. The gods know him to be a brahmana, who is devoted to all forms of dharma, who studies and teaches, who sacrifices and is a priest at the sacrifices of others. The gods know him to be a brahmana, who
donates according to his capacity. The supreme among brahmanas who studies the Vedas is known as a brahmachari. He who studies without being distracted is known by the gods to be a brahmana. What ensures the welfare of brahmanas has been recounted-always speaking the truth and mentally not rejoicing in falsehood. O
supreme among brahmanas! The eternal wealth of brahmanas is in studying, control of passions and restraint of the
senses. Those who know dharma say that truth and uprightness are the supreme dharma. While eternal dharma is
difficult to fathom, it is based on truth. The injunctions of the elders are that the proof of dharma is in the
shrutis[Shrutis are sacred texts that have been revealed. They are of divine origin and have no author. The core consists of the Vedas and the Vedanta literature.]. O supreme among brahmanas! It is evident that dharma can be seen in many ways and that it is subtle.
You are learned in dharma. You are devoted to studying and are pure. O illustrious one! In my view you do not
know the true meaning of dharma. There is a hunter who lives in Mithila. He serves his father and his mother, he is
truthful and is in control of his senses. He will tell you about dharma. O fortunate one! O supreme among brahmanas! If you desire, go there. O unblemished one! Please pardon everything that I may have spoken in excess. All
the ones who are learned in dharma say that women must not be injured.'

'"The brahmana replied, 'O fortunate one! O beautiful one! I am pleased with you and my anger has gone. The
reprimands uttered by you have been extremely beneficial for me. O beautiful one! May you live in peace. I am
leaving to improve myself.'"

'Markandeya said, "O supreme among men! Having obtained her permission, the brahmana Koushika censured
himself and left for his own dwelling."'
