'Duryodhana asked, "O foremost among the Bharata lineage! When you see Shikhandi in the field of battle, with
arrows raised and ready to slay you, what is the reason for you not to kill him? O mighty-armed one! You said earlier that you would kill the Panchalas and the Somakas. O Gangeya! O grandfather! Tell me the reason for this[Shikhandi also belongs to the lineage of the Panchalas.]."
'Bhishma replied, "O Duryodhana! Together with the lords of the earth, listen to the reason why I will not kill
Shikhandi when I see him in the field of battle. My father, King Shantanu, was a bull among the Bharata lineage
and had dharma in his soul. O bull among men! In course of time, he met his destiny. O foremost among the
Bharata lineage! I then fulfilled my promise. I consecrated my brother Chitrangada as the great king. When he
died, abiding by the instructions of Satyavati and in accordance with the decreed rites, I instated Vichitravirya as
the king. O Indra among kings! Though he was young, he was consecrated by me in accordance with dharma. Vichitravirya had dharma in his soul and glanced towards me for everything. O son[The word used is tata. This means son, but is affectionately used towards anyone who is younger or junior.]! I desired to obtain brides for
him and reflected on those who would be equal in beauty and lineage. O mighty-armed one! At that time, I heard
that the three daughters of the king of Kashi would be given away in a svayamvara[Ceremony where a lady chooses her own husband from assembled suitors.]. All of them were unrivalled
in beauty and their names were Amba, Ambika and Ambalika. O bull among the Bharata lineage! All the kings of
the earth had been summoned there. O Indra among kings! Amba was the eldest and Ambika was the one in the
middle, while Ambalika was the youngest princess. On a single chariot, I went to the capital of the lord of Kashi.
O mighty-armed one! O lord of the earth! I saw the three ornamented maidens there and the kings, the lords of the
earth, who had assembled there. Established in battle, I challenged all those kings. O bull among the Bharata lineage! I raised those maidens onto my chariot. Knowing that they were being offered as viryashulka[However, viryashulka is not the same as a svayamvara. Svayamvara is a ceremony where the maiden herself
(svayam) chooses her husband (vara) from assembled suitors. Viryashulka is when the maiden is offered to the
suitor who shows the most valour (virya), shulka meaning price.], I raised them
onto my chariot and told all the lords of the earth who had assembled there, 'Bhishma, Shantanu's son, is taking
these maidens away by force.' I repeated the challenge. 'O kings! Use the limits of your strength to set them free.
O lords of men! I am forcibly abducting them, in front of your eyes.' At this, all those lords of the earth arose, with
weapons upraised. Enraged, they instructed their charioteers to yoke the chariots. Some were on chariots that were
like the clouds. Others were on elephants and were warriors who fought on elephants. Other lords of the earth were
on the backs of horses. They arose, with weapons upraised. O lord of the earth! Those lords of the earth surrounded me from all directions. With a great mass of chariots, they attacked me from all sides. I repulsed them with a
great shower of arrows. I vanquished all those kings, like the king of the gods against the danavas. I brought down
their colourful and gold-embellished standards. With a single arrow each, I brought them down on the ground. O
bull among men! I laughed and used my flaming arrows to bring down their horses, elephants and chariots in that
battle. On seeing the dexterity of my palms, they were shattered and retreated. After vanquishing those lords of the
earth, I returned to Hastinapura. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O mighty-armed one! I recounted my deed
to Satyavati and handed over the maidens for my brother."'
