'Sanjaya said, "Having said this, the king pierced Arjuna with three arrows that penetrated the inner organs. With
another four extremely forceful arrows, he pierced his four horses. He pierced Vasudeva between the breasts with
ten arrows and with another broad-headed arrow, severed the whip, so that it fell down on the ground. Partha
quickly struck him, without being distracted, with fourteen arrows that had been sharpened on stone and were
colourfully tufted. But those were neutralized by the armour. On seeing that those were unsuccessful, he[Arjuna.] again
struck him with fourteen sharp arrows. But these were also neutralized by the armour. On seeing that twenty-eight
of his arrows had become unsuccessful, Krishna, the destroyer of enemy heroes, spoke these words to Arjuna. 'I
have never seen anything like this before. It is as if boulders have begun to move. O Partha! Arrows shot by you
are bcoming unsuccessful. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Has Gandiva lost its life? Is the grasp of your fist
and the strength of your arms not what it used to be earlier? Is this not the time for your final encounter with your
enemy? Tell me. I am asking you. O Partha! In the battle, I am amazed at seeing that all your arrows are unsuccessful and are falling down in front of Duryodhana's chariot. They are as terrible as the vajra or thunder. They
penetrate the bodies of enemies. But those arrows are becoming unsuccessful. O Partha! What mockery is this
now!'

'"Arjuna replied, 'O Krishna! It is my view that Dhritarashtra's son has sought refuge with Drona and he has
fastened this weapon, so that the weapons are unsuccessful. O Krishna! This armour possesses the essence of the
three worlds. Drona alone knows this. And I have learnt it from that excellent one. My arrows are incapable of
penetrating this armour. O Govinda! Maghavan himself cannot shatter it with his vajra. O Krishna! Knowing this,
why are you trying to confuse me? O Keshava! You know everything that goes on in the three worlds. You know
everything about what will happen in the future. O Madhusudana! No one else knows it as well as you do. O
Krishna! This Duryodhana has been prepared by Drona and is stationed fearlessly in this battle, having donned the
armour. O Madhava! But he does not know something about the appropriate course of action. He has only donned
the armour like a woman. O Janardana! Witness the valour of my arms and my bow. I will defeat Kouravya, although he is protected by the armour. The lord of the gods gave this radiant armour to Angiras. The lord of the
gods again gave me the armour, with the understanding that goes with it[The text uses the word samgraha, which in this context, we have translated as understanding. The sense is that
the mantras associated with the weapon were also given.]. Even if this armour is divine and even
if it has been created by Brahma himself, the evil-minded one will be pierced by my arrows today and will not be
protected by it.'"

'Sanjaya said, "Having said this, Arjuna invoked some arrows with mantras and fixed them. He affixed those
arrows on the bow and stretched it. But Drona's son cut them down with a weapon that was capable of destroying
all weapons. The one with the white horses was astounded at the sight of the one who knew about the brahman[Referring to Ashvatthama.]
making those arrows unsuccessful from a distance. He told Keshava, 'O Janardana! I am incapable of releasing
this weapon a second time. If I do that, the weapon will kill those on our own side. But behold my power today.' O
king! Meanwhile, in that battle, Duryodhana pierced each of the two Krishnas with nine arrows that had drooping
tufts and were like virulent serpents. In that encounter, he again showered down arrows on Krishna and Pandava.
At this great shower of arrows, those on your side were delighted. They roared like lions and sounded their musical
instruments. At this, Partha became enraged in that battle and licked the corners of his mouth. He did not see any
part of the body that was not protected by the armour. He released some well-directed and sharp arrows that were
like death. These killed his[Duryodhana's.] horses and the two charioteers who guarded his flanks[Parshnis.]. The valiant Savyasachi
severed his colourful bow, the leather guards on his hands and shattered his chariot into fragments. With sharp arrows, he deprived Duryodhana of his chariot. Arjuna then pierced both his palms. On seeing that the supreme
archer was in such great difficulty and was afflicted by Dhananjaya's arrows, many rushed there to save him.

'"There were many thousands of chariots and elephants and horses that had been readied. There were angry
warriors on foot and they surrounded Dhananjaya. Arjuna, Govinda, or the chariot could no longer be seen. That
mass of men surrounded them and brought down a giant shower of weapons. But Arjuna slew those troops with
the valour of his weapons. Hundreds of rathas and elephants fell down, deprived of their limbs. They were killed,
or were being killed, and could not reach that supreme chariot[Arjuna's chariot.]. That chariot was stationed one krosha away in
every direction[In every direction, the enemy could not approach closer than one krosha.].

'"Quickly, the hero of the Vrishni lineage then spoke these words to Arjuna. 'Stretch Gandiva with force and I
will blow on my conch shell.' Arjuna drew Gandiva with force and began to slaughter the enemy again. He
brought down a mighty shower of arrows and there was a slapping sound from his palms. Keshava powerfully
blew a loud note on Panchajanya, his eyelashes covered with dust and his face sweating profusely. At the roar of
the conch shell and the sound of the bow, the men, whether they were spirited or dispirited, fell down on the
ground. Arjuna's chariot was freed from the melee, like a cloud driven by the wind. Those who were protecting
Jayadratha, and their followers, became disturbed. The ones who were protecting Saindhava suddenly saw Partha.
They roared loudly, in many ways, and made the earth tremble. The sound of their arrows mixed with other fierce
sounds and the blare of conch shells. Those great-souled ones roared like lions. On hearing the terrible noise raised
by those on your side, Vasudeva and Dhananjaya blew on their conch shells. O lord of the earth! That great sound
filled the earth, with its mountains, oceans, islands and the nether regions. O best of the Bharata lineage! That
sound filled all the ten directions and echoed there, from the Kuru and Pandava forces. The rathas on your side saw
Krishna and Dhananjaya and were frightened. But the maharathas quickly regained their spirits. Having seen the
immensely fortunate Krishnas, those on your side armoured themselves and angrily attacked. It was wonderful."'
