'Droupadi said, "Because of the crafty one who is addicted to dice, I roam around in the king's residence in the
form of a sairandhri, washing for Sudeshna. O scorcher of enemies! I am a princess. Look at the extreme and improper acts I perform. Like a diseased one, I am waiting for the time when all my difficulties will be over. For mortals, it is said that prosperity, success, victory and defeat are only transient. Thinking of this, I am waiting for my
husbands to arise again. That which leads to a man's victory may lead to his defeat too. I am waiting for that. Men
give and beg, kill and are killed, in that order. I have heard that they kill, and are then killed by enemies. There is
nothing that is too heavy for destiny. Nor can destiny ever be transgressed. Therefore, I am waiting for destiny to
manifest itself. Where there was no water earlier, there may be water again[This is probably a reference to waterbodies drying up during the summer and being filled later.]. Thinking of this reversal, I am waiting for us to arise again. If one is not successful because of destiny, even though affairs have been conducted well,
it is said that learned ones should endeavour to make destiny turn favourable. I will tell you the reason behind my
words, whether you ask me or do not ask me. I am immersed in grief and I will tell you. I am the queen of the sons
of Pandu and the daughter of Drupada. Having attained such a plight, who but me would wish to live? O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O destroyer of enemies! These sorrows that I have been overtaken by, bring disgrace
to all the Kurus, the Panchalas and the Pandavyas. I am sustained by many brothers, fathers-in-law and sons. What
woman, other than me, can bear to be so unhappy? In my childhood, I must have performed an act to displease the
creator. O bull among the Bharata lineage! His ill favours have brought me this misfortune. O Pandava! Look at
the pallor of my complexion, the likes of which I have not had, even in the worst of difficulties. O Bhima! O
Partha! You know how happy I used to be earlier. I have now become a servant maid. I am helpless and can find no
peace.

'"I think it cannot be anything other than fate. The mighty-armed Partha Dhananjaya, whose bow is terrible, has
been pacified, like a fire that is covered. O Partha[Both Arjuna and Bhima can be addressed as Partha, because they are both sons of Pritha (Kunti).]! It is impossible for men to comprehend the fate of beings. I
know that this downfall of ours could not have been thought of earlier. You are the likes of Indra and you have always glanced at my face. I am supreme among women. But you now look towards the faces of those who are inferior. O Pandava! Look at my plight, something that I did not deserve. Though all of you are alive, look at how
times have changed. The entire earth, up to the frontiers of the ocean, was under my control. I am frightened of
Sudeshna and am under her control. Earlier, I used to have servants before me and behind me. But I now walk before Sudeshna and follow her at the back. O Kounteya! Listen to another misery that I find to be insufferable. I
have never before had to grind unguents, not even for my own self-only for Kunti. O fortunate one! I now have
to grind sandalwood. O Kounteya! Look at my hands. They have never looked like this earlier."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having said this, she showed him both her calloused hands.

'Droupadi said, "I was never scared of Kunti, or any one of you. But I now stand like a servant maid before Vi-
rata, always terrified. 'What will the emperor tell me? Have I prepared the unguents properly? Perhaps Matysa will
not like sandalwood when it has been ground by others.'"'

Vaishampayana said, 'Narrating her miseries to Bhimasena, the beautiful Krishna wept silently and glanced towards Bhimasena. Her voice was choked with tears. She sighed repeatedly. Bhimasena's heart was shattered and
she said, "O Bhima! In earlier times, the offence that I have caused to the gods cannot have been trifling. O Panda-
va! I am unfortunate that I continue to be alive, when I should be dead." Vrikodara, the destroyer of enemy warriors, then placed the swollen and calloused hands of the trembling one against his face and began to weep. The
valorous Kounteya grasped them. Extremely miserable, and in a voice choked with tears, he spoke these words.'
