'Baladeva said, "You have heard Gada's elder brother[Other than Devaki and Rohini, Vasudeva had other wives too. In different texts, the number of his wives is given as twelve, thirteen or fourteen. One of these wives was Devarakshita and Gada is Devarakshita's son. Gada's
elder brother is thus Krishna.]. These words are in conformity with dharma and artha.
These will ensure welfare for Ajatashatru[Ajatashatru is one of Yudhishthira's names, meaning one without enemies, one for whom enemies have not been
born.] and also ensure welfare for King Duryodhana. By giving up half of the
kingdom, the brave sons of Kunti are striving to ensure that which is good. Dhritarashtra's son should also give up
half of the kingdom and happily spend his time with us. Provided that the rivals act in a similar fashion, by obtaining the kingdom[Meaning, half of the kingdom.], it is certain that the brave ones among men will be pacified and will find joy. Their pacification
will also ensure the welfare of the subjects. I will be happy if someone goes there to ascertain Duryodhana's intentions and conveys to him Yudhishthira's words, so that welfare is ensured for the Kurus and the Pandavas. Let him
meet Bhishma, foremost among the Kurus, Vichitravirya's noble son[Dhritarashtra. Vichitravirya was Dhritarashtra's father.], Drona and his son, Vidura, Kripa, the king
of Gandhara[Shakuni.] and the son of the suta[Karna.], and also the other sons of Dhritarashtra, who are foremost among strong
ones and foremost among those who are learned. They are established in their own dharma. They are heroes in this
world and they are aged in learning and in years. When all these elders and citizens have collected and assembled
together, he must bow down and speak his words, so that the welfare of Kunti's son is ensured. Under no circumstances should they be angered. They have ensured their welfare by resorting to their strength. Yudhishthira was
addicted to gambling and they approached him with affection. It was thus that he lost his kingdom. He was warned
by all his well-wishers, the brave ones among the Kurus, because he was not skilled in gambling[The first gambling match has been described in Section 27 (Volume 2). Balarama's statement is not quite correct. The only one who had warned Yudhishthira was Vidura.]. But
Ajamidha[Yudhishthira's name.] challenged the son of the king of Gandhara, who was skilled in gambling with the dice. There were
thousands of other gamblers whom Yudhishthira could have defeated with the dice. But he ignored them and challenged Soubala, who defeated him with the dice. He was defeated by the one who gambled against him and the
dice were always against him. Having commenced, he lost his head and was convincingly defeated. Therefore,
there is no crime that attaches to Shakuni. Thus, let him show obeisance to Vichitravirya's son and speak many
words that are conciliatory. In this way, the man[The messenger.] may be able to persuade Dhritarashtra's son and bring him
around to what is in our interest."'

Vaishampayana said, 'While the foremost among the Madhus[Madhu is one of the ancestors of the Yadavas.] was thus speaking, the foremost among the Shi-
nis[Satyaki.] suddenly stood up. He censured his words and in great anger, spoke these words.'
