Vaishampayana said, 'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! When the sweet-smiling Devayani heard of this birth
of a son, she unhappily began to think about Sharmishtha. Devayani went to Sharmishtha and said, "O one with
the beautiful eyebrows! What sin have you committed out of desire?" Sharmishtha replied, "A rishi arrived. He
was devoted to dharma and learned in the Vedas. In accordance with dharma, I asked for a boon and he gave it to
me. O one with the sweet smile! I did not fall prey to sin so as to satiate my desire. I tell you truthfully that I obtained this son through the rishi." Devayani said, "O timid one! If that is the case, it is all right. I wish to know the
name, lineage and birth of that Brahmana." Sharmishtha replied, "O one with the beautiful smile! He was as radiant in energy as the sun. On seeing him, I was powerless to ask these questions." Devayani said, "O Sharmishtha!
If all this is true and you have indeed obtained this son from such a superior and great Brahmana, I have no reason
to be angry." They conversed and laughed happily with each other. Believing literally what she had been told,
Bhrigu's descendant[Devayani.] went home.

'O king! Yayati had two sons through Devayani-Yadu and Turvasu. Those two were like Shakra[Indra.] and Vishnu. Through that rajarshi, Vrishaparva's daughter Sharmishtha gave birth to three sons-Druhyu, Anu and Puru.

'O king! One day, the sweet-smiling Devayani went with Yayati to a great forest. She saw three divine looking
children playing there, without any care in the world. Devayani was surprised and asked, "O king! Whose children
are these handsome ones? They look like sons of the gods. They look exactly like you in form and radiance." Having asked the king, she asked the boys, "O sons! What is the name of your lineage? Which Brahmana is your father? Tell me truthfully. I wish to hear it all." The children pointed at the supreme king with their fingers and said
that Sharmishtha was their mother. Having said this, they came up to the king. But with Devayani there, the king
dared not greet them. The boys then wept in sorrow and went to their mother, Sharmishtha. On witnessing the love
the boys displayed towards the king, the queen understood and asked Sharmishtha, "You are owned by me. How
have you dared to do that which brings displeasure to me? You have reverted to the dharma of the asuras. Do you
have no fear?" Sharmishtha replied, "O one with the beautiful smile! What I told you about the rishi is true. My
acts were in accordance with dharma and propriety. Therefore, why should I be afraid of you? O beautiful one!
You chose the king as your husband. So did I. According to dharma, a friend's husband is one's own husband. You
are the daughter of a Brahmana. Therefore, as my superior, you deserve my honour and respect. But don't you
know that this rajarshi is deserving of greater honour?" On hearing these words, Devayani said, "O king! You have
caused me displeasure. I will not live here any longer." Having said this, the dusky one quickly arose, with tears in
her eyes. In a miserable state, she went to her father Kavya.

'Extremely alarmed, the king followed her, trying to pacify her wrath. But she did not return. Her eyes were red
with anger. She did not speak a word to the king. With eyes full of tears, she soon reached Kavya Ushanas. On seeing her father, she paid him homage and stood before him. Yayati followed soon after and also paid homage to
Bhrigu's descendant. Devayani said, "Evil has won over dharma. The inferior have ascended and the superior
brought down. I have been overtaken by Sharmishtha, Vrishaparva's daughter. This king, Yayati, has fathered three
sons through that wretched woman. But I have got only two sons. O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! This king is
famous for his knowledge of dharma. O Kavya! Nevertheless, I tell you that he has crossed the threshold." Shukra
said, "O great king! You know dharma well. Yet, you have committed sin for the sake of pleasure. Therefore, invincible old age will soon oppress you." Yayati replied, "O illustrious one! The daughter of the lord of the danavas
begged me to make her season bear fruit. It was with that thought, and no other, that I did what I thought was right.
Those who know the brahman say that a man who is asked by a woman for the fruition of her season must grant
her wish. Otherwise, he commits the sin of killing an embryo. A man who refuses when a desiring woman privately solicits him, is called a killer of an embryo by the learned. O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! It is for these
reasons, concerned about committing a sin, that I went to Sharmishtha." Shukra said, "O king! You are dependent
on me. You should have awaited my instructions. O son of Nahusha! By committing a falsehood, you have become
a thief in the eyes of dharma." Being thus cursed by the angry Ushanas, Yayati, son of Nahusha, was instantly deprived of his earlier youth and old age overcame him.

'Yayati said, "O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! I am not yet satiated with Devayani's youth. O Brahmana!
Therefore, show me mercy and let old age not overcome me now." Shukra replied, "I never utter a falsehood. O
ruler of the earth! You have been instantly attacked by old age. But if you wish, you can transfer this old age to another." Yayati said, "O Brahmana! Then agree to this. A son of mine who will grant me his youth will enjoy my
kingdom, my merit and my fame." Shukra replied, "O son of Nahusha! If you think of me, you will be able to
transfer your old age to whomsoever you wish. No evil will befall you from that. The son who will give you his
youth will become the king. He will have a long life and numerous offspring and will attain fame."'
