Yajnavalkya said, 'O king! Now listen attentively to the places that they go to. If it[This is after death. The reference is to that part of the anatomy, from where the jivatman emerges at the time of
death.] emerges through the
feet, the person is said to go to Vishnu's region. If it emerges through the calves, we have heard that he obtains  the  gods  known  as  the  Vasus.  If  it  emerges  through  the  knees,  he  obtains  the  immensely  fortunate  gods
known as the Sadhyas. If it emerges through the anus, he obtains Mitra's region. If it emerges through the loins, it
is  the  earth's  region[This is probably not meant to signify being born on earth, but is a reference to Prithivi's region.].  If  it  is  through  the  thighs,  it  is  Prajapati's.  Through  the  flanks,  it  is  the  gods  Maruts.
Through the nose, it is the region of the moon. Through the arms, it is Indra's. Through the chest, it is Rudra's.
Through the neck, he obtains the supreme region of the best of rishis, Nara. Through the mouth, he obtains the
Vishvadevas and through the ears, the directions. Through the nose, he obtains the wind god and through the eyes,
Surya. Through the brows, it is the region of the gods, the Ashvins. Through the forehead, it is the ancestors.
Through the crown of the head, it is the region of the lord Brahma, the foremost among the gods. O lord of Mith-
ila! I have thus told you about the different places that can be obtained through emerging. I will now tell you about
the signs described by learned ones, signifying that an embodied being only has one year of lifespan left. If a person fails to see Arundhati, although he has seen it earlier, or if it is the same with Dhruva, or if the moon appears
like a lamp, with the radiance broken towards the south, it is said that he only has one year of lifespan left[Arundhati is the wife of the sage Vasishtha. She is also the fainter of the two stars in the double star in Ursa Major. Mizar is Vasishtha and Arundhati is Alcor. Dhruva is the Pole Star.]. O
lord of the earth! Those who can no longer see their own selves reflected in the eyes of others only have one year
of lifespan left. If a person has been extremely radiant, but loses that radiance, or if a person has been extremely
wise, but loses that wisdom, or if there are changes in his inner or outer nature, those are signs that he will die
within six months. If a person disrespects the gods, if he acts against brahmanas, if his dark complexion turns pale
-those are signs that he will die within six months. If the lunar disc is seen to have holes, like a spider's web, or if
this is the case with the one with one thousand rays[The sun.]-such a person will confront death within seven nights. If
the fragrant scents in temples of the gods appear to a man to be like the putrid scent from corpses, he will confront
death within six nights. A depression in the ears or the nose, a discolouring of the teeth or the eye, the loss of consciousness and the loss of heat from the body-these are the signs of imminent death. O lord of men! If there is a
sudden flow of tears from the left eye, or if vapour rises from the crown of the head-these are the signs of imminent death. Knowing these signs, a man with a cleansed atman should spend day and night in uniting the atman
with the paramatman. That  is  the  way  he  should  spend  his  time,  until  the  time  for  setting  arrives.  Even if he
doesn't wish to die, he should establish himself in all the rites. He should control himself and discard all fragrances
and tastes. By fixing his atman on the supreme, he can conquer death. O bull among men! He knows the practice
of those who follow sankhya. By using yoga to fix his atman on the supreme, he can conquer death. He goes to the
place that is completely indestructible, without birth and death. It is auspicious and without decay. It is the eternal
and immutable region, difficult for those with unclean souls to obtain.'"'
