'Droupadi said, "O Partha! I have not insulted or censured dharma in any way. Why should I censure the supreme
god, the lord of all beings? O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Know me as one who is incoherent with grief.
Listen to me with a calm mind, as I lament a lot more. O destroyer of enemies! Whatever is born must certainly
perform tasks. Not even inferior ones, but only the immobile[Those without life.] can live without acting. O Yudhishthira! From the
time one suckles at a breast to the time one is supine before death, all mobile beings act according to their nature.
O bull among the Bharata lineage! Among mobile beings in particular, men wish to perform deeds that ensure conduct in this life and the next. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All beings know about ascent[The idea of ascent doesn't become very clear. It probably refers to ascent to a higher form of life after
rebirth.]. The world is
a witness to the fact that they directly reap the fruits of their actions. I can see myself that all beings live in accordance with this ascent, even the creator[Vidhata.] and the preserver[Dhata.], like a crane in the water. You should do your
own task, without becoming fatigued. You should be armed through your deeds. He who knows his own task is
one in a thousand, if not rarer. Therefore, one should act, to protect and to extend what one has. If it[Referring to that which one possesses.] is eaten up
without a new crop, it dwindles like the Himalayas. All subjects would have been destroyed had they not performed their tasks. Do we ever see people act, without their acts leading to fruits? We do not know of anyone in
this world who makes a living without action. In this world, those who believe in destiny and those who believe in
chance are both wrong. What is praised is intelligence based on action. He who is happily asleep and believing in
destiny, makes no effort, that evil-minded one soon sinks like a pot in the water. This is also true of the one who
believes in chance and though capable of action, fails to act. His seat is not permanent and he lives like a weak
one, without a protector. If a man unexpectedly obtains something and it is thought that it has been obtained by
chance, his efforts have not been successful. O Partha! If a man obtains something and describes it as destiny, then
he certainly decides that it was divine decree and nothing but fate. The fruit that a man obtains through his own
acts is directly seen through the eyes and is regarded as manliness. One who is naturally active obtains results
without any obvious reason. O supreme among men! Know that this fruit is only natural. Whatever is thus obtained by a man through chance, divine destiny and as the natural outcome of deeds is the fruit of the man's earlier
deeds.

'"According to the deeds men have earlier done, the preserver and the supreme god distribute them and their
fruits in their respective tasks. Whatever task a man performs, good or bad, know that this has been decided by the
preserver in accordance with the fruits of the earlier deeds. This body is only an instrument of the preserver to undertake acts and take actions. Under his control, one helplessly acts accordingly. O Kounteya! It is the great lord
who appoints us to this task or that one and all beings are made to act, though they are themselves inert. Having
fixed the objective in one's mind, one subsequently undertakes the task. A man who himself uses his intelligence
first is therefore the cause, because of his resolution. O bull among men! It is not possible to count the number of
deeds. Man is the reason behind the success of houses and towns. There is oil in sesame seeds. There is milk in
cows. Finally, there is fire in wood. Using one's intelligence, one should cleverly understand the means for attaining success. Thereafter one undertakes action, after ascertaining the reasons for success. It is on the success of their
deeds that beings survive. An act that is well performed by a skilled actor is certainly different from another act
that is felt to have been performed by one who is not skilled. Had man not been the reason behind the success of
acts, there would have been no oblations and sacrifices, no disciples or preceptors. It is because a man is himself
the actor that he is praised for the success of his deeds and blamed in the case of failure. How can one's deeds be
destroyed?

'"Some say that everything is the outcome of chance, others that everything is the outcome of destiny. There are
those who think it results from a man's efforts. Others say the reason is threefold. Others hold that it is not enough
to think of the task alone. Everything is invisible, be it chance or destiny. It is seen that results are the outcome of
chance or destiny. Some of it is chance, some of it is destiny, some of it is the outcome of one's own deeds. This is
how a man obtains the fruits, there is no fourth reason. Learned and skilled ones who know say this. But even then,
the preserver is the one who gives desirable and undesirable fruits to all beings. Had that not been the case, no beings would have been miserable. A man would have performed the act that would bring him his desired results.
Had earlier acts not existed, his deeds would have led to success. Those men who do not see these three doors to
success and failure are unsuccessful, like their own worlds. Tasks must always be performed. This is what Manu
had decided. A man who does not act is always defeated. O Yudhishthira! If a man acts, he is usually successful.
Those who are lazy rarely attain success. If there is a reason for failure, propitiation is indicated. O Indra among
kings! But if the act is undertaken, one is freed from one's debts. Misfortune characterizes the lazy man who
sleeps. But a skilled one certainly obtains the fruits and attains prosperity. Intelligent men committed to acting never have doubts and are successful. But they do not seek to free from doubt those who doubt and are unsuccessful.

'"We have now been overtaken by misfortune. However, if you engage in action, there is no doubt that this misfortune will be removed. Even if you are unsuccessful, you will have the pride and this is also true of Vrikodara,
Bibhatsu and the twin brothers. The tasks of others have obtained success and ours might also be. Without undertaking the task first, how can one know what the outcome will be? Having cleaved the earth with his plough and
sown the seed, the farmer waits silently for the rains to be the cause. However, if the rains do not favour him, the
farmer is not to be blamed. He knows he has done everything that any other man could have. Even if we do not obtain the fruits of success, the slightest bit of blame will not attach to us. The intelligent one keeps this in mind and
does not blame himself. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Even if the objective is not attained, though one has
acted, there is no reason to despair, because there are two other reasons too[Chance and destiny.]. There is success and there is failure. But lack of inclination is a different thing altogether. Success in a task is the united outcome of many factors.
If the required attributes are deficient, the fruit may be incomplete, or non-existent. O one without decay! But if the
task is not begun, neither fruit nor attributes can be seen. According to his strength and power, the intelligent one
brings together time, place, means and auspicious rites for prosperity. Those who are not deluded must act. Valour
will be the instructor. Among the qualities required for action, valour is the most important. If an intelligent person
sees one[Implicitly, one who is an enemy.] who is superior in many qualities, he should employ conciliation and other kinds of tasks. O Yudhishthira! He should wish for his misery and destruction. This is true of oceans and mountains, not to speak of
mortal men. By looking for the weaknesses in an enemy, a man satisfies a debt to himself, as well as to the enemy.
A man should never think ill of himself. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Prosperity does not come to one
who thinks of himself as having become overpowered. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! This is the foundation
for the success of the world. It is said that the reasons for success are many and depend on the time and the place.

'"In earlier times, a learned brahmana was lodged in my father's house[This reference to the brahmana is irrelevant and is required only because Droupadi is a woman and therefore, should not normally be so knowledgeable.]. O bull among the Bharata lineage!
He told all this, first propounded by Brihaspati[The preceptor of the gods.], to my father. He also taught all this to my brothers. I overheard
this conversation at home. O King Yudhishthira! He explained this to me comfortingly, when I would arrive on
some task, or when I was serving, or when I was seated on my father's lap."'
