'Vyasa said, "Cows give birth to asses. Sons have intercourse with their mothers. When it is not the season, trees in
the forest can be seen to produce flowers and fruit. Princes are pregnant and are giving birth to monsters. Predatory
birds are feeding on other birds and jackals on other animals. Inauspicious animals with terrible teeth are born,
with three horns, four eyes, five legs, two penises, two heads and two tails. They have wide open jaws and are
emitting inauspicious sounds. There are horses with three feet, crests, four eyes and horns. In your city, the wives
of those who are learned about the brahman are seen to give birth to birds and peacocks. O lord of the earth! Mares
give birth to calves and she-dogs to jackals. Cocks, mynahs[Sharika, the bird Turdus Salica.] and parrots are uttering inauspicious sounds.
Women are giving birth to four and five daughters at the same time. As soon as they are born, they are dancing,
singing and laughing. In their houses, inferior ones can be seen to be playing, suckling, dancing and singing. These
are signs of a great calamity. Driven by destiny, other children are seen to paint armed men who are running
around, with staffs in their hands. Desirous of fighting, they are laying siege to cities. Lotuses, blue lotuses and
night-lotuses[Padma (a lotus in general), utpala (a blue lotus) and kumuda (a lotus that grows in the night or a water lily)
respectively.] are growing on trees. Strong winds are blowing and the dust is not abating. The earth is trembling
and the sun seems to have been swallowed by Rahu[Rahu is a demon. At the time of the churning of the ocean, he disguised himself as a god and began to drink amrita. This was noticed by the sun and the moon and they reported this to Vishnu, who sliced off Rahu's head
with his chakra. Rahu is a head without a body. Seeking revenge against the sun and the moon, he swallows
them at the time of an eclipse.]. The white planet has passed beyond Chitra and is established there[The white planet is Shukra. Chitra is the fourteenth nakshatra, Spica. Shukra has passed beyond Chitra, towards
the fifteenth nakshatra, Svati (Arcturus), whose lord is Rahu. The white planet might also be Ketu.]. In particular, all this shows harm for the Kurus. There is an extremely terrible comet and it is based
in Pushya and is oppressing it[Pushya is the eighth nakshatra.]. This great planet will be inauspicious for the armies. Angaraka is retrograde and
is in Magha, while Brihaspati is in Shravana[Angaraka is Mars, while Magha is the tenth nakshatra. Brihaspati is Jupiter, while Shravana is the twenty-second nakshatra.]. The son of the sun is in Bhaga nakshatra and is oppressing it[The son of the sun is Shani and Bhaga is the presiding deity for the eleventh nakshatra, Purva Phalguni. However, we have earlier been told that Saturn is in Rohini. There is a contradiction in the positions of the planets
across these two chapters.]. O
lord of the earth! Shukra is rising towards Purva Proshthapada. Having crossed it, it is glancing towards Uttara[Shukra is Venus and Purva Proshthapada is the same as Purva Bhadrapada, the twenty-fifth nakshatra. Uttara
means Uttara Bhadrapada, the twenty-sixth nakshatra.].
The dark planet is blazing, with smoke and fire. It is based in, and is attacking, Indra's energetic nakshatra,
Jyeshtha[The dark planet is Saturn, Jyeshtha is the eighteenth nakshatra and its presiding deity is Indra. However, we
have earlier been told that Saturn is in Rohini.]. Dhruva is flaming and is circling towards the left in a terrible way[Dhruva is the pole star.]. The harsh planet is established
between Chitra and Svati[The harsh planet is probably Rahu.]. The one with radiance like the fire is retrograde, having completed its regular
course[Because of the energy of the brahman and Shravana, this seems to be Jupiter.]. It is full of the energy of the brahman and is red in its body. It is established in Shravana. The earth that
produces fruit is full of every kind of grain[Even if it is the wrong season for that kind of grain.]. Every stalk of barley has five ears and every stalk of paddy a hundred ears. Cattle are the foremost in all the worlds and they sustain the entire universe. When they are milked after
calving, they only yield blood.

'"The bows radiate rays of light. The swords are flaming terribly. The weapons are seen to be unsheathed. A battle is at hand. The weapons, the water, the armour and the standards are shining with the complexion of the fire,
foretelling great destruction. In every direction, animals and birds can be seen, emitting harsh noises and their
mouths blazing. This signifies a great calamity. A bird with one wing, one eye and one leg is flying in the sky at
night. It is screaming terribly, repeatedly vomiting blood. The blazing planets are stationed, with copper-red crests.
But the radiance of saptarshi[Saptarshi means the seven (sapta) great sages (rishi). But here, it means the constellation Ursa Majoris (Great
Bear).] has been dimmed. The two blazing planets, Brihaspati and Shani, are near
Vishakha[Vishakha is the sixteenth nakshatra.] and have become stationary for a year. The terrible planet is established like a comet and has robbed
Krittika, the first among nakshatras in brilliance, of its radiance[The identification of the terrible planet is not clear, but it could be Ketu, Rahu's headless torso. Krittika is the
Pleiades, the third of the twenty-seven nakshatras. The reference to Krittika as the first might also mean that the
ordering of the nakshatras used to be different earlier.]. O lord of the earth! The nakshatras were earlier
classified into three groups[There are different ways of classifying the twenty-seven nakshatras. The three-fold classification can be a reference to their categorization as upward looking, downward looking and ones that look straight or sideways. Alternatively, kings are divided into three categories, those who own elephants, those who own horses and those
who own men. The nine nakshatras that begin with Ashvini signify danger to kings who own horses, if evil
planets influence them. The nine nakshatras that begin with Magha have the same implication for kings who
own elephants and the nine nakshatras that begin with Mula have that implication for kings who own men.]. Budha's[Budha is Mercury.] glances are descending on them and this engenders great fear. Earlier, the
night of the new moon used to be on the fourteenth, fifteenth or sixteenth lunar day. But like now, I do not know of
it occurring on the thirteenth. On the thirteenth lunar day and in the same month, eclipses of the sun and the moon
took place. These eclipses occurred at the wrong times, signifying a destruction of living beings. All the directions
are covered in dust and dust is showering everywhere. There are terrible and ill portents in the clouds. Blood showers down in the night. There are also terrible showers of flesh on the fourteenth day of the dark lunar fortnight. The
rakshasas are not satiated and utter terrible roars in the middle of the night. The great rivers are flowing in the opposite direction and water has turned into blood. The wells are foaming and roaring like bulls. Meteors are descending with roars, inter-mingled with dry thunder[That is, without rain.]. It is now night and the impaired sun will arise at dawn. Giant and fiery meteors have covered everything in the four directions. Maharshis have said that when the sun is thus
afflicted, the earth will drink the blood of thousands of kings. From Kailasa and Mandara and also from the Himalaya mountains, thousands of sounds are heard, as the summits fall down. There are giant tremors in the ground
and because of this, the four oceans are repeatedly overflowing their shores. Fierce winds that are full of pebbles
are blowing, crushing the trees. In villages, towns and sanctuaries, trees are falling down. When brahmanas pour
oblations into the fire, it becomes yellow, red or blue. The flames bend to the left and have a bad smell. They are
generally full of smoke and make harsh sounds. O lord of the earth! Touch, smell and taste have become contrary.
The standards of kings tremble repeatedly and emit smoke. Kettledrums and war drums release showers of coal
dust. From the tops of palaces and the gates of cities, vultures form circles and fly to the left, uttering terrible cries.
They are uttering terrible cries of 'paka, paka[This doesn't mean anything. It is just the sound being uttered by the birds.]' and so are the crows. They are perching on the tops of standards
and this forebodes the destruction of the kings. Distressed and weeping horses and thousands of elephants are
trembling and are running here and there, releasing urine and dung. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having
heard this and the time having arrived, do what is necessary, so that the world does not head towards destruction."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having heard the words of his father, Dhritarashtra said, "I think that all of this has been
ordained earlier and there is no doubt that it will happen. If there is a battle and kshatriyas kill, in accordance with
the dharma of kshatriyas, they will attain the world of heroes and only obtain happiness. These tigers among men
will give up their lives in this great battle and will obtain fame in this world and great happiness for a long time in
the other world."'
