'The dundubha said, "In times long past, I had a Brahmana friend named Khagama. He was truthful in his words
and possessed powers through his austerities. When he was engaged in the agnihotra sacrifice, out of juvenile playfulness, I made a snake out of blades of grass and tried to frighten him. He fainted. When he regained consciousness, that truthful ascetic, rigid in his vows, told me in great anger, 'Since you created a powerless mock snake to
frighten me, you will yourself turn into a powerless[That is, non-poisonous.] snake through my curse.' O ascetic! I knew the power of his
austerities. Therefore, very agitated in my heart, I told him, 'I stand here, bowing before you and saluting you with
folded hands. Since I am your friend, I did this only to make you laugh. O Brahmana! You should forgive me and
take back your curse.' Seeing that my mind was thus agitated, the ascetic was moved and breathing hot and hard,
he said, 'What I have said must come to pass. But, O ascetic! Since you are always rigid in your austerities and unwavering from your rites, hear what I have to say and hold it close to your heart. When Pramati's son, the pure
Ruru appears, you will be immediately freed from the curse on seeing him.' You are that Ruru, the son of Pramati.
Regaining my form, I will tell you something for your benefit.

'"O best of beings! The righteous path is non-violence and that of not destroying life. Therefore, a Brahmana
should never take the life of any living creature. The sacred texts say that a Brahmana should always be peaceful,
learned in the Vedas and the Vedangas, should make all creatures fearless and should be non-violent, truthful and
forgiving. The supreme duty of Brahmanas is to retain the knowledge of the Vedas. The duty of the Kshatriyas is
not meant for you. O Ruru! Listen to me. To hold up the rod of punishment, to rule over and protect subjects, these
are the natural duties of Kshatriyas. In days gone by, the snakes were destroyed in Janamejaya's sacrifice. But the
frightened snakes were saved by a Brahmana at the snake-sacrifice. O supreme among the Brahmanas! This was
Astika, chief among the Brahmanas, powerful in his austerities, brave, strong and learned in the Vedas."'
