Vaishampayana said, 'On seeing her delay, Hidimba, the lord of the rakshasas, got down from his tree and came to
where the Pandavas were. His eyes were red, his arms were gigantic, his hair stood up and he had great strength.
His complexion was like that of clouds, his teeth were sharp and his face was aflame. On seeing this malformed
one descend[From the tree.], Hidimba[This is the sister, not named thus far. The avoidance of diacritical marks makes it difficult to differentiate the
brother from the sister. The brother is Hidimba, while the sister is Hidimbaa. In the translation, Hidimba will be
used for both, since the context will make it clear which one is meant, and Hidimbaa seems forced.] was frightened and told Bhimsena, "The evil-minded maneater is coming and he is angry.
You and your brothers do what I ask you to. O brave one! Since I have the power of the rakshasas, I can go wherever I want, at will. Climb onto my hips and I will carry you through the sky. O scorcher of enemies! Awake your
mother and brothers who are sleeping. Taking all of them, I will travel through the sky." Bhima replied, "O lady
with the broad hips! Do not be afraid. I am certain that as long as I am here, no one can harm us. O slender-waisted
one! I will kill him before your eyes. O frightened one! The worst of rakshasas is no match for my strength. All the
rakshasas together cannot stand up to me in a fight. Look at my arms, as round as the trunks of an elephant. Look
at my thighs, like iron clubs. Look at my broad and hard chest. O beautiful one! Today, you will be witness to my
valour, like that of Indra. O broad-hipped one! Do not think that I am only a man and consider me to be weak."

Hidimba replied, "O tiger among men! You are like a god. I do not consider you to be weak. But I have witnessed
the power this rakshasa has unleashed on men."

'O descendant of the Bharata lineage! While Bhimasena was engaged in this conversation with her, the man-eating rakshasa heard these words and was furious. He also saw Hidimba in human form, the crown of her head bedecked with flowers and her face like the full moon. Her eyebrows, nose, eyes and the tips of her hair were beautiful and her nails and skin were delicate. She was adorned with all kinds of ornaments and attired in a fine and
transparent dress. On seeing her in that beautiful and deluding human form, the maneater thought she was lusting
for a man and became furious. O best of the Kurus! Becoming very angry with his sister, the rakshasa dilated his
gigantic eyes and told her, "Who is the deluded one who comes in my way when I am hungry? O Hidimba! Have
you become so senseless that you are not frightened of my anger? Shame on you, you who lust after men! You do
that which causes me displeasure. You bring disrepute to all the chief rakshasas, your ancestors. Today, I will kill
you, together with all those for whose sake you have done this great injury to me." Having addressed Hidimba in
these words, the red-eyed Hidimba gnashed his teeth against each other and rushed at her, with the intention of
killing her. On seeing him rush at her, Bhima, the supreme wielder of all weapons, reproached him strongly, asking
him to stop.'
