Janamejaya asked, 'How did those brave ones, the Kurus, the Pandavas, the Somakas and the extremely fortunate
kings who had assembled from many countries, fight?'

Vaishampayana said, 'O lord of the earth! Listen to how those brave ones, the Kurus, the Pandavas and the Somakas, fought in Kurukshetra, the region where austerities were performed. Arriving in Kurukshetra, the extremely powerful Pandavas, together with the Somakas, were desirous of victory and advanced against the Kouravas. All
of them were accomplished in the study of the Vedas and rejoiced at the prospect of battle. They wished to be victorious in the fight and were ready to be slain in the field of battle. They advanced towards the invincible army of
Dhritarashtra's son and, together with their soldiers, set up camp on the western side, facing the east. In the prescribed fashion, Kunti's son, Yudhishthira, instructed that thousands of camps should be set up in the region beyond Samantapanchaka[Samantapanchaka is another name for Kurukshetra, usually explained because of the five (pancha) lakes created
by Parashurama. Alternatively, it is said that the land was five yojanas in every direction.]. The entire earth seemed to be devoid of horses, men, chariots and elephants, with only
children and the aged remaining. O supreme among kings! That large army was as large as the entire spread of
Jambudvipa[The earth is divided into different continents (dvipa). The number varies, but is usually stated to be seven. The
central one is Jambudvipa, named after jambu, the jamun tree. Bharatavarsha is in the centre of Jambudvipa.], over which the sun radiates heat. All the varnas were together and the expanse covered many yo-
janas, encompassing in due course, all the regions, rivers, mountains and forests. King Yudhishthira, bull among
all men, instructed that the best of food, and every object of enjoyment, should be supplied to them and their
mounts. Yudhishthira assigned diverse kinds of signs to them, so that in this fashion, they would know that they
belonged to the Pandaveya side[That is, there were passwords and other signs that the Pandava army would use with each other.]. With the time for battle having arrived, Kouravya[Yudhishthira.] instructed that all of them
should have signs and emblems, so that they might be recognized. When Dhritarashtra's great-minded son saw the
tops of the standards of the Parthas, he and all the kings arrayed themselves against the Pandavas. He was in the
midst of one thousand elephants and was surrounded by his brothers, with a white umbrella held aloft his head. On
seeing Duryodhana thus, all the Pandava soldiers were delighted. All of them blew on giant conch shells and
sounded thousands of kettledrums. The Pandavas and the valiant Vasudeva were delighted to see that their soldiers
were rejoicing. To delight their warriors, Vasudeva and Dhananjaya, tigers among men who were stationed on their
chariot, blew their divine conch shells. Both Panchajanya and Devadatta resounded[Panchajanya is Krishna's conch shell and Devadatta is Arjuna's.]. At this, like deer on hearing
the sound of a roaring lion, the warriors and the mounts released urine and excrement. At that time, Dhritarashtra's
army was frightened on hearing this. A terrible dust arose and nothing could be seen. Enveloped in the dust raised
by the soldiers, the sun disappeared. Clouds rained down showers of flesh and blood and this covered all the soldiers. It was extraordinary. Then, near the ground, a wind arose, carrying small stones. The troops were afflicted
with this, but the dust was dispelled. O king! The two armies stood ready and stationed in Kurukshetra, delighted
at the prospect of battle, like two turbulent oceans. The encounter between those two armies was extraordinary,
like two oceans when the end of a yuga has arrived. When the Kouravas[Meaning both Yudhishthira and Duryodhana.] assembled their armies, the entire earth
became empty, with the exception of the aged and children.

'O bull among the Bharata lineage! Then the Kurus, Pandavas and Somakas had an agreement and established
rules of dharma that would be followed in the war. When hostilities ceased, there would be friendliness towards
each other, as was the appropriate behaviour earlier. There would be no resort to deceit again. Those engaged in a
war of words would be countered with words. Those who had withdrawn from the midst of battle should not be
killed under any circumstances. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! A ratha should only fight with a ratha, one on
an elephant with another on an elephant, one on a horse with another on a horse and a foot soldier with a foot soldier. Any striking should be in accordance with appropriateness, valour, energy and age and after a challenge had
been issued. It should not be against one who was unsuspecting or distressed, or was engaged in fighting with another, or was distracted or retreating. One who was without a weapon or without armour should never be killed.
One should never strike charioteers, those carrying burdens[The word used in the text is dhurya. This means one who carries a burden and can be a beast or a man.], those carrying weapons and those who sound kettle-
drums or conch shells. Having concluded this agreement, the Kurus, the Pandavas and the Somakas looked at each
other in supreme wonder. Those great-souled bulls among men stationed themselves and together with their soldiers, were extremely delighted in their minds.'
