Vaishampayana said, 'The best among brahmanas applauded Narada's words. Rajarshi Shatayupa spoke these
words to Narada. "O illustrious one! O immensely radiant one! You have increased the Kuru king's faith and
all these people's and mine. O devarshi! But there is something I wish to tell you. Please listen attentively. O one
who is revered by the worlds! It concerns Dhritarashtra. You possess divine sight and know the truth about everything. O devarshi! You can see the destinations of different kinds of men. You have spoken about the kings who
are in the great Indra's abode. O great sage! But you have not spoken about the worlds this king will obtain. O
lord! I wish to hear about the regions that will be obtained by this lord of the earth. When will he obtain them? I
am asking you. Tell me the truth about that." Thus addressed, Narada spoke words that were pleasant for everyone
to hear. The great ascetic with the divine sight was in the midst of all those virtuous ones. "I can always go to
Shakra, whenever I wish. Having gone there, I saw Shakra, Shachi's consort. There, I also saw the rajarshi, King
Pandu. O king! There was a conversation about Dhritarashtra there, about the extremely difficult austerities that
the king was tormenting himself with. O king! I heard what Shakra said. There are three years left in this king's
lifespan. After that, with Gandhari, the king will go to Kubera's abode. Dhritarashtra will find pleasure there and
will be honoured by the king of the yakshas. He will be adorned in divine ornaments and will travel as he wishes,
in a celestial vehicle. He is a rishi's son[Vedavyasa.] and has burnt his sins through austerities. The one with dharma in his
soul will roam around in the worlds of the gods, the gandharvas and the rakshasas at ease. What you have asked
me is a great mystery, even to the gods. However, since I am pleased with you, I have told you. You are also
learned about the sacred texts and have burnt your sins through austerities." They heard these sweet words of the
devarshi. All of them were extremely happy in their minds and so was the king. Those learned brahmanas conversed in this way with Dhritarashtra and then went away as they desired, along paths meant for those who are
successful.'
