Vaishampayana said, 'Having been defeated, the sons of Pritha began to prepare for exile in the forest. One after
another, they dressed themselves in deerskins and upper garments. Those destroyers of enemies had lost their kingdom and were attired in deerskin. On seeing them ready to leave for the forest, Duhshasana said, "The wheel has
now begun to turn for the great-souled king, Dhritarashtra's son. The Pandavas have been vanquished and have attained supreme misery. Today, the gods have come to us along their smooth celestial routes. We have become elders to our enemies in qualities, their elders and more numerous than they are. The Pandavas have descended into
hell for a long time, for eternity. They have fallen from happiness and have lost their kingdom, destroyed for an
eternity. The Pandavas were intoxicated with their strength and laughed at the sons of Dhritarashtra. They have
been defeated and have lost their riches. They must go to the forest. They have to give up their multicoloured armour and their divine and radiant garments. All of them must now put on the skins of ruru deer. They have accepted the stake that Soubala offered. Their minds were always nourished by the thought that there were no men like
them in the world. But today, the Pandavas will know themselves in adversity, like sesame seeds that are barren. O
Kourava[Addressing Yudhishthira.]! Your stay will not be like that of great-minded ones[Ascetics who live in the forest.]. The deerskins of the powerful Pandavas have
not been consecrated[Unlike proper ascetics.]. Yajnasena was the immensely intelligent descendant of Somaka. He gave his daughter
Panchali to the Pandavas. That was not a deed well done, because the Parthas, husbands of Yajnaseni, are impotent. O Yajnaseni! What pleasure will you derive, since those dressed in fine garments are now reduced to deer-
skins in the forest, without riches and without homes? Choose a husband who will bring you pleasure. All the Kurus who are assembled here are forbearing and self-controlled and have no dearth of riches. Choose one of them as
your husband, so that you do not suffer from this change in fortune. All the Pandavas are now like sesame seeds
without kernels, or deer that only have skin on them. They are like barren corn. Why do you show homage to the
Pandavas who have fallen? Serving sterile sesame seeds is a waste of labour." Dhritarashtra's son uttered these
cruel and harsh words in the hearing of the Parthas.

'Having heard these words, the impetuous Bhimasena suppressed his anger. Like a Himalayan lion dashing at a
jackal, he suddenly approached him[Duhshasana.] and loudly rebuked him. "O cruel and evil one! You utter words that lead to
failure. You are boasting among these kings because of the skills of Gandhara[Shakuni.]. Just as your words pierce our
hearts like arrows, I will make you remember all this when I pierce your heart in battle. I will send to Yama's
abode all those who are your followers and protectors because of desire and avarice, together with all their relatives." Clad in his deerskin, Bhima uttered these angry words. But though immersed in grief, he stuck to the path
of dharma. The other one[Duhshasana.] had no shame. He danced around in the middle of the Kurus and challenged him[Bhima.],
calling him a cow. Bhimasena said, "O Duhshasana! Cruel, harsh and rough words are possible for you. Who else
will boast of riches obtained through deceit? If he does not rip apart your breast and drink your blood in battle,
Partha Vrikodara will not go to the worlds attained by those with good deeds. In front of all the archers, I will kill
the sons of Dhritarashtra in battle. I tell you truthfully that it is only after this that I will go to the abode of peace."

When the Pandavas were leaving the sabha, the evil king Duryodhana, in play and delight, sought to mimic
through his own steps Bhimasena's leonine gait. At that, Vrikodara half-turned his body towards him and said, "O
stupid one! This will not make you successful. I will soon kill you, with your relatives, and give you my response
by reminding you of this." The powerful and proud Bhima witnessed this insult to himself, but controlled his
anger. Following the king[Yudhishthira.] in the assembly of Kurus, he spoke these words and went out, "I will be the slayer of
Duryodhana. Dhananjaya will be the slayer of Karna. Sahadeva will kill Shakuni, the deceitful one with the dice.
In the midst of this sabha, I will once again utter the words of grave and solemn import. The gods will surely make
this true when there is a war between us. I will kill Suyodhana[Duryodhana.] with a club in battle. I will press down his head
on the ground with my foot. As for this evil-hearted and cruel Duhshasana, whose valour is in his words, I will
drink his blood like the king of deer[A lion is the king of deer.]."
'Arjuna said, "The truthful Bhima's resolutions are not known only in words. In the fourteenth year, what is going to occur will be witnessed. The earth will drink the blood of Duryodhana, Karna, the evil-hearted Shakuni and
Duhshasana, as the fourth. O Bhimasena! On your instructions, I will kill in battle this jealous Karna, who uses his
eloquence to praise the wicked." For giving pleasure to Bhima, this is what Arjuna swears. "In battle, I will kill
Karna and Karna's followers with my arrows. With my sharp arrows, I will send to Yama's abode all those other
kings who will fight with me out of their folly. Let the Himalayas move from where they are established, let the
sun be dimmed, let coolness be destroyed from the moon, if I deviate from this vow. In the fourteenth year, if
Duryodhana does not restore the kingdom to us with proper honour, all this will certainly happen."'

Vaishampayana said, 'When Partha said this, Sahadeva, Madri's handsome and powerful son, grasped his own
large arms. His eyes were red with anger and he sighed like a serpent. Desiring to kill Soubala, he uttered these
words. "O foolish one! O destroyer of the fame of Gandhara! What you thought were dice are not dice, but sharp
arrows that you have invited in battle. For you and your relatives, I will certainly accomplish what Bhima has said.
I will do what I have to do and you can do everything that you wish to do. O Soubala! I will overpower you and
swiftly kill you in battle with your relatives, if you stay and fight in accordance with the dharma of the kshatriyas."

O lord of the world! On hearing Sahadeva's words, Nakula, the most handsome among men, uttered his words, "At
this gambling match, Dhritarashtra's sons have used harsh and insulting words towards Yajnaseni, so as to bring
pleasure to Duryodhana. These sons of Dhritarashtra are evil and summoned by destiny, are soon to die. In their
great numbers, I will show them the abode of Vaivasvata[Yama's name.]. On Dharmaraja's instructions and following Droupadi's footsteps, I will soon relieve the earth of the sons of Dhritarashtra." Having extended their arms to take these
many oaths, all these tigers among men went to Dhritarashtra.'
