Janamejaya asked, 'Why is it called Sapta-Sarasvata? Who was the sage Mankanaka? How did that illustrious
one observe rituals and become successful? O supreme among brahmanas! What lineage was he born in and
what did he study? O supreme among brahmanas! In accordance with the proper way, I wish to hear all this.'

Vaishampayana replied, 'O king! The seven Sarasvatis cover this entire universe. Wherever she was powerfully
summoned, Sarasvati manifested herself there-Suprabha, Kanchanakshi, Vishala, Manashrada, Sarasvati, Oghavati, Suvenu and Vimalodaka[It is not clear whether Vimalodaka is a proper name or not. If it is a
proper name, the seven names of Sarasvati are in addition to the name of
Sarasvati. If Sarasvati is also one of the seven names, Vimalodaka is an
adjective, meaning the one with clear waters. However, since the seven
names occur separately later, Sarasvati is not one of the seven names.]. The grandfather[Brahma.] performed a great sacrifice on the surface of the earth and all
the brahmanas assembled there. Sacred incantations from the unblemished Vedas resounded there. At that great
sacrifice, performed in accordance with the indicated rites, the gods were also agitated[Because the sacrifice was so spectacular.]. O great king! The great
grandfather consecrated himself at that sacrifice. That sacrifice yielded every object of desire, everything that one
could mentally think of. It yielded the objectives of dharma and artha. O Indra among kings! All of these manifested themselves before the brahmanas who were there. The gandharvas went there and large numbers of apsaras
danced. Divine musical instruments were played upon. At the richness of the sacrifice, even the gods were satisfied, not to speak of the supreme wonder that arose among those who were human. In the grandfather's presence,
the sacrifice was held in Pushkara. O king! However, the rishis said, "This sacrifice will not lead to great fruits.
The best of rivers, Sarasvati, cannot be seen here." On hearing this, the illustrious one cheerfully summoned Sarasvati. O Indra among kings! Summoned by the grandfather to the sacrifice in Pushkara, Sarasvati came there as
Suprabha. On seeing the swift flows of the Sarasvati, the sages were satisfied and showed a great deal of respect to
the grandfather's sacrifice. Thus, for the sake of the grandfather and to satisfy the learned ones, Sarasvati, supreme
among rivers, manifested herself in Pushkara.

'O king! The sages assembled in Naimisha. O lord of men! They conversed colourfully amongst themselves. In
diverse ways, the sages there talked about the study of the Vedas. The sages who were assembled there remembered Sarasvati. O great king! The rishis, who wanted to perform a sacrifice, thought of her. O Indra among kings!
To aid the assembled great-souled ones, the immensely fortunate and sacred Sarasvati arrived there in Naimisha, as
Kanchanakshi, for the sake of the sages who wished to perform a sacrifice. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
The best of rivers arrived there and was worshipped.

'Gaya performed a great sacrifice in Gaya. Sarasvati, the best of rivers, was summoned to Gaya's sacrifice. In
Gaya, the rishis, rigid in their vows, named her Vishala.

'The river originates from the flanks of the Himalayas and is swift in flow. O descendant of the Bharata lineage!
Ouddalaka performed a sacrifice there. From every direction, a large number of sages assembled there. O king!
This was a sacred spot towards the north of the region of Kosala. Before the great-souled Ouddalaka had performed his sacrifice there, he had thought of Sarasvati. For the sake of that rishi, the best of rivers had arrived at
that spot. She was honoured by the large number of sages, clad in bark and deerskin. Because she had been summoned mentally, she came to be known as Manashrada[Here, the text actually says Manohrada, but the two words mean the
same thing. Literally, both mean something that has been summoned by
the mind.].

'There is a sacred region known as Suvenurishabha, frequented by rajarshis. There, the great-souled Kuru performed a sacrifice in Kurukshetra. The immensely fortunate Sarasvati, best among rivers, arrived there. O Indra
among kings! Sarasvati, with divine waters, was summoned to Kurukshetra as Oghavati by the great-souled
Vasishtha.

'Daksha performed a sacrifice in Gangadvara[The Critical edition abruptly excises a shloka here. The missing shloka
tells us that Sarasvati appeared there as Suvenu. Gangadvara is the gate
of the Ganga, meaning the opening in the Himalayas, through which,
Ganga descends into the plains. This is in Haridvara.].
'Brahma again performed a sacrifice on the sacred slopes of the Himalaya mountains. The illustrious one was
summoned there as Vimaloda[The same as Vimalodaka.].

'All of these come together as one flow at the tirtha of Sapta-Sarasvata. That tirtha is famous on earth. These are
the seven names of Sarasvati that are recounted. The tirtha of Sapta-Sarasvata is sacred and famous. Now hear
about the young Mankanaka, who observed brahmacharya. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! While he was
bathing, he saw a woman sporting a lot in the waters, as she pleased. She was also bathing and was beautiful in her
limbs. She was unblemished and was naked. O great king! At this, his semen fell into the waters of the Sarasvati.
The great ascetic picked it up and placed it in a pot. Collected in the pot, it became divided into seven parts. Seven
rishis were born from these and gave birth to the large number of Maruts[The Maruts are gods of the storm and the wind, sometimes identified
with Indra and sometimes with Shiva. While the number of Maruts
varies, it is often given as forty-nine, which fits the notion of seven times
seven.]. Vayuvega, Vayubala, Vayuha, Vayu-
mandala, Vayujvala, Vayureta and the valiant Vayuchakra-these were the ones who gave birth to the Maruts.

'O Indra among kings! Other than this, listen to another wonderful account on earth. This is about the conduct of
the maharshi, famous in the three worlds. O king! It has been heard that, in earlier times, after Mankanaka obtained
success, his hand was wounded by a blade of kusha grass. The juice of vegetables began to flow from this. On seeing the flow of vegetable juice, he was delighted and began to dance around. O brave one! He was overwhelmed
by his own energy and began to dance. On seeing him dance, all mobile and immobile objects also began to dance.
O king! Brahma and the other gods and the rishis, rich in their austerities, went to Mahadeva and told him about
the rishi. O lord of men! They said, "O god! You should do something to prevent him from dancing." On seeing
that the sage was extremely delighted, for the sake of the welfare of the gods, the god Mahadeva spoke to him. "O
brahmana! You know about dharma. Why are you dancing around in this way? O supreme among sages! What is
the reason for your delight? Tell me. O supreme among brahmanas! You are an ascetic and should be stationed on
the path of dharma." The rishi replied, "O brahmana[Shiva was in the disguise of a brahmana.]! Can you not see that vegetable juice is flowing from this
wound in my hand? O lord! On seeing this, I am overcome with great delight and am dancing." The god laughed at
the sage who was overcome by such emotion and said, "O brahmana! I am not astounded at all. Look at me." O
Indra among kings! Having spoken thus to the best of sages, the intelligent Mahadeva pierced his thumb with one
of his fingernails. O king! Ashes, white as snow, began to flow from that wound. O king! On seeing this, the sage
was ashamed and fell down at his feet. The rishi said, "I think that you are no other than the god Rudra, great and
supreme. O wielder of the trident! You are the refuge of the universe, the gods and the asuras. The learned ones say
that the universe has been created by you. At the time of the destruction of a yuga, everything enters into you
again. Even the gods are incapable of comprehending you. How can I? O unblemished one! Everything, Brahma
and the other gods, are seen in you. You are all the gods. You are the actor and the one who causes action. It is
through your favours that the gods enjoy happiness, free from fear." Thus did the rishi prostrate himself and worship Mahadeva. He said, "O illustrious one! Through your favours, let there be no decline in my store of austerities." The god was pleased and spoke again to the rishi. "O brahmana! Through my favours, your austerities will
multiply a thousandfold. I will always dwell with you in this hermitage. If a man worships me in Sapta-Sarasvata,
there is nothing that cannot be attained by him, in this world or in the next. There is no doubt that he will go to the
world known as Sarasvata[After death.]." Such was the infinitely energetic conduct of Mankanaka. He was the son of Sajanya, born from the wind god.'
