Sanjaya said, "O king! When Shalya was killed, seven hundred brave rathas, followers of the king of Madra, advanced in a large army. Duryodhana was astride an elephant that was like a mountain. An umbrella was held aloft
his head and he was fanned with whisks. He restrained the ones from Madra, 'Do not go. Do not advance.' Duryodhana repeatedly tried to restrain those brave ones. However, wishing to kill Yudhishthira, they penetrated the Pandu army. O great king! Those brave warriors had made up their minds to fight. They loudly twanged their bows
and fought with the Pandavas. On hearing that Shalya had been killed, they afflicted Dharma's son. Those maharathas from Madra were devoted to ensuring the welfare of the king of Madra. Partha advanced there, stretching
the bow Gandiva. The maharatha again filled the directions with the clatter of his chariot. Arjuna, Bhima, the Pandavas who were Madri's sons, Satyaki, tiger among men, all of Droupadi's sons, Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi, the
Panchalas and the Somakas desired to protect Yudhishthira and surrounded him from every direction. Surrounding
him, the bulls among the Pandavas agitated that army, like makaras in an ocean. It was as if the great river Ganga
was agitated by a mighty wind. O king! But those maharathas were ready to give up their lives and again agitated
the great army of the Pandus and their standards. Those on your side made it tremble, like trees by a giant storm.
They loudly exclaimed, 'Where is King Yudhishthira? Why are his brave brothers not seen? Where are the immensely valorous Panchalas, maharatha Shikhandi, Dhrishtadyumna, Shini's descendant and all the sons of
Droupadi?' While they were roaring in this way, Droupadi's brave and maharatha sons and Yuyudhana attacked
the followers of the king of Madra. Some of them were crushed by the wheels. Others were mangled and the giant
standards destroyed. In the battle, those on your side were seen to be slain by the enemy. O king! O descendant of
the Bharata lineage! Though they were restrained by your son, on seeing the Pandavas in the battle, those warriors
powerfully rushed against them from every side. Duryodhana tried to restrain and calm those brave ones. But not a
single one of those maharathas would listen to him.

' "O great king! Shakuni, the son of the king of Gandhara, capable of speaking eloquently, spoke these words to
Duryodhana. 'The army of the Madras is being slaughtered. Why are we looking on? O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! While you are stationed in the battle, this is not proper. At that time, we took a decision that we would
fight together. O king! The enemy is slaughtering us. Why are you tolerating this?' Duryodhana replied, 'I tried to
restrain them earlier. But they did not listen to my words. Having penetrated the Pandu army, this is the reason they
are being killed.' Shakuni said, 'When they are enraged in a battle, valiant ones do not listen to their master. You
should not be angry with them. This is not the time to ignore this. All of us should advance with our horses, chariots and elephants and rescue the great archers who are the followers of the king of Madra. O king! We will take
great care and protect each other. Let all of us think along those lines and ask the soldiers to advance.' Having been
thus addressed, the king surrounded himself with a large army. He roared like a lion, made the earth tremble and
advanced. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Among your soldiers, there were tumultuous sounds like, 'Slay.
Pierce. Seize. Strike. Sever.' In the battle, the Pandavas beheld the followers of the king of Madra. They advanced,
uniting in a moderate formation[The word used is madhyama, meaning mild or moderate. The word used
for formation is gulma, not vyuha. The entire army is arrayed in the form
of a vyuha, while a gulma is a smaller division, something like a battalion. The suggestion probably is that the Pandavas did not take this attack
very seriously.]. O lord of the earth! In a short instant, those brave ones engaged in hand-to-hand
combat in the battle and the followers of the king of Madra were seen to be killed. While we were advancing, we
saw that the enemy had spiritedly killed their foes and were cheerfully uttering roars of delight. In every direction,
headless torsos were seen to rise up and fall down, like giant meteors from the solar disc at midday. The chariots
and yokes were shattered. The maharathas were slain. Horses fell down. The earth was strewn with these. O great
king! Steeds that were as fleet as the wind were still yoked. In the battle, they were seen to drag the warriors
around. In the encounter, some horses dragged around chariots with shattered wheels. Some others fled in the ten
directions, dragging along halves of chariots. Here and there, yokes were seen to be attached to the horses. O
supreme among men! Rathas were seen to fall down. They were like siddhas dislodged from the sky, after their
store of good deeds had been exhausted. The brave followers of the king of Madra were slaughtered.

' "The maharatha Parthas saw that we were advancing towards them[The Kouravas who were trying to rescue the followers of the king of
Madra.]. Wielding weapons and desiring victory,
they attacked powerfully. They created a whizzing sound with their arrows and this mixed with the blare of conch
shells. Unwavering in their aim, those strikers again clashed against us. They brandished their bows and arrows
and roared like lions. On seeing that the large army of the king of Madra had been slain and that the brave king of
Madra had been brought down in the battle, all of Duryodhana's soldiers again retreated. O great king! They were
slaughtered by the Pandavas, firm archers, who desired victory. Frightened and terrified, they fled in different directions." '
