Vaishampayana said, 'On seeing that the sutas had been killed, they went and told the king, "O king! The gandharvas have killed more than one hundred sons of the suta. Like the giant peak of a mountain shattered by a vajra, the
sutas can be seen, scattered on the ground. Sairandhri has been set free and is returning to your residence. O king!
The entire city now faces danger. Sairandhri is beautiful and the gandharvas are extremely powerful. There is no
doubt that men are addicted to sexual intercourse. O king! Swiftly lay down some rules so that your city is not destroyed by one who is in the disguise of a sairandhri." On hearing their words, Virata, the lord of the armies, said,
"Let the funeral rites be performed for the sutas. Kindle a fire well and let all of them be cremated together. Swiftly
burn the Kichakas, with jewels and fragrances." Filled with fear, the king then spoke to his queen Sudeshna,
"When Sairandhri arrives, tell her these words in my name. 'O Sairandhri! O fortunate one! Go wherever you desire! O one with the beautiful hips! The king is scared of being defeated by the gandharvas.' I cannot tell her this
myself, because she is protected by the gandharvas. But women cannot cause offence. That is the reason I am asking you to tell her." Krishna had been freed from danger and the sons of the suta had been destroyed. She had been
freed by Bhimasena and returned to the city, like a young and spirited doe that had been frightened by a tiger. She
washed her limbs and her garments with water.

'O king! On seeing her, the men fled in the ten directions. Frightened of the gandharvas, some of them closed
their eyes. O king! Panchali saw Bhimasena standing at the door of the kitchen, like a large and crazy elephant.
She was surprised and softly spoke to him in a secret language[So that others might not understand.], "I honour the king of the gandharvas, who has
freed me." Bhimasena replied, "The men who roam here are under her control now. Having heard her words, they
are roaming without any debts[An oblique reference that the Pandavas will pay attention to Droupadi's needs.]." She saw mighty-armed Dhananjaya in the dancing hall. He was instructing Vira-
ta's daughter in dancing. Emerging from the dancing hall with Arjuna, the maiden saw Krishna arrive, who had
been molested though she had been innocent. The maiden said, "O Sairandhri! It is fortunate that you have been
freed. It is fortunate that you have returned. Though you were innocent, you were molested and it is fortunate that
the sutas who caused this have been slain." Brihannada said, "O Sairandhri! How were you freed? How were those
evil ones slain? I wish to hear everything exactly as it happened." Sairandhri replied, "O Brihannada! What do you
have to do with a sairandhri? O fortunate one! You live happily in the quarters meant for women. You will not confront the miseries a sairandhri does. You must be asking about my unhappiness in jest." Brihannada said, "O fortunate one! Brihannada also faces supreme unhappiness, having been reduced to an inferior life. O girl! You do not
understand this." Together with the maiden, Droupadi entered the king's residence.

'She had no desire to run away and went before Sudeshna. The princess then communicated Virata's words to
her. "O Sairandhri! Swiftly go wherever you desire to go. O fortunate one! The king is scared of being defeated by
the gandharvas. That apart, you are young and have beautiful eyebrows. Your beauty is unsurpassed on earth."

Sairandhri replied, "O beautiful one! Let the king excuse me for thirteen days[The numbers don't add up. Earlier, Bhima mentioned one and a half months. Droupadi now mentions thirteen
days. There might have been a corruption in the Bhima part of the text, where half a month (rather than one-and-ahalf months) was intended. With this correction, the numbers add up.]. There is no doubt that the gandharvas will have accomplished their tasks by then. They will then take me away and do whatever brings you pleasure. It is certain that they will do that which is best for the king and his relatives."'
