Suta[Lomaharshana.] said, "On hearing of the reappearance and departure of his forefathers, the learned King Janamejaya was
delighted. Filled with joy, he again asked about the reappearance. 'If one has cast aside the body, how can one
be again seen in that same form?' The best among brahmanas, Vyasa's powerful disciple was addressed in this way
and replied. 'It is certain that the results of all deeds are never destroyed. O king! Bodies and forms are the outcome of deeds. The great elements are united with the lord of all elements and are permanent. They always exist
with the eternal and are not destroyed when they are separated from the impermanent. The efforts of acts done easily bring fruits. However, if the atman is attached to the acts, one enjoys happiness and unhappiness[This is a reference to the paths of nivritti and pravritti. Nivritti or detachment brings the best fruits. But pravritti
or attachment leads to joy and misery.]. It has been
determined that the kshetrajna is never destroyed. Know that the atman in creatures is permanent. One's own form
exists as long as deeds have not been exhausted. Until the deeds are exhausted, a man is constrained by his own
form. There are many attributes that come together and lead to the body. Those who know can distinguish these
from the eternal. In a horse sacrifice, the sacred texts have spoken about what is meant by a horse. Even when the
horse goes to another world, the breath of life is eternal and in that sense, the horse is eternal. O king! If it pleases
you, I will tell you what is beneficial for you. When engaged in sacrifices, you have heard of the path of devayana.
When good deeds are performed for a sacrifice, the gods are favourably inclined towards you. When gods are honoured through animals, they become lords of the passage. Though they are seen to have gone, there are other parts
that are permanent[This needs explanation. Animals are slaughtered at sacrifices and their bodies are destroyed. However, the gods
are pleased and convey the essence of these animals, which is permanent, elsewhere.]. A man who sees this union of the five elements and various categories as permanent and confuses it with the eternal atman is futile in his intelligence. A person who sorrows because of separation is foolish.
That is my view. A person who connects separation with taints should avoid all forms of association. If there is no
attachment, there is no association. In this world, misery results from separation. A man who distinguishes the
temporary from the permanent is not agitated by a sense of ego. A person who is touched by intelligence and can
separate the temporary from the permanent is freed from confusion. Creatures arrive from a state of being invisible
and return to being invisible again. I do not know him. He does not know me. Nor do I yet know detachment. If a
man does not have control over his mind, whatever be the form of the body in which he undertakes acts, that is the
form of the body in which he has to enjoy the fruits. Deeds of the mind are enjoyed in the mind. Deeds of the body
are enjoyed in the body."'
