Sanjaya said, "They fled because of that descent of arrows. The soldiers of the Kurus were routed. However, they
waited at a distance and glanced back, gazing at Dhananjaya's weapons, which were descending like lightning in
all directions. In that great battle, the angry Partha quickly unleashed a weapon to slay Karna. However, while Arjuna's weapon was still travelling and roaring through the air, the brave one destroyed it with a great weapon that
he had obtained from Atharvan Rama[Parashurama. Atharvan can simply be interpreted as wise. Alternatively, the
Atharvan lineage was often mentioned in conjunction with the Bhrigu lineage,
from which, Parashurama was descended.] and which was capable of destroying enemies. Having destroyed Arjuna's weapon, he struck Partha with innumerable sharp arrows. O king! The clash between Arjuna and Adhiratha's
son assumed a great and dreadful form. They struck each other with arrows, like two fierce elephants goring each
other with their tusks. Karna affixed an extremely sharp and flaming arrow that was capable of slaying the enemy.
This had a serpent in its mouth[This was the serpent Ashvasena, desiring to take revenge on Arjuna.]. That terrible arrow had been carefully preserved and washed well, protected
well for Partha's destruction. It had been worshipped and laid down on a bed of sandalwood paste. That immensely
virulent weapon was lying down in a golden quiver. It was generated from the lineage of Airavata[This means the serpent Airavata, from whom, Ashvasena was descended.] and flamed.
Wishing to kill Phalguna in the battle, he aimed at his head. On seeing that Vaikartana had affixed that arrow, the
great-souled king of Madra said, 'O Karna! This arrow will not be able to reach his neck. Fix and aim another arrow that can sever his head.' With eyes that were red with rage, Karna affixed that arrow and told Shalya, 'O
Shalya! Karna will not affix a second arrow. Someone like me does not engage in deceit.' Having said this, he released that arrow, the serpent which he had worshipped for many years. He said, 'O Phalguna! You have been
slain,' and swiftly shot the arrow. On seeing that Karna had affixed the serpent, Madhava, supreme among strong
ones, used his strength to press down on the chariot with his feet. The chariot sank down on the ground and the
horses sank down on their knees.

' "The arrow struck down the intelligent one's diadem. The ornament that adorned Arjuna's head was famous
throughout the earth, heaven and the waters. In his anger and through the strength of his weapon, the son of a suta
used the arrow to bring it down from his head. It possessed the flaming radiance of the sun, the moon and the planets. It was decorated with nets of gold, pearls and gems. Using his austerities and efforts, this had been crafted for
Purandara by the earth's son himself[There is a typo here that is difficult to unravel. The crown was given by Puran-
dara (Indra) to Arjuna. It had been constructed by Brahma, the earth's creator.
Therefore, the text should probably read earth's creator and not earth's son. However, this is more than a simple typo.]. It was extremely expensive in form and generated terror amongst the enemy. It was fragrant and brought happiness to the one who wore it. When he killed the enemies of the gods[Described in Section 32 (Volume 2).], the
lord of the gods was delighted and himself gave it to Kiriti. It could not be destroyed by Hara, the lord of the waters or the protector of riches[Shiva, Varuna and Kubera respectively.], and by the pinaka, pasha or vajra[Respectively the weapons of Shiva, Yama and Indra.] and the best of arrows. The supreme gods
were incapable of withstanding it. However, using the serpent, Vrisha now destroyed it. The flame of the poison
uprooted it from his head and brought the beloved crown, with flaming rays, down on the ground. Partha's
supreme diadem fell down, like the blazing sun setting over Mount Asta. The crown was decorated with many
gems. The serpent forcefully tore it down from Arjuna's head. It was as if an excellent mountain top, with shoots
and blossoming trees, was struck down by the great Indra's vajra. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The earth,
the sky, heaven and the waters seemed to be whirled around by a tempest. Such a noise arose on earth then.
Though they tried to control themselves, people were distressed and trembled. But Arjuna was not distressed. He
tied the hair on his head with a white garment. The serpent released from Karna's arms was extremely radiant, like
the rays of the sun. That giant serpent was firm in its enmity of Arjuna. It struck the diadem and fell down. It told
him[Karna.], 'Know who I am. I am firm in my enmity of the two Krishnas, because they slew my mother[The Critical edition excises some shlokas. In those, Ashvasena returns and asks
Karna to shoot the arrow again. More specifically, the first time, Karna shot the
arrow without looking at Ashvasena and that was the reason it failed. Ashvasena
asks him to shoot the arrow a second time, after taking a look at him. However,
Karna refuses to use the same arrow a second time.].' In the
battle, Krishna then spoke to Partha. 'The giant serpent is firm in its enmity. Slay it.' Having been thus addressed
by Madhusudana, the wielder of Gandiva, fierce in using the bow and arrow against enemies, asked, 'Who is the
serpent who is advancing against me of his own accord, as if into Garuda's gaping mouth?' Krishna replied, 'In
Khandava, you satisfied the blazing one[The fire god.] with the bow in your hand. You killed his mother, taking her to be a
single snake. However, though her body was destroyed by the arrows, he was in the sky, covered by her.' The serpent was falling down from the sky. Jishnu severed the serpent with six sharp arrows. Mangled in its body, it fell
down on the ground.

' "At the time, Karna, foremost among brave men, glanced sideways at Dhananjaya and pierced him with ten
arrows that had been sharpened on stone and were tufted with the feathers of peacocks. Arjuna drew his bow all
the way back up to his ears and struck him with twelve sharp arrows. Those iron arrows were like venomous serpents in their force. He drew his bow all the way back up to his ears and shot them. They were released well. They
shattered his supreme and colourful armour, as if they were robbing him of his life. Having drunk Karna's blood,
they penetrated the ground, with the tufts smeared with blood. Vrisha became extremely angry at being struck by
the arrows, like a giant serpent that has been beaten with a staff. He swiftly shot supreme arrows that were like giant serpents with excellent poison. He struck Janardana with twelve arrows and Arjuna with ninety-nine. Karna
again pierced Pandava with terrible arrows and roared loudly. Pandava could not tolerate this joy. He was like Indra in his valour. He shot supreme arrows, like Indra energetically striking Bala. Arjuna shot ninety arrows at Karna and each of them was like Yama's staff. Those arrows severely mangled his body, like a mountain shattered by
thunder. The crown on his head was decorated with gems and diamonds and he wore excellent earrings. These
were severed by Dhananjaya's arrows and fell down. His radiant and excellent armour was carefully crafted by the
best of craftsmen over a long period of time. It was extremely expensive. In an instant, Pandava shattered this into
many fragments with his arrows. Having deprived him of his armour with those excellent arrows, he then angrily
struck him with four arrows. Distressed and struck by his enemy, he was like a diseased person, suffering from
bile, phlegm, wind and wounds. Arjuna spiritedly shot sharp arrows from the great circle of his bow. He made
great efforts and struck with strength. Karna was struck by many supreme arrows and they penetrated his inner organs. Karna was struck by many of Partha's sharp arrows. He was severely wounded by those arrows that were
fierce and forceful. He looked as beautiful as a mountain with red chalk, from which, streams of red water were
flowing down the slopes. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Kiriti struck Karna and his horses and his chariot
with vatsadanta arrows. Making every effort, he used gold-tufted arrows to envelope the directions. When he was
struck in his broad chest by those vatsadanta arrows, Adhiratha's son looked resplendent. He looked like a blossoming ashoka, palasha or shalmali tree, or like a trembling mountain with many sandalwood trees. O lord of the
earth! With those many arrows stuck to his body, Karna looked beautiful in the battle. He looked like a valley in a
mountain, covered with many large trees, or like a giant mountain, with sparkling karnikara trees.

' "Karna also shot a large number of arrows from his bow. With those nets of arrows as rays, he looked dazzling.
He was like the sun advancing towards sunset, red and with a crimson solar disc. Those arrows were released from
the arms of Adhiratha's son and blazed like giant serpents in the sky. In all the directions, they clashed with the
sharp and fierce arrows released from Arjuna's arms and destroyed them. At that time, the earth trembled and the
son of a suta became confused in the battle. Because of the brahmana's curse, the chariot was whirled around in
the encounter[Disguised as a brahmana, Karna had studied under Parashurama. When this
was discovered, Parashurama cursed Karna that his chariot would be swallowed
up by the earth and the weapons wouldn't manifest themselves.]. Because of Rama's curse, the weapons no longer manifested themselves. Unable to tolerate this,
he whirled his garments and his arms around and lamented, 'Those who know about dharma have always held that
that dharma protects those who place dharma at the forefront. But instead of protecting one who is devoted, it is
now bringing me down. I think that dharma does not always protect.' While he was speaking in this way, his horses and chariot were dislodged and he began to waver because of the downpour of Arjuna's weapons. He was struck
in his inner organs and was incapable of acting. He repeatedly censured dharma. In the battle, having been struck
by three fierce arrows in the arm, Karna then pierced Partha with seven. Arjuna struck him back with seventeen
straight-flying and energetic arrows. They were as terrible as Indra's vajra and like fire to the touch. They pierced
him with great force and then fell down on the surface of the earth.

' "Karna trembled. However, he exhibited great capacity. Using his strength, he invoked brahmastra. On seeing
this, Arjuna invoked mantras and released aindrastra. Dhananjaya also invoked mantras on the bowstring of Gan-
diva and the arrows. He released showers of arrows, like Purandara pouring down rain. Those energetic arrows issued from the immensely valorous Partha's chariot and were about to destroy Karna's chariot. However, when they
arrived in front of him, maharatha Karna repulsed all of them. When that weapon was destroyed, the brave one
from the Vrishni lineage said, 'O Partha! Radheya is destroying your arrows. Release supreme weapons.' Using
mantras, Arjuna released brahmastra. With those radiant arrows, Arjuna shrouded Karna. But Karna used extremely energetic arrows to angrily sever his bowstring. Fixing another bowstring, Pandava enveloped Karna with thousands of fiery arrows. In that battle, when Karna severed his bowstring, he fixed another one so quickly that no one
could make this out. It was wonderful. Using his weapons, Radheya countered all of Savyasachi's weapons. At that
time, his valour seemed to be greater than that of Partha. Krishna saw that Arjuna was afflicted because of Karna's
weapons. He said, 'O Partha! Go closer and strike him with the best weapons.' Dhananjaya invoked an arrow with
divine mantras. It was like a fire and the poison of a serpent. It was made completely out of iron. Kiriti united this
with roudrastra and wished to shoot it. But, in that great battle, the earth swallowed up one of the wheels of Rad-
heya's chariot.

' "Radheya wept in rage. He told Arjuna, 'O Pandava! Wait for an instant. You can see that because of destiny,
my central wheel[Some non-critical versions say left wheel.] has got submerged. O Partha! Abandon the thought[Of shooting the weapon.] that only befits a coward. O Arjuna!
One should not shoot a weapon at one with dishevelled hair, at one who doesn't wish to fight, at a brahmana, at
someone who has joined his hands in salutation, at one who has sought refuge, at one who has cast aside his
weapons, at someone who faces a calamity, at someone who doesn't have arrows, at a person whose armour has
been destroyed, or at a person whose weapons have been shattered and broken. Brave ones do not strike at such
people, nor do kings and lords of the earth. O Kounteya! You are brave. Wait for a short while. O Dhananjaya! Let
me extricate the wheel from the ground. You are stationed on your chariot. You should not kill me when I am on
the ground. O Pandaveya! You and Vasudeva are not frightened of me. You are a kshatriya and you are the extender of a great lineage. O Pandava! Remember the instructions of dharma and wait for a short while.'" '
