'Dhritarashtra asked, "How was the battle between Karna and Bhima, both of whom were immensely strong? In
the vicinity of Arjuna's chariot, what was its nature? In the earlier encounter, Karna had been defeated by Bhimasena. How could maharatha Radheya progress against Bhima? In the battle, how did Bhima face the son of the
suta, regarded as a maharatha and the foremost among all rathas on earth? Having surpassed Bhishma and Drona,
Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, did not fear anyone as much as he did the archer Karna. Thinking of the maharatha,
he[Yudhishthira.] always lay down in fear. How did Bhima fight with the son of the suta in battle? He never retreated in a battle. He was full of valour and devoted to brahmanas. How did Bhima fight with Karna, foremost among warriors,
in the battle? In the encounter near Arjuna's chariot, how did the son of the suta and Vrikodara, fight with each other? Since the son of the suta had earlier been told about the fraternal relationship[That the Pandavas were his brothers.], he was compassionate. Remembering the word that he had given to Kunti, how did he fight with Bhima[This promise has been described in Section 55 (Volume 5). With the exception of Arjuna, Karna promised
Kunti that he would not harm any of the other Pandavas.]? Bhima must have remembered
the earlier enmity caused by the suta's son? In the battle, how did the brave one fight with Karna? My son, Duryodhana, was always assured that Karna, the son of the suta, would defeat the united Pandavas in a battle. In the battle, for my wicked son, he was the hope for victory. How did he fight with Bhimasena, the performer of terrible
deeds? Using him as a refuge, my sons engendered the enmity with those maharathas. O son! How did Bhima fight
with that son of a suta? Having remembered the many hardships that the son of the suta had caused, how did Bhi-
ma fight with the son of the suta? The valiant son of a suta conquered the entire world on a single chariot. How did
Bhima fight with him? He was born with earrings and armour. How did Bhima fight with that son of a suta in battle? Tell me in detail about the battle that raged between those two and which of the two was victorious. O Sanjaya! You are skilled in narrating."

'Sanjaya said, "Abandoning Radheya, supreme among rathas, Bhimasena attempted to go where the brave
Krishna and Dhananjaya were. O great king! As he was leaving, Radheya attacked him and showered down arrows
tufted with feathers of herons on him, like a cloud raining on a mountain. The face of Adhiratha's powerful son
was as beautiful as a blooming lotus and he challenged the departing Bhima to do battle. Bhimasena could not tolerate Karna's summons to do battle. He did a semicircle[That is, wheeled his chariot around.] and began to fight with the son of the suta. Armoured
for the duel, the supreme among all wielders of weapons sought to bring down a great shower of iron arrows that
travelled straight. Wishing to kill Karna, he began to tire him out, thinking that this was a means for bringing the
quarrel to an end. O venerable one! The angry and intolerant Pandava, scorcher of enemies, showered down many
kinds of fierce arrows. His gait was like that of a mad elephant and he showered down those arrows. However, the
suta's greatly illustrious son used the maya of his own weapons to devour them. Karna, the great archer, was greatly honoured because of his knowledge and began to roam around in that battle like a preceptor. As Bhimasena angrily fought, Radheya seemed to smile and taunt the furious and intolerant Vrikodara. In the battle, Kounteya could
not tolerate Karna's smile, since all the brave ones were fighting and watching them in every direction. Having approached him, the powerful and angry Bhimasena pierced him between the breasts with vatsadanta arrows, like a
giant elephant being goaded. He pierced the charioteer of the son of the suta with well-tufted and sharp arrows and
then used seventy-three well-directed arrows to pierce his[Karna's.] colourful armour. The brave one enveloped the brave
Karna's horses, which were as swift as the wind and were clad in golden harnesses, and pierced each of them with
five arrows. O king! Karna released a net of arrows towards Bhimasena's chariot and in a short instant, made Pan-
dava disappear, with his chariot, his standard and his charioteer. O great king! Karna completely covered them
with arrows released from his bow. Then Karna used sixty-four arrows to firmly pierce his armour and angrily
struck him in the sides with iron arrows that could penetrate the inner organs. But Vrikodara ignored the extremely
forceful arrows released from Karna's bow and without any fear, struck the son of the suta. O great king! The arrows released from Karna's bow were like venomous serpents. Though Bhima bore them in that battle, he suffered
from no pain. In that encounter, the powerful Bhimasena struck Karna with thirty-two sharp and broad-headed arrows that were extremely energetic. However, Karna paid no attention to them. The mighty-armed Bhimasena
wished to kill Saindhava and he covered him[Karna covered Bhima.] with arrows. Radheya fought mildly with Bhima. However, remembering the earlier enmity, Bhima, the conqueror of enemies, fought with anger and quickly released a shower
of arrows. O king! The arrows released by Bhimasena in that battle descended all over him, like warbling
birds[The image is of birds descending on a tree.]. O great king! The arrows released from Bhima's bow were gold-tufted. They dashed towards Radheya,
like a wolf towards small deer. O king! Karna was foremost among rathas and in that encounter, released showers
of fierce arrows that shrouded all the directions. He was the ornament of any battle and his arrows were like the
vajra. However, before they could reach him, Vrikodara sliced them down with many broad-headed arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that battle, Vaikartana Karna again enveloped maharatha Bhimasena with a
shower of arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that battle, we saw Bhima covered with those arrows
and his body looked like that of a porcupine, with its quills jutting out. Those arrows released from Karna's bow
were gold-tufted and sharpened on stone. In that encounter, the brave one bore them, like the sun withstanding its
own rays. Bhimasena looked beautiful, with blood flowing from all his limbs. He was as golden as a flowering
palasha tree in a grove. O great king! Bhima could not tolerate Karna's conduct in that encounter. The great archer
dilated his eyes in rage and struck Karna with twenty-five iron arrows. Karna looked like a white mountain, with
the foothills covered with poisonous snakes[The arrows are being compared to poisonous snakes.]. In that great battle, Bhima again pierced the son of the suta, who
was as valorous as an immortal, with sixty-eight arrows in his inner organs. The powerful and enraged Bhimasena
quickly severed Karna's bow and all his implements. He used swift arrows to slay the four horses and the charioteer. With iron arrows as radiant as the sun's rays, he struck Karna in the chest. O venerable one! After having
pierced Karna, all of them penetrated the earth. O king! It was as if the sun's rays were penetrating the clouds.
He[Karna.] was proud of his manliness. But his bow had been severed and he was afflicted with arrows. He was overcome by great despondency and went to another chariot."'
