'Yudhishthira said, "Because you are wise, you have said what no one else could have said. No one can be seen on
earth who dispels doubts the way you do. In each and every household, there are kings who do that which is for the
welfare of their own. But none of them has attained the status of emperor, because the title of emperor encompasses everything. One who knows the power of others does not praise himself. He who is praised in comparison with
others is worshipped. The earth is large and extensive and covered with many gems. O extender of the Vrishni lineage! It is by travelling far that one gets to know what is best. I consider tranquillity to be supreme, because from
that freedom follows. I do not think the highest goal can be attained if I begin this rite. O Janardana! The wise ones
who are born in every lineage know this. Sometimes, one among them will become supreme."

'Bhima said, "A king who has no enterprise is like an anthill. One who tries to rule a stronger one without a plan
is weak. But if the plan is right, even a weak and enterprising king can defeat a strong enemy and attain goals that
bring one's welfare. There is plan in Krishna, strength in me and victory in Partha Dhananjaya. Like three sacrificial fires, we will consume Magadha[Meaning Jarasandha, the king of Magadha.]."
'Krishna said, "A child grasps, without understanding the consequences of the action. Therefore, an enemy of
immature understanding is not tolerated. We have heard that five have become emperors-Youvanashva by eliminating taxes, Bhagiratha through protection[That is, through protecting his subjects.], Kartavirya through the power of his austerities, the lord Bharata
through his power and Marutta through his wealth. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Know that in accordance
with the principles of dharma and artha, Brihadratha's son Jarasandha is now the one to be punished. One hundred
and one dynasties of kings have failed to accept his suzerainty and he therefore claims his empire through force.
Kings who possess jewels offer him homage. Since he has been evil from childhood, he is not content even with
that. He uses force to conquer foremost men and kings who have been anointed. Not a single man can be seen who
does not offer him tribute. O Partha! Thus has he brought under his power those kings, who number almost one
hundred. How can a weaker king advance on him with hostile intent? O bull among the Bharata lineage! How can
those kings, who have been cleaned and washed like animals in Pashupati's house[Pashupati is Shiva, literally, the lord of animals. The sense is that the imprisoned kings have been prepared
like sacrificial animals.], be happy with their fate? It
has been said that a kshatriya is honoured when he is killed by weapons. Why should we then not collectively oppose the Magadha? O king! Jarasandha has already brought under his sway eighty-six kings and waits for the others to complete his cruel act[Jarasandha is waiting for the tally of imprisoned kings to become one hundred, which is when he will sacrifice them.]. He who obstructs him from accomplishing this will obtain blazing fame. He who
defeats Jarasandha will certainly become emperor."'
