Vaishampayana said, 'There, he saw the king, who had assumed a terrible form. His beard was long and it was
smeared with the blood of humans. However, the brahmana wasn't frightened. The immensely energetic king,
the cause of terror, looked like Yama's equal. He arose and said, "O supreme among brahmanas! It is good fortune
and beneficial that you  have come before me at the sixth hour,  when  I  am about to hunt for  food[Sixth hour is not to be interpreted in the sense of 'hour'. This is a division of the day and night into six segments, each of three hours' duration. Hence, sixth hour means evening, the end of the day and the beginning of
the night, when rakshasas set out to feed.]."  Utanka
replied, "O king! Know that I have wandered around and have come here for the sake of my preceptor. The learned
ones  have  said  that  a  person  who  is  engaged  in  his  preceptor's  task  must  not  be  injured."  The  king  said,  "O
supreme among brahmanas! The sixth hour has been ordained as a time for me to seek food. I am hungry now and
am incapable of letting you go." Utanka replied, "O great king! Fine, let you and me have an agreement. Having
accomplished my preceptor's task, I will again return and place myself under your control. O  supreme among
kings! O lord of men! I have heard that what I seek for my preceptor is owned by you. O Indra among kings! I beg
that from you. You give all kinds of jewels to the best of brahmanas. You are a giver. O tiger among men! On
earth, I am a fit person to receive. O supreme among kings! Know me to be a worthy recipient. O scorcher of enemies! I will take it from you and satisfy my preceptor by giving it to him. O Indra among kings! After that, following the agreement, I will return and place myself under your control. I only know the truth and have never resorted
to falsehood. Since I have never uttered a lie, why shall I violate that rule now, even in jest?" Soudasa said, "If the
object that you seek for your preceptor is something that I am fit to give and you are fit to receive, then tell me
what that object is." Utanka replied, "O bull among men! It is my view that you have always been a worthy person
from whom one can receive. That is the reason I am begging the earrings from you." Soudasa said, "O brahmana
rishi! Those earrings are loved by my wife. O one with excellent vows! Think of some other boon and I shall grant
that to you." Utanka replied, "O king! Enough of this attempt to instruct me. If you want to demonstrate that you
speak the truth, then give me those earrings." Thus addressed, the king again spoke these words to Utanka. "O excellent one! Listen to my words. Go to the queen and ask her to give them to you. O best among brahmanas! There
is no doubt that when you speak to the sweet-smiling one and tell her about my instructions, she will follow them
and give you those earrings." Utanka asked, "O lord of men! Where is your wife and how am I capable of meeting
her? Why don't you go to your wife and ask her yourself?" Soudasa said, "You will now find her near a waterfall
in the mountains. It is now the sixth hour and I am incapable of seeing her." O bull among the Bharata lineage!
Utanka agreed to this and departed.

'He saw Madayanti[Soudasa's wife.] and told her about his need. O Janamejaya! On hearing Soudasa's words, the large-eyed
one spoke to the immensely intelligent Utanka. "O brahmana! O unblemished one! It shall be that way. But I need
to ensure that you are not lying. You should bring me some sign[From Soudasa.]. These earrings are divine and the gods, the
yakshas and the giant serpents always desire to look for means to steal them. They watch out for opportunities. If
they are placed on the ground, the serpents will steal the jewels and so will the supreme rishis. If the wearer eats
leftovers, they will be taken away by the yakshas. If the wearer succumbs to sleep, they will be stolen by the gods.
O bull among brahmanas! Whenever there are weaknesses, they are always capable of being stolen. The gods, rakshasas and the serpents look for a moment of carelessness. O supreme among brahmanas! During day and night,
they produce gold. At night, they attract the radiance of the nakshatras and the stars. O illustrious one! The wearer
is freed from hunger, thirst and fear. There is also no fear from poison, fire and predatory beasts. If the wearer is
short, the earrings become short. If the wearer is tall, they also assume a similar kind of form. These are the characteristics of the earrings and they are worshipped. They are famous in the three worlds. Therefore, bring me some
sign."'
