Yudhishthira said, "O grandfather! There may be a brahmana who is observing a vow. If he is invited by another brahmana and eats the food offered as an oblation, what happens[Though this act is against the vow.]?"
'Bhishma replied, "If the vow is not in conformity with the Vedas, eating is not a perverse act. O Yudhishthira!
However, if it is in conformity with the Vedas, he has deviated from his vow."

'Yudhishthira said, "There are some people who say that fasting is a vow. Is fasting really an austerity? Are
there any other kinds of austerities?"

'Bhishma replied, "People think that fasting for a month, or for half a month, is an austerity. However, a person
who causes harm to his own body is not an ascetic. Nor does he know about dharma. Renunciation is excellent and
has been said to be the supreme austerity. A brahmachari is a person who always fasts in that way. A brahmana
must always behave like a sage and always perform sacrifices for the gods. O descendant of the Bharata lineage.
Desiring dharma, he must always have a family and never sleep[In excess, or in a figurative sense.]. He must always subsist on amrita and always
be pure. He must always be truthful in speech. He must always be self-restrained. He must always eat leftovers[After the guests and the servants have eaten. This is regarded as amrita.].
He must always be affectionate towards guests. He must never eat meat. He must always be pure."

'Yudhishthira asked, "O king! What is regarded as fasting and when is one a brahmachari? What does eating
leftovers mean? How is one affectionate towards guests?"

'Bhishma replied, "If a person eats in the morning and in the evening and never in the intervening period, he is
regarded as a person who always fasts. A person who only has intercourse with his wife during her season is regarded as a brahmachari. So is a man who always speaks the truth and is generous in his conduct. By not eating the
flesh of animals that should not be eaten, or of animals pointlessly killed[Other than at sacrifices.], one is regarded as a person who abstains from meat. A person who donates is pure. One who doesn't sleep during the day is regarded as one who
does not sleep. O Yudhishthira! Know this. If a man always eats what is left after the servants and the guests have
eaten, he is a person who only subsists on amrita. If a person does not eat as long as brahmanas are unfed, he is regarded as someone who does not eat. He conquers heaven. If a person eats what is left after gods, ancestors, servants and guests have eaten, he is said to be a person who only eats leftovers. It is said that they obtain worlds all
the way up to Brahma's abode. O lord of men! The apsaras and the gandharvas attend to them there. They eat and
find pleasure with the gods, the guests, the ancestors and their sons and grandsons there. This is their supreme destination."'
