Vaishampayana said, 'On the orders of King Dhritarashtra and those of Shantanu's son[Bhishma. Shantanu was Bhishma's father.], they lived in Indraprastha
and brought under their rule many kings. All the people lived happily in Dharmaraja's refuge, like souls in bodies
that have auspicious marks and perform deeds[Meaning good deeds.]. That bull among Bharatas[Yudhishthira.] served dharma, artha and kama equally, looking upon the three as relatives, like one's own self. It was as if dharma, artha and kama had become personified on earth and with them, the king became like a fourth[The king became like a fourth objective to be attained.]. The vedas found a great student, the sacrifices a great
performer and the castes[Varnas.] a pure protector in this ruler of men. Lakshmi[The goddess of wealth.] was established. Intelligence was
revered. Dharma found a relative everywhere and extended on earth. With his four brothers, the king shone with
radiance, like a great sacrifice assisted by the four vedas. Dhoumya and other brahmanas surrounded him and paid
homage, like the chief immortals, each equal to Brihaspati, worshipers of Prajapati[Literally, the lord of all beings. But more generally, the lord of creation. Though usually applied to Brahma,
the term is also used for Vishnu and for ten lords of the world created by Brahma. In this context, the reference is
to Brahma.]. In the eyes and the hearts of
the subjects, owing to their great affection, Dharmaraja was equal to the unblemished full moon. The subjects
didn't love him only because he was their king. They also bore him affection because of his deeds. Pritha's intelligent son was always sweet in speech. He never uttered words that were improper, untrue, malicious or unpleasant.
The immensely energetic and supreme one of the Bharata lineage found pleasure in devoting himself to the welfare
of all the worlds, treating everyone like his own self. Through their great energy, all the Pandavas lived happily,
devoid of distress, pacifying all the kings.

'After a few days, Bibhatsu told Krishna, "O Krishna! Warm days are here. Let us go towards the Yamuna. O
Madhusudana! O Janardana! If you agree, let us sport there with our friends and return in the evening." Vasudeva
replied, "O Kunti's son! O Pritha's son! That is my wish too. As long as we desire, let us sport with our friends in
the water." O descendant of the Bharata lineage! After consulting and obtaining Dharmaraja's permission, Partha,
Govinda and their friends set out.

'They reached that beautiful pleasure ground, dotted with many trees and adorned with many tall houses, like
Purandara's[Since pura means a city, Purandara is the destroyer of cities and is Indra's name.] abode. Flavoured and expensive food and drinks were spread out and many perfumed garlands were
adorned for Varshneya[Descendant of the Vrishni lineage, that is, Krishna.] and Partha. They entered the place that was stocked with many pure and brilliant gems. O
descendant of the Bharata lineage! All of them began to sport as they pleased. Some women sported in the woods,
others in the water and some others in the houses, wherever it pleased Krishna and Partha. In great intoxication,
Droupadi and Subhadra gave away expensive garments and ornaments to the women. Some danced in great delight, others shouted. Some of the women laughed, others drank the excellent wine. Some began to weep, others
fought among themselves. Some whispered secrets to each other and jested. The woods became the scene of prosperity, filled all around with the beautiful music of flutes, veenas and drums.

'While this was going on, the descendants of Kuru and Dasharha[Arjuna and Krishna respectively.] went to a beautiful region that was not far
off. O king! Having gone there, the two great-souled Krishnas[Though rarely used, Krishna is also one of Arjuna's names.], conquerors of enemy cities, seated themselves on
very expensive seats. Partha and Madhava amused themselves by recounting to each other the many deeds of valour and love they had performed earlier. When Vasudeva and Dhananjaya were thus happily seated together, like
the two Ashvins[The twin physicians of the gods.] in heaven, a brahmana arrived. He was like a tall shala tree and his complexion was like heated
gold. His beard was reddish brown and his limbs were well proportioned. His hair was matted and his attire was
dark. He was radiant like the young sun[That is, the morning sun.] and his eyes were like lotus leaves. His complexion was tawny and he
blazed with energy. On seeing that supreme among brahmanas approach, the two Krishnas, Arjuna and Vasudeva,
quickly stood up.'
