Janamejaya said, 'Yudhishthira advanced with his soldiers, with a desire to fight and, protected by Vasudeva, set up
camp in Kurukshetra. He was followed by Virata and Drupada with their sons, and surrounded by hundreds of
kings, like the great Indra, protected by maharatha Adityas. On hearing this, what did King Duryodhana do? O one
rich in austerities! I wish to hear this in detail. On that terrible occasion, what transpired in Kurujangala? Even the
army of the gods would have trembled to fight those who gathered there-the Pandavas, Vasudeva, Virata, Drupada, Dhrishtadyumna from Panchala, maharatha Shikhandi and valorous Yuyudhana, unassailable even to the gods.
O one rich in austerities! I wish to hear all this in detail, about what the Kurus and the Pandavas did.'

Vaishampayana said, 'When Dasharha had left, King Duryodhana spoke to Karna, Duhshasana and Shakuni.

"Adhokshaja[Krishna.] was unsuccessful and has returned to the Parthas. There is no doubt that he will speak to them in
anger. Vasudeva desires war between the Pandavas and me. Bhima and Arjuna will adhere to his desires. Ajatashatru will follow Bhima and Arjuna. I have acted badly towards him and his brothers in the past. Virata and Drupada
have had an enmity towards me. Those two leaders of armies will also follow Vasudeva. There will be a terrible
war that will make the body hair stand up. Therefore, with great attention, let us make all the arrangements for war.
Let the lords of the earth set up hundreds and thousands of camps in Kurukshetra. They should be spacious and
spaced so that the enemy cannot attack them. Water and kindling should be available nearby. The roads should be
such that supplies can be carried. There must be stores of treasure. Let them be stocked with many kinds of
weapons and adorned with flags and banners. Let the roads emerging from the city be levelled. Let an announcement be made that we will march out tomorrow." They promised that they would act in that way and followed the
instructions on the next day. The great-souled ones were delighted at the prospect of destroying the lords of the
earth[The allies of the Pandavas.]. On hearing the king's instructions, all the kings were enraged and arose from their expensive seats. They
slowly touched their arms, which were like clubs and had golden armlets and were smeared with sandalwood and
aloe. With hands like lotuses, they donned their headdresses and put on their lower and upper garments and ornaments. The foremost among charioteers tended to the chariots, those skilled in horses to the horses. Those who
were skilled about elephants got the elephants ready. All of them prepared large quantities of colourful and golden
armour and many different weapons. The foot soldiers took up many weapons and covered their bodies with
colourful and golden armour. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The city of Dhritarashtra's son was festive. It
was full of cheerful and agitated men. The crowd of men looked like an ocean. The chariots, elephants and horses
were like fish. There was the roar of conch shells and drums. The stores of treasure were like jewels. The colourful
ornaments were like waves. The spotless weapons were like foam. The palaces were like a garland of mountains.
The roads and shops were like giant lakes. O king! That great ocean of the king of the Kurus was like the ocean,
with the warriors looking like a rising moon.'
