'Sanjaya said, "Partha, the immensely strong and valiant one, was checked by them. Drona, supreme among
rathas, also quickly attacked him from the rear. But he showered rays of a large number of sharp arrows, like the
rays of the sun. He tormented your soldiers, like a large number of diseases assailing the body. Horses were
pierced. Standards were severed. Elephants and their riders were brought down. Umbrellas and bows were pierced.
Chariots were deprived of their wheels. The soldiers were afflicted by arrows and were routed in every direction.
This was the terrible battle and nothing could be distinguished. O king! In that battle, they fought each other with
arrows and Arjuna made the standard-bearers tremble with his sharp arrows. He was always devoted to the truth.
He was always truthful to his pledge. The one borne on white horses attacked the best of warriors, who was borne
on red horses[Arjuna and Drona respectively.]. Drona, the preceptor, struck his disciple, the great archer, with twenty-five arrows that pierced the
inner organs. Bibhatsu, supreme among those who wielded all weapons, quickly attacked him with arrows that
could repluse the most forceful of arrows. The one whose soul was immeasurable[Arjuna.] invoked the brahmastra[Divine weapon named after Brahma.]. He
used broad-headed arrows to counter the straight-tufted and broad-headed arrows used by his opponent. We beheld
the extraordinary fighting skills of Drona, the preceptor. Even though he was young and exerted himself, Arjuna
could not pierce him back. The cloud that was Drona was like a mighty cloud that poured down thousands of torrents of rain in the form of a shower of arrows on the mountain that was Partha. O venerable one! Arjuna used the
brahmastra to counter the shower of arrows. The spirited one countered all those arrows with his own arrows.
Drona then struck the one on white horses with twenty-five arrows and struck Vasudeva on the chest and the arms
with seventy swift arrows. The intelligent Partha laughed at this mass of arrows released by the preceptor. He released sharp arrows and countered him in battle. Those two[Krishna and Arjuna.], supreme among rathas, were thus wounded by
Drona. The unassailable one was like a sun that has arisen at the end of a yuga and they avoided him. They avoided the sharp arrows that were released from Drona's bow.

'"Kiriti Arjuna attacked the army of the Bhojas and stationed himself between Kritavarma and Sudakshina of
Kamboja. He avoided the invincible Drona, who was like Mount Mainaka. The supreme among the Kuru lineage
was unassailable and a tiger among men[Arjuna.]. But quickly and forcefully, Bhoja[Kritavarma.] struck him with ten arrows that
were tufted with the feathers of herons. O king! Arjuna pierced him with sharp arrows and confounded Satvata[Kritavarma.]
by striking him again with three arrows. But Bhoja laughed and pierced Partha and Madhava Vasudeva with twenty-five arrows each. At this, Arjuna severed his bow and pierced him with seventy-three arrows that were like
crests of fire or like angry and venomous serpents. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Maharatha Kritavarma
took up another bow and swiftly struck him in the chest with five arrows. He again pierced Partha with five sharp
arrows. Partha struck him between the breasts with nine arrows. On seeing that Kounteya was obstructed by the
ratha Kritavarma, Varshneya thought that they should not waste time. At this, Krishna spoke to Partha. 'Do not
show mercy towards Kritavarma. Forget the relationship with him and crush and kill him[As a Yadava, Kritavarma was related to the Pandavas through matrimonial alliances.].' Thereafter, Arjuna
confounded Kritavarma with his arrows. He advanced on his swift horses against the army of the Kambojas.
Hardikya[Hridika's son, Kritavarma.] became angry at seeing that the one on white horses was thus penetrating. He picked up his bow and
arrows and attacked the two Panchalas who were following Arjuna and guarding his chariot wheels. Kritavarma
used his arrows to counter the two rathas. Bhoja used three arrows completely made out of iron to pierce Yudhamanyu and four for Uttamouja. They pierced him back with ten arrows each. They severed his standard and his
bow. Hardikya became senseless with anger and picked up another bow. He enveloped the two brave ones with arrows and deprived them of their bows. They grasped and readied other bows and struck Bhoja. Meanwhile, Bib-
hatsu penetrated the enemy's army. But those two bulls among men endeavoured, they could not penetrate the formation of Dhritarashtra's son, since the entry was barred by Kritavarma.

'"In the battle, the one on the white horses spiritedly fought against the soldiers of the opposition. Though the
slayer of enemies was within reach of Kritavarma, he did not kill him. On seeing that he was advancing, the brave
King Shrutayudha angrily attacked him, brandishing a giant bow. He pierced Partha with three arrows and Janardana with seventy. He struck Partha's standard with an extremely sharp kshurapra arrow. At this, Arjuna was extremely enraged. He used ninety arrows with drooping tufts to strike him, like a giant elephant being struck with a
goad. O king! But he could not tolerate Pandaveya's valour and struck him with seventy-seven iron arrows. At this,
Arjuna severed his bow and deprived him of his quiver. He angrily struck him on the chest with seven arrows with
drooping tufts. The king was senseless with rage and picked up another bow. He struck Vasava's son[Indra's son, that is, Arjuna.] in the arms
and the chest with nine arrows. But Arjuna, the destroyer of enemies, smiled at Shrutayudha. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! He afflicted him with thousands of arrows. The maharatha swiftly killed his horses and his charioteer. The immensely strong one then pierced him with seventy iron arrows. With his horses slain, King Shrutayudha abandoned that chariot. The brave King Shrutayudha was the son of Varuna. His mother was the great river Par-
nasha[Parnasha is identified with the river Banas, in Rajasthan.], with cool waters. In the battle, the brave one raised his club and rushed against Partha. For the sake of her
son, his mother had spoken these words to Varuna. 'In this world, let my son be unslayable by enemies.' Pleased
with her, Varuna had said, 'For the sake of his welfare, I will grant him this boon. Because of this divine weapon, it
won't be possible for your son to be killed. But it is impossible for any human to be immortal. O supreme among
rivers! Everyone who has been born must certainly be mortal. Because of the power of this weapon, the enemies
will always find him to be unassailable in battle. Dispel this fever from your mind.' Having spoken these words,
Varuna gave him the club, with the relevant mantras. Having obtained this, Shrutayudha became invincible in all
the worlds. But the illustrious lord of the ocean again spoke these words. 'This should never be released on someone who is not fighting. If that is done, it will descend on you.' He used that slayer of enemies to strike
Janardana[The slayer of enemies is a description of the club. Shrutayudha used the club to strike the non-combatant
Krishna.]. The valiant Krishna received it on his broad shoulders. Shouri did not tremble, like Mount Vindhya
against the wind. This was like a badly performed act of magic that backfires. It returned and killed the brave and
intolerant Shrutayudha, who was stationed there. Having slain the brave Shrutayudha, it fell down on the ground.
Great sounds of lamentation arose among the assembled soldiers, when they saw that Shrutayudha, the scorcher of
enemies, had been slain by his own weapon. O lord of men! This was because Keshava was a non-combatant and
Shrutayudha had hurled the club at him. He was thus slain and destroyed, just as Varuna had said. All the archers
saw him fall down on the ground. Thus was Parnasha's beloved son brought down. He was as resplendent as a tree
with many branches, shattered by a storm. On seeing that Shrutayudha, the scorcher of enemies, had been slain, all
the soldiers and all the chiefs among the soldiers began to flee.

'"At this, the brave Sudakshina, the son of the king of Kamboja, attacked Phalguna, the destroyer of enemies, on
swift horses. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Partha shot seven arrows at him. These penetrated through the
brave one's body and entered the ground. In the battle, pierced by sharp arrows released from Gandiva, he pierced
Arjuna back with ten arrows shafted with the feathers of herons. He again pierced Vasudeva with three and Partha
with five. O venerable one! At this, Partha severed his bow and standard. Pandava pierced him with two extremely
sharp broad-headed arrows. However, he pierced Partha with three and roared like a lion. The brave Sudakshina
angrily hurled a javelin that was completely made out of iron at the wielder of Gandiva. This was terrible and was
adorned with bells. It flamed like a giant meteor, emitting sparks, and descended on the maharatha. It pierced him
and fell down on the surface of the ground. However, Partha's valour was unthinkable. He used fourteen arrows
shafted with heron feathers to pierce him, his horses, his standard, his bow and his charioteer. He used many other
arrows to shatter his chariot. Though Sudakshina of Kamboja was valiant, his resolution had been rendered unsuccessful. With a broad and sharp arrow, Pandava pierced his heart. With his armour shattered, he trembled in his
limbs. His crown and his armlets were dislodged. The brave one fell downwards, like a standard released from an
implement. He was like a handsome and well-established karnikara tree on a mountain peak in the spring in the
Himalayas, shattered by the force of the wind. The handsome Sudakshina of Kamboja was slain and lay down on
the ground, though he deserved an expensive bed. His eyes were coppery red and his ears were adorned. The son
of the king of Kamboja was brought down by Partha. All the soldiers in your son's army ran away, on seeing that
Shrutayudha and Sudakshina of Kamboja had been slain."'
