Vaishampayana said, 'Duryodhana, bull among the Bharata lineage, lived in that sabha and with Shakuni, he slowly inspected that entire sabha. There, the descendant[The word used is nandana, which can also be translated as beloved.] of the Kuru lineage saw many divine designs that he had
never seen before in the city of Nagasahrya[Nagasahrya is another name for Hastinapura.]. One day, Dhritarashtra's son[Duryodhana.], the lord of the earth, arrived at a place
in the middle of the sabha that was paved with crystal. The king thought it to be water and, in alarm, raised up his
clothes. His mind deluded, he wandered around the sabha, shame-faced and miserable. After some time, he mistook a lake with crystal water, adorned with crystal lotuses, for land and fell into the water with his clothes on. On
seeing him fall into the water, the servants laughed out in delight and on the instructions of the king[Yudhishthira. At the end of the last chapter, it was mentioned that only Duryodhana and Shakuni remained.
Since the Pandavas were still there, this means that these were the only two among the invited guests who
remained.], gave him
fresh clothes. On seeing him in that fashion, the immensely strong Bhimasena, and Arjuna and the twins, all burst
out in laughter. Since he was incapable of bearing insults, he could not tolerate this. To save his face, he did not
even look at them. He again drew up his clothes to ascend firm land and all the people again laughed out aloud[Duryodhana took the land to be water.].
He mistook a closed door to be open and hurt his forehead against it. On another occasion, taking an open one to
be closed, he stepped away from the doorway. O lord of the earth! He thus committed various errors there. Having
taken Pandavya's[In this context, Yudhishthira.] leave, King Duryodhana set out for Gajasahrya[Gaja, naga and hasti, all mean elephant. Gajasahrya is another name for Hastinapura.]. On having witnessed the extraordinary opulence at the great rajasuya sacrifice, his mind was unhappy. As he travelled, he was inflamed at the prosperity of
the Pandavas and evil thoughts were seeded in King Duryodhana's mind.

'O extender of the Kuru lineage! On seeing the happiness of the Parthas, the submission of the kings, the love
the worlds had for them, from children onwards, and the supreme splendour of the great-souled Pandavas, Dhritarashtra's son Duryodhana turned pale. As he travelled, he thought intently about the sabha and the unrivalled
prosperity of the intelligent Dharmaraja. Dhritarashtra's son Duryodhana was so inattentive, that he did not respond when Subala's son repeatedly spoke to him. On seeing him so distracted, Shakuni responded, "O Duryodhana! Why are you travelling with all these sighs?"

'Duryodhana replied, "O maternal uncle[Shakuni's sister was Gandhari, Duryodhana's mother.]! I saw the entire earth brought under Yudhishthira's suzerainty, conquered with the power and weapons of the great-souled one with white horses[Arjuna's horses were white.]. I witnessed the sacrifice of
Partha[Yudhishthira.], like that of the immensely radiant Shakra among the gods. I am full of envy and am burning day and
night. I am drying up like a shallow pond in the hot season[The expression in the text translates as the onset of shuchishukra and there is repetition. Shuchi means the
months of Jyeshtha and Ashada and would have sufficed. Shukra means the month of Jyeshtha.]. Witness-when Shishupala was felled by the foremost of the Satvatas[Yadavas, the foremost one being Krishna.], there wasn't a single man who stood by his side. The kings were burnt with the flames of
the Pandavas and pardoned the crime. Who can pardon that crime? Vasudeva's great deed was improper and succeeded only because of the power of the great-souled Pandavas. Various kings brought many jewels to King
Kounteya[Yudhishthira.] and worshipped him, like vaishyas who pay taxes. On seeing the blazing prosperity of the Pandavas, I
am afflicted with jealousy and am burning, though I am not made that way. I will throw myself into the fire, or
consume poison, or immerse myself in water. I cannot bear to be alive. What true man in the worlds has the fortitude to see his rivals prosper, while his own self is in decline? If today I bore the prosperity that has befallen them,
I would not be a woman, or one who is not a woman, or a man, or one who is not a man. On witnessing their lordship over the earth, the likes of their riches and the likes of their sacrifice, how can a man like me not be feverish?
Alone, I am not capable of acquiring such royal prosperity, nor do I see any help. Therefore, I am thinking of
death. On seeing the pure prosperity of Kunti's son, I consider destiny to be supreme and endeavour to be meaningless. O Soubala! In the past, I have made attempts to kill him[Yudhishthira.]. But he overcame all of them and prospered
like a lotus in the water. Therefore, I consider destiny to be supreme and endeavour to be meaningless. The Dhritarashtras[The sons of Dhritarashtra, the Kouravas.] are declining and the Parthas are always prospering. When I see their prosperity and that beautiful
sabha and the derisive laughter of the guards, I burn as if with fire. O maternal uncle! Please allow me now to suffer in misery and tell Dhritarashtra about the envy that has pervaded me.'
