Vaishampayana said, 'They cheerfully set out, with delighted men and mounts. The loud roar of the chariots
filled the earth. Bards, minstrels and raconteurs chanted songs of praise. They were accompanied by their own
soldiers, like the sun by its rays. With a white umbrella held aloft his head, Yudhishthira looked lustrous, like the
king of the stars[The moon.] on the night of the full moon. As Pandava proceeded along the road, men joyfully pronounced
benedictions of victory. As is appropriate, the bull among men accepted these. O king! There were soldiers who
followed the king and their clamour rose up into the sky and filled it. The great king passed through lakes, rivers,
forests and groves and arrived at the mountain. O Indra among kings! The best of riches was buried at the spot and
with his soldiers, King Pandava arrived there. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! That plain region was auspicious. The brahmanas, full of austerities and knowledge of the Vedas, were placed at the forefront. King Kouravya
placed Agniveshya[Another name for Dhoumya.], the priest, accomplished in the Vedas and the Vedangas, ahead of the brahmanas. Following
the ordinances, the rites of peace were performed and all of them surrounded the spot. Following the rites, the king
and his advisers were in the middle. The brahmanas indicated that the camp should be laid out with six roads and
nine divisions[The camp was in the form of a 3 × 3 square, with nine smaller squares. There were three roads laid out east to
west and three roads laid out north to south.]. A separate encampment was properly erected for the crazy kings among elephants.

'Having done all this, the Indra among kings addressed the brahmanas. "O best among brahmanas! For this task,
determine an auspicious nakshatra and day. Decide what you truly think to be the most opportune time. However,
we should not spend a long period of time here. O Indra among brahmanas! Having determined this, decide what
should be done next." Hearing the king's words, the brahmanas and the priest were delighted. Wishing to ensure
pleasure to Dharmaraja, they spoke these words. "Today's nakshatra is extremely auspicious and is the best for undertaking this task. O king! Today, we will reside here, surviving only on water. You should also not eat today."

Hearing the words of the excellent brahmanas, the Indras among men fasted during the night. They happily slept
on beds made out of kusha grass, like fires that blaze at the time of a sacrifice. Throughout the night, the great-
souled ones listened to the words spoken by the brahmanas. When the clear morning dawned, the bulls among
brahmanas spoke to the king who was Dharma's son.'
