Vasishtha said, 'Because of forgetfulness, he[The atman. The text is gender neutral.] follows ignorance and has to go through thousands of lives in
bodies. Depending on the qualities and the strengths of those qualities, he is born thousands of times as inferior species, and sometimes, also as gods. From the status of humanity, he goes to heaven. From heaven, he obtains the status of humanity. From humanity, for an infinitely long time, he sinks into hell. This is like an insect
weaving a sheath around itself[A cocoon.], using thread as strands. In that way, the qualities are always like threads woven
around the atman. Though he should be beyond opposite sentiments, it is thus that creatures succumb to opposite
sentiments. Because of this headaches, eye diseases, toothaches, throat problems, dropsy, haemorrhoid, diseases
like enlargement of glands, cholera, white leprosy, leprosy, agnidaha[Disease treated by thermal cauterization.], sidhma[Spots. There were eighteen kinds of leprosy and this is one of those.], epilepsy and many other kinds
of opposites are naturally seen in bodies. He sees himself to be afflicted by these and other ailments. Because of
arrogance, he thinks that he enjoys the fruits of good deeds. He attires himself in a single garment or in torn garments[Different kinds of austerities are being described.].  He  always lies down  in inferior places. He  lies down  like a frog,  or  seats himself in virasana[Literally, posture of a hero. A seated position used by ascetics.].  He
clothes himself in rags and lies down under the sky. Or he lies down on bricks and stones, or thorns and stones. He
lies down on ashes or bare stones. Or he smears himself and lies down on the ground. He sleeps in places meant
for heroes, in mud and on stakes. Searching for many kinds of fruits, he futilely uses these different kinds of beds.
He attires himself in girdles of munja grass or is naked. Or he wears silk and the skin of black antelopes. He attires
himself in hemp or hair, or is dressed in tiger skin, lion skin, woven silk, those woven by insects and torn rags.
Dressed in many other kinds of attire, he thinks himself to be intelligent. There are many kinds of food and many
kinds of ornaments. He sometimes wears a single piece of cloth and eats only once a day. Alternatively, he eats at
every fourth hour or every sixth hour, or once every six days or eight days. He eats once every seven days, or once
every twelve days. He fasts for a month, or eats only roots and fruits. He subsists on air or water, or only eats oil-
cakes. He drinks only cow's urine, or vegetables and flowers. He eats moss and only drinks water from the palm of
the hand. He subsists on leaves that have fallen down, or fruit that has fallen down. In a desire for happiness, he
undergoes many other kinds of hardship. There are many types and many kinds of chandrayana[A chandrayana is fasting determined by the moon's progress. For example, during krishnapaksha, the food taken is diminished by one mouthful per day and during shuklapaksha, it is increased by one mouthful per day.]. There are the
modes of the four ashramas. One can follow those ashramas, or deviate from those ashramas. Resorting to mountainous caverns, the good and the wicked practise them. They are solitary under the shades of mountains, or near
fountains. There are many different kinds of meditation and diverse kinds of vows. There are colourful rituals and
many kinds of austerities. There are different kinds of sacrifices and diverse ordinances. There are many kinds of
donations for merchants, brahmanas, kshatriyas, vaishyas and shudras, decreed for the miserable, the blind and the
helpless. Instigated by the three qualities, he is full of ignorance. He pursues sattva, rajas and tamas and dharma,
artha and kama. With Prakriti influencing the atman, he engages in all these. He performs rites, to the words of
svadha, vashat and svaha. He officiates at sacrifices, teaches, gives donations, receives, performs sacrifices, studies
and does many other things. For birth, death, disputes, causing death and everything connected with the good and
the bad, it has been said that there is the path of rituals. But it is the goddess Prakriti who actually does everything.
At the time of the great destruction, at the end of the day[Brahma's day.], all those qualities are withdrawn, like the sun withdrawing its net of rays at the time of setting. In this way, she[Prakriti.] can be thought of, as repeatedly sporting with
everything. Depending on the atman, there are many kinds of qualities that bring pleasure to the heart. But this is
the way, the originator of creation and destruction works. There are rituals along the path of rituals. Those who are
attached to the three qualities follow those three qualities. Driven by those, a person follows rituals along a path of
rituals. He[The atman.] has a sense of ownership and it is that sense of ownership that binds him down. O lord of men! It is
because of ignorance that he thinks that all these can be transcended through good deeds. "These objects of pleasure will be enjoyed by me. I will enjoy the fruits of good and bad deeds in the world and then go to the world of
the gods. It is my task to ensure happiness and through these good deeds, happiness will be mine. I will obtain happiness till the end of this life and also ensure it when I am born and born again. But because of what I do, till the
end of my life, I may also confront misery. There is great misery for humans and the prospect of submerging in
hell. From hell, it will take a long period of time before I become human again. From humanity, I may obtain divinity. From divinity, I may again obtain humanity. From humanity, I may also progressively have to descend into
hell." Those who always think in this way are those whose atmans are covered by the qualities and therefore, it is
as if they are without an atman. From that state of divinity or humanity, they obtain hell. They are enveloped by a
sense of ownership and always circle around there. At the end of death, they have to go through millions of births.
If a person acts in this way, with a desire for good and bad fruits in mind, he obtains the fruit of having to assume a
body in the three worlds. But it is actually Prakriti who enjoys that desire in the three worlds. Inferior species, humanity and the world of the gods-all those three regions should be known as belonging to Prakriti. Prakriti has no
attributes. But she is said to possess attributes in this world. In that way, Purusha is also thought of as possessing
attributes. Prakriti is without attributes or taints, but she enters inside something[The body.] that possesses attributes. Therefore, one thinks that she is established in those attributes and undertakes action. The ear and the other senses, the
five organs of action and speech and the others unite with the qualities and become engaged. Because of the senses, he thinks, "I am the one who is acting." He[The atman.] is actually devoid of the senses. He is without attributes. But he
thinks that he is with attributes. He is beyond signs, but thinks himself to have signs. He is beyond time, but thinks
himself to be subject to time. He is beyond understanding, but thinks himself to be understanding. He is beyond
truth, but thinks himself to be truth. He is immortal, but thinks himself to be mortal. He is motionless, but thinks
himself to possess motion. He is without a field[The body.], but thinks himself to possess a field. He is beyond creation, but
thinks himself to be created. He is beyond austerities, but thinks himself to be made up of austerities. He is beyond
all objectives, but thinks himself to possess an objective. He is beyond sentiments, but thinks himself to possess
sentiments. He is beyond fear, but finds himself to be touched by fear. He is beyond decay. But because of ignorance, he thinks himself to be subject to decay.'"'
