Sanjaya said, "O great king! Soubala's followers were enraged. Ready to give up their lives, they repulsed the
Pandavas. Wishing to support Sahadeva in his victory, Arjuna and the spirited Bhimasena, who looked like an angry and virulent serpent, received them. They wished to kill Sahadeva, with javelins, swords and spears in their
hands. But with Gandiva, Dhananjaya rendered their resolution unsuccessful. With weapons in their hands, those
warriors attacked. However, with broad-headed arrows, Bibhatsu severed their heads and their horses. They were
slain and lay down on the ground, deprived of their lives. Spiritedly, Savyasachi struck those brave men of the
world. King Duryodhana saw that his own army was being destroyed. O lord! He angrily rallied the one hundred
chariots that still remained. O scorcher of enemies! He spoke these words to all the assembled army of the son of
Dhritarashtra, the elephants, the horses and the foot soldiers. 'In the battle, attack all the Pandavas and their well-
wishers, with Panchala and his army. Return after swiftly slaying them.' Unassailable in battle, they accepted those
instructions. On your son's command, they attacked the Parthas back in that encounter. In the great battle, those
who were left attacked swiftly. But the Pandavas countered them with arrows that were like venomous serpents. O
foremost among the Bharata lineage! In a short instant, those great-souled ones slaughtered those soldiers in the
battle and they could not find a protector. Though armoured and stationed, they were full of fear. The horses fled in
a reverse direction and the soldiers were covered in dust. In the battle, the directions and the sub-directions could
not be distinguished. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In a short while, in that battle, many men emerged from
the army of the Pandavas and slaughtered those on your side. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Your soldiers
were annihilated. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O lord! Eleven akshouhinis had been mustered by your son
and they were slaughtered in the battle by the Pandus and the Srinjayas. O king! Among the thousands of great-
souled kings on your side, only Duryodhana remained and he was seen to be severely wounded. He glanced in all
the directions and saw that the earth had been emptied. He was bereft of all warriors and glanced at the Pandavas
in the battle, who were delighted that all their objectives had been accomplished. They roared in every direction. O
great king! Hearing the whizzing of arrows shot by those great-souled ones, Duryodhana was overcome by depression. Devoid of soldiers and men, he resolved to retreat."

'Dhritarashtra asked, "O suta! When my soldiers and my camps were annihilated, what was the army that still
remained with the Pandavas? I am asking you. O Sanjaya! You are skilled in recounting. Tell me. What did my unfortunate son, Duryodhana, the lord of the earth, do, when he saw that his army had been destroyed and he was the
only one left?"

'Sanjaya replied, "O king! Two thousand chariots, seven hundred elephants, five thousand horses and ten thousand foot soldiers-this is what was left from the large army of the Pandavas. Dhrishtadyumna gathered them and
remained stationed in the battle. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! King Duryodhana was alone. In the battle,
he could not see any supreme ratha as his aide. He saw that his own army had been destroyed and that the enemy
was roaring. He abandoned his horse, which had been slain. Out of fear, he retreated and fled in an eastern direction. Your son, Duryodhana, had been the lord of eleven hundred army divisions. With a club in his hand, the spirited one advanced on foot towards a lake. He had advanced on foot only for a short distance, when the lord of men
remembered the words that the intelligent Kshatta, devoted to dharma, had spoken. 'The immensely wise Vidura
had certainly foreseen all of this earlier. Our great destruction and that of the kshatriyas would occur in the battle.'

Thinking in this way, the king entered the lake. O king! Having seen the destruction of his army, his heart was consumed with grief. O great king! With Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, the Pandavas angrily attacked your soldiers.
O king! They[The remaining Kourava soldiers.] wielded javelins, swords and spears in their hands and roared powerfully. With Gandiva, Dhananjaya rendered their resolutions unsuccessful. He slaughtered them with his sharp arrows, with their advisers and
their relatives. Stationed on a chariot drawn by white horses, Arjuna was extremely radiant. Subala and his son
were killed, with their horses, chariots and elephants. Your army was like a large forest that had been destroyed.
There had been hundreds and thousands in Duryodhana's army. O king! But not a single maharatha was seen to
remain alive. O king! The only exceptions were Drona's son, the brave Kritavarma, Goutama Kripa and the king,
your son.

' "On seeing me, Dhrishtadyumna laughed. He spoke to Satyaki. 'What is the point of capturing this one? Nothing will be gained by keeping him alive.' On hearing Dhrishtadyumna's words, Shini's maharatha grandson raised
his sharp sword, so as to kill me then. At that time, the immensely wise Krishna Dvaipayana arrived and said,
'Free Sanjaya alive. Under no circumstances should he be killed.' Hearing Dvaipayana's words, Shini's grandson
joined his hands in salutation. Freeing me, he said, 'O Sanjaya! Depart in peace.' Obtaining his permission, I cast
aside my armour. I was without weapons. In the evening, I set out for the city[Hastinapura.], my limbs covered in blood. O
king! When I had travelled one krosha[Measure of distance, between 2 and 3 miles.], I saw the solitary Duryodhana, with the club in his hand. He was severely wounded. His eyes were full of tears and he did not see me. Miserable, I stood before him. Though he saw
me, he ignored me. On seeing him alone thus, alone after the battle, I was overcome with great grief and could not
speak for a while. Then I told him everything about my capture in the battle and my release, alive, through the
favours of Dvaipayana. Having thought for some time, he regained his senses. He asked me about his brothers and
all the soldiers. I told him everything that I had directly witnessed, that all his brothers had been killed and the soldiers brought down. 'O lord of men! Only three rathas remain among those on your side. This is what Krishna
Dvaipayana told me when I was about to leave[Sanjaya knew it too and didn't need Vyasa to tell him this.].' He sighed and glanced repeatedly at me. Then, touching me
with his hands, your son replied, 'O Sanjaya! With your exception, no one else has been left alive in this battle. I
do not see a second one, though the Pandavas have their aides. O Sanjaya! Tell the lord, the king, who has wisdom
for his sight[Dhritarashtra.]. Tell him, your son, Duryodhana, has entered the lake. He is without well-wishers, without direction
and without sons and brothers. When the Pandavas have obtained the kingdom, what is the point of someone like
me remaining alive? Tell him everything and tell him that I have escaped from the great battle. I am alive, but am
severely wounded. I will rest in this lake.' O great king! Having said this, the king entered the lake. Through his
maya, that lord of men created a passage in the water.

' "When he had entered that lake, I was alone and saw that the three rathas arrived at the spot, with their exhausted mounts. They were Sharadvata Kripa, Drona's son, supreme among rathas, and Kritavarma, from the Bho-
ja lineage. They were wounded with arrows. All of them glanced towards me and swiftly urged their horses. Having approached me, they said, 'O Sanjaya! It is through good fortune that you are alive.' All of them asked me
about your son, the lord of men. 'O Sanjaya! Where is King Duryodhana? Is he alive?' I told them that the king
was well. I told them everything that Duryodhana had told me. I also showed them the lake that the king had entered. O king! Having heard my words, Ashvatthama glanced towards the large lake. He lamented in grief and
said, 'Alas! The king does not know that we are still alive. With him, we are sufficient to fight with the enemy.'

For a long time, those maharathas lamented there. Then, on seeing the sons of Pandu in the battle, those best of
rathas fled[The Pandava soldiers were approaching.]. Kripa took me up on his well-prepared chariot. Those three rathas, all that was left of our army, departed for the camp. The sun had set. On hearing that all your sons had been killed, those who guarded the outposts
lamented.

' "O great king! They were aged men who had been employed to take care of the women. With the wives of the
king, they set out for the city. All of them lamented and wept loudly. On hearing about the destruction of your
army, great sounds of woe arose. O king! The women wept repeatedly. They made the earth resound with that
noise, like female ospreys. They scratched their bodies with their nails. They struck their heads with their hands.
They tore out their hair. The wept loudly. They beat on their breasts with loud sounds of lamentation. O lord of the
earth! With those sounds of lamentation, they wept loudly. Duryodhana's advisers were extremely miserable and
their voices choked with tears. Taking the king's wives with them, they left for the city. O lord of the earth! With
staffs in their hands, those who were in charge of the gates and those who guarded the gates also swiftly fled towards the city. They took with them beautiful beds that were spread with expensive covers. Other men placed their
wives on carts that were drawn by mules and left towards the city. O great king! Those noble women had earlier
lived in palaces and were not seen, even by the sun. As they departed for the city, they were seen by ordinary men.
O foremost among the Bharata lineage! Those women were delicate and noble. With their kin and relatives slain,
they swiftly departed for the city. The cowherds and other herdsmen also fled towards the city. The men were terrified, afflicted by their fear of Bhimasena. They were overcome by an extremely terrible fear of the Parthas too. As
they fled towards the city, they glanced at each other. There was an extremely terrible exodus that took place.

' "At that time, Yuyutsu was senseless because of his grief. Nevertheless, he thought about what should be done
at the time. 'Duryodhana has been defeated in the battle by the terrible valour of the Pandavas. He was the lord of
eleven army divisions. His brothers have been slain. All the Kurus, with Bhishma and Drona as the foremost, have
been killed. Through the wishes of destiny, I am the only one who has been spared. In every direction, all of them
are running away from the camps. There are only a few who are left from among Duryodhana's advisers. Taking
the king's wives with them, they have run away towards the city. O lord[Yuyutsu is addressing himself.]! I think that the time has come for me to
also enter with them, after having taken Yudhishthira and Bhima's permission[Because these two were older than him.].' For this purpose, the mighty-
armed one presented himself before them. The king, who was always compassionate, was pleased. The mighty-
armed one[Yudhishthira.] embraced the son of a vaishya[Yuyutsu was the son of a vaishya lady.] and granted him leave. Ascending his chariot, he swiftly urged the
horses and also tended to the task of conveying the wives of the king to the city. With them, he entered Hastinapura, his voice choking with tears and his eyes full of tears. The sun was swiftly setting. He saw the immensely wise
Vidura, who also had tears in his eyes. His senses overcome with grief, he had come away from the king[That is, Vidura had come away from Dhritarashtra.]. He
bowed down before him and stood before him. The one who upheld the truth spoke to him[Vidura spoke to Yuyutsu.]. 'O son! It is through
good fortune that you are alive amidst this destruction of the Kurus. Why have you entered and come here without
the king[Duryodhana.]? Tell me, in detail, the reason for this.' Yuyutsu replied, 'O father[The word used is tata. It means father, but is affectionately used towards
anyone who is senior or elder.]! Shakuni has been slain, with his
kin and his relatives. When his relatives had been killed, King Duryodhana abandoned his horse. He retreated and
fled in an eastern direction. When the king had run away, all those in the camps and abodes were terrified and anxious and fled towards the city. The guards in charge also fled, having placed the wives of the king and his brothers
on the mounts. At this, I took the permission of the king and Keshava[However, earlier, Bhima rather than Krishna has been mentioned.] and entered Hastinapura, wishing to protect the people who were running away.' Having heard the words spoken by the son of a vaishya, Vidura, knowledgeable about all forms of dharma, thought that the right decision had been taken at the time. The one who was
eloquent with words, immeasurable in his soul, applauded Yuyutsu. 'When all those of the Bharata lineage were
being destroyed, you acted in accordance with what should have been done at the time. You should rest now. Tomorrow, you can return to Yudhishthira.' Having heard the words of Vidura, knowledgeable about all forms of
dharma, Yuyutsu took his permission and entered, after the destruction of the king had taken place. Yuyutsu spent
the night in his own house." '
