'Sanjaya said, "When the soldiers had been routed and Arjuna, Satvata and Bhimasena had proceeded towards
Saindhava, your son went to Drona. He went on a single chariot and thought about many things. That chariot of
your son was fast and was speedily driven. It was as swift as thought and the wind and quickly reached Drona.
With eyes that were red with anger, your son spoke these words. 'Arjuna, Bhimasena, the unvanquished Satyaki
and many other great maharathas have defeated the soldiers. Those destroyers of enemies are approaching near the
king of Sindhu. None of them have been defeated and all of them are proceeding there. O one who gives honours!
Even if maharatha Partha has passed by you in the battle, how could Satyaki and Bhima cross you? This is a miracle in this world, like that of the ocean drying up. O foremost among brahmanas! You have been vanquished by
Satvata and Arjuna and by Bhimasena. The people are repeatedly talking about this. "How could Drona, skilled in
knowledge of war, be defeated?" My ill fortune and destruction in this battle are certain. You, a tiger among men,
have been passed by three rathas. This having happened, tell me about what should be done now. O one who gives
honours! Think about what should be done about what is left. The time has come. What should we do about the
king of Sindhu next? Tell me this and let what you decide be carried out properly and fast.'

'"Drona replied, 'O great king! I have thought a lot about what should be done. Listen to me. Only three Panda-
va maharathas have passed by us. We should be frightened of those who are at the rear, as well as those who are
ahead, but I think it is greater at the place where Krishna and Dhananjaya are. The army of the Bharatas has been
attacked both from the front and from the rear. I think that our most important task is to protect Saindhava. O
son[The word used is tata.]! He is terrified of Dhananjaya and our task should be to protect him. The brave Yuyudhana and Vrikodara
have also gone after Saindhava. All of this is the outcome of the gambling match, the result of Shakuni's intelligence. In that assembly hall, there was no victory, nor was there a defeat[The victory there was illusory.]. O son! Now that we are immersed in
this gambling match today, there will be victory, or there will be defeat. In the assembly of the Kurus, Shakuni indulged in a gambling match with the terrible dice. O son! But those were actually unassailable arrows and they
have surrounded the Kurus in many ways now. O lord of the earth! Know the soldiers to be the players and the arrows to be the dice. O king! In this gambling match, Saindhava is certainly the stake. With Saindhava as the stake,
you have embarked on a great gambling match with the enemy. O great king! All of us here are ready to give up
our lives. In this battle, it should be our task to properly protect Saindhava. O son! In this gambling match, it is
certain that there will be victory or defeat. That is the spot where the great archers are protecting Saindhava.
Quickly go there yourself and protect the ones who are doing the protecting. I will remain here and send others
there. I will restrain the assembled Panchalas, Pandus and Srinjayas.'"

'Sanjaya said, "On the instructions of the preceptor, Duryodhana quickly left with his followers, to accomplish
an extremely difficult task[The text does not explicitly indicate where Drona's quote ends and Sanjaya's begins. But it is obvious.]. The two Panchalas, Yudhamanyu and Uttamouja, the protectors of the chariot
wheels[These two protected Arjuna's chariot wheels.], were passing through the periphery of the army and advancing towards Savyasachi. O great king!
Those two had earlier been contained by Kritavarma. O king! They were in search of Arjuna, who had penetrated
your army in a desire to fight. Duryodhana engaged in a supreme battle with those two. The powerful descendant
of the Bharata lineage quickly engaged with those two spirited brothers. Those foremost of kshatriyas were known
as maharathas. They raised their bows and attacked him. Yudhamanyu was extremely angry[In the encounter between Yudhamanyu-Uttamouja and Duryodhana, the Critical edition excises some shlokas.
Consequently, there is some abruptness in what remains.]. He quickly released arrows and pierced your son between the breasts with thirty arrows. O Indra among kings! Duryodhana
killed the four horses of the infinitely energetic Panchala and also his two parshnis. With his horses and his charioteer slain in that battle, Yudhamanyu climbed onto his brother's chariot. When he had ascended his brother's chariot, he struck Duryodhana's horses with many arrows. They were killed and fell down on the ground. In that encounter, when the horses were killed, Yudhamanyu quickly used a supreme arrow to sever his[Duryodhana's.] bow and armguard. When the horses and charioteer were slain, your maharatha son descended from the chariot. He grasped a
club and attacked the Panchalas. On seeing that enraged destroyer of enemy cities descend, Yudhamanyu and Uttamouja jumped down from the terrace of the chariot. That supreme chariot was decorated in gold. In that encounter,
he[Duryodhana.] used the club to smash the chariot down onto the ground, with its horses, charioteer and standard. Though
he killed them, your son's horses had also been killed. His charioteer had been slain. The scorcher of enemies
swiftly ascended the chariot of the king of Madra. Those two immensely strong princes, the foremost among the
Panchalas, also climbed onto another chariot and advanced towards Dhananjaya."'
