'Narada said, "O Yudhishthira! Listen. I will now describe Vaivasvata Yama's divine sabha, built by Vishvakarma.
O king! O Pandava! That radiant assembly hall is one hundred yojanas long and wide and possesses the resplendence of the sun. It can roam everywhere at will. It pleases the heart and is neither too cold, nor too hot. Grief, old
age, hunger, thirst, unpleasantness, misery, fatigue and obstructions are not found there. Every desire, human and
divine, is satisfied there. O vanquisher of foes! There is an abundant supply of tasty food and drink. The garlands
there have pure fragrances. The trees always bear flowers and fruit. There is tasty water, both hot and cold.

'"O son! Pure rajarshis and unblemished brahmarshis[Brahmana sages.] happily attend upon Yama Vaivasvata there-Yayati,
Nahusha, Puru, Mandhata, Somaka, Nriga, Trasadasyu, Turaya, Kritavirya, Shrutashrava, Aripranuda, Susimha,
Kritavega, Kriti, Nimi, Pratardana, Shibi, Matysa, Prithavaksha, Brihadratha, Aida, Marutta, Kushika, Samkashya,
Samkriti, Bhava, Chaturashva, Sadashvormi, the king Kartavirya, Bharata, Suratha, Sunitha, Nala from
Nishadha[Region in north India, around Kumaon. Its capital was Alaka, located on the Alakananda river.], Divodasa, Sumana, Ambarisha, Bhagiratha, Vyashva, Sadashva, Vadhryashva, Panchahasta,
Prithushrava, Rushadgu, Vrishasena, the immensely powerful Kshupa, Rushadashva, Vasumana, Purukutsa, Dhvaji, Rathi, Arshtishena, Dilipa, the great-souled Ushinara, Oushinara, Pundarika, Sharyati, Sharabha, Shuchi, Anga,
Arishta, Vena, Duhshanta, Sanjaya, Jaya, Bhangasvari, Sunitha, Nishadha[Sunitha has been mentioned before, so has Nala of Nishadha. It is of course possible that more than one person had the same name.], Tvishiratha, Karandhama, Bahlika[The region around the Punjab, though in the text the reference is to the king of the region.],
Sudyumna, the powerful Madhu, Kapotaroma, Trinaka, Sahadeva, Arjuna, Dasharathi Rama[That is, Rama, the son of Dasharatha.], Lakshmana,
Pratardana, Alarka, Kakshasena, Gaya, Gourashva, Jamadagni Rama[That is, Parashurama, the son of Jamadagni.], Nabhaga, Sagara, Bhuridyumna, Mahashva, Prithvashva, Janaka, the king Vainya, Varishena, Puraja, Janamejaya, Brahmadatta, Trigarta, King Uparichara,
Indradyumna, Bhimajanu, Gaya, Prishtha, the unblemished Naya, Padma, Muchukunda, Bhuridyumna, Prasenajit,
Arishtanemi, Pradyumna, Prithagashva, Ajaka, the one hundred kings from Matsya[Matsya and Virata are the names of the same kingdom, in today's Rajasthan.], the hundred Nipas[The name of a royal lineage, difficult to identify beyond that.], the
hundred Hayas[The name of a royal lineage, difficult to identify beyond that.], the one hundred Dhritarashtras[There were a hundred kings named Dhritarashtra.], the eighty Janamejayas[There were eighty kings named Janamejaya.], the one hundred Brahmadattas[There were one hundred kings named Brahmadatta.],
the one hundred fighting Iris[It is not clear who these Iris were.], the rajarshi Shantanu, your father Pandu, Ushadgava, Shataratha, Devaraja,
Jayadratha, the rajarshi Vrishadarbhi, Dhaman and his ministers and, in addition, thousands of Shashabindus[There were thousands of kings with this name.]
who departed after performing many great horse sacrifices, with copious donations. O rajarshi! These pure rajarshis, of great fame and renown, waited upon Vaivasvata Yama in his sabha. There were Agastya, Matanga,
Kala[Time or destiny, personified.], Mrityu[Death personified.], performers of sacrifices, Siddhas, those whose bodies are based on yoga, those with fire in their
mouths[Agnishvatta, a term used for brahmanas.], the ancestors-those who live on froth, those who live on vapours, those who receive oblations, those
who seat themselves on kusa grass and those others who have bodies[All these are classes of ancestors.]. Free from disease and in embodied form,
the wheel of time, the illustrious conveyor of sacrificial offerings[Havyavahana, the fire-god Agni.], men who performed evil deeds, those who
died during the winter solstice, those of Yama's officers appointed to reckon time, shimshapa[Tree associated with cremation grounds.] and palasha[The palasha tree is also called kimshuka.]
trees, kasha[Kind of grass.], kusha[Holy grass used in religious ceremonies.] and other trees and plants worshipped Dharmaraja[Yama.]. These and many others are the
courtiers of the king of the ancestors. O Partha[Pritha's son, Yudhishthira.]! I am incapable of enumerating their names and deeds. But this
beautiful sabha is never crowded and is capable of going anywhere at will. Vishvakarma built it after spending a
long time in austerities. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It blazes with the luminosity of its own radiance. Ascetics who are fearsome in their austerities, rigid in their vows, truthful, calm, practised in renunciation, accomplished, purified through their holy deeds, all with radiant bodies and all attired in spotless attire, adorned with
bracelets on their upper arms and garlands, with flaming earrings, performers of good and holy deeds and marked
with signs, go there. Great-souled gandharvas and one hundred classes of apsaras are there, filling it everywhere
with instrumental music, dancing, singing, laughter and sport. O Partha! Sacred fragrances and sounds and celestial garlands adorn it everywhere. Ten million righteous and intelligent men, in bodily form, always wait upon the
great-souled lord of all beings. O king! Such is the sabha of the great-souled king of the ancestors. I will now describe to you Varuna's sabha, known as Pushkaramalini."'
