Yudhishthira asked, "O grandfather! Creatures are always terrified of sorrow and misery and death. O grandfathe
Tell me how both of these can be prevented."

'Bhishma replied, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In this connection, there is an ancient history about a
conversation between Narada and Samanga.

'"Narada said, 'You bow down with your chest and cross with your arms[Prostrate yourself down, with the chest touching the ground. Crossing has the image of crossing the river of life
and 'with your arms' probably signifies self-dependence, as compared to relying on others.]. You are always cheerful and are
seen to be without sorrow. One cannot discern the slightest bit of anxiety in you. You are always content and satisfied and seem to be like a child in your endeavours.'

'"Samanga replied, 'O one who grants honours! I know the truth about the past, the present and the future. Since
I know the truth about these, I am never distressed. I also know about how exertions result and their fruits. There
are many different kinds of fruits. Therefore, I am never distressed. O Narada! Behold. Those who are unfathomable in destitution, those who are not healthy and those who are blind and dumb are also alive. They are seen to
live. It has been ordained that the residents of heaven should have no disease in their limbs. The strong and the
weak are also thus created[Because of earlier deeds.]. A person who rules over thousands is alive. A person who rules over hundreds is
also alive. There are others who sustain themselves only on vegetables. Behold. I am also alive. O Narada! I do not
grieve. What use do I have for dharma or deeds? One comes under the control of happiness that results from deeds
and it is only misery that grows. When a person realizes that wisdom is actually the foundation of all the gratification of the senses, such a man is said to be wise. The senses cause confusion and sorrow. If a person is confounded
because of the senses, such a person cannot obtain wisdom. A foolish person also suffers from pride and delusion.
There is no world here, or in the hereafter, for a foolish person. Misery does not last forever. Any happiness obtained is also not eternal. Since I know that everything created is always changeable, a person like me never suffers
from fever. I do not care for objects of desire or the happiness that results from possessions. Nor do I think about
any unhappiness that may befall. I am controlled and do not desire the possessions of others. I do not bother about
what has not been obtained. Nor do I find delight in what has been obtained. I am not delighted at obtaining a great
deal of riches. Nor am I distressed if riches are destroyed. Relatives, riches, noble birth, learning, mantras and valour are incapable of saving one from miseries and they have to be tolerated. Good conduct alone can bring peace
in the world hereafter. If a person does not possess intelligence or yoga, he cannot obtain happiness. There cannot
be any happiness without both fortitude and the abandoning of misery. Anything that brings delight is pleasant. But
delight also increases pride. Pride leads to hell. That is the reason I have discarded these. Sorrow and fear cause
delusion and so do pleasure and pain. I may move around in my body. But I look upon all these as an indifferent
witness. I have abandoned all desire for riches. I am bereft of sorrow and bereft of fever. I roam around the entire
earth, having discarded thirst and confusion. There is no death. There is no adharma. Where will greed come from?
I have drunk amrita. I have no fear in this world and in the next. Because of the great and undecaying austerities
that I have performed, I have got to know the brahman. O Narada! Having obtained that, there is no grief that can
constrain me.'"'
