Bhishma said, "O one without decay! Matanga was careful about his vows and in control of his soul. Though
he was addressed in this way, he stood on one foot for one hundred years. The immensely illustrious Shakra
again appeared before him and said, 'O Matanga! The supreme state that you desire is extremely difficult to obtain.
O son! Do not exhibit this futile rashness. This isn't the path of dharma. You cannot obtain what you wish for and
will soon be destroyed. O Matanga! I have sought to restrain you from aspiring to obtain that supreme state. If you
still desire to perform these austerities, you will be destroyed in every possible way. Among all the men who are
born as inferior[Subhuman.] species, only a few are reborn as pulkasa or chandala. O Matanga! Anyone on earth who is seen
to have been born as wicked species, will have to whirl around in that state for a long period of time. After having
spent one thousand births in this way, one obtains the status of a shudra[We have followed non-Critical versions in translating the duration. Non-Critical versions say, ten times one
hundred, that is, one thousand. The Critical edition states, ten times. This makes deduction of the duration
difficult.]. One is whirled around in the state of a
shudra for a long period of time. After three thousand births in this way, one obtains the status of a vaishya. One is
whirled around in the state of a vaishya for a long period of time. After six thousand births in this way, one obtains
the status of a king[Meaning a kshatriya.]. One is whirled around in the state of a king for a long period of time. After six thousand
births in this way, one obtains the status of being a friend of a brahmana[That is, a brahmana.]. One is whirled around in the state of
being a friend of a brahmana for a long period of time. After two thousand births in this way, one obtains the status
of a brahmana who earns a living by selling weapons. One is whirled around in the status of a brahmana who earns
a living by selling weapons for a long period of time. After three thousand births in this way, one obtains the status
of an ordinary brahmana. Having obtained this status, one is whirled around for a long period of time. After four
thousand births in this way, one is born as a learned brahmana. One is whirled around in the state of a learned
brahmana for a long period of time. O son! In that state, anger, delight, desire, hatred, insolence and argumentation
penetrate him and try to make him the worst among brahmanas. When he abandons these enemies, he obtains a
virtuous end. However, if they defeat him, he falls down, as if from the top of a palm tree. O Matanga! That is the
reason I have spoken to you, restraining you and asking you to ask for some other boon. The status of a brahmana
is something that is extremely difficult to obtain.'"'
