Vaishampayana said, 'O king! After Drona had been killed, the kings, with Duryodhana at the forefront, were
extremely anxious in their minds. They went to Drona's son. They sorrowed and were dispirited because the
infinitely energetic Drona had been killed. In their grief, they surrounded the son of Sharadvati[Ashvatthama's mother was Sharadvati or Kripi, the daughter of Sharadvata.]. For some time,
they comforted him by recounting the reasons given in the sacred texts. However, once night arrived, those lords
of the earth went to their own camps. But, in particular, the son of the suta[Karna.], King Suyodhana, Duhshasana and
Shakuni could not sleep. In their camps, the Kouravyas and the lords of the earth found no cheer. They thought of
that terrible destruction and could not sleep. Together[This is a reference to Karna, Duryodhana, Duhshasana and Shakuni.], they spent the night in Duryodhana's camp and thought
about the extremely fierce enmity that they had unleashed on the great-souled Pandavas. They had oppressed
Krishna[Krishnaa, Droupadi.] at the time of gambling with the dice and had brought her to the assembly hall. They thought of that and
repented. They became extremely anxious. They thought of the hardships the Parthas had confronted on account of
the gambling match. O king! As they thought about these difficulties, the moment seemed to last for a hundred
years. Then, the clear morning dawned and they went through the prescribed rites. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! All of them performed these necessary tasks and having performed these necessary tasks, they were somewhat reassured. When the sun arose, they instructed that the soldiers should be yoked and departed. Karna was
made the overall commander and the auspicious ceremonies were performed. The foremost among brahmanas
were praised and given vessels full of curds, clarified butter, parched rice, golden coins, cattle, gold and extremely
expensive garments. Bards, raconteurs and minstrels prayed that their victory and prosperity might increase. O
king! In similar fashion, the Pandavas also performed all the morning rites. O king! Making up their minds to fight,
they emerged from their camps. As the Kurus and the Pandavas wished to kill each other, a tumultuous battle commenced and it made the body hair stand up. O king! When Karna was the overall commander, the battle between
the Kuru and Pandava soldiers lasted for two days. It was wonderful to see. After having caused a great slaughter
of the enemy in the battle, Vrisha[Karna.] was brought down by Phalguna, while all the sons of Dhritarashtra looked on.
Sanjaya then went to the city of Nagasahvya[Another name for Hastinapura.] and told Dhritarashtra everything that had transpired in
Kurujangala[Another name for Kurukshetra.].'
Janamejaya said, 'Having heard that Drona had been killed by the enemy in the battle, the aged king, Ambika's
son[Dhritarashtra was the son of Ambika.], had been overcome by supreme grief. O supreme among brahmanas! On hearing that Karna, Duryodhana's
well-wisher, had been slain, he must have been miserable. How could he sustain his life? The king's hopes for the
victory of his sons had been based on him. On hearing that he had been killed, how could Kouravya sustain his
life? Even when there is a hardship, I think that it is very difficult for men to die, since, despite hearing that Karna
had been slain, the king did not give up his life. O brahmana! That was also true of Shantanu's aged son[Bhishma.], Bahlika, Drona, Somadatta and Bhurishrava. Many other well-wishers, sons and grandsons were also brought down. O
brahmana! On hearing this, I think that it must have been very difficult for the king to remain alive. O one rich in
austerities! Tell me everything about this in detail. I am not satisfied with hearing about the great conduct of my
ancestors.'

Vaishampayana said, 'O great king! When Karna was slain, with a distressed mind, Gavalgana's son[Sanjaya was Gavalgana's son.] set out in
the night for Nagapura[Another name for Hastinapura, naga and hasti both mean elephant.], on horses that were as fleet as the wind. He reached Hastinapura with great anxiety in
his mind. He went to Dhritarashtra's place, where, the number of well-wishers had declined[They were out fighting, but the sense is more of them having been killed.]. He saw the king,
who was overcome by lassitude and was devoid of energy. Joining his hands in salutation, he bowed his head at the
king's feet. He worshipped Dhritarashtra, lord of the earth, in accordance with the prescribed rites. He then spoke
these words. "Alas! I am Sanjaya. O lord of the earth! Are you happy? You have confronted this state because of
your own sins. I hope you are not confounded now. You did not follow the beneficial advice of Vidura, Drona,
Gangeya[Ganga's son, Bhishma.] and Keshava. Are you distressed when you remember that? In the assembly hall, Rama, Narada and
Kanva spoke beneficial words to you, but you did not accept them[Rama means Parashurama. These incidents have been described in Section 54 (Volume 4).]. Are you distressed when you remember that?
Remembering that the well-wishers who were engaged in your welfare, with Bhishma and Drona as the foremost,
have been killed by the enemy in the battle, are you distressed?" Having been thus addressed, the king joined his
hands in salutation before the son of the suta[Sanjaya was the son of a suta (charioteer).]. He sighed deeply. Oppressed by sorrow he spoke these words. "O
Sanjaya! The brave Gangeya, who was well versed in the use of divine weapons, has been brought down. So has
the great archer, Drona, and my mind is severely distressed. The energetic one[Bhishma, who was one of the eight Vasus born on earth. There are eight Vasus. According to the Mahabharata,
they are descended from Brahma. The names of the eight Vasus vary from one text to another. According to the
Mahabharata, the names are Anala (alternatively Agni), Dhara (Prithvi elsewhere), Anila (alternatively Vayu),
Aha (Antariksha elsewhere), Pratyusha (Aditya elsewhere), Prabhasa (Dyaus elsewhere), Soma (alternatively
Chandrama) and Dhruva. Bhishma had taken a vow to kill ten thousand warriors every day.] was born from the Vasus. The armoured one slaughtered ten thousand rathas. He has been killed by Yajnasena's son, Shikhandi, who was protected
by the Pandaveyas. My mind is severely distressed. Bhargava gave supreme weapons to the great-souled one and
when he was a child, Rama himself taught him Dhanurveda[Bhargava is Parashurama, also referred to as Rama. In Section 60 (Volume 5), there is a reference to Bhishma
having been taught by Parashurama and having received weapons from him. Dhanurveda is the art of fighting.]. It is through his favours that the immensely strong
Kounteya princes and many other lords of the earth became maharathas. Drona was a great archer and unwavering
in his aim. On hearing that he has been killed by Dhrishtadyumna in the battle, my mind is severely distressed. In
the three worlds, there was no man who was his equal in the sacred texts[Since the text says shaastra (sacred texts), there may be a typo. Shastra (weapons) fits better.]. On hearing that Drona had been killed,
what did those on my side do? Using his valour, the great-souled Pandava Dhananjaya dispatched the army of the
samshaptakas to Yama's abode. The narayana weapon used by Drona's intelligent son was repulsed[Drona's son was Ashvatthama. The use of the divine narayana weapon has been described in Section 72 (Volume 6).]. After this,
and when the remainder of the army was slain and driven away, what did those on my side do? I think that they
must have been immersed in an ocean of grief. When Drona was killed, they must have been like people on an
ocean whose boat had been shattered. O Sanjaya! What were the facial complexions of Duryodhana, Karna, Bhoja
Kritavarma, Shalya, the king of Madra, Drona's son, Kripa, my remaining sons and the others when the soldiers
fled? Tell me that. O son of Gavalgana! Tell me everything, exactly as it happened in the battle. Tell me everything
about the Pandaveyas and those on my side." Sanjaya replied, "O venerable one! On hearing what transpired between the Pandaveyas and the Kouraveyas, you should not be distressed. This is destiny and your mind should not
be full of grief. Sometimes, what should not happen, happens to a man. And sometimes, what should happen, does
not. Therefore, learned ones do not grieve over that which has not been obtained, or what has been obtained."

Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! On hearing this, my mind is not distressed. I think this is because of what destiny
has ordained earlier. Tell me what you wish to." '
