Duryodhana said, 'O lord of Madra! Listen once more to what I am about to tell you. O lord! This is an account
of the ancient battle that took place between the gods and the asuras. The great rishi, Markandeya, told my father
about this. O supreme among rajarshis! I will recount it, without leaving anything out. You should listen to it, without doubting its veracity.

' "'The gods and the asuras engaged with each other in a mighty battle. O king! At first, there was the encounter
known as Tarakamaya[There are different stories about the Tarakamaya battle. In this version, it is named after the demon Taraka.]. It has been heard by us that the daityas were then defeated by the gods. O king! When
the daityas were defeated, Taraka's three sons, Taraksha[Subsequently referred to as Tarakaksha.], Kamalaksha and Vidyunmali, resorted to fierce austerities and established themselves in supreme control. O scorcher of enemies! They oppressed their bodies with
austerities. O king! Because of their control, austerities and rules, the grandfather[Brahma.] was pleased with them and
offered them supreme boons. O king! They were united in asking for the boon that all beings would always be unable to kill them. They wanted this from the grandfather of all the worlds. The god who is the lord and master of
all the worlds told them, "O asuras! There is nothing like immortality and not being killed by anyone. Ask for any
other boon that pleases you." At this, they consulted among themselves for a long time and then, bowing down before the lord who is the master of the worlds, spoke these words, "O god! O grandfather! Please grant us this boon.
With your favours, we will dwell in three cities above the earth and roam around in this world. O unblemished
one! Once, every one thousand years, those cities will merge with one another and become one. O illustrious one!
When they have merged, if a supreme among gods slays us with a single arrow, let that be the means of our death."

Having agreed to this, the god[Brahma.] left for heaven.

' "'Having obtained the boon, they were pleased and consulted each other about constructing the three cities.
They asked the great asura Maya, who was accomplished in everything. He was without decay and was worshipped by the daityas and the danavas[Maya was the architect of the demons.]. Using his own austerities, the intelligent Maya created those three
cities, one of gold, another of silver and another of black iron. O lord of the earth! The one that was of gold was
resplendent in heaven, the one of silver in the firmament and the one of iron on earth. They were such that they circled. Each was a hundred yojanas in length and breadth and possessed houses, mansions and many walls and
gates[A yojana is a measure of length, between 8 and 9 miles.]. The roads had many qualities and they were also spacious. There were many kinds of palaces, adorned
with gates. O king! Each of those cities had a different king. The great-souled Tarakaksha possessed the expensive
city of gold, Kamalaksha the silver one and Vidyunmali the iron one. Those three daitya kings swiftly attacked the
three worlds with their energy. They spoke these words. "Who is the one who is known as Prajapati[Prajapati is Brahma's name.]?" There
were no heroes to rival them and the foremost among danavas went and united with them, in tens of millions. They
sought refuge in those three inaccessible cities, desiring great wealth. When they were thus united, Maya gave
them everything they wanted. Resorting to him, all of them lived there, without any fear. If any resident of the
three cities desired anything in his mind, using his powers of illusion, Maya immediately satisfied that wish.
Tarakaksha had an immensely strong son named Hari. He went through supreme austerities and satisfied the grandfather. Having satisfied the god, he asked for a boon. "Let there be a lake in our city. When those killed with
weapons are flung into it, let them emerge with life and greater strength." Having obtained the boon, Tarakaksha's
brave son, Hari, constructed a lake there. O lord! It was capable of reviving the dead. In whatever form and in
whatever attire a daitya was slain, once he was thrown there, he became alive in that form. Having obtained them
back, those in Tripura[Tripura means three cities.] began to oppress all the worlds. They obtained success through their great austerities and
extended the fear of the gods. O king! They never suffered from destruction in a battle. At this, they were overcome by avarice and delusion and were bereft of their senses. They shamelessly uprooted everything that had been
established. Everywhere, they drove away the gods and their companions. They roamed around at will, insolent
because of the boon they had obtained, through all the celestial forests and other regions loved by the residents of
heaven and the sacred and revered hermitages of rishis. The evil-acting danavas did not show respect towards
anyone.

' "'O scorcher of enemies! All the gods united and went to the grandfather, to tell him about the depredations
caused by those who were not suras[The suras are gods. Those who are not suras are the asuras.]. They bowed their heads in obeisance before him and told him everything.
They asked the illustrious grandfather about a means for their destruction[The destruction of the demons.]. On hearing this, the illustrious god
told the gods, "The asuras are evil-souled and hate the gods. Those who commit crimes against you, also oppress
me. There is no doubt that I am neutral among beings. But those who are against dharma must be killed. I am firmly telling you this. You elect Sthanu Ishana Jishnu, the performer of undecaying deeds[These are Shiva's names. Sthanu means the one who is immoveable or motionless. Ishana means the splendid
lord. Jishnu means the victorious one.]. O Adityas! He will save
you and kill the ones who are not suras." Having heard his words, with Shakra at the forefront, the gods placed
Brahma ahead of them and sought refuge with the one who bears the mark of a bull. They performed supreme austerities and praised the eternal brahman. With the rishis, the ones who knew about dharma gave up all their souls
to Bhava[Shiva's name, meaning the excellent one.]. With eloquent words, they praised the one who grants freedom from fear in all situations that cause
fear. He is the great-souled one who is the soul of everything. He pervades everything with his soul. They[The gods.]
knew special austerities and many kinds of yoga to control the soul. They knew about the techniques of sankhya,
so that the soul could always be controlled[While sankhya is a school of philosophy, it can loosely be translated as knowledge of the soul.]. They then beheld Ishana, the consort of Uma, in his mass of energy. He has no equal in the worlds. He is devoted to vows and is without blemish. He is the single illustrious one,
though they had thought of him in many different forms. On seeing the form of the great-souled one, whom they
had thought of in many different forms in their own souls, all of them were astounded and glanced at each other in
great wonder. He is the lord who is in all beings. He is the one without origin and is the lord of the universe. On
seeing him, all the gods and brahmarshis bowed their heads down on the ground. Shankara welcomed them with
words of benediction over them and asked them to arise. The illustrious one smiled and said, "Tell me why you
have come." Having obtained permission from Tryambaka[The three-eyed one, Shiva.], their hearts were assured. They told Bhava, "O
lord! We bow down. We bow down before you. We bow down before the one who is the god of all the gods. You
are the archer. You are the one who is supremely angry. You are the one who destroyed the sacrifice of
Prajapati[Here, Prajapati means Daksha. Shiva destroyed Daksha's sacrifice.]. You are the one who is worshipped by all Prajapatis. We bow down before you. We praise you. We
praise the one who is praised by those who are about to die. You are the one who is red. You are Rudra. You are the
one with the blue throat. You are the one with the trident. You are the one who cannot be repulsed. You are the one
with the eyes of a deer. You are the one who fights with the best of weapons. You are unassailable. You are the
seed. You are the brahman. You are a brahmachari. You are Ishana. You are the one who cannot be measured. You
are the one who controls. You are dressed in skin. You are always engaged in austerities. You are tawny. You are
the one who observes vows. You are the one who is attired in skin. You are the father of Kumara. You are three-
eyed. You wield the best of weapons. You destroy the afflictions of those who seek refuge. You destroy masses of
those who hate brahmanas. You are the lord of trees. You are the lord of men. We bow down before you. You are
the lord of cattle. You are always the lord of sacrifices. We bow down before you. We bow down before you. O
Tryambaka! Fierce in your energy, you are in front of all the soldiers. O god! We worship you, in our thoughts and
our deeds. Be pacified." At this, the illustrious one was gratified and welcomed and honoured them. He asked, "Let
the reason for your fright be dispelled. Tell me what I should do for you." The great-souled one granted a boon to
the masses of ancestors, gods and rishis. Brahma honoured Shankara and spoke these words for the welfare of the
worlds. "O lord of the gods! Through your favours, I have obtained the status of Prajapati. Having been thus established, I have granted a great boon to the danavas. Because of that, they are transgressing all norms of respect. You
are the lord of the past, the present and the future. Other than you, there is no one who can destroy those wicked
ones. Show your favours to the gods and grant this to the residents of heaven. O lord of the gods! O wielder of the
trident! Show your favours and kill the danavas."

' "'The illustrious one replied, "All your enemies should be killed. That is my view. But I cannot kill them
alone. Those who hate the gods are capable. Therefore, all of you should unite. Use the energy of my weapons to
fight against the enemy in battle. Unity offers great strength."

' "'The gods said, "We think that their energy and strength is double that of ours. We think that we have already
witnessed their energy and their strength."

' "'The illustrious one replied, "Those who have committed crimes against you and are wicked must always be
killed. Accept half of my energy and strength and kill all those enemies."

' "'The gods said, "O Maheshvara! We will not be able to bear half of your energy. But with half of our united
strength, you can kill the enemies." '

' "Duryodhana said, 'O supreme among kings! The gods accepted what the lord of the gods had said[The Critical edition excises an intervening shloka. In that, Shiva agreed to accept half the energy and strength
of the gods.]. All of
them gave him half of their energy and he became superior. The god became the strongest among all the strong
ones. From that time, Shankara came to be known as Mahadeva[The great god.]. Mahadeva said, "Armed with the bow and the
arrow, I will station myself on my chariot and kill the enemies of the residents of heaven. Therefore, all of you attend to my chariot and my bow and arrows. Behold, as I bring them down on the surface of the earth."

' "'The gods said, "Let all forms be gathered from everywhere in the three worlds. O lord of the gods! Using
that, we will construct an immensely energetic and resplendent chariot for you, which will be fashioned by Vishvakarma with his intelligence."

' "'The tigers among the gods then constructed the chariot[This is Duryodhana continuing his account.]. The goddess earth, garlanded with large cities
and with mountains, forests, islands and all the beings, became the seat for the charioteer. Mandara[Mount Mandara.] was the
axle and Mahanadi[The river.] became the flank. The directions and the sub-directions became the entourage around the
chariot. The flaming planets were the anukarsha[It is not obvious what an anukarsha is. It is something that was used to attract or pull and may have been some
kind of hook.] and the stars were the bumpers. Dharma, artha and kama united to become the trivenu[Trivenu means three bamboo poles. One doesn't know what part of the chariot this is, except that it is clearly a
joint.]. Many kinds of herbs and many trees, with flowers and fruit, became the seat for the
charioteer. The sun and the moon became wheels of that supreme chariot. Day and night were the auspicious
flanks, ahead and to the rear. The ten lords of the nagas, with Dhritarashtra[Not to be confused with the Kourava Dhritarashtra.] as the foremost, constituted the
shaft. The sky was the yoke and Samvartaka and Balahaka were the leather coverings for the yoke[Samvartaka and Balahaka are the names of clouds that appear at the time of the destruction of the universe.]. Fortitude,
understanding, permanence and humility were the staffs. The planets, nakshatras, stars and the colourful firmament
were the leather coverings. The guardians of the world, the lords of the gods, the water, the dead and wealth[Indra, Varuna, Yama and Kubera respectively.],
were made the horses. Sinivali, Anumati, Kuhu and Raka, all excellent in their vows, were made the yokes and
harnesses around the necks of the mounts, for use by the rider[Sinivali is the day before the new moon. Anumati is the day before the full moon. Kuhu is the day of the new
moon and Raka is the day of the full moon. These are also the names of goddesses associated with those days.]. Action, truth, austerities and prosperity were
made the reins. The mind became the base and Sarasvati[Meaning speech.] the track for the chariot. Many beautiful and colourful
flags were whirled around by the wind. With lightning and Indra's bow fastened to the chariot, it blazed in radiance. O great king! Thus was the supreme of chariots prepared there. O tiger among men! The gods prepared it, for
crushing those who hated them. Shankara placed the best of his weapons on the chariot. Having made the firmament the flagstaff for his chariot, he placed the mark of the bull there. Brahma's staff, Yama's staff, Rudra's staff
and Fever became the protectors of the chariot and faced all the directions. The great-souled Atharvan and Angi-
rasa became the protectors of the chariot wheels[Famous sages.]. Rig Veda, Sama Veda and the Puranas were in the front. Iti-
hasa[Itihasa means the two epics and the Puranas. Since the Puranas have already been mentioned, it means only
the two epics here.] and the Yajur Veda protected the rear. Divine words and learning surrounded it from all sides. O Indra
among kings! Vashatkara[The exclamation 'vashat' made at the time of offering an oblation.] was the goad there. O king! The syllable Om was at the forefront and made it look
radiant. He[Shiva.] made the year, with its six seasons, his bow. He made the night that destroys men the undecaying
bowstring. Vishnu, Agni and Soma were the arrows. Agni and Soma constitute the entire universe and it is said
that Vishnu is the universe. Vishnu is the illustrious one's soul and Bhava's infinite energy. That is the reason
they[The asuras.] could not bear the touch of Hara's bowstring. On that arrow, the lord released his fierce and virulent fire of
anger, generated from the intolerable wrath of Bhrigu and Angirasa. Nilalohita, Dhumra and Krittivasa looked terrible[Shiva's names. Nilalohita means the one who is blue-red. Dhumra means the one who is dark-red or covered
in smoke. Krittivasa means the one who is attired in skin.]. He blazed like ten thousand suns, amidst a mass of flaming energy. Hara is the vanquisher of those who
can be defeated with difficulty. He is the slayer of those who hate Brahma. He is always the protector and the destroyer. He is the refuge of dharma and adharma. He was surrounded by large numbers of terrible and fierce beings
who were horrible in form. Surrounded by large numbers of these, the illustrious Sthanu was resplendent. O king!
The entire world and universe is established in his limbs and all mobile and immobile objects were beautiful. It
was a wonderful sight. On seeing that the chariot was ready, he donned divine armour and picked up his bow and
arrow. He grasped the celestial arrows that were generated through Soma, Vishnu and Agni. O king! O supreme
among kings! The gods instructed the lord of the wind to blow sacred fragrances. Mahadeva ascended the chariot
and terrified the gods. When he ascended, the earth and heaven trembled. The granter of boons was beautiful, with
his sword, arrows and bow.

' "'He smiled and asked the masses of gods, "Who will be my charioteer?" The gods replied, "O lord of the
gods! There is no doubt that whoever you employ, will be your charioteer." He told the gods again, "You decide
who is superior to me. Decide this yourselves and make him the charioteer." Having heard the words of the great-
souled one, the gods went to the grandfather and having obtained his reassurance, spoke these words. "O god! We
have done everything that you asked us to, for destroying the enemies of the thirty gods. The one with the bull on
his banner is completely pleased with us. We have constructed a chariot and equipped it with many wonderful
weapons. But we do not know who should be the charioteer of that supreme chariot. Therefore, let the best of the
gods be appointed as the charioteer. O god! O lord! You should ensure that the words that you spoke become successful. O illustrious one! You told us earlier that you would do that which would be beneficial for us. You should
act in accordance with that. The supreme of chariots has parts from all the gods. It is irresistible and will drive
away the enemy. The one with the Pinaka in his hand is the warrior. He is ready and will strike terror among the
danavas. The four Vedas have become the best of steeds. With all the mountains, the earth is the great-souled one's
chariot. The nakshatras have obediently become the ornaments. But we do not see a charioteer for that warrior. O
god! O grandfather! When such are the chariot, the horses and the warrior, the charioteer must be someone who is
special in every way, just as the armour, the weapons and the bow are. But except you, we do not see someone who
can be a charioteer. O lord! You are the one who is superior to the gods in all the qualities. Ascend swiftly as a
charioteer and control those supreme horses." It has been heard, that in this fashion, the gods bowed down their
heads before the grandfather who is the lord of the three worlds and sought his favours, so that he might become
the charioteer. Brahma said, "O residents of heaven! There is nothing false in everything that you have said. I will
control the horses when Kapardin[Shiva's name, the one with the matted hair.] fights." The illustrious god, the grandfather who was the creator of the
worlds, was appointed by the gods as the charioteer of the great-souled Ishana. When he swiftly ascended the chariot, worshipped by the worlds, the horses, which possessed the speed of the wind, quickly lowered their heads and
sank down on their knees on the ground. Maheshvara also ascended. The great grandfather of the three worlds successfully grasped the reins and urged those horses, which possessed the speed of thought and the wind. When the
granter of boons[Brahma.] ascended and left in the direction of the asuras, the lord of the universe[Shiva.] smiled and said,
"Excellent! Wonderful! O god! Go to the spot of the daityas. Urge the horses diligently. Behold the strength of my
my arms today. I will slay the enemies in the battle." At this, he[Brahma.] urged the horses, which were as fleet as the
wind. O king! He went towards the city that was protected by the daityas and the danavas.

' "'Sharva[Shiva.] strung the bow and affixed the arrow. He affixed the pashupata weapon and thought of Tripura. O
king! Having stationed himself there, he angrily stretched his bow. At that point, the cities united and became one.
The three cities united and became one and a tumultuous sound of delight arose among the great-souled gods. All
the masses of gods, siddhas and supreme rishis became full of joy and uttered words of praise, signifying victory.
Tripura manifested itself before the one who wanted to slay the asuras, the god whose form was indescribable and
fierce and whose energy was intolerable. The illustrious one, the lord of the worlds, drew his celestial bow. The
one who is the essence of the three worlds released the arrow towards Tripura. He consumed the large numbers of
asuras and flung them into the western ocean. Thus, Tripura was burnt and the remaining danavas scorched by the
angry Maheshvara for the welfare of the three worlds. The one with three eyes then pacified the flames that resulted from his wrath and said, "Do not reduce the world to ashes." At this, nature, the gods, the worlds and the rishis
returned to their natural states and satisfied the infinitely energetic Sthanu with eloquent words of grave import. On
receiving the permission of the illustrious one, all of them returned to where they had come from. Having accomplished their objective, the gods, with Prajapati at the forefront, were satisfied. Thus did the illustrious Brahma, the
grandfather who is the controller of the worlds, control the horses, and you should do the same for the great-souled
Radheya. O tiger among kings! There is no need to debate whether you are especially superior to Krishna, Karna
and Phalguna. O unblemished one! He[Karna.] is like Rudra in a battle and you are like Brahma. Like the asuras, if the
two of you are united, you can vanquish my enemies. O Shalya! Act so that Karna can swiftly oppress and slay
Kounteya, the one with the white horses, with Krishna as his charioteer. Karna, the kingdom and our foundation is
based on you.

' "'There is another account I will tell you about. Listen to it. A brahmana who knew about dharma recounted it
in my father's presence. Hear these wonderful words, full of reasons, deeds and objectives. O Shalya! Do what
must be done and do not reflect. The immensely energetic Jamadagni was born in the lineage of the Bhargavas. He
had a famous son named Rama[Parashurama.], with energy and all the qualities. So that he might be able to please Bhava and
obtain weapons, he performed terrible austerities. He was cheerful in his soul, controlled and restrained his senses.
At this, Mahadeva was satisfied and pleased by his devotion. Shankara knew what was in his mind and showed
himself. The god said, "O Rama! I am satisfied with you. O fortunate one! I know what you wish for. If you purify
your soul, you will get everything that you want. When you become pure, I will give you all the weapons. O Bhargava! Those weapons burn down a person who is incapable and undeserving." Having been thus addressed by the
god of the gods who wields a trident, Jamadagni's great-souled son bowed his head in obeisance and told the lord,
"O lord of the gods! If you think that I am a person who is capable of bearing those weapons, you should give me
those weapons, since I have always served you." He performed austerities and resorted to control and discipline.
He worshipped, offered gifts and sacrifices and honoured him with oblations and mantras. He worshipped Sharva
for a large number of years. Mahadeva was satisfied with the great-souled Bhargava. In the presence of the gods,
he spoke about his[Parashurama's.] many qualities. "Rama is firm in his vows and is always devoted to me." The lord, the destroyer of enemies, was pleased and spoke about his qualities in many different ways, in the presence of the gods
and the ancestors. At this time, the daityas became extremely powerful. Because of their insolence and delusion,
they afflicted the residents of heaven. At this, all the gods united and made up their minds to kill them. They made
every effort to kill the enemy, but were incapable of vanquishing them. The gods then went and spoke to Mahesh-
vara. They pleased him with their devotion and asked him to kill the large numbers of the enemy. Having obtained
a promise from the god that the enemies would be destroyed, the gods summoned Bhargava Rama. Shankara told
him, "O Bhargava! For the sake of the welfare of the worlds and to please me, kill the enemies of the assembled
gods." Rama replied, "O lord of the gods! O Maheshvara! Without the weapons, what strength do I possess, that I
should kill the danavas? All of them are accomplished in the use of weapons and are indomitable in battle." The
god said, "On my instructions, go. You will kill the danavas. Having vanquished the enemy, you will obtain many
qualities." Having heard these words, he agreed wholeheartedly. Rama offered benedictions and left in the direction of the danavas. He killed the enemies of the gods, who were proud, insolent and powerful. Bhargava struck
them with the touch of the vajra. The danavas inflicted wounds on the body of Jamadagni's son, supreme among
the brahmanas. However, at Sthanu's touch, all those wounds disappeared. The illustrious god was pleased at his
deed and granted boons to the great-souled Bhargava, who was knowledgable about the brahman. The god of the
gods, the wielder of the trident, was pleased and said, "From the descent of the weapons, there are wounds on your
body. O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! These prove the superhuman deed you have achieved. As you desired,
accept these divine weapons from me." He obtained the weapons and all the boons that he wished for. Having obtained these diverse objects, Rama lowered his head before Shiva. The immensely ascetic one took the permission
of the lord of the gods and departed. This is the ancient account that was told by the rishi.

' "'Bhargava imparted all his knowledge of dhanurveda to the great-souled Karna, tiger among men, having
been extremely pleased with him. O king! Had Karna not been a deserving person, the descendant of the Bhrigu
lineage would not have given him those celestial weapons. I therefore think that Karna cannot have been born in
the lineage of a suta. I think that he is the son of a god, born in the lineage of kshatriyas. The maharatha is long in
his arms and possessed earrings and armour. How can a doe give birth to such a tiger? Behold his thick arms,
which are like the trunk of a king of elephants. Behold his thick chest, capable of withstanding all enemies.'" '
