Vaishampayana said, 'After Radheya fled, the others, with Duryodhana in the lead, attacked with their respective
armies and showered Pandava with arrows. On seeing those many soldiers, arranged in battle formations, attacking
him with arrows, Virata's son said, "What is your intention? O Jishnu! You are stationed on this beautiful chariot
and I am your charioteer. Towards which part of the army will I advance next? I will go where you ask me to."

'Arjuna replied, "O Uttara! You can see the red-eyed one clad in the skin of a tiger. He is unhurt. He is stationed
on a chariot with a blue flag. That is Kripa and those are his chariots and soldiers. Take me to him. I will show that
firm-bowed one my dexterity in use of weapons. The one with the pure and golden water pot on his flag is the preceptor Drona himself, supreme among those who have knowledge of all weapons. O brave one! Circumambulate
him cheerfully, without obstructing him in any way. That is the eternal dharma. If Drona strikes at my body first
and I strike him back in return, he will not be angered. There is one who can be seen not far from him, with a bow
on the top of his standard. That is the preceptor's son, maharatha Ashvatthama. I have always honoured him, and
so have all the wielders of weapons. When you encounter his chariot, restrain again and again. There is one in that
mass of chariots, clad in golden armour. He is stationed, surrounded by one-third of the army. An elephant on a
golden flag can be seen at the top of his standard. That is Dhritarashtra's son, the illustrious King Suyodhana. O
brave one! Take this chariot before him. He can destroy the chariots of enemies. The king is indomitable in energy
and is irrepressible in battle. In swiftness in the use of weapons, he is regarded as the foremost among Drona's
pupils. But I will show him many times what it means to be swift in use of weapons in battle. The one who has a
beautiful elephant's enclosure embellished on his standard is Vaikartana Karna, whom you have known earlier[Because Karna has been defeated earlier.].
When you approach the chariot of that evil-souled Radheya, be careful, because he always challenges me in a battle. There is one whose flag is blue and is decorated with five stars. The brave one is stationed on his chariot, his
hands encased in guards. He has a large bow. He is stationed on his chariot and his supreme flag is decorated with
stars and the sun. A white and unblemished umbrella is held aloft his head. He is at the head of a great mass of
chariots, with many flags and pennants. He is like the sun stationed before a mass of clouds. His golden armour
can be seen, like the moon and the sun. His golden helmet seems to trouble me. This is Shantanu's son Bhishma, a
grandfather to all of us. He is blessed with royal prosperity, but obeys Duryodhana's instructions. You should approach him last, so that he does not cause an obstruction for me. When I fight with him, control the horses carefully."'

Vaishampayana said, 'O king! Virata's son carefully drove Savyasachi to Kripa, who was ready to engage with
Dhananjaya.'
