'Markandeya said, "Now hear about Skanda's companions. They were terrible and extraordinary. They were born
when Skanda was struck by the vajra and are the minor Kumaras. These terrible ones steal children, whether they
have been born or whether they are in the womb. From the force of the vajra, immensely strong daughters were
also born from him. The Kumaras thought of Vishakha as their father. The illustrious one protects in battle, with
the face of a goat. He is surrounded by the masses of daughters and all his own sons. While the mothers look on,
Bhadrashakha[Kumara's epithet.] provides succour. So people on earth call Skanda the father of sons. In different regions, those
who wish sons or have sons, always worship Rudra, Agni and the extremely strong Uma as Svaha.

'"The maidens who the fire named Tapas had begotten, went to Skanda and he asked, 'What will I do?' The
mothers replied, 'Grant us this favour. May we be the supreme mothers of all the worlds. May we be worshipped.
Do this for our pleasure.' He replied that it would be this way. Then that great-souled one again said, 'You will be
of different kinds, auspicious and inauspicious.' Thus, having fulfilled the resolution of making Skanda their son,
the group of mothers went away. Kaki, Halima, Rudra, Brihali, Arya, Palala and Mitra became the seven mothers
of children who have just been born. Through Skanda's favours, each of them had a terrible son, named
Shishu[Meaning infant or child.], full of valour and red in the eye. Those who were born from Skanda's group of mothers are known as
the eight brave ones[There is an anomaly in the numbers. The number of mothers (matrikas) is sometimes given as seven, sometimes as eight. Seven is also associated with the six stars of the Pleiades (krittika). One sentence in the text mentions seven mothers, but the next sentence suggests eight. Krittika (krittikas in the plural) is the third of the twenty-
seven nakshatras. Reared by the Krittikas, Skanda was named Kartikeya. The six wives of the rishis became the
Krittikas.]. Together with the one who has the face of a goat[Skanda.], they are referred to as the nine. O
king! Know that the sixth of Skanda's six heads has the face of a goat and is always worshipped by the group of
mothers. The chief among his six heads is known as Bhadrashakha. It is through this that he created divine energy.
All these incidents occurred on the fifth day of shuklapaksha. O lord of men! The extremely terrible war transpired
on the sixth."'
