'Narada said, "King Haryashva thought about many things. He released warm sighs at the lack of offspring. Then
the supreme among kings said, 'She is high in the six high points[Nose, eyes, ears, nails, breasts and neck.]. She is slim in the seven places that should be
slim[Other than the obvious waist, ankles, wrists and neck, it is difficult to pinpoint this number seven. It is not mentioned in any of the standard treatises.]. She is deep in the three places[Speech, intelligence and navel.] that should be deep. She is red in the five places that should be red[Soles of the feet, palms of the hand, tongue, lips and nails.].
She is fit to be seen in many worlds of gods and asuras and by many gandharvas. She has many auspicious marks.
She is capable of giving birth to many. I am capable of giving birth to a son who will be an emperor[Chakravarti, an universal monarch or sovereign, whose wheels (chakra) travel as far as the frontiers of the
ocean.]. O foremost
among brahmanas! Tell me the bride price, remembering the state of my riches.' Galava replied, 'Give me eight
hundred horses that have one black ear each. They must be as white as the moon. They must be built well and they
must have been born in this country. Then this beautiful and long-eyed one will be the mother of your children,
just as kindling is the womb of fires.' On hearing these words, King Haryashva, who was overcome with desire,
was miserable. The rajarshi told Galava, supreme among rishis, 'I only have two hundred horses of the sort that
you desire, though there are hundreds of other sacrificial horses that are roaming around. O Galava! I will give
birth to a single son through her. Grant me this desire as a boon.' When the maiden heard these words, she told
Galava, 'One who knows about the brahman once granted me a boon. After each time that I give birth, I will become a virgin again. Therefore, give me to the king and accept those supreme horses. By going to four kings in
succession, you will obtain all the eight hundred horses. I will also have four sons. O supreme among brahmanas!
Act in this way for the sake of your preceptor. I think that this is wise. O brahmana! What do you think?' Having
been thus addressed by the maiden, the sage Galava told King Haryashva, 'O Haryashva! O best of men! Accept
this maiden. Give birth to a single son through her, for one quarter of the bride price.' He[Haryashva.] applauded Galava and
accepted the maiden. At the right time and the right place, he obtained the son that he had wished for. He was
named Vasumana. He was greater in riches than the Vasus. That lord of men resembled one of the Vasus and he became a great granter of riches.

'"After some time, the intelligent Galava presented himself again. He met Haryashva, who was delighted in his
mind, and told him, 'O king! A son has been born to you and he is like the young sun in his radiance. O lord of
men! It is now time for me to go to another king in search of alms.' Haryashva was truthful in his words and truthful in his manliness. Since those horses were extremely rare, he returned Madhavi. Madhavi gave up the radiant
prosperity of the king. Of her own will, she became a virgin again and followed Galava. The brahmana said, 'Let
the horses remain with you for the moment.' With the maiden, he went to Divodasa, the lord of his subjects."'
