Sanjaya said, "On seeing that Vrishasena had been killed, Karna was overcome by anger and rage. Sudden tears
of sorrow flowed down from Vrisha's eyes. On his chariot, he spiritedly advanced towards the enemy. His eyes
were coppery red with rage and he challenged Dhananjaya to a fight. Those two chariots were as radiant as the sun
and were covered with tiger skins. When they encountered each other, it was as if two suns had clashed against
each other. Those two men, scorchers of enemies, were like suns and were borne by white horses. Those two great-
souled ones were as radiant as the sun and the moon in the sky. O venerable one! On seeing them, all the beings
were astounded. They looked like Indra and Virochana's son[Virochana's son was the demon Bali.], embarking on a conquest of the three worlds.
There was the clatter of chariots, the twang of bowstrings, the slapping of palms, the whizzing of arrows and the
blare of conch shells. As they advanced on their chariots, all the lords of the earth looked on. As they clashed
against each other, the standards generated great wonder. Karna's had the housing of an elephant and Kiriti's the
ape. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! As the two chariots clashed against each other, the kings looked on.
They emitted roars like lions and voiced loud words of applause. On hearing about the duel between them, the
warriors gathered around there. They slapped their arms powerfully and forcefully waved their garments around.
The Kurus assembled there. Wishing to cheer Karna, they blew loudly on their conch shells and instructed that musical instruments should be played. All the Pandavas also cheered Dhananjaya. They caused trumpets and conch
shells to be sounded in all the directions. The roars generated a tumultuous sound everywhere. As Karna and Arjuna clashed, the brave ones slapped their arms. They saw that those two tigers among men, supreme among rathas,
were stationed on their chariots. They grasped their giant bows, arrows, javelins, clubs and other weapons. They
were armoured and had girded their swords. They were borne on white horses that were as beautiful as conch
shells. Both of them possessed the best of quivers and were handsome. They were smeared with red sandalwood
paste on their limbs and were as crazy as bulls. They were like venomous serpents and like Yama, the Destroyer, in
their rage. They were as wrathful as Indra and Vritra and as resplendent as the sun and the moon. They were as
cruel as mighty planets that clash at the end of a yuga. They were born from gods. They were the equals of the
gods. They were like the gods in their beauty. Those two tigers among men, Karna and Dhananjaya, clashed and it
was a sight worth seeing. Both of them possessed the best of weapons and both of them were exhausted from fighting. Both of them made the sky resound with the slapping of their arms. Both of them were famous for their deeds,
their manliness and their strength. In a battle, both of them were the equals of Shambara and the king of the immortals. In an encounter, both of them were the equals of Kartavirya[Karavirya Arjuna.] and Dasharatha's son. Both of them possessed valour that was like Vishnu's bravery and both were Bhava's[Bhava is Shiva.] equal in a fight. O king! Both were borne
on white horses and on supreme chariots. The charioteers of those immensely strong ones were the best. O great
king! On seeing those two blazing maharathas, there was great amazement among the large numbers of siddhas
and charanas. O bull among the Bharata lineage! The sons of Dhritarashtra quickly surrounded Karna, the ornament of a battle, with their army. In similar fashion, with Dhrishtadyumna at the forefront, the Pandavas joyfully
surrounded the great-souled Partha, who was unmatched in a battle. O lord of the earth! For those on your side,
Karna became the stake in the battle. In that way, for the Pandaveyas, Partha became the stake in the battle. The
troops on both sides, and those who had assembled, were eager to witness the encounter. The stakes were determined and it was certain that there would be victory, or there would be defeat. Stationed on the field of battle, the
gambling match between us and the Pandavas commenced, with the objective of victory, or its reverse. O great
king! Those two, who were skilled in fighting, were stationed in the encounter. They were extremely angry towards each other and wished to defeat each other. Like Indra and Vritra, they wished to kill each other. They assumed fearful forms, like planets trailing a lot of smoke.

' "O bull among the Bharata lineage! As they took sides between Karna and Arjuna, there were differences, debates, dissension and arguments among those in the sky and among all beings. O venerable one! The directions
and all the worlds also adopted different sides. When Karna and Arjuna clashed, the gods, the danavas, the gandharvas, the pishachas, the serpents and the rakshasas adopted different sides. O lord of the earth! The sky and the
nakshatras became anxious on Karna's account[Presumably because Karna was the son of the sun god.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The extensive earth was
anxious on Partha's account, like a mother for her son[Presumably because Arjuna was the son of Pritha (Kunti) and earth is known as prithvi. Kunti personified the
earth.]. O supreme among men! The rivers, the oceans, the
mountains, the trees and the herbs took Kiriti's side. O scorcher of enemies! The asuras, the yatudhanas, the
guhyakas, crows and others who travelled through the sky were on Karna's side. The stores of all gems, the Vedas
and accounts as the fifth[Accounts (the two epics and the Puranas) are regarded as the fifth Veda.], the minor Vedas, the Upanishads, with collections of their commentaries, Vasuki,
Chitrasena, Takshaka, Upatakshaka, all the mountains, Kadru's offspring and immensely wrathful and virulent serpents were on Arjuna's side[Kadru was married to the sage Kashyapa and was the mother of all the serpents. Since Arjuna burnt down the
serpents in Khandava, the serpents should have been on Karna's side. However, as a succeeding shloka explains,
the serpents were divided.]. Airavata's offspring, the offspring of Surabhi and Vaishali and the serpents were
on Arjuna's side[Surabhi was married to the sage Kashyapa and was the mother of cattle. Vaishali is a reference to the princess
Vaishali, daughter of King Vishala. Her story is recounted in the Puranas. She gave birth to the famous King
Marut, who was an emperor who ruled over the entire earth. The reference to Vaishali's offspring is not obvious.
Serpents mentioned again require an explanation. The earlier reference to serpents was to serpents in general.
Here, the reference is to specific serpents who live in Bhogavati, the capital city of nagas.]. The smaller snakes were on Karna's side. O king! The wolves, jackals and all the auspicious
animals and birds were on Partha's side, wishing for his victory. The Vasus, the Maruts, the Sadhyas, the Rudras,
the Vishvas[The Vishvadevas.], the Ashvins, Agni, Indra, the moon god, the wind god and the ten directions were on Dhananjaya's side, while the Adityas were on Karna's side[In general, the Adityas are the sons of Aditi and Kashyapa, that is, the gods. There is no reason for the gods to
be on Karna's side, especially because some of them (Vasus, Maruts, Sadhyas, Rudras, Vishvadevas, Agni, Indra, Soma (the moon god) and Pavana (the wind god) have just been mentioned to be on Arjuna's side. However, in a narrower sense, the twelve Adityas are the manifestations of the sun for the twelve months. It is these
who were on Karna's side, Karna being the son of the sun god.]. The gods, together with the large number of ancestors,
were on Arjuna's side. Yama, Vaishravana[Kubera.] and Varuna were also with Arjuna. The gods, the brahmanas, the
kings and the large number of rishis were with Pandava. O king! The gandharvas, with Tumburu at the head, were
with Arjuna. The descendants of Prava and Muni, the large numbers of gandharvas and apsaras[Prava is a typo. It should be Pradha. Kashyapa married Pradha and the gandharvas were the offspring. Kashyapa married Muni and the apsaras were the offspring.], wolves, predatory beasts, animals, birds, large numbers of chariots, different forms of clouds and winds, and sages assembled
there to witness the clash between Karna and Arjuna. O great king! The gods, the danavas, the gandharvas, the nagas, the yakshas, birds, maharshis learned in the Vedas, the ancestors who thrive on svadha oblations[Svadha is the exclamation made when oblations are offered to the ancestors.], austerities, learning and the herbs, in many different forms and attires, took up their places in the firmament and this created a great noise. Brahma, with the brahmarshis and the Prajapatis[Prajapati is a name for Brahma, as well as for guardians of the world. Since Brahma has been separately mentioned, the Prajapatis here are the guardians of the world.] and Bhava[Shiva.], on his celestial chariot, also
arrived at the spot.

' "On seeing that Prajapati[This Prajapati means Brahma.], the self-creating one, had arrived, the gods spoke to him. 'O god! Let this struggle for victory between these two lions among men be pacified.' Hearing this, Maghavan[Indra.] prostrated himself
before the grandfather and said, 'Let the entire universe not be destroyed because of Karna and Arjuna. O self-creating one! You had earlier said that Vijaya and the other one[Vijaya is Arjuna. The other one seems to be a reference to Krishna. It is difficult to make sense of these
shlokas, especially because the Critical edition excises some shlokas where Indra sides with Arjuna and Surya
with Karna. But the gist is that Indra wants Arjuna to win.] are identical. O illustrious one! I am bowing down
before you. Be pacified and let that be true.' Brahma and Ishana[Shiva.] spoke these words to the lord of the thirty
gods. 'The victory of the great-souled Vijaya is certain. He is spirited, powerful and brave. He is skilled in the use
of weapons and is rich in austerities. Great energy is manifested in him, especially in dhanurveda. Through his
greatness, he is capable of overcoming destiny. He is capable of controlling and overcoming the worlds. When the
two Krishnas are angered, no one is capable of standing before them. Those two bulls among men are truly the creators of the universe. They are the ancient and supreme rishis Nara and Narayana[Nara being identified with Arjuna and Narayana with Krishna.]. Those two scorchers of enemies control everything and cannot be controlled by anyone. Karna, foremost in the worlds, is a bull among men.
Vaikartana is brave and valiant. But let the two Krishnas be victorious. With Drona and Bhishma, let him[Karna.] obtain the great world of heaven and the worlds of the Vasus and the Maruts.' Having heard the words spoken by
those two gods of the gods and abiding by the instructions of Brahma and Ishana, the one with the one thousand
eyes spoke these words to all the beings. 'You have heard what the two illustrious ones have said for the welfare of
the universe. It must happen that way and cannot be countered. Therefore, do not be anxious.' O venerable one! O
king! Having heard Indra's words, all the beings were astounded and honoured him. The gods showered down
many kinds of fragrant flowers from the sky and sounded divine trumpets. To witness the unmatched duel between
those two lions among men, all the gods, danavas and gandharvas waited.

' "The two chariots were yoked to white horses. They possessed standards and made a loud noise. The brave
ones from the world assembled and separately blew on their conch shells. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! So
did the brave Vasudeva and Arjuna and Karna and Shalya. The battle that generated terror among cowards commenced. They rivalled each other in their valour, like Shakra and Shambara. The two clear and radiant standards
were fixed to the chariots. As they angrily prepared to fight each other, they[The standards.] were thick. Karna's resplendent
one was marked with an elephant's housing. It was bejewelled and firm, like Purandara's bow, and like a venomous serpent. The best of apes opened its terrible and gaping mouth on Partha's. It was extremely fierce and difficult to look at, like the sun. Stationed on the standard of the wielder of Gandiva, it desired a fight. It roared loudly
and flung itself on Karna's standard. Having descended with great force, the ape used its nails and its teeth to destroy the elephant's housing, like Garuda against serpents. The elephant's housing was well decorated with bells. It
was like Yama's noose and was hard as iron. It angrily attacked the giant ape. As those two excellent ones challenged each other to a duel, the standards began to fight each other, wishing to destroy each other.

' "Pundarikaksha pierced Shalya with the arrows of his sight and he also glanced back at Pundarikaksha in a
similar way. Using the arrows of his sight, Vasudeva defeated Shalya. Kunti's son, Dhananjaya, also glanced at
Karna with his sight and vanquished him. At this, the son of a suta smiled and told Shalya, 'O friend! If through
some means, Partha slays me in the battle today, what will you do after that? Tell me truthfully.' Shalya replied, 'O
Karna! If the one with the white horses kills you in the battle today, I will slay both Madhava and Pandava.' In that
way, Arjuna also asked Govinda. However, Krishna laughed and spoke these supreme words to Partha. 'The sun
may fall down from its place. The earth may shatter into many fragments. The fire may become cold. But Karna
will not be able to kill Dhananjaya. However, if this does happen, the world will be destroyed. Using my arms in
the battle, I will kill Karna and Shalya.' Having heard Krishna's words, the one with the ape on his banner
laughed. Arjuna told Krishna, the performer of undecaying deeds, 'O Janardana! Karna and Shalya together are not
sufficient for me. In the battle today, you will see Karna severed into many fragments with my arrows, with Karna's flags and standard, with Shalya, the chariot and the horses, with his umbrella and armour, and with his
javelins, arrows and bow. In earlier times, he laughed at Krishna[Krishnaa, Droupadi.]. Today, you will see Karna uprooted by me,
like a flowering tree brought down by a maddened elephant. O Madhusudana! After that, you will hear pleasant
words today. Today, you will be able to comfort Abhimanyu's mother and repay her debt. O Janardana! Kunti,
your father's sister, will be delighted. O Madhava! The tears on Krishna's[Krishnaa's, that is, Droupadi's.] face will be comforted today. You
will be able to speak immortal words to Dharmaraja Yudhishthira.'" '
