'Arjuna said, "O gandharva! We are the chastisers of enemies. We are learned in the Vedas. We are all virtuous.
Yet, why did you abuse us when we were travelling in the night?"

'The gandharva said, "O son of Pandu! You do not keep the fire[Keep fire burning in the household.]. You do not make sacrificial offerings. You
do not have Brahmanas walking ahead of you. That is the reason you were abused by me. The yakshas, the rakshasas, the gandharvas, the pishachas, the uragas and men speak in detail about the prosperity of the Kuru dynasty.
O brave one! I have heard Narada and other devarshis speak of the qualities and wisdom of your ancestors. When I
myself roamed this rich earth that has this ocean as a garment, I saw the influence of your dynasty. O Arjuna! I
personally know your preceptor in knowledge of the Vedas and the science of weapons, Bharadvaja's famous son.
He is revered in the three worlds. O Partha! O tiger among the Kurus! I also know Dharma, Vayu, Shakra[Indra.], the
Ashvins and Pandu, the six who extended this lineage. These best of gods and men are your ancestors. I know that
all you brothers are divine-minded, great-souled, supreme among those who wield arms, excellent in observance of
vows, supreme in mind and intelligence and perfect in character. O Partha! Nevertheless, I abused you. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! No man who has the strength of his arms can patiently tolerate abuse before his wife's
eyes. O son of Kunti! Especially at night, our strength increases. Since I was with my wife, I was filled with anger.

'"O extender of Tapati's lineage! I was defeated by you in battle. Hear from me the reason why I suffered. O
Partha! Brahmacharya is the supreme dharma and you are established in that. That is the reason you defeated me in
the battle. O chastiser of enemies! If any Kshatriya, driven by desire, wishes to fight with us in the night, he can
never escape alive. O descendant of Tapati's lineage! However, a king, driven by desire, can vanquish all the wanderers of the night in battle if he is led by a priest. O descendant of Tapati's lineage! Therefore, men should always
employ priests who are learned and self-controlled in all acts that are desired. He who is learned in the six Vedangas, and is always pure, truthful, devoted to dharma and self-controlled, is fit to be a priest for kings. A king who
has a priest who is learned in the precepts of dharma, eloquent, well behaved and pure ahead of him is always victorious and is assured of heaven afterwards. A king must always choose a priest who has all the qualities, who can
protect what he possesses and acquire that which he does not. A king should always be guided by his priest to acquire the entire earth, from Mount Meru to where the ocean is the garment. O descendant of Tapati's lineage! A
king who is without a Brahmana can never acquire any land through his bravery or high birth alone. O extender of
the Kuru lineage! Therefore, know that kingdoms with Brahmanas at their head can be sustained eternally."'
