'Sanjaya said, "On hearing the slap of Bhimasena's bowstring against his palms, Radheya could not tolerate it and
advanced like a mad elephant against another elephant. He had moved away from the reach of Bhima's arrows for
only an instant. Adhiratha's son saw that your sons had been brought down from their chariots and had been killed
by Bhimasena. He was distressed and miserable. He sighed long and warm sighs and again attacked Pandava. His
eyes were coppery red in anger and he sighed like a giant serpent. As he released his arrows, Karna was as resplendent as the sun with its rays. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Vrikodara was shrouded by the arrows released
from Karna's bow, which were like the rays of the sun. The colourful arrows released from Karna's bow were tufted with the feathers of peacocks. They penetrated all over Partha, like birds entering a tree. The arrows released
from Karna's bow descended incessantly. They were gold-tufted and looked like a continuous array of swans. O
king! Such was the power of the arrows shot by Adhiratha's son that it seemed as if they were issuing not only
from the bow, but also the standard, the seat, the umbrella, the yoke and the floor[The standard, seat, yoke and floor of the chariot.]. The arrows released by Adhiratha's son filled the sky with their great force and were tufted with the feathers of birds. They were colourful
and decorated with gold. Vrikodara saw that they were descending towards him, like Death. He became ready to
give up his life and angrily pierced him[Karna.] with nine arrows. The brave Pandava saw the great force of Karna's
storm of arrows, but did not waver. Pandava shot a net of arrows towards Adhiratha's son and again pierced Karna
with another twenty sharp arrows. In that encounter, just as Partha enveloped the son of the suta with arrows, Karna also shrouded Pandava. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On witnessing Bhimasena's valour in that fight,
those on your side were delighted and praised him, as did the charanas. Ten of the foremost of rathas among the
Kurus and the Pandavas-Bhurishrava, Kripa, Drona's son, the king of Madra, Jayadratha, Uttamouja, Yudhamanyu, Satyaki, Keshava and Arjuna-uttered words of praise and roared loudly, like lions. There was a tumultuous sound and it made the body hair stand up.

'"O king! Your son, Duryodhana, quickly spoke to the kings and the princes, and especially to his brothers. 'O
fortunate ones! Advance towards Karna and save him from Vrikodara. Ahead of us, the arrows released by Bhima
are striking Radheya. All of you great archers should make efforts to protect the son of the suta.' O venerable one!
Having been instructed by Duryodhana, seven of his brothers angrily attacked Bhimasena and surrounded him
from all sides. They approached Kounteya and covered him with showers of arrows. This was like the slayer of
Bala showering down rain on a mountain. O king! Bhimasena was oppressed by those seven angry maharathas,
like seven planets afflicting the moon at the time of destruction. O king! Pandava Kounteya drew the well-decorated and firm bow with his left hand and held it in his hand[That is, held the string in his right hand.]. Knowing that they were only men[Hence, no divine weapons or extraordinary skills were necessary.], the lord affixed and released seven arrows that were as bright as the rays of the sun. O great king! Bhimasena remembered
the earlier enmity and took away the lives from the bodies of your sons. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Bhimasena shot arrows at those descendants of the Bharata lineage. These were gold-tufted and sharpened on stone
and coursed through the sky. Those arrows were decorated with gold and pierced through their hearts. O great
king! They were as resplendent as Suparna[Garuda.] travelling through the sky. O Indra among kings! They were fierce
and decorated with gold and now had blood on their tips. They drank the blood of your sons. Those arrows penetrated their inner organs and brought them down from the chariots onto the ground. They were like giant trees on
mountain tops, shattered by an elephant. Shatrunjaya, Shatrusaha, Chitra, Chitrayudha, Dridha, Chitrasena and
Vikarna-these seven were brought down.

'"Having killed them, the mighty-armed one saw Radheya. The descendant of the Pandu lineage roared terribly,
like the roar of a lion. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The brave one's roar resounded in the sky and informed Dharmaraja about his victory in the battle. On hearing the great roar emitted by the archer Bhimasena in
the battle, Dharmaraja was supremely delighted. O great king! In joy, musical instruments were played in loud
tones. Having heard Bhimasena's roar, Partha[Yudhishthira.] attacked Drona, supreme among the wielders of weapons, from
every direction. On receiving the sign from Vrikodara, he was filled with great delight. O great king! On seeing
that thirty-one of your maharatha sons had been killed, Duryodhana remembered the words of Kshatta[Vidura.], which
had been spoken at the time of the gambling match to your evil-minded son, when Karna had spoken harsh words
to Krishna[Krishnaa, Droupadi.] in the assembly hall. O lord of the earth! This was in your presence and in that of the sons of Pandu
and in the presence of all the Kouravas and the preceptor. 'O Krishna[These were the words spoken by Karna to Droupadi.]! The Pandavas have been destroyed and
have gone to eternal hell. Accept someone else as a husband.' Those harsh words spoken to Droupadi in the assembly hall are now bearing fruit. Thinking of this, the king[Duryodhana.] did not know what to do next. The Pandavas wield
fierce bows and will kill your sons in their anger. O Kourava! The fire of Bhimasena's anger has been restrained
for thirteen years. It is now being released and will convey your sons towards destruction. Having lamented a lot,
Kshatta failed to obtain peace from you. O foremost among the Bharata lineage! With your sons, enjoy the fruits of
that now. O Indra among kings! Vikarna and the valiant Chitrasena, foremost among your sons, have been killed
and so have other maharatha sons, all those who have come within the range of Bhima's sight. O mighty-armed
one! He swiftly slew your sons. It is only because of your deeds that I saw our arrays being scorched, as a result of
the thousands of arrows released by Pandava and Vrisha[Karna.]."'