'The Brahmana said, "At the source of the Ganga, there lived a rishi of great austerities. He was always rigid in his
vows and he was extremely wise. His name was Bharadvaja. One day, the rishi went to the Ganga to have his bath
and saw there the apsara Ghritachi, who had arrived before him and now stood there, having finished her bath.
Then a wind arose from the riverbank and removed the clothing from her body. Seeing her nude, the rishi was afflicted with desire. He had been celibate[A brahmachari. Because he had been a brahmachari, he had immense powers.] since boyhood. As soon as his mind felt desire, his semen dropped and
the rishi collected it in a wooden cup[Drona. A drona was used to carry water and can also be translated as a vessel, rather than cup.]. From that was born a son, who became the learned Drona and who studied
all the Vedas and the Vedangas.

'"Bharadvaja had a king as his friend. His name was Prishata and he had a son named Drupada. Parshata[The son of Prishata, hence Drupada.], that
bull among Kshatriyas, always used to go to the hermitage and play and study with Drona. After Prishata died,
Drupada became the king. Drona heard that Rama[Parashurama.] wanted to give away all his riches. When Rama was leaving
for the forest[That is, going away to the forest after giving away all his wealth.], Bharadvaja's son went to him and said, 'O bull among Brahmanas! I am Drona and I have come
to you for some riches.' Rama said, 'O Brahmana! Now I have only my body left. Ask for either my body or my
weapons.' Drona said, 'O illustrious one! Give me all your weapons, together with the knowledge of releasing
them and recalling them.' The descendant of Bhrigu[Parashurama.] agreed and gave those to him. On receiving them, Drona
concluded that he had become successful. On obtaining from Rama that supreme weapon known as brahmastra,
Drona became extremely happy and became supreme among men. Thereupon, Bharadvaja's powerful son went to
Drupada, a tiger among men, and said, 'Know me to be your friend.' Drupada said, 'A man without learning cannot be a friend to one who is learned, nor one without chariots to one who has chariots, nor one who is not a king
to one who is a king. Why do you desire our old friendship?' Turning his mind against the king of Panchala, the
intelligent one[Drona.] went to Nagasahrya[Another name for Hastinapura.], the capital of the Kurus.

'"Thereupon, Bhishma took a lot of riches with him and offered his grandsons to the wise Drona as students.
With the intention of humiliating Drupada, Drona assembled all his students and told them, 'O unblemished ones!
When you have become skilled in the use of all weapons, as a preceptor's fee, you must promise that you will give
me what I wish for.' When the Pandavas became skilled in the use of all weapons and became successful in their
labour, Drona spoke to them and reminded them about the preceptor's fee, 'Parshata Drupada is the king in Chhatravati[Chhatravati is another name for Ahichhatra, which was the capital of the kingdom of Panchala.]. Take his kingdom away from him and give it to me quickly.' Then Pandu's five sons defeated Drupada
in battle. Taking him and his advisers prisoners, they showed them to Drona. Drona said, 'O king of men! I again
seek your friendship. One who is not a king cannot be a friend to one who is a king. O Yajnasena! Therefore, I will
divide the kingdom with you. You will be the king on the southern banks of the Bhagirathi and I on the north.' The
thought of that great insult never left the king's[Drupada.] mind for a single instant. Being miserable, the king became
thin."'
