Janamejaya said, 'He was vanquished and bound by his enemies in battle. Later, he was freed by the great-souled
Pandavas. The extremely evil-souled Duryodhana was always boastful, insolent and proud. He always looked
down upon the manliness and generosity of the Pandavas. It seems to me that the wicked one's entry into Hastinapura must have been difficult. He must have been overcome by shame and sorrow. His heart must have been full of
grief. O Vaishampayana! Recount in detail his entry.'

Vaishampayana said, 'Dhritarashtra's son, Suyodhana, was given his leave by Dharmaraja. His face was lowered
in shame. He was extremely miserable. He returned slowly. The king left for his city, followed by four components
of his army[Infantry, horses, elephants and chariots.]. On the way, there was a region that was full of excellent grass and water. He set his vehicles free
there. As he wished, he camped in an auspicious and beautiful spot of ground. In due order, his elephants, horses,
chariots and infantry were stationed around him. The king seated himself on a couch that was like the fire in its radiance. He looked like the moon, eclipsed by Rahu. When night was over, Karna came to Duryodhana and spoke
to him. "O son of Gandhari! It is fortunate that you are alive and fortunate that we have met again. It is fortunate
that you have vanquished the gandharvas, who are capable of assuming any form at will. O descendant of the Kuru
lineage! It is fortunate that I see all of your brothers. They are maharathas and have been victorious, triumphing
over the enemies in battle. While you looked on, I was worsted by all those gandharvas. My own army was routed
and I was incapable of ensuring that they remained there. I was sorely wounded by the arrows and hard-pressed. I
ran away. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! I think it is extraordinary that I see you here, without harm and
without injury, and with all your wives, riches and vehicles. You have freed yourself from that superhuman battle.
O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O great king! There is no other man in this world who is like you, or can
achieve what you have done in battle with your brothers." O king! Having been thus addressed by Karna, King
Duryodhana lowered his head and spoke in a voice that was choked with tears.'
