'Narada said, "The king[Yayati.] wished to hold a svayamvara for her. He went to a hermitage that was at the confluence
of the Ganga and the Yamuna. Madhavi ascended a chariot that was adorned with garlands and flowers. Puru and
Yadu[Puru and Yadu were two of Yayati's sons. The Pouravas are descended from Puru and the Yadavas from Yadu.] followed their sister to the hermitage. Serpents, yakshas, men, winged creatures, animals, birds and
dwellers of mountains, trees and groves gathered there. There was also an assemblage of lords of men from many
countries. The forest was full of rishis who were like Brahma. The beautiful one was asked to choose a groom. But
when the suitors were announced in due order, she chose the forest as her groom. The maiden descended from the
chariot and bowed down before her relatives. Yayati's daughter went to the sacred forest and performed austerities.
She observed diverse fasts, rites and restraint. She made herself light[In body.] and lived like a doe. She subsisted on excellent grass that was pungent and sweet, with soft and green blades that were like lapis lazuli. She drank excellent
water that was holy, pure, cool and clean, flowing from streams. She roamed in forests where the lion, the king of
deer, was absent. They were deserted and dense, but were free of conflagrations. Together with the deer, the forest-
dwelling one was like a doe. She practised brahmacharya and earned a great deal of dharma.

'"Yayati followed the conduct of kings who had preceded him. He lived for many thousand years and then succumbed to the dharma of time. Puru and Yadu, supreme among men, extended two lineages. Because of this,
Nahusha's son[Yayati.] obtained status in this world and the next. Having arrived in heaven, King Yayati attained greatness. Like a maharshi, the illustrious king obtained the best of fruits in heaven. After many thousand years had
passed in many excellent ways among the great rajarshis and maharshis who were there, Yayati, confounded by
ignorance, insulted all men, gods and the masses of rishis[Yayati's fall from heaven has been described in Section 7 (Volume 1).]. The god Shakra, the destroyer of Bala, detected his
folly and all the rajarshis censured him. They glanced at Nahusha's son and reflected, 'Who is he, the son of which
king? How did he arrive in heaven? What deeds brought him success? What austerities has he performed? How is
he known in heaven? By whom is he known?' The kings who resided in heaven reflected in this way. They glanced
at each other and asked such questions about King Yayati. The hundreds of guardians of vimanas, the protectors of
the gates of heaven and the keepers of the seats were asked, and replied that they did not know him. All their
knowledge was clouded and no one recognized the king. In an instant, the king lost all his energy."'
