Yudhishthira asked, "O best among the Bharata lineage! Who have the brahmanas always described as the best
recipient of a gift? Is it a brahmana with the signs or is it a brahmana without the signs[A brahmana with the signs is someone in the state of brahmacharya or sannyasa. Other brahmanas will not have
any obvious signs.]?"
'Bhishma replied, "O great king! It has been said that one must give to a person who follows his own prescribed
conduct, regardless of whether he bears the signs or not, because both are ascetics."

'Yudhishthira asked, "O grandfather! A person may be unclean. Nevertheless, with supreme devotion, he gives
to brahmanas. What are the taints associated with such havya, kavya and gifts?"

'Bhishma replied, "O son[The word used is tata.]!  There is no  doubt that even if a man is impossible to restrain, he is cleansed
through devotion. O lord of the earth! He is cleansed in every way. What else is there to say?"

'Yudhishthira said, "A man must not examine a brahmana who is engaged in the tasks of the gods. However, the
learned have also said that when it comes to offering kavya, the learning of the brahmana must be tested[Havya is offered to the gods and kavya is offered to the ancestors. The learned texts say that before engaging a
brahmana in offering havya, the brahmana's qualities need not be tested. However, an examination is needed before offering kavya. Hence, Yudhishthira's question.]."
'Bhishma replied, "Brahmanas do not ensure the success of havya. It is the gods who ensure success. There is
no doubt that a person who undertakes a sacrifice is successful in that sacrifice because of the favours of the gods.
O best among the Bharata lineage! Brahmanas always speak about the brahman. In ancient times, Markandeya, the
most intelligent person in the worlds, said this."

'Yudhishthira asked, "A person whom one has not met before, a learned person, a person who is related through
marriage, an ascetic and a person who is devoted to sacrifices-why are these regarded as worthy recipients of a
gift?"

'Bhishma replied, "Noble lineage, devotion to tasks, learning, non-violence, modesty, uprightness and truthfulness-the foremost recipients possess at least three of these attributes[This isn't a shloka that is easy to understand and we have taken some liberties.]. O Partha! Listen to the views of four energetic ones-the earth, Kashyapa, Agni and Markandeya.

'"The earth said, 'When a stone is flung into the great ocean, it is destroyed because of that act of flinging. In
that way, all evil conduct is destroyed in three kinds of conduct[The text does not tell us what these three are. They are interpreted as teaching, officiating at sacrifices and receiving gifts.].'
'"Kashyapa said, 'O king! All the Vedas and the six Vedangas, sankhya, the Puranas and noble birth-if a man
deviates from good conduct, none of these can save him from destruction.'

'"Agni said, 'There may be a person who studies and thinks himself to be learned. He may use his learning to
destroy the fame of others. Such a brahmana acts as if he has killed a brahmana. All the worlds are destroyed for
him.'

'"Markandeya said, 'If one thousand horse sacrifices and truth are weighed on a pair of scales, I do not know
whether truth will weigh one and a half times the other.'"

'Bhishma said, "Having said this, those four infinitely energetic ones, the earth, Kashyapa, Agni and Bhargava,
with his excellent weapons, quickly went away[This entire segment hangs loose. We are not told who these four were asked by, and where they went away
from. In addition, though Markandeya was descended from Bhrigu, it is somewhat unusual to find him described
as the possessor of weapons. That Bhargava is normally Parashurama.]."
'Yudhishthira asked, "In this world, there may be a brahmana who follows vows. In order to please brahmanas,
if offerings meant for gods are eaten by such a brahmana, is that regarded as good conduct[Good conduct by whom? That remains unclear. Evidently, out of reverence for brahmanas, a person performing
a sacrifice is giving the offerings to a brahmana.]?"
'Bhishma replied, "O Indra among kings! A brahmana may have been instructed and may have become accomplished in the Vedas. However, if he devours what is meant for the brahman, he has deviated from his vows."

'Yudhishthira said, "O grandfather! Learned ones have said that dharma has many end objectives and many
doors. Please tell me what has certainly been determined."

'Bhishma replied, "O Indra among kings! Non-violence, truth, lack of anger, lack of injury, self-control and uprightness-these are said to be the certain signs of dharma. There are those who praise dharma and roam around
the earth. O lord! However, they may be engaged in wicked conduct, amounting to a confusion of dharma. If a person gives gems, gold, cattle or horses to such a person, then the giver remains in hell for ten years, surviving on
excrement. This is also the case if one gives to those who eat human fat and flesh, those who live as outcasts outside habitations and those who are confused by anger and confusion and talk about the undesirable acts that others
have performed. O Indra among kings! There may be a brahmana who follows brahmacharya. If a person stupidly
gives something meant for the Vishvadevas to such a brahmana, he is made to enjoy inauspicious worlds."

'Yudhishthira asked, "What is superior to brahmacharya? What are the best signs of dharma? What is the best
kind of purification? O grandfather! Tell me that."

'Bhishma replied, "O son! The avoidance of liquor and flesh is superior to brahmacharya. The signs of dharma
are adherence to strictures, tranquility and purity."

'Yudhishthira asked, "When is the time for pursuing dharma? When is the time for pursuing artha? When is the
time for being happy? O grandfather! Tell me that."

'Bhishma replied, "There is a time for pursuing artha and that for pursuing dharma comes after that. It is after
this that one should pursue kama. But one must not get attached. One must honour brahmanas and worship seniors.
One must treat all creatures in a proper way. One must be mild in conduct and pleasant in speech. In a judicial dispute, one must not utter a lie. When one is brought before a king, one must not be deceitful. One must not behave
falsely towards a senior. All these are equal to the sin of killing a brahmana. One should not strike a king, nor
should one kill a cow. Anyone who does either commits a sin that is equal to that of killing a foetus. One must not
abandon the sacrificial fire. One must not abandon the Vedas. Nor should one attack a brahmana. These sins are
equal to the sin of killing a brahmana."

'Yudhishthira asked, "What kind of brahmanas are good? Who are the ones to whom one should donate, so as to
obtain great fruits? Who are the ones who should be fed? O grandfather! Tell me this."

'Bhishma replied, "Those who are without anger, those who are devoted to dharma, those who are truthful and
those who are always self-restrained-these brahmanas are regarded as virtuous. Great fruits are obtained from donating to them. There are those who aren't insolent, withstand everything, are cheerful in pursuing their objectives,
have conquered their senses, are engaged in the welfare of all beings and are friendly. Great fruits are obtained
from donating to them. There are those who are without avarice, pure, learned, modest, truthful in speech and engaged in their own tasks. Great fruits are obtained from donating to them. There are bulls among brahmanas who
have studied the four Vedas and the six Vedangas and have withdrawn from action. The learned have said that they
are the best recipients of gifts. Great fruits are obtained from donating to those who have these kinds of qualities. If
one gives to a person with these qualities, the giver's own qualities are multiplied one thousand times. Even if
there is only one single bull among brahmanas who possesses wisdom and learning and good conduct, he is alone
capable of saving an entire lineage[Through gifts made to such a brahmana.]. One should give cattle, horses, riches, food and other objects to such a person. In that event, one won't have to grieve after death. Even one brahmana who is excellent is capable of saving
an entire lineage. That is the reason one must be selective about choosing the recipient. If one hears that a brahmana who possesses the qualities and is revered by the virtuous lives some distance away, even then, one must honour him and worship him in every possible way."'
