Sanjaya said, "O great king! The one on the white horses[Arjuna.] killed your soldiers, like the wind scattering a mass
of cotton in every direction. The Trigartas, Shibis, Kouravas, Shalvas, samshaptakas and the army of narayanas
combined and attacked him. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were Satyasena, Satyakirti, Mitradeva,
Shrutanjaya, Soushruti, Chitrasena and Mitravarma. In that battle, the king of Trigarta was surrounded by his
brothers and sons. They were great archers and wielded many kinds of weapons while fighting. In that battle
against Arjuna, they released a storm of arrows. They attacked in that encounter, like waves agitated by the wind in
the ocean. Hundreds and thousands of warriors attacked Arjuna, but all of them encountered their destruction, like
serpents at the sight of Tarkshya[Garuda.]. O king! But though they were killed in that battle, they did not abandon Pan-
dava. They were scorched, like insects in a fire.

' "In that battle, Satyasena pierced Pandava with three arrows, Mitradeva with sixty-three, Chandradeva with
seven, Mitravarma with seventy-three, Soushruti with five, Shatrunjaya with twenty and Susharma with nine arrows. He[Arjuna.] killed King Shatrunjaya with arrows sharpened on stone. He severed Soushruti's helmeted head from
his body. He swiftly used arrows to convey Chandradeva to Yama's eternal abode. O great king! When the other
maharathas endeavoured against him, he struck them with five arrows each. Satyasena became angry in that battle.
He roared like a lion and hurled a giant spear towards Krishna. It was extremely terrible and was made completely
out of iron. It pierced the great-souled Madhava's left arm and penetrated the ground. O lord of the earth! Madhava
was thus pierced by the spear in that great battle, and the whip and the reins fell down from his hand. However, the
immensely illustrious one picked up the whip and the reins again and drove the horses towards Satyasena's chariot.
On seeing that Vishvaksena[Krishna.] had been pierced, the immensely strong Partha Dhananjaya struck Satyasena with
sharp arrows. In the forefront of that army, with extremely sharp arrows, he severed the king's large head, adorned
with earrings, from his body. O venerable one! He then struck and killed Chitravarma with sharp arrows and used a
sharp vatsadanta arrow to kill his charioteer. He angrily brought down hundreds and thousands from that mass of
samshaptakas with hundreds of arrows. With a kshurapra arrow that was silver-tufted, the great-souled and immensely illustrious one severed King Mitradeva's head. In wrath, he struck Susharma between his shoulder joints.
At this, all the samshaptakas surrounded Dhananjaya. They angrily showered him with weapons and roared in the
ten directions. Jishnu, who was like Shakra in his valour, was oppressed by them. The maharatha, whose soul was
immeasurable, released the aindra[Divine missile named after Indra.] weapon. O lord of the earth! Thousands of arrows were released from this.
In that encounter, standards, bows, chariots and their flags, quivers with their arrows, axles, yokes, wheels, harnesses, seatings, bumpers and whips were shattered. In that battle, rocks rained down, with a shower of lances.
There were clubs, maces, lances and spears. O venerable one! Shataghnis with wheels and arms and thighs fell
down, with necklaces, armlets and bracelets. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! There were golden necklaces
and body armour, with umbrellas, whisks and heads adorned with crowns. O lord of the earth! A great sound could
be heard there. There were heads ornamented with earrings, with faces like the full moon. They could be seen lying there, like stars in the firmament. The slain bodies could be seen on the ground. They had excellent garlands
and excellent garments and were smeared with sandalwood paste. At that time, the fierce field of battle looked like
a city of the gandharvas. Immensely strong princes and kshatriyas were killed. Elephants and swift horses were
brought down on the ground. In that battle, they were heaped around like mountains and it became difficult to pass.
As the great-souled Pandava slew a large number of the enemy and elephants with his broad-headed arrows, there
was no path for him. As he roamed around in that battle, in that red-coloured mud, it was as if the wheels of his
own chariot were sinking in distress. But though the wheels seemed to sink, his horses possessed great energy and
had the speed of the mind and the wind. They exerted a great effort and dragged along Pandu's archer son, as he
killed those soldiers. None of them could remain stationed in the battle and most of them retreated. In that battle,
Jishnu defeated large numbers of samshaptakas. O great king! He was resplendent, like a blazing fire without any
smoke.

' "O great king! Yudhishthira shot a large number of arrows and King Duryodhana fearlessly received him himself. On seeing that your immensely strong son was violently descending, Dharmaraja asked him to wait and
pierced him. He[Duryodhana.] pierced him back with nine sharp arrows and, extremely angry, struck his charioteer with a
broad-headed arrow. At this, King Yudhishthira shot thirteen arrows at Duryodhana. They were gold-tufted and
sharpened on stone and possessed stone heads. The maharatha[Yudhishthira.] killed his four horses with four arrows and with
a fifth, severed his charioteer's head from his body. With a sixth, he brought down the king's standard; with a seventh, his bow; and with an eighth, his sword, on the ground. With five more arrows, Dharmaraja severely struck
the king. With the horses slain, your son descended from his chariot. He was stationed on the ground and was in
supreme danger. On seeing that he was overcome by this calamity, Karna, Drona's son, Kripa and the others collectively rushed there, wishing to save the king. O king! At this, all the sons of Pandu surrounded Yudhishthira in
the battle and an encounter commenced.

' "In that great battle, thousands of trumpets were sounded. O lord of the earth! As the Panchalas clashed against
the Kouravas, a tumultuous sound arose. Men clashed against men and elephants against supreme elephants.
Rathas clashed against rathas and horses against horse riders. O great king! Duels could be witnessed in that encounter. As supreme weapons were used, the sight was wonderful and unthinkable. They wished to kill each other
and fought with great force, killing each other in that battle and following the vow of warriors. In that encounter,
for a short while, no one attacked from the rear and it was beautiful to see. O king! But it soon became crazy and
no one followed codes of honour. As they roamed around in the field of battle, rathas attacked elephants and dispatched them to Yama, using straight-tufted arrows. Elephants attacked horses and brought down large numbers of
them there, fiercely driving them away. O king! Having driven away large numbers of horses, the elephants were
intoxicated with their strength and gored them with their tusks or severely crushed them. In that battle, they
pierced horse riders and horses with their tusks. Others picked them up powerfully and flung them down with great
force. In every direction, there were elephants that were struck by foot soldiers in their weak spots. They uttered
fierce woes of lamentation and fled in the ten directions. In that great battle, foot soldiers were violently driven
away. In the field of battle, there were many who quickly discarded their ornaments. Having determined that this
was a sign, the giant elephants picked up those expensive ornaments and pierced them[The elephant riders discerned that the flinging away of ornaments was a
sign of victory and pierced the foot soldiers.]. Other elephants were
severely wounded in their temples and the bases of their tusks by lances and spears. Others were sorely and fiercely struck along their sides with clubs hurled by rathas and horse riders. They were shattered and fell down on the
ground. There were other giant elephants that powerfully brought charioteers and horse riders down on the ground,
with their armour and their flags. O venerable one! In that great battle, some elephants assumed terrible forms.
They approached rathas and picking them up, hurled them down violently. Giant elephants were killed by iron arrows and brought down. They lay down on the ground, like mountain peaks shattered by thunder. In the battle,
warriors encountered warriors and struck each other with their fists. They dragged and seized each other by the
hair. Others sought to use their arms and flung the foe down on the ground. They placed their feet on their chests
and cheerfully severed their heads. O great king! With their feet, some kicked those that were already dead. Others
used weapons to sever the bodies of those who were alive but dying. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! In that
spot, warriors fought great fights with their fists. They fiercely seized each other by the hair and there were others
who only wrestled. In that battle, there were many who were killed with weapons while they were fighting with
another and were therefore ignorant[Because they were fighting with another person, they were ignorant
that they were being attacked by a third party.]. The warriors were thus engaged in that frightful encounter. Hundreds and
thousands of headless torsos stood there. The weapons and armour were red. And in that great arena, so were the
garments. Thus did that great and fierce battle rage on and filled the universe with a sound like that of violent
waves. O king! Oppressed by arrows, they could not distinguish those on one's own side from that of the enemy. O
great king! Desiring victory, the kings fought as they should and killed those who advanced against them, whether
they were from their own side or from the side of the enemy. As they advanced, the warriors on both sides were
anxious. O great king! The chariots were shattered and the elephants were brought down. The horses were brought
down and the men fell. The earth was covered with flesh, blood and mud and became impassable. O great king! In
a short instant, there were currents of blood. Karna killed the Panchalas and Dhananjaya killed the Trigartas. O
king! Bhimasena killed the Kurus and their entire army of elephants. O great king! In this way, there was carnage
among the soldiers of the Kurus and the Pandavas, as they clashed in the afternoon, desiring a great victory." '
