Vaishampayana said, 'O great king! When he entered, bards sang praises of the unblemished one. Others eulogized
the great archer, supreme among kings. Sprinkling fried grain and sandalwood powder over him, the people said,
"O king! It is through good fortune that your sacrifice has been completed without any impediments." There were
others present, who were not careful in speech. They told the king, "Your sacrifice has not been equal to Yudhishthira's sacrifice. It does not equal a sixteenth part of that sacrifice." Thus some, who were voluble, spoke to
that lord of men. However, his well-wishers said, "Your sacrifice has surpassed all the others. Purified by performing such a sacrifice, Yayati, Nahusha, Mandhata and Bharata have all gone to heaven." O bull among the Bharata
lineage! On hearing such pleasant words from his well-wishers, that lord of men was extremely pleased and entered his city and his own house. O lord of the earth! He bowed in obeisance at the feet of his father and mother,
Bhishma, Drona, Kripa and the wise Vidura. He was himself honoured by his younger brothers, brothers whom he
loved.

'Surrounded by his brothers, he sat down on an excellent seat. O great king! The son of the suta arose and spoke
to him, "O foremost among Bharatas! It is through good fortune that your great sacrifice has been completed. O
best of men! When you have killed the Parthas in battle and have performed a rajasuya, I will honour you again."

The immensely famous son of Dhritarashtra, great among kings, replied, "O brave one! You have spoken the truth.
O best among men! When the evil-souled Pandavas have been killed and the great sacrifice of rajasuya has been
performed, you will honour me again." O descendant of the Bharata lineage! With these words, the immensely
wise Kourava embraced Karna and began to think about rajasuya, the greatest of sacrifices. That supreme of kings
then spoke to the Kouravas who were by his side. "O Kouravas! When will I perform the supreme and extremely
expensive sacrifice of rajasuya, after having killed all the Pandavas?" Karna then told him, "O elephant among
kings! Listen to my words. I will not wash my feet until Arjuna is dead." When Karna vowed to kill Phalguna[Arjuna.] in
battle, Dhritarashtra's sons, maharathas and great archers, roared in approval. Dhritarashtra's sons thought that the
Pandavas had already been conquered.

'O Indra among kings! Duryodhana then permitted those bulls among men to leave. The lord[Duryodhana.] entered his
beautiful house, which was like Chaitraratha[The name of Kubera's pleasure garden.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Those other great archers
also went to their own houses. Prodded by the words of the messenger, the great archers, the Pandavas, began to
think about the purport of those words and could not find any happiness. O Indra among kings! The news had been
brought to them by spies that the son of the suta had taken a vow to kill Vijaya[One of Arjuna's names.]. O lord of men! On learning
this, Dharma's son was greatly anxious. He thought of the impenetrable armour that Karna, extraordinary in valour, possessed. He thought of all their difficulties and had no peace of mind. The great-souled one's intelligence
was full of such thoughts. He decided to leave the forest of Dvaitavana, infested with many predators and animals.
The king, who was Dhritarashtra's son, ruled the earth with his brothers and the brave Bhishma, Drona and Kripa.
He consorted with Karna, the son of a suta, who was radiant in battle. King Duryodhana was always engaged in
bringing pleasure to others. He honoured the chief brahmanas and performed sacrifices with a lot of donations. O
king! That scorcher of enemies did that which brought pleasure to his brothers. The brave one had decided that the
fruits of wealth were to be enjoyed and given.'
