Vaishampayana said, 'Kavya, the best of the Bhrigu lineage, was very angry. He went to the place where Vrishaparva was seated and unhesitatingly told him, "O king! Unlike a cow, the fruits of evil actions are not immediate.
Such fruits are certainly manifested, if not in one's own self, in one's son or in one's grandson. They are like a
heavy meal in the stomach. You killed the Brahmana Kacha, descended from Angirasa, when he lived with me,
even though he was devoted to dharma, committed no sin and served me. You killed one who did not deserve to
die. You caused injury to my daughter. O Vrishaparva! For this reason, I have to forsake you and your relatives. O
king! I can no longer live with you in your territory. O daitya! Do not take me to be one who utters a falsehood.
Why do you overlook the faults of your own and do not check them?"

'Vrishaparva said, "O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! Never have I known falsehood or non-adherence to
dharma in you. Dharma and truth are established in you. O illustrious one! Please show me your grace. O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! If you forsake us and depart, we will have no refuge and will drown in the ocean."

Shukra replied, "O asura! I do not care whether you sink to the bottom of the ocean or disappear in the various directions. I cannot tolerate any unpleasant act directed at my daughter, whom I love. Pacify Devayani, because my
life is based on her. Just as Brihaspati ensures Indra's welfare, my ascetic powers are for your protection." Vrishaparva replied, "O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! You are the master of everything that belongs to the lord of the
asuras-riches, elephants, cattle, horses. You are their lord, even of me." Shukra said, "O great asura! If it is true
that I am the lord of everything that is possessed by the lord of the daityas, go and try to pacify Devayani." Devayani said, "O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! O father! If you are really the lord of all the wealth of the king
and he himself, ask the king to come to me and state it himself. Otherwise, I won't accept it[There is a break in continuity in the critical edition. Other editions have a shloka where Shukra goes and
tells Devayani what has occurred.]." Vrishaparva said,
"O Devayani! O one with the beautiful smile! I will give you whatever you desire to possess, regardless of how
difficult it is to obtain." Devayani replied, "I desire that Sharmishtha, together with 1000 other ladies, should be
my maid servants. She must also follow me when my father gives my hand in marriage." Vrishaparva said, "O
nurse! Quickly go and fetch Sharmishtha here. She must do whatever Devayani wishes." The nurse then went and
told Sharmishtha, "O fortunate one! Arise and do what is good for your relatives. Urged by Devayani, the Brahmana is about to forsake his disciples. O unblemished one! You must now do exactly what Devayani wishes."

Sharmishtha replied, "I will today do exactly what she desires. Because of me, Shukra and Devayani must not
leave." Commanded by her father, she then quickly emerged from the supreme palace on a palanquin, accompanied by 1000 maidens.

'Sharmishtha said, "I am your maid servant and will serve you, with 1000 other slaves. I will follow you wherever your father bestows you." Devayani retorted, "I am the daughter of one who chants praises, begs and stretches
out his hand for alms. You are the daughter of one who is praised. How can you be my slave?" Sharmishtha
replied, "Whatever be the way, one must be prepared to bring about the welfare of one's afflicted relatives. I will
follow you wherever your father bestows you." O best of kings! When Vrishaparva's daughter promised to be her
slave, Devayani told her father, "O supreme among Brahmanas! I will now enter the capital. I know that your
knowledge and the strength of your learning are invincible." Having been thus addressed by his daughter, the immensely famous one, the best of Brahmanas, was pleased and entered the city. All the danavas paid him homage.'
