'Yudhishthira said, "O grandfather! The rich and the poor observe their own rites. How, and from where, do
they face happiness and unhappiness?"

'Bhishma replied, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted. Shamyaka, who was liberated and
had obtained peace, sung a song. In ancient times, a brahmana who had renounced told me this. He was afflicted because of a bad wife, whose conduct was bad. He was also suffering from hunger. 'Since the time he is
born on earth, many different kinds of joy and sorrow afflict a man. If he is conveyed along either of these
paths[Conveyed by an external force, destiny.], he will not be delighted on obtaining joy, or be anxious on obtaining sorrow. On this earth, you are not
following what is best for yourself. Even though you have no desire, you are bearing a heavy burden. If you
roam around, thinking all this to be insignificant, you will obtain happiness. A person with nothing sleeps, and
awakes, in happiness. Not possessing anything is the medication for happiness in the world. This is healthy
and auspicious. This path is extremely difficult, even for those who have no enemies[But have desire.]. But it is easily obtained by those who are virtuous. Glancing at the three worlds, I do not find anyone with possessions who is
equal to a virtuous person who is without possessions. I weighed the lack of possessions and a kingdom on a
balance and found that the lack of possessions surpassed the kingdom in qualities. Specifically, there is a great
difference between the lack of possessions and a kingdom. A prosperous person is always anxious, as if he is
in the jaws of death. A fire, the sun, death and bandits have no power over a person who has freed himself
from riches and is without hopes. Depending on his wishes, he lies down on the bare ground, using his arms as
a pillow. He has obtained tranquility and is praised by the residents of heaven. A wealthy person is afflicted by
both anger and avarice and loses his senses. He is wicked, casts sideways glances, has a frown on his face and
his mouth is dry. He bites his lower lips with his teeth. He is enraged and terrible in speech. Even if he desires
to give the earth away, who will wish to look at him? Dwelling in continuous prosperity confuses a person
who is not very discerning. It robs him of his senses, like the wind bearing away autumn clouds. He takes delight in, "I am handsome. I am wealthy. I am noble. I am successful. I am not an ordinary man." His consciousness is sprinkled with these three reasons[Probably beauty, wealth and nobility, success not being an independent
reason.]. Thus sprinkled and attached to objects of pleasure, he is deprived of the riches his ancestors accumulated. When these have decayed, he thinks it is virtuous to appropriate the property of others. He transgresses boundaries and seizes from every direction. The kings then restrain
the greedy person, like deer with arrows. These are the many different kinds of sorrows that then touch the
man's body. Afflicted by these supreme hardships, he realizes that he needs medication. He abandons the dharma of the world[The pursuit of desire.], with everything that is temporary and permanent. Without renunciation, one cannot enjoy
supreme happiness. Without renunciation, one can neither sleep, nor be happy in every way[It is not clear where the quote from Shamyaka ends. It is possible that the
quote ended earlier and the rest of it was spoken by the brahmana.].' This is what
the brahmana told me in earlier times in Hastinapura, about what had been said by Shamyaka. Therefore, it is
my view that renunciation is supreme."'
