'Sanjaya said, "On seeing that Hidimba's son had been killed, like a shattered mountain, all the Pandavas were distressed in their minds and their eyes were full of tears. However, Vasudeva was overcome with great delight. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He roared like a lion and this pained them. He roared loudly and embraced Phal-
guna. Roaring loudly, he tied the horses. He danced in joy, like a tree stirred by the wind. Having embraced Partha
yet again, he slapped his arms against his breast. Achyuta climbed onto the chariot and let out a fierce yell. O king!
On discerning that the immensely strong Vasudeva was in a delighted frame of mind, Arjuna was miserable and
spoke to him. 'O Madhusudana! At this time of death today, you are extremely happy. The death of Hidimba's son
is a time for great sorrow. On seeing that Ghatotkacha has been killed, the soldiers are retreating. Since Hidimba's
son has been brought down, we are also extremely anxious. O Janardana! There must be a grave reason behind
your delight now. O supreme among the ones who are truthful! I am asking you. Tell me the truth. O scorcher of
enemies! If it is not a secret, you should tell me. O Madhusudana! Tell me why your calm has been disturbed so
much today. This is like the ocean drying up, or Mount Meru moving. O Janardana! I think that this act of yours
shows levity.'

'"Vasudeva replied, 'O Dhananjaya! I am overcome by great delight. Listen to me. I will tell you what will bring
supreme satisfaction to your mind. O immensely radiant one! Because of Ghatotkacha, the spear has been used up.
O Dhananjaya! Therefore, know that Karna has already been slain. Had Karna possessed the spear in his hand, no
man in the world would have been able to stand before him. He would have been stationed like Kartikeya in the
battle. It is through good fortune that his armour has gone. It is through good fortune that his earrings have been
robbed. It is through good fortune that the invincible spear has been used up on Ghatotkacha. Had he possessed the
armour and had he possessed the earrings, the powerful Karna would have been able to defeat everyone in the
three worlds, even the immortals. Vasava, Kubera, Varuna, lord of the waters, and Yama would not have ventured
against Karna in an encounter. Had that bull among men possessed those, you with your Gandiva and I with my
sudarshana chakra would not have had the capacity to defeat him in a battle. It is for your welfare that Shakra
used delusion to rob him of his earrings. The conqueror of enemy cities was also robbed of his armour. It is because he sliced off the armour and the sparkling earrings and gave them to Shakra that Karna came to be known as
Vaikartana[Kartana means to cut. The story of Karna giving them to Indra has been recounted in Section 43 (Volume 3).]. Karna is now like an angry snake, whose energy has been sapped through mantras. Therefore, Karna
is now like a fire whose flames have been pacified. O mighty-armed one! Karna obtained a spear from the great-
souled Vasava, the one that has now been used against Ghatotkacha. This was obtained in exchange for the earrings and the celestial armour. Since the time he obtained it, Vrisha has always thought that you have been killed in
the battle. O unblemished one! O tiger among men! However, though that spear has now gone, I swear to you
truthfully that he is incapable of being killed by anyone other than you. He is devoted to brahmanas. He is truthful.
He has engaged in austerities. He is devoted to his vows. He is compassionate towards his enemies. It is for these
reasons that Karna is known as Vrisha[The word vrisha means a bull, as well as a virtuous act. Karna was thus named because he was a strong and virtuous man.]. He is terrible in battle. He is mighty-armed. His bow is always raised. He
is like a lion in the forest, crushing the leaders of crazy herds of elephants. In the field of battle, he crushes tigers
among the rathas. He is like the sun when it has attained midday and no one is capable of looking at him. O tiger
among men! He has fought with all the foremost and great-souled ones on your side. His nets of arrows are like the
thousand rays of the autumn sun. His incessant shower of arrows is like rain from the clouds, at the end of summer.
Karna is like a cloud with divine weapons, showering down rain. However, having been deprived today of what
was given to him by Shakra, he has become human. There is now an opportunity to kill him, one that the insolent
one has brought about through his own insolence. He will face a hardship when the wheel of his chariot sinks. That
is the time to kill him and I will signal the moment to you in advance. Jarasandha, the great-souled king of Chedi,
the immensely strong Ekalavya from Nishadha-all of these have been killed through my yoga, for your sake[Jarasandha's death has been described in Section 22 (Volume 2). The king of Chedi was Shishupala and he was
killed by Krishna in Section 26 (Volume 2). While specific details are missing, Section 53 (Volume 4) tell us that
before the Kurukshetra War, Ekalavya had already been killed by Krishna.].
Later, other Indras among rakshasas have been killed-Hidimba, Kirmira, Baka, the foremost among them,
Alayudha, the destroyer of enemy soldiers, and the spirited Ghatotkacha, the performer of fierce deeds.'"'
