Vaishampayana said, 'Then Shantanu's son Bhishma, powerful and invincible, advanced towards Dhananjaya,
while all the warriors were being killed in battle. He took up the best of bows, decorated with gold, and arrows that
were sharp at the tip, capable of piercing the vitals of the heart. A white umbrella was held aloft his head. The tiger
among men was as radiant as a mountain at the time of sunrise. Ganga's son[Bhishma was Ganga's son.] blew on his conch shell and delighted the sons of Dhritarashtra. He circled[The word used is pradakshina, which means to circle. But more specifically, it means to circle from the right.] and prepared to battle Bibhatsu. On seeing him advance, Kounteya,
the destroyer of enemies, received him gladly, like a mountain receives a cloud full of rain.

'The brave Bhishma shot eight arrows at Partha's banner. They were extremely swift and hissed like serpents.
Those blazing and feathered arrows struck the banner of Pandu's son and struck the monkey and other beings that
were stationed on the top of the standard. With an arrow that was sharp and broad, Pandava sliced off Bhishma's
umbrella and it fell down on the ground. With firm and swift arrows, Kounteya struck his banner, the horses yoked
to his chariot and the two charioteers who guarded his flanks. Then a terrible battle began between Bhisma and
Pandava, like that between Bali and Vasava[Vasava is Indra. Bali was a demon who defeated and conquered Indra, and was later vanquished by Vishnu in
his vamana (dwarf) incarnation. However, a typo is possible, since there was a demon named Bala who was killed
by Indra.], and it made the body hair stand up. When Bhisma and Pandava
fought each other in that battle, arrows countered arrows in the sky and seemed like fireflies during the rains. O
king! As Partha shot arrows with his left hand and his right, Gandiva looked like an unbroken circle of fire. He enveloped Bhishma with hundreds of sharp arrows, like a rain cloud covering a mountain with a shower of rain. With
his own arrows, Bhishma repulsed Arjuna and countered that shower of arrows, like a shoreline beating back
waves. In that battle, the shower of arrows was splintered and fell down around Phalguna's chariot. A shower of
arrows with golden shafts then arose from Pandava's chariot, like a swarm of locusts. But yet again, Bhishma cut
them down with hundreds of sharp arrows. All the Kurus applauded. "Wonderful! Bhishma has accomplished a
difficult task in fighting with Arjuna. Pandava is powerful, young, skilled and swift. Truly, who other than Shantanu's son Bhishma, Devaki's son Krishna, or the immensely strong preceptor who is Bharadvaja's son, is capable
of withstanding Partha's force in battle?" Using weapons to counter weapons, those bulls among men seemed to be
playing. Those immensely strong ones confounded the sights of all beings. Those great-souled ones roamed on that
field of battle, using Prajapatya, Aindreya, the extremely terrible Agneya, Koubera, Varuna, Yamya and Vayavya
weapons[Divine weapons named after Prajapati, Indra, Agni, Kubera, Varuna, Yama and Vayu respectively.]. All the beings who witnessed the battle were astounded. They said, "O mighty-armed Partha! Wonderful! O Bhishma! Wonderful! It is not for men to witness this great battle with mighty weapons between Bhishma and Partha." Thus the battle between those two, who were skilled in the use of all weapons, went on. Then
Jishnu fixed a broad and sharp arrow to his bow and sliced down Bhishma's bow, which was decorated with gold.
In an instant, the mighty-armed and immensely strong Bhishma grasped another bow in the field of battle, strung
it, and angrily released many arrows at Dhananjaya. But Arjuna shot many sharp and colourful arrows at Bhishma
and the immensely energetic Bhishma shot many at Pandava. They were both skilled in the use of divine weapons
and incessantly shot arrows at each other. O king! Neither of the great-souled ones could be seen to be superior.
The diademed Kounteya and Shantanu's brave son, both atirathas, covered the ten directions with their arrows. At
times, Pandava surpassed Bhishma. At other times, Bhishma surpassed Pandava. O king! That battle was extraordinary in this world.

'Pandava killed the brave warriors who guarded Bhishma's chariot. O king! Killed by Kounteya, they were piled
up in front of the chariot. Shvetavahana's[Shvetavahana is Arjuna's name.] feathered shafts seemed to have wings. They leapt up when released
from Gandiva, wishing to destroy the enemy. They leapt up from his chariot, white and adorned in gold, like a
flock of geese seen in the sky. He released his deep and divine weapons and it was marvellous. All the gods, together with Vasava, assembled in the sky to witness this. On witnessing this extraordinary sight, the powerful
gandharva Chitrasena was extremely delighted and told the king of the gods these words of praise. "Look at the
way these arrows, the destroyers of enemies, travel. As Jishnu releases his divine weapons, they are linked in a
chain. Men will not believe this, because they[The divine weapons.] do not exist among them. There has been a wonderful collection
of these ancient and great weapons. The soldiers are incapable of looking at Pandava. He dazzles like the midday
sun in the sky. They are both famous in their deeds. They are skilled in battle. They are equal in their exploits.
They are extremely difficult to vanquish in battle." O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On hearing these words,
the king of the gods honoured the duel between Partha and Bhishma with a divine shower of flowers. Having perceived a weakness, Shantanu's son Bhishma attacked Savyasachi from the left side. But Bibhatsu laughed out
aloud. With a broad and sharp arrow, shafted with the feathers of vultures, he sliced down the infinitely energetic
Bhishma's bow. With ten arrows, Kunti's son, Dhananjaya, pierced the brave and careful one on his chest. Thus
oppressed, Ganga's mighty-armed son, invincible in battle, clung to the pole of the chariot and stood there for a
long time. On seeing that he had lost his senses, the charioteer remembered his instructions, and controlling the
horses that were yoked to the chariot, drove away, so as to protect the maharatha.'
