'Bhagavan said, "O mighty-armed one! O Pandava! It will be as you say. O Bibhatsu! Everything depends on two
courses of action[War and peace.]. A field may be cleared and made fertile by a farmer. O Kounteya! But if it does not rain in the
right season, there will be no fruit. It is said that man may make efforts, such as through irrigation. But even there,
it is certain that there can be a drought because of destiny. Our great-souled ancestors have decided this in their
wisdom-the affairs of the world depend on both human effort and destiny. I will exert myself to the best of human endeavour. But there is nothing that I can do to counteract destiny. The evil-minded one acts after discarding
both dharma and truth. And he does not repent that kind of conduct. His wicked intentions are encouraged by his
advisers-Shakuni, the son of the suta and his brother Duhshasana. He will not give up the kingdom for the sake
of obtaining peace. O Partha! Not unless Suyodhana and his relatives are killed. Even if Dharmaraja gives everything up and surrenders to him, the evil-minded one will not hand over the kingdom he is asking for. I do not think
there is any point in telling him what Yudhishthira wants. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Dharmaraja has
himself stated the reasons. The Kourava will do everything that is wicked. Because he will act in this way, he deserves to be killed by anyone in this world. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He deserves to be killed by me,
or anyone in this world. He maltreated all of you when you were children. The cruel and evil-minded one wrested
your kingdom. The wicked one had no peace, once he saw Yudhishthira's prosperity. O Partha! He has repeatedly
tried to create dissension between you and me, but I have never accepted his evil intentions. O mighty-armed one!
You also know his supreme desire and that I always seek to ensure Dharmaraja's welfare. O Arjuna! Knowing his
intentions and my supreme desires, why are you suddenly suspicious, as if you do not know? O Partha! You also
know the supreme destiny that has been ordained. How can you then think that one should surrender to the enemy?
O Pandava! O Partha! Through word and deed, I will do whatever it is possible for me to do. But I do not expect
peace with the enemy. Is this not the supremely beneficial peace that Bhishma desired, when the cattle were
robbed? A year has passed, but has it been accomplished[This has been described in Section 47. This is a reference to that and a year cannot have passed since then. A
year will have elapsed from the cattle expedition described in Section 39 (Volume 3), but that doesn't fit the
context.]? Once you had decided, they were defeated then. Suyo-
dhana will not be satisfied with parting with the smallest bit for the shortest period of time. I will always act in accordance with Dharmaraja's instructions. But the wicked deeds of that evil-souled one will also have to be considered."'
