'Sanjaya said, "There was great confusion in the army of the Pandavas. Drona roamed amidst the Pandavas, like a
fire consuming deadwood. He burnt those soldiers, as if Agni himself had arisen. On seeing him on the golden
chariot in that battle, the Srinjayas trembled. He was swift in continuously stretching the bow. The twang of his
bow could be heard, like the clap of thunder. Rathas, riders, elephants, horses and foot soldiers were mangled
through the terrible arrows released by his hands. His arrows were like roaring clouds at the end of the summer,
assisted by the wind. They were like a hailstorm and created terror among the enemy. O king! The lord roamed
amidst the soldiers, agitating and terrifying them. He increased the fear that humans have for the foe. His bow, decorated with gold, was like clouds tinged with lightning. It was repeatedly seen, as he roamed around on a chariot
that was like dense clouds. The brave one was truthful, wise, always devoted to dharma and extremely terrible. He
was like the controller at the end of a yuga, creating a terrible river. Its currents resulted from the power of his intolerance. It was full of large numbers of predators and overflowed with masses of soldiers. The heroes were trees
along the banks, which were being eaten away. The blood was the water. The chariots were eddies. Elephants and
horses were the banks. Armour constituted rafts, the flesh was the mud. The foam was formed out of fat, marrow,
bones and excellent headdresses. The battle seemed to be completely covered by a cloud. It was infested with fish
in the form of javelins. Men, elephants and horses flowed along, driven by the force of the arrows. The bodies
were like the tops of trees, the arms were like snakes. The heads were like tender fruit. The swords were like fish.
The chariots and elephants were like lakes and it was decorated with many ornaments. The maharathas were hundreds of whirlpools. The dust of the earth was like garlands. In that battle, it was possible for the greatly valiant
ones to cross it. But cowards found it difficult to cross. Brave ones were strewn around like snakes. The ones who
were alive were like aquatic birds. Torn umbrellas were like gigantic swans. The crowns were like smaller birds.
The chakras were tortoises, the clubs were crocodiles, the arrows were smaller fish. It was populated by large numbers of terrible wild crows, vultures and jackals. In that battle, the powerful Drona killed beings with his arrows. O
supreme among kings! Hundreds of them were conveyed to the world of the ancestors. Hundreds of bodies caused
obstructions. The hair constituted moss and weeds. O king! Such was the terrible river that began to flow there and
it increased one's fear. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Thus was their army defeated by those on your side.

'"With Yudhishthira at the forefront, all of them attacked Drona from every direction. On seeing them advance,
the brave ones on your side wielded firm bows and attacked them back on every side. The battle that commenced
made the body hair stand up. Shakuni was conversant with a hundred different kinds of maya and attacked Sahadeva, piercing his charioteer, standard and chariot with sharp arrows. However, Madri's son wasn't greatly enraged.
He pierced his standard, bow, charioteer and horses with arrows and then pierced his maternal uncle with sixty. At
this, Soubala grasped a club and jumped down from his supreme chariot. O king! With that club, he brought down
his[Sahadeva's.] charioteer from his chariot. O king! Thus bereft of his chariot, the immensely strong one grasped a club in
his hands. The brave ones began to sport in that battle, like two mountains with peaks. Drona pierced the king of
Panchala with ten arrows, was himself pierced back in turn by many arrows and pierced back again with more than
a hundred arrows. Bhimasena pierced Vivimshati with twenty sharp arrows. Though he was pierced, the brave one
did not tremble and it was extraordinary. O great king! Vivimshati suddenly deprived Bhima of his horses, standard, bow and arrows and all the soldiers honoured this feat. But the brave one[Bhima.] could not tolerate the victory of
the enemy in battle. With his club, he brought down his charioteer and all his horses. The brave Shalya seemed to
be smiling. As if to anger him, he pierced Nakula, the beloved son of his sister, with arrows. In the battle, the powerful Nakula brought down his horses, umbrella, standard, charioteer and bow and blew on his conch shell. Dhrishtaketu severed the many kinds of arrows Kripa released towards him. He then pierced Kripa with seventy arrows
and then used three more to bring down the sign on his standard. Kripa countered him with a great shower of arrows. In this fashion, in that battle, the brahmana[Kripa.] countered Dhrishtaketu and fought with him. Satyaki pierced
Kritavarma between the breasts with an iron arrow. Having pierced him, he smiled and pierced him with seventy
arrows, piercing him again with others. But Bhoja[Kritavarma.] pierced him with seventy-seven sharp arrows. However, Shini's descendant did not waver, like a mountain before a swift wind. Senapati quickly struck Susharma in his inner
organs and he[Susharma.] struck him back in the shoulder joint with a lance. With the immensely valiant Matsyas, Virata
attacked Vaikartana in the battle and it was extraordinary. This was terrible manliness on the part of the son of the
suta. He countered the soldiers with his straight-tufted arrows. Drupada himself confronted King Bhagadatta. O
great king! The battle between the two, skilled in the use of weapons, was wonderful and created terror among beings. O king! In the battle, the valiant Bhurishrava enveloped Yajnasena's maharatha son[Shikhandi.] with a shower of arrows. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O lord of the earth! Shikhandi was enraged at this and pierced Soma-
datta's son with ninety arrows, making him tremble. The rakshasas, Hidimba's son and Alambusa, fought an extraordinary battle against each other, wishing to kill each other. They proudly created a hundred different kinds of
maya and used maya against each other. They disappeared as they wandered around, giving rise to great wonder.
Chekitana fought a terrible battle with Anuvinda, like that between Bala and the immensely strong Shakra, when
the gods and the asuras fought. O king! Lakshmana fought fiercely with Kshatradeva, like Vishnu in ancient times,
when he fought against Hiranyaksha[Hiranyaksha was slain by Vishnu in his varaha (boar) incarnation and the battle between the two lasted for one
thousand years.].

'"Pourava was on swift horses and his chariot was stocked with every implement. O king! He roared and attacked Subhadra's son. The immensely strong one swiftly attacked, desiring to fight. Abhimanyu, the destroyer of
enemies, fought a great battle with him. Pourava enveloped Subhadra's son with a storm of arrows. Arjuna's son
brought down his standard, umbrella and bow on the ground. Subhadra's son pierced Pourava with seven swift arrows. He then pierced his horses and charioteer with five arrows. The soldiers were delighted at this and he roared
repeatedly like a lion. Arjuna's son then quickly affixed an arrow that was certain to kill Pourava. But Hardikya[Kritavarma.]
used two arrows to slice down his bow and arrow. Subhadra's son, the destroyer of enemy heroes, cast aside that
shattered bow. He grasped a sharp sword and a shield. He exhibited his own valour and whirled it, as he moved
around. He whirled it in front of him and brandished it in the air. He leapt up and shook it. O king! No difference
could be distinguished between the sword and the shield. He leapt onto the shaft of Pourava's chariot and suddenly
roared. Having ascended onto Pourava's chariot, he grasped him by the side of the hair. He killed the charioteer
with a kick and sliced down the standard with his sword. He raised him up, like Tarkshya[Garuda.] agitating the water of
the ocean and raising up a snake from it. All the kings saw him with his disheveled hair. He looked like an unconscious bull, when it has been brought down by a lion. Jayadratha could not tolerate the sight of Pourava having
been brought down, afflicted and without a protector, and in the control of Arjuna's son. He grasped a shield
marked with the giant wings of a peacock and decorated with a hundred bells, and a sword. He roared and jumped
down from his chariot. On seeing Saindhava, Krishna's son[Krishna means Arjuna in this context.] let go of Pourava. He swiftly leapt down from the
chariot, like a hawk alighting. Spears, lances and swords were hurled towards him by the enemy. But Krishna's son
sliced them down with his sword or countered them with his shield. He displayed the strength of his own arms to
the soldiers. The strong one again raised his giant sword and shield. The brave one advanced against Vriddhakshatra's heir[Jayadratha.], who was a sworn enemy of his father's. It was like a tiger advancing against an elephant. They cheerfully advanced and attacked each other, using swords as weapons, like a tiger and a lion using teeth and claws to
fight. No one could distinguish any difference between those lions among men and the motions of the sword and
the shield[The text mentions three specific techniques of fighting with the sword-sampata, abhipata and nipata. Loosely,
these can be translated as whirling, striking and descending.]. When they whirled their swords and brought them down, or when they fended off each other's blows,
no special difference could be seen between the weapons. They roamed around in excellent motions, advancing
and retreating. The great-souled ones looked like mountains with wings. As he extended his sword to strike,
Jayadratha struck the shield of Subhadra's illustrious son. The sword stuck in the radiant shield, which had plates
made out of gold and the great sword snapped when the king of Sindhu tried to extract it forcefully. On seeing that
the sword had been shattered, Jayadratha was instantly seen to retreat six steps and climb onto his chariot again. In
the battle, Krishna's son resorted to his supreme chariot and all the kings surrounded him from every direction.
Arjuna's immensely strong heir raised his shield and sword and roared, glancing towards Jayadratha. Subhadra's
son, the destroyer of enemy heroes, then abandoned the king of Sindhu and tormented the soldiers, like the sun on
the earth. In the encounter, Shalya hurled a terrible javelin at him. It was made completely out of iron and was decorated with gold. It was as radiant as the flames of a fire. As it descended, Krishna's son leapt up and caught it, like
Vinata's son grasping a supreme serpent that has fallen from above. He then unsheathed his sword. On witnessing
the dexterity and spirit of that infinitely energetic one, all the kings roared like lions. Subhadra's son, the destroyer
of enemy heroes, then used the valour of his arms to hurl the javelin, radiant with lapis lazuli, back at Shalya. It
was like a snake that had just cast off its skin. It reached Shalya's chariot and slew his charioteer and brought him
down from the chariot. Virata, Drupada, Dhrishtaketu, Yudhishthira, Satyaki, the Kekayas, Bhima, Dhrishtadyumna, Shikhandi, the twins and Droupadi's sons uttered sounds of acclamation. There were many different kinds of
sounds from arrows and diverse roars like lions. They arose and delighted Subhadra's son, who had not retreated.
But your sons could not tolerate those signs of victory on the part of the enemy. O great king! They suddenly surrounded him and enveloped him with sharp arrows, like clouds pouring down on a mountain. Artayani[Shalya.], the slayer of enemies, wished to do what would bring pleasure to your sons and was enraged because of the overthrow of
his charioteer. He attacked Subhadra's son."'
