Vaishampayana said, 'At this, the king, Pandu's son, addressed Narada. "O illustrious one! I wish to hear how Suvarnashthivi was born." Having been thus addressed by Dharmaraja, the sage Narada told him the exact truth about
Suvarnashthivi. "O great king! It was just as Keshava told you. Since you have asked me, I will tell you about the
part that remains. I and the great sage Parvata, my sister's son, went to Srinjaya, supreme among victorious ones,
wishing to dwell with him. He honoured us with all the indicated rites. With all our wishes well tended to, we lived
in his house. After many years had passed, it was time for us to leave. At that time, Parvata spoke these words to
me and they were of grave import. 'We have lived in the house of this Indra among men and have been greatly honoured. O brahmana! Now that the time of residing here is over, we should think about what is appropriate.' O
king! At this, I spoke to the handsome Parvata. 'O lord! O nephew! In every respect, this is worthy of you. The
king should be delighted with boons and let him obtain what he desires. If you so think fit, let him obtain success
through our austerities.' At this, Parvata, bull among sages, summoned the handsome Srinjaya and told him what
we had decided. 'O king! We are delighted with the great hospitality you have sincerely offered us. O best among
men! With our permission, think of a boon that you desire. However, let it not cause injury to the gods or destruction to men. O great king! It is our view that you are worthy of respect and accept this from us.' Srinjaya replied,
'If you are pleased with me, that is sufficient for me. That is a great fruit and it has been my supreme gain.' When
the king repeated this again, Parvata said, 'O king! Ask for a desire that has been in your heart for a long time.'

Srinjaya answered, 'I desire a brave son, one who is full of valour and is firm in his vows. He should be immensely
fortunate and have a long life. He should be like the king of the gods in his resplendence.' Parvata said, 'This desire of yours will come true. However, he will not live for a long time, since there is a desire in your heart that he
should surpass the prosperity of the king of the gods. He will be Suvarnashthivi, since his excreta will be golden.
He will be like the king of the gods in his radiance. But protect him from the king of the gods."

'"Narada said, 'On hearing the great-souled Parvata's words, Srinjaya said, 'Through your favours, let it not be
that way. O sage! Through your powers of austerities, let my son have a long life.' However, because of his partiality for Indra, Parvata said nothing. The king was miserable and I spoke to him again. 'O great king! When it is
time to remember me, think of me and I will show myself to you. When your beloved son has come under the subjugation of the king of the dead, I will give him back to you. O lord of the earth! Do not sorrow. I will again give
him back to you in that form[That is, alive.].' Having addressed the king thus, we departed, as we desired. As he wished, Srinjaya also entered his own palace.

'"After some time had passed, rajarshi Srinjaya had a son born to him. He was immensely valorous and blazed
in his energy. As time passed, he grew, like a giant lotus in a pond. He became Kanchanashthivi, and not just in
name[That is, his excreta were golden.]. O supreme among the Kuru lineage! This extraordinary fact came to be known throughout the world. Indra of the gods got to know this was because of the boon granted by the great-souled ones[Narada and Parvata.]. The slayer of Bala
and Vritra was frightened[At the prospect that the child might overthrow him.] and, listening to the counsel of Brihaspati, sought a weakness in the child. He instructed his divine weapon vajra, which appeared in a personified form. 'O lord! Become a tiger. Go and slay the
prince. O vajra! Parvata gave Srinjaya his son and if he grows up, he may surpass me in valour.' Having been thus
addressed by Shakra, the vajra, the vanquisher of enemy cities, was always near the child, looking for a weakness.
Having obtained a son who was the equal of the king of the gods in radiance, Srinjaya was delighted. The king,
and all the women belonging to his inner quarters, began to reside in the forest. One day, on the banks of the Bhagirathi, the child was running around near that mountainous stream[The Ganga (Bhagirathi) was a mountainous stream there.]. His nurse was the only other person with
him. Though the child was only five years old, he was like a king of elephants in his valour. The immensely strong
one suddenly ran into the tiger. The king's son trembled as he was crushed. He lost his life and fell down on the
ground. The nurse screamed. As soon as the prince had been killed, through the maya of the king of the gods, the
tiger instantly disappeared.

'"Hearing the screams and weeping of the extremely distressed nurse, the king himself rushed to the spot. He
saw the child lying down dead, covered in blood, and was distressed. It was as if the moon had been dislodged. He
raised the mangled torso of his son, covered in blood, on his lap and wept in great grief. His mothers[The king had more than one wife.] also rushed
to the spot where King Srinjaya was. Afflicted by grief, they also wept. At that time, with an attentive mind, the
king remembered me[This is Narada speaking.]. Knowing that he had thought of me, I went and showed myself to him. He was stricken
with grief. O lord of the earth! Therefore, I made him hear the words that the brave one from the Yadu lineage has
told you about[The stories of the kings, described in Chapter 1356(29).]. With Vasava's permission, he was revived by me. It was destiny and it could not have been otherwise. After this, the child, the immensely famous Svarnashthivi, arose. The valiant one delighted the hearts of his
father and his mother. When his father went to heaven, the lord ruled the kingdom for one thousand and one hundred years. He was terrible in his valour. He performed many great sacrifices at which large quantities of donations
were given. The immensely radiant one satisfied the gods and the ancestors. He generated many sons who were the
extenders of the lineage. O king! After a long period, he succumbed to the dharma of time[That is, he died.]. O Indra among
kings! Just as Keshava and the immensely ascetic Vyasa have told you, you must stem this sorrow that has been
generated in you. Bear the burden of the kingdom that belonged to your father and grandfather. Perform great and
auspicious sacrifices and obtain the worlds that are desired."'
