'Yudhishthira said, "O supreme among devarshis! I do not think myself to be without qualities. But yet I am tormented by miseries, like no other king. O Lomasha! I think that my enemies do not possess any qualities. Nor do
they follow dharma. Why do they then prosper in this world?"

'Lomasha replied, "O king! O Partha! You should never grieve that those who do not follow dharma achieve
prosperity because they do not follow dharma. A man may be seen to prosper, attain fortune and triumph over his
enemies, though he does not follow dharma, but will be destroyed, down to his roots. O lord of the earth! I have
seen many daityas and danavas prosper, though they do not follow dharma. But decay finally overcomes them. O
lord! I have witnessed all this earlier, in the era of the gods. The gods found delight in dharma, but the asuras gave
up dharma. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The gods visited the tirthas, but the asuras did not. As a result of
not following dharma, they were first filled with insolence. Insolence gave birth to vanity and vanity gave birth to
anger. Anger resulted in a lack of shame and shamelessness destroyed their conduct. Because of their shamelessness, because of their lack of modesty, because of their evil conduct and because of their worthless vows, forgiveness, prosperity and dharma soon abandoned them. O king! Prosperity went to the gods and ill fortune went to the
asuras. When ill fortune overwhelmed them, they lost their senses because of insolence. Dissension possessed the
daityas and the danavas. O Kounteya! Overwhelmed by ill fortune and dissension and overtaken by insolence, the
danavas lost all their rites and intelligence. Overwhelmed by insolence, they soon confronted destruction. Overcome by infamy, the daityas were soon completely destroyed. But the gods went to oceans, rivers and lakes. They
followed dharma and visited other purifying places. O Pandava! They observed austerities and sacrifices and gave
gifts and benedictions. They discarded all sin and ensured their welfare. Thus, they were generous and always observed rites. They went to the tirthas. Therefore, they obtained supreme prosperity. O Indra among kings! Like
that, you will also bathe in the tirthas with your younger brothers. You will also regain prosperity. That is the eternal path. O lord of the earth! Just as King Nriga, Shibi and Oushinara, Bhagiratha, Vasumana, Gaya, Puru and Pururava were purified, through always observing austerities, touching water and visiting tirthas and seeing great-
souled ones, you will also obtain fame and pure riches. O Indra among kings! Like that, you will also obtain great
prosperity. Like Ikshvaku with his sons, subjects and relatives, like Muchukunda, Mandhata and King Marutta obtained pure fame, like the gods with their power of austerities, like the devarshis, you will also obtain it. But the
sons of Dhritarashtra are enslaved by insolence and delusion. There is no doubt that they will soon be destroyed
like the daityas."'
