'Bhishma said, "The yoga and kshema of a kingdom is said to depend on the king. The yoga and
kshema of the king depend on the priest. When the invisible fears of the subjects are pacified by the
brahmana and the visible ones by the arms of the king, there is indeed happiness in the kingdom. In
this connection, an ancient history is recounted. That was a conversation between King Muchukunda
and Vaishravana[Kubera.]. Having conquered this earth, King Muchukunda wished to test the strength of his
own army and attacked the lord of Alaka[The lord of Alaka is Kubera. Kubera's capital is Alaka or Alakapuri.]. King Vaishravana created and released rakshasas on him
and that army of nairittas crushed and drove away his forces. When King Muchukunda, the scorcher
of enemies, saw that his own soldiers were being slaughtered, he censured his learned priest. Vasishtha, supreme in knowledge about the brahman, performed terrible austerities and drove the rakshasas there away, thereby creating a path. At this, King Vaishravana showed himself before
Muchukunda. On the soldiers being slaughtered, he spoke these words. 'Earlier, there were kings who
were more powerful than you and they also had priests. However, none of them acted the way you are
acting. It is not as if those lords of the earth were limited in strength or in their accomplishment with
weapons. They approached and worshipped me, as the lord of happiness and unhappiness. If you possess strength in your arms, you should exhibit it. Why are you depending to such a great degree on
the strength of a brahmana?' At this, Muchukunda became angry and replied to the lord of riches.
Though he was initially enraged, he reverentially spoke these justified words. 'Svayambhu[Brahma.] created
the brahmana and the kshatriya from the same womb. Separate powers have been ordained for them
and they protect the world. The brahmana is always established in the strength of austerities and
mantras. The kshatriya is always established in the strength of weapons and his arms. Together, their
task is to protect the subjects. O lord of Alaka! Though you have reprimanded me, this is the way I
have acted.' Vaishravana then spoke to the king and his priest. 'Unless it has been ordained, I do not
bestow a kingdom on anyone. O king! Know that unless it has been ordained, I do not take it away
either. O brave one! I have given you this entire earth. Rule it.' Muchukunda replied, 'O king! I do
not wish to enjoy a kingdom that has been given to me by you. I wish to enjoy the prosperity of a
kingdom that has been won by my arms and valour.' King Vaishravana was overcome by supreme
wonder. On seeing that Muchukunda was established in the dharma of kshatriyas, he honoured this.
King Muchukunda followed the dharma and vows of kshatriyas well and ruled over the earth that he
had conquered through the valour of his arms. Like that, if a king knows the brahman well and gives
precedence to brahmanas, he conquers what has not been conquered earlier and obtains great fame.
The brahmana must always have water[For various religious rituals.] and the kshatriya must always have weapons. Everything
that is there in the universe is under their control."'
