'"Manu said, 'When the senses are collected together and obtain their qualities, they remember what has
been done a long time ago. When the senses are collected together later, through the use of the intelligence,
one comprehends one's supreme nature. When all the objects of the senses are simultaneously controlled
and, over time, one uses one's strength to prevent them from wandering around, the intelligent person understands himself to be the single supreme embodied being[This is a difficult shloka to translate and we have taken some liberties.]. One passes through the three-rajas, tamas
and sattva-and the three qualities and forms of knowledge. In that way, the embodied being penetrates the
senses, like wind entering a kindled fire. The eyes cannot see the form of the atman. Touch cannot comprehend it. It is beyond the senses to fathom it. The ears cannot comprehend the soul through hearing. Whichever sense comprehends it is destroyed[The senses have to be destroyed before the atman can be comprehended.]. Hearing and the other senses cannot fathom the atman on their
own. The kshetrajna knows everything, sees everything and witnesses. No man has seen the other side of
the Himalayas, or the dark side of the moon. But this doesn't mean that they don't exist. In that way, the atman exists in a subtle way in all beings and is based in knowledge. Something that has not been seen earlier
and something that has not been heard of earlier is not necessarily non-existent. Even if one looks, one
doesn't always see the universe in the moon. It is like that for those who are not fixed on the final objective.
The learned see that form is created and form is also destroyed. Through their intelligence, they can understand the motion of the sun[As opposed to rising and setting.]. With the lamp of intelligence, the extremely learned see what is far away.
Through their intelligence, they can immediately investigate what should be known. Indeed, nothing can be
accomplished without the use of means. Fishermen kill fish by using nets that are made out of strings. Deer
are used to capture other deer, birds for other birds and elephants for other elephants. In that way, what
needs to be known can be seen through knowledge. As an example, only a snake can see a snake's legs.
Through knowledge, inside the body, one can see what is based in the body and deserves to be known. One
will not be able to comprehend the senses through the use of the senses. In that way, what is beyond intelligence cannot be understood through the use of supreme intelligence. On the fifteenth day of the dark lunar
fortnight, even a subtle form of the moon cannot be seen. That does not mean that it has been destroyed.
Know that the embodied being is like that. On the fifteenth day of the dark lunar fortnight, the faint form of
the moon is not evident in the sky. In that way, when it is separated from its body, its own body cannot
comprehend the soul. Having attained another position, the moon begins to shine again. In that way, having
obtained another body, the soul is resplendent again. The birth, growth and decay of the moon can immediately be seen. But the soul is not like that. The birth, growth and decay of the body should also be accepted
like that. Even in its dark state, the moon possesses a form. One does not see darkness seize the moon and
release it. In that way, the release and entering of the soul cannot be seen[Release from a body and entering another body.]. Darkness is seen when it approaches the moon and the sun[At the time of an eclipse.]. In that way, the soul can be understood as separate from the body. When
the moon and the sun have been freed, Rahu can no longer be seen[An eclipse is believed to be due to Rahu devouring the sun and the
moon.]. In that way, when it has been separated from the body, the soul can no longer be comprehended. Even on the fifteenth day of the dark lunar
fortnight, the nakshatras are still united with the moon. In that way, though it has been separated from the
body, the fruits of acts performed are still united with it.'"'
