'Dhritarashtra said, "O Sanjaya! You have described to me many wonderful duels. On hearing what you have said,
I envy those who possess eyes. Men in the world will speak of this as wonderful, the fight between the Kurus and
the Pandavas, like that between the gods and the asuras. I am never satisfied on hearing about this supreme battle.
Therefore, tell me about the encounter between Artayani and Subhadra's son."

'Sanjaya said, "On seeing that his charioteer had been sent to the regulator[Yama.], Shalya grasped a club that was
completely made out of iron. He leapt down from his supreme chariot and roared in anger. He looked like the flaming fire of destruction, or Death with a staff in his hand. Bhima grasped a mighty club and quickly rushed towards
him. Subhadra's son also grasped a gigantic club that was like the vajra and summoned Shalya to a fight. But Bhi-
ma made efforts and restrained Subhadra's son. The powerful Bhimasena approached Shalya in that battle and
stood immobile, like a mountain. The king of Madra saw the immensely strong Bhima and forcefully advanced towards him, like a tiger towards an elephant. Thousands of trumpets and conch shells were sounded. There were
roars like those of lions and the mighty sounds of drums. On seeing those two, equal in spirit, rush towards each
other, there were sounds of applause among hundreds of Pandavas and Kurus. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Among all the kings, there is no one other than the lord of Madra who can withstand Bhimasena's force in
battle. There is no warrior in this world, other than Vrikodara, who can withstand the force of the club of the great-
souled lord of Madra. Bhima's mighty club was tied in hemp and decorated with gold. It caused great delight
among the people. When wielded, it seemed to blaze. Shalya's beautiful club was also like a giant flash of lightning, when he roamed and whirled it around. They wandered around in circles and lowered their clubs. They
roared like bulls, as if with horns lowered. They wielded their clubs and executed circular motions. In the encounter, there was no difference between those lions among men. Struck by Bhimasena, Shalya's gigantic club
emitted extremely terrible sparks of fire and the club was shattered. In similar fashion, when struck by the enemy,
Bhimasena's club was as resplendent as a tree covered with fireflies during the evening of the monsoon. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The king of Madra hurled a club in that battle[Obviously, he had picked up another club.]. It blazed through the sky and created
many fires. Similarly, Bhimasena hurled a club at the enemy and tormented his soldiers, like a giant meteor that
was falling down. The best of clubs struck each other. They sighed like the maidens of serpents and created fire.
They were like giant tigers using claws, or giant elephants using tusks. They roamed around, striking each other
with clubs. In a short while, struck by clubs, they were covered with blood and the great-souled ones looked like
flowering kimshukas. The sounds of the clubs wielded by those lions among men could be heard in all the directions, like that of Shakra's vajra. The club of the king of Madra struck Bhima on the left and the right. But he did
not waver, like a mountain that has been struck. Similarly, the immensely strong Bhima's club struck the lord of
Madra. But he bore it with patience, like a mountain struck by the vajra. They raised their giant clubs and attacked
each other with great force. They repeatedly roamed around, executing circular motions. They approached each
other by eight steps and suddenly attacked each other like elephants wishing to kill each other, with clubs like iron
rods. They were severely wounded from the force of each other's clubs. The brave ones simultaneously fell down,
like shattered poles of Indra. Shalya was deprived of his senses, having been struck by the club, and sighed repeatedly. O great king! On seeing this, maharatha Kritavarma quickly approached him, as he was unconscious and immobile like a serpent, having been struck by the club. Maharatha Kritavarma swiftly lifted the lord of Madra up
onto his own chariot and carried him away from the field of battle. The brave Bhima was unconscious, like someone who is drunk. However, the mighty-armed one raised himself in an instant and could be seen, with the club in
his hand. Your sons saw that the lord of Madra had retreated. O venerable one! They trembled, with their elephants, chariots, infantry and horses. Those on your side were routed by the Pandavas, who desired victory. They
were frightened and fled in different directions, like clouds scattered by the wind. The maharatha Pandaveyas defeated the sons of Dhritarashtra. O king! The illustrious ones were radiant and roamed around on the field of battle.
They roared fiercely like lions and blew on their conch shells in delight. Drums were sounded, together with kettle-
drums and tambourines."'
