Yudhishthira said, "Brothers, fathers, sons, relatives and well-wishers have been slain for the sake of accomplishing objectives. We have been driven by wicked resolutions and have been cruel. O grandfather! How can
this thirst for riches be removed? Following that thirst, we have perpetrated wicked deeds."

'Bhishma replied, "In this connection, an ancient history is recounted about a song sung by the king of Videha,
when he was asked by Mandavya. 'I possess nothing, but I live my life in great happiness. Though Mithila[Mithila was the capital of Videha.] is
blazing, nothing that belongs to me is burning. Riches indeed bring prosperity. But those who know, regard these
as misery. Objects that bring little prosperity always confuse those who are not accomplished. Whatever happiness
satisfaction brings in this world and whatever great happiness is obtained in heaven are not even one-sixteenth of
the happiness that comes about from the extinguishment of thirst. With the progress of time, a cow grows and so
does its horns. In that way, with more and more riches, the thirst also increases. If one has a sense of ownership in
anything, then, when that object is destroyed, one suffers from torment. One should not be driven by desire. Attachment to desire brings misery. When desired riches have been obtained, they should be used for dharma. But
even then, desire must be shunned. A learned person regards all beings as equal, as equal as a tiger and a lump of
flesh[There is no difference between a tiger and its food, the lump of flesh.]. Having been successful in purifying his soul, he renounces everything. He discards both truth and falsehood, sorrow and joy, the pleasant and the unpleasant, fear and freedom from fear. Having abandoned everything,
he is tranquil and healthy. This[The thirst.] is difficult to be given up by those who are evil in their intelligence. Even when
the body decays, it does not decrease. It is like a disease that destroys life. The casting aside of thirst brings happiness. A person who has dharma in his soul beholds his own atman, like the sparkling and unblemished moon. He
obtains happiness in this world and fame in the hereafter.' On hearing the king's words, the brahmana was pleased.
Mandavya, who had earlier been confused, honoured those words."'
