'"The hawk said, 'All the kings of the earth say that you have dharma in your soul. Why do you therefore perform
a deed that is against all dharma? O king! I am suffering from hunger and this is my decreed food. Do not protect it
out of avarice for dharma. Otherwise, you will discard dharma.'

'"The king replied, 'O great bird! This bird is terrified out of fear for you and has sought shelter. To protect its
life, it has sought refuge with me. O hawk! Do you not see that it is supreme adharma for me to give up this dove,
which has sought refuge from fear? O hawk! It can be seen that this dove is agitated and trembling. It has come to
me for its life. Giving it up merits condemnation.'

'"The hawk said, 'O lord of the earth! All beings sustain themselves through food. They prosper through food
and live because of food. One can live for many nights after giving up objects that are difficult to discard. But one
cannot live for a long time after giving up food. O lord of the earth! If I am deprived of my food, my life will give
up my body and tread the path from which one does not return[Meaning death.]. O one with dharma in your soul! After my
death, my son and wife will perish. While protecting the dove, you are not protecting many lives. Dharma that
stands in the way of another dharma is not dharma at all. It is evil dharma. O one for whom valour is based on
truth! Dharma that does not conflict with anything is the right dharma. O lord of the earth! When there is a conflict,
you must decide in accordance with what is important and what is unimportant. That should be dharma where
there is no conflict. O king! After measuring the important with the unimportant and determining what constitutes
dharma, and what does not constitute dharma, you must decide that to be dharma which is weightier and act
accordingly.'

'"The king replied, 'O supreme bird! Your words seem to bring much welfare. Are you Suparna[Suparna is one of Garuda's names.], king of the
birds? There is no doubt that you are conversant with dharma. You have spoken many attractive words, full of
dharma. I do not see anything that is not evident to you. Then how can you think it virtuous to discard someone
who has sought refuge? O bird! All your efforts are to get food. You are capable of appeasing your hunger through
other food, that which is more plentiful. For your sake, I will now cook whatever you desire-cow, bull, boar, deer
or buffalo.'

'"The hawk said, 'O great king! I do not desire a boar, a bull, a deer or anything else. I do not eat them. What
use are they to me now? O bull among the kshatriyas! O protector of the earth! Give up the food that has been earmarked for me by destiny. Release the dove. It is the eternal rule that hawks eat doves. O king! Not knowing a
plantain tree, do not climb it[A plantain tree is weak. Therefore, one should not climb it.].'
'"The king replied, 'O one who is worshipped by masses of birds! Rule over this prosperous kingdom of Shibi.
O hawk! Alternatively, I will give you everything that you desire. O hawk! But I will not give up the bird that has
sought refuge with me. O supreme bird! Tell me what deed I must perform so that you give this up. I will not give
up this small bird.'

'"The hawk said, 'O Ushinara! O lord of men! If you have so much affection for the dove, then cut some flesh
from your body and weigh it, so that it is equal to the dove. O king! When your flesh is equal to the dove, you can
give it to me and I will find satisfaction.'

'"The king replied, 'O hawk! I think this request of yours is a favour. I will right now give you an equal amount
of my own flesh.'"

'Lomasha said, "O Kounteya! The king was learned in supreme dharma. The illustrious one cut his own flesh
and weighed it against the dove. When he found that the dove was heavier than this flesh, King Ushinara again cut
some more flesh and gave it. Thus, there was no more flesh left to weigh against the dove. Having given up all the
flesh, he himself ascended the scales."

'"The hawk said, 'O one learned in dharma! I am Indra and that dove is the bearer of the sacrificial offerings[Agni. The text uses Havyavahana, one of Agni's names, meaning the bearer of sacrificial offerings.].
We came to your sacrificial grounds to test you about dharma. O lord of the earth! This deed of yours, your cutting
off flesh from your body, will be resplendent in the world. O king! As long as men talk in this world, so long will
your eternal deed be established in this world.'"

'Lomasha said, "O Pandava! Behold the seat of that great-souled king. It is sacred and the cleanser of all sins.
Look at it with me. O king! It is here that the gods and the eternal sages are always seen by brahmanas, who are
great-souled and performers of holy deeds."'
