Vaishampayana said, 'O Indra among kings! Thus addressed and senseless with grief, the slayer of Keshi signified his assent. When he said this, all the people were delighted. The bull among men spoke these words to the
people and they rejoiced, like those who are suffering from sweat recovering through a sprinkling of water. O tiger
among men! He quickly entered the quarters where your father had been born. In the proper way, it was sanctified
with white garlands. In every direction, pots completely full of water were arrayed. O mighty-armed one! There
was tinduka[Medicinal tree, Diospyros peregrina. It is easily inflammable and the fruit yields a resin.] wood sprinkled with clarified butter. There were mustard seeds. Sparkling weapons and fires were
arranged on every side. There were pleasant and aged women as attendants. O brave one! All around, there were
skilled and accomplished physicians. The energetic one also saw many objects designed to destroy rakshasas laid
around, placed there by people who were accomplished in such matters. On seeing that the room where your father
was born had been readied in this way, Hrishikesha was delighted and spoke words of appreciation. With a cheerful face, Varshneya said this. Droupadi quickly went to Virata's daughter and spoke these words. "O fortunate one!
Your father-in-law, Madhusudana, has come here. He is the ancient rishi whose soul cannot be comprehended. The
unvanquished one has approached." The queen[Uttara.] controlled her tears. She covered herself and glanced towards
Krishna, the way one looks towards a god. The ascetic lady's heart was shattered. On seeing that Govinda was approaching, she lamented piteously, in a voice that choked with tears. "O Pundarikaksha! Behold. We have been deprived of this child. O Janardana! It is as if both Abhimanyu and I have been killed. O Varshneya! O slayer of
Madhu! O brave one! I am bowing down my head and seeking your favours. My son has been burnt by the weapon
of Drona's son. Revive him. O lord! O Pundarikaksha! At that time, had Dharmaraja, Bhimasena or you said, 'Let
the blade of grass destroy the unconscious mother,' I would have been destroyed and this disaster would not have
occurred. The child in the womb has been destroyed by the brahmastra. Drona's evil-minded son has perpetrated a
cruel deed. What purpose has been served by that? O slayer of enemies! She is now bowing down her head and
seeking your favours. O Govinda! If you do not revive him, I will cast aside my life. O virtuous one! Many of my
wishes are based on him. O Keshava! If he is slain by Drona's son, why should I remain alive? O Krishna! O Janardana! It was my hope that I would honour you with him on my lap, but that has been destroyed. O bull among
men! This son of the one with the restless eyes[Meaning Abhimanyu.] has been killed. O Krishna! All the wishes in my heart have become futile. O Madhusudana! You loved the one with the restless eyes. Look at his son, brought down by the brahmastra. He is ungrateful and cruel, just like his father. Having cast aside the prosperity of the Pandavas, he has now
gone to Yama's abode. O Keshava! O brave one! When Abhimanyu was slain in the forefront of the battle, I had
pledged that I would soon follow him. O Krishna! But I didn't do that. I am cruel and love life. If I go there and
meet him now, what will Phalguna's son say?"'
