Sanjaya said, "O great king! Your son spoke these words to the king of Madra. He went humbly to him and spoke
these affectionate words to him. 'O one who observes truthful vows! O immensely fortunate one! O one who increases the hardship of enemies! O lord of Madra! O one who is brave in battle! O one who is terrible to enemy
soldiers! O supreme among eloquent ones! You have heard Karna's words. I am seeking you out among all these
lions among kings. This is for Partha's destruction and for my welfare. O best of rathas! O one with an excellent
mind! You should accept the task of being a charioteer. There is no one in the worlds who is your equal in holding
the reins. Protect Karna in every way, like Brahma protects Shankara. Krishna is Partha's adviser and he is
supreme in holding the reins. In that fashion, always protect Radheya. Bhishma, Drona, Kripa, Karna, you, the
valiant Bhoja, Shakuni Soubala, Drona's son and I are our strength. O leader of an army! In that fashion, we were
divided into nine divisions. The divisions of the great-souled Bhishma and Drona no longer exist. They slew my
enemy, more than the two parts that were allotted to them[The enemy was divided into nine shares, with each of these nine warriors taking care of his share.]. But those two tigers among men were old and were
killed through deceit. O unblemished one! Having performed extremely difficult deeds for us, they have gone to
heaven. In that way, in this battle, many other tigers among men have been slain by the enemy. In that way, in this
encounter, there are many on our side who have ascended to heaven, giving up their lives, striving to the best of
their capacity and performing good rites. The mighty-armed Karna alone remains, engaged in our welfare. O tiger
among men! And you are there, a maharatha in all the worlds. O lord of Madra! That is the reason my hopes of
victory are still great. Krishna is foremost among those who hold Partha's reins in battle. O king! In the battle, he
is engaged in protecting Partha. You have witnessed the deeds that he has performed. Earlier, in an encounter, Arjuna has never killed enemies in this fashion[Because Krishna is with Arjuna, Arjuna has become stronger.]. O lord of Madra! But you have seen how he has killed and driven
away in this battle. O immensely radiant one! Yours and Karna's divisions are left. In the battle, unite with Karna
and bear that share. O venerable one! Surya and Aruna are seen to destroy the darkness[While Aruna is also a name for the sun, more specifically, Aruna is the
sun's charioteer.]. In that way, destroy
the Kounteyas, with the Panchalas and the Srinjayas. Karna is foremost among rathas. You are foremost among
men. When there is a clash, there is no one in the worlds who is your equal. Varshneya protects the Pandavas in
every situation. In that way, in this battle, protect Vaikartana Karna. O lord of the earth! If you are the charioteer of
the horses, he will be unassailable in a battle by Shakra and all the gods, not to speak of the Pandaveyas. Do not
doubt these words of mine.'

' "Hearing these words of Duryodhana, Shalya was filled with anger. His brows furrowed into three lines. He
repeatedly whirled his hands around. His large eyes were red with rage. The mighty-armed Shalya was proud of
his lineage, prosperity, knowledge and strength. He spoke these words. 'O son of Gandhari! You are insulting me
and it is certain that you suspect me. Without any hesitation, you have asked me to act as a charioteer. You regard
Karna to be superior to us and have honoured and praised him. But I have never regarded Radheya as my equal in
battle. O lord of the earth! Instruct me to assume a burden that is greater than my share. Having defeated them in
battle, I will return to the place I have come from. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! I will fight single-handedly
with them. As I consume the enemies in the battle, behold my valour today. O Kouravya! It is not proper for a man
to advance with an injury in his heart. Do not doubt me and do not enjoin me in this way. You should not act so as
to insult me in the battle. Behold my thick arms. They are capable of withstanding the vajra. Behold my colourful
bow and these arrows, which are like venomous serpents. Behold my chariot. Well-trained horses that are as swift
as the wind have been yoked to it. O son of Gandhari! Behold my club. It has been decorated with strips of golden
garments. If I am angry, I can split the earth and shatter the mountains. O lord of the earth! I can dry up the oceans
with my energy. O king! Knowing that I am capable of oppressing the enemy in this way, why are you instructing
me to be the charioteer of Adhiratha's inferior son in the battle? O Indra among kings! You should not employ me
on such a lowly task. Since I am superior, I have no interest in following the commands of that wicked person. A
superior person has arrived with affection and obedience. If one makes such a person subject to the commands of
an inferior one, one commits the crime of confusing the inferior with the superior. Brahma created brahmanas from
his mouth and kshatriyas from his chest. He created vaishyas from his thighs and shudras from his feet. That is
what has been heard. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Because of mixture among the varnas, those who are
other than the four varnas, pratiloma and anuloma, have been generated[Pratiloma means against the natural order and applies to progeny where
the mother is superior in varna to the father. Anuloma applies to progeny
where the father is superior in varna to the mother.]. It has been said in the sacred texts
that kshatriyas are protectors. They accumulate wealth and distribute it. Pure brahmanas act as officiating priests,
study and receive[Receive gifts.]. Brahmanas have been established on earth for the sake of gratifying people. Agriculture, animal husbandry and donations are always the tasks of vaishyas. It has been decreed that shudras are the servants of
brahmanas, kshatriyas and vaishyas. It has been decreed that sutas are the servants of brahmanas and kshatriyas.
They are not the servants of shudras[Unless shudras are being equated with sutas, it is possible that there is a
typo here and the text should read, 'they are not the servants of sutas'.]. O unblemished one! Therefore, listen to my words. I am one whose head
has been consecrated[By sprinkling with sacred water.]. I have been born in a lineage of rajarshis. I am famous as a maharatha and should be
served by bards and minstrels. O destroyer of enemy forces! Since I am such a person, I have no interest in being
the charioteer of the son of the suta in battle. Having been thus humiliated, I will never fight. O son of Gandhari! I
am seeking your permission now, because I wish to return to the place that I have come from.' Having spoken
these words, Shalya, tiger among men and the ornament of an assembly, was angry and quickly stood up in the
midst of those kings.

' "However, your son restrained him, with affection and great respect. He spoke sweet and conciliatory words
that were capable of achieving every object. 'O Shalya! There is no doubt that it is exactly as you have said. O lord
of men! But I have an objective. Please listen to it. O king! Karna is not superior to you and I have never doubted
you. The king who is the lord of Madra will never do something that is false. Your ancestors, the best of men, always spoke the truth. It is my view that this is the reason you are known as Artayani[Artayani was Shalya's name. Artayana means someone who is the
refuge of one who is distressed and Artayani means a descendant of
Artayana.]. O one who deserves honours. That is the reason, on this earth, you are like a stake to enemies[There is a pun that a translation cannot capture. The word shalya means
stake.]. O lord of the earth! That is the reason
you are known by the name of Shalya. You have given away a large quantity of donations earlier. O one who
knows about dharma! Therefore, for my sake, do what you have promised to do earlier. Radheya and I are not
more valiant than you, that I am asking you to be the charioteer of those foremost of horses in the battle. Just as the
world thinks that Karna is superior to Dhananjaya in qualities, the world thinks that Shalya is superior to Vasudeva. O bull among men! Karna is superior to Partha in weapons. And you are superior to Krishna in the knowledge
of horses and in strength. The great-minded Vasudeva knows about the heart of horses. O king of Madra! But there
is no doubt that you are twice as knowledgeable as him." Shalya replied, "O son of Gandhari! O Kourava! Since,
in the midst of the soldiers, you have said that I am superior to Devaki's son, I am pleased with you. Therefore, I
will be the charioteer of the illustrious Radheya, while he fights with the foremost of the Pandavas. O brave one! It
shall be as you wish. O brave one! But let this be clear to Vaikartana, what when the time is right, I will be free to
speak disrespectful words to him." O king! O descendant of the Bharata lineage! O supreme among the Bharata
lineage! Together with Karna, your son told the king of Madra that it would be this way.'
