Vaishampayana said, 'Then the monkey contracted his huge body, which he had extended through his own wishes.
He once again embraced Bhimasena with his arms. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Having been thus embraced by his brother, Bhima's exhaustion was destroyed and everything was at ease. With tears in his eyes, the
ape once again told Bhima, in a voice that was choked and affectionate. "O brave one! Return to your own abode.
But remember me in your thoughts. O best of the Kurus! Do not tell anyone that I am here. O immensely powerful
one! When they have obtained leave from the abode of the lord of the riches, the wives of the gods and the gandharvas come to this region and to this time. My eyes have been satisfied and I have remembered Raghava. O Bhi-
ma! Through you, I have touched another human body. O brave one! O Kounteya! Now let your sight of me be
successful too. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Because of our brotherhood, ask for a boon. If you wish that I
should go to Hastinapura and kill the low sons of Dhritarashtra, I will do that. Or I will grind that city down with
rocks. O immensely strong one! I will perform whatever deed you desire." On hearing these words of the great-
souled one, Bhima was delighted and replied to Hanuman with happiness in his heart, "O bull among apes! You
have already done everything for me. O mighty-armed one! May you be fortunate. Forgive me. I desire your
favours. With a protector as valorous as you, all of us Pandavas have found a protector. With your energy, all of us
will triumph over our enemies." Having heard these words, Hanuman told Bhimasena, "From brotherhood and out
of my well wishes towards you, I will do that which will bring you pleasure. O brave one! O mighty-armed one!
When you rush into the enemy's battle formations, armed with arrows and spears, and utter a roar like that of a
lion, I will add my own roars to that of yours. Seated on Vijaya's flagstaff[Vijaya is Arjuna's name. Hanuman was perched on Arjuna's flagstaff at the time of battle.], I will let loose terrible roars that will
rob the enemies of their lives." Having said this, he disappeared.

'When that supreme of apes had left, Bhima, foremost among strong ones, travelled along that road to the extensive Gandhamadana. He thought about his[Hanuman's.] resplendent body, unmatched on earth. He thought about
Dasharathi's greatness and power. Travelling eagerly towards Sougandhika forest, he made lovely forests and
groves tremble. He saw forests with blossoms and many colourful flowers and lotuses. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! He saw mad elephants that were streaked with mud, like masses of monsoon clouds. Proceeding fast,
the handsome one saw bucks with does in the forest. They had grass in their mouths and their darting eyes looked
at him. With great valour, Bhimasena entered the mountain that was infested with buffaloes, boars and tigers, as if
forest trees that were in blossom, stirred by the breeze and with branches lowered by the burden of delicate and
copper-red shoots, had invited him in. He passed ponds teeming with lotuses, with beautiful tirthas and groves,
swarming with intoxicated bees. The lotuses seemed to join their hands in salutation. But Bhima's mind was set on
the peak of the mountain, full of flowers. With Droupadi's words providing sustenance, he travelled faster. When
the day had turned[That is, when it was afternoon.], in the forest that was infested with deer, he saw a wide river. It was full of unblemished and
golden lotuses. It was aswarm with intoxicated karandavas[Type of duck.] and adorned with chakravakas[The ruddy goose.]. It was as if a
garland of spotless lotuses had been designed for the mountain. Near that river, the greatly powerful one saw the
large Sougandhika forest. It was as radiant as the rising sun and brought him joy. On seeing this, Pandu's son
thought that his desires had been satisfied. His mind went out to his beloved, who was suffering as a result of
dwelling in the forest.'
