Vaishampayana continued, 'The grandfather was lying down on the bed of arrows. After this, the immensely energetic King Yudhishthira again asked the supreme among eloquent ones. "O immensely intelligent one! The
rishis, the brahmanas and the gods cite the proofs laid down in the Vedas and praise the dharma that has signs of
non-violence. O supreme among kings! However, if a man has indulged in violence, in deeds, words and thoughts,
how can he be freed from the misery?"

'Bhishma replied, "O slayer of enemies! Those who have spoken about the brahman have instructed that there
are four kinds of non-violence and deviation from even one of these is not acceptable. All quadrupeds are incapable of standing on three legs. O protector of the earth! In that way, it is said that one cannot stand on only three.
When others follow in the footsteps of an elephant, all their footprints are lost in the footprints left by the elephant.
In that way, in this world, non-violence has been instructed as the supreme dharma. Creatures become attached to
violence in deeds, words and thoughts. It must first be given up in the mind and then in words and deeds. Those
who have spoken about the brahman have spoken about these three kinds of reasons. The sins are established in
thoughts, words and taste[The text isn't very smooth. In addition to deeds, words and thoughts, a fourth kind of violence is now added, in
terms of eating flesh.]. Learned ones who are devoted to austerities do not eat flesh. O king! I will tell you
about the sins attached to the eating of meat. Listen to me. Those who senselessly eat it, eat what is like the flesh of
their own son. A son is born through the union of the mother and the father. In that way, the juices are united with
the tongue and lead to discrimination. That is the reason the sacred texts say that taste and attachment must be controlled[If one tastes meat, an attachment develops for it. Better to not taste it in the first place.]. Whether it is cooked well or not cooked well, whether there is salt in it or no salt in it, once one discriminates,  those  sentiments  constrict  the  consciousness.  After  listening  to  the  sounds  of  drums,  conch  shells  and
stringed musical instruments, how can those evil men eat meat? Having tasted the juices, there are those who
praise  meat  and  the  fruits  it  leads  to,  describing  it  as  inconceivable,  unimaginable  and  impossible  to  describe.
These are sinful acts and lead to consequent fruits. There are many virtuous people who protected the flesh of others and gave up their own flesh and their own lives instead. They went to heaven. O great king! These are the four
traits of non-violent conduct. What I have instructed you has the essence of all dharma and artha."'
