Shounaka asked, 'O suta! What was Indra's fault and how was he negligent? How was Garuda born through the
austerities of the valakhilyas? How did Kashyapa, a Brahmana, have the king of the birds as a son? How did he[The son, Garuda.]
become invincible and indestructible to all creatures? How did the bird have the power to travel anywhere at will
and summon up every power at will? If they are recounted in the ancient tales, I would like to know the answers to
these questions.'

Souti said, 'O Brahmana! What you wish to know is indeed narrated in the ancient tales. Listen to me, as I
briefly recount it to you. Prajapati Kashyapa undertook a sacrifice in order to have a son and it is said that he was
helped by the rishis, the gods and the gandharvas. Kashyapa appointed Shakra[Indra.], the other gods and the valakhilya
sages to bring firewood for the sacrifice. Because of his great strength, the lord Shakra picked up firewood that was
as large as a mountain and carried it, without any effort at all. On the way, he saw some rishis who were no larger
than the joint of a thumb. Together, they carried a single leaf of a palasha tree[A tree with large, fragrant and orange-coloured flowers, the Butea frondosa.]. The ascetics were extremely
weak from lack of food and their bodies were lean. A cow's hoof had left a print[On the road.] and this had filled up with water, causing them grief. Vain about his valour, Purandara[Indra.] was amazed at this sight and contemptuously laughing
at them swiftly passed over them, stepping over their heads. At this they were angered and began a great act[A sacrifice.] that
would bring danger to Shakra. According to the rites, these great sages, rigid in their austerities, poured libations
into the sacrificial fire and chanted mantras saying, "The gods will have another Indra, capable of going anywhere
at will and capable of summoning up any power at will. He will bring great fear to the present king of the gods.
Through the fruits of our austerities, there will be born one, swift as the mind, who will be a hundred times better
than Indra in strength and valour." On learning of this, Shatakratu[Indra.], the king of the gods, was greatly alarmed and
sought refuge with Kashyapa, rigid in his vows.

'Hearing everything from the king of the gods, Prajapati Kashyapa went to the valakhilyas and asked them if
their act had been successful. The truthful ones replied that it had been. Then Prajapati Kashyapa pacified them
and said, "O ones blessed with the power of austerities! The present Indra has been appointed by Brahma as the
lord of the three worlds. You are trying to create another Indra. O supreme ones! You should not make Brahma's
words false. Nor should I make your intentions false. Let there be another Indra for winged beings, endowed with
great strength and valour. Show mercy to the king of the gods who is a supplicant before you." Having been thus
addressed by Kashyapa, the valakhilya ascetics saluted Kashyapa, supreme among sages, and said, "O Prajapati!
Our act was for the purpose of creating an Indra. It is also something that you wish, because it was meant to bring
you a son. Please accept this act and its fruits. Do whatever seems to you to be the best course of action." At that
time, the beautiful and illustrious goddess Dakshayani[Daksha's daughter.] Vinata desired to have a son.

'Having performed austerities and rites for the birth of a son and bathed, the pure one served her husband.
Kashyapa told her, "O goddess! This act of yours will bear fruit and you will obtain what you desire. You will give
birth to two valorous sons, lords of the three worlds. Owing to the austerities of the valakhilyas and through my
own desire, these sons will be extremely fortunate and will be worshipped in the worlds." Marichi's illustrious
son[Marichi was Kashyapa's father.] again told her, "Take good care when you bear these auspicious seeds in your womb. One of these will be a
valorous bird, the Indra of all winged beings, capable of summoning every power at will and esteemed by the
worlds." Pleased, Prajapati[Kashyapa.] then spoke to Shatakratu[Indra.], "O Purandara! You will have two powerful birds as
brothers. They will cause no injury to you. O Shakra! Stop worrying. You will continue to be Indra. But in your
arrogance, never insult those who have knowledge of the brahman. Their words are like poison, their anger is fearsome." At these words, Indra's fears were dispelled and he went to his world. Vinata was delighted, because her
wishes had been fulfilled. She gave birth to two sons, Aruna and Garuda. Aruna, with the malformed body, became
the one who comes before the sun[Aruna is the dawn and also the sun's charioteer.]. Garuda was instated as the Indra of the birds. O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! Now listen to his great deeds.'
