Vaishampayana said, 'On hearing Dvaipayana's words and on seeing that Dhananjaya was angry, Kounteya Yudhishthira took Vyasa's permission and replied in these words. "Ruling over this kingdom and its many separate objects of desire do not please my mind now. The sorrow is making me tremble. O sage! On hearing the lamentations
of the women who have lost their brave husbands and sons, I can find no peace." Having been thus addressed,
Vyasa, supreme among those who know about yoga and knew about dharma, accomplished in the Vedas, spoke the
following words in reply to the immensely wise Yudhishthira.

'"A man does not obtain anything through deeds or thought, or by giving anything[This is Vyasa speaking.]. Everything that a man obtains progressively in the course of time has been ordained by the creator in successive arrangements. If it is not
time, man is incapable of obtaining anything in particular, even by studying learned texts. Even a fool is capable of
obtaining riches. Time determines the success of acts. When it is a time of adversity, crafts, mantras and herbs
yield no fruits. When the right time arrives and it is a time for prosperity, it is these which ensure success. It is because of time that winds blow swiftly. It is because of time that rain is generated in the clouds. It is because of time
that waterbodies have lotuses in them. It is because of time that trees flourish in the forest. It is because of time that
the night is dark and cool. It is because of time that the disc of the moon becomes full. When it is not time, there
are no flowers or fruits in trees. When it is not time, rivers do not flow with force. When it is not time, birds, serpents, small animals, elephants and large predatory beasts on mountains do not become crazy[This is certainly a reference to sexual desire.]. When it is not
time, women do not conceive. When it is not time, winter, summer and the monsoons do not arrive. When it is not
time, one does not die, nor is one born. When it is not time, a child does not begin to speak. When it is not time,
youth does not arrive. When it is not time, seeds do not sprout. When it is not time, the sun does not appear. When
it is not time, it does not set behind Mount Asta. When it is not time, the moon does not wax and wane, nor do the
large waves of the ocean ebb and rise.

'"O Yudhishthira! On this, there is an ancient history that is recounted. In great grief, King Senajit sang a
song[The song is being indirectly reported and is therefore not within quotes.]. All mortals are touched by this extremely difficult revolution. All men are ripened by time and die. O
king! Some men kill others, and in turn, those men are slain by others. O king! This is the understanding of the
worlds. But no one is killed and no one kills. Some think there are killers. Others think that there are no killers.
The creation and destruction of beings is determined by their nature. When prosperity is destroyed and one's wife,
son or father dies, one cries out in grief. One reflects on this sorrow and acts accordingly. O stupid one! Why do
you sorrow? Why do you grieve, since you will also be grieved over? Consider the sorrow amidst all the sorrows
and the fear amidst all fears. This body is not mine. Nothing in the earth is mine. He who realizes that what is mine
also belongs to others is not confounded. There are thousands of reasons for sorrow and hundreds of reasons for
joy. From one day to another, the foolish are submerged in this, but not the one who is learned. In the course of
time, there are separate reasons for affection and aversion and beings are whirled around in unhappiness and in
happiness. There is only unhappiness and no happiness. This is sometimes perceived. However, unhappiness results from desire and happiness results from unhappiness. There is unhappiness at the end of happiness and happiness at the end of unhappiness. One cannot obtain unhappiness all the time. Nor can one obtain happiness all the
time. There is unhappiness at the end of happiness. There is happiness at the end of unhappiness. Therefore, anyone who desires eternal happiness should discard these opposite sentiments. When there is sorrow or torment,
when one is senseless with grief, one must abandon the root of that grief, like severing a limb of the body. Whether
it is happiness or unhappiness, whether it is pleasant or unpleasant, the one who is unvanquished in his heart will
regard this as something that was bound to happen. If you do something that is only a little unpleasant towards
your wives or your sons, you will know who, whose, why and how[The sense is that these relationships are driven by selfish motives and
therefore, not permanent.]. Those who are the greatest fools in this
world and those who have obtained supreme intelligence are the ones who are in the midst of happiness. Suffering
is for those who are in the middle. O Yudhishthira! This is what the immensely wise Senajit said. He knew about
cause and effect in this world, about dharma and about happiness and unhappiness. He who delights in the sorrow
of someone else will never be happy. There is no end to sorrows, since there is a succession of them. Happiness
and unhappiness, existence and non-existence, gain and loss and death and life touch everyone on this earth in
turn. One with fortitude is not delighted or angry at this. For a king, it is said that fighting and protection are like
the consecration at a sacrifice, appropriate use of the rod is yoga, the renunciation of wealth is the dakshina in a
sacrifice and complete knowledge is the purification. By governing the kingdom with intelligence and policy, by
controlling selfishness in the soul, by performing sacrifices and by roaming through all the worlds as someone immersed in dharma, after casting aside a body, a great-souled one[A king.] finds delight in the world of the gods. Being
victorious in battle, protecting the kingdom, drinking soma, making the subjects prosper, upholding subjects with
the rod of chastisement and dying in a battle, he finds delight in the world of the gods. Having studied all the Vedas
and the sacred texts, having protected the kingdom well and having established the four varnas in their own dharma, the king purifies his soul and finds delight in the world of the gods. When a king has ascended to heaven, if
men, inhabitants of the city and the country and advisers bow down before his conduct, he is the best of kings."'
