'Bhishma said, "O lord of men! O mighty-armed one! Then Shikhandi's mother told her husband everything about
the maiden Shikhandi. 'O king! I was without a son and was scared of my co-wives. Though Shikhandi was born
as a girl, I reported that she was male. O best of men! O bull among kings! Out of affection towards me, you performed the rites for a son, though those for a daughter should have been performed. O king! Then you got the
daughter of the lord of Dasharna as a wife. You remembered the purport of the words the god had spoken earlier.
Though born as a girl, she would become a man later. So we overlooked it.' On hearing this, Drupada Yajnasena
reported the entire truth to his advisers. O king! The king consulted with them, about what should be done to protect the subjects. O Indra among men! Though he had himself deceived the king of Dasharna, he was certain the
matrimonial alliance was an appropriate one and was attentive to the consultations. O descendant of the Bharata
lineage! The city was naturally protected for times of emergency. O Indra among kings! He fortified it more and
adorned it everywhere. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Together with his wife, the king was extremely distressed at this enmity with the lord of Dasharna. Thinking about this great enmity with his in-law in his mind, he
began to worship the gods. O king! On seeing him thus devoted to the gods and worshipping them, his wife, the
queen, spoke these words. 'In times of prosperity, the worship of the gods is truly praised by the virtuous. Great
worship is recommended for those who are immersed in an ocean of grief. Worship all the gods. Let there be large
quantities of donations. Let oblations be offered into the fire, so that Dasharna can be countered. O lord! Think in
your mind about how he can be restrained without a fight. Through the grace of the gods, all of this will happen. O
one with the large eyes! Have consultations with your ministers, so that the city is not destroyed. O king! Act accordingly. O lord of the earth! Destiny, together with human endeavour, brings great success. But when they act
against each other, neither succeeds. Therefore, together with your advisers, take appropriate measures for the city.
O lord of the earth! Then worship the gods, as you please.' The spirited maiden, Shikhandi, was overcome with
grief at seeing them converse in this fashion and was filled with shame. She thought, 'It is because of me that both
of them are suffering.' She made up her mind to kill herself.

'"Having been overcome by terrible misery, she decided this and left the residence for the deep and deserted forest. O king! This happened to be ruled by a yaksha[Yakshas are semi-divine species and companions of Kubera, the god of treasure.] named Sthunakarna. O lord! Because they were afraid of
him, people avoided that forest. Sthuna's abode was constructed with bricks and was plastered white. It was full of
smoke from parched grain. It had high walls and a gate. O king! Drupada's daughter, Shikhandi, entered there. She
fasted for many days and dried her body out. The yaksha Sthuna had eyes like honey and showed himself to her.

'Why have you begun to do this? Tell me and I will do it without any delay.' She replied to the yaksha, 'This is impossible to accomplish.' However, the guhyaka[Demi-gods similar to the yakshas, companions of Kubera.] told her, 'I will do it. O daughter of a king! I am the follower of
the lord of riches[Kubera.]. I am one who grants boons. I will even give what cannot be granted. Tell me what you wish.'

O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Then Shikhandi told everything, in complete detail, to the foremost of yak-
shas, Sthunarkarna. 'O yaksha! My father faces a calamity and will soon be destroyed. In great anger, the lord of
Dasharna is invading him. The king with the golden armour[The text uses the word Hemakavacha, translated as golden (hema) armour (kavacha). This has the same meaning as Hiranyavarma, so Hemakavacha can also be interpreted as a proper name.] is great in his strength and great in his energy. O
yaksha! Therefore, save me and my father and my mother. You have promised that you will relieve my unhappiness. O yaksha! O unblemished one! Through your favours, make me a man, before that king attacks my city. O
great yaksha! O guhyaka! Bestow your favours on me.'"'
