Uma asked, "Through what kind of conduct, behaviour, deeds and donations does a man obtain heaven?"

'"'Maheshvara replied, "O goddess! If a man is generous, honours brahmanas, is compassionate towards the distressed and the blind, donates food, grain, drink and garments, constructs dwelling houses, assemblies, wells, lakes and ponds and cheerfully gives all those who desire, and not just one single person, seats, beds,
vehicles, riches, jewels, houses, all kinds of grain, cattle, fields and women-when such a person dies, he obtains
the world of the gods. He dwells there for a long period of time, enjoying all the objects of pleasure. With apsaras
for company, he sports and obtains bliss in Nandana and other pleasure gardens. Thereafter, when he is dislodged
from heaven, he is reborn in the world of men. O goddess! However, he is born in a family that possesses all the
objects of pleasure, with riches and grain. With all the qualities of desire, he finds delight there. Such a man is
prosperous. He has large stores of treasure and many objects of pleasure. O goddess! In this way, a person who is
generous in his conduct towards all creatures obtains all the objects of pleasure and is handsome in every way.
Brahma himself spoke about this in ancient times. O goddess! There are others who are niggardly in giving to
brahmanas. They are limited in intelligence and do not give, even when they have possessions. Even when they see
distressed, blind and afflicted people and mendicants and guests who are seeking, they turn them away. They are
addicted to their own tongues and greed. They do not give riches, garments, objects of pleasure, food, gold, cattle,
not even food that is not good. They follow evil conduct. They are greedy and non-believers. They are devoid of
generosity. O goddess! Such foolish men always go to hell. After some time has passed, they are reborn as men.
But these ones, limited in intelligence, are born in families that lack riches. They are overwhelmed by hunger and
thirst. They do not enjoy the objects of pleasure. They lose hope about obtaining all the objects of pleasure. They
subsist by following inferior methods of living. Such men are born in families that have few objects of pleasure.
They suffer from ill fortune. O goddess! It is through their own deeds that these men are born poor. There are others who are insolent and proud, always addicted to wicked deeds. Lacking sense, they do not offer seats, even to
those who deserve them. Limited in intelligence, they do not yield right of way to those who should be granted
right of way. Limited in intelligence, they do not offer padya to those who should be offered padya. They do not
follow the ordinances and worship and honour those who should be revered by giving them arghya. Limited in intelligence, they do not offer arghya and water for ablutions to those who deserve them. When a preceptor arrives,
they do not treat the preceptor with the affection that he deserves. Their conduct is driven by insolence and they
are full of greed. They disrespect those who should be revered. They seek to subjugate their seniors. O goddess!
Such kinds of men always go to hell. After many years have passed, these men overcome hell and are born again,
but in inferior families. Those insensible people, those who disrespect their preceptors and seniors, are born in inferior lineages, like those of svapakas and pulkasas[Pulkasas are same as pukkasas.]. A person who is not insolent and proud, one who worships
gods and brahmanas, one who bows down before everyone and uses sweets words, one who does what is agreeable
to all varnas and is always engaged in the welfare of all beings, is honoured in the worlds. Such a person does not
hate. He is pleasant and gentle in his words. His speech is always agreeable. He does not cause injury to any being
and has words of welcome for everyone. He always observes the virtuous ordinances and worships those who deserve to be shown respect. He yields the right of way to those who should be given right of way. He worships preceptors as a preceptor should be worshipped. He receives guests who arrive and honours the others who come. O
goddess! Such men obtain the destination of heaven. When such a person is reborn as a man, this occurs in a superior family. There are all the objects of pleasure there and the family possesses all the jewels. He follows supreme
dharma and donates to those who should be given. He is revered by all creatures. All the worlds bow down before
him. Such a man always obtains these fruits because of his own deeds. He obtains a superior lineage and associates
with those who are superior. I have spoken about the dharma that the creator himself spoke about. There may be a
person who is fierce in conduct. All creatures are terrified of him. He strikes them with his hands and feet and
sticks, or binds them up in ropes. O beautiful one! He stupefies creatures with bricks and other methods and ties
them up. He is deceitful in his intelligence, causing violence and agitation. He always attacks creatures and makes
them anxious. A person who shows this kind of conduct goes to hell. After some time has passed, he is born as a
man. However, he is reborn in an inferior family and has to face many kinds of impediments and hardships. This
wicked man hated creatures and these are the fruits of his own deeds. O goddess! Know that this man's relatives
and friends also have similar natures. There may be another person who is seen to be compassionate towards all
creatures. He looks on everyone with a friendly eye, and treats them the way a father treats his son. He is in control
of his senses and is without any enmity. He does not agitate creatures or cause any violence to them. He controls
his hands and feet and offers assurance to all beings. He does not use ropes, rods, sticks and weapons to agitate
creatures. He is gentle in his deeds and is full of compassion. A person with good conduct of this nature obtains
heaven. He obtains delight in that divine residence, dwelling like a god. After those deeds have been exhausted, he
is reborn in the mortal world as a human. However, when he is born, he faces no hardships or impediments and obtains happiness. Without any effort, he obtains happiness. Such a man is always without any anxiety. O goddess!
These are the paths of the virtuous, where there are no obstructions."

'"'Uma said, "Some men are seen to be accomplished in commentaries and debating. They are full of jnana and
vijnana. They are wise and learned about meanings. O god! There are others who find wisdom difficult to obtain.
They are devoid of jnana and vijnana. Through what specific deeds does a man become wise? O Virupaksha! How
does a man become limited in wisdom? O supreme among those who know about all kinds of dharma! Dispel my
doubt about this. O god! Some are born blind. Others are afflicted by disease. Some men are seen to be eunuchs.
Tell me the reason for this."

'"'Maheshvara replied, "There are brahmanas who are learned about the Vedas. They are successful and know
about dharma. They incessantly ask about what is good and what is bad. They avoid inauspicious deeds and practise the auspicious ones. They always obtain heaven and happiness in this world. When they are reborn as men,
they become intelligent. They are learned and wise and obtain what is beneficial. If a foolish person looks at another person's wife with a wicked eye, because of that evil sentiment, he is reborn as a blind person. With wicked intent, if a man looks at naked women, because of that evil deed, he is reborn as a person who is afflicted with disease. If a foolish man is evil in conduct and engages in an act of sexual intercourse with someone from another
varna, because of that lack of wisdom, he is reborn as an eunuch. A man who binds animals, violates his preceptor's bed and indulges in indiscriminate sexual intercourse, is reborn as one who is impotent."

'"'Uma asked, "What are virtuous deeds? What leads to hell? O supreme among gods! How can a man obtain
what is beneficial?"

'"'Maheshvara replied, "A person who wishes to stay on the virtuous path must always ask brahmanas. A person who searches for dharma and desires the qualities obtains heaven. O goddess! Thereafter, when he is reborn as
a human, he is intelligent and wise and retains his memory. O goddess! This is the revered dharma of the virtuous
and it leads to prosperity. For the welfare of men, I have told you about this."

'"'Uma said, "There are men who are limited in knowledge. They hate dharma. They do not desire to approach
brahmanas who are learned in the Vedas. There are other men who follow vows and are full of devotion and selfcontrol. There are others who deviate from vows and rituals and are like rakshasas. Some perform sacrifices. Others do not offer oblations. What kind of deeds lead to these outcomes? Tell me."

'"'Maheshvara replied, "For the worlds, the ordinances of dharma have been laid down earlier in the sacred
texts. However, even those who are firm in vows are subsequently seen to become ordinary in conduct. Because
they are overcome by delusion, those who speak about dharma practise adharma. Those who deviate from their
vows and ordinances are said to become Brahma-rakshasas[A brahmana who is reborn as a rakshasa.]. After some time has passed, they regain their enterprise and are reborn as humans. However, they do not offer oblations. They do not utter vashatkara and are the
worst among men. O goddess! I have thus dispelled all your doubts. I have told you about what is good and bad for
men and about the ocean of dharma."'"'
