'Yudhishthira said, "There are hidden beings here, powerful rakshasas. O Vrikodara! We are capable of passing
them with fire and austerities. O Kounteya! Resorting to strength, control your hunger and thirst. O extender of the
Kuru lineage! Resort to your strength and dexterity. You have heard the words of the rishi about Mount Kailasa. O
Kounteya! Use your intelligence to think about how Krishna will pass this place. O lord! Alternatively, return from
here with Sahadeva, Dhoumya, the cooks, the superintendents of the kitchen, all the servants, the chariots, the
horses and other brahmanas who cannot bear the difficulties of the road, with all of them. O Bhima! O one with the
large eyes! The three of us will go on, restrained in our food and rigid in our vows-the immensely ascetic Lo-
masha, I and Nakula. Wait carefully for my return at Gangadvara. Dwell there and protect Droupadi until I return."

'Bhima replied, "O descendant of the Bharata lineage! The princess is oppressed by exhaustion and miserable.
But in a desire to see Shvetavahana[Shvetavahana is literally one whose transport (vahana) is white (shveta) meaning one whose horses are
white. Arjuna's horses are white and Shvetavahana is one of Arjuna's names.], there is no doubt that she will travel. Your suffering is also acute at not being able to see him. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! It will be even more without Sahadeva, I and Krishna. If
you so wish, let all the chariots return with the servants, the cooks, the superintendents of the kitchen and whoever
else you think of. I do not wish to leave you here, in these mountains infested by rakshasas, in this uneven and difficult region. This immensely fortunate princess is devoted to her vows. O tiger among men! She will not be able
to return without you. Like that, Sahadeva is always devoted to you. I know his mind and he will never return. O
great king! In addition, all of us wish to see Savyasachi. All of us are desirous and therefore, all of us will travel
together. If we cannot use our chariots to travel over these mountains with many caverns, we will travel on foot. O
king! Do not worry. I will carry Panchali wherever she is incapable of travelling on her own. This is what I have
decided in accordance with my intelligence. O king! Do not worry. I will also carry these two delicate warriors
who are the delight of Madri[Nakula and Sahadeva.]. I will bear them over difficult terrain, if they are incapable of doing it
themselves."

'Yudhishthira said, "O Bhima! Since you have spoken like this, let your strength increase, so that you are capable of carrying Droupadi on this long journey, and also the twins. O fortunate one! No one else can do it. May your
strength, fame, devotion to dharma and deeds increase. O mighty-armed one! If you are able to carry your brothers
and Krishna, may you not suffer from exhaustion. May defeat never confront you."'

Vaishampayana said, 'Then the beautiful Krishna laughed and spoke these words. "O descendant of the Bharata
lineage[Droupadi is presumably speaking to Bhima. But it could be Yudhishthira too.]! I will travel. Do not be anxious on my account."

'Lomasha said, "It is possible to traverse Mount Gandhamadana with austerities. O Kounteya! O king! Therefore, let all of us be united with austerities-Nakula, Sahadeva, Bhimasena, I and you-so that we are able to see
Shvetavahana."'

Vaishampayana said, 'O king! Having happily conversed in this fashion, they happily saw the extensive region
of Subahu, prosperous with many elephants and horses, infested with kiratas, tanganas and full of hundreds of
kunindas[Kiratas, tanganas and kunindas are all mountain-dwelling hunter races.]. This Himalayan region is frequented by the gods and has many extraordinary things. On seeing
them, Subahu, lord of the kunindas, was extremely delighted. He met them at the frontiers and welcomed them
with homage. Having been thus worshipped, all of them happily dwelt there for some time. When the sun was
clear[That is, when the sun could be clearly seen.], they left for the Himalaya mountains. O king! The servants, Indrasena being the foremost, the superintendents of the kitchen, the cooks and all of Droupadi's retinue were entrusted by the maharathas to the king who
was the lord of the kunindas. The Pandavas, the immensely valorous descendants of the Kourava lineage, then
slowly left that region on foot, together with Krishna. They were extremely happy at the prospect of seeing
Dhananjaya.'
