Vaishampayana said, 'O Indra among kings! After the lords of the worlds had left, Partha, the destroyer of enemies, thought about the chariot of the king of the gods. As the intelligent Gudakesha was thinking, the immensely
resplendent chariot, driven by Matali, arrived. It removed the darkness from the sky and split the clouds. It filled
the directions with a roar like that of giant clouds. It was stocked with swords, terrible spears, fearful-looking
clubs, lances with divine power, giant flashes of lightning, vajras, hudagudas with wheels[A hudaguda is an iron club. However, an iron club cannot have wheels. So what is probably meant is some
kind of battering-ram made out of iron.], implements that created gusts of wind and sounded like peacocks and large clouds, and fearful nagas that were giant in form and tall as
white clouds and hard as rocks. The divine chariot, beautiful to the eye and full of maya, was drawn by ten thousand tawny horses that had the speed of the wind. He[Arjuna.] saw there the immensely radiant and extremely blue flag
known as Vaijayanta, as dark as a blue lotus[Indivara, a blue lotus.] and with a staff that was ornamented with gold. He saw the charioteer seated on the chariot, adorned in molten gold. On seeing him, the mighty-armed Partha took him to be a god.

'While Phalguna was thus debating, Matali approached and bowing low, addressed Arjuna in these words, "O
Shakra's son[Shakra is Indra and Arjuna was Indra's son.]! The illustrious Shakra desires to see you. Swiftly ascend this chariot that has been sent by Indra.
Your father Shatakratu, foremost among the gods, has told me, 'The thirty gods must see Kunti's son here in their
abode.' Surrounded by the gods and masses of rishis and gandharvas and apsaras, Shakra himself is anxiously
waiting to see you. On the instructions of the chastiser of Paka, ascend with me from this world to the world of the
gods. Once you have obtained the weapons, you will return." Arjuna replied, "O Matali! Let us go swiftly. Ascend
this supreme chariot that is difficult to obtain, even through a hundred rajasuya and ashvamedha sacrifices. Even
immensely fortunate kings, who have performed sacrifices and given a lot of dakshina, or daivatas[Daivata is a word used for the class of gods as a whole. In this context, it seems to mean the minor gods.] or danavas,
cannot ascend this supreme chariot. He who has not performed austerities cannot see this great and divine chariot,
or touch it. How can one ride it? O virtuous one! Once you have established yourself in the chariot and the horses
have been steadied, I will ascend it thereafter, like a performer of good deeds along the righteous path." Having
heard these words, Matali, Shakra's charioteer, swiftly ascended the chariot and controlled the horses with the
reins. After that, Arjuna purified himself by bathing in the Ganga. Then Kounteya, descendant of the Kuru
lineage[The word used is nandana. Hence alternatively, beloved of the Kuru lineage.], happily recited his prayers, in accordance with the rites. In accordance with the rites, he offered oblations
to the ancestors. Then he bid farewell to Mandara, king of the mountains. "O mountain! You are always the refuge
of righteous ones, those whose conduct follows dharma, the sages whose deeds are holy and those who desire to
traverse the road to heaven. O mountain! Through your favours, Brahmanas, Kshatriyas and Vaishyas attain heaven and devoid of afflictions, roam with the gods. O king of the mountains! O great mountain! You are the refuge of
sages and have places of pilgrimage. I have lived happily on you. But I must now leave, bidding you farewell. My
eyes have seen many of your peaks, groves, rivers, springs and sacred places of pilgrimage." With these words,
Arjuna, the destroyer of enemy warriors, bid farewell to the mountain. He then ascended the divine chariot, blazing
like the sun. It resembled the sun in its form. It was divine and the performer of extraordinary deeds. In a delighted
frame of mind, the intelligent descendant of the Kuru lineage[The word used is nandana.] ascended upwards.

'His path became invisible to mortal ones who roam on earth. He saw thousands of chariots that were extraordinary in form[The word used is vimana and vimanas are not ordinary chariots. They fly through the sky and are therefore,
divine chariots.]. There was no sun there, nor the moon, nor light, nor the fire. Everything shone there with the
radiance of purity. Those are the brilliant regions that are seen in the forms of stars[By implication, from the earth.]. Though they are very large,
because of the distance, they appear like lamps. Pandava saw them, full of radiance and beauty, resplendent in their
own fires and established in their own abodes. There were rajarshis, siddhas, warriors slain on the field of battle,
those who had obtained heaven through their austerities and had gathered in groups of hundreds, thousands of
gandharvas with an energy like that of the radiant sun, guhyakas, rishis and masses of apsaras. On beholding those
regions, with their own luminosity, Phalguna was astounded.

'In a friendly tone, he asked Matali and Matali replied, "O Partha! These are the performers of good deeds. They
are established in their own abodes. O lord! From the earth, you have seen them in the form of stars." Then he saw,
standing at the gate, the white elephant that is always victorious. This was the four-tusked Airavata, like Mount
Kailasa. Travelling along the road traversed by the siddhas, the supreme one of the Kuru and Pandava lineages,
shone, like the supreme king Mandhata in earlier times[Famous king whose story will be recounted in Section 33.]. The lotus-eyed one passed through worlds earmarked
for kings and then set his eyes on Amaravati, Shakra's city.'
