'Sanjaya said, "With three arrows, Virata pierced maharatha Bhishma. With another three arrows, he pierced the
maharatha's steeds. At this, Bhishma, Shantanu's son, the great archer, immensely strong and skilled in the use of
his hands, used ten gold-tufted arrows to pierce him back in return. With a firm hand, Drona's son, the maharatha
who was terrible in wielding the bow, used six arrows to pierce the wielder of Gandiva between his breasts. At
this, Phalguna, the slayer of enemy heroes, sliced down his bow. The destroyer of enemies used extremely sharp
arrows to wound him. He[Ashvatthama.] became senseless with rage and grasped an even more powerful bow. In that encounter, he could not tolerate his bow being sliced down by Partha. O king! He pierced Phalguna with nine sharp
arrows and pierced Vasudeva with seventy supreme arrows. At this, the eyes of Krishna and Phalguna became coppery red in wrath. They sighed long and deep and began to think repeatedly. The wielder of Gandiva, the destroyer
of enemies, grasped his bow with his left hand. He angrily affixed sharp and straight-tufted arrows. They were terrible and were capable of robbing one of one's life. In that encounter, he swiftly pierced Drona's son, supreme
among strong ones, with these. In that battle, they pierced through his armour and drank up his blood. But though
pierced by the wielder of Gandiva, Drona's son was not distressed. Without being perturbed, he showered back arrows in return. O king! In that battle, he wished to protect the one who was great in his vows[Bhishma.]. The bulls among
men applauded this great deed of his, of being able to counter the two Krishnas[Arjuna and Krishna.] together. He remained fearlessly stationed in that battle, fighting all the soldiers. From Drona, he had learnt about releasing and withdrawing extremely difficult weapons. 'This is the son of my preceptor. This is Drona's beloved son. In particular, he is a brahmana and is worthy of my veneration.' Thinking this, the brave Bibhatsu, the tormentor of his enemies and foremost among charioteers, showed mercy towards Bharadvaja's son. In that battle, Kounteya, the tormentor of his
enemies, gave up the fight with Drona's son. The brave one swiftly began to kill your soldiers.

'"Duryodhana pierced the mighty archer Bhimasena with ten gold-tufted arrows that had been sharpened on
stone and were shafted with the feathers of vultures. Extremely enraged, Bhimasena grasped a colourful and firm
bow, which was capable of slaying the enemy, and ten sharp arrows. He drew the bow back to his ear and aimed
those sharp, forceful and extremely energetic arrows. With these, he powerfully pierced the king of the Kurus on
his broad chest. A gem hung from his chest on golden threads. When he was pierced, this was as resplendent as the
sun surrounded by planets. When oppressed by Bhimasena, your energetic son could not tolerate it, like a snake
unable to bear the slap of a palm. O great king! He became extremely wrathful and desiring to protect his own soldiers, used gold-tufted arrows that were sharpened on stone to pierce Bhima. In that battle, they fought and wounded each other. Those two immensely strong sons of yours were like the gods.

'"Subhadra's son, the destroyer of enemy heroes, pierced Chitrasena, tiger among men, with ten arrows and Purumitra with seven. He was the equal of Shakra in battle and pierced Satyavrata with seventy. The brave one
seemed to dance around on the field, causing great grief to us. Chitrasena pierced him back with ten arrows, Saytavrata with nine and Purumitra with seven. He was pierced and wounded and was covered with blood. However,
Arjuna's son sliced down Chitrasena's great and colourful bow, which was capable of repulsing the enemy. He
used an arrow to pierce his armour and oppress him. At this, all the brave and maharatha princes on your side united together and angrily began to pierce him with sharp arrows. But he was supreme in the knowledge of weapons
and wounded all of them with sharp arrows. On witnessing this deed accomplished by him, your sons surrounded
him. He was capable of consuming soldiers in a battle, like a fire consumes deadwood in the forest after the winter
season is over. As he chastised your soldiers, Subhadra's son was radiant. O lord of the earth! On beholding the
deeds of Satvati's son[Subhadra belonged to the Yadava lineage and is being referred to as Satvati. Lakshmana was Duryodhana's
son.] in that battle, your grandson, Lakshmana, the bearer of auspicious marks, swiftly attacked him. Abhimanyu angrily pierced Lakshmana with six arrows and his charioteer with three. O king! But
Lakshmana pierced Subhadra's son with sharp arrows. O great king! This seemed to be extraordinary. Subhadra's
extremely powerful son used sharp arrows to slay Lakshmana's four arrows and his charioteer, and then attacked
him. When the horses were killed, Lakshmana, the destroyer of enemy heroes, remained stationed on his chariot.
He angrily hurled a javelin towards the chariot of Subhadra's son. It was terrible in form and unassailable and suddenly descended, like a snake. But Abhimanyu used sharp arrows to slice it down. At this, Goutama's son[Kripa.] took
Lakshmana up on his own chariot and carried him away on the chariot, while all the soldiers looked on.

'"That extremely fearful battle raged on. Warriors violently struck each other, wishing to kill each other. The
great archers on your side and the maharatha Pandavas fought each other in that battle, prepared to lay down their
lives and killing each other. Their hair was dishevelled. They lost their armour. They were bereft of their chariots.
Their bows were sliced down. The Srinjayas and the Kurus fought on, with their bare arms. The mighty-armed and
immensely strong Bhishma, angrily began to kill the soldiers of the great-souled Pandavas with divine weapons.
Horses, elephants, men, charioteers and horse-riders were slain and brought down there and the earth was covered
with them."'
