'Dhritarashtra said, "After speaking to Duryodhana, my son, who has always transgressed me, the preceptor was
overcome by anger and penetrated the Pandavas. The brave one is extremely skilled in weapons. He entered and
roamed around in the battle. How did the Pandavas counter the great archer, Drona? Who protected the right wheel
of the great-souled preceptor? When he killed the enemies in the battle, who protected his left wheel? The one who
is supreme among all wielders of weapons seemed to be dancing along the path of his chariot. He was as angry as
a fire[The text uses the word dhumaketu. Dhumaketu has different meanings. Given the context, fire is most
appropriate.]. How did he come by his death?"

'Sanjaya replied, "Having killed Saindhava in the evening, Partha met the king[Arjuna and Yudhishthira respectively.] and the great archer, Satyaki,
and then attacked Drona. Yudhishthira and Pandava Bhimasena also quickly attacked Drona, each with a separate
army. So did the intelligent Nakula and the invincible Sahadeva. Dhrishtadyumna, Shatanika[This is almost certainly a typo. Shatanika is Droupadi's son through Nakula and there is no particular reason for
singling him out. It should probably read sahanika instead of Shatanika, meaning that Dhrishtadyumna had attacked with his soldiers. In any event, Droupadi's sons are mentioned later.], Virata with the
Kekayas, the Matsyas and the Shalveya soldiers also began to fight with Drona. O king! King Drupada, Dhrishtadyumna's father, was protected by the Panchalas and advanced against Drona. The great archers, Droupadi's
sons, and the rakshasa Ghatotkacha also attacked the immensely illustrious Drona, with their soldiers. There were
six thousand Prabhadrakas and Panchalas, skilled in striking. With Shikhandi at the forefront, they advanced
against Drona. With other tigers among men, the maharatha Pandavas attacked Drona, bull among brahmanas. O
bull among the Bharata lineage! When those brave ones advanced to fight, it was already night. It was fierce and
increased the fear of cowards. O king! At that inauspicious and terrible time, many warriors went to their destruction. It caused the death of elephants, horses and elephants. During that terrible night, jackals howled in all directions. They caused great fear, because their gaping mouths were blazing. Fierce owls could be seen and they
caused great terror. In particular, they were perched on the standards of the Kouravas. O Indra among kings! A
great roar arose among the soldiers. This mingled with the loud sound of battle drums and the blare of other drums,
and with the trumpeting of elephants and the neighing of horses. There was the sound of hooves and a tumultuous
noise spread everywhere. O great king! In that twilight hour, there was a fierce battle between Drona and all the
Srinjayas. Darkness covered the earth and nothing could be seen. The dust raised by the soldiers covered everything. Men, horses and elephants were immersed in blood. The earth's dust could no longer be seen and we were
full of lassitude. During that night, a terrible slapping sound could be heard. It arose from the clashing of weapons
and was like the noise of bamboos being burnt in a forest in the mountains. O king! Because everything was covered in darkness, one could not distinguish one's own side from that of the enemy. At the beginning of that night,
everyone seemed to be mad. O Indra among kings! The dust that arose from the earth settled down because of the
blood. The darkness disappeared because of the golden radiance of armour and ornaments. O bull among the
Bharata lineage! The army of the Bharatas was adorned with gems and gold and looked like the sky in the night,
decorated with stars. Full of lances and standards, that place resounded with the noise of jackals and wild crows
and fierce cries and roars made by those who were fighting. There was a great and tumultuous sound and it made
the body hair stand up. All the directions were covered by the uproar, which was like the sound of the great Indra's
vajra. O great king! In that night, the soldiers of the Bharatas could be seen, illuminated with armlets, golden earrings and the radiance of weapons. There were elephants and chariots, decorated in gold. During that night, they
looked like clouds tinged with lightning. Swords, lances, clubs, arrows, maces, javelins and battleaxes were seen to
descend, flaming like fires. Duryodhana was like the wind at the front. The chariots and elephants were like clouds.
The sound of musical instruments was like thunder. The bows and standards were like lightning. Drona and the
Pandavas were like clouds. The swords, javelins and clubs were like thunder. The shower of arrows was like a terrible wind, both hot and cold. It was fierce and caused extreme astonishment. It was destructive of life and there
was no escape. Without any fear, the soldiers entered there, wishing to fight. At the beginning of that terrible night,
there was a great roar that created fear among cowards and delighted heroes. An extremely terrible and fierce battle
commenced in the night, as the Pandus and Srinjayas united and angrily attacked Drona. O king! But all those who
advanced against the great-souled one were forced to retreat and some others were sent to Yama's eternal abode."'
