Vaishampayana said, 'Having been thus addressed, the powerful and mighty-armed Bhimasena prostrated himself
before his brother and happily spoke these gentle words to Hanuman, lord of the monkeys. "Since I have been able
to see your illustrious self, no one is more fortunate than I am. Since I have been able to see you, this is a great
favour to me. But I desire that you should today do that which is my wish. O brave one! I wish to see your unmatched form that you assumed when you leapt across the ocean, the abode of sharks. I will then be satisified and
will have faith in your words." Having been thus addressed, the energetic ape began to laugh and said, "Neither
you, nor anyone else, can see that form of mine. That was in another age that no longer exists. Time was different
in krita yuga and it is different in treta and dvapara[The four eras (yuga) are satya (or krita), treta, dvapara and kali. The incidents of the Ramayana occurred in
treta yuga and those of the Mahabharata in dvapara yuga. Dharma decays as one moves down these eras.]. This is the time of decay and I no longer possess that form.
The earth, rivers, ranges, mountains, siddhas, gods and maharshis must all conform to time and adjust their forms
from one yuga to another yuga. Strength, size and power decline, and then increase again. O extender of the Kuru
lineage! Therefore, do not wish to see that form. I am conforming to the rules of the yugas and no one can overcome time." Bhima said, "Then tell me the number of yugas and the conduct from one yuga to another yuga. What
are the different forms of dharma, kama and artha, and variations in size, influence, existence and death?"

'Hanuman replied, "O son! Krita is the yuga when dharma is eternal. At the time of krita, supreme among yu-
gas, there are no deeds to be done. Dharma knew no decay then. Nor were beings destroyed. That is the reason this
yuga was known as krita[The word krita has several meanings and one meaning is done or accomplished. The sense is that deeds
were accomplished in krita yuga.]. Those qualities have gone now. O son! In krita yuga, there are no gods, demons,
gandharvas, yakshas, rakshasas or serpents. There is no buying or selling. The sounds of Rig, Sama and Yajur did
not exist. Nor did rites, or manual labour. When thought of, the desired fruits appeared. The only dharma was sannyasa. At the conjunction of the yugas, there is no disease, or decay of the senses. There is no discontentment, no
lamentation, no insolence, no wickedness, no strife, no laziness, no enmity, no distortion, no fear, no sorrow, no
envy and no jealousy. The supreme brahman, the supreme objective of all yogis, and the white Narayana were then
in the souls of all beings. Brahmanas, kshatriyas, vaishyas and shudras were all auspiciously marked in krita yuga
and were equal in deportment. All beings were engaged in their own tasks. The stages of life, conduct, knowledge,
wisdom and deed were equally distributed among the varnas and all of them obtained equal dharma. All of them
were united with one Veda. All rituals were performed with one mantra. Though they may have followed different
forms of dharma, they actually followed one Veda and one dharma. They followed the four ashramas and performed tasks without seeking the fruits, in accordance with the dictates of that time. They attained the supreme objective. Everyone sought for yoga in one's soul and being united with dharma, attained the objective. In krita yuga,
the four varnas had four eternal feet[Dharma has four feet (pada) in krita yuga, three in treta, two in dvapara and one in kali. The face of a dice
with four spots is also called krita, with three treta, with two dvapara and with one kali.]. This was known as krita yuga, devoid of the three qualities[The three qualities (guna) are sattva, rajas and tamas. These were irrelevant in krita yuga.]."
'"Now hear about treta yuga. Sacrifices were introduced then. Dharma decayed by one quarter then and
Achyuta[Narayana or Vishnu.] assumed a red complexion. Men were always addicted to the truth and devoted to the dharma of rituals. Sacrifices were introduced and many rituals became part of dharma in treta. These were motivated by reasons
and rituals and donations were because of the fruits that they would bring. People never deviated from the path of
dharma and were devoted to austerities and donations. In treta yuga, people performed deeds in accordance with
their own dharma.

'"In dvapara yuga, dharma decayed by half. Vishnu assumes a yellow complexion and there are four Vedas.
Some people know four Vedas. Others know three, or two, or one. Still others know no hymns. The sacred texts
have thus been divided into many parts and there are many rituals. Beings are engaged in austerities and donations
because of their passions[In a desire for the fruits of these deeds.]. Because the single Veda is no longer known, the Vedas have been divided into many
parts. There has been a deviation from the truth and there are only a few who are established in the truth. When
one deviates from the truth, one becomes a prey to many diseases. One resorts to desire and there are many natural
disasters. Being afflicted by these, some men resort to terrible austerities. Others, motivated by a desire to attain
heaven, resort to deeds. Thus, having attained dvapara, beings decay because they are no longer devoted to
dharma.

'"O Kounteya! Only one quarter of dharma remains in kali yuga. When this yuga arrives, Keshava's complexion
becomes black. The rituals of the Vedas, dharma, sacrifices and deeds fall into disuse. There is excessive rain, disease, sin and vices like anger. There are many natural calamities. There are ailments and sicknesses. As the yugas
proceed, dharma repeatedly decays. As dharma decays, beings repeatedly deteriorate. As beings deteriorate, the
forces that sustain the world also go into a decline. As the yugas decay, even tasks performed in the name of dharma lead to perverse outcomes. This is the name of kali yuga, which will soon manifest itself. Even those who live
for a long time must conform to the changes in the yugas. O destroyer of enemies! You were curious to know
everything about me. Why should a learned man wish to know about things that are useless? O mighty-armed one!
I have told you everything that you had asked me, including about the number of yugas. May you be blessed.
Leave now."'
