Janamejaya said, 'O one rich in austerities! When the Vrishnis and the Pandavas met in the tirtha of Prabhasa, what
did they do? What did they converse about? All of them were great-souled and they were skilled in the use of
every weapon. The Vrishnis and the Pandavas were well-wishers of each other.'

Vaishampayana said, 'Having arrived at the sacred tirtha of Prabhasa, on the shores of the great ocean, the Vrishnis surrounded the heroic Pandavas and offered them homage. Then Vanamali Rama[Vanamali means one who wears a garland of wild flowers and is usually Krishna's epithet. But here, it is being used for Balarama.], the wielder of the
plough, the one who is as white as cow's milk, the kunda flower[Jasmine.], the moon, the lotus and silver, spoke to the
lotus-eyed one[Krishna.]. "O Krishna! The pursuit of dharma does not lead to good and the pursuit of that which is not
dharma does not lead to defeat. The great-souled Yudhishthira wears matted hair and is miserable in the forest,
clad in the bark of trees. Duryodhana is the ruler of the earth and the earth does not swallow him up. From this, a
man with limited intelligence will think that the pursuit of that which is not dharma is superior to dharma. When
Duryodhana prospers and Yudhishthira is in grief, robbed of his kingdom, what is the duty of subjects in the matter? This is a doubt that perplexes men. This was a lord of men whose power was dharma. He followed the path of
truth and dharma and was generous. Partha gave up his kingdom and his happiness. Should one forsake dharma
and prosper? After banishing the Parthas, will Bhishma, the brahmana Kripa, Drona and the king[Dhritarashtra.], the eldest of
the lineage, find happiness? Shame on the evil-minded chiefs of the Bharata lineage! In the hereafter, what will
that evil chief of the earth[Dhritarashtra.] tell his ancestors, when he meets them? Having deprived his innocent sons[The Pandavas. The word son is being used in a loose sense.] of the
kingdom, will he be able to say that he has treated his sons properly? He does not see with his intelligence the reasons behind his having been born sightless, among all the kings of this earth. It is because he banished the
Kounteyas from the kingdom. There is no doubt that Vichitravirya's son[Vichitravirya was Dhritarashtra's father.], together with his sons, after the performance of this cruel act, will not see trees of gold blossom in the world of the ancestors. Yudhishthira and his
younger brothers are armed. They are tall, wide of shoulder and have red eyes. Did he not ask them and hear their
reply? How could he have fearlessly banished them to the forest? Without any weapons, the long-armed Vrikodara
can slay a large army of enemies. On hearing his roars, soldiers release their bowels and their bladders. He suffers
now from hunger and thirst and is emaciated from journeys. But when he meets them, he will have weapons and
arrows in his hands. He will then remember the extremely terrible dwelling in the forest. I am certain that he will
not leave any survivors. On this earth, there will be no one else who is his equal in valour and strength. He is now
thin from cold, heat, wind and sun. But in battle, he will not leave any survivors. Atiratha Vrikodara conquered the
kings of the east[Bhima's conquest of the east has been described in Section 23 (Volume 2).] in battle, together with their followers, alone on a chariot and swiftly returned, unharmed,
even though he is now miserable in the forest and is clad in barks. Look now at Sahadeva, an ascetic dressed in the
garb of an ascetic now. In Dantakura, he defeated all the lords, the kings who had assembled from the south[Sahadeva's conquest of the south has been described in Section 23 (Volume 2). Dantakura was the capital of
Kalinga and there may be a typo here. Kalinga is not in the south and there is no mention of Dantakura in Section
Twenty Three (Volume 2).].
This brave one[Referring to Nakula. Nakula's conquest of the west has been described in Section 23 (Volume 2).], valorous in battle and alone on a chariot, conquered the kings of the west. He now lives in the
forest on roots and fruit. He now sports matted hair and has dirt smeared on his body. This queen[Droupadi.], the daughter
of an atiratha, arose from a prosperous sacrificial altar. She was always accustomed to a life of comfort and ease.
How can she endure the great misery of dwelling in the forest? These are the sons of Dharma[The text refers to Dharma tangentially. The three objectives of worldly existence (trivarga) are dharma,
artha and kama and foremost among them is dharma. Instead of saying Dharma, the text says the foremost of
trivarga.], the wind, the
lord of the gods and the Ashvins. They are the sons of the gods and deserve to be happy. Deprived of happiness,
how can they roam around in the forest? Dharma's son was conquered, together with his wife, his brothers and his
attendants, and was driven out. Duryodhana has begun to flourish. Why did the earth, with all her mountains, not
collapse?"'
