'Brihadashva said, "After Bhima's daughter had chosen Nishadha and the immensely energetic lords of the worlds
were returning, they saw Dvapara, together with Kali[In the four yuga cycle, dvapara and kali are the third and the fourth yuga, with dharma progressively declining as one moves down the yugas. Here, the third and the fourth yugas have been personified.]. On seeing Kali, Shakra, the slayer of Bala and Vritra,
asked him, 'O Kali! Tell me where you are going with Dvapara.' Then Kali told Shakra, 'I am going to Damayanti's svayamvara. My mind has gone out to her. On going there, I will choose her.' Indra smilingly told him, 'The
svayamvara is over. In our presence, she has chosen King Nala as her husband.' Thus addressed by Shakra, Kali
was struck with rage. He spoke to all the gods and uttered these words, 'In the midst of all the gods, she has chosen
a man as her husband. Because of that, she certainly deserves severe chastisement.' When Kali spoke in this fashion, the gods replied, 'It is with our sanction that Damayanti has chosen Nala. Since he possesses all the qualities,
who would not choose King Nala? He knows everything about dharma and observes all the vows. Truth, perseverance, generosity, austerity, purity, self-control and pacification can be found in him. It is certain that this king, tiger
among men, is the equal of the lords of the worlds. O Kali! Such are the qualities of Nala. The deluded one, who
wishes to curse him, only curses himself and kills himself. He suffers difficulties and immerses himself in a bottomless and great hell, without any means of crossing it.' Thus speaking to Kali and Dvapara, the gods left for
heaven.

'"When the gods had departed, Kali told Dvapara, 'O Dvapara! I cannot control my anger. I will take possession
of Nala. I will dislodge him from his kingdom. He will not be able to sport with Bhima's daughter. Help me by entering the dice[Dvapara is also the side of a dice marked with two points, satya or krita with four points, treta with three
points and kali with one point.].'"'