'Narada said, "When the festivities ended, the two great ones wished to conquer the three worlds. Having obtained
the permission of their well-wishers and elders among the daityas, arranging their army and having sought counsel
and performed the required rites, they set out in the night, when the constellation Magha[Magha is one of the twenty-seven lunar mansions or nakshatras, specifically, the tenth. Nakshatra can be
translated as star, but not all nakshatras are stars. Sometimes, they are constellations. For instance, Magha is actually a constellation with five stars.] was in the ascendant. A
large army of daityas went with them, carrying clubs, pikes, spears, all following the same dharma[The critical edition has dharma. Some other editions have varma or armour, in which case, the army would
have been clad in armour. Given the context, varma is more appropriate.]. Charanas[Bards.]
sung their praises in auspicious songs that wished them victory. They set out with happiness in their hearts. The
two daityas could assume any form at will and were intoxicated at the prospect of war. They rose into the sky and
went to the habitation of the gods. Knowing that they were coming and aware of the boon that they had obtained
from the illustrious one, the gods fled heaven[Heaven needs explanation, the word used in Sanskrit is trivishtapa. More accurately, the word should be
translated as Indra's world. There were thirty (or thirty-three) gods. Even more accurately, trivishtapa should be
translated as the world of the thirty.] and went to Brahma's world. With their terrible valour, they conquered Indra's world and defeated masses of yakshas[Yakshas are a semi-divine species and companions of Kubera, the god of treasure.] and rakshas[Rakshas or rakshasas are demons and evil spirits, but a distinct species from daityas. Rakshas are also
guardians or protectors and that sense is more relevant in this context.] and beings that frequent the sky. The two
great asuras then vanquished the nagas[Serpants. Throughout the translation, we have used serpents for nagas and snakes for sarpas. Nagas are not
quite snakes. They are semi-divine, can assume human forms and live in specific regions. All these traits are uncharacteristic of snakes.] who dwell in the interior regions of the earth, all those who live in the
oceans and all the mleccha[A mleccha is a barbarian, meaning that mlecchas do not speak Sanskrit and are not aryas.] races.

'"The two who were terrible in their rule, wished to subjugate the entire earth. They summoned their soldiers
and uttered these harsh words. 'With their great sacrifices and offerings, the rajarshis[Royal sages.] and brahmanas increase
the energy, strength and prosperity of the gods. Because of these acts, they cause injury to the asuras. Together, we
must attack and completely destroy them.' Having thus ordered them on the eastern shores of the great ocean, they
set out in all directions with this cruel resolution in mind. The two powerful ones killed those who sacrificed and
brahmanas who officiated at sacrifices, wherever they were seen. In hermitages of rishis who had controlled their
souls, their soldiers grasped the sacrificial fires and flung them irreverently away. Because of the boon granted to
them, the curses of the great-souled and angry ascetics had no effect. When the brahmanas saw that their curses
had no effect, like when arrows strike stone, they gave up their vows and fled in all directions. Like snakes fleeing
at the approach of Vinata's son[Garuda.], those on earth who were successful in austerities and were self-controlled and
calm, ran away. All the hermitages were destroyed, the pots and ladles were broken and scattered. The entire universe was empty, as if it was the time of final destruction.

'"When the rajarshis and rishis disappeared into hiding, the great asuras united in their decision to kill. They
changed their forms and assumed ones of mad, rutting elephants with their temples oozing, and sent those who
were in inaccessible regions to Yama's abode. Sometimes they became lions and yet again, tigers. They also became invisible. With these forms, they slaughtered the rishis wherever they found them. Sacrifices and studying
ceased and the brahmanas were exterminated. The earth bereft of festivals and sacrifices cried out in fear. All buying and selling ended. The worship of the gods was stopped. Sacred rites and marriages were not observed. Agriculture and the tending of cattle ended. Cities and hermitages were destroyed. Strewn with bones and skeletons,
the earth was terrible to behold. Ceremonies for the ancestors were no longer observed. The sacred chants ceased.
The universe was terrible and loathsome to behold. On witnessing these acts of Sunda and Upasunda, the moon,
the sun, the planets, the stars, the constellations and the dwellers of heaven were depressed. Thus subjugating all
the directions with their terrible acts, the two daityas lived in Kurukshetra, after vanquishing every enemy."'
