Yudhishthira said, "O grandfather! You have spoken to me about the supreme donation of cows. This is especially true of kings who look towards dharma. A kingdom is always full of misery. It cannot be sustained by a
person who is ignorant. A family is the source of misery. It is difficult for a person who has not cleansed his soul to
bear that burden. Most kings fail to obtain an auspicious end. However, by donating the earth, they can always purify themselves. O descendant of the Kuru lineage! You have spoken to me about dharma earlier. In that way, you
have told me about the gift Nriga made of cattle. You have told me about the earlier instructions of rishi Nachiketa.
The Vedas and the Upanishads have instructed that in all rites and in all sacrifices, dakshina must be in the form of
land, cattle or gold. But the sacred texts have also said that gold is the supreme dakshina. O grandfather! I wish to
hear the truth about this. What is gold? How was it created and when? What is its nature? What are the fruits from
donating it? Why is it said to be supreme? Why do learned people revere the gift of gold? Why is it praised as dakshina in the rites associated with sacrifices? Why is gold regarded as a better purifier than land and cattle? Why is
it a supreme dakshina? O grandfather! Tell me this."

'Bhishma replied, "O king! I will recount in detail the many reasons. Listen attentively to the origin of gold, as I
have understood it. When Shantanu, my greatly energetic father, died, I went to Gangadvara, wishing to perform
his funeral ceremony. O son! Having gone there, I commenced the funeral rites for my father. My mother, Jahnavi,
helped me. I placed many rishis, who had obtained success through fierce austerities, at the forefront and asked
them to be seated. I began the offering of water and the other rites. As instructed, I controlled myself and completed the preliminary rites. In the proper way, I then started to offer the funeral libations. O lord of the earth! At that
time, an arm pierced through the darbha grass that had been spread out and rose up. It was adorned in beautiful
armlets. On seeing it rise, I was struck by great wonder. O bull among the Bharata lineage! I thought that my father
had himself come to receive what was being offered. When I regained my senses, I began to think about the sacred
texts. O lord! The ordinances of the Vedas decree that a man must not render the funeral cake into a hand. That
was my view. The ancestors are invisible. They do not appear before a man in visible form. It is said that the funeral cake must be offered on a mat of kusha grass and that it will be received from there. Therefore, I ignored what
seemed to be my father's hand. O king! I remembered the subtle rituals that are laid down in the sacred texts. O
bull among the Bharata lineage! O bull among men! Know that I followed the method indicated in the sacred texts
and offered everything on the mat of darbha grass. O lord of men! At this, my father's arm disappeared. When I
slept[Later, in the night.], my ancestors appeared before me and told me, 'O bull among the Bharata lineage! We are pleased and delighted with you for your knowledge. You have not been confused about dharma. O king! You have acted in accordance with the proofs laid down in the sacred texts. You have maintained yourself, dharma, the sacred texts, the
Vedas, your ancestors, the maharshis, Brahma, the grandfather, the preceptors and Prajapati. There has been no deviation from the proofs that have been laid down. O bull among the Bharata lineage! Today, you have completed
everything in the proper way. But to accomplish the purpose, what will be achieved with land and cattle? Donate
gold. It is supremely cleansing. By following this act of dharma, we and all our ancestors will be purified. If you
donate gold, ten generations of your ancestors and descendants will be saved.' My ancestors spoke in this way. O
king! O lord of the earth! I was astounded and woke up. O supreme among the Bharata lineage! I turned my mind
towards donating gold. '"O king! O lord! Listen to this ancient history about Jamadagni's son, which is praiseworthy and leads to an increase in the lifespan. In ancient times, Rama, Jamadagni's son, was overcome by great rage
and exterminated all the kshatriyas from earth twenty-one times. Having conquered the entire earth, the brave and
lotus-eyed Rama made arrangements for a sacrifice that was honoured by brahmanas and kshatriyas. O great king!
This was a horse sacrifice that grants all the objects of desire. It purifies all creatures and leads to the enhancement
of energy and resplendence. Because of the fruits of that sacrifice, that energetic one was cleansed of his sins.
However, despite performing that supreme sacrifice and offering dakshina, Jamadagni's great-souled son still did
not obtain lightness of heart. Bhargava met the gods and the rishis and asked them. He said, 'For men who have
indulged in fierce deeds, what is the supreme purifier? O ones without decay! O immensely fortunate ones! Tell
me.' Overcome by compassion, this is what he asked. The maharshis who knew about the sacred texts and the
Vedas replied. Vasishtha said, 'Give gold to the gods. All the gods are nothing but fire and gold is its essence.
Therefore, donate gold. Give it to all the gods. O tiger among men! The learned know that there is nothing superior
to it. O brahmana rishi! O supreme among all the bearers of weapons! Listen to me. I will again[Vasishtha has already talked about the superiority of gold, but the Critical Edition has excised those shlokas.] tell you about
the greatness of gold. O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! Earlier, I heard about this in the ancient accounts. Prajapati spoke about this to Svayambhu Manu. O extender of the Bhrigu lineage! O descendant of the Bhrigu lineage! The marriage of the great-souled and illustrious Rudra, the wielder of the trident, and the goddess Rudrani
was completed on the slopes of the excellent Himalaya mountains. The illustrious and great-souled one was about
to unite with the goddess. Everyone was anxious and approached the illustrious one. O extender of the Bhrigu lineage! Mahadeva was seated with the goddess Uma, the granter of boons. All of them bowed down their heads and
spoke to Rudra. "O god! O unblemished one! This union of yours with the goddess is of one ascetic with another
ascetic, of one energy with an extremely greater energy. O god! Your energy, and that of the goddess Uma, are
both invincible. O god! O lord! Your offspring will be powerful. There is no doubt that he will leave nothing left in
the three worlds. O large-eyed one! The gods are bowing down before you. O lord of the worlds! For the welfare
of the three worlds, grant them a boon. Withdraw your supreme and blazing energy, which will give rise to offspring." Hearing their words, the illustrious one, with the bull on his banner, agreed and accordingly replied to the
gods and the brahmana rishis. Having said this and having held up his seed, the one with the bull as his mount
came to be known as Urdhvareta[One who holds up his seed.]. Since then, he has held up his seed. However, Rudrani became angry at this
termination of offspring. Though she was a woman, she used harsh words and spoke to the gods. "You have restrained my husband's desire to have offspring. Therefore, all of you gods will no longer have offspring. Since you
have stopped me from having offspring, you will also be restricted in that way." Therefore, the residents of heaven
no longer have offspring. O extender of the Bhrigu lineage! But at the time when this curse was imposed, the fire
god was not present. Because of the curse imposed by the goddess, the gods no longer had offspring. A little bit of
Rudra's unsurpassed energy was dislodged and fell down on the earth, which held it up. That fell into the fire and a
wonderful  being  began  to  grow.  With  energy  having  come  into  contact  with  another  energy,  an  embryo  was
formed. At this time, with Shakra at the forefront, the gods were severely tormented by the asura named Taraka.
The Adityas, the Vasus, the Rudras, the Maruts, the Ashvins and all the Sadhyas were terrified by the daitya's valour. The asuras seized the regions of the gods, their celestial vehicles, their cities and the hermitages of the rishis.
All the gods and the rishis were distressed in their minds. They sought refuge with the lord and god, the undecaying Brahma.'"'
