'Sanjaya said, "O lord of the earth! That terrible battle that took place during the night led to the destruction of all
beings. At that time, Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, spoke to the Pandavas, Panchalas and Somakas. 'Advance only
against Drona, desiring to kill him.' O king! On hearing the king's words, the Panchalas and the Somakas advanced against Drona, roaring fiercely. Those on our side roared back in return and counter-attacked with intolerance. In that encounter, they used the best of their capacity, the best of their enterprise and the best of their spirit.

'"Yudhishthira was advancing towards Drona, desiring to kill him, like a crazy elephant against another crazy
one, and Hardikya Kritavarma attacked him. O king! In the forefront of that battle, the Kourava Bhuri[Bhurishrava's brother.] released
a shower of arrows, from every direction, on Shini's descendant. O king! Maharatha Sahadeva wished to advance
against Drona and Vaikartana Karna countered the Pandava. Bhimasena advanced, like Death with a gaping
mouth. In that encounter, Duryodhana himself countered the obstinate one, who was advancing like Death. O king!
Nakula was foremost among warriors and was skilled in all forms of fighting. Shakuni Soubala quickly countered
him. O king! Shikhandi, supreme among rathas, advanced on his chariot and Sharadvata Kripa countered him in
that battle. O great king! Prativindhya[Droupadi's son through Yudhishthira.] advanced on horses that had the complexion of peacocks and
Duhshasana made endeavours to counter him. Bhimasena's son[Ghatotkacha.], skilled in a hundred different kinds of maya,
advanced, and wishing to protect his father's honour, Ashvatthama checked him. In that battle, maharatha Drupada
wished to advance against Drona and Vrishasena checked him, together with his soldiers and his followers. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Virata quickly advanced, wishing to kill Drona, and the king of Madra angrily
checked him. Wishing to kill Drona, Nakula's son, Shatanika, proudly advanced in that battle. Chitrasena quickly
countered him with his arrows. Maharatha Arjuna, foremost among warriors, advanced, driving everyone away. O
great king! Alambusa, Indra among rakshasas, checked him[However, Alambusa has already been killed by Ghatotkacha in Section 69.]. The great archer, Drona, slaughtered enemies in
the battle. However, Panchala Dhrishtadyumna cheerfully countered him. O king! There were other maharatha
sons of Pandu who also advanced and the rathas on your side countered them, with all their energy. In that great
battle, elephant riders swiftly clashed with other elephant riders. Hundreds and thousands were seen to fight with
each other. O king! During that night, horses advanced against each other with great force and seemed to be like
mountains with wings. O great king! Horse riders clashed against horse riders with spears, lances and swords in
their hands and roared separately. There were many men there, clashing against each other. They used large numbers of clubs, bludgeons and many other kinds of weapons.

'"Hardikya Kritavarma angrily countered Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, like the shoreline holds back the ocean.
Yudhishthira pierced Hardikya with five swift arrows. Asking him to wait, he again pierced him with twenty arrows. O venerable one! Kritavarma became extremely angry with Dharma's son. He severed his bow with a broad-
headed arrow and pierced him with seven arrows. Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, then picked up another bow. He
pierced Hardikya in the arms and the chest with ten arrows. O venerable one! Having been thus pierced in the battle by Dharma's son, Madhava[Madhu was an ancestor of the Yadavas and anyone from the Yadava lineage can be referred to as Madhava.
Kritavarma belonged to the Yadava lineage.] trembled with rage and afflicted him with seven arrows. However, Partha severed his bow and his arm-guard. The king released five sharp arrows that had been sharpened on stone. They
pierced his armour, which was decorated with gold and was extremely expensive. They then penetrated the earth,
like angry snakes entering a termite hill. In the twinkling of an eye, he[Kritavarma.] picked up another bow and pierced Pan-
dava with sixty arrows and his charioteer with nine. Pandava's soul was immeasurable. O foremost among the
Bharata lineage! He laid down his giant bow on his chariot and hurled a lance that was like a serpent. It was large
and decorated with gold. Having been thus released by Pandava, it penetrated his right arm and entered the ground.
At that time, Partha again picked up his bow. He enveloped Hardikya with straight-tufted arrows. In that battle, in
an instant, the foremost of brave rathas among the Vrishni lineage[Kritavarma.] made Yudhishthira devoid of his horses,
charioteer and chariot. The eldest of the Pandavas then grasped a sword and a shield. But in that battle, Madhava
sliced these down with his sharp arrows. Yudhishthira then picked up a spear with a golden handle. It was difficult
to resist and in that battle, he quickly hurled it towards Hardikya. It was released from Dharmaraja's hands and descended suddenly. However, dexterous in the use of his hands, Hardikya severed it into two fragments and
laughed. He then shrouded Dharma's son with hundreds of arrows. He angrily cut down his armour with sharp arrows. The great-souled one's armour was severed by Hardikya. O king! It fell down in that battle, like a stellar
cluster dislodged from the firmament. His bow was severed. He was without a chariot. He was without armour. He
was afflicted by arrows. Yudhishthira, Dharma's son, quickly withdrew himself from that battle. Kritavarma defeated Yudhishthira, Dharma's son. The immensely strong one again began to protect Drona's wheel."'
