'"Damayanti said, 'O ruler of Nishadha! O fortunate one! It does not behove you to be suspicious of sin or find
fault with me. I rejected the gods and chose you. It was in order to bring you here that the brahmanas had gone in
all the directions, singing my words in verses in the ten directions. O king! At last, a learned brahmana named Par-
nada discovered you in Koshala, in Rituparna's house. When I heard his words and the exact reply that you gave, I
saw this means of bringing Nishadha here. O lord of the earth! O lord of men! Other than you, who in this world is
capable of driving horses over more than a hundred yojanas in a single day? O lord of the earth! I touch your feet
in worship and swear that I have not been unfaithful towards you, not even in my thoughts. If I have committed
any sin, let the moving wind that courses through the world and is a witness to everything free me from my breath
of life today. If I have committed any sin, let the sun which always travels the world with its sharp rays free me
from my breath of life today. If I have committed any sin, let the moon which courses through all beings as a witness free me from my breath of life today. Let these three gods who hold up the three worlds relate the truth of exactly what has happened. Or let them abandon me today.'"

'Brihadashva said, "Thus addressed, the wind-god spoke from the sky and said, 'O Nala! I tell you the truth that
she has not committed any sin. O king! Damayanti has protected her treasure of good conduct and has increased it.
We have protected her for three years and are witness. This method that she has devised for your sake is unparalleled. But for you, there is no other man who can travel one hundred yojanas in a single day. O lord of the earth!
Bhima's daughter has obtained you and you have obtained Bhima's daughter. Do not have any doubts about what
you should do. Be united with your wife.' While the wind-god was speaking, a shower of flowers fell from above.
The drums of the gods sounded and a pure breeze began to blow. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! On witnessing this marvel, King Nala, the destroyer of enemies, gave up all his doubts about Damayanti.

'"Then the lord of the earth donned the garment that does not decay and recalled to his mind the king of the serpents. He regained his old form. When Bhima's daughter saw her husband in his own form, the unblemished one
embraced Punyashloka and cried loudly. Radiant as before, King Nala also embraced Bhima's daughter. He also
embraced his children in the proper way and was delighted. The one with the beautiful face and the large eyes
placed her head on his chest. Overcome with sorrow, she sighed heavily. The sweet-smiling one's limbs were covered with dirt and tears flowed down. She embraced that tiger among men for a long time.

'"O king! Then the mother of the daughter of Vidarbha happily informed Bhima about everything that had transpired between Nala and Damayanti. The great king replied, 'I will see Nala and Damayanti tomorrow, after he has
rested and performed his ablutions.' O king! Then the happy couple conversed throughout the night about their
earlier wanderings in the forest. They slept happily. He was united with his wife in the fourth year. He obtained all
the objects of desire, attained all accomplishments and was supremely happy. Damayanti was extremely content at
having regained her husband, like the earth with half-grown crops is, on receiving showers. She was united with
her husband and all her fatigue had passed. Her fever was gone and her heart was filled with joy. All the desires of
Bhima's daughter were met and she was as radiant as the night, when the moon had arisen."'
