'Narada said, "O king! Vaishravana's[Kubera. Kubera's father was the sage Vishrava, Pulastya's son. Hence, Kubera is known as Vaishravana.
Kubera's mother was Idavida. However, Vishrava had another wife named Kaikasi and through her, had Ravana,
Kumbhakarna, Vibhishana and Surpanakha as offspring.] radiant and white sabha is one hundred yojanas long and seventy yojanas
wide. O king! Vaishravana built it himself through the power of his austerities. It has the luminosity of the moon, is
established in the sky and is like a peak of the mountain Kailasa. Held aloft by the guhyakas[Semi-divine species, companions of Kubera.], celestial and
adorned with tall and golden trees, it seems to be fixed to the firmament. It radiates rays and is resplendent, fragrant with divine scents. Beautiful and resembling white clouds and mountain peaks, it seems to float in the sky.
There sits the handsome King Vaishravana, adorned in lustrous earrings and attired in colourful ornaments and garments. He is surrounded by one thousand women. He is seated on a supreme and pure throne that is as radiant as
the sun and is covered with divine spreads, with celestial footstools. Pure and fragrant breezes carry the perfume
from extensive coral trees, scented groves, water lilies from the lotus pond known as Alaka[Alaka is the name of Kubera's capital.] and Nandana[Beautiful gardens. Specifically, also the name of Indra's garden.]
gardens, please the mind and heart and offer homage[Offer homage to Kubera.]. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Gods and gandharvas, surrounded by crowds of apsaras, sing divine songs in celestial tones there."

'"There are Mishrakeshi, Rambha, the sweet-smiling Chitrasena, Charunetra, Ghritachi, Menaka, Punjikasthala,
Vishvachi, Sahajanya, Pramlocha, Urvashi, Ira, Varga, Sourabheyi, Samichi, Budbuda and Lata. O Pandava! These
and a thousand other masses of apsaras, skilled in singing and dancing, pay homage to the granter of riches. With
these masses of gandharvas and apsaras, that sabha is never empty and is magnificent, filled with divine music,
singing and dancing. There are the gandharvas known as kinnaras and others known as naras-anibhadra, Dhana-
da, Shvetabhadra, Guhyaka, Kasheraka, Gandhakandu, the immensely strong Pradyota, Kustumbura, Pishacha,
Gajakarna, Vishalaka, Varahakarna, Sandroshtha, Phalabhaksha, Phalodaka, Angachuda, Shikhavarta, Hemanetra,
Vibhishana, Pushpanana, Pingalaka, Shonitoda, Pravalaka, Vrikshavasya, Aniketa, Chitravasa. O descendant of the
Bharata lineage! These, and many other yakshas[The yakshas are a distinct species, companions of Kubera. They are not gandharvas. But the text here is not
careful in maintaining these distinctions.], in hundreds and thousands, are in attendance. The fortunate
Shri and Nalakubara[Kubera's son.] are always there. I and others like me go there often. Many preceptors and devarshis are
often present there. O tiger among men! And also the three-eyed[Tryambaka, meaning three-eyed. One of Shiva's names.] illustrious god, Pashupati Umapati[Pashupati is Shiva's name and his consort is Uma. Umapati is thus Shiva's name.], the
wielder of the trident, the destroyer of Bhaganetra[The name of a demon.], with the unblemished goddess[Uma.], and surrounded by hundreds and thousands of his followers[The bhutas, spirits and goblins that are Shiva's companions.]-dwarfs, horrible, hunchbacked, bloody-eyed, swift as thought, feeding
on flesh, fat and marrow, fearful to see and hear, wielding many terrible weapons and like powerful wind storms. O
king! He[Shiva.] is always seated with his friend[Kubera.], the granter of riches. O king! Such is his sabha. I saw it while I
was travelling through the sky. O king! I will now tell you about the grandfather's[Brahma's.] sabha, where all fatigue is
dispelled."'
