'Sanjaya said, "The energetic Abhimanyu, foremost among rathas, was borne on steeds that were of a tawny colour
and advanced against Duryodhana's large army. He brought down a shower of arrows, like clouds pouring down
rain. The bulls among the Kurus who were on your side could not resist Subhadra's angry son in battle. That destroyer of enemies possessed a great number of weapons and he immersed himself in that inexhaustible ocean of
soldiers. O king! In that encounter, he released many arrows that destroyed enemies. They conveyed the brave
kshatriyas to the abode of the king of the dead. In that battle, Subhadra's angry son unleashed arrows that were like
Yama's staff. They were flaming and terrible, like poisonous serpents. Phalguna's son quickly brought down charioteers from their chariots, horse-riders from the backs of horses and elephant-riders together with the elephants. In
that great battle, the lords of the earth cheerfully honoured his extraordinary deeds and praised Phalguna's son.
Subhadra's son drove away many colourful armies, like masses of cotton blown away by the wind in every direction. O descendant of the Bharata lineage! Driven away by him, your soldiers could not find a protector and were
like elephants stuck in the mud. O king! Having driven all your soldiers away, Abhimanyu, supreme among men,
stood like a flaming fire, without any smoke. All those on your side could not counter that destroyer of enemies
and were like insects, driven by destiny, before a flaming fire. Having struck all the enemies of the Pandavas, the
maharatha and great archer was like the wielder of the vajra with his vajra. His bow had a golden back. O king! As
it was moved around in every direction, it was seen to be as radiant as lightning[Shatahrada.]. The arrows released from his
bow in that battle were sharp and yellow. They were like flocks of bees, visiting blossoming trees in the forest.
That is the way Subhadra's great-souled son roamed around. His chariot roared like the clouds and people could
not find an opportunity to strike him. He confounded Kripa, Drona, Drona's son, Brihadbala and Saindhava, the
great archer. He moved around with skill and dexterity. O venerable one! As he tormented your army, I saw that
his bow was drawn in the shape of a circle and was like the circular halo that is around the sun. Brave kshatriyas
saw this and were tormented by his arrows. Because of his deeds, they thought the world now had two Phalgunas.
O great king! Oppressed by him, that great army of the Bharatas ran here and there, like a woman intoxicated with
liquour. He drove away your soldiers and made the maharathas tremble and delighted his well-wishers, like Vasava
after vanquishing Maya[Maya was a famous danava. He was also the architect of the demons.]. Driven away by him in that battle, your soldiers uttered lamentations of woe and these
sounded like the roar of the clouds.

'"O venerable one! On hearing that awful wail amidst your soldiers, like that of the ocean agitated by the force
of the wind at the time of the new moon or the full moon, King Duryodhana spoke to Rishyashringa's son. 'This
great archer who is Krishna's son[Arjuna is also named Krishna.] is like a second Phalguna. He is driving away the soldiers in rage, like Vritra
against the army of the gods. I do not see any other great medicine against him in this battle, except your own self.
O best of the rakshasas! You are skilled in all forms of knowledge. O brave one! Go swiftly and slay Subhadra's
son in battle. We will kill Partha, with Bhishma and Drona leading us.' Thus addressed and following the instructions of your son, the powerful and strong Indra among the rakshasas quickly advanced to do battle. He emitted a
loud roar, like the slayer of Bala at the time of the monsoon. O king! At this great sound, the mighty army of the
Pandavas trembled in every direction, like a full ocean. O king! Frightened by that roar, many men gave up their
beloved lives and fell down on the ground. Krishna's son was delighted and grasped his bow and arrows. He
seemed to be dancing around on his chariot and attacked the rakshasa. The rakshasa was enraged and approached
Arjuna's son in that battle. Stationing himself at a short distance, he started to drive away the soldiers. In that battle, he killed the great army of the Pandavas. The rakshasa attacked them in the encounter, like Bali against the
army of the gods. O venerable one! There was great oppression and slaughter among those soldiers. The rakshasa,
terrible in form, killed them in that battle. He released thousands of arrows on the great army of the Pandavas. The
rakshasa displayed his valour and drove them back in that battle. Thus slaughtered by the rakshasa, terrible in
form, the army of the Pandavas was frightened and fled from the field of battle. He crushed those soldiers, like an
elephant amidst lotuses.

'"In that encounter, the immensely strong one then attacked the sons of Droupadi. The great archers who were
Droupadi's sons were armoured and became wrathful. All of them advanced against the rakshasa, like five planets
against the sun. Prativindhya swiftly pierced the immensely strong rakshasa with sharp, vigorous and iron arrows.
They penetrated his armour and the supreme among rakshasas looked resplendent. He was like a giant mass of rain
clouds, penetrated by the rays of the sun. O king! He was struck by arrows that were embellished with gold and
Rishyashringa's son looked like a mountain with a flaming summit. In that great battle, the five brothers pierced
the Indra among rakshasas with sharp arrows that were embellished with gold. O king! Pierced by terrible arrows
that were like angry snakes, Alambusha became as angry as a king of elephants. O great king! O venerable one!
He was pierced within a short instant. Having been wounded, the maharatha remained unconscious for a long time.
When he regained consciousness, in his rage, he increased his dimensions to double of what they were. He sliced
down their arrows, standards and bows. As if smiling, he pierced each of them with three arrows. Maharatha
Alambusa seemed to be dancing around on his chariot. The rakshasa was angry and in his rage, the immensely
strong one killed the horses and the charioteers of the great-souled ones. In great delight, he again pierced them
with extremely sharp arrows. He used many different kinds of arrows, in hundreds and thousands. Those great
archers were bereft of their chariots by the rakshasa and the traveller of the night swiftly rushed against them,
wishing to kill them. On seeing them thus oppressed in battle by the evil-souled rakshasa, Arjuna's son attacked
the rakshasa in that battle. The battle that commenced was like that between Vritra and Vasava. All those on your
side and the maharatha Pandavas witnessed it. They encountered each other in that great battle and blazed with
rage. O great king! They were immensely strong and their eyes were red with rage. The warriors glanced towards
each other, like the fire at the destruction of a yuga. There was a terrible encounter that was fierce and awful. It was
like that between Shakra and Shambara[There are various demons named Shambara. This is the one whom Indra defeated to obtain soma.], during the battle between the gods and the asuras."'
